A REVIEW AND EXAMINATION OF A BOOK, bearing the Title of the HISTORY OF THE
Indulgence.

Wherein the lawfulness of the acceptance of the peaceable exercise of the
Ministry, granted by the Acts of the Magistrates Indulgence, is demonstrated,
contrary Objections answered, and the Vindication of such as withdraw from
hearing Indulged Ministers, is confuted.

To which is added, a Survey of the mischievous absurdities of the late Bond,
and Sanquhair Declaration.

Romans 14.19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and
things wherewith one may edify another.

Prove. 24.21. My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to change, etc.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey,
over against the Stocks Market. 1681.

A Review and Examination of a Book; bearing the Title of the History of the
Indulgence, etc.
AMongst the many sad tokens, and prodigious Prognostics of Gods anger against
the Church of Scotland, our multiplied Divisions are none of the least. The
righteous and holy God being deeply provoked, has armed every man against his
brother, so that Manasseh is against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh, and
they both together against Judah. And the Lord has hereby, in the open view of
the Atheistical and profane world, poured contempt upon the remnant of his
people, that desire to cleave to his way and truth, and made them despicable,
as a broken vessel that cannot be made whole again. And this is the more
afflicting, that these contentions abound in a time, wherein the Protestant
Religion is visibly in so great danger from Popery and Popish Plots. It
therefore concerns all them, who are any thing affected with the wrath and
anger of a jealous and provoked God, to lie in the dust, to search out their
own sins and provocations, and sincerely bewail them before the Lord. And
although the public defections and provocations, ought not to be slighted, but
much sorrowed for; yet it is to be feared, that personal humiliation,
repentance, and reformation, has been little minded by many pretending to the
abhorrence of public sins. O that every one of us might find grace, seriously
to enquire what we have done, and that (at such a time, when all souls serious
exercise of Religion is like to evanish into notions and debates) every one of
us would lay to heart the evil of his way, both as to accession unto public
provocations, and as to personal sins. It is now high time, when the Lord is so
visibly taking vengeance for our inventions.

It has been the sad observation of diverse, that every new trial has been the
occasion of a new difference, if not division. The Lord partly, in his holy
displeasure, withdrawing light, and chastising his people for their sins, and
partly trying, and exercising of them in that great duty of mutual forbearance,
so little made conscience of; and partly discovering infirmities, much dross in
his own, by the contests so carnally managed. This we are now to instance in
the Indulgence, which although it was first looked on as a favor and mercy
from God, and the Ministers that embraced it were advised thereto by the
generality of outed Ministers (a great part whereof were then at Edenborough);
yet now the contention about it is come to such a height, that the acceptance
is cried down, as highly sinful, and the hearing of Indulged Ministers Preached
and written against, as utterly unlawful: The Indulged Ministers have generally
hitherto (for ought I know), with much Christian meekness and patience, endured
reproach, finding that what Letters were spread abroad against them, did
contain nothing but high Magisterial dictates, without any show of arguments;
as also, they were resolved by their silence and forbearance, to evidence their
great desire to prevent contentions: but now, lest their silence should be
looked on as faintness, arising from the conviction of the evil of their Cause
(which, it seems, made the Author of one of these Letters to write, that they
never had the heart to dare to speak or themselves), I shall say something in
their behalf. I must confess, I am astonished to read these Papers that are
going up and down amongst the people, wherein with high and bitter words (which
I love not to repeat), the Indulged Ministers are represented, as having
acknowledged, and homologate a formal Ecclesiastic Supremacy, assumed by the
Magistrate, and having subjected their Ministry in a direct line of
subordination unto his cognizance (as inferior Civil Courts are unto the
superior); yea not only so, but these grave and worthy Ministers, who thought
it their duty to notice, and bring to an account some few Probationers, that
were visibly sowing sedition, and kindling a flame, are represented as
enamoured with that Idol of Jealousy (meaning the Indulgence), and as acted by
the spirit of Antichrist. And wherefore? Because they took upon them to
question the carriage of a few hardy and extravagant young men, the tendency of
whose way, will ere long make it to appear, what a spirit they were acted by.
But before I go further, I must here protest, that the personal reproaches cast
upon those honest Ministers, are not so much the motive that prevails with me
to put Pen to Paper, upon this Subject, as respect unto the Truth, and public
Interest of the Church (the unity and order whereof seems to be wholly shaken,
and going to ruin, by the courses driven on by some), and to the Gospel of
Jesus Christ Preached by them, who, I am sure, have been armed by God in the
Ministry, with a blessing upon the souls of many; though it is like these that
now seek to decry the Indulged Ministers, will not believe that ever their
Ministry was blessed and countenanced of God; and how can they, seeing they
look not upon them as the Ambassadors of Christ? But blessed be God, who has
looked upon them as his Ambassadors, and has not left their Ministry without
the seal of a sensible blessing upon many.

But that I may inform honest well-meaning people, who are jumbled and
confounded with questions about the acceptance of the Indulgence, and about
hearing of Indulged Ministers, I shall endeavor to lay the matter open in a
plain conference; The persons conferring, shall be a Minister not Indulged, but
clear for hearing Indulged Ministers: an ingenious Farmer, who scruples to hear
Indulged Ministers, and a Preacher, who is against the hearing of Indulged
Ministers.

Farmer. Sir, it is now near Sunsetting, I would be much obliged to you, if
you would be pleased to lodge at my house this night.


Minister. I would be nearer the Church, ere I take up my lodging; for I use to
make my Sabbath Days journeys as short as I can.


Farm. You will be nighted ere you can come where you can have any tolerable
lodging, and you may with ease reach the Church to morrow before Sermon-time.


Min. Well, I am content to stay with you.


Farm. I assure you of welcome. When you have taken some refreshment, I shall
within a little advertise you when to come to the Family-exercise; and after
Supper I shall desire half an hours conference about a particular, with which I
will not now trouble you.


Min. I use to be heavy after Supper, I had rather take a little time just now,
or, if the matter be fit for a Sabbath Days discourse, we may confer upon it to
morrow in our way to the Church.


Farm. It is almost all the matter of some folks discourse upon the Sabbath;
but for my self, though I am sometimes a hearer of such discourses upon the
Sabbath, I have no great pleasure in them, for I find not my self edified by
them, as I was wont to be with the discourses which we used long since to have
upon the Lords day. As for going to the Church with you to morrow, I desire you
would excuse me in that matter, for I have not clearness to hear Indulged
Ministers; but you shall not want company, for there are several of my Family,
who have clearness to hear, and I dare not hinder them.


Min. I commend you, in that you do not impose your opinion in that matter upon
others: but did you not once hear Indulged Ministers?


Farm. I did; but I have more light about the Indulgence than I had; and I am
much confirmed in withdrawing from hearing, by a Preacher who is in the next
Chamber; and, if you will, I shall call him to the conference about the
Indulgence; for this is the conference which I designed to trouble you with
after Supper.


Min. I think it very fit that you call him.


Preacher. I have overheard you, and half an invitation is enough to engage me
in that conference which ye design; but I desire, Sir, that you and our
Landlord may enter upon it, and I shall speak when I think it convenient.


Min. Seeing you did once hear the Indulged Minister, who is settled in this
Parish, why did you withdraw from hearing him?


Farm. It is very confidently said, by those who are acknowledged for able men,
and very zealous, that the Indulged are not the Ministers of Christ, but of men.


Min. It is as confidently said, by as able and zealous men, That the Indulged
Ministers are the Ministers of Christ, and not the Ministers of men. But our
faith and practice must not be ruled by men's sayings, how confident soever the
sayers be: Ye know the Reformed Churches have, with detestation, rejected that
error of the Popish Doctors, that people should implicitly, that is, in effect
blindly believe all that they say, and do all that they direct.


Farm. But do you think, Sir, that so able and zealous Preachers would deceive
us poor people?


Min. I do not say, that they would deceive you; but seeing able and zealous,
yea, and godly men may themselves be deceived (for the best of men are
fallible, and may err in many things, so long as they have corruption remaining
in them, and know but in part), they may deceive others in those things in
which they are themselves deceived, though they do not design to deceive either
themselves or others. But I wonder how any can have the confidence to say, that
they are not the Ministers of Christ: were they not ordained Ministers by the
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery?


Farm. I acknowledge that they were ordained in the way appointed by Christ to
feed the flock of God.


Min. Do they not Preach the wholesome words of Christ, and not the inventions
and Doctrines of men?


Farm. I cannot deny that, for they Preach the Doctrine contained in the
Scriptures, which was taught to us in our best times; I hear of no change in
their Doctrine.


Pr. Sir, we do not question their Ordination, they had their Potestative
Mission from Christ by the Presbytery; and if we should deny them to be
lawfully called, and sent to Preach the Gospel, we should condemn the
Ordination, and calling of all Presbyterian Ministers; nor do we deny that they
Preach the Gospel, and administrate Gospel Ordinances according to Christ's
institution; nor do we charge them with Preaching the Doctrines of men.


Min. Seeing ye grant that they are sent of God, and that they speak the words
of God, and not the Precepts and Doctrines of men, why deny you them to he the
Ministers of Christ, and alledg that they are the Ministers of men?


Pr. They have renounced their former Mission, which they had from Christ, and
have now their Potestative Mission from the Magistrate, and have subjected
their Ministry in a direct line of Subordination to the Magistrates cognizance,
as inferior Civil Courts are unto the superior; and they have received their
instructions, for regulating them in the exercise of their Ministry, from the
Magistrate.


Min. I have seen these things, which you say, Written and Printed, but they
are so manifestly false, that I wonder how any could write them, and I am sorry
to hear you repeat them as if they were true; for the Magistrate did not so
much as pretend to ordain them, or to make them Ministers; for the Act of
Indulgence supposes them to be Ministers, and only permits them, or puts them
to the exercise of the Ministry. Those Ministers were so far from renouncing
their dependence on Christ, and their Mission from him, that they at the first
acceptance of the Indulgence, declared to the Council, that they were the
Ministers of Christ, that they had received their Ministry from Christ; and
they were so far from subjecting their Ministry, and the matters of their
Ministry, to the Magistrates pleasure, that they declared, that they were the
servants of Christ in these matters, and that they would behave, as became the
faithful Ministers of Christ; and they were so far from receiving the
Magistrates instructions, that they declared they could not receive from the
Magistrate instructions intrinsecally Ecclesiastical, to regulate them in the
exercise of their Ministry; and the Author of the History of the Indulgence
grants, that Mr. Blair did give a faithful testimony against these
instructions, and that Mr. Hutcheson said the same upon the matter with Mr.
Blair; and as these Ministers did by word, in the presence of the Council, show
that they could not accept of such instructions of their Lordships making, and
imposing, and did design them impositions; so their practice did evidence, that
they did not accept of these instructions; and any who will but read Mr. H's
speech at the first Indulgence, in which he asserts, That as they had received
their Ministry from Christ, and full prescriptions to regulate them in the
exercise of their Ministry, so they were to discharge it, as they would be
accountable to Christ; will wonder how any person, let be a Minister, who had
read that speech, could harbor any such ugly injurious thoughts of these
Ministers, and much more that any could deliberately write and Print such
horrid falsehoods and reproaches of honest Ministers.


Farm. If these things be so as you have represented them, it seems, that the
Indulged Ministers are wronged.


Min. If you doubt of the truth of what I have said, I desire you may read the
History of the Indulgence, and you shall find these things which I have said
here, recorded there.


Pr. That cannot be denied, but that Historian says, that upon the matter the
Indulged Ministers renounced, etc.


Min. That addition of the words upon the matter, is but a mere blind, it may
beguile simple people, but no judicious person will be deceived by it, seeing
there is nothing either in the matter or form of what these Ministers said, or
did, which does import any such thing, as that Historian alleges; and although
these Ministers had said nothing of their receiving their Ministry from Christ,
etc. before the Council, it had been a very uncharitable construction to have
construed their silence to be a renunciation of their dependence on Christ,
etc. but it is a horrid injury to charge them with the renunciation of that
which they expressly own before the Magistrate.


Pr. But Sir, have not they their Ministry, and the exercise of their Ministry
in these Parishes, from the Magistrate?


Min. They have their Ministerial calling, or which is all one, Authority, to
exercise the acts of their Ministerial Office, from Jesus Christ, as the
fountain of their spiritual power; and this Ministerial Authority flowing from
God, was conveyed to them by the Presbyteries, by which they were ordained
Ministers according to Christ institution. But they have the peaceable public
exercise of their Ministry, in these places, by the Magistrate, under God. It Is
the Magistrates civil Authority, by which the penal Statutes, which rendered
their Preaching hazardous, are removed, or relaxed; by the protection of Civil
Authority, they have the peaceable exercise of their Ministry, or they have
freedom from molestation or disturbance, while they are exercising their
Ministry in these places. Before the Act of Indulgence they had their
Ministerial Authority, and did Preach upon hazard before they were Indulged;
but by the Indulgence they had this benefit, that whereas before it, they were
exposed to hazard wherever they Preached, whether in private or public; after
it, they might Preach publicly, and exercise the other parts of the
Ministerial Office, in some places, without molestation.


Pr. Their accepting of the Indulgence, and the peoples hearing of them who
have accepted the Indulgence, is an Homologation of the Supremacy.


Farm. Sir, I beseech you make use of some other word than that long word, with
the four O's in it; for though I have often heard it, I ingeniously profess I
do not understand it. I always thought, that many of our Country people
rendered themselves ridiculous, by learning to speak words, like Parrots, which
they did not understand.


Min. That Is not the worst of it; for when poor people are once brought to
speak confidently they wot not what, they may be brought next to do they know
not what; and to stumble they know not at what: As it was indiscreetly done to
bring in this long Greek word among unlearned people, so this word is miserably
misapplyed in the business of the Indulgence; for to homologate, is to say what
was before said, in the same or like words; as when in a Court one declares his
mind in some matter, and another rises up after him, and says the same which he
said, in the same, or like words; this last speaker is said to homologate what
the other said before him. Now the Indulged Ministers, when they accepted the
Indulgence, were far from saying that the Magistrate had a Spiritual Supremacy,
or an absolute Supremacy; they never said it, they never thought it; they
declare, that the Magistrate has not the power of the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven at all, and much less a Supremacy of Spiritual power; and they declare,
that the Magistrate may not do what he pleases in Ecclesiastical matters; for
all things in the Church of God must be done according to the will of the God
of Heaven, and not according to the will of man; they were so far from saying
any thing for the Magistrates Spiritual or absolute Supremacy, or any thing
that sounded that way, that they said much to the contrary, as appears in their
speeches before the Council; and as they said nothing sounding this way, so
they did nothing in accepting the peaceable exercise of their Ministry, which
did any way import any approbation of any unlawful Supremacy; they grant, that
the King is Supreme Civil Governor of his Kingdoms; and that it belongs to the
Magistrate, as Magistrate, to take off civil restraints, which hinder Ministers
from the peaceable exercise of their Ministry; and that the Magistrate should
permit and allow Ministers to exercise their Ministerial Office in his
Dominions; and when the Magistrate did this in the Indulgence, he did not
exercise any unlawful Supremacy, but did exercise that lawful Authority which
he has from God, for good; and when they made use of the liberty granted by
the exercise of lawful Authority, they did not approve of any sinful Supremacy,
but did approve, and make use of that lawful power which the Magistrate has
from God. All Orthodox Divines grant, that the Magistrate not only may, but
should permit, allow, countenance, and protect the exercise of the Ministry of
the Gospel in his Dominions; and when there is need, the Magistrate may command
and compel Ministers to do the work of their Office, as appears from the Books
of Discipline of the Church of Scotland.


Farm. Sir, I am feared to sin; and we are told, that there is sin wrapped up in
hearing Indulged Ministers.


Min. We should be feared for sin, and for that sin, among the rest, of adding
to the word of God; they who make these actions, which are not transgressions
of the Law, to be sins, do highly provoke God; but they who make these actions
which God not only permits, but also commands and commends, to be sins, they
set themselves in the Throne of God, and annul his Law, and countermand the
commands of the most high God: Sin, ye know, is the transgression of the Law of
God; before ye believe that the hearing Ministers of the Gospel Preach the
Gospel, is sin, ye should require, that they who say so much, show you what
command of God is transgressed by your hearing Indulged Ministers; for if ye be
so easily driven from the worship of God by strong alledgments, the Devil can
alledg as strongly, and suggest it importunately, that it is a sin to pray in
your Family, in which it may be there are some profane persons; and if ye be
driven from Family Worship by such alledgances, he will alledg, that it is a
sin for you to believe on the Name of the Lord Jesus; and thus drill you from
all exercises of Religion, public, private, and secret.


Farm. But Sir, seeing I doubt if it be lawful to hear, I would be damned if I
did hear; for ye know the Apostole says, he that doubts is damned, if he eat.


Min. But if you take up doubtings, whether ye should do what God has
commanded, and that upon mere alledgances that these duties are sin, you lay
your self open to the tentations of Satan, who by this method will drive you
from all duty, and by your doubtings make void the law of God; for he will
strongly alledg, that it is a sin to pray to God; and if ye upon this doubt, if
ye should pray, and then upon your doubting forbear praying, what comes of the
command, That men must always pray, and not faint? There is a great difference
betwixt praying, hearing the word of God, and the eating of meats, which the
Apostle speaks of in that fourteenth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, for
it was once unlawful to eat of those meats which was discharged in the
Ceremonial Law, and it was not necessary by any precept to eat of those meats;
so that the weak Christian who did not yet understand that the Ceremonial Law
was abrogate, was under no obligation to eat of those meats; it was lawful to
those who knew their Christian liberty to eat (providing they did not use their
liberty unseasonably before weak ones, and so induce them to do what they
judged unlawful) and it was lawful to them to forbear; the use of these things
being at that time, as Mr. Rutherfurd shows in his Treatise of Scandal, every
way indifferent.

The doubting of these weak ones, did arise from the Ceremonial Law, which was
unquestionably the Law of God; and there was no Law obliging them to eat of
these meats at that time; and so their doubting in such a case at that time,
was a doubt very incident to those who did know the Law, and were tender of it;
and their knowledge that that Ceremonial Law was the Law of God, and their fear
to break the Law of God, occasioned their doubting; and there was no hazard of
sin in forbearing to eat, but there was sin in eating, so long as their doubt
remained; and therefore the Lord would not have the strong eating before these
weak ones, to wound their weak Consciences.

Hence it appears, that they who would from this place plead for their
forbearing to pray or to hear the word of God, because, forsooth, they doubt if
they should pray or hear Gods word; they fearfully misapply and wrest that
Scripture; for this doubt is no ways like the Jews doubt, aabout eating of such
or such meats; for the Lord had once forbidden to eat of these meats, but he
never forbad the hearing of his own Word, he never forbad prayer.

2. There was no command obliging these weak Jews to eat of these forbidden
meats at that time; but there is a command obliging us to hear the Word of God,
and not to forsake the assembling of our selves together, not to despise
prophesying, and obliging us to pray without ceasing.

3. These doubtings of the weak Jews was not damnable; for they did not incur
the hazard of damnation by their doubting, but by their eating with a doubting
Conscience. But the doubting of these, who doubt if they should hear the Word
of God, and if they should join with the Church of God in hearing the Word of
God, in praying and praising, their doubting is damnable, and they should repel
it with detestation and abhorrency, and not so much as listen to such a
suggestion of the Devil, who goes about to make void the Law of God, by raising
such profane and godless doubtings in men's minds, that he may drive them from
all Religious exercises, to gross profanity: And if people would observe what
absurdities this doubting to hear Indulged Ministers, has produced, it might,
through the blessing of God, be a means to clear them of these doubtings. I
doubt not, but ye have heard of some, who from doubting to hear Indulged
Ministers, have proceeded to doubt if they should hear any Ministers who were
for hearing Indulged Ministers; and some have gone that length, that they would
hear none but those who were not only against hearing Indulged Ministers, but
also Preached against the hearing of them; and some have doubted themselves out
of all hearing; and some are come to that, that they will not join in private
prayer with those who hear Indulged Ministers. It Is true wisdom and tenderness
to repel doubts and scruples, which hinder us from the worship of God, or move
us in it, that they may not get any entrance into our minds and consciences;
and if they have entered, we should cast them out with detestation.


Farm. But though that was granted, that there were no sin in hearing them; yet
seeing they are not the Ministers of those Congregations where they are settled,
there is no obligation upon these people to hear them, seeing they are not
their Ministers.


Min. Some of them are in the Parishes where they were ordained Ministers by
the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. Others of them, who had no access
to the Congregations where they were ordained, were cordially invited by vacant
destitute Congregations; and the Ministers concerned, approved of the peoples
invitation, and of the Ministers going to these Parishes upon the peoples
invitation. And what more could be expected in a broken time, when Presbyterial
Government was broken, and General Assembles, Synods, Presbyteries, dissolved,
and Presbyterian Ministers turned out of their Churches, and dispersed and
scattered through the Nation? If these Congregations cast at these Indulged
Ministers, and disown them as not their Ministers, and so think themselves
loosed of all obligation to hear them, they shake themselves loose of any
obligation to hear any Ministers; for no other Ministers can pretend such
interest in these Congregations as they really have, upon the grounds which I
mentioned. If you be not obliged to hear the Indulged Minister, who is in your
Parish, because he is not your Minister, then upon the same ground ye are not
obliged to hear any outed Ministers, who occasionally come alongs to Preach;
for they are not Ministers of this Congregation: And if ye be obliged to hear
them, though they be not Ministers of this Congregation, why are ye not also
obliged to hear the Indulged Ministers, though they were not Ministers of these
Congregations? They who shake themselves loose of any relation to the Indulged
Ministers, will very easily shake themselves loose of any obligation to hear
others. And this is the thing which the Devil designs, to cast the people loose
of all relation to Ministers, and of all obligation to hear any, whether
Indulged, or no Indulged. And he has gained this design, as to some, who are
come to that, that they think not themselves obliged to hear any, except it be
one or two whom they think the only witnesses; and others think themselves
obliged not to hear these, and think it much better to hear none, than to hear
these, who teach such strange, and wild conceits, which tend to the confusion
both of the Church and Kingdom; and many finding, that all obligation to hear
any Ministers, is called in question, and that the hearing of Ministers depends
upon their own pleasure, they are better pleased to stay at home on the
Sabbath, than to go any where, to hear any Minister; and this is like to
prevail with people who have not any true principle of Religion; for this is an
easy way, and pleasing to flesh and blood.


Farm. The Indulged Ministers, do not bring forward the whole Reformation with
them; they have no Presbyteries, Synods, General Assemblies; they have quit
these: Our godly Ancestors would have taken nothing, except they had gotten
all, they would not have quit with a hoof; and seeing it is so, how should we
own them, or hear them, who are so far degenerate from the zeal of the
Ministers of Christ who lived in former times?


Min. This reason, if it were good, would cast all the Ministers who are not
Indulged, as well as the Indulged; for they want Presbyteries, Synods, and
General Assemblies; in the fields, or houses where they Preach, they do not
bring the whole frame of Presbyterian Government along with them where they
come to Preach; and if you do not disown them, because they want general
Assemblies, etc. why should you disown Indulged Ministers upon this account?
Will you add affliction to the afflicted? And because the Lord in his righteous
Judgments has taken away these solemn Courts of his House, which were great
blessings to the Church, and has scattered his Servants; will ye as far as in
you lies, deprive them of the power of Preaching the Gospel, because they have
not access to the exercise of Government? This looks like a judicial
infatuation, to cast at any remnant of Gods Ordinances, because ye have not
all; does this look like humility? or looks this like the frame of the Godly
Israelites, who when the stately Temple was ruined, yet took pleasure in the
Stones of Zion, and favored the Dust thereof?

2. General Assemblies, Synods, Presbyteries, were taken away long before the
Indulgence; and therefore it is a foolish Calumny which has no shadow of
likelihood, that the Indulged Ministers by accepting the Indulgence, did quit
these Courts; for they were quit and gone before the Indulgence; the Indulged
Ministers got somewhat of that which they formerly had, liberty to Preach
without hazard in some places, and to keep Church-Sessions; but they quit
nothing when they accepted of that.

3. It Is a great wrong done to our Ancestors, to allege that they were such
humorous Fools, that they would take nothing from the Magistrate if he withheld
any thing which was due to the Church: They did indeed desire all the Churches
privileges, but they took what they could get, and made the best use of it in
the mean time, till more came.

Although Queen Mary labored to impose Popery upon the Nation, and was far
from granting all which She should have granted; yet as they, who were of the
Reformed Religion, were far from scrupling to seek and petition for liberty to
their Ministers to Preach the Gospel; so when these Petitions, or any part
thereof, was granted, they thankfully accepted of what was granted. And
although King James and his Heirs and Successors have a vast Supremacy settled
upon them, Anno 1584. Parl. 8. James 6. And though he exerted that Supremacy;
yet the Ministers, though they found themselves deprived of their privileges,
which they judged due to the Church, and though several of them were
imprisoned, banished for their adhering to these privileges; yet they were
always willing to take the liberty of Preaching the Gospel when the King
granted it; and when they could not get access to their own Charges, they did
take other Charges. Mr. Bruce did not return to Edinburgh, his proper Charge,
but to Larber: When Mr. Scrimgeour, Minister of Kinghorn, was outed, he was so
glad when he heard that an honest Minister would be permitted to go to his
Charge, that he said, O to have it but one day old, I would with joy bear him
on my back, to have the Gospel preached to my poor people. Mr. Welsh, a man of
God, when he was imprisoned in the Castle of Edinburgh for holding the Assembly
at Aberdeen, he was so far from refusing to take liberty to Preach from the
King, till he repented and restored the Churches privileges, and till the
Church got all that was due; that he desires the Lord Ochletree to carry a
Petition from him to his Majesty, entreating for liberty to Preach the Gospel:
And thus he owned a lawful Civil Supremacy in the King, and sued for its lawful
exercise, in granting the liberty to Preach the Gospel, even when he was
suffering upon the account of his disowning the Kings spiritual or vast
Supremacy. Dr. Sharp, after his banishment returns not to his own Charge, but
to Edinburgh, when permitted.

In the Reign of King Charles the First, they begin with a Petition to be free
of Innovations, afterward they Petition for an Assembly, they were not of that
opinion, that they would seek or take nothing from the King, except he would
right all that was wrong in the Government and Worship at the first.

The famous Assembly of Divines which met at Westminster, and composed the
Confession of Faith, Catechisms, Directory for Worship, etc. when called
together by the Parliament in the year 1643. they were not only all nominated
by the Parliament, but the Prolocutor was named and chosen to them by Ordinance
of Parliament; also they were limited so as to meddle only with the exercise of
dogmatick power, and that only in such matters, as should from time to time be
proposed to them by the Parliament; and in case of difference among themselves,
they were to receive directions from the Houses of Parliament; and beside many
other things, that Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, provides in the close,
that they in that Assembly shall not assume to exercise any Jurisdiction,
Power, or Authority Ecclesiastical whatsoever, or any other power than is
herein particularly expressed. Yet these Divines did not refuse to sit, because
of the limitations and restraints, although diverse of these cannot but be
looked on as incroaching too much upon that Assemblies liberty: As also the
General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, did approve of the said Assembly,
sent their Commissioners to it, who took the Oath of the Assembly, and their
sitting in that Assembly was approved, as the Printed Acts of our Assembly do
fully bear.

I shall here insert a Paper entitled,


Certain Considerations, and Cautions, agreed upon by the Ministers of London
and Westminster, and within the Lines of Communication, June 19. 1646.
According to which they resolved to put the Presbyterian Government in
Execution, upon the Ordinance of Parliament heretofore published by Authority.
Printed by T. R. and E. N.
WE Ministers of Christ, resident within the Cities of London and Westminster,
and lines of Communication, having seen and read an Order of the Honorable
House of Commons Assembled in Parliament, bearing date, June 9. 1646.
requiring, and enjoining all the Ministers of the Province of London, forthwith
to put in Execution the Ordinances concerning Church Government, we thought it
requisite humbly and faithfully, as in the sight of God, to show our judgments
and resolutions about this weighty matter, for clearing of our integrity, and
preserving our Consciences void of offense both toward God and man.

We have secondly, pondered the state of things, and find our selves, whether
we act as is required, or act not, in a very great strait: On the one side,
Prelacy being justly pulled down, and the Church miserably groaning under
discord and confusion, many things cry aloud upon us, in our places, to put
Church Government into actual Execution; the Glory of God, the edification of
his Church, the duty of our Functions, the engagement of our solemn Covenant
with God, the command of the Civil Magistrate, which so far as we can with a
good Conscience, we are resolved, and hold it our duty to obey, and the present
unspeakable miseries of the Church, by woeful Divisions, Blasphemies, Heresies,
abominable Laziness, Libertinism, Atheism, the spiritual ruins of many
Congregations through false Teachers, for want of faithful Pastors, for lack of
Ordination. On the other hand, upon consideration of all the Ordinances of
Parliament about Church Government, we find many necessary things, not yet
established, and some things wherein our Consciences are not fully satisfied;
and therefore in our beginning to act, we cannot but see how sinisterly we are
like to be interpreted by many, who are prone to misconstruct all our actions
of this nature.

We hereupon hold it necessary, to express upon what grounds we may proceed to
act upon the Ordinances already established by Authority, although that we
conceive the power of Church Censures, and particularly the Lords Supper, to be
in the Church Officers, by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ, and from
him they receive their Office and Authority; yet we acknowledge, it belongs to
the Magistrate to have his Conscience satisfied in the truth of the Government
of the Church which he will set up by his Authority, from whom the
Church Officers do receive Authority of the public exercise of their Offices,
in his Dominions; and in case the Magistrate be not fully informed, as to set
up a right and perfect rule in every particular, the Church Officers may act
under that rule, provided they do not subscribe to, nor otherwise acknowledge
that rule to be entire, and right in all points; and therefore for these
particular Ordinances, although we humbly conceive they do not hold forth a
complete rule, nor are in all points satisfactory to our Consciences, yet
because we find many things established in them, agreeable to the word of God,
for which we desire heartily to bless God, and to be thankful to the Honorable
House, provision being made for enabling of the Elderships, by their Authority
to keep away from the Lords Supper all ignorant persons, and many scandalous
persons, with a Declaration of their resolution, that all notorious and
scandalous persons shall be kept from the Sacrament, and that there shall be
an addition to the scandalous offenses formerly enumerated. We conceive it is
our duty to begin to act, in reference to Church Government, by Congregational,
Classical, Provincial, and National Assemblies; resolving by the grace of God,
to walk in all things according to the Word, and according to the Ordinances,
so far as we conceive them correspondent to it, and to be countable to the
Magistrate wheresoever he shall call us thereto; hoping so to carry our selves,
as not only to enjoy his concurrence with us on all occasions; but also that he
will supply what is lacking, to make the Government entire, and likewise to
make alterations in all things that shall happen to be amiss. In this doing we
trust we shall not grieve the Spirits of the truly godly either at home or
abroad, nor give any just occasion to them who are contrary-minded to blame our
Proceedings.

By which Paper we may see, how respectfully and courteously these worthy and
godly men walked toward the Magistrate, how much they give him as his due,
even when he was exercising Erastianism in a great height, giving Rules and
Directions to regulate them in admission to the Lords Supper, limiting them as
to scandal, with diverse other things, which they here but generally hint; and
yet having given this sober salvo for quieting their Consciences, and guarding
against offenses; they do not refuse to go the length they have access, for
doing their duty.

And thus I have showed you, that they are much mistaken who imagine that our
zealous Ancestors were of that humor, that they would take nothing except they
got all which they thought due, and that they would do nothing except they got
leave to do all, without any restriction put upon them by the Magistrate. That
Calderwood in his History, p. 381. relates: That the Synod of Fife, Anno 1597.
instructs their Commissioners to travel with the Ministers, Barons, and
Noblemen, that a supplication may be given in for the Ministers of Edinburgh,
and Mr. David Black, that they may be restored again to their Flocks, and to
behave themselves therein in the fear of God, and love of Christ and his
Kingdom, faithfully and providently, with all dutiful reverence to the Kings
Majesty. And p. 470. That Anno 1603. Mr. Robert Bruce desired his Majesty's
warrant of his re-entry to his calling, or reposition to his place: And in that
same Page, in his Letter to the Council of Edinburgh, he says: And to this
effect I craved that the Act of Council which stood against me, which closes
up my mouth, might be deleted; and that also I might have a warrant from his
Majesty, to testify his Majesty's good will to my free and full Reposition.

That passage of Scripture, Exodus 10.26. -- Not an hoof shall be left behind,
is frequently used, and very often abused and misapplyed, as in the present
case; Moses would not leave a hoof, and therefore Ministers should not preach
the Gospel when the Magistrate permits it, except he permit Presbyteries,
Synods, General Assemblies, and restore Peesbyterial Government entirely as it
was. But there is so great disparity in the cases, that there it no ground for
the inference of the one from the other: For Moses was made a God to Pharaoh,
Exodus 7.1. He was King in Jesurun; as he was extraordinarily raised up by God,
so he was backed by the miraculous power of God, which plagued Pharaoh and the
Egyptians.

Again, Moses and Israel were in possession of their Beasts, and had the
extraordinary warrant and protection of God to secure their possessions.
Further, Moses had also a reason for his refusal to leave a beast; for says he,
Thereof we must take to serve the Lord, and we know not with what we must serve
the Lord until we come thither.

If Moses had been a mere Subject of Pharaoh, and if Pharaoh had taken away all
the Israelites Beasts, and had them in his possession; if Moses being but a
mere Subject, having no extraordinary call nor capacity, had refused to take
any of the Beasts again, except Pharaoh would give every hoof, there would have
heen some kind of resemblance; but as the case stands, there is none.

Moses would not part with what he had in possession, and therefore we should
not take a part of that which we are deprived of, except we get all. Moses gave
a reason why he could not leave a hoof, because they were to sacrifice, and
they knew not what Sacrifices the Lord would require: But what reason can we
give for that resolution, that if we get not all at once which is taken away,
we cannot, we will not take any thing? there is no reason here but will and
humor, and impotent pride.

Moses being extraordinarily authorized and assisted with the miraculous power
of God, would not quit the grip of what he had in possession, and that upon a
solid reason; and therefore a people who have through their sin and the
displeasure of God, lost the possession of the Church Privileges they had, so
that all is quit and gone, that they should take nothing till they get all;
that they should refuse the benefit of Preaching of the Gospel, till all their
Assemblies for Government be restored, this looks like a judicial infatuation,
a proud heart in a poor breast, that has mickle dolor to dry. They who are
wise and humble, will see that it is their duty to be humbled under the ruins
and desolations of the Church, and to take back any little that may be had,
till the Lord send better.

Farm. I ingenuously acknowledge, that I am instructed and informed by what you
have said in several things, which I did not before understand: But Sir, I
wonder how ye who are not indulged, labors so much to justify the Indulged
Ministers, when the Indulged Ministers, as I am informed, confess that they are
wrong; and if what they have done were to do, they would not do it.


Min. That is among the false reproaches that are cast upon the Indulged
Ministers; they grant that there are several things in the Magistrates actings,
which relate to the Indulgence, which are not right; as the Act of
Instructions; but for that Act, which is indeed the Act of Indulgence, the
permitting and allowing the Preaching of the Gospel, they declare upon all
occasions, that the Magistrate not only may, but ought to permit and allow the
Ministers of the Gospel to Preach the Gospel; and as for their own practice in
accepting the liberty of the peaceable exercise of their Ministry, when the
Magistrate granted it, they have upon all occasions declared, that it was their
duty to do what they did, and that they could not have had peace in their
Consciences to have refused to Preach the Gospel in these places, where they
are settled, and several of them have declared this, when they saw themselves
near to Death and Judgment, as for example, Mr. Alexander Blare, and Mr.
Alexander Wedderburne.


Farm. It has been very confidently said, That the Indulged Ministers have
given in Bands to the Council, and that they should have sitten upon the Assize
of some of these who were put to death for being at Bothwelbridge.


Minist. I know these to be vile lies, and Calumnies, which the Father of lies,
and Malicious persons have devised, to render these Ministers and their
Ministry hateful. The time was, when persons, who had muttered such odious
Calumnies of honest Ministers, would have been hunted and hissed at, as
graceless Persons; but now its a great part of some peoples work, to make up,
and take up false Reproaches of Ministers: it is a great Evidence of the absence
of the God of Truth, that the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of Love, is far
away from many of this Generation; and that a lying Spirit, the Devil, the
Calumniator, the accuser of the Brethren, does much prevail in the hearts of
many, who are under the power of this lust of evil speaking; But I think it
very observable, that the Lord has so overruled the Devil and his Instruments,
that the lies which they have spread, are so manifestly false, and so void of
any appearance of Truth, that none but these who desire to believe lies of the
indulged Ministers, will be deceived by them; and sober Persons are the more
respectful to the Indulged Ministers, because they see the Devil, the Father of
lies, is so busy in feigning false Accusations against them. They say, if
there were not receivers, there would not be thieves; if there were not so many
to listen to such Backbiters, and to take up such reproaches which others have
made up, this Trade of Calumniating would decay. I hope, Landlord, you will
think it your Duty after this, to discountenance, and drive away such
Tale-bearers and Back-biters, by an angry Countenance, and sharp Rebukes, that
they may not go on to delude themselves, in thinking the more ill tales they
have of the Lords Servants, that they are the more Religious; but they may be
brought to understand, that they are Satan's Instruments, and doing his Work. As
you would abide in the Tabernacle of God, and dwell in his holy Hill, beware of
Backbiting, beware of taking up a Reproach against your Neighbor: Ye must not
only forbear to make up, but ye must not take up, or as some read it, ye must
not receive nor endure a Reproach against your neighbor.


Farm. I thank you for your good Counsel, or rather for minding me of the
Counsel of God in the 15 Psalm, and I shall by the grace of God resist that
lust of evil-speaking for the time to come. I hear much, that the Magistrate
had an ill design in granting the Indulgence, and therefore the Ministers
should not have accepted of it, and we should not hear them; for their
Preaching, and our hearing, furthers that ill design.


Minist. I think we might be better employed, than in guessing at Statesmens
designs. I have been credibly informed, that they who were the first movers of
the Indulgence, had a very good design, and none who knew them, will suspect
them of mischievous designs; others I suppose, who were not much taken up with
supernatural ends, or designs, yet they designed the Quiet and Peace of the
Country; they desired not intestine Wars; they were content that they that
would not hear Conformists, might be rid of Trouble and Fining; if any intended
the Indulgence for division, they who divide upon that head, they work to their
hand; but its an idle fancy to imagine, that the ill design of the Magistrate,
who permits the preaching of the Gospel, will alter the Nature of the Gospel,
or make the good design of the Gospel of no effect, or that it will vitiate the
preaching or hearing of the Gospel to those who preach and hear the Gospel in
that manner, and for that end, that the Lord has appointed it to be preached
and heard. Although a Magistrate did for some ill end, permit a faithful,
skilful Physician to exercise his Office, the Magistrates ill design would not
alter the nature, or hinder the Operation of the Physic given by that
Physician, who did not approve of that ill design, but honestly designed the
health of his Patients, and used the proper means for prescribing or recovering
their health. And it is another reasonless conceit to imagine, that when a
Magistrate assumes to himself some false Title, or unlawful power, that in that
case no use may be made of that lawful Authority which he has as Magistrate.
Though Cyrus prefixed a great lie to his Proclamation which granted the Jews
liberty to return and build the Temple of the Lord; yet the Jews were not such
fools, as not to make use of the good Decree, because the King said, that God
had given him all the Kingdoms of the earth, and so arrogated to himself more
power than God had given him. But I might have eased my self of all this
trouble, by referring them to the many solid Vindications of the acceptance of
the Indulgence, which are in several peoples hands; but that is your fault that
ye seek only for those Papers which are against the Indulgence.


Farm. I would be content to read those Papers if I had them.


Minist. You might get them, if you would seek them.

I have heard of some short Papers of that nature; but I suppose the History of
the Indulgence will never be answered.


Minist. These short Papers answered all that is to the purpose, in the History
of the Indulgence.


Pr. That Is a pretty device to decline the answering of that unanswerable Book.


Minist. Softly Sir! that Book is fully answered. I have seen two full Answers
of it, and there may be more that I have not seen; and if you be here on Monday
next, a sight of one of these Answers will clear you, that that book is not
unanswerable.


Pr. I would be glad to see it.


Farm. Sir, you have much obliged me, by staying with me this night, and it
will be a double obligation, if you come again to my house upon Monday, and
bring that Answer with you. But it is now time to go to the Family-exercise. I
shall desire of you both, that ye would be pleased to forbear to fall upon this
question about the Indulgence, before my Family. Let the subject of your
discourse at Table, and after Supper, be of purposes which may be fitter to
prepare us for sanctifying the Lords day, than this doubtful disputation. I
hear also from some of my Neighbors, that since their servants did withdraw
from hearing Indulged Ministers, and from the duty of Catechizing, they are
become more ignorant and careless of learning the grounds of Religion, and are
taken up with the jangling about the Indulgence, as if that were the one thing
needful, not to go to the Kirk, but to the fields, to hear Preaching. And I
hear their Masters complaining, that they are become more unruly, and make less
conscience of doing their work, which makes me apprehensive, that all is not
right in this new way they have taken; and to be ingenuous with you, I find,
that my own withdrawing has not been to my advantage; and this prejudice
against the Indulged Ministers, who Preach edifying Doctrine, seems not to be
to edification; I sometimes hear no Preaching upon the Sabbath, when there is
no Preaching in the Fields, in the bounds; and I sometimes upon false
Advertisements wander, seeking Preaching in the Field, and find it not; and
sometimes there comes Preachers along, whose doctrine is little to Edification,
which makes me often think, that those of my Family who go to the Kirk, and
brings away edifying Notes of the Sermon, spend the Sabbath much better than I
do; and when I compare their Notes with the Notes of some others, who go to the
Field, who either bring away nothing, except it be a fair general, that the
Preacher had brave work, and it was a wonderful Sermon, or some reflection upon
the indulged Ministers, or some bitter invective against the Magistrate. I
cannot but think, that they who go to the Church have the advantage of these
who go to the Fields. And therefore I do not desire, that these of my Family
who go to the Church, may be hindered from going; for I am edified by the Notes
which they bring from the Church.


Minist. There are none of my acquaintance for any thing I can perceive,
bettered by their deserting of the indulged Ministers; and this doctrine that
the indulged Ministers should not be heard, is a Doctrine from which (for any
thing I can see) no edifying use can be drawn. The Lord incline our hearts to
follow after the things which make for peace, and the things wherewith one may
edify another.


Farm. Sir, you are as good as your word, in returning. Have you brought the
answer of the History of the Indulgence with you.


Minist. Here it is.


There are so many Papers already extant, and never yet answered, which from
the Holy Scripture, and from the Writings of Orthodox Divines, do clearly
demonstrate the lawfulness of the acceptance of the peaceable Exercise of the
Ministry, granted in the Magistrates Acts of Indulgence, that it may seem a
needless work to write any more upon that Subject. And if the sad Consequences
which have followed upon this Question, did not render it serious, it were
almost ridiculous to move the Question whether these of the outed Ministers of
the Church of Scotland, who after the Magigrates Act of Indulgence, did either
resume to their own Congregations, or not having access to return to their own
Congregations, did upon the Invitation of vacant Congregations, and the Consent
of the Ministers concerned, come to help these desolate Congregations, till
they might have access to these Congregations where they were formerly settled.
Whether these Ministers did right or not; and whether these Congregations did
right in receiving, and countenancing their own Ministers, or in inviting and
countenancing those Ministers who had no access to their own Congregations, but
had access to the peaceable Exercise of their Ministry among them? They who
will make a question, if it be lawful for Ministers of the Gospel to preach the
Gospel to their own Congregations, or when they have not access to their own
Congregations, if it be lawful to preach to desolate Congregations, which
earnestly desire them to come and help them; they may make a question of any
thing. And yet some have not only started this question, but resolved it in the
Negative; and not only so, but they have raised a horrible Hue-and-Cry after
these honest Ministers, for going to preach the Gospel in these Congregations,
as if they had been Thieves or Robbers, and have charged them as Traitors,
Betrayers of the cause, and what not? and have not only stirred up the People
to disown and desert them, but have commended their deserting of them, as a
necessary testimony, forsooth, against Erastianism: and thus one of the vilest
and most groundless Schisms that has ever been in the Church, is made a sort
of Martyrdom.

This Doctrine was first whispered to the People in private Conferences; then
it was dropped now and then in the Sermons of one or two; then some rash youths
made it a great part of their discourse in public; then we had Letters and
Questions from Holland, with Advertisement, that the Press was traveling with
the History of the Indulgence, which is now brought forth. And although any
thing to the purpose in it, has either been answered, or grounds laid down
from which it may be answered, in the Answers which were given to the Authors
Letters and Questions: yet because some have alleged, that this Book is so
irrafragible in its reason, that the many who are against it, shall never be
able to answer its Reason, and a friend of this Historian threatened, that he
would make all the Indulged Ministers run before him; and because the People
who withdraw from the Indulged Ministers, are confident that this Book will
never be answered, and so are hardened in their Separation; and because there
are many dangerous and destructive Tenets in this Book, and the Epistle
prefixed to it, which if reduced to practice, would fill the World with
Confusion; I shall for Vindication of the Truth, and out of Love and Compassion
to the People, who are deceived by this Book, and for the just Vindication of
the reputation of the Indulged Ministes, who are very injuriously reproached in
this History, examine all that looks like reason in this Book. And though I be
of their Opinion, that all that has any shadow of Reason in this Book, might
be answered fully in a few Pages; yet seeing many are so possessed with a
conceit of the Unanswerableness of this Book, that if any part of it were left
unanswered, it would be alleged that it could not be answered, and this might
be a snare to the poor people, who lay so great stress upon this Book; I hope
the judicious Reader will forgive me, that I put my self to so much labor,
which to him seems needless; for though it will not only seem, but be really
needless to the Judicious Reader, yet it is necessary for the weak, for whose
sake I especially put my self to this trouble.

The Historian gives his Book the Title of The History of the Indulgence,
showing its Rise, Conveyance, Acceptance together with a Demonstration of the
Unlawfulness thereof. If under the name of Indulgence he comprehend all the
Acts of the Magistrate, which he records in this History, he abuses the word
Indulgence, and he abuses his Reader; for there are several of the Acts which
he relates, as for Example the Act of Instructions, and the Act of Fining the
Ministers who kept not the Twenty ninth of May, which were not Acts of
Indulgence. The Acts of Indulgence were only those Acts which granted the
peaceable Exercise of the Ministry to some Presbyterian Ministers,
notwithstanding of the Laws which established Prelacy, and enjoined Conformity,
But this Confusion runs through his whole Book, in which he would have his
Reader believe, that the Indulged Ministers accepted of all these Acts, which
he calls, or rather miscalls by the name of Indulgence; and this confusion is
one main foundation upon which his confused Babel is found. Whether he has
demonstrated the unlawfulness of the Magistrates Acts in which these Ministers
are permitted, and allowed to preach the Gospel, or the unlawfulness of the
acceptance of the peaceable exercise of the Ministry, we will see when we come
to his Demonstrations, and his answers to contrary Objections.

As for his Vindication of such as scruple to hear the indulged, it is a rare
undertaking, and looks liker the attempt of a Knight errant, than of a solid
and peaceable Divine; for a scruple (as he might have learned from Amesius in
his Cases of Conscience, 1 Book, and sixth Chapter) is a rash and groundless
fear, and therefore he has been very ill advised to undertake to maintain
those who scruple to hear Indulged Ministers; this was a rash and frantic act
of Casuistick Chivalry; his prowess would have been better proved and approved
of all sober persons, in setting these people free from these rash and
groundless fears; for that would have been a right Vindication of those
Scrupulous people, to have delivered them from their rash and groundless fears,
which scare them from their mercies, and the means of their Salvation, and was
an injurious cruelty to their souls.

The Historian designs himself a Presbyterian, in great Letters; and yet this
Book is a History of warring against Presbyterians; and if it were fair War, it
were more tolerable; but as the War is groundless and unjust, so it is very
foully managed, non amice factum ab amico. And though he be a Presbyterian in
great Letters, in uberiore forma, and the Indulged stand before him in the
frontispiece of his Book, in a very small Character, yet he should have
remembered, that he was but one, and they were many, and it is not a
Presbyterian practice, but a Popish Prank for one to stigmatize, censure and
condemn many; his Designation should have put him in mind of Presbyterian
Practice, and that among Presbyterians, matters are carried by the Plurality of
voices, and not by the will of one how great soever he imagine himself to be;
but there are so many things in this History, which are inconsistent with
Presbyterian Principles, and which overturns the very foundation of
Presbyterian Government, and of all Government; and there is so much Satyrick,
insolent insulting over his Presbyterian Brethren, that he had some reason to
fear, that he would be taken for some other sort of Creature than a
Presbyterian: and therefore he has done as the Painters they say were wont to
do, when the Art of Painting was rude, and it was not easy to know where a
Horse were a Horse or an Ox, what was defective in their Painting they helped
it by writing, and in good great Letters wrote down, this is an Horse, and this
an Ox, that none might mistake. I cannot but resent the injury, which he has
done to Presbyterians, and to their cause, in calling himself a Presbyterian,
and then acting the part sometimes of a Pope, and sometimes of a Separatist,
and venting extravagant, wild conceits, which are contrary to the received
Tenets of Presbyterians; but I am hopeful that no ^ngenious Person will impute
all this Authors conceits to Presbyterians, because he calls himself a
Presbyterian.

Before I come to the History, I find an Epistle to the Christian Reader
written by the Historians Friend, who was like-minded with him in these matters
relating to the Indulgence. This Epistle is particularly directed to the
suffering Ministers and Professors of the Church of Scotland. To these
Christian Readers, he says, he need not tell them, that the knowledge of the
Times, and what the Israel of God ought to do, should be their Ornament and
Cognizance, distinguishing them from others, who are brutish in their
knowledge. He has an eye to that Scripture, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. Among those who
were ready armed to the War, and came to David to Hebron, to turn the Kingdom
of Saul to him, according to the word of the Lord Ver. 23. There are some of
the Children of Issachar, v. 32. And of the Children of Issachar, which were
men that had understanding of the Times, to know what Israel ought to do: the
Heads of them were two hundred, and all their Brethren were at their command.
These men of Issachar spoken of, were, as ^he Dutch Interpreters expound the
place, under^tanding and expert men, which are able to give good Advice and
Counsel at what time it were best ^o attempt any thing, or desist from it,
whether in War, or civil Affairs, as Esther 1.13. or in Husban^ry and Country
Affairs. Some Interpreters re^^r this to the knowledge of Astronomy, as Diodate
^ews: but others (says he) understand and take it to be only wisdom and
sagacity, either natural, or gotten by long experience, to discern and know the
very moment of Opportunities, a thing very important, whence ordinarily depends
the good success of Affairs Others show, that these men of Issachar were men
eminently skilful, and endued with prudence, to know what was to be done, and
when, and gave evidence of this sagacity at this time, in taking this fit
opportunity in turning the Kingdom of Saul to David, and they were followed by
their Brethren in this matter.

This Knowledge of the Times was not common to all the Professors in Israel;
for if so, this Knowledge of the Times would not have been noted by the Spirit
of God, as something remarkable in these men of Issachar. And no doubt there
were many Israelites who were taught of God, and were sufficiently
distinguished from those who were brutish in their knowledge, who yet had not
this Knowledge of the Times, to know when it was time to make War, and to make
alterations in the State, in turning the Kingdom from the house of Saul to
David. This Knowledge of the Times is very desirable, but every thing desirable
is not a duty. Moses wishes that all the Lords People were Prophets; but it is
not the duty of every one of the Lords People to be a Prophet, and to
Prophecy. Again, there are several things which we are oblidged to have and to
do, which yet are not the Cognizance, or the Badges and Marks whereby they who
are taught of God, are distinguished from them who are brutish in their
Knowledge; as for example, an eminent measure of Knowledge, of Prudence, of
Love, of Assurance, these indeed, are excellent Ornaments, but they are not
Badges and Marks common to all those who are taught of God, and distinguishing
them from those who are brutish in their Knowledge; for there are many honest
Professors who are taught of God, who have not attained to these eminent
degrees of Knowledge, Prudence, Love and Assurance. Again, it is the duty of all
Professors to obey the Law of God perfectly, otherways their defects in
obedience would not be sins. But that perfection is not the Badg or Cognizance
to distinguish those who are taught of God, from those who are brutish in their
Knowledge. So that though that knowledge of the times were a thing which all
Israelites should be adorned with, yet it would not be right to make it their
Cognizance, or a distinguishing Mark to difference them from those who are
brutish in their Knowledge.

But for any thing that appears from the Text or the Interpreters, which I have
consulted this, Knowledge of the Times was a natural or political sagacity
attained by long experience, by which these men of Issachar knew what was the
fit seasons of making War and alterations in matters of State, which concerned
all Israel.

Now for this sort of Knowledge of times, I suppose the Author of the Epistle
will not say, that it is the duty of every Professor in the Church of Scotland
to have this politic sagacity, to discern the Seasons of making War, and
making alterations in State matters: and much less is this politic sagacity
and prudence, which is not ordinarily acquired, even by men employed in
State Affairs, but by much exercise and long experience, to be made a
Cognizance distinguishing those who are taught of God, from those who have not
saving knowledge: for this knowledge of the Times is (as Interpreters think) a
natural or politic knowledge, and so no evidence or mark of a Spiritual and
supernatural estate. This is certain from the Scripture, that this Knowledge of
the Times was a Knowledge which distinguished some of the Tribe of Issachar
from the Generality of the people of Israel, and therefore this Scripture is
misapplyed, when this Knowledge of the Times is alleged to be the Mark and
Cognizance of all who are taught of God, distinguishing them from those who
have no true Wisdom, but are brutish in their Knowledge, and so like the beasts
that perish.

This is an ill token that the Author of this Epistle has stumbled in the
threshold, and in the very Entry of his Address; and his stumbling is the more
dangerous, because it may be a stumbling block to private Professors, by
putting this conceit in their heads, that they must either have the knowledge
of the Times that the men of Issachar had, concerning the fit seasons of making
War and peace, and of making State-alterations, or else they are brutish in
their Knowledge, and are not taught of God. This were the way to put all
Professors Male and Female, Lad and Less, to become Politicians, and to take
on them to know and determine what Israel should do, to determine what the
State and Church should do. And thus they are diverted from studying to know
what they ought to do themselves, and how they ought to rule their own
Families, and set a work to dive into the intrigues of State Policy, and to
plot alterations of States, and conclude when to make Wars; and to allege that
all who are taught of God, have that Knowledge of the Times which the men of
Issachar had, is to deceive them, and make them imagine that they have that
Knowledge which they have not, and to tempt them to meddle with things that are
too high for them, and to crack their brains by racking them to reach those
things which are beyond their Capacity, and to stretch themselves beyond their
line, and pass the bounds of their Station and Vocation. Such flattering
insinuations, which either puff up people with a conceit of their Wisdom, to
manage the greatest and most important Affairs of Kirk and State, and that they
are fit to guide their Guides, and break the Ice to them, as the Historian says
in his 28 Questions and Vindication, has done much harm to several
well-meaning people, and put them from minding the duties of their particular
Callings, and the Duties of their Christian Vocation, in the exercise of Faith
and Repentance, and in giving diligence in the exercise of the Graces of the
Spirit, to glorify God, and enjoy him, and to make sure their calling and
election, and to edify one another, and put them to be wholly or mostly taken
up about the managing of public Affairs, and to break out of their own place,
and pass the bounds of their Vocation, that they may right all that is wrong;
and what confusion this breeds, both Reason and Experience may teach us. If
Professors had been earnestly exhorted to do the duties of their Vocation,
which the Lord calls them to, and to be earnest in praying to God for those
whom God has called to be Magistrates and Ministers, that they might be guided
of God, and inclined to those things that are right in the sight of God, that
they might under them live a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty: This had been to put them to their duty, to walk in the way of God,
and to have shunned many disorders and confusions, and to have obtained Isreal's
mercy, whom the Lord led like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

But when every private Professor is taught, that he knows the Times, and what
Israel ought to do, and that he is fit to guide the Shepherds, and go before
them, in breaking the Ice; what can be expected from such Antiscriptural
Conceits, but Confusion and Ruin? He adds, neither need I tell you how
impossible it is to know what the present day and hour makes indispensable
duty, without a just reflection on what is past; for the emergents of the
present day can never be improved to the advantage of preventing the morrows
Misery, without this -- Now that you and I may be helped to a profitable
reflection upon what is past, and improve it to it is just Advantage, the Lord
has been pleased in this unconcerned Soper of many, to put it upon the heart
of a Servant of his -- to give you and me the following History, etc.

Ans. Does he think that what he says here, is so evident, that every Christian
Reader knows it without his telling them; if he had only said, that a just
Reflection on what is past, is useful for the Time present; or if he had only
said, that this Reflection on what is past, is useful for improving the
emergents of the present day, it might have passed without Animadversion; but
when he makes it impossible to know the present days duty, without Reflection
on yesterday; when he says, that the present days emergents can never be
improved without reflection on yesterday; He has needlessly, by winding up his
Assertions as high as his fancy could twine them, cracked their credit, and
disobliged his Reader, and provoked him to stand out against his Assertions, as
injurious, in bringing him under a new impossibility and impotency which he
knew not of. Now men love not to be brought under Impossibilities, of knowing
and acting: for

1. It Is neither Time past nor present, which makes duty, or makes us know what
is duty; nor is it the remembrance of what is past, that makes men know what is
their present duty: it is the will of God and not Time, which makes this or that
our duty; and it is the Revelation of the Will of God that makes us know what is
our duty the day, and what was our duty or error yesterduy. Adam knew the duty
of the day in which he was created, but he had no yesterday to reflect upon.
Suppose a man lose all memory of what is past, yet he may by taking heed to his
way according to the word, know his present duty. I have known some Persons
have that weakness of Memory, that they did not remember that they themselves
had spoken but a little before, and yet they made Conscience of speaking right
when they spoke. It Is a hard thing to bind a man who has lost his Memory of
things past, up under an Impossibility of knowing his duty in things present.

Again, he makes a just Reflection, not only upon a man's own actions, which he
may more certainly know, but also a Reflection upon the Actions of others,
which he cannot know, but by the relation of others, and written Histories,
absolutely necessary for knowing the duty of the present day: Now this is yet a
more intolerable Impossibility, to make our necessary present duty, dependent
upon uncertain Relations, and it may be false stories; how can men be assured,
that their reflections upon these past things are just, when they know not
whether the things be truly and justly related? As for Exemple, this History of
the Indulgence has many falsehoods in it, and these falsehoods are not fit to
instruct any what is the present duty, but are apt to deceive the Readers, and
induce them to sin, and not direct them to their duty. But I see if I stay thus
with the Author of the Epistle, it will be long ere I can come to the
Historian; and therefore I shall only take notice afterward of these things
which concern the Indulgence in this Epistle. But ere I go further, I cannot
but here remember what I heard a Judicious Gentleman say of the Author of this
Epistle, viz. that he used to get as high in his expressions, as his fancy
could reach: this is ordinary in Romantic Writers, but it is a great fault in
any who pretend to write Truth, especially in Divines. And this puts me in mind
of what I heard that great, judicious, and acute Divine, Mr. James Wood say,
that the study of the flourishes of Oratory, was dangerous in a Divine; because
as these flourishing Rhetorications do divert the Hearers or Readers from the
simplicity of the Gospel; so they who follow them, are in hazard in that
pursuit to run over the bounds of truth, and to fly higher than Scripture and
solid Reason do allow. The Author of the Epistle, has frequently in these few
lines, flown higher in his fancy, than Scripture or solid Reason will allow:

1. In making the knowledge of the Times, to know what Israel ought to do, the
Cognizance and Badge of the Professors of the Church of Scotland.

2. In making it impossible to know the present duty, without Reflection on the
Time past.

3. In making our necessary duty depend upon humane Stories, which are often
false, and at best very uncertain.

4. In saying, that the emergents of the present day can never be improved,
without this Reflection on Yesterday.

Seeing the Author of the Epistle has assaulted the Indulged Ministers with
Questions; I shall make use of the same Weapon, that he may have fair play; and
my first Question is, Whether he has any Scripture or Reason to prove these
four Assertions last mentioned? My next Question is, what Warrant has he to
say so confidenly, that the Lord put it upon the Heart of the Historian to give
us this History? Does he think that the History was inspired by the Lord into
the Heart of this Historian? In this History there are many falsehoods in matter
of Fact, many false Reasonings; there are Contradictions and Inconsistences:
Now the God of Truth puts it not upon men's hearts to write Untruth. There are
many bitter Reproaches and Calumnies, much of the Wrath of man, many things
which are not for Peace and Edification; the design of the Book is a vile
Separation and Schism: These things are not from God, who is Love, who is the
God of Peace, who has commanded us to do all our things in love, and not to
forsake the assembling of our selves together.

My third Question is, How he will refute those who allege that the Writing of
this Story came in the Head and Heart of the Historian, as it came in David's
head and heart to number the People? The Lord was angry against Israel, and he
left David to the temptation of Satan, and to his pride and he numbered the
People, and this brought on the Plague. The Lord was angry at the People, who
were weary of the Ordinances, and were disposed to lightly Ministers; and the
Lord in his righteous judgment, may justly leave men to their Pride and
Self-conceit, to Write and Print Calumnies against Ministers, etc. for a Plague
upon those who depise his Servants and Ordinances, so filling them with their
own ways: this Book is a great Plague to such people, hardening them in their
neglect of Preaching, Catechizing, to the increase of ignorance, unbelief,
ungodliness. The dismal effects which he spoke of, are not the effects of the
Magistrates granting, or the Ministers accepting of the peaceable exercise of
the Ministry. Page 3. he charges the Indulged Ministers with a fearless making
and meddling with the stated enemies of Gods work, ere they had mourned over
former unfaithfulness and miscarriages, and ere Brethren equally concerned,
were consulted.

Ans. How knows he that they were fearless, or that they had not mourned for
their former miscarriages? by what evidence does he thus judge of the frame of
the hearts of his fellow servants, especially when he was at such a distance
from them when they meddled in this matter? and I suppose he will not conclude,
that they had no fears nor tears, because they did not Print them and send them
over sea, seeing they have been and are mourners, of whose tears the World gets
not notice; and I am inclined to think, that the deepest sorrow makes least
dinn. Every mourner has not the opportunity of publishing their tears in
Print; and many Mourners have put Books to the Press, whose Modesty would not
suffer them to mention their own Tears. As there is rashness in his judging
concerning the inward frame of his Brethrens heart, in intruding into those
things which he has not seen; so there is something more than rashness, in his
alleging that Brethren were not consulted; for he might have known, if he
would have been at the pains to have enquired, that Brethren were consulted,
and that the generality of the Ministers in Scotland, were for Ministers
returning to their own charges; and that those who had not access to their own
charges, might upon the Invitation of vacant Congregations, go and exercise
their Ministry among them. But I perceive that he is against all meddling with
the present Magistrates, because of the ill they have done and do design. He
looks on all making and meddling with them, as Defection, and the cause of
further Defection; for, says he, what else but further Defection could be
expected as the issue and result of those medlings? the Author of the Cup of
cold Water, advises to stand aloof from all listnings to proposals coming from
them, or making any to them; and he conceives we are called of God to take this
course, as that way wherein alone we can expect his approbation and
countenance, Page 41.

Again page 42. he says, it passes his ken what Address can be made to him,
except it be to tell, we can make none, or to beseech him to forbear to
persecute the Mediators Ambassadors; and that he sees not, and hopes never to
see with his eyes; who can see how Addresses to them in Church Matters can
consist with the resentment of their Usurpation of Christ's Throne? and after in
that same Page, We have nothing to seek from any who sets in our Masters Chair
of State; God forbid that ever we should be seen to bow or beg to them, while
they sit there; however when we are passive, we may make use of what liberty is
given, yet it is our Peace, etc. to abstain from seekings and receivings from
those who stand in such terms of Opposition to him.

Ans. This is new Doctrine, a new light which I suppose come never to light
till now; if the Author has learned it of any, I wish he would tell us who are
his Authors. I doubt if he can show us a Precedent going before us in this way
in which, and (which is more strange) in which alone we can expect Gods
Approbation and Countenance, I wonder how he has come to have so great
Confidence in this untrodden Path, that Subjects are called of God to keep at
such a distance from their Rulers, as to stand aloof from all listnings to
their Proposals; And that Subjects are called of God, to stand aloof from
making any Proposals to their Rulers: And that this Course is the way, and the
only way wherein they can expect Gods Approbation and Countenance, are strange
and bold Assertions, which should not have been obtruded upon us by his
Conceit. A Divine call, and Divine approbation should have been confirmed by
Divine Authority; what knows he, but the Lord may put some good motion in
their hearts? he has put good things in the hearts of Idolaters, Heathen
Princes, to which the Lords People did listen, and to which they were obliged
to listen, and for which they found themselves bound to bless the Lord, who had
put such things in their hearts; the Lord can put good Motions in the Hearts of
ill Men, and to refuse to listen to those Motions which are good and of God, is
to refuse to listen unto God. How can this consist with the Honor which all
Inferiors, Servants, Children, Subjects, are bound to give to their
Superiors? I suppose there is no Superior who would not judge it to be a
manifest Contempt in his Inferior, if he should keep at such a distance from
him, as that he would neither hear what he proposed to him, nor yet would
propose any thing to, nor desire any thing of his Superior.

I cannot see how a man can bind himself to keep such a distance from any man,
Superior, Equal or Inferior, as not to listen to any thing he says, be what
it will. This standing aloof from all listnings to any Proposals made to us,
and from making any Proposals to them, if we like not those that are made by
them, seems inconsistent with common Civility and humanity. This is a new sort
of an Act of Intercommuning: Let us hear his Reasons for it, page 41. first,
says he, This is the most proper means to convince them of their Wichedness. I
am so far from being of his Opinion, that I think it were a very proper Way, to
provoke them to use all Violence against such who would neither hear them, nor
speak to them; who would neither seek nor take any thing from them, this would
appear to them a great height of Insolence and Contempt; and Insolence and
Contempt in Inferiors toward their Superiors, is no proper means to make
Superiors better, but has a native tendency to tempt and provoke them to be
worse.

Secondly, he says, That this is the alone expedient to preserve our selves
free of all compliances with them, and in good terms with Jesus Christ; and
this, says he, is best Policy, to beware of sinning him out of Soul or sight,
by touching with that which his Soul hates.

Ans. As we must not sin against Christ by complying with Rulers in any thing
that is sinful; so we must not sin against him, by despising Dignities, and by
carrying our selves insolently toward those whom he has commanded us to
honor: but we should both honor them, and forbear to comply with them in any
evil. We should not refuse to hear their Proposals, if they make any to us, but
we should hear them, and if they be good, entertain them; and if they be evil,
we should with meekness of Wisdom show the evil of them, and give our Reasons
why we cannot comply with them. Thus we both keep our selves free from the sin
of contempt of lawful Authority, and from the Contagion of any sinful Proposal;
and what know we, but solid Reasons given to the Magistrate, may instruct and
edify him, and divert him from pressing that which is not right.

Thirdly, says he, this is the way to preserve Unity among the Remnant.

Ans. This is none of the means of Unity prescribed in the Scripture; and if it
be not among the means of Union which God has appointed, I know not what
ground we have to expect that it will be effectual for that Union which God
has appointed to be among his People.

2. This was not the way that our godly and learned Ancestors took: new ways
are ordinarily dividing ways. This way would quite cast out the Magistrates and
the Nonconformists; and this is the thing which the Papists have been driving
this long time; and it would certainly break the Nonconformists: for if this
Motion should take with some, it would not take with Judicious and Sober
Persons, for they would perceive that this were the Highway to render the
whole Nonconformists hateful to Magistrates, as a pack of sullen, humorous
People, who would neither seek, nor take any thing from them, nor hear them,
nor answer any thing to them, except it were, that they would neither make nor
meddle with them, and that they would make no Address to them; except it were
to tell them that they could make none to them. Yet I perceive, that the
Author, page 42. though he is for abstaining from seeking and receiving any
thing from them, yet he thinks we may make use of what liberty is given by
them. When I read this, it put me in mind of some petted Children, and of some
Persons under deep Melancholy, who will not seek meat nor receive it from
those who would give it to them; yet if it be set down beside them, they will
eat it: it is hard enough to make any considerable rational difference betwixt
receiving liberty, and making use of liberty given. And I can see no reason why
we may not receive and seek that which we may take and make use of when it is
given; there is more Humor than Reason in this distinction. Yea, I perceive
that the Author is not against all seeking; for in that same page he allows of
one Petition to be put up to them, and that is to beseech them to forbear to
persecute the Mediators Ambassadors; if we may beseech them to forbear one
evil, why may we not beseech them to forbear other evils? and if we may beseech
them to forbear to do evil, why may we not beseech them to do good? The Prophet
Isaiah when he is speaking to a very wicked Generation, whom he calls Rulers of
Sodom, and People of Gomorrha, he puts these together, Cease to do evil, learn
to do well.

In that same page the Author limits this keeping aloof as to Addresses to the
Magistrate, to Addresses in Church Matters: he has foreseen the Objection
which would be made; if we may make no Addresses to them, then how shall Wrongs
be righted, Justice administered? etc. For it is not to be supposed that Rulers
will right those who are wronged, except the Wrong be represented to them, and
recourse be had to them for Redress. But if we may make Addresses to them for
righting Wrongs done to us in our Persons, or Estates, why may we not make
Addresses to them for righting the Wrongs, that are done to Christ and his
Church? If Erastian Supremacy does not bar us from making Address to them, from
making and meddling with them in seeking what is due to us from them, and
receiving it when they give it; why should it hinder us to make and meddle with
them, in seeking that they would do right to the Church and Servants of Christ?
and when they do any thing right in taking off any undue Restraints which they
had laid formerly upon the Church or Ministers, why may not that right be
received? For the Magistrate, as a Magistrate, is bound to do right to the
Church, as well as to the Commonwealth; and his encroachment upon
Church-privileges, does no more make void that power which he has from God for
doing good to the Church, than it makes void the power that he has, for doing
good to the Commonwealth. The Author of the Cup of cold Water, charges them
very high, as having passed all bounds of Civil Authority, p. 4. and yet
condemns not Addresses to them in civil matters; why then should he condemn
Addresses to them in Church Matters, because of their passing the bounds of
that civil Power about Church Matters which they have from God? The main ground
upon which he would infer, that there should be no making nor meddling with the
Magistrate, is the Supremacy, and other sins which are mentioned in his
Preface, and in the Cup of cold Water, and in the History of the Indulgence

It should be our earnest Prayer that the Lord would open the Eyes, and
convince the Consciences, and soften the Hearts of our Rulers, that they may in
time repent of their sins; and it is our duty to be humbled, weighted and
ashamed, not only because of our own sins, but also because of the sins of our
Rulers; and we have the greater reason to take confusion of face to our selves
because of their sins, because it is the sins of Subjects which ordinarily
provokes God to leave their Rulers to their own Lusts, and the temptation of
Flatterers and Devils to bring on Judgment upon themselves and their People.

We may see our sins in the sins of Rulers; if Christ had been in Truth as he
was in Word, acknowledged alone Head and Lord of his own house; if his Divine
Wisdom, and Sovereign Will had been only observed and followed in the matters
of God; and if men's wills, and humors, and conceits, and interests, had not
been mixed in these things; and if those to whom the Lord had given the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, had kept close to their Spiritual Function, it might
have prevented all encroachments upon the Spiritual Power of the Church. O that
the Lord himself would teach Rulers with a strong hand, that no other power is
good, but that which is of God, and to God, and no other power but that which
is of God, by whom Kings reign, is for their honor and interest; all other
power is vanity, nothing, and worse than nothing, and will be to their loss,
shame and sorrow. Darius found that that Decree which seemed to confer too much
honor upon him, in pretending to make him God alone for thirty days, was but a
miserable cheating snare; as Flatterers are a great plague to Rulers, so wise
and faithful Instructors, Counselors, and Reprovers, who out of pure Zeal for
God, and true love to Rulers, show them what is right and wrong in the sight of
God, are great blessings to them.

It is not every one that is fit to reprove equals, far less any Superiors, and
least of all Rulers; and it is not every one that has some fitness, that is
called of God to this work. They who are called to it, must manage this
difficil work with all Wisdom, Faithfulness, love to the person of the Ruler,
and respect to his Authority, that in discovering his sin, his Authority be not
brought into Contempt. As they must not lessen their sin, so they must not make
it worse than it is. If we must not lie upon the Devil, far less upon those
whom the Lord has called Gods: it were also good to say nothing of them behind
their backs, but what we could say to them, if we were called to it, and had
access: for to vent things of Rulers behind their backs, and when called to an
account, to deny or mince and extenuate, and put another face upon it than it
had at first, is not ingenuous dealing.

It is found in sad experience, that bitter invectives against Rulers published
by uncertain Authors, and which overlashes and passes the bounds of verity,
irritates and provokes Rulers, and makes them think that such invectives flow
from hatred to their persons, and contempt of their Authority, and tempts them
to reject the truths which are mixed with these falsehoods; and thus many by
overdoing, undo all that they intended to do. I wish the Author of the Preface,
and Cup of cold Water, and of the Letters, had not overlashed and passed the
bounds of Truth in their exagerations of the Magistrates sins, and in uttering
things derogatory to their Authority; as for example, that no Magistrate either
Heathen, Turk or Christian, ever arrogated such a Supremacy.

Some have arrogated to themselves the Deity, and to be God alone, as Darius
did by signing the Decree. Herod arrogated to himself to be God, and not man.
And that allegiance that they have delete the apprehension of that eternal God,
who is above them, would fasten that upon them which many think the greatest
professed Atheists, though they intend it, yet can never attain unto it, to get
the apprehension of a Deity rased out. It Is also said that they have the purity
of enmity at, and implacability against all who desire to be faithful and loyal
to Christ. And elsewhere it is said, If it be not an abuse of language to call
them Rulers whose Government is pure Tyranny. They have much real guilt, why
should we make our selves guilty in alleging upon them that which we cannot
prove? The Lord has forbidden to speak evil of any man, and in a special
manner he has forbidden to revile Rulers; as we should beware of idolizing
Rulers, so we should beware of despising Dignities; if the pains and time that
has been spent in telling how our Rulers had been taken up in earnest Prayers
and Endeavors to make them better, it might have been better both for them and
us.

The exaggerating of their sins to scare us from all Addresses to them, from
all seekings and receivings, has a direct tendency to put them and us in a
state of hostility, and render us hateful to Rulers, as Persons who are utterly
alienate from them, and will have nothing to do with them. It may seem a very
cleanly-like conceit to well-meaning people, to forbear all making and meddling
with Rulers, who have highly provoked the Lord, and vexed his People; but this
is but a conceited cleanliness. The first Magistrate that Israel had to do
with, was a grievous Oppressor of the Lords People, and an Idolater, and an
insolent despiser of God, who makes nothing of God, Who is the Lord that I
should obey his voice, and let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I
let Israel go: And yet the Lord sends Moses and Aaron to him, to desire him to
let Israel go to serve him in the Wilderness; and after he has given that
blasphemous insolent answer, full of tempting of God, they insist humbly to
pray him to let them go, Exodus 5.1, 2, 3. And they are many times after, sent
by the Lord to Pharaoh with the same desire. It were easy to multiply
instances of this nature, but this one is sufficient; here are frequent
Addresses made by the Lords servants to a most Godless, Atheistical Blasphemer
and Persecutor of the Lords people, and that in a religious matter, It Is for
liberty to go and worship God.

If a company of Christians were taken at Sea, by a company of profligate
godless Pirates, who were stronger than they, might not the Christians desire
of them Liberty to worship God together? who will question it? And if an
address may be made to such Ruffians, who neither fear God nor regard man, and
who have no Authority over the Christians, but keep them Prisoners by strong
hand; how much more may Addresses be made to the Magistrate, who, whatever be
his sins, has Authority from God to do good, and the same Authority that a
godly Magistrate has; and to draw out this power by Petitions, and to take the
benefit of the exercise of it? When the Magistrate does any good to the Church,
and undoeth any ill formerly done, it is not a touching of any unclean thing,
but a making use of that Authority which is the excellent Ordinance of God. I
shall shut up this with a Testimony of precious Mr. Rutherford, in his Divine
Right of Church Government and Excommunication, Chap. 24. Quest. 20. page 539,
541. Now the Magistrate Heathen, as Magistrate, even Nero, when the Church of
God is in his Court and Dominions, has the same Jus, the same Authority and
Official Power, to be Keeper of both Tables of the Law, and to defend the
Gospel, and to command the Preachers and Synods to fulfill their charge, and to
see that the Officers do their Duty; and to punish dumb Dogs, Idolaters,
Excommunicate persons, to drive away with the Sword false Teachers from the
flock. He has, I say, the same Magistratical Power, while he is a Heathen, as
when he is converted to the Christian Faith; and he is equally head of men when
Heathenish, as when Christian. I shall add no more of this, but that as the
Magistrate has retracted the Act of Intercommuning made against several of the
Subjects, so I wish that the Author of this new Act of Intercommuning against
the Magistrate may retract it also.

In the 4th page of the Preface, he says of the Indulged Ministers, That they
were men in as ill case to have made or meddled in the concerns of Christ and
his Church, with the men with whom they had to do in their circumstances, as
ever any godly men in our Church were.

Answ. I see this Author has a way of judging the inward Frames and Cases of
others, and even of those who live at a great distance from him; not only in
regard of place, but also of time. By what Evidence he knows the ill case of
these indulged Ministers at the time of the Indulgence, and by what Evidence he
knows the cases of all the godly men, which have been in this Church, (for this
he must know, or else he could not determine that the Indulged were in as ill
case as ever any godly men in this Church were) I cannot conjecture. He should
either have held his peace of their ill case, or else he should have instanced
it; for as he has left it, in this uncharitable time, some people may suspect
much worse than any thing he has to say: It may be his Informations and
Reasons may be false, or not concludent; and it may be his Reasons, if he have
any, conclude only against some of the indulged; whereas he has now left it
upon them all, that they were in as ill case as ever any godly men in this
Church were. But suppose they were in an ill case, will that prove, that it was
unlawful for them to go and preach in these Parishes which were either their
own, or else being destitute, invited them? The exercise of their Ministry
might be, through the Blessing of God, an excellent means to better their case.
I have heard it of some, who could well judge, that he had heard some of these
Ministers before affirm, that they Preached much better since their return,
than they did before they were put out. If he knew his Brethren to be in an ill
case, he should have told them of it, and have heard them what they had to say,
and then have considered, whether it were fit to have Printed their Case, and
Published it to the world. Whatever truth may appear in his dilating this
further, there is no great appearance of Charity in this Method that he has
taken; as we should think on the things that are true, so on the things that
are lovely, and speak the truth in Love. What ground the Author has for this
Faith, by which he believes that the smothering of what he has said concerning
the ill case of his Brethren, would have met him at the Lord's Tribunal, he
knows best himself; but I hope he does not intend to obtrude his belief upon
others, as an evidence of the truth of what he believes. The belief of
appearing before the Tribunal, should keep us from rash judging of our
Brethren, Romans 14.10. But why do thou judge thy Brother? or, why do thou
set at naught thy Brother? We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of
Christ. And verse. 4. Who art thou that judge another man's Servant? to his own
Master he stands or falls. Matthew. 7.1. Judge not, that ye be not judged.
Jam. 3.1. My Brethren, be not many Masters, knowing that we shall receive the
greater condemnation. Jam. 4.11. Speak not evil one of another (Brethren) he
that speaks evil of his Brother, and judges his Brother, speaks evil of the
Law, and judges the Law: but if thou judge the Law, thou art not a doer of the
Law, but a judge. I do not see how he can clear himself of rash judging, except
he knew certainly the case of all the Godly men that have been in the Church;
and because Godly men may be sometimes in a better, and sometimes in a worse
case, he must know their case when it was at the worst, or else he cannot make
a parallel of their Case, and the Case of the Indulged Ministers: Or else he
must know, that the Case of these Indulged Ministers was so ill, that no Godly
men could be in a worse case: and how he can certainly know the one or the
other, except he have it by Revelation, which I think he will not pretend unto,
I cannot imagine. I think it would not be rashness to say, that his confidence
in this matter has gone further than his evidence could carry it; for as
fearless and untender as he thinks these Indulged Ministers, I suppose they
would have been afraid to have intruded so far in the comparative judging of
the illness of the case of any one godly Minister, let be of so many.

In this next Section he charges the Indulged Ministers with this new step of
defection, and says, That it has had most deplorable effects, and that it is
like to be more fatal to the poor languishing remnant, than any step of
defection to which ever any godly men were left in the Church of Scotland.

If it be found that the Indulged Ministers have not made defection in their
going to exercise their Ministry in the places to which they are indulged, nor
in their Acts that were previous to their going to these Congregations, his
charge will be found false, and he must find out some other causes of these
deplorable effects of which he speaks, than the practice of these Indulged
Ministers. There are many good effects of the exercise of their Ministry in
these Congregations; several have been converted, many edified and built up in
their most holy Faith. The renting and ruin of the Church, which he speaks of
afterward, will be found to have proceeded from other causes, which I love not
to name, and not from the Ministry of these Ministers in these places, or from
their practices which went before their Preaching in these Congregations.

The first degree of their defection, as we heard before, was this, That they
made or meddled with the Rulers at all. He is against all Addresses to them; and
therefore according to his opinion, when the Magistrate called for these
Ministers whom they intended to indulge they should have sent them word, We
will neither make nor meddle with you, nor can we make any Address to you,
except it be to tell you we can make none. Now how this could have consisted
with common civility, and how it could have consisted with the duty of any
Subjects toward Rulers, especially with the duty of Ministers, who should be
examples to others in all dutiful, respectful behavior toward Superiors, I
cannot understand; I suppose the Author will not get many to vote with him in
this vote of Non-addresses; I doubt much if he was of that opinion himself at
the time of the first Indulgence: but we had enough of this before. 2. He taxes
their embracing of the Indulgence. 3. their giving thanks to the givers. 4.
Their not giving Testimony against their invasion. 5. Their going and
continuing to exercise their Mistry in these Parishes to which they were
Indulged; for he desires them with much earnestness to deliver themselves from
this Indulgence, by relinquishing those Congregations.

The embracing and accepting of the Indulgence, is taken ordinarily by those
who quarrel with the Indulged Ministers, for an accepting of all that is in the
Magistrates Acts that relate to the Indulgence, and so they allege they
accepted the Instructions, etc. But this is a manifest mistake, the Indulged
Ministers know best themselves what they did make use of in the Magistrates
Indulgence; and Mr. Hutchesons speech shows what it was that they acknowledged
as desirable and refreshing to them, even the free liberty of the public
exercise of their Ministry, under the protection of lawful Authority. They show
they had been under a long restraint; and this liberty and free liberty (as it
is called afterward) of the public exercise of their Ministry, is opposed to
that civil restraint which the Magistrate had laid on them, by reason of which
they could not, without hazard or great disturbance, publicly exercise their
Ministry, as wanting the Magistrates Protection, and being exposed to the
hazard threatened in the penal Statutes, which did inhibit the public exercise
of the Ministry. This public exercise, free from this restraint; or this
public exexercise under the protection of lawful Authority, is the same with
the public peaceable exercise of the Ministry; this they acknowledge as a
favor; and why may they not accept of freedom from restraint, which had been
upon the public exercise of their Ministry, and accept of the Protection of
lawful Authority, and give thanks for it? The peaceable exercise of the
Ministry is a great benefit, and it is acknowledged, that the public peaceable
exercise of the Ministry, is by the Magistrate; and therefore it was very fit
that they should thankfully acknowledge this.

It is a wonder to me, when I hear men who should have more than common
ingenuity, alleging so confidently, that the Indulged Ministers received and
accepted their Ministry, and Instructions to regulate them in their Ministry,
from the Council; and that they allege this after they have seen what M. H.
spoke in their name, who acknowledges no more as received from the Magistrate,
but liberty or freedom from the restraint that had been upon their Ministry,
and their Protection of lawful Authority in the exercise of it; though he had
said no more, I think this should have been sufficient to have prevented such
false alledgences; but when he has said further in the face of the Council,
that they received their Ministry from Jesus Christ, and full prescriptions
from him for regulating them therein, that yet they will allege that they
received their Ministry and instructions from the Council, is even astonishing,
and shows what force humors and prejudices have upon men's minds.

I come next to his Questions; and he asks, 1. If they could after this their
acceptance and giving thanks to the Council, have withdrawn from that
appearance, and settled themselves before Christ Jesus the King of his Church,
and with a sweet serenity of soul have had confidence to offer their thanks to
him for being helped to witness a good Confession against the wickedness of
this Invasion made by the overturners of his work, upon his Royal Prerogative,
who built the house, and must bear the glory; for it was either then or never,
that this was to have been done?

Ans. I perceive this Author has a way of intruding upon the secrets of his
Brethren; as before he judged and condemned their frame and case, so here he
sets up a new sort of Inquisition, and will have his brethren give an account
to him and the World of the serenity of their souls after they had been before
the Council: Although I am in charity bound to think, that these Ministers had
this serenity of soul after what they had done before the Council, and that
they can declare this when they find themselves called thereto; yet I think
this new Inquisition is a dangerous preparative. I see not what Authority he
has to put his Brethren to give an account to him, and to the World, of the
frame of their soul, nor what obligation lies upon them to give such an
account to him; if he have a particular Warrant to erect such an
Inquisition-Court, let him show how he came by it; if he have no particular
privilege for this, then any one may do what he does; and if every one may
make such Inquisition, and all the Lords people and servants be obliged to
answer every Inquisitor that searches after the secrets of their souls, this
would be much more intolerable than the Popish Inquisition, and Auricular
Confession; for this makes every man that pleases, an Inquisitor, and obliges
the party inquired, not only to round his secrets in the ear of one, but to
publish them to the whole world, and that upon the Inquisition of persons who
are rashly suspicious, or prejudged against them and their way.

How often have good men, after they have done what was good and acceptable to
God, been assaulted with temptations, and perplexed with doubts and fears,
about what they had done? I hope he will not say that they were upon the
inquiry of persons prejudged against them, and the good which they had done,
and who were waiting for their halting, obliged to tell those prejudged persons
and the whole World, that they were under such doubts and fears about what they
had done; for beside many other evils that would follow upon this, it would
give occasion of speaking evil of the good which they had done, and harden
those who were adversaries to the good deed they had done, and might occasion
others to doubt of the lawfulness of a good action.

Beside, this sort of Inquisition, if it should take place, would draw out
secret sins to the view of the world, and make them public scandals, and would
raise suspicions of scandals without ground; as for example, if a suspicious
person might inquire and oblige any other person to answer to this question,
Could ye, after ye come from such a place or such company, have confidence to
offer thanks to God for helping you to overcome the temptation ye had to
uncleanness, theft, drunkenness, and to bear witness against the sins of the
persons ye were with? If the person be silent and give no answer, the
suspicious Inquisitor will be more confirmed in his suspicion, and readily
conclude the man guilty. If the man be really guilty, and yet clears himself,
he sins by lying If he confess his guilt, he makes a scandal in an
unwarrantable divulging of his sin; and though it may be he has behaved
himself blamelesly, yet a tender person upon such an enquiry may readily be put
to a demur, and suspect that he may at least have omitted something which he
ought to have done, and so cannot give any present account of the serenity of
his foul in that matter, which will increase the sinful suspiciousness of his
Inquisitor; and though he be altogether blameless, and his Conscience serene,
yet the very questioning of such things, is apt to breed suspicions and
scandals.

But to come to his Question, His design in it is to find the Indulged
Ministers guilty by their own Confession of the neglect of a Testimony against
the wickedness of this Invasion made by the overturners of the Work of Christ.

The Question is, Whether it was the duty of those Ministers at that time, to
give in a Testimony of that nature? He determines, they should have done it
then or never. Now he has so conceived his Question, that whether they answer
yea or nay, he will conclude them guilty for not giving in such a Testimony as
he requires at that time; for if they say, they were helped to witness a good
Confession against this wickedness, then he will conclude, that then it was
duty to give in such a Testimony as he requires at that time; for to make a
Confession good, it is required that it be seasonable; an unseasonable
Confession is not a good Confession, for the seasonableness of a Confession, is
one of those things which are required to the goodness of it; and a good thing
is made up of entire causes, but any defect makes a thing evil.

Again, it cannot be said, that men with serenity of soul can have confidence
to give Christ thanks for helping them to give an unseasonable Confession, or a
Confession out of season. But again, if they answer, that they were not helped
by Christ to give such a good Confession; then he will conclude, that they are
guilty of neglecting to give in that Confession at that time, seeing it was a
good Confession, and so seasonable, which if they had given, they would have
done it by the help of Christ, and would have had matter of thanksgiving; and
seeing they have not done it, they have not been helped by him to that which
was good and their duty at that time. Thus whether they answer his Question
affirmatively or negatively, he will conclude them guilty.

The Author made his Address, as he says, not as an acute disputant, but as a
poor, blunt, plain, open-hearted man, in a few plain Questions; he should not
after such a profession of plain-dealing in the very Entry, begun with
Sophistry, with a Caption from many Interrogations. Solomon says, Prove. 9.8.
Reprove not a Scorner, lest he hate thee. So that a man may forbear to reprove
a Scorner, and yet not be guilty of a sinful neglect; but by such a captious
Question as this, any man who has been with, and heard Scorners, will be found
guilty; for if ye spear at him, were ye helped by Christ to witness a good
Confession against such a Scorner, or to give a good reproof to such a scorner?
if he answer, that he was not helped to give him a good reproof, then ye
conclude that he omitted good, and so sinned in not reproving him; whereas
Solomon forbids to reprove him. If he say, he gave him a good reproof, then he
calls that good which the Scripture forbids; or if this question be moved to
one who has not reproved a man when he was not in a case to receive reproof,
suppose when in drink, or in the height of rage, or when in such distemper, and
under such prejudice, as the reproving of him would hinder him from doing some
good that he were about to do, and in all probability make him worse; if the
person perceive not the captiousness and sophistry of the Question, but answer
yea or nay, he will be entangled; but such may easily answer the Question thus,
1. That they did not reprove such a person in such a case: and 2. That it was
not good to reprove him in such a case, or at such a time; and that therefore
he was not guilty of neglecting a good reproof, because it was not seasonable
to reprove at that time.

If the Prefacer would have dealt as plainly as he promised, he should have
plainly proved, that these Ministers should at that time have given in such a
Testimony as he requires. The command that requires the making of Confession,
is an affirmative Precept; and though it be obliged at all times, yet does not
oblige to give a Testimony at all times; we must never deny the truth, but we
must not ever make Confession of it, as all Casuists grant. We do not hear that
Moses and Aaron made any formal protestation against Pharaohs Blasphemy and
avowed Rebellion against God; they heard him say, Who is the Lord that I should
obey his voice, to let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let
Israel go: They make no Protestation nor Declaration against this blasphemous
Speech, and avowed Rebellion against God; they only show their Warrant, and
humbly insist in their Petition: and yet these extraordinary Ambassadors of
God, were in another manner of capacity for doing this, if it had been
necessary and seasonable, than ordinary Ministers are; read Exodus 5.2, 3. Nor
do we hear that the other Children gave any written or verbal Protestation
against the making of the Image, and Proclaimation to worship it: Nor did
Daniel give any written, subscribed, or verbal Declaration against the making,
signing, publishing of that Decree which discharged all Petitions to be given
to any for thirty days, but to Darius, which was to make him God alone: All
that they did, was, they did not obey, but acted contrary to those godless
Decrees, and chused rather to suffer death than obey them. Nor did our Savior
speak any thing before Herod, though a vile man, when he was before him. Christ
held his peace a long time before the Council, and when he spoke, he gave in no
written or verbal Protestation against the Council, it is constitution and
corruptions, nor against the sentence they pronounced against him as a
Blasphemer. Nor when Paul compeared at Rome, do we hear of any Protestation
against the monstrous abominations and persecutions of Nero. Many Martyrs and
Confessors did forbear to make public Protestation against the Idols and
Idolatry of their Persecutors; and all that many of them said, was this, That
they were Christians, and upon that suffered. How many, both private Christians
and Ministers, have appeared before the Council, since the Supremacy was
established, who did not think themselves obliged to give in a written or
verbal Confession, Testimony, or Protestation against the Supremacy, and the
Invasions made upon the Government of the Church? and yet the Author of this
Epistle urges none of these with his Queries; but only the Indulged Ministers,
though they have somewhat to say for their forbearance of any such Protestation
which others had not, seeing they were called to the Council in a time when the
Magistrate was relenting somewhat as to the severity formerly used, and they
were called to get some relaxation from the restraint laid formerly upon them;
and their irritating of the Magistrate, might not only have prejudged
themselves of that freedom, but also have been prejudicial to others who were
in expectation of it, who might very readily have blamed them for their
imprudency in tristing their Protestation with that season, not only to their
own prejudice, but to the prejudice of others. And I leave it to the
Consideration of indifferent persons, whether or not the Magistrate would in
all probability have said, These men and others of them made no Protestation
against us when we turned them out, and subverted their Government, but now
when we begin to show favor to any of them, they grow more insolent, and
therefore it is best policy to forbear our favors, and to use severities. And
seeing all these Brethren, and the whole Presbyterians in Scotland, were
concerned in the Invasions made upon the Church, and were concerned in the bad
effects that might have followed upon the irritation of the Magistrate in that
juncture of Affairs; if it had been fit for a few private Ministers, without
the concurrence of all concerned, or at lest without their counsel and advice,
to have given in such a Testimony or Protestation as the Author requires: and
it is well known that no such concurrence was offered, nor such advice given to
these Ministers by the rest of their Judgment, who were concerned in this
matter.

I shall not repeat what the Author of the Answer to the Countrey-mans Scruples
anent the Indulgence, has said, concerning Testimonies, in which he has
showed from Scripture and solid Reason, the rashness and unreasonableness of
those who have condemned the suffering Ministers, and the Indulged Ministers,
for not giving Testimonies: He has excellently discovered from Scripture when
Testimonies are to be given, and when not; when they are seasonable, and when
unseasonable: He has also showed how written Testimonies which Synods had
prepared when Prelacy was coming in, particularly the Synod of Fife, were
obstructed by the Magistrates raising of these Synods; and that they who had no
clearness to make any use of the Indulgence, did obstruct the written Testimony
which was prepared against the evils which were in the complex acts, which
related to the Indulgence; he has also showed how many Testimonies have been
given by word in Preaching, and before the Council, and by suffering, and by
not obeying the Instructions of the Council.

I shall only show, that the Ministers, who first appeared before the Council,
at the first Indulgence, did witness a good Confession in the presence of the
Council.

They declare that they had received their Ministry from Jesus Christ; and
after design themselves the Ministers of Jesus Christ: They speak of their
Ministry as Paul did of his Ministry, Acts 22.24. The Ministry, says he, which
I have received of the Lord Jesus. And by the way we may take notice, that the
Ministry is not a mere Power or Authority, but comprehends the exercise of that
Authority, the exercise of the Ministerial Office; for Paul speaks of finishing
the Ministry which he had received, which unquestionably points at the exercise
of his Ministry; and they design themselves as Paul designs Ministers, 1 Cor.
4.1. Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ. 2 Cor. 11.23.
Are they Ministers of Christ? I speak as a fool, I am more. They who quarrel
this part of their Confession, must fall first upon the Apostle Paul, or rather
upon the Holy Ghost; for the Apostle spoke as he was moved by the Holy Ghost.

2. They declare that they had received from Christ full prescriptions for
regulating them in their Ministry; as they had acknowledged Christ the giver of
the Ministry, so they acknowledge him the Lawgiver from whom they have the
prescriptions to regulate them in the Ministry, both in their entrance into it,
and exercise of it: then they declare that these prescriptions of Christ's are
full. This excludes all other prescriptions, though they had said no more but
that they had received prescriptions from Christ to regulate them; this would
have sufficiently excluded all other prescriptions: For the prescriptions being
the prescriptions of God, we must not diminish from them; and so we must not
admit any Rules contrary to them, or that derogate any way from them; and we
must not add unto them, because they are his words, Prove. 30.5, 6. Every word
of God is pure -- add thou not to his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be
found a liar. And then seeing Christ has given these prescriptions to regulate
Ministers in their Ministry, this shows that these prescriptions are a perfect
Rule; a Rule must be perfect, else it is not a Rule, as our Divines maintain
against the Papists in pleading for the perfection of the Scripture; seeing
Christ has given prescriptions to his Ministers to regulate them in their
Ministry, these prescriptions are perfect, else they were not sufficient to
reach the end of regulating. His work is perfect, he is faithful in his house,
as a son over his own house, he has finished all the work that was given him
to do.

But when they further assert, that these prescriptions were full, this did
clearly exclude all other prescriptions for regulating them in their Ministry
as superfluous, and as Additions to that which God had made full and perfect;
but last of all, this is one of the Lords prescriptions, that we should not add
to his Word, nor diminish from it, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Again, that is another of his
prescriptions, that they do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus: And seeing they
are the Ministers of Christ, and their work, the work of the Ministry, received
from Christ, any that will not shut their eyes may see that they behoved to be
regulated by his prescriptions alone in the matter of their Ministry.

3. They confess Christ to be their Judge to whom they were countable in the
discharge of their Ministry: for these are the words which Mr. Hutcheson spoke
in their name, We have received our Ministry from Jesus Christ, with full
prescriptions from him for regulating us therein; and must in discharge thereof
be accountable to him. This does clearly evidence that they behoved upon their
greatest peril to adhere closely to these prescriptions which they had received
from the Lord Jesus: Seeing they were to give an account unto Christ how they
had discharged their Ministry according to his full prescriptions, and that
they could receive no other prescriptions besides Christ's prescriptions to
regulate them in the exercise of their Ministry.

4. They declare how desirable and refreshing the exercise of this their
Ministry was to them.

5. They declare what power they acknowledged in the Magistrate; it is not a
lawless but lawfu^ Authority which they acknowledge; they acknowledge no other
power in the Magistrate but what is the Ordinance of God; for so they describe
lawful Authority the excellent Ordinance of God: They declare it is the work of
Magistrates to protect the Ministers of Christ in the exercise of their
Ministry.

6. That they purposed and resolved to behave themselves in the discharge of
their Ministry with that wisdom and prudence which became faithful Ministers of
Jesus Christ.

7. They declare that they continued in their known judgment in Church Affairs;
they did let the Magistrates know that they had not altered their Judgment in
Church Affairs, that they were still Presbyterians; Their judgment is known
from the Confession of faith, chap. 23. Art. 3. chapter 25. Art. 6. chapter 30. Art. 1.
chapter 31. Art. 3.
and all who have any knowledge of the Judgment of Presbyterians, know that
they own Christ for the alone head of the Church, and fountain of
Church Authority, and that they are as opposite to Erastianism as they are to
Prelacy. That they are so far from ascribing a Supremacy of spiritual power to
the Magistrate, that they profess that the Magistrate has not any power of the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven committed to him; and that it does not belong to
the Magistrate to ordain or depose, suspend, excommunicate, or to exercise any
Church Censures; and that it does not belong to him to form Church-Canons, or
to prescribe Instructions for regulating Ministers in the exercise of their
Ministry; and that they are of that Judgment, that no Magistrate, nay, nor all
the powers on earth, though they were united, can dispose of Ecclesiastical
matters according to their Wisdom or pleasure; seeing the things of the house
of the God of Heaven, must be done according to the wisdom and pleasure of the
Lord, and not according to the wisdom and pleasure of Creatures.

These and many other Tenets are known by all who know what Presbyterians are,
to be their known and professed Judgment. Now seeing they declared their
continuance in their known Judgment, and adherence to their former principles,
and that to the Magistrate, and had declared before their resolutions to behave
as faithful Ministers of Christ, and that they believed the account they were
to give of their Ministry to Jesus Christ. They did show to the Magistrate,
that they did not, nor could not approve of power or acts of the Magistrate
which were contrary to their Judgments; for that had been so far from becoming
the faithfulness of the Ministers of Jesus Christ, that it could not consist
with common Ingenuity.

8. And they clearly enough insinuate that there was an opposition betwixt
their known Judgments and the actings of the Magistrate in subverting
Presbyterial Government, and setting up of Prelacy, and other actings contrary
to Presbyterial Principles; some whereof I mentioned before: This opposition is
clearly insinuated and imported, while they say, And to demain our selves
toward lawful Authority, notwithstanding of our known Judgment in
Church Affairs, as well becomes Loyal Subjects: for if the Affairs of the
Church had been then according to their known Judgment, that [notwithstanding]
had been impertinent, and could have had no sufferable sense. But
Church Affairs being settled by the Magistrate, contrary to the known Judgment
of Presbyterians, some might have alleged, that Presbyterian Ministers would
not be Loyal toward lawful Authority; to obviate this they say, That
notwithstanding their known Judgments, they would behave as Loyal Subjects.

9. And hence they declare to the Magistrate that there was no disloyalty in
their Principles or practice; of their Principles, that their known judgment
in Church Affairs, and the faithful discharge of their Ministry, according to
their known Judgment, did well consist with loyalty, and with that respect
which from a principle of Conscience they did owe to lawful Authority, though
it did not consist with some of the actings of those who were in Authority.

10. They modestly declare the low esteem they they had of themselves, in
saying they were the unworthiest of many of their Brethren; and they so far
from selfishness, in desiring to partake of this liberty alone, that they
express their desire that others of their Brethren may be sharers of the
liberty which they enjoyed.

It appears from what is said, that these Brethren witnessed a good Confession
before the Council; and the Author of the History of the-Indulgence, has in
this respect done right to these Brethren, and good service to the Church, in
Printing the Speech which Mr. Hutcheson spoke in their name before the Council.
If any object, that their Testimony is not good, because they do not expressly
and in terminis testify against the Invasions made upon the Church. I would
desire these to consider, that in saying so, they condemn the Testimonies of
many Martyrs, who in their Confessions only expressed the truths which they did
believe; and some of them only in the general asserted that they were
Christians. They condemn also our Confession of Faith, which does not so
expressly, and in so many words refute and reject many dangerous and damnable
errors, but does only assert the truths opposite to these errors; yea, they
condemn the Testimony of the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures, which is good and
perfect, and yet does not in terminis, and expressly mention every error which
is contrary to the truth, but leaves the refutation of many of these errors to
be gathered by good consequence from what is said in the Holy Scriptures; and
they condemn also that good Confession which Christ witnessed before Pontius
Pilate, in asserting himself to be a King; for he does not expressly mention and
reject all the errors which are contrary to his Spiritual Kingdom.

And seeing I am speaking of Testimonies, I shall mention what the Indulged
Ministers, who were called before the Council for not keeping the 29. of May,
declared in the face of the Council. As they had agreed, that Mr. Hutcheson
should declare that the Magistrate had not a power formally Ecclesiastical, and
that they could not receive Rules intrinsecally Ecclesiastical from the
Magistrate: So Mr. Hutcheson to prevent the Councils giving them any such
instructions, desired that their Lordships would be pleased not to burden them
with impositions in the matter of their Ministry, wherein they were the
Servants of Christ. And after Mr. Alexander Blare, who was called before Mr.
Hutcheson, had showed that he could not receive such instructions to regulate
him in his Ministry; Mr. Hutcheson before he was called, spoke against their L.
L. imposing Rules intrinsecally Ecclesiastical for regulating Ministers in the
exercise of their Ministry, who were the Servants of Christ in these matters:
And after when he was called, he showed that a formal Ecclesiastic power could
not be allowed to the Magistrate; and several others of them spoke to the same
purpose. As these Ministers have not received these Instructions, so they have
declared to the Council, that they could not receive them; beside what we
observed from M. Hutchesons Speech at the first Indulgence, there are here
other things observable.

1. That he designs them Impositions, and so he shows that they looked upon
them as incroaching and intrenching upon their Ministerial calling.

2. In asserting, that the Magistrate had not a power formally Ecclesiastical,
he testified against Erastianism; and did further show, That the Magistrates
work is not to form Rules or Instructions which are formally Ecclesiastical;
for all Acts which are intrinsecally and formally Ecclesiastical, must be
elicite by a power which is formally Ecclesiastical; the giving instructions
formally Ecclesiastical, is the formal effect of an Ecclesiastical Instructor;
as it is not proper for the Magistrate, but for Physicians to give medicinal
Receipts, which must be drawn from the art or faculty of Medicine; Nor is it
proper for the Magistrate to make a Physical Directory to regulate Physicians
in their giving of Physical Receipts; for this were an intrenching and breaking
in upon the Physicians Calling. So it is not proper for the Magistrate to make
Rules intrinsecally Ecclesiastical; for these must be drawn from the Word of
God, seeing they are for the ordering of the Matters of God; and when there is
need of forming any such Rules or Instructions, it is the proper Work of those
to whom the public Explication and Application of the Word of God belongs: The
forming of such Canons, has in all Ages been the work of Ecclesiastical
Synods, who had not the power of the Sword; and consequently the forming of
such Rules is not an Act of the power of the Sword.

3. In asserting, That in their Ministry, and these matters which were the
exercise of it, they were the Servants of Christ; they did show that they could
not admit of any Impositions which would prejudice their Masters service; and
that in these matters they were not at their own disposal, and must not act ex
proprio arbitrio, nor pro hominum imperio, but ex Christi obsequio; that is,
That they were neither to be ruled by their own will, nor the will of men, but
by the will of Christ in these Matters. They did put in the words formally and
intrinsecally Ecclesiastical, because the Magistrate may make civil laws about
Church Matters, as is acknowledged in the second Book of Discipline, Chap. 10.
where it is said, That he may make Civil Laws and Constitutions agreeable to
Gods word, for the advancement of the Kirk and policy thereof, though he may
not make Canons intrinsecally Ecclesiastical.

These were good Confessions made before the Magistrate by the Indulged
Ministers, and the fullest I know has been made by any before the Magistrate:
Although persons while they are under perjudices against these Ministers, make
nothing of any thing these say or do; yet when these humors and perjudices are
removed, and the carriage of these Ministers is impartially considered,
ingenuous and unbyassed persons will not only clear them of the unjust
aspersions cast upon them, but commend them, and wonder that that they have
been so unjustly abused, and that they have so long born so many injuries with
so great patience. The attempts of the Author of the History of the Indulgence,
to make nothing of these Testimonies, as they discover the strength of humor
and prejudice, so the vanity of his attemps will appear when we come to examine
them. I come to the second Question in the Epistle to the Reader.

Secondly, says he, let me ask, Are they so very clear and confident in the
case, that they cannot only in dealing with men, hold up their face, and affirm
without hink or hesitation, that this is their rejoicing, even the Testimony of
their Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God they have had their Conversation before all
men, and more abundantly toward these backsliding Rulers, before whom they
appeared, now declared enemies to the work of God, and Invaders of his Throne
and Prerogative? But are they also content to be carried before the Tribunal of
Christ with this acceptance from those which have exauctorate their Lord and
Master in their hand, and to have the quality of their love to the coming of
his Kingdom, and their Loyalty unto Christ Jesus now opposed, and put from the
exercise of his Royal Government by the party indulging in this very
Indulgence, tried by such a test? It were fit sure to think on this, and lay it
to heart, for each Receiver may lay his account with it, that soon or syne he
shall be put to it.

Ans. Before I come to answer this Question, I cannot but advertise him, that
in saying, without any limitation or restriction, that not only the Magistrate
has exauctorate Christ, but also that Christ is put from the exercise of his
Royal Government, he has laid a stumbling block before weak and ignorant
people, which may occasion them to imagine that Christ is quite vanquished, and
denied of all Authority, and put from all exercise of his Kingly Office. There
are such loose Rhetorications in the Cup of cold Water, which may occasion
simple people to think, that Christ is quite dispossessed of his Crown and
Throne. If any will read the Answer to that Question in the larger Catechism,
How does Christ execute the Office of a King? they will see, that he exercises
his Kingly Office, not only by Governing his Church visibly, in calling it out
of the World, in giving Officers, Laws and Censures, but also in bestowing
saving Grace upon the Elect; rewarding them for their obedience, correcting
them for their sins, preserving and supporting them under all their temptations
and sufferings, restraining and overcoming all their enemies, and powerfully
ordering all things for his own Glory, and their own good; and also in taking
vengeance on the rest who know not God, and obey not the Gospel.

Now I suppose the Author of the Letter, will not imagine that the Magistrate
intended to put Christ from the exercise of his Royal Government, as to many of
these Acts of his Kingly Office. It Is a sad truth, that the Magistrate has
subverted Presbyterial Government, which is a part of the visible Kingdom of
Christ; but it is not the all of Christ's Kingdom; wherever there is a visible
Church called out of the World, where the Word of God is preached, where the
truth is born witness to, and the Sacraments Administered, there Christ
executes his Kingly Office, and there is something of his visible Kingdom. I
do not think that the Author of the Epistle will say, that the Magistrate
intended that there should be no Church, nor any Preaching of the Word of God
in Scotland.

2. What ever may be said of the Act of Supremacy, which is so terribly vast,
that even Mr. Burnet in his last Dialogues insinuates, that it cannot bear a
strict examen; and that some expressions in it must carry with them a tacit
exception; yet it is manifestly false that the Act of Indu^gence did any way
oppose the exercise of Christ's Royal Government; for the Act of Indulgence
allowed Christ's Ministers to preach the Gospel of the Kingdom, to keep
Kirk-Sessions, which is one of Christ's Courts.

As for the Question; I wonder how he dare call the simplicity and godly
sincerity of these Ministers in question, or how he durst doubt of their
Loyalty to Christ, and of their love to the coming of his Kingdom. I am bound
to think, that it was the desire which they had of the coming of his Kingdom,
which moved them to desire the peaceable exercise of their Ministry, that they
might make full proof of it in Preaching, Baptising, celebrating the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, Catechizing, Visiting, exercising Discipline without
disturbance, which they could not have attained in an unsettled ambulatory
Preaching. As these Ministers think themselves bound to praise the Lord, and to
be thankful to the Magistrate for the peaceable exerc^se of their Ministry, so
they could not according to these thoughts that they then had, and still have,
with peace in their Consciences, refuse to take this opportunity of the
peaceable, settled exercise of their Ministry.

I would enquire of him how he knows that this acceptance of freedom from that
restraint which had been upon the public exercise of their Ministry, will be a
test before the Tribunal of Christ, by which their love to the coming of his
Kingdom, and their Loyalty to Christ will be tried. Acceptance of a freedom of
this nature, if considered simply in it is own nature, is no test of love to
Christ, or Loyalty to him; because this is a favor, that a Minister void of
Grace, may be desirous of, and take, as any man who is restrained from the
exercise of his calling whereby he has his livelihood, will willingly accept
of freedom from that restraint. And so a Minister who has no love to Christ,
who has been restrained from the exercise of the Ministry, will willingly
accept of a relaxation from that restraint; and therefore this acceptance
simply considered, being a thing common, and not a thing accompanying
Salvation, is not capable of being a mark or test of Love or Loyalty to Christ.
It were an impertinent and foolish Question if one should come to a poor man
come out of Prison, with this Question, Are ye content to be carried before the
Tribunal of Christ with your acceptance of freedom from your Prison in your
hand, as a test of your love to Christ? If the man had any knowledge, he would
answer, that acceptance of freedom from Imprisonment, is common both to good
and bad; and therefore he behooves to seek for other marks and tests of his
love to Christ: if he would further urge and say, If your coming out of Prison,
be not a test of your love to Christ, and your Loyalty to him, then it was not
lawful for you to come out of Prison. The man might answer, that there are many
things lawful and commendable, which are not marks and tests of Love and
Loyalty to Christ. Now it seems this is the thing that he would be at, that if
this acceptance of freedom, etc. be not a test or mark of Love or Loyalty to
Christ, that then it was sinful. I think it a strange thing to see a rational
man professing, and as I suppose, designing plainness, making such captious
confused Questions. I shall not say, that the Author's Questions are the
Questions of a blunt man; but all the point I can perceive in his plain
Questions, is in the captious confusedness of them.

His third Question is; If they believe that Christ who purchased his Church,
etc. In this Question, if the Indulged Ministers believe that Christ who
purchased his Church, etc. lives to make Intercession, etc. And there are some
things which he supposes the Indulged Brethren will not, nor cannot deny, which
are not so clear as to be beyond the possibility of denial; as for example,
That Christ procures by virtue of the price he has paid, the execution of the
written vengeance upon all who strive with him for state and supremacy, etc.
And afterward, That the Mediator who is set down at the right hand of God,
intercedes and pleads by his blood, by his wounds and passion, for the
execution of the purchased and promised vengeance. I do not remember that I
have read this before, that the price Christ has paid, does procure vengeance;
the purchasing and promising of vengeance, are expressions new to me; men's sins
procure or deserve vengeance, and God threatens vengeance. Purchases and
Promises are of things that are good. I shall only move this Question, By what
evidence was he assured, that none of the Indulged Ministers would or could
deny, that Christ intercedes and pleads by his blood, by his wounds and
passion, for the execution of vengeance? I do not remember, that ever I heard
or read this assertion, that Christ intercedes by his blood for vengeance,
before I read it in this Epistle; and I have had occasion to speak with others
who were surprised with it, as an uncouth and strange assertion, which they had
never heard before; and therefore there was great rashness to allege, that
none of the Indulged Ministers would or could deny such an uncouth assertion,
which is neither clear by it is own innate light, nor commonly received among
Divines; yea, it is so far from being an opinion commonly received, that I know
not if the Author of the Epistle will find any who have used such expressions
as these which he uses in this matter. I find several Divines restricting
Christ's Priestly Intercession unto the Elect; and they look upon his Priestly
Office, as an Office of Grace; and herein they distinguish Christ's Kingly and
Priestly Office, which the Socinians would confound; that the Priestly Office,
and that part of it, the Priestly Intercession, is for the Elect, and is not
for punishing of enemies, as the Kingly Office is. Essenius in his Triumphus
Crucis, page 279. shows the distinction of the Kingly and Priestly Office of
Christ, by ascribing to the Priestly Office the Sacrifice and Intercession, and
the punishing of enemies to the Kingly Office, and after in the same page he
shows, That the Intercession differs much from the Kingly Acts, among which
Kingly Acts he reckons the compescing or quashing of enemies; and he shows,
That even Crellius, though he labor to confound the Kingly and Priestly Office
of Christ, yet he assigns some differences, and this is one, That it belongs to
Christ, as a King, to punish; but to him, as a Priest, it belongs only to
expiate the sins of the people.

And Maresius in his Systems of Theology, in his 10. Commonplace, These. 57.
taxes the Socinians for confounding Christ's Kingly Office with his Priestly;
and in his Annotations subjoyned to his last Edition of that System, he says,
As these two Offices must not be divided, or drawn assunder, or separate, so
they should not be confounded; for Christ's Priestly Intercession in Heaven, is
only for the Elect, but his Royal Power is exercised, as in calling and
protecting the Elect, so also in restraining, compescing, and punishing the
enemies of his Church; and in that same 10th. Chap. These. 55. Annot. A. In
which respect, the blood of the New Covenant is said to cry for better things
than the blood of Abel, Heb. 12.24. for the blood of Abel requires
vengeneance, but the blood of Christ seeks and obtains Grace and Peace. And the
excellent Doctor Owen in his Exercitations prefixed to the Continuation of the
Exposition on the 3, 4, 5. Chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Exercitat.
8. page 117. says, For neither did Christ as King, expiate and purge our sins,
which could be done only by a bloody Sacrifice; nor does he as Priest subdue
his enemies and ours, which is the work, and whereunto the power of a King is
required -- in brief, as a Priest, he interposeth with God for us; as a King,
he acts from God toward us. Page 119. For the Kingly power of Christ is
intended unto his enemies, the stubbornest of them, and those who are finally
so; but Christ is a Priest offered and intended only for the Elect. Page 122.
speaking of the Offices of a King and Priest, considered absolutely, he says,
That the Office of a King is founded in nature, the Office of a Priest in
Grace; the one belongs to men, as Creatures capable of Political Society; the
other with respect unto the supernatural end only. Page 123. For that the
Office of Priesthood is that faculty and power, whereby some persons do
Officiate with God, in the name and on the behalf of others, by offering
Sacrifices, all men in general are agreed. And thereon it is consented also,
that it is in it is entire nature distinct from the Kingly Power and Office.
Page 124. For every Priest, as we have showed, acts in the name, and on the
hehalf of men with God; but a King in the name, and on the behalf of God, with
and toward men, as to the ends of that rule which God has ordained. The
Priest represents men to God, pleading their cause; the King represents God to
men, acting his Power -- for all the acts of the Priestly Office, belongs to
oblation and intercession; and these effects consists either in 1.
Averruncatione mali, or procuratione boni; these they affect morally only by
procuring and obtaining of them. The Acts of the Kingly Office, are
Legislation, -- destruction of enemies, and the like. Page 129. The special
nature of his Sacerdotal Intercession, which consists in the moral efficacy of
his Mediation, in procuring Mercy and Grace. And in his Exposition on the 5th.
Chap. v. 1, 2. where the Priestly Office is described; For every High Priest
taken from among men, is ordained for men in things pertaining to God for men,
(...) is sometimes vice or loco, in the stead, Joh. 10.11, 15. Chap. 13.38.
Sometimes pro only, as it denotes the final cause, as to do a thing for the
good of men, 2 Timothy 2.10. And both these senses may have place here; for where
the first intention is, the latter is always included; he that does any thing
instead of another, does it always for his good; and the High Priest might be
so far said to stand and act in the stead of other men, as he appears in their
behalf, represented their persons, and pleaded their cause, and confessed their
sins, Levit. 16.21. But in their behalf, and for their good and advantage, to
perform what on their part is with God to be performed, is evidently intended
in this place; and page 130. he expounds the things pertaining to God (...) the
Expression is eliptical and sacred; hut what is intended in it, is sufficiently
manifest, the things which were to be done with God, or toward God in his
worship, to answer the duties and ends of the Office of the Priesthood; that
is, to do the things, whereby God might be appeased, atoned, reconciled,
pac^fied, and his anger turned away; see Chap. 2.17. and page 136. He shows
from the Text, That Compassion is a qualification of an High Priest for their
relief, who are sensible of their ignorance and wanderings; and therefore are
apt to be cast down and discouraged; and that it is a qualification required in
the Priest, and necessary unto him for the aforesaid end, -- So it is said of
our Savior, the great High Priest, that he made reconciliation for the sins of
the people, and Intercession for Transgressors.

I shall only add one other, and that is Thomas Goodwin B. D. in his Treatise
entitled, The heart of Christ in Heaven, to sinners on earth, Part. 2. 188.
First, (says he) this Office of High Priesthood, is an Office erected wholly
for the showing of Grace and Mercy, -- the Office of the High Priesthood, is
altogether an Office of Grace, and I may call it the Pardon-Office, set up and
erected by God in Heaven, and Christ he is appointed the Lord and Minister of
it; and as his Kingly Office, is an Office of Power and Dominion, and his
Prophetical Office, an Office of Knowledge and Wisdom; so his Priestly Office
is an Office of Grace and Mercy; the Highpriests Office did properly deal in
nothing else; if there had not been a Mercy-seat in the Holy of Holies, the
High Priest had not been at all appointed to go into it; it was mercy,
reconciliation, and atonement for sinners, that he was to treat about, and so
to Officiate for at the Mercy-seat; he had otherways no work, nor any thing to
do, when he should come into the most Holy place. Now this was but a typical
allusion to this Office of Christ in Heaven; and therefore the Apostle in the
Text, when he speaks of this our High Priests being entered into Heaven, he
makes mention of a Throne of Grace -- and this is the very next words to my
Text, Chap. 5.1, 2, 3. verses, in which he gives a full description of an
High Priest, and all the properties and requisites, that were to be in him.
Page 189. the great and essential qualifications there specified, that were to
be in an High Priest, are Mercy and Grace. -- It Is said he was ordained for
men. -- that is, for men's cause, and for their good -- page 190. thus you see
the ends which he is ordained for, are all matter of Grace and Mercy -- the
qualification that was required in an High Priest, was, That he should be one
that could have Compassion -- Mercy and Compassion is that which is here made
the special, and therefore the only mentioned property of the High Priest as
such, and the specifical essential qualification that was inwardly and
internally to constitute him.

The Reader will find much more to this purpose in the place cited; but from
what has bin cited from the Authors mentioned, whose Books are common, and no
doubt have been seen by the Author of the Epistle, he might have seen, that it
was great rashness to suppose that none would or could deny, that Christ by his
blood did intercede for vengeance.

Those Authors mentioned, have a far other up-taking of Christ's Priestly
Office, and of that part of it, his Priestly Intercession by his blood; for
they think his Priestly Office was wholly an Office of Grace, and altogether an
Office of Grace, founded in Grace and Mercy and that Mercy is an essential
qualification of a Priest, as a Priest; that it is an Office for men for
expiating sin, and not for punishing it; that the design of it is mercy and
grace; that the Priestly intercession is only for the Elect, and in this
distinguished from Christ's Royal Power, which as it is for protecting the
Elect, so it is for punishing the enemies of his Church.

2. But suppose Christ did intercede by his blood against some; I enquire at
him, how he knows that he intercedes by his blood for vengeance upon the
Authors of the Indulgence? what knows he but some of them may be elect? I am
sure he will not say that the blood of Christ which was shed on earth for the
Elect, does plead against them within the vail in Heaven; if he say, that he
knows they are all Reprobates, he knows more than the Author of the Cup of cold
Water knew in the year 1678. for page 40. he says, It may be there are some of
the Elect so far left at present, as to run along with this course. I hope he
will not take on him to say, They have sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost.
If by vengeance he mean eternal vengeance, he must conclude them Reprobates; if
he mean temporal vengeance, how knows he that Christ's blood pleads for that? We
see Aaron as Priest, stood betwixt the dead and the living to stay the Plague;
he made an atonement to avert the wrath of God, and not to bring it on; Numb.
16.46, 47, 48. And the Plague which came after the numbering of the people, is
stayed by building an altar, It belonged to the Priest as Priest, to bless in
the name of the Lord for ever, 2 Chronicles. 23.13.
and offering burnt-offerings and peace offerings, 2 Samuel 24.25. Again,
whatsoever Christ intercedes for by his blood, he obtains it; now how knows
he, that temporal vengeance will certainly come upon the Authors of the
Indulgence? May not Sovereign grace avert the temporal judgment which men's
heinous sins have deserved? who can set bounds to the Grace of God, who has
Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and has showed mercy to some of those who
were the chief of sinners?

3. Suppose that were granted, that Christ did by his blood intercede for
vengeance, and that the Author of this Epistle could condescend upon the
particular persons against whom Christ intercedes, and that he intercedes
against the Authors of the Indulgence, because of the complex of this deed of
the Indulgence; yet this would make no discrepancy betwixt Christ's Intercession
in Heaven and Mr. Hutchesons Speech upon earth; for except he proves that
Christ intercedes for vengeance upon them, for their taking off the civil
restraints of penal Statutes, and granting the peaceable exercise of the
Ministry; all he says, is nothing to the purpose: For Mr. H. and the Indulged
Ministers did give thanks for this, and not for the complex of the Indulgence;
for they never gave thanks for the Instructions. He will never prove that
Christ as King, wills the execution of vengeance upon Magistrates, for taking
off such undue restraints; and much less will he be able to prove that Christ
as Priest intercedes by his blood for vengeance upon that account. And as for
the Prayer which is in the end of Mr. Hutchesons Speech, That the Lord would
bless his Majesty in his Person and Govenment, and their L. L. in the public
Administration; that was according to the Lords Command, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3.
where it is expressly said, That this praying for Kings, and all that are in
Authority, is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. And what
they meant by his Majesty's Government, is clear from what they said before in
the Description of Magistracy, which they design lawful Authority, and the
excellent Ordinance of God. Seeing Mr. Hutcheson spoke according to the good
and acceptable will of the Lord, revealed in his word, this alleged
discrepancy betwixt Christ's Intercession and their Speech, is one of the
Authors roaveries, a Melancholy dream, with which he may affright himself; but
the Indulged Ministers are not such weak Fools, as to be affrighted with his
many terrible words of terror, trembling, confusion of face, shame and
astonishment. This minds me of the censure which I saw of him in an Answer to
the History of the Indulgence, that he has (...), passions without reason. The
Indulged Ministers believe, that they have followed the Lords will, in not
slighting the opportunity of the peaceable exercise of their Ministry, which
the Lord in his good providence did offer to them; and they look upon the
direction which they had from the Lord in this matter, to choose the good, and
refuse the ill; and upon the Lords assistance of them in the exercise of their
Ministry, and his helping them hitherto, to run with patience in the course of
their Ministry, notwithstanding of the contradictions, and false reproaches
they have met with from some, from whom they expected better things; and upon
the blessing of the Lord in the exercise of their Ministry, as the fruits of
Christ's Intercession, so far are they from being confounded and terrified with
reflecting upon the Intercession of Christ.

There are other things in this 3d. Question, which may be denied, at for
example; That our Rulers in affronting Christ have outdone all that ever went
before them, and were resolved never to be outdone by any who should come after
them. What? no not by the Council at Jerusalem, who condemned him of Blasphemy,
and after commanded his Apostles not to speak at all to any man in the name of
Jesus?

But the Gentleman's observation holds here; for he goes as far as his fancy can
go; he minds me of a Drunken man in the times of Popery, who could not get on
upon his Horse; at length, having prayed to the Haly-rude of Crail to help him
on, he went to some advantage, and did cast himself over the Horse, and then he
blamed Haly-rude of Crail, because it could not do, except it did over-do.

I wish his style were as solid and temperate as that Speech of Mr. Hutchesons,
which though he slightingly calls an Harangue yet was such as did well become a
Minister of the Gospel; whereas this Author by a flood of great swelling words,
is often carried away beyond all bounds of Rhyme or Reason; but although they
who cannot discern betwixt Words and Reason, may be tossed to and fro with the
windy noise of empty words; yet they who can discern the forcibleness of right
words and solid arguings, from bold and imperious dictates and captious
Questions, will not be moved with a Mass of words, void of the Nerves of solid
Reason.

After his Questions, he very earnestly desires the Indulged Ministers to
relinquish the Congregations where they have the peaceable exercise of their
Ministry. To this Petition I give this short answer: These Ministers think it
their duty to preach in these Congregations, and therefore till he prove it to
be their duty to relinquish them, he cannot expect that they should grant his
Petition. The reading of the following History which he recommends, has been
so far from shaking them, that they are more confirmed thereby; for his grounds
are either so false, or so inconcludent of what he would infer from them
against the Indulged Ministers, that any who understand any thing of the rules
of right reasoning, are confirmed that the cause he has taken in hand is evil;
for if there had been good reasons to have concluded against the Practice of
the Indulged Ministers, a man of his parts, and who had so much spare time to
seek them out, could hardly have missed them.

After this Petition and Advice to read the History, he says, I am not without
hope, but you will suffer your selves to be overcome into a compliance with the
humble and earnest beseechings, not of your poor Brother only, but of many who
are presenting you to God, and dare seek nothing for you till this be obtained;
do not offend at this last word, for if it were my last, I must both confess
unto you, I never had confidence to seek any thing for you, since you embraced
the Indulgence, save this; and I know since that day, you have been out of the
Prayers of many serious Prayers, to whom you were and yet are dear, which has
been none of your advantage; yea, whatever use you may make of it, yet fidelity
to you, put me to use this freedom; that I have not only found my self in
fetters, but I have observed more fervent, judicious and gracious persons, to
whom it was a case of Conscience; yea, who had no confidence to represent you
to God, as a part of that suffering remnant for whom they assayed to pour out
their heart before him; whereat you will cease to wonder when you consider,
that to them the Indulgence was defection.

Ans. If his Petition prevail not to draw the Indulged Ministers to relinquish
what they have embraced; he essays to drive them from these Congregations where
they exercise their Ministry, by a new kind of Excommunication; for till this,
which he desires be obtained, he shows that himself and others dare seek
nothing for them; if he had said, that in their Prayers for the Indulged, they
did in the first place seek, that they might relinquish what they had embraced,
and then subjoyned other Petitions to that, it had been hard enough to have
justified this Method and Order of praying, as the only right Method of praying
for them; but that they dare seek nothing for them till they first relinquish
what they have embraced, till his Petition to them be obtained, is a new piece
of practical Divinity. I am sure the Lords Prayer is not his Directory in this
new Method of Praying, or rather of this new Method of restraining Prayer; is
there no way of hallowing of the Name of God, and promoving of the coming of
the Kingdom of God, and doing the will of God which they are bound to by the
command of God, till his Petition to them be obtained? I think he will not say
that their continuance in these charges, do make void the obligation of the
command of God; and if they be obliged to other duties (suppose this granting
of his Petition to be a duty which it is not) even before this which he desires
be performed by them, why may he not pray for Grace to them, to enable them to
hallow the name of God, and do his will in these duties? May he not pray for
daily bread for them, and that their sins may be forgiven them, and that they
be not led into temptation? etc. May not a godly man dye without any doubt of
the lawfulness of his exercising his Ministry in his own Parish, or in any
other destitute Congregation that invited him? May not a godly man dye in one,
yea, in many errors that are not fundamental? Would this Author, if he were at
the death of such, refuse to seek any thing for them, till they explicitly
repent of these errors, and actually quit them? I say explicitly; for every
good man who has true Repentance does virtually and interpretatively repent of
every one of his sins.

This Author will have an actual relinquishing what they have embraced, before
he seek any thing for them. Our Savior prayed, that the Father would forgive
those who were persecuting him to death, and mocking him when on the Cross.
Stephen prays, That the Lord would not lay the sin of those who were stoning
him, to their charge. These Persecutors were far from Repentance and
Reformation, when these prayers were put up for them.

The Author acknowledges the Indulged to be godly men, and so he cannot deny
that Christ intercedes for them in Heaven; does he think that the Intercession
of Christ for them is interrupted, till that be obtained which the Author
petitions? He knows that Christ intercedes for the Elect before they believe;
for he prays for them who shall believe, that they may be one, etc. Joh. 17.20,
21. If their unbelief does not hinder his Intercession, (for by his Death and
Intercession they are brought to believe) does he think that their miscarriages
after their Conversion, does interrupt his Intercession, and that he intercedes
for nothing for them, till they actually reform what is wrong? I would desire
the Author and these persons who take this method in this restraining Prayer,
to think seriously how they can clear this method of theirs from a discord and
discrepancy with Christ's Intercession; and if he has not fallen into that
fault, which he without just ground alleged against the Indulged Ministers,
What warrant he and these he speaks of, have to cast the Indulged Ministers out
of their Prayers, he and they would do well to examine; this is a new sort of
Excommunication, to cast those whom he acknowledges to be godly men, out of
this part of the Communion of Saints. And I perceive by what he says, that this
new censure is no warrantable censure; and proceeds not from that Authority
which is given for edification, and not for destruction; for even the sentence
of excommunication, is for the good and advantage, for the Salvation of the
person excommunicated. But this new censure has beeen, as he says, none of the
advantage of the Indulged Ministers. A censure that has no other effect but a
non-advantage and damage of godly persons; is no censure approven of Christ;
for he has commanded his servants and people, that they do all their things in
love and for edification. How the Indulged Ministers can be still dear to those
who cast them out of their Prayers to their damage, I cannot understand: I
suppose when he and those who take his Method, have seriously reflected upon
the matter, they will find that they themselves have more disadvantage by this
uncharitable neglect of duty, than the Indulged Minsters have. He says, he
finds himself in fetters as to praying for them; ignorance, and prejudice, and
humor, and such like distempers, will fetter folk in duty; I am sure his
fetters are not made of the cords of love. I am very confident that more light
and more love would loose these fetters. If those fervent, judicious, gracious
persons that he speaks of, were more judicious, and had more of the grace of
charity, and had learned to love more fervently, they would not have fallen
into that ignorant and uncharitable case of Conscience, which binds them up
from making Conscience of praying for those who are (as he says) dear unto
them. If they had more judgment, and more fervent charity, they would pray much
more better than they do; and when they pray better, the Indulged Ministers
will not be cast out of their Prayers. And I cannot but tell him, so long as he
and they take such unwarrantable and uncharitable methods of praying
Christians, who are truly judicious, will not think so much of their Prayers,
as it seems he and they do, who would terrify the Indulged Ministers by their
forbearing to pray for them, from the exercise of their Ministry in those
Congregations, in which through the good Providence of God, they have had in a
sad time the peaceable exercise thereof.

That these people do not account the Indulged Ministers a part of the
suffering remnant, is another of their mistakes; for though their sufferings
have not run in the channel of the sufferings of others, yet they have had
their large share in sufferings, if the scourge of Tongues and Calumnies,
back-bitings and heartbreaking reproaches be sufferings, they may be reckoned
among sufferers. These and many other sad things they have endured with much
patience; and these things they have suffered, because they could not in
Conscience neglect to take the opportunity of the peaceable exercise of their
Ministry.

It Is another of their mistakes, that they look on the Indulged Ministers as
guilty of defection. They might have had patience till the Ministry of the
Church of Scotland had tried and found the practice of the Indulged Ministers
defection: But at their own hand to condemn so many judicious and conscientious
Ministers of defection, and cast them out of their Prayers, are among the wild
Practices of this evil time; in which many folk do what is right in their own
eyes.

But I perceive a new sort of negative Religion is like to come in fashion in
this Generation: Practical Divines condemn the ill-grounded confidence of those
who please themselves because they forbear gross evils, though they neglect
that which is good; and justly, because the tree that brings not forth good
fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. But now many please themselves as
if they were more judicious, gracious, tender than others, because they forbear
to hear the word of God preached by those whom they dare not to deny to be
Ministers of the Gospel, and because they forsake the assemblies of the Lords
People met together for the Lords worship; and because they do not pray for
those who are dear to them, and whom they dare not deny to be godly, until they
actually do that which they desire them. O what need have we to walk humbly,
and pray earnestly for the Spirit of a sound mind!

He says in that same page, That God has written an History against the
Indulged Ministers acceptance. I wish he had forborne this rash assertion; the
right order had been to have showed that the practice of the Indulged Ministers
was contrary to the written word of God; he knows that Providence is not our
Bible. I know not what History this is, and what these effects that he speaks
of, as flowing from the Indulged Ministers practice which he mentions
elsewhere, are, and so cannot speak particularly to them; if he meant that some
have been very busy to draw people away from hearing the Indulged Ministers,
he may remember that there were some who endeavored to draw away the people
from hearing Christ himself. He is mad, said they, why hear ye him? If he mean
that some people who once countenanced their Ministry, have withdrawn from
them, he knows that many of Christ's Disciples went back and walked no more with
him; and they who would once have pulled out their eyes, and given them to
Paul, looked on him as an enemy, because he told them the truth; many have
stumbled at Christ and the Gospel, and the Ministers of it, without cause. If
he mean the renting and division, that is no effect of the practice of the
Indulged Ministers, but of those who did set themselves to draw the people off
from them, and upon such grounds that too many people are become very
indifferent and careless of hearing any Ministers, and some are only for
hearing some few; and how long they will continue their respect for such, who
can tell? for it is the work of a spirit of Schism to divide and subdivide, Mr.
Rutherford used to say, that Providence was not our Bible: and Mr. To. Blare
used to call the Arguments which the English usurpers took from success,
Turkish Arguments.
till all be broken in shivers, and crumbled away to nothing. We should be very
tender in speaking of Gods written Histories against or for any thing. There
are great mysteries in divine Providence, which does not appear, at first, till
the Lords work be complete, and all his Counsel appear; and therefore folk who
are hasty in determining in this matter, run a great hazard of taking the Name
of God in vain.

In his next page he expresses some hope, that amongst the Indulged themselves,
among so many godly men, there were some that the Lord should make use of to
discover the evil of this Indulgence; and says, That that man shall be blessed.

Ans. As for the evil that is in the complex of the Indulgence, several of the
Indulged. Ministers have discovered it to much better purpose than the Author
of the following History has done; but these same Ministers have given such
solid Reasons for the warrantableness of their own Practice in what they have
done upon the Magistrates Indulgence, that he cannot in reason expect that they
should condemn themselves in that, in which they have so much peace upon so
solid grounds.

In his last Section, he says, Many will cry out against the following History
(who shall never be able to answer its Reason, but by clamor) as unanswerable.
I answer, If he had been pleased to have read what the Indulged Ministers and
others have written in answer to what the Author of this History sent before
this History, in Letters and Questions, he might have seen any thing that this
Author has said against the practice of the Indulged Ministers, very
rationally and solidly answered. As for his first reason, for the
seasonableness of this, I answer, The evil which is in the Magistrates actings,
which relate to the Indulgence, have been more solidly discovered than this
Author does; but this Authors great design, is to fasten all the Magistrates
faults in this matter, upon the Indulged Ministers: And if this last be the
Testimony which the Author means in his second Reason, it is a false Testimony,
and of no value and worth, and worse than nothing.

In his third he is mistaken; for several who are dissatisfied with the
Indulgence, are much more dissatisfied with this History, as a Book which they
think will do much mischief among ignorant and profane people, in hardening them
in a careless neglect of the Lords Ordinances, and profaning of the Sabbath,
and jumble many weak and well-meaning people, and confound them with things
that they do not understand.

His fourth Reason for the seasonableness of it, is, because the Indulged
Brethren had been threatening and boasting with a Vindication of the lawfulness
of their acceptance. I answer, The Author either saw these Vindications, for
there were many of them, or not; if he saw them not, might he not have had
patience till he had seen what they had to say for themselves? it was injustice
to condemn men unheard, who were offering a Vindication of their Practice; but
it seemed he had a mind to give them Couper Justice: But it may be he thought
he could imagine all that they had to say; but this was rashness, and too much
self-confidence; he should have heard them, before he had answered, seeing he
knew they had spoken for themselves. If he saw any of these Vindications, as
some think he did, why did he not examine them? it may be he found them too hot
for his handling: If he had sent this History to the Indulged Ministers
privately, that they might have given him a return, this had been fairly done;
but to print it and publish it to the World at the very first, was not fair;
non amice factum ab amico.

His first Reason for the seasonableness of it, is, because the Non-indulged
Ministers had done somewhat to strengthen the hands of the Indulged, by giving
them new confidence in their course, in obliquo, covering all aid carrying
toward them, as if they had done nothing amiss, but upon the the matter, by a
direct Homologatry of the Indulgence; for now silence as to all speaking
against this evil, is made the very door and porch through which all entrance
to the Ministry must pass; And therefore (says he) it is now simply necessary,
and more than high time, to discover and detect the blackness of its Defection,
when the Church is thus brought in bondage by it.

Ans. I did not think that the Author, though he be very confident upon small
evidence, had so far passed the bounds of modesty, as that he durst in Print
have avowed and justified the deed of two young men, who contrary to
Presbyterian Principles, did set themselves to counteract the judgment and
sentence of the suffering Ministers of the Church of Scotland; for their way
did manifestly tend to the subversion of the very foundation of all Government
and Order.

It Is a strange Reason, that because the Non indulged Ministers endeavored to
strengthen the hands of the Indulged Ministers, that therefore it was
seasonable to put out a Book condemning all together; and what else was this,
but for two men living at a distance, to take upon them to condemn the whole
Presbyterian Ministers of the Church of Scotland, and to encourage two unruly
youths in their contempt of any remnant of Authority, that that poor remnant
had?

What sober person, who has any Judgment in matters of that nature, can but
commend the Practice of these Non-indulged Ministers, who labored to prevent
the breaking of the Church, by that Question about the Indulgence, by
restraining these young men, who made it their great work to cry out against
the Indulged Ministers and the hearing of them? and yet this Author is so far
from having that reverence that he ought to have had to the Judgment of the
generality of the Ministers of the Church of Scotland, that he thinks, because
they agreed together to endeavor to prevent the renting of the Church,
therefore it was seasonable to cast in a new fire-ball of Contention among the
people, and so render all their endeavors of Unity ineffectual; and what more
effectual way would he have taken to render all the suffering Ministers of the
Church of Scotland contemptible in the eyes of all who will believe him, than
to charge all the Indulged Ministers with so black and fearful a defection, and
all the rest of the Ministers with a direct homologating of the Indulgence? In
this he has done service very acceptable to Prelatists, Papists, and Quakers,
though I believe he designed no such thing.

His sixth, taken from the severe insulting over some of the poor remnant, who
could not forbear to witness their abhorrency of it, flows from misinformation;
the insulting was among some of those who quarrelled with the Indulged
Ministers, and who took occasion from the Indulged Ministers forbearance to
meddle with that matter in their Sermons, to say, that they had nothing to say
for themselves; and thus their silence for peace sake, was turned into a
prejudice against them. They who live in these parts where Indulged Ministers
are, can bear witness how much forbearance and tenderness has been used
toward the poor people, who were confounded with these doubtful Disputations,
and frighted with unknown words of Homologations and Homologatings, and imposed
upon by strong alledgencies, and parables, and allegories, without Scripture or
solid Reasons.

This way of witnessing, which he means the withdrawing from the Lords
Ordinances, to which they formerly resorted, and in the use of which they
profited, is a way of witnessing, that if they who take it, have little cause
to be ashamed of it, as he says, I am sure they have as little cause to glory
in it; for there needs no more to qualify folk for giving this Testimony, but
laziness and gross profanity, and contempt of Ordinances. There can be no great
matter in that, which any profane man, as he is profane, and because he is
profane, can do.

As for his seventh, neither this Author, nor he, has proven that the Indulged
Ministers entering into these Parishes, was a coming in, not by the door, but a
climbing up another way.

His last consists of hopes, That some of these godly men Indulged, may be by
this History taken off, and that the Non-indulged will consider how to deliver
the Church from this evil, and their Brethren out of the snare, and themselves
from giving this evil any interpretatite countenance; withal, that they will
henceforth appear more friendly toward the real Lovers of them and the Cause.

It Is needless to make any Answer to this: but that I see no appearance that
this History is like to take any of the Indulged Ministers off; upon the
contrary, there are so many false aspersions and uncharitable wrestlings, and
so much bitterness, that it makes even indifferent persons suspect his Cause
bad, which is managed by so ill means and methods. As for those lovers of the
Non-indulged, and the Cause whom he designs, holders fast of their integrity,
in whom he seems afterward to grant that there are excesses, he means, I
suppose the young man of whom he spoke before, and if there be any other of his
way.

I like well of friendliness, and of showing of all meekness to all men; but
those whom he seems to mean, have given no great evidence, that they are lovers
of the cause, if by the cause he mean Presbytery; for their way was directly
destructive to the way of Presbyterian Government; for they would not, and
thought they should not be subject to the Ministers, and their work was to
kindle the fire of Contention: if he and the Author of the History had had as
much charity for the Indulged Ministers, as they had for those young men, they
would have found other names for their supposed faults, than blak defection,
and betraying of the cause, etc. When all that he says of these young men, is,
that they had excesses which are incident to the Zeal of the best Saints out of
Heaven. He requires a just discountenancing of the defection of the Indulged
Ministers; but he says, these young men ought to be countenanced, cherished and
encouraged for their uprightness; and after real affection, and tenderness
witnessed to them, then to proceed to curb or cure their excesses. Curbing, it
seems, seemed too rash a word; and therefore he mollifies it by the alternative
of curing. And yet I cannot understand how he comes to condescend to the cure
of their excesses; for if I be not misinformed, he and the Author of the
History, Commended them for these Practices, which were looked upon as their
greatest excesses. As for example, a confident asserting an immediate Call from
God to preach upon a particular Text in a particular place, before any
Invitation from the People or Minister.
But now I remember that one of them had some strange Enthusiastical Doctrine;
it may be he has heard some such things which he designs excesses. I have been
much longer detained in reviewing this Epistle to the Reader than I designed;
for I really designed to have made my Observation upon it no longer, if not
shorter than the Epistle. I did not set my self to seek out all that might have
been excepted against, but only took notice of those things which were obvious,
and offered themselves at first view.

I thought my self the more obliged to note those obvious errors which I found
in it, both for the peoples sake; some whereof I hear read this book on the
Lords day instead of the Bible; and for the Authors sake, that he, if he shall
see what is written, may see himself to be fallible; and that he may be better
advised before he put such Papers as this to the Press; and that he may know
his own measure, and not look on himself as one fit to censure the generality
of the Ministers of the Church of Scotland, and to obtrude his dictates upon
them, when one of the unworthiest of these Ministers, who has so little
leisure for such work, has in a hasty glancing through his Epistle, observed
in a few pages so many dangerous Errata's in Doctrine, Worship, and Christian
Practice, and in Civil and Ecclesiastical Government.

I come now to the History of the Indulgence. I have not so much leisure as the
Author of it had, and therefore I purpose not to follow him foot for foot; as
that would be tedious, so it would be needless; seeing the Author serves us not
only twice, but thrice with the same Coleworts.

Occidit miseros crambe repetita magistros. I looked for a state of the
Question, but in vain. The true state of the Question, according to the mind of
the Author of the Epistle, and the Author of the History, is, Whether any
Indulgence or Permission, though it were for every Minister to return to his
own charge, if granted by the present Magistrate, could be made use of? Both
these Authors are for the negative: We heard the Author of the Epistle's mind
before; the Author of the History goes the same way, Page 121.5. If it should
be free of all these inintanglements, and grounds of scrupling; I leave it to
Christian Prudence to consider, whether, as matters now stand, the Lord be not
rather calling them to preach his Name on the Mountains, seeing this way has
been so signally blessed of the Lord, and is daily more countenanced of him,
than their laboring in their particular respective charges usually have been:
And seeing it is undeniable, that the Adversaries are not yet really repenting
of their opposition to the Work of God, and therefore, that any such
permission, if granted, could not be supposed to flow from any love to the
prosperous progress of the Gospel, but rather from the contrary, as is clear in
the Indulgence already granted; and to flow from a purpose to entangle and
ensnare, yea, and endanger both soul and body; if not from a purpose and design
to destroy all at once. He has a hint of it also, page 18. knowing that
favors granted by standing and stated enemies, could not be for advantage, but
for hurt. Ans. I think it was well done, that he left the matter to Christian
Prudence; but it was not to the purpose he designs, for seeing it was necessity
that put prudent Ministers and Christians to the fields and mountains, because
they were there most free from hazard; I suppose the Christian Prudence of the
one and other, would advise not to go to the fields and mountains, if the
Magistrate granted so free a permission as he there supposes. And I know not if
Ministers and people could expect the Lords approbation and blessing, if
needlessly they would clash with the Magistrate in going to the mountains; for
if Fathers should not provoke their Children to wrath, then certainly Children
and Subjects should not provoke their Parents and Rulers to wrath. His
suspending of use-making of a liberty granted by the Magistrate, though free of
entanglements, and ground of scruple upon the Magistrates real Repentance, and
love to the prosperous progress of the Gospel, is as unreasonable as the Author
of the Epistle his suspending of his Prayers for the Indulged Ministers till
they quit their charges; and it savours strongly of that error, That Dominion
is founded in grace. May we take no favors from Magistrates, except they be
real penitents, and have gracious Principles and good designs in their
Magistratical actings? From what is said, it appears, that though the
Indulgence had been free of clogs, yet these Authors would not have been for
making use of it; they would still have called the people to leave the Kirks,
and come to the fields and mountains. They know that the Magistrate would
oppose these Field-meetings; so that people may see, if they will follow the
dictates of their Authors, what ever favors our present Magistrates would
give, and how free soever of such clogs and entanglements as attended the
Indulgence: yet they must go to the fields; and then seeing the Magistrate will
send soldiers to dissipate these Field-meetings, they must resolve, if they
cannot flee, to be carried to Prisons, or else to fight. This gratifies the
designs of Papists exceedingly, who have been laboring ever since the
Reformation, to put Magistrates and Subjects in a state-hostility and enmity
one against another.

Among many sad things which have accompanied and followed this way, this has
been one, that the conceit many have entertained of fighting, has exceedingly
hindered their Humiliation under the mighty hand of God, and so has holden on,
and increased the Calamities and Desolations of this poor Church.

From what is observed out of the Writings of these Authors, Ministers and
People may see that no Indulgence given by the pre^ent Magistrates, will
satisfy them; and that it is not a withdrawing from hearing the Indulged
Ministers that will satisfy them. Nothing less will satisfy them, than a
going to the mountains, and hearing those who preach contrary to the
Magistrates command; for there must be a contrariety in their acting to the
Magistrate, or else it is not right; for this is put in the state of the
Question in his Vindication of those who scruple to hear and own the Indulged,
Page 128, 129. for those who are to be heard, are such as preach not according
to man's order, but contrary thereto. If there be not a contrariety to, and
counteracting of the Magistrate, their Authors will not be satisfied, and no
wonder; for nothing less than this will answer their design: so that people may
see that their Authors, though they were out of danger themselves, being at a
good distance, and under an Engagement by subscription with their hand not to
come where the hazard was, yet they take upon them to draw up poor people, as
it were in Battalia against Rulers, and armed rude soldiers, and discharges
them to hear any Proposals from the Magistrate, or to make any to him, or seek
or receive any thing from him; and now I leave it to be considered what this
tends to. It was not becoming them, especially who were without the reach of
Musket Shot, to be so prodigal of the lives of poor people, as to think of no
way of Peace, nor of any treating. I could not but remember what I had read in
Terence of Thraso, who kept himself far off from the hazard, and put others
betwixt him and it; but he undertakes to give the sign of Battle, Hic ego ero
post principia inde omnibus signum dabo. And of Gnathos remark, Illuc est
sapere ut hos instruxit ipsius sibi cavit loco: But People should not upon the
desire of any man, rush themselves upon hazards; when crosses lies in the way
that God calls them to walk in, then they are their crosses which the Lord
calls them to take up willingly, and bear patiently; but they must not go out
of the Lords way to seek crosses; they will meet with as many as the Lord sees
meet for them in the Lords way. I cannot see how the prescriptions that their
Authors give to people, consists with that command of of God, Romans 12.18. If it
be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men. I am sure
Rulers are not excluded, but in a special manner included in the Universality
of all men.

But I do not wonder, that the Author did not form the state of the Question
distinctly; nor do I wonder, that they who are against the Indulged Ministers,
are generally against distinctions, at least in that Question; seeing that any
apparent strength that is in their arguings, is founded in confounding things
that differ. If the Question be rightly stated, as I stated it in the
beginning, the Arguments commonly used against the Indulgence, will be found
not only inconcludent, but very ridiculous; for suppose the acts of the
Magistrate indulging, to be wrong; and suppose the Indulged Ministers to have
miscarried in their appearance before the Council; yet if ye but grant them to
be Ministers of the Gospel, they might warrant to return to preach to their own
Parishes, and destitute Congregations, might warrantably invite others of them
who had not access to their own Congregations, to help them in their destitute
condition; and they might warrantably come upon their invitation to help them.
To argue, it was unlawful to invite them, and for them to go upon that
Invitation, because the Magistrate appointed or permitted them to go, or
because the Magistrate gave them Instructions, is very absurd reasoning; for
this absurdity follows upon it, that the Magistrate may lay by any, yea, all
the Ministers of the Gospel from exercising their Ministry, and render it
sinful to them to exercise their Ministry; for according to this way of
reasoning, he need do no more to bind up a Minister in his very Conscience,
that he cannot preach without sin, but appoint him or permit him to preach, and
give him Instructions, and the work is done. He need not give pay to maintain
soldiers to hinder preaching, with Swords and Guns, seeing he may do all that
soldiers can do, and much more, by Pen, Ink and Paper: for soldiers can only
impede them where they are present by external force; but these
Paper-Ordinances reach their Consciences, that they cannot preach without sin
in any place that he appoints or permits them to preach in.

But there was thus much at least of right in the Magistrates Indulgence, that
it did so far relax that general restraint that was formerly laid by Penal
Statutes upon Ministers, that whereas before they could preach no where without
hazard, now they might somewhere have the public exercise of their Ministry
without hazard or disturbance; so that it made way for the peaceable exercise
of their Ministry in some places; so that though the former Statutes were not
abrogated, yet this derogating from such Statutes, or this dispensation in
taking away the Obligation of the Law, or the Obligation of a part of it, as to
some persons in respect of some place, etc. ^s something of right, and better
than nothing, and may lawfully be made use of.

The Method which the Author has followed, ^s first to represent the Indulged
Ministers as guil^y of many grievous faults, and then to draw people from
hearing them, to the Mountains. The most compendious way, if I be not mistaken,
to meet with any thing he says, is to consider what is in his Arguments against
the Indulgence; for he resumes there what he had remarked on the Kings Letter;
and what he has in his Vindication, is taken out of these Arguments. In these
Reasons against the Indulgence, he says, the Reader may see at one view, what
was scattered up and down the foregoing Relation; so here we will find all his
forces united and drawn up in order.

Page 85. 1. He promises to show in how many particulars, Injury was done by
the Indulgence, as accepted, unto our Lord Jesus Christ, the only Head and King
of his Church.

Ans. That which the Indulged Ministers accepted, was a freedom from, or a
relaxation of that civil restraint which had hindered the peaceable exercise of
their Ministry; as was cleared before. If he allege that they accepted of the
Instructions, etc. This is an acceptance of his own making, and he may make
any thing, if he pleases; for the Indulged Ministers cannot hinder any body to
fight against their own fancies. having premised this, I come to the
particulars of his charge against them.

1. (Says he) in that hereby they declared they did not hold their Ministry
wholly and solely of Christ Jesus: How proves he this? We, says he, saw above,
how the Indulged did plainly and positively refuse to say, that they held their
Ministry of Jesus Christ alone, where ex professo, the word alone was left out.
See what is remarked on Mr. Hutchesons Speech, and what was said in answer to
the Informer, wh^ was dissatisfied with M. Blair, whereby an injury of a very
high nature was done unto our Lord Jesus. That which is remarked on Mr.
Hutchesons Speech, is in page 24. 9. they say, That they received their
Ministry from Jesus Christ: Bu^ why was it not said, as some of them (if I am
n^ misinformed) desired, only from Jesus Christ, when this was designedly and
deliberately left out; le^ all the World judge whether in this they carried a
faithful Ministers of the Gospel or not: For m^ part, I cannot but judge, that
this was a manifest betraying of the Cause, and a giving up of all i^ the
Magistrate; for hereby they declared, that either in their judgment they had
their Ministry from others as well as from Christ, that is from the Magistrate
as well as from Christ; and that in an equality and Co-ordination, or else that
they had it n^ from Christ immediately, but from men, from the Magistrate in
subordination to Christ. And then he reasons against both these, and concludes,
that therefore when they kept out the Word only, they did plainly declare that
they held their Ministry partly of the Magistrate. And after he has started
another Objection about holding the peaceable exercise of the Ministry from the
Magistrate, he concludes; So that use what devices men can to cover this
matter, a manifest betraying of the Cause will break through, and a receding
from received and sworn Principles, will be visible.

In the answer to the Informer, to which also he refers, he says page 71.
Ministers receiving instructions for regulating them in the exercise of their
Ministry from Magistrates, acting like themselves Magisterially and
Architectonically, do, if not formally, yet at least virtually, deny Christ to
be the only Head and Lawgiver of his Church. But again page 85. he objects,
That this fault was but personal and accidental to the Indulgence, and so
cannot effect the same, or make it an encroachment upon Christ of so high a
nature. He answers, That being spoken at that occasion, when the King and
Council were acknowledged thankfully, for granting of the Indulgence, and being
sp^ken with understanding, it must be granted that it had reference to the
Indulgence it self, and so (says he) their discourse was to this purpose in
effect.

We declare that we hold not our Ministry of Christ alone, but of Christ and of
the Magistrate; and therefore do accept of this Indulgence without scruple. He
adds afterward. Further this Discourse of theirs so worded purposely and
deliberately, says, That if they had not believed that they held their
Ministry not of Christ alone, but of others also, they could not have accepted
of the Indulgence.

Ans. This is the Authors great Gun with which he thought fit to begin the
battle; if this misgive and do no skaith, there is no less reason to fear his
lesser Ordnance. It Is strange that he should have begun with a piece of
Ordnance, which he knows not whether it be fixed or not; he is not sure whether
the word only, was by some of the Indulged Ministers desired to be added; for
when he says it, he casts in this doubtful Parenthesis, If I be not
misinformed. He got many wrong Informations, and this may be one among the rest.

I do not remember of any such thing; and if he be misinformed, his first
Argument has neither matter nor form. I have heard it alleged that some
people, by telling uncertainties, yea, falsehoods, come themselves to believe
them, and confidently to add to them. I find something like this in this Author.

1. We see he speaks doubtfully, if I be not misinformed; but the oftener he
repeats it, he grows the more positive and confident; for we never hear more of
any doubt of his Inforformation; yea, in repeating he wonderfully amplifies the
matter, and makes the not saying of this only, to say many things; For, says
he, hereby they declared, that they did not hold their Ministry wholly and
solely of Christ. He might have easily perceived, that a positive Declaration
that they did not hold their Ministry from Christ only, is more than a
not-saying, that they had it from him only. A man may truly say, I had this
gift from my Father, though he add not the exclusive word only: Who yet cannot
positively declare, that he had not the gift only from his Father, because he
(as I suppose) received it from ^is Father, and not from any other.

Again, he granted that some of the Indulged desired that the word only might
be put in; sure ^hese did not positively and plainly refuse to say, That they
held their Ministry from Christ alone; and yet here he charges it upon the
Indulged, generally, that they refused to say so. This is another of his
Amplifications.

Then he judges that this was a manifest betraying of the Cause, and refers it
to the judgment of the world, if they carried as faithful Ministers. What?
shall Ministers be condemned ^as not faithful, because they spoke of their
Ministry in the words that the Holy Ghost taught Paul to speak, Acts 20.24.
Shall the using of the Words of God be judged a betraying of the cause of God?
Suppose that that word was designedly and deliberately left out; this might
have been the reason that they durst not adventure to add a word to the words
of the Apostle who spoke by the Inspiration of God.

He amplifies yet further, This was, says he, a giving up all to the
Magistrate: That is a wonderful amplification. There is no mention made of the
Magistrate in that sentence at all, nor any giving of any thing to him there,
but an acknowledgment that they had received their Ministry from Christ; and
yet he will conclude, that by this all was given up to the Magistrate. What?
was nothing given to Christ from whom they acknowledge they had received their
Ministry expressly, and all given to the Magistrate, whom they do not so much as
mention there? But he will prove that they gave up all to the Magistrate; For,
says he, hereby they declared, that in their judgment they had their Ministry
from others as well as from Christ. Here he eats in again somewhat he had said;
for even now all was given to the Magistrate; but here he leaves something at
least to Christ, but takes in others with him; but who are these others? That
is, says he, the Magistrate, as well as from Christ. What? was there no others
but the Magistrate that they might have their Ministry from? I think he might
rather have supposed that it was the Father and the Holy Ghost, than the
Magistrate, especially when he is speaking of an equality; for it was an
abominable alledgance of Blasphemy to say, that they declared in their judgment
that they had their Ministry from the Magistrate, as well as from Christ, and
that in an Equality and Coordination; Or else, says he, that they had it not
from Christ immediately, but from men; from the Magistrate in subordination to
Christ: But were there no other men beside the Magistrate? if he would have
dealt heartily, he might have supposed that Presbyterians meaned rather the
Presbytery than the Magistrate; and therefore, says he, when they kept out the
word only, they did plainly declare that they held their Ministry partly of the
Magistrate, quod erat demonstrandum. He is not sure if this word was desired to
be put in; he knows not whether it was kept out upon design; he knows not upon
what design it was kept out; suppose it had been designedly kept out, and how
then can he conclude from this, That these Ministers declared, and that they
plainly declared that they held their Ministry of the Magistrate? he may
conclude any thing he pleases at this rate of reasoning; yet I perceive he has
forgotten himself, as very ordinarily men who pass the bounds of truth do,
except they have very good memories; for a little before he alleged, all was
given up to the Magistrate; but here he has reduced him to a part: what is
cited from page 71. relates to the instructions, which will come in afterward.

That the want of this only, was a personal fault, or was an encroachment upon
Christ, or did affect the Indulgence, as he speaks: he must prove he would make
it a fault affecting the Indulgence, because it was at that occasion when the
King and Council were thankfully acknowledged for the granting of the
Indulgence, and because it was spoken with understanding; but this has no show
of Reason, if it be considered what it was they thankfully acknowledged, the
freeing of them from the restraint which was upon the public exercise of their
Ministry; any who are not blinded with prejudice, may see that this was the
design of these Presbyterian Ministers to show, that though they acknowledged
the Magistrates taking off that restraint, yet they did not look on themselves
as the Magistrates Ministers, but as the Ministers of Jesus Christ, who had
received their Ministry from him: But the thing that he says, must be granted,
whether there be reason or no; and so he proceeds in his Amplifications; and
out of the want of this only, he forms a Charrang and Discourse, and puts it in
these Ministers mouths; and so if ye will believe him, their Discourse was to
this purpose in effect: We declare that we hold not our Ministry of Christ
alone, but of Christ and the Magistrate; and therefore do accept of this
Indulgence without scruple. But, which is more strange, he will not only have
them to say as he says, but also believe as he alleges upom them; he will not
only impose Charrangs upon them, but he will impose a Creed upon them; For,
says he, this Discourse of theirs says, That if they had not believed that
they held their Ministry not of Christ alone, but of others also, they could
not have accepted of the Indulgence. I am sure no judicious person who reads
these things, will think that they deserve any refutation; and I am very
apprehensive such will allege, that I had little to do who transcribed them.

When I was writing this, and reflecting upon the wild conceits that the Author
has fallen into upon this supposition, that only was purposely kept out, and
that his amplifications grow still the more remote from truth; it put me in
mind of a censure which an English man passed upon a Scottish Gentleman with
whom he was acquainted; this Gentleman told him strange things which the
English man could not believe, they were so leasing-like: This English man
having occasion to speak of this Gentleman, said of him, He is, said he, a very
pretty Gentleman, but he amplifies mightily. This Author has amplified
mightily upon the word only; and if he had been professedly making Romances, it
had been more tolerable; but in a matter of so great importance to give his
fancy leave to rove so as to condemn a Scripture-expression made use of by the
Indulged Ministers, and to draw Treason against Christ, and a betraying of the
Cause out of a Scripture sentence uttered by the Apostle Paul, speaking by the
Inspiration of the Spirit; and not only to condemn them for using the words
that the Holy Ghost uses, but to impose words of his own, and a Creed of his
own devising upon them; and then condemn them because of that Faith and
Profession, is very intolerable insolency.

His Argument, if reduced to a form, must be to this purpose. Whosoever
designedly and deliberately declares that they have received their Ministry
from the Lord Jesus, and says not that they have not received their Ministry
from Jesus Christ only, they deny Christ to be alone head of his Church, and
are guilty of High Treason against the King of kings, and betrayers of the
Cause, and they set the Magistrate in Christ's Throne, and hold their Ministry
of the Magistrate, etc. but so is it, the Indulged have designedly and
deliberately declared, etc. and therefore, etc.

Ans. He is not sure of the truth of the matter, for he brings in the Story,
page 24. with that doubtful Parenthesis, if I be not misinformed; many say,
that it was the Authors mshap that he was many times misinformed; and its like
this may be a piece of his bad intelligence: it is doubtful if it was refused by
any of the Indulged Ministers, to say they received, their Ministry from Christ
only. The Author doubts of the truth of it himself, and I do not remember if
ever I heard this before.

But again, suppose it was refused, yet it was not refused by all the Indulged
Ministers, and yet he charges all indefinitely; it can be only charged upon the
first ten who appeared before the Council, and not upon all these either; for
he says, some of them desired to have only put in, and so they did not refuse.
Yea, for any thing he has said, this Refusal, if there were any such thing,
might have been only the Act of the Speaker; and yet from this Omission or
Refusal to put in this word, which for any thing he says might have been the
deed of one, he charges all the Indulged with High Treason against Christ, yea,
he would have been at proving that this Omission did affect the very
Indulgence; and for any thing I can see, he would make this Omission affect all
after-Indulgences; for if the second Indulgence be affected as well as the
first, why not also a third, and sic in infinitum. He amplifieth mightily when
he speaks of any ill or supposed ill in the Indulged Ministers. The
Magnifying-glass through which he has looked upon the faults of the Indulged
Ministers, has not been a true Glass; and there has been no charity
intermixed in its composition, but the vice which is opposite to that grace,
has been the great Ingredient in its composition.

But I come to his major Proposition; and I shall so far gratify him, though
I'be not obliged to it, to give him leave to allege that this only was
deliberately left out. Yet I deny his Proposition upon this ground, because if
it were true, the Apostle Paul, who spoke by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
when he said he received his Ministry from the Lord Jesus, would be chargeable
with all these hideous things, which he charges on the Indulged Ministers; for
Paul put not in this exclusive particle only in his assertion, when he was
speaking to the same purpose which Mr. H. was speaking of; and he spoke not
rashly but with understanding and deliberation, yea, by the inspiration of the
Holy Ghost. If ye say, Paul did not refuse to put it in; that is true, because
none did desire him to put it in; but I enquire, if the Author had been by him,
and had desired him to alter what he had spoken, that he might prevent the
Erastian Error, whether he would have altered what he had said? I suppose none
will be so bold as to imagine he would have altered the words of the Holy
Ghost. Who dare take on them to teach God, who made man's mouth, how to speak?
If any were so bold as to allege, that if Paul were to speak this over again
in these times, he would add only; he would be as ridiculous as that Minister
was, who before the celebration of the Communion, told his Hearers, That they
had hitherto received the Communion sitting, but now they were to receive it
kneeling; it is true, said he, Christ gave it sitting, but I am sure if he had
given it again, he would have given it kneeling. What the Spirit of God who
knows all things past, present, and to come, spoke by the Apostle Paul, he
spoke it not only for that time, but for this; and except men's eyes be quite
put out by prejudice, or some other distemper, they cannot imagine that words
dited by the Spirit of Christ, are chargeable with these horrid things which
the Author would charge upon the Indulged Ministers, who spoke as the Apostle
Paul spoke: Might not this be a very good Reason why Mr. H. might refuse to put
in the word only, because he would not mend the Phrase and Style of the Holy
Ghost?

2. But Mr. H. might think it fit to forbear to put in the exclusive Particle,
to prevent the Calumny of those who might readily have alleged that they
pretended to an immediate call, such as the Apostles had; for the words seem to
sound that way; and to add any word to the words of the Holy Ghost, which might
be turned into an occasion of Calumny, had been, to say no more, great rashness.

3. Mr. Hutcheson might have this Reason why he put not in the word only,
because Ministers receive their Ministry not only from Christ, but also from
the Father and the Holy Ghost; and it is one of the Arguments whereby Orthodox
Divines prove the Deity of the Holy Ghost, against those Heretics who deny it,
That the Holy Ghost is the Author and Institutor of the Ministry, and cite that
same Scripture which the Author has cited, page 85. Hence, says he, they are
said to be made Overseers by the Holy Ghost, Acts 20. v. 28. so that if he had
but considered what he was writing, he might have seen a very good Reason why
Mr. H. did keep out the exclusive Particle; and was not this a very good Reason
why he might deliberately leave it out, that he might not lose an Argument for
the Deity of the Holy Ghost? And Gal. 1.1. The Father is joined with Christ,
Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the
Father, who raised him from the dead. And Acts 13.2, 4. he is separated and
sent by the Holy Ghost to the work of the Ministry. He might have remembered
that Mr. H. was much better insighted in Divinity, than he was, and might have
had many Reasons for forbearing this Addition, which he could not fall upon.

4. If he had confessed his Ignorance, that he did not know upon what Reason or
upon what Design Mr. H. had lest this word out; this might have been spoken
ingenuously; but to allege that the design of this, was, to betray the Cause,
and to establish Erastianism, and to set the Magistrate in Christ's Throne, or
put them in the room of the Presbytery, was a foul fault, which deserves a
worse name than I will give it; and this fault is the more inexcusable, because
there is not only no ground, nor appearance of ground in Mr. Hutchesons Speech
for it, but on the contrary, any who will not shut their eyes may see that Mr.
Hutchesons design was to show, that they had not their Ministry from the
Magistrate, and that the Magistrate cannot order the Ministry or Ministerial
actings as he pleases. For 1. the Ministry which Mr. H. speaks of, is that
Ministry which had, as to it is public exercise, been under a civil restraint;
now I suppose none will imagine that at their Ordination they received their
Ministry from the Magistrate; for when they were Ordained, Presbytery was
standing, and no body imagined that their Ministry was received from the
Magistrate.

2. If the Author, page 87. reason right, when he shows that the receiving of
the Ministry from the Magistrate, is inconsistent with the receiving of it from
Christ, and is a plain dethroning of him. Then the receiving of the Ministry
from Christ, is inconsistent with receiving it from the Civil Magistrate; and
so when Mr. H. asserted that they had received their Ministry from Christ, he
excluded the Magistrate from Christ's Throne.

3. The receiving or deriving the Ministry from the Magistrate is an Erastian
conceit, and none of the full Prescriptions of Christ, but contrary thereunto,
and therefore was excluded by Mr. Hutchesons Speech, which asserts the fullness
of Christ's Prescriptions for regulating the Ministry.

4. Whereas they declare their Resolution in the discharge of their Ministry,
to behave themselves as became faithful Ministers of Christ: They show that
they were not the Magistrates Ministers but Christ's; and it had been
inconsistent with faithfulness, to have derived their Ministry from the
Magistrate, or to have submitted their Ministry which they had from Christ, and
which they were to exercise according to the Prescriptions, as accountable to
him, to the will and pleasure of men; this had been a sinful way of pleasing
men, inconsistent with faithfulness in the service of Christ, Gal. 1.10.

5. Their declaring of their continuance in their known Judgments, shows that
they designed to let the Magistrate know that they were not Erastians, and that
they minded not to put the Magistrate either in Christ's Throne, or in the room
of the Presbytery; for all who know Presbyterians know that this is their
Judgment, That it is Christ and not the Magistrate that is the Fountain of the
Spiritual Power of the Church; and that it is not by the Magistrate but by the
Presbytery, that Christ does convey the Ministerial Function to those who are
ordained.

Now is not this strange dealing, to allege that Mr. Hutchesons Speech gives
the power of Christ, or the Presbytery, to the Magistrate, when there is not
only no ground from Mr. Hutchesons Speech for any such alledgance, but many
solid grounds demonstrating the contrary? but this lets us see the imperious
force of prejudice, which will have things to be as it will, without, yea,
contrary to all Reason. After the writing of this, I was informed that this
alledgance of the Author concerning the word only, is utterly false, as all the
Ministers alive who were first Indulged will witness.

In his 2, 3, 4. Sections page 86, and 87. he answers an alledgance, That the
Indulged Ministers accepted of the exercise of their Ministry from the
Magistrate.

Ans. The Indulged Ministers assert, That they have not only their Office or
Authority, but also the exercise of it from Christ and not from the Magistrate;
and if he had but considered the Scripture which Mr. H. made use of, he might
have clearly seen, that the Ministry Paul speaks of, comprehends the whole
exercise of it; for he speaks of finishing the Ministry which he had received
from the Lord Jesus. For any thing I know, the Author in these Sections, is
fighting with his own shadow.

In page 87. Sect. 5. he says, The accepting of this Indulgence contains
another wrong done to Christ, in that thereby there is an acknowledgment made
of the sufficiency of all the Rules, Prescriptions and Instructions granted by
him for the ordering of the exercise of the Ministry -- for in the Indulgence,
Instructions were given -- and when the Indulgence was embraced, as accompanied
with these Instructions, the power granting these Instructions was acknowledged
-- and a granting of a Magisterial Power to Magistrates to make such Rules,
etc. is a robbing of Christ of that sole Supreme Power which is due to him.

Ans. If the Author had not Printed Mr. Hutchesons Speech, and what the
Ministers who were called before the Council for not keeping the 29th. of May,
spoke, it might have been thought he had never seen their Speeches.

M. Hutcheson declares the fullness of these Prescriptions; and yet this Author
would have folk believe that the contrary was acknowledged, that these Rules
were not full, but insufficient; he supposes these Rules were received; the
contrary whereof was before cleared. It Is a miserable task to dispute against a
man who begs the Question.

His 6th. Section goes upon the same supposition, that they have taken their
Ministry and Instructions from the Magistrate.

Ans. The falsehood of both is cleared before. He refers us to what he said in
the Vindication of Mr. Blairs assertion. Ans. If the Author had been as well
disposed toward the rest of the Indulged Ministers as he was to Mr. Blair, he
would have vindicated them also, and not have been their accuser; yea, so great
is the force of truth, that it has extorted a Vindication of them also from
him; for he acknowledges that what Mr. Hutcheson spoke, was the same upon the
matter with what Mr. Blair spoke; for speaking of Mr. Hutchesons desire to the
Council, viz. That their L. L. would be pleased not to burden them with
impositions in the matter of their Ministry, wherein they were the servants of
Christ. He says, he is apt to think that this desire did import, that he and
the rest were unclear to submit unto impositions in the matter of their
Ministry, because of their being the Servants of Christ; and then he subjoyns
that Question, Why were the Brethren so offended with what Mr. Blair said?
which shows that Mr. Hutchesons and Mr. Blairs words were to the same purpose.
As for another sense of these words of Mr. Hutchesons, which in that 69. page
he mentions; As he does not think it to be the sense of Mr. Hutchesons words,
so it is so void of sense, and inconsistent with what he acknowledges Mr.
Hutcheson was ordered to speak in all the names, that I wonder how he could
imagin^ any such sense of Mr. Hutchesons words. An^ page 70. the Author says,
And what differen^ I pray, was there upon the matter betwixt Mr Hutchesons
requesting that they might not be b^thened with impositi^ns in the matter of
their Ministry, and Mr. Blairs saying he would not receive Instructions from
them for regulating him in the exe^cise of his Ministry? and the Author
clears this in the words following in that page. He repeats the same, page
73. That Mr. Hutchesons assertion was the same upon the matter with what Mr.
Blai^ said. Thus I hope he will not allege there wa^ not an honest Te^^^mony
given against the Instructions, seeing he acknowledges that Mr. Blair gave an
honest Testimony; and that Mr. Hutches^^ spoke the same upon the matter which
Mr. Blair said. Page 88. Sect. 7. He will have the indulged Ministers guilty,
because the Magistrate determined and appointed the qualifications of
Ministers; and the Accepters, says he, acknowledged that they were so and so
qualified, and did sweetly acquiesce in the Magistrates Aristocratorical
determining of these qualifications. He refers us to his 3d. remark upon the
Kings Letter, which is page 7. and 8. The qualifications are, living peaceably
and orderly in the places where they resided. I shall be far, says he, from
saying, that Ministers should not live peac^^bly and orderly. But he would have
it considered what was the sense of this qualification, by such as did propose
it, which he says, is a negative compliance with a great number of heinous
evils, and an, etc. at the end of them. He expounds it, that is to say, have
been very quiet and silent as to the bearing of faithful witness to the Cause
of God -- and has been loath to transgress any of their iniquous Laws, and
careful to carry so in all their deportment, as not to displease them in the
least. What Son of the Church of Scotland could accept a favor in the bosom
of which lay such a Reproach? For this, says he, was an open declaring that he
was one of these peaceable livers -- he thinks this was a loud call to
vindicate themselves from this aspersion, and to have born witness to the truth
of God. And after he says, That the Accepters of the Indulgence, did upon the
matter and interpretatively give their assent and approbation to these two
things.

1. That the Magistrate as such, has power to prescribe and specify what are
indeed, and what he will have looked on as the only qualification necessarily
requisite in Ministers.

And next, That these here specified, are the only qualifications necessarily
requisite in Ministers; and consequently, that the Apostles and Primitive
Ministers, who neither would, nor could have lived so peaceably in reference to
the Heathen Emperors, were not rightly qualified for the Ministry. Add to
these, says he, that hereby they acknowledged themselves to be duly qualified
after this manner.

Ans. 1. These qualifications were in none of the acts of Indulgence; they were
not intimate to the Ministers, much less were these Ministers interrogate, if
they had lived peaceably and orderly: And as for the Kings Letter, I believe
many Indulged Ministers never saw it, till the Author printed it; yea, some who
have better intelligence than the Author had, doubt if ever any Presbyterians
saw the Kings Letter, or a true Copy of it, or if there be a true Copy of it
extant; the Council did not publish the Kings Let; and to quarrel openly at a
Clause in the Kings Letter directed to the secret Council, not published to
them, and whereof they had no certain Copy upon which they could found their
Plea, would have evidenced too great an Itch of quarrelling with the King.

I see it is very hard to please some folk when they are angry; if the
Magistrate had designed the Author unpeaceable and disorderly, he would have
judged himself injured; and if he had designed him peaceable and orderly, he
would have counted it a reproach; and yet it would seem rational, he should
have been pleased either with the one or the other. If he look upon it as an
injury to be called unpeaceable, why should be think that which is opposite to
that injury to be evil? I think he is mistaken in the explication of these
terms. I do not well understand a negative compliance; for compliance seems to
import something positive; and a negative positive thing, is a thing odly
composed.

I know no outed Minister who can fall under the description that he gives of
peaceable and orderly living, seeing their very Nonconformity is a
transgression of the Laws, and so displeasing to the Makers of these Laws; and
to allege that any of them were silent, as to the bearing faithful witness to
the cause of God, etc. is no small injury done to them. I suppose it was not
the Magistrates design to set down Ministerial qualifications, and to determine
that these too, are the qualifications only requisite in a Minister; to allege
that peaceableness and orderliness, which every Magistrate in the world
requires of every Subject, were made Ministerial qualifications, and the only
Ministerial qualifications by our Rulers, is an alledgance that has no color,
no show, no shadow of probability. Nor do I think that it was the design of the
Magistrate to exclude Presbyterians for preaching against Prelacy, or for
Presbytery, or for the obligation of the Covenant. I do not remember that they
have put any to the trouble for Doctrine of that nature. But I conceive their
design being to keep the Country peaceable they had no mind that any Ministers
who would stir up the people to fight against them, should be settled in Kirks;
and in this they are not singular: For I suppose all the Magistrates in the
World are of the same mind. Now he knows that the Apostles and primitive
Christians lived peaceably enough in this sense in reference to the Heathen
Emperors.

2. But grant that the Magistrate had designed these for Ministerial
qualifications, and grant that these qualifications were as ill as he makes
them; he has no shadow of Reason to prove that the Indulged Ministers did
approve of the Magistrates taking on him to appoint qualifications, or that
they owned themselves to be such and such, as the Magistrate designed; for as I
said, these qualifications were not intimate to them; and though they had been
intimate, what Mr. H. spoke was sufficient to cast all qualifications that were
not right; for Ministers must be qualified according to Christ's prescription;
and he summ^^ed up their qualifications in Prudency and Faithfulness. And it is
the known Judgment of Presbyterians, that it is the work of Christ, and not of
the Magistrate, to institute the Ministry, and to appoint the qualifications of
Ministers.

Page 88. Sect. 8. He alleges, That the Indulged are not set over these flocks
by the Holy Ghost, but by the King and the Council; and for those who return to
their former charges, he says, their ground of returning is not their former
relation unto that people, but the Order of the Council.

Ans. These are false alledgances, and as easily denied by the Indulged
Ministers, as affirmed by him. The former relation was the ground of these
Ministers returning to their former charges; it was really a just ground of
returning; and they who returned, did go upon this ground in returning; the
Councils Act did not weaken this ground, but made way for their peaceable
access to the exercise of their Ministry, where they had so just ground to
exercise it. I wonder how he could obtrude his groundless alledgances, and put
his groundless sayings in the mouths of the Indulged Ministers; for he says,
That the Minister can only now say, Though this be the Flock over which the
Holy Ghost did once make me Overseer, yet now I am set over it by the Councils
Order. It Is strange that he will not content himself to speak what he pleases
without reason, but he will have the Indulged Ministers to speak as he pleases,
contrary to their own knowledge and solid reason; but they who will speak
without reason, must allege, and make where they want.

He says, That the cordial invitation, which some possibly did obtain, was no
such call as Christ's law allows; it was not the Rise and Fountain of these
Ministers going to these places, but a posterior mere precarious thing; whereby
the Ordinance of Christ was rather prostituted than followed. It Is sufficienly
known, the Council made the free Election, and not the Parish; and withal,
where was the Act of the Presbytery, giving them Ministerially a potestative
mission. The Council both called, choosed, and sent, and so were both the
flocks and Presbytery.

Ans. He still plays the Dictator; and what he should prove, he alleges,
that it is sufficienly known. It Is well known that there could be no access to
the peaceable exercise of the Ministry without the Magistrate.

2. Ministers could not prescribe to the Council when they should make their
Acts of Indulgence; had it been fit for them to have desired the Council to
make no Acts in reference to any Ministers, until the Election of the Parish
and the Act of the Presbytery had gone before? the Presbyteries were dissolved,
and to quarrel that there was no Presbyteries, is but to quarrel against the
holy Providence of God, who had deprived us of these Courts; and to have
declared that they would not have the Council make any such Act, till
Presbyteries were again settled, would have been to have refused any thing from
the Council, except they would give all; and this as matters then stood, had
been a refusal of any thing from the Magistrate; this had been very suitable to
the design of the Author, and the Author of the Epistle to the Reader, and Cup
of cold Water, who are for receiving nothing from the Magistrate. But when it is
exeamined by reason, it will be found to be nothing but unreasonable humor.
That the Councils Act which made way for the peaceable exercise of their
Ministry in such places, went before the peoples invitation, flowed from the
Councils pleasure, which was not in the power of the Indulged Ministers. But
after the Council had passed their Act, it was in the power of the Parishes to
have invited there Ministers, or not to have invited them, as they saw fit.

Mr. Thomas Wily has in that Paper which he emitted for Vindication of the
Indulged Ministers, cleared the freedom of the peoples invitation; it was in
their power to have invited, or to have forborne to invite; and though they had
forborne to invite; they would have been but in the condition they were formerly
in. And it was in the power of these Ministers in these bounds, to have
consented or not consented to the invitation of the Parishes; and it was in the
power of the Indulged Ministers, when they saw the Invitation of the people, to
have gone, or not to have gone to these Parishes, as they saw reason; for
though the Councils Act made way for their going, yet it did not settle them in
these Parishes, nor make any relation betwixt them and there Parishes.

Now when it is considered that all Ministers are Ministers of the Church
Universal, and in a special manner of the National Church, in which they were
ordained Ministers, and many exercise their Ministerial Offices in other
Congregations than those where they were ordained (as Presbyterians maintain
against Independents) if there be no just Impediment, nor wrong done to any by
the exercise of their Ministry; and that these Congregations who invited them,
were destitute, and earnestly desired their help; and that the Ministers of
these bounds consented, or acquiesced to the peoples inviting them, and their
coming upon the peoples invitation. When these things are considered, I suppose
every judicious unperjudiced person, will acknowledge that these Ministers had
a sufficient call to help these destitute people, who earnestly desired their
help until they might have regress to their own Congregations where they were
ordained Ministers.

He saw that if the call of the Indulged Misters were questioned, then the call
of these who preach in the Fields would be questioned also; therefore having
moved that question, What shall then be said of them, who preach in the Fields?
page 89. Sect. 3. he answers, Every one may see how impertinent this question
is; for this preaching in the Fields or Houses is no fixed stated oversight
over a distinct company, as is that of a Minister over a particular flock, but
a mere occasional act, depending upon a providential Call from God, and the
cordial entreaty of this persecuted people, which is all that is requisite
thereunto. Ans. This is a piece of art in some Disputers, to slight that as
clearly impertinent which they cannot answer; there is no doubt of a difference
betwixt fixed and occasional Preaching: for a fixed stated preaching has many
advantages which an ambulatory and occasional preaching wants; but the question
is, whether they who preach in the Fields be called of God to preach, and to
take as much inspection as they can for that occasion, of the peoples case to
whom they preach; and if their call be good, as I hope he will not deny, the
call of the Indulged Ministers must be good also; For the Indulged had a more
deliberate Invitation and entreaty than these Preachers ordinarily can have;
and a more general invitation from these concerned, than these Preachers have,
or can wait for: And the Ministers of the bounds knew of the invitation given
to the Indulged Ministers a considerable time before they came; so that if they
had been disposed to have excepted against it, they had opportunity to have
acquainted the people, or the Indulged Minister, with their exceptions: but
these occasional Preachers are often come and gone before Ministers concerned
in these bounds hear any thing of it; and therefore, if the one be good, the
other cannot be evil.

The fixedness of the Indulged Ministers makes not their call bad. I suppose
those people did entreat one of these who preaches in the Fields to stay with
them, and take inspetcion of them as long as he could with safety; would his
continuing to labor among them, make his Call, which was at first good, become
bad afterward? if it was good the first time he preached, why should it be ill
the next? if he may preach for a month, why not for a year? etc. The term of a
providential Call, is a kittle word; and some have said, That only Providential
Ministers are the Ministers that should be heard. We had need to beware of new
words in a time when folk are so much addicted to Novelties; ordinarily new
words are big with Novelties, new Conceits and new things: how he would define
a Providential Call, I know not; but if that be the thing he means, That the
Lord in his Providence makes way for, and gives an opportunity of occasional
Preaching; then it may be said, that the Lord in his Providence made way by
what the Magistrate did, for the peaceable exercise of the Indulged Ministers
Ministry in the Congregations where they are settled. I shall say no more of
this, but for any thing I can see, if this Author be believed, neither
Presbyterians that preach fixedly, nor these who preach occasionally, can say,
that their Ministerial oversight or inspection is by the Holy Ghost; for he
affirms this of the Indulged, and does not think it requisite in those who
preach occasionally; and of how dangerous consequence this is, I leave it to be
considered.

Page 89. Sect. 9. His 9. Section is concerning the Instructions, of which
enough has been said before. The Indulged Ministers accepted of the
relaxation, as before explained, but did not accept of the limitations. In the
same page he says in answer to an objection, That there could be no simple
use-making of that supposed favor, so attended with imposed conditions,
without a virtual acknowledgment of a right and power in the Magistrate to make
and impose such conditions; for howbeit the Council propose the matters by way
of command, yet both the nature of the thing, and the Concomitant acts to
restrict, etc. say that the accepting of the first is with an engagement to
perform the second, both being but one complex thing -- Then he adds; That the
Council held forth the favor to be granted and accepted condition-ways. And
Mr. A. Blair for the renouncing of the condition, was deprived of the favor;
he who takes a favor offered with burdens, takes the favor cum onere; as
when a Father grants such a piece of Land to his Son, but withal lays on the
burden of paying so much debt; if the Son accepts the Land, he cannot but
take on the debt, though he gave no express consent.

Ans. That there could be no simple use-making of the freedom from restraint,
as before explained, without the acknowledgment that he speaks of, is one of
his dictates. The taking off the restraint was good, the laying of restrictions
was ill; are good and ill so inseparable that we cannot choose what is good, and
refuse what is evil?

The nature of the thing says no such thing as he alleges. It Is no wonder this
Author makes the Indulged Ministers speak his Imaginations, when he makes the
nature of things speak any thing that he pleases; then to make all sure, he
makes the taking off the restraint, and the imposing of restrictions, to be one
complex thing; for he can make two things, though the one be good, and the
other evil, to be one thing; but this Composition is in his own Fancy. I
warrant he can make one thing two: the force of Imagination will do, they say,
great feats upon the person in whom the Imagination is: but I hope his
Imagination cannot change the nature of things without him, as to turn two
things into one, or one thing into two. I am confident the Counselors will not
say, That the Instructions, etc. were accepted by the Indulged Ministers; what
words might be slipped in Papers, I will not say; and what wonder if some
Prelatick person did allege that, and get it in a Printed paper, when a young
man when he should have been preaching, said, That the Indulged Ministers had
given in Bands to the Council. If Mr. Blair refused the Conditions, so did Mr.
Hutcheson; and if Mr. Hutcheson had been imprisoned, his Testimony would have
been commended; for this was the difference: for as to what they said, the
Author acknowledges that it was the same thing upon the matter; but nothing in
Ministers carriage will please some folk, except it anger, and so anger the
Magistrate, that the Minister be put to suffer, or else into a posture of War.

His similitude is but a similitude; and although Allegories and Comparisons
pass for good proofs among common people, yet he knows that similitudes
illustrate a thing, but do not prove it. A Father who grants his Son a piece
of Land, might have given it to another, and has power to oblige his Son who
gets his Land, to pay his debt; and it is reasonable that a man's debts should be
paid by him who gets his Land; but if the Father should grant his Land to his
Son, and enjoin something to his Son that he could not oblige his Son to do, as
being something that the Father had not power to prescribe, or something not
right, or which the Son could not in conscience observe; if the Son should
accept of the Fathers grant, and withal tell him that he could not receive such
Prescriptions, and that his Father could not impose such things upon him, or
that he had received full Prescriptions from one Superior both to his Father
and him, which he behoved to keep upon his greatest peril, without adding to
them, or diminishing from them; or that in these matters which his Father
prescribed, he was not at his own disposal, being servant to another in things
of that nature. None could say in that case that the Son was obliged to the
Conditions his Father required.

Now the Indulged Ministers did show that they had received full Prescriptions,
etc. and that the Magistrate had not a power formally Ecclesiastical; and that
in the matters of their Ministry, they were the Servants of Christ; but enough
of this before.

Yea, I suppose in some cases silence will import no consent nor acceptance.
Suppose one who has by strong hand bound a man who ought not to have been
bound, and tells him he will loose him, and withal when he is loosing him, he
commands him to do something which he has no power to command, nor can the man
in conscience perform; will any say, that because the poor man holds his
tongue, that therefore he has accepted the Condition? I see no reason for
this; for as a man is not obliged at all times to profess what he believes, as
is clear in that case commonly alleged; If a mad furious man with a drawn
Sword in his hand, would cry, Whoever professes himself to believe the Gospel,
I will kill him; no Casuist determines that a Christian is to prosess his faith
in the hearing of that furious man; so a man is not always bound to profess
what he will do, or not do; as suppose one who has unjustly bound a man, comes
and looses him to do something which the man that is loosed has no mind to
perform; is he obliged in all cases to tell that he will not do what he
commands, when the telling of it will in all appearance provoke the other to
keep him still in bonds? He who gets an Estate from one who owed him nothing,
and a Command withal to pay his debt, seems to be in justice bound to pay that
debt, though he speak not. Again, he who gets a favor from another, which the
giver was not bound to give, and withal a desire to do something for his
Benefactor, if the thing desired be not prejudicial to the man who received the
favor, or if he be as much advantaged by the favor showed to him, as he can
be prejudiced by the doing of that which his Benefactor desired; it seems that
he is in point of gratitude bound to do it: But when one who has done an
injury to another in binding him, looses him and commands him to do something
lawful, though the man hold his peace, I do not see how he is bound even to
that lawful thing; because the man that looses him, is bound to do him that
right whom he had wronged before; and besides, is obliged to make reparation
for the wrong done: but much less could he be obliged by his silence, or could
his silence be interpreted to be a consent to it. But the Indulged Ministers
need not this Answer, for they witnessed a good Confession before the Rulers.
If he had formed his similitude thus, A Father restrains his Son from some
external duty in Religion, which the Son is called to of God, and when he takes
off the restraint, takes upon him to give Rules of worshipping God to his Son,
which the Lord has not given; the similitude would have been more to the
purpose: And if the Son had accepted of the freedom from the former restraint,
and withal, had told his Father he had full Prescriptions from God how to
worship, and that the matters of Divine worship are not to be ordered by the
will and pleasure of Parents, but by the Will of God; none would imagine that
the Son had accepted of these Instructions.

Page 90. He undertakes to show how contrary the acceptance of the Indulgence
is to Presbyterian Principles. If he would have disputed against what the
Indulged Ministers did, he should have disputed against their use-making of the
relaxation of the civil restraint, as was said before. But he still mistakes
the question, and plays in the general confused words of accepting of the
Indulgence. Veterator ludit in generalibus.

He has wasted much time and Paper in vain, in fighting against an imaginary
accepting of the Indulgence, which is a man of straw of his own making, and he
may use it as he pleases. We have already spoken of the qualifications which
he speaks of in his first Section, and are not to weary our selves or the
Reader with needless Repetitions.

In that same page Sect. 2. He alleges, That the Magistrate did all which
belongs to Church Judicatories in conveying Ministerially the Office and Power
to persons qualified, and in granting a potestative mission in sending the
Indulged to such and such places, and that the Council only clothed them with
Authority for that effect.

An. 1. These are still his own fancies and dictates; for he cannot prove from
the words that the Council used, that they did assume any such thing as a Power
of potestative mission. In the first Indulgence they appoint Ministers to
preach and exercise the other Functions of the Ministry at such and such Kirks,
as he relates, page 19. In the second Indulgence they appoint the Ministers to
repair to such and such Parishes, and to remain therein confined, permitting
and allowing them to preach and exercise the other parts of their Ministerial
Function in the Parishes to which they are confined.

Now the words of appointing, allowing, permitting to preach, import no
potestative mission. The Magistrate may in some cases not only permit, allow,
appoint, but compel Ministers to preach; yea, they may place them, which is
much more than appointing them to preach: If any please to read the Book of the
Discipline of the Church of Scotland, they will find in the first Book of
Discipline, in the 4th. head of that Book, concerning Ministers and their
lawful Election, and under the title of Admission, and toward the end of that
title, these words, That their Honors (they mean the great Council of Scotland
to whom the Book was directed) were bound by their Authority to compel such men
as had gifts and graces able to edify the Church of God, to bestow them where
there was greatest necessity. And after -- we cannot prescribe unto your
Honors, how that ye shall distribute the Ministers and learned men which God
has already sent unto you. And after they say, and therefore of your Honors
we require in Gods Name, that by your Authority ye compel all men to whom God
has given any Talent, to persuade by wholesome Doctrine, to bestow the same,
if they be called by the Church, to the advancement of Christ's Glory. And
afterward they desire them to assign unto their chief workmen n^^ only Towns,
but Provinces. And in the head of Superintendents, they think it expedient in
that necessity, that their Honors by themselves nominate so many as may serve
the forewritten Provinces; and that the same Ministers being called in your
presence, shall be by you, and such as your Honors pleases to call unto you
for consultation in that case, appointed to their Provinces. And in the last
Title of that Section, they say, Of one thing we must admonish your Lordships,
that in the appointing of the Superintendents, for this present, ye disappoint
not your chief Towns, and where Learning is exercised. This first Book of
Discipline was approven by the Assembly met at Edinburgh July 30. An. 1562.

And in the second Book of Discipline which was often examined in several
Assemblies, and appointed by the Assembly at Glasgow April 24. 1581. to be
registered among the Acts of the Assembly, and to remain there ad perpetuam rei
memoriam; and the Copies thereof taken out by every Presbytery, and every
Minister was by the Assembly August. 4th. 1590. appointed to subscribe the said
Book of Discipline; in the first Chapter of that Book, it is said, The Civil
Power should command the Spiritual to exercise. And Chap. 10. which is the
Office of the Christian Magistrate, it is said, That it pertains to the Office
of the Christian Magistrate to see that the Kirk be not invaded, nor hurt by
false Teachers; nor the rooms thereof occupied by dumb Dogs or idle Bellies --
and to make Laws and Constitutions agreeable to Gods Word for the Advancement
of the Kirk and Polity thereof, without usurping any thing that pertains not to
the Civil Sword, but belongs to the Offices that are merely Ecclesiastical; as
is the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, using Ecclesiastic Discipline, and
the Spiritual Execution thereof, or any part of the Power of the Spiritual
Keys, which our Master gave to the Apostles, and their true Successors.

And although Kings and Princes that be godly, sometimes by their own Authority
when the K^r^ is corrupted and all things out of order, place M^nisters, and
restore the true Service of the Lord, after the example of some godly Kings of
Judah, and diverse godly Kings and Emperors, also, in the light of the New
Testament; yet where the Ministry of the Kirk is once lawfully instituted, and
they that are placed do their Office faithfully, all godly Princes and
Magistrates ought to hear and obey their voice, and reverence the Majesty of
the Son of God speaking in them.

I shall but subjoyn one other Testimony, which may be instead of many, and
that is the Testimony of that man of God, Mr. Welsh, who was very tender of
Church Priviledges, in his Epistle Dedicatory to King James, prefixed to his
Book against Mr. Gilbert Brown Priest, he says to the King, Follow these
examples, Sir; send Pastors throughout all the Borders of your Kingdom, to
teach your Subjects the Law of the Lord, and the Gospel of their Salvation;
establish Religion and Justice in all the Cities of your Kingdom; cause the
waters of Life to run from the heart of your Kingdom unto the Borders thereof;
establish Pastors in all your Kingdom; strengthen them in their Offices, and
speak to their hearts. And afterward in the next page he says to the King, I
have heard your Majest^ gravely protest before God, in two General Assemblies.
That it was one of your Majesty's greatest desires, and ye were even as it were
ambitious of the work, to plant every Parish within your Kingdom^ with a
Pastor, that the Posterity to come might say, That King James the sixth, had
done such; notable Work in his days. Confirm your self, Sir, in that purpose,
for ye know who has said, I will honor them that honor me.

Thus we see Mr. Welsh makes use of the words, sending and establishing
Pastors, and does not find fault with the Kings using the word of planting
Parishes.

Mr. Welsh by the Kings sending, does not mean a potestative Mission; he
understood himself better than so: He knew the King could not ordain Ministers;
but the Kings sending, is his commanding, his appointing Ministers to go and
preach throughout the Kingdom; but if the Council in the Acts of Indulgence,
had made use of the word of sending, and other words in the Books of
Discipline; O what out-crying would some folk have made, seeing they make the
simple words of appointing and permitting to be no less than a potestative
Mission; which is a manifest abuse and perverting of Words!

It is well known, that the Papists give Magistrates much less than they should
in Church Matters; yea, they make them mere Executioners of Kirkmens Decrees;
yea, some of their Writers have not been ashamed to compare Kings and Emperors
to beasts in respect of their Kirkmen. Let any read Prin's Preface to his Book
called a Quenchcoal, and he will see in that Preface which was directed to the
late King, Page 44, 45, 46. he will find that Becan^s calls the Pope a
Shepherd, and Kings and Emperors Dogs of this Shepherd; and Gasper S^i^^pius
calls the Bishops the men who are the Mulietiers, and Ass-drivers, and the
Catholics Asses; and the Catholic Kings, Asses with Bells; and Charles the
Great, he says was a far greater and wiser Ass than these Kings who cast off
the Popes yoke. And yet though they make Kings and Emperors mere Servants to
the Pope and Bishops, implicitly and blindly to execute their Decrees; yet
they grant that the Magistrate may apply the Churchmen to the use and exercise
of their Office; yea, even the Jesuits who are most addicted to the Pope, grant
this, as Becanus the Jesuit in his Manual of Controversies of the Time, Book 5.
Chap. 19. page 746. and withal shows, that this is the common use among them,
and hoc passim apud Catholicos in usu est. From what has been cited from the
Books of Discipline, we may see that the Church of Scotland did not look upon
the Magistrates appointing, and much less on their permitting Ministers to
preach, as a potestative mission, or as any part of the power of the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven.

The Author of the History of the Indulgence, mentions not, that I remember,
what I have cited out of the first Book of Discipline; he only, page 116.
objects in the 3d. objection what is cited out of the the second Book of
Discipline, Chap. 10. concerning Magistrates placing of Ministers, when the
Kirk is corrupted, and all things are out of order; and he answers, That in
such times Magistrates may do much more than at other times; yet, says he, I
suppose none for shame can make use of such a Concession now.

I suspect the Author has been gravelled and picked with this Objection; and
therefore he would shuffe it off with scorn and disdain: but this is a piece of
Art in some to seem to make nothing of these objections to which they see they
can give no satisfactory answer; but when any will without passion consider
this passage in the second Book of Discipline, they will see that the placing
of Ministers implies more than permitting them or appointing them to preach;
for though the Magistrate appoint a Minister to preach in such a Parish, if the
Parish do not invite him, or if the Invitation be not satisfactory to the
Minister, he may forbear to go to that Parish to preach; but when a Minister is
placed, he is actually settled in a Parish; and therefore the Book of Discipline
allows of the Magistrates doing more than permitting and appointing Ministers
to preach.

Again, it appears from this, That the Magistrates permitting or appointing
Ministers to preach in a Parish, is not in the Judgment of the Kirk of
Scotland, contrary to Presbyterian Principles; for the Authors of the second
Book of Discipline, and the General Assembly of Scotland, who examined that
Book so carefully, and appointed all the Ministers of the Church of Scotland to
subscribe it, understood what were the Principles of Presbyterian Government,
better than this Author did: And these great Seers did see no abomination of
desolation in Magistrates placing Ministers; and much less did they, or could
they see it in their permitting them or appointing them to preach when the
Church is corrupted, and all things out of order; but why thinks he, that none
can for shame make use of that Concession now? He gives this Reason; Seeing,
says he, our Church was constituted and well ordered, and had all her Rights
and Privlledges. But I wonder that he for shame could make use of this answer.
If he could have said, Seeing our Church is constituted and well ordered, and
has all her Rights, it had been a pertinent answer, if it had been true; but
when he says, only our Church was constituted and well ordered, and had all her
Rights, he grants that the Church now is not constituted nor ordered, nor has
not her Rights; he clearly yields the cause, and acknowledges that our Church
is in such a case, as that is of which the second Book of Discipline speaks. He
might have considered that the Readers of his Book would be very senseless if
they could not see a difference betwixt what once was, and what now is; but
this was good enough to put off simple people who cannot distinguish betwixt
wat is past, and what is present. But he adds, When the Magistrates with their
own hands have overturned all, shall this Objection be made use of to
countenance their after-practises? that were indeed to teach Magistrates a way
how to usurp, and take to themselves all Church Power, viz. let them once by
Iniquity and Tyranny break the glorious Order of the Church, and bring all into
Confusion, and then forsooth, they may warrantably assume to themselves an
exercise all Church Power according to their mind.

Ans. He seems to insinuate, that the second Book of Discipline yields, that
the Magistrate may assume all Church Power, which is an insinuation very
injurious to the Church of Scotland. In that same page cited from Chap. 10. of
the second Book of Discipline, they show that the Magistrate may not usurp the
power of the spiritual Keys.

2. He might have learned from Mr. Rutherford, that the Magistratical power
which capacitates the Magistrate to do good to the Church, is the same in ill
Magistrates, even in a Nero, that it is in good Magistrates.

3. The more ill the Magistrate has done to the Church, he is more bound to
repair the wrong he has done.

4. According to this way of Reasoning, if the Magistrate overturn the Church;
he can do no more good to the Church; if the placing of Ministers in the
corrupted state of the Church, be commendable in godly Magistrates, why would
he hinder Magistrates which have overrurned all, to restore all or a part, to
do something that is good? or why should that be counted Usurpation in them,
which is commended as good service done to the Church, when it is done by godly
Emperors and Kings? Is not that the duty of these who have overturned the
Order of the Church, to build what they have destroyed? and when they do any
thing that way, it should not be despised, but made use of, as far as can be
done with a good Conscience?

But the Indulged Ministers need not anxiously enquire (as to the defense of
their Practice) what Power the Magistrate has, or may have in some cases to
command Ministers to exercise their Ministry in such or such particular
Parishes; for that which they accepted and made use of, was the relaxation from
the Civil restraint; and they were called by these Parishes to preach and do
their parts of the Ministry there.

What he says page 91. Sect. 3. concerning planting and transplanting, and
placing Ministers in particular charges, is obviated already. If he would have
disputed fairly, he should have kept the terms of the Councils Acts of
appointing, allowing, permitting Ministers to preach in such and such places,
and not have thrust in his own words of potestative mission, planting and
transplanting.

We heard before what words are used in the first Book of Discipline, as
nominating, compelling, appointing, assigning. And in the second Book of
Discipline, placing Ministers; and Mr. Welsh does not find fault with King
James's using the word of planting every Parish within his Kingdom; but as was
said, the Indulged Ministers needs not have recourse to these defenses. Any who
considers, that Presbyterial Government was overturned before these Acts of
Indulgence, and Prelacy settled by Law, may think strange, that he blames the
Council for not consulting Kirk-judicatories. There were no Presbyterial
Church-judicatories to consult, and the Prelates did not like the Indulgence;
and the consulting them in the matter, would have readily scared Presbyterians
from making any use of the Indulgence.

He says in that same Section, That it was the Councils deed alone which did
constitute all the Indulged Ministers in such and such places, and so made up
that relation.

Now this is false, and a begging of the question; for they who returned to
their own Congregations had a standing relation to these Congregations, and
they who had not access to their own, did not, till they had Invitation from
the Parishes, to which they went, and the consent of Presbyterian Ministers
concerned, conceive themselves obliged to exercise their Ministry among them;
far less did they think, that the Councils deed did constitute them Ministers
of these Congregations, and make up that relation; for if they had thought so,
they would have thought themselves obliged to have gone to these Congregations
upon the Councils deed. Concerning the oversight that they have of these
Congregations, we spoke before, and must not continually weary the Reader with
Repetitions.

He frequently carps at their getting the stipend; I know not whom he would
have to get these stipends, seeing he is against the Indulged Ministers getting
of them: as for the Councils design of fixing them in other charges than their
own, the Indulged Ministers are not Masters of the designs of any persons, but
their own; but the design of these Ministers was to return to their own
Congregations as soon as they had peaceable access. Nor could the Indulged
Ministers hinder the Council to have regard to the consent of the Patrons, but
they had no regard to it. He refers us to his second remark on the Kings
Letter. I find no new thing in it; he taxes the Indulged Ministers silence, and
alleges that by their silence they interpretatively assented to the
usurpation; but they were not silent, as we heard before. But I would enquire
as to the point now in hand, to wit, the Council appointing Ministers to preach
in such and such places, What he would have had these Ministers to say? Would
he have had these who were appointed to return to those Parishes where they
were ordained Ministers, to have told the Council they would not go to these
Parishes, because they had appointed them to go? Or would he have had these who
were appointed to go to other Parishes than their own, to have refused
absolutely to go, because they appointed them to go? They did not promise them
to go to preach in those Parishes; but it had been rashness and unreasonable
rashness to have absolutely refused to go, and to go upon that account; and
therefore as they acknowledged not any relation betwixt them and these Parishes
upon the Councils Act, and did not oblige themselves before the Council to go
to these Parishes; so they did not go until they were invited by these
Congregations. To have absolutely refused to preach in these Congregations,
before they had heard what was the resolution of these Congregations who were
concerned as well as they in that matter, had been a preposterous haste; and
they could not have given any rational account to the Council of such a refusal
or protestation: for if the Council had inquired, Why will ye not go to preach
there? if they had answered according to this Authors mind, they behoved to
have said, Because your L. L. appoints me to go there and preach, and I can
preach no where where ye command me to preach; for I must preach contrary to
your command; for so he states the matter page 129. had not this been humor
and no reason? if the Magistrate had been disposed to make themselves sport,
they might have said, Then we discharge you to preach in that Congregation
which we appointed you to preach in before, and we appoint you to preach any
where else; if the Minister concerned would have been ruled by this Authors
reason, or humor rather, he would have answered, Then I will preach in that
Congregation where ye first appointed me to preach in, and no other place; this
had been very ridiculous!

The Magistrate needs not keep soldiers under pay to hinder any of this humor
from preaching in any place; for they need do no more, but appoint them to
preach in any place, and they may be sure they will not preach there; or if
they would have them to preach in any place, they may forbid them to preach
there, and they may be sure they will do it; for this cross humor will act
contrary to what is commanded.

Page 91. Sect. 4. Relates to the Canons; of these we have spoken before. The
Indulged Ministers accepting of the relaxation of the rigor of Civil Edicts,
has no necessary connection with the approving of the Magistrates power to make
Ecclesiatical Canons. The Author has said, That it has such a connection, but
he has never shown what he said; but he says this will abundantly evince it,
that if they had received the same or like Indulgence at the hands of the
Prelates, clogged with the same or like injunctions, this would have been a
granting to the Prelate that power to make such injunctions.

Ans. He knows that in the Judgment of the Presbyterians, the power that
Magistrates has from God, and the exercise of that Power, is Gods Ordinance;
and the taking off the restraint so often spoken of, was the exercise of the
Magistrates lawful Authority. But Presbyterians do not acknowledge Prelacy, nor
the exercise of it to be the Ordinance of God. And therefore there is a great
difference betwixt the use-making of an Indulgence from the Magistrate, and
from the Prelate. But if that were granted, that a Prelate had the same power
from God, that the Magistrate has, to do what the Magistrate did in taking off
the restraint; and then suppose the Ministers to have declared themselves in
reference to the injunctions, as they did before the Council, they could not
have been at all charged with granting any such power of making instructions to
the Prelate; but this Scarcrow is good enough to beguile simple people.

I have often observed, that the apparent strength of all that is said against
the Indulged Ministers practice, lies in a confused mistaking of the question,
and in false alledgances, and halting similitudes and parables.

To what he says page 92. Sect. 5. It Is answered, That it is not in the Acts
of Indulgence so easy to prove, as to say, That the Magistrate has assumed
the power of exercising real Church Censures; but suppose that could be proven,
he cannot prove that the Indulged Ministers are any ways accessory to their
assuming any such power.

Page 92. he says, Our third head of Arguments against this Indulgence, is
taken from its relation to, affinity with, dependence upon, and Confirmation by
that woeful Act of Supremacy made by our Parliament 1669.

He grants several times in that Book, that the Indulged Ministers did not
formally and expressly own, acknowledge, acquiesce in, or approve of the
Ecclesiastic supremacy, in and by their accepting of the Indulgence; and that
he is far from thinking that they had any intention to make way for, approve
of, or confirm the said Supremacy, page 33. and elsewhere; but he alleges
they are interpretatively guilty. But this is but a mean alledgance; for as the
Magistrates Acts of permitting or appointing Ministers to preach, are not Acts
flowing from any sinful Supremacy, as has been cleared from the Books of
Discipline; and these were the Acts which were properly the Acts of Indulgence;
So much less can the Magistrates Act of relaxing of the restraint, be called an
Act of sinful Supremacy; it was a part of right which they were obliged unto,
and it was only this relaxation which the Indulged Ministers accepted and made
use of, as is clear from Mr. Hutchesons Speech; and if he would have said any
thing to the purpose, he should have proven that this was an homologating of an
Erastian, or absolute Supremacy in the Magistrate. But he never attempts this,
and he did best never to essay to do that which he knew he could not do: but
according to his confused way, he takes the Indulgence for all the Acts of the
Magistrate, relating to the Indulgence, and shows what affinity some of these
have with the Supremacy; and this he labors in from page 25. till page 33. but
what will he infer from that? shall the Indulged Ministers be guilty of
homologating the Supremacy, because the Magistrates Acts have affinity one with
another, and relate one to another? How knows he that we would never have seen
the Act of Supremacy, if the Indulgence had been utterly refused? this is but
his own conjecture, and conjectures made upon men's designs; and Statemens
designs are very uncertain.

I was surprised page 93. Sect. 2. When I found him abusing the Indulgence, as
an illigitimate brood, because it was directly against law; he means the Laws
made in favor of the Prelates; for I thought he would have liked it the
better, because it was contrary to Law, and such Laws, If he could have said,
that the taking the restraint off these Ministers, had been contrary to the Law
of God, it would have been more to his purpose; but that he could not say. In
his Sect. 3. he speaks as if he minded to persuade the Indulged Ministers to
take shelter under the wings of the Act of Supremacy, against the charge of
Sedition; but I do not think that ever any Indulged Minister thought of this
for a refuge.

His Sect. 4. refers to the two foregoing heads of which we have spoken. His
5th. Sect. contains Mr. Burnets Argument, which shows a correspondence betwixt
the Act of Supremacy and the complex Acts of Indulgence, but it concludes
nothing against the practice of the Indulged Ministers, or what they did upon
or after the Indulgence. As for his 6th Sect. it is more likely that that Act
was made to salve these he speaks of in his Sect. 1. than to support the
Indulgence; but these things are little or nothing to the purpose. To his Sect.
7. That the taking off the restraint, or the giving relaxation from the
restraint, did flow from no usurped power in the King and Council; it was the
product of that power which every Magistrate has from God, page 94. To his
8th. where he again brings in the Prelates Indulgence, we spoke before. His
9th. about the Prelates Collation, is to the same purpose; he still begs the
question when he supposes, that what the Indulged Ministers made use of, flowed
from an unlawful power. In his Sect. 10. he has the fashion of an Argument,
but he begs the question; for he takes for granted, what he should have proven.
The Indulged Ministers did no^ submit themselves to be disposed of by an
E^astian or absolute supremacy in the Magistrate. As for the Ministers going
after the Magistrates ^ndulgence to such and such Kirks, he himself grants,
according to the second Book of Discipline, That the Magistrate who claims no
Spiritual Supremacy, may in some cases place Ministers, which is much more than
the Council did, who only appointed or permitted them to preach ^n such and
such Kirks, as we cleared before. We did show also from the first book of
Discipline, That the Magristrate may in some cases appoint and compel Ministers
to preach where there is need. He knows also that the Indulged Ministers who
were appointed to go to other Congregations than their own, did not upon the
Magistrates appointment go, till they were invited by the people; and would not
have gone, if they had not been invited; and his alledgance that that they
accepted Instructions, Orders, Acts and Constitutions, to regulate them in the
exercise of their Ministry, is a false alledgance. He says he has cleared it
above; but he has neither cleared it above or under.

I cleared from his own Confession, that the Indulged Ministers gave an honest
Testimony against these Instructions. He grants page 95. That the Indulged
Ministers never did, nor will own the Supremacy, but plainly disown it; and
says, he speaks not of a positive, explicit, formal, intenti^nal and express
homologating; but of a virtual, implicit, material, and elsewhere an
interpretative homlogating. He did well to explain Homologating in the
beginning of this page, that the people might understand the meaning of this
Greek word; but now again in showing what sort of homologating the Indulged
Ministers are guilty of, he has added so many Latin words, virtual,
implicit, material, interpretative, that the people who read this, will be
more in the dark than before; for now they have four kittle words, whereas they
had but one before; and yet he will have them to believe, that though the
Indulged Ministers plainly disown the Supremacy, that yet they are virtually,
implicitly, materially, interpretatively guilty of it; that is to say, they are
guilty of it, but they cannot tell how: and yet upon this interpretative
Homologation which they cannot interpret nor understand, they are advised to
withdraw from hearing the Indulged Ministers. The case of the poor people is
much to be pitied, who are thus made to stumble at they know not what, and made
to believe that the Indulged Ministers homologate a sinful Supremacy in the
Magistrate; and that they in hearing the Indulged Ministers, homologate the
Supremacy; and some have gone that length, that the Ministers who preach not
against hearing of the Indulged Ministers, are not to be heard; and upon the
same groundless grounds they may give up private Christian fellowship with
those who are not against hearing the Indulged Ministers.

I remember a History which I read of one John of Liege, who upon the approach
of some enemies against that Town, took such a pannick fear, that he fled into
the desert of Ardenna, and durst not adventure to come out; for he apprehended
that all men that he heard or saw, were those enemies which first frighted him.
It has befallen this Author, and the Author of the Epistle, as it did to him;
they have taken such a fright at the Supremacy, that they apprehend many Acts
to be Acts of Supremacy, which others, who are as opposite to Erastianism, and
an arbitrary Supremacy as they, know to be Acts of that Authority which the
Magistrate has from God; and they apprehend many things to have affinity with
the Supremacy, which have none at all; but this way of theirs is so far from
being the right way to discern the ill which is in the Supremacy, that upon the
contrary, it is the way to commend it, when these Acts which Orthodox and
Anti-Erastian Divines grant to be Acts of lawful Authority, are alleged to be
the Acts of a sinful Supremacy.

Page 95. We have his fourth ground. I need not repeat the true state of the
question; he should have proven, if he would have proven any thing against the
Indulged Ministers, that their practice was injurious to the people. I know no
injury they have done to the people, except that be an injury, that upon their
Invitation they came and preached the truth to them. I think they may be
forgiven this wrong.

He says, The mere appointment of the civil Magistrate, was all the ground of
their relation, and the only thing that made them Pastors to such a people.
This is false, and will never be proven.

I told him, the Indulged Ministers had no regard to the Patron. He objects,
that it will be said they obtained the full and unanimous consent of the
people. And he answers 1. I doubt if this was either universally sought or
obtained.

Ans. Seeing he charges the indulged Ministers as injurious to the people, he
should have been clear, that they obtruded themselves upon the people; and that
the people did not consent to their coming. It seems he makes his doubts to be
evidences to prove his Brethren guilty of injurious dealing. But he might have
known, that no man who has any common sense, will take the most confident
assertions of an accuser, and much less his doubts, for proofs and evidences
against the party whom he charges with a fault.

2. As for those who returned to their own Congregations, they had a standing
relation founded upon the election of the people, and ordination of the
Presbytery; and none can rationally imagine, that their own Congregations did
not desire the return of their own Pastors. As for those who went to other
Congregations, not having access to their own; I suppose he would not have
thought it suitable for them to have sought Invitations to these Parishes. It
was not the Custom, nor had it been decent, but very unsuitable and liable to
Exceptions, to have sought Invitations; it was all that could be rationally
expected from them, to signify to the people concerned, that they could not
come to exercise their Ministry among them, except they did consent. Neither
had it been fit for the people to have made a formal election of them, seeing
they had never heard, nor seen some of them; and seeing these Ministers were
not out of hope of obtaining regress to their own Parishes; but all that was
necessary, as the case stood, was the peoples consent to their coming and
preaching among them; and when they had heard them, both the Ministers and they
might consider what was fit for them to do. I shall set down a true Copy of one
of these Invitations.

We under Subscribers in the Parish of -- being informed by very many
Testimonies, to which we owe credit, That it has pleased the Lord to endue you
with great Abilities for preaching the Gospel, and that upon our call you have
free access to come and exercise the Ministerial Function among us; have
thought it our Duty to give you a very cordial Invitation to come and preach,
which we expect may be upon Sunday, the fifteenth of this instant; after which
we are not doubtful, but both you and we shall have such mutual satisfaction,
that we shall have the Comfort of your Ministry, and you the opportunity of
doing service to your Lord and Master, in pursuance of the Commission you have
from him, in whom we remain and subscribe, etc.

By this it appears, 1. That the people were informed, that the Minister had
signified, That an Invitation from the Parish was necessary for his access to
preach to them.

2. Though they express their hopes, that after his preaching among them, both
they and he should have mutual satisfaction; yet they do not determine
themselves, nor pretend to determine the Minister; so that both they and he
were at liberty, as to a mutual settling.

Now when such an Invitation was given by persons having special interest, and
not without the knowledge of the people who had place, to have objected if they
had any thing to say; and seeing the people upon the Ministers coming to
preach, did willingly come and hear, and continued to do so, and to frequent
Diets of Catechizing, etc. What further could be desired, as matters then
stood? the people were willing that these Ministers come to preach; and when
they had heard them, they willingly attended upon their Ministry; and that very
unanimously, until about the time of the second Indulgence, some made it their
work first in private, and then more publicly, to perplex the poor people with
scruples. I say, what further could be desired? and as the matter was
circumstantiate, it had been unfit to have used any more formalities in the
matter, seeing there was a real willingness in the people to attend upon the
Ordinances dispensed by these Ministers.

2. He says, Where this consent was had, it was but a mere blind, and to me a
mere prostituting of that Appointment and Order of Christ, rather than any
conscientious observation thereof.

Ans. This is a very high charge against these destitute Congregations; and I
doubt not to say, it is a blind accusation to charge a destitute Congregation,
because they desired a Minister of the Gospel to preach the Gospel to them,
with such an odious crime as the prostituting of the appointment and order of
Christ. When he was charging others as injurious to the people, he should not
have wronged them himself, as if they minded to deceive themselves or others,
to put out their own eyes, or the eyes of others, by a blind, and as if they
made not Conscience of observing Christ's Order, but had prostituted it. But let
us hear his Reason.

For 3. (says he) this call of the people ought to be a free Election and
Choice; but there was no free Election left unto them; but whether they did
consent or not, the person designed by the Council, was to be set over them.

Ans. I showed before, That the peoples Invitation was free, and Mr. Thomas
Wily in his paper has made it very evident there was no force upon the
people; they might have invited or not, as they thought fit. There have been
many free Invitations, where there has not been a comparative preferring of
one to others; several people have never had thoughts of any but of one to be
their Minister; there may be the greatest freedom without a formal choice of
one out of many, upon comparing them one with another.

I wonder how he could say, That whether the people had consented or not, the
person designed by the Council was to be set over them. How knew he that? did
he know the secret purposes of those Ministers, that they would obtrude
themselves upon the people against their will? or that the Council would make
these Ministers preach, and the people hear against their wills? Both the
Ministers knew that they would not preach to these people without their
consent; and the people knew that these Ministers would not preach to them
except they consented; but this Author knew, it seems, more than they all. He
had it seems a scientia media of his own, by which he knew what the Indulged
Ministers would do, upon supposition that the people did not consent. He is a
little too homely with the Indulged Ministers; for he not only imposes
harangues upon them, of his own making, and makes them speak contrary to their
own mind; and imposes Creeds upon them of his own making, and makes them to
believe what they never thought; but also he takes on him to tell, that they
would have done that which they resolved not to have done. This is very
strange, that he should make himself not only Master of their mouths, and of
their faith, but also of their wills and future actions! But suppose that event
which he not only without, but contrary to reason, takes upon him, as if he had
been a Prophet to foretell, had fallen, or would have fallen out; yet this could
not make the peoples Invitation unlawful, because the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of actions is to be measured by their conformity or disconformity
to the rule by their constituent causes, and concomitant circumstances, which
are in being when the action is performed, and not from future events.

4. (Says he) The free election of the people should go before the persons
designation to that charge, and become the foundation of his relation to that
flock; but here it was posterior to the Councils designation, and was a mere
precarious thing, coming ex post facto.

Ans. The Indulged Ministers had not the disposal of the time of the Councils
actings, as was said before; but the peoples Invitation was before these
Ministers preaching to these Parishes.

5. This call (says he) and election of the people, was not in the least
presupposed as any way requisite either in the Kings Letter, or the Councils
Nomination and Election.

Ans. It may be if a Call or Election had been mentioned in any deed of the
Magistrates, he would have excepted against it, because according with the
Magistrates will; for elsewhere, as we heard, he commends preaching for not
being according to man's order, but contrary thereunto, page 129. But any may
see that the Magistrates not mentioning of the peoples Invitation, cannot
vitiate the peoples Invitation.

6. He adds, Nor did they make any mention hereof, when hefore the Council,
nor make exception against the Councils order or collation, until this was had.

Ans. The Councils Election and Collation are words of his own making; he
should have used the Councils own words, and not thrust in invidious terms of
his own devising.

If they had mentioned the peoples Call before the Council, it might have been
he would have alleged, That this was a bringing of the peoples Call under the
Cognizance of the Council; and it might have occasioned the Council to enquire
after the peoples calls, and to have urged people contrary to their
Inclinations, to have given calls; yea, the Councils requiring them to give
calls, would have occasioned scruples to some people, and this might have
exposed them to suffering; or if they had upon the Magistrates interposing,
given Invitations, it might have been alleged, That they were constrained
thereunto. If the Ministers had rejected the Councils Act, till once they had
the peoples Call, then this would have either provoked the Magistrate to
retract their Act, and give no Indulgence; which is the thing that this Author
would have been at; for, if he thinks it a disparagement to the Parishes, that
their Act is posterior to the Councils, he was or might be sure the Council
would think it a disparagement to have their Act not only posterior to the
Parish Act, but also excepted against and casten, till the Parish Act went
before; for the Council would have thought it as great a disparagement to their
Act to be trailed at the heels of the peoples Act, as he thinks it for the
peoples Act to be trailed at the heels of the Councils Acts. This would have
brought in a very odious question about precedence betwixt the Council and the
Parish. Or if the Council had determined to settle such a Minister in such a
Parish, and saw that he would not go without the invitation of the people; this
would have put them to urge the Parish, as thinking it a disparagement to have
their Act made void by the Parish-refusal. If the Parish had refused to give a
reason of their refusal, they would have used them the more hardly. If they had
excepted against the Ministers Qualifications, Doctrine, etc. this would have
entangled the people to have pursued these matters before the Magistrate as the
Judge competent.

These Ministers intending to make use of the Councils Act, in so far as it was
some relaxation of the restraint formerly laid on, and as it did make way for
the peaceable exercise of their Ministry in some Parishes, and minding to have
it free to those Parishes to invite and not to invite them, as they saw fit,
and to themselves to go or not to go, as they found it fit; it was very
convenient that they should not make mention of the Parishes or their
Invitations; for this might have either needlessly irritated the Council, and
provoked them to undo what they had done, or else have entangled themselves and
the Parishes. They declared before the Council, that they had full
prescriptions from Christ to regulate them in their Ministry; and a violent
obtruding themselves upon a people without their consent, had been contrary to
these Prescriptions, and contrary to the known Judgment of Presbyterians.

7. Nor (says he) did they testify their dissatisfaction with, nor protest
against the unlawful usurped interest of the Patron, and his necessary
pre-requisite consent.

Ans. The Author would have had such formal Protestations, because they would
have marred all Indulgence. I spoke of Protestations before, upon the Epistle
to the Reader. The proper season of protesting against Patronages, had been
when they were to establish them by Law; and it concerned all the Ministers as
well as these Ten who were first indulged, and it would have seemed impertinent
enough for them to have protested against the Patrons for consenting to their
coming to such Parishes; if a Patron had been holding them out of a Parish they
had right to be in, it had been more pertinent in that case to have protested,
than in this. When a Patron had given his consent without the Ministers
knowledge, could these Ministers hinder the Patron to consent? or the Council
to have regard to his consent? but they declared their adherence to their known
Judgments, and consequently that they were not for Patronages.

8. Did such (says he) as wanted this unanimous call or consent of the People,
give back the Councils warrant as weak and insufficient.

Ans. In the case supposed it was sufficient not to go; and it had been very
inconvenient to have given back the Councils Act as weak; for this had been to
set the Council and the Parish at variance, and a temptation to the Council to
reinforce their Act, and make it strong, seeing it was brought back to them as
weak.

As for his Dilemma page 96. Sect. 2. It Is easily answered, they look on
themselves as having a relation to their former charges, and would return if
they could have a peaceable access to their Ministry there. Until that be
obtained, the exercise of the Ministry is not the worse that it is fixed; for
as was said, the fixed exercise of the Ministry has many advantages, which an
unfixed exercise of the Ministry wants. He seems to make unfixed Ministers to
be Curates; for, says he, if they look not on themselves as fixed Pastors,
then are they Curates.

This is an injurious Inference to the Ministers who have not the fixed
exercise of their Ministry. But it may possibly be said, that he calls them
Curates, because of the Councils Order, and because the Council can turn them
out when they please; but I do not see how that makes them Curates more than it
did under the former supposition of their owning themselves as fixed Ministers;
for whether they look on themselves as fixed or unfixed, the Councils Act is
the same, and the Council can as easily turn them out, though they suppose
themselves fixed, as they can when they suppose themselves unfixed; so that
this horn of his Dilemma has no force, except it be in that, That unfixed
Ministers are Curates, which is a false and injurious assertion.

I see no necessary Connection betwixt Curates and unfixedness; for the name of
Curate seems to import that they are fixed to a Cure. And I do not remember
that ever I heard unfixed Ministers designed Curates; he might have bethought
himself, that some Ministers who went to Holland, might be tossed betwixt the
Horns of this horned Argument; and if it have any force, they cannot decline
the force thereof. For, if they were fixed Pastors of that Congregation in
Holland, where they ordinarily preached, what becomes of their relation to
their former charges? if they were not fixed, then were they Curates; the
Magistrates in Holland could turn them out when they pleased, as well as the
Magistrates in Scotland. They continued only during the Magistrates pleasure;
and when the Magistrate thought fit to turn them out of that place where they
had the public exercise of their Ministry, they could not stay whether the
Magistrate would or not. The Indulged Ministers have often declared their
relation to their former charges, and their desire to return to them, if they
could have access; and when they began to preach to the people, among whom they
labor for the present, they declared they were ordained Ministers of other
Congregations: And neither by word nor writ did they engage themselves not to
return to their former charges, as they say this Author did; and they did
nothing which might obstruct their regress to these charges; their fixed
preaching in one Congregation, so long as they have no regress, is no more
obstructive to their return, than the preaching of other outed Ministers in
many places, is obstructive to their returning to their former charges.

And if the Author had considered what he himself writes afterward, page 103.
Sect. 8. he would have seen how unequally he deals with the Indulged Ministers.

He says, In King James's days, several faithful and honest Ministers were
banished from their own Churches, and confined in other places of the Land; and
seeing no hope of getting the Civil Sentence taken off, were necessitated to
accept of a call to serve the Lord in the places where they were confined. Now
he might have seen that this was much more than the Indulged Ministers did. He
adds in that same place, But we never find that they took the charge of such or
such a flock, upon the Edict or Act of the Council enjoining them thereto.

Now we see that the Ministers not only took the charge of other Congregations,
but quit hopes of returning to their former charges; and yet he acknowledges
them faithful and honest Ministers: but if the Indulged Ministers had thus
absolutely settled in other Congregations than their own, it would have been
judged by this Author, unfaithfulness and dishonesty. What? is it dishonesty in
these Ministers, that they have not quit all hope of returning to their former
charges? For I see no difference betwixt them and these honest Ministers, but
in this, that they hold out longer in hoping a return, than they did. As for
what he says in the end of that Section, That these honest Ministers took not
the charge of these flocks where they were confined, upon the Edict of the
Council enjoining them thereto; it makes no difference: for the Indulged
Ministers did not take the charge of the Congregations where they preach, upon
the Act of the Council, as is well known to all who will not shut their eyes,
and are not blinded with prejudice.

What the Author has said in these few lines, page 103. Sect. 8. overturns a
great part of his Book. The Author has used diverse weights, and deals not
equally with the Indulged Ministers. If they had lived in King James's time,
though they had done more than they have done, they might have been honest and
faithful men, though they had absolutely taken the charge of other
Congregations than those in which, they were ordained Ministers.

Page 96. We have his fifth ground of dissatisfaction with the Indulgence, and
with the accepting thereof. He still mistakes the question. If he would have
said any thing against the Indulged Ministers, he should have proven that their
Practice had established Erastianism; but that had been too hard a Task for
him, and therefore he did wisely not to undertake it. It cannot be proven that
the Magistrate practiced Erastianism in relaxing the Civil restraint which
hindered the peaceable exercise of their Ministry; or that they established
Erastianism in making use of that relaxation.

In his Sect. 1. he refers the Reader to what he has said under the first,
second and third heads; and I need not repeat what has been answered to these
heads.

In his 2d. he says, That hereby the Magistrate is confirmed in that usurpation
of being proper judges of Ministers Doctrine, even in the first instance, that
is, before any Church Judicatory take cognition thereof, and pass a Judgment
thereupon. And he refers us to his 8th. remark upon the Kings Letter; the words
of the Kings Letter, as he has related them, are page 4. And upon complaint
made and verified of any seditious discourse or expressions in the Pulpit, or
elsewhere uttered by any of those Ministers, you are immediately to turn them
out, and further punish them according to Law, and the degree of the offense.
His remark is page 14. he remarks, That the Council is to take notice of the
Indulged Ministers speeches in the Pulpit.

Ans. It seems he is not against the Councils taking notice of their seditious
speeches elsewhere; for he passes that which the Council is also to take notice
of; but if there be no fault in the Councils taking notice of seditious
discourses elsewhere, it will be unreasonable to hinder them from taking notice
of seditious speeches uttered in the Pulpit; for seditious discourses in the
Pulpit, are not the better, but the worse, that they are spoken in the Pulpit;
and they are the more dangerous, and may readily be the more infectious, that
they are spoken, as if they were the word of God; and so may readily be
received by the hearers, who cannot discern the word of God; and there is no
sedition more dangerous, than that which pretends to be warranted by the word
of God. No sober person will say, That the Pulpit privileges a Minister to
speak sedition; and that the Magistrate may not take notice of seditious
discourses, if they be uttered in the Pulpit.

He adds, By which we see the Council is made the immediate formal Judge of
Ministers Doctrine; for under the pretext of seditious Doctrine, they may
condemn the most Innocent and Orthodox Truths. No Anti-Erastian Divine will
grant this unto the Civil Magistrate; and though it be true, that the Civil
Magistrate can only and properly judge of what is truly seditious, and can only
civilly punish for such crimes; yet our Divines never granted that the
Magistrates might in prima instantia examine and judge of Ministers Doctrine
when alleged to be seditious and treasonable.

Ans. His first inference, that the Council is made the immediate formal Judge
of Ministers Doctrine, will be denied till it be better proven than the Author
has proven it; for it only follows, that the Magistrate is the Judge of
seditious speeches and discourses; and this is no absurdity, even in this
Authors opinion; for he grants that the Civil Magistrate can only and properly
judge of what is truly seditious. But, says he, under the pretext of seditious
Doctrine, they may judge and condemn the most Innocent and Orthodox truths. I
reply, so Church-judicatory under the pretext of error or scandal, may condemn
Orthodox truths, and innocent Practices. But I hope he will not deny, that
because a Kirk-judicatory, corrupt in all its members, or in the major part of
its members, may condemn Orthodox Truths, that therefore Church-judicatories
are not the competent Judges of Truth and Error; or of what is scandalous, and
what not; and if the Errors of Kirk-men does not destroy the Power and
Authority which Christ has given to Ecclesiastical Courts to judge of
Doctrine, and to censure Heresy and Scandals; so the Errors of Magistrates,
who take innocent Truths for seditious Errors, does not destroy and make void
that Authority which God has given to Magistrates to judge and punish
seditious Discourses.

I cannot well see how, according to this Authors opinion, the Magistrate can
have access to judge of Sedition, if it be vented in the Pulpit; For he cannot
judge it, says he, in prima instantia. He will have the Kirk-judicatories
Judgment to precede; but again he binds the Kirk-judicatory up, that it cannot
judge what is seditious; For, says this Author, the Civil Magistrate can only
and properly judge what is truly seditious; and therefore if the Civil
Magistrate may not judge of Sedition till the Church has judged it in prima
instantia, I see not how they can judge it at all; for if they whom he will
have to judge in prima instantia, cannot judge of Sedition at all, their prima
instantia will never be, and the Magistrates secunda instantia will never come;
for the first instance must be before the second. If the Kirk-judicatory may
not judge what is seditious, as he grants, then it would seem that the
Magistrate must judge what is seditious in prima instantia, if he judge at all
in that matter. And it seems very hard to bind up the Magistrate that he may
not judge of seditious Doctrine, or whether Doctrine was seditious or not, till
there be a precedent Judgment of the Church; for what if there be no
Church-Courts, or none to which the Minister who is accused of seditious
speeches, has clearness to answer? what if the Magistrate think, and, it may
be, have reason to think, that the Church-Court is disaffected to the
Magistrate, and favors seditious discourses? Suppose the Court be incorrupt
and not suspected to the Magistrate; what if the Magistrate think it dangerous
to suffer the Minister who preaches seditiously, to preach on till the
Ecclesiastic process against him be ended; seeing such processes use to be
long, and they be apprehensive, that his seditious Discourses may bring forth
very dangerous effects, before the Ecclesiastic Court can (observing their
Order and way of proceeding) inflict any Ecclesiastical censure upon him; and
they apprehend that the fire of sedition must be quickly suppressed that it do
not spread?

I would gladly know what the Author would have a Minister do, when he is cited
to appear before the Magistrate for speaking seditious speeches? would he have
him refuse to come till the Kirk-judicatories ended their process? But what if
the Magistrate will not wait so long? then either the Minister has uttered
speeches really seditious; and in that case the Author grants, That the
Magistrate is the only Judge of Sedition. If his speeches have not been
seditious, but the words of Truth, then he has an opportunity not only of
vindicating himself of the crime of Sedition, but also of vindicating the
truth, and of instructing and edifying the Magistrate; and who knows, but a
plain, sober, solid Vindication of the truth, may be blessed of God to discover
to the Magistrate his Error, and the Innocence of the Minister accused; and
that any injury done to the Minister for preaching the truth of God, would be a
fighting against the God of truth. Every Christian should be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks them a reason of the hope that is in
them, 1 Pet. 3.15. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26.
with meekness and fear. And especially the servant of the Lord must not
strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves; if God paradventure will give them
repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken Captives by him at his
will.

Jeremiah is brought before the Princes, and accused for the Doctrine he had
taught; he does not refuse to answer to the Accusation, but shows, That his
Doctrine was of God; and takes that occasion to exhort all that were hearing
him, to amend their doings; and assures them, that if they put him to death,
they would bring innocent blood upon themselves; and this Doctrine has a good
effect upon the Princes, Jer. 26.10. etc.

The Apostle Paul refuses not to declare what he had taught to the Roman
Judges; he sought and took all opportunities of preaching the Gospel; he did
not submit his Doctrine to their decisive Judgment; for though they had
condemned the Truth, he would have still justified it, and would have pitied
them as blind; but he was always before all persons ready to preach the Gospel,
of which he was not ashamed.

The true strength of the cause of the Ministers of Christ when they are
brought before Rulers for preaching of the Truth, does not consist in some
formalities which men use in litigious Pleas, but in the plain declaring of the
Truth of God, which is mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds,
casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ.

If the Magistrate take upon him to judge of Causes that are merely
Ecclesiastical, the Ministers of Christ do their duty, when they tell the
Magistrate, That such causes are to be determined by the Church-Courts, and not
by the Magistrate; but Sedition, by the Confession of this Author, is none of
these Causes which are merely Ecclesiastical; for he grants that the Magistrate
can only properly judge of what is truly seditious.

The Historian does not faithfully relate the History of Mr. Andrew Melvine;
for in Calderwoods History, page 144. we find that Mr. Melvine at his first
compearance before the King and Council, declared what he said in his Sermon,
without any Protestation. At his second compearance he protests that he spoke
nothing in that Sermon tending to the slander or dishonor of the Kings Majesty
his Sovereign, any ways; on the contrary he exhorted always all his Highness's
Subjects to obedience and reverence of his Majesty; and most earnestly prayed
for the preservation and prosperous estate of his Majesty. And after this he
humbly protests, that in respect of Gods ordinance; Acts of Parliament and a
late Conference betwixt some Lords and Ministers deputed by the King and Kirk,
That the Trial might be remitted to the Judge Ordinary, which was the Assembly
of the Kirk; then he pleads the privilege of the University of St. Andrews,
the Members whereof were to be judged in prima instantia by the Rector and his
Assessors. And then again he declares what he had spoken in that Sermon, that
he might clear his Innocence, and remove all sinistrous suspicions.

Thus it appears that Mr. Melvine answered concerning his Sermon, before he
gave in that Protestation. And as to Mr. David Blakes declinature, we see page
340. of Calderwoods Story, That the Commissioners of the General Assembly,
declare that their intention in the Declinature, was no ways to diminish, hurt,
or prejudice his Majesty's Authority by exeeming from the same Judicatory, any
matter or cause civil or criminal, committed by whatsoever persons; and in this
Mr. Guthrie agreed with them.

In the close of that 8. Section page 14. he blames the Indulged Ministers for
silence; and their silence, and not giving a Testimony, was, as he says, a
Declaration that they were willing that all their Doctrine should be
immediately and in prima instantia judged and examined by the Council.

Ans. 1. As this part of the Kings Letter was not intimate to them; so though
it had been intimate, I do not see how they could in reason have protested
against it; is there any Magistrate in the World, who will suffer Ministers to
preach seditious discourses, if they can hinder them? and if for a reason of
their Protestation they had said, That by that means all their Doctrine would
be brought under the Magistrates Judgment; the Magistrate might have replied,
that by that reason they gave them to understand, that all their Doctrine would
be seditious.

2. This Declaration is much like the Harangue and Creed which he imposed upon
the Indulged Ministers in his first head of Arguments. The Indulged Ministers
cannot hinder men to make Creeds and Harangues, and Declarations, and then
allege that they are the Creeds and Declarations of the Indulged Ministers.
But it is sad, that any man, and especially a Minister, should have unspent his
time, to say no worse, in making such forgeries.

3. The Indulged Ministers declared, That they adhered to their known Judgment
in Church Affairs; now the known Judgment of Presbyterians is opposite to this
Declaration, which he falsely fathers upon the Indulged Ministers.

Page 96. 3. He says, Hereby the Magistrate is confirmed in this usurpation,
that Ministers may not preach in public or in private, without Authoriy and
License from the Civil Magistrate; and refers us to his 12th. Remark, which is
page 16. what he says there, comes all to this; That the Magistrate looks upon
them who preach without a borrowed Authority from the Magistrate, as seditious;
and that this Indulgence in the sense of the Court, was a clothing of the
Indulged with Authority to preach; as if all they had from Christ had been
null, and altogether insignificant.

Ans. 1. I am wearied in repeating, that the accepting and use-making of the
relaxation of the Civil restraint, did not confirm the Magistrate in any
usurpation.

2. I do not think that the Magistrate imagined, that all the power these
Ministers had from Christ, was null, and insignificant.

3. Suppose they had thought so, the Indulged Ministers were so far from
confirming them in that conceit, that they told them that they had received
their Ministry from Jesus Christ; but enough of this before.

He adds Sect. 4. How this was confirmed and yielded to by the Indulged, we saw
above in our Examination of Mr. H. Speech before the Council An 1669 and that
Relation of the carriage and Speeches of those who were before the Council Anno
1673.

Ans. In his Remarks upon Mr. Hutcheson Speech, which begins page 22. he says,
That th^^ Discourse was an homologating of the Kings La^^ and this he supposes
to be plain and manifest This is his ordinary, I perceive, to suppose those
things manifest which he cannot prove. 1. Says he We see the Brethren were not
ignorant of the King Letter, and the Contents there^f.

Ans. In Mr. Hutchesons Speech before the Council, there was no mention of the
Kings Letter, whether either they or he ever saw the true Copy of the Kings
Letter, is not certain; but the the King did write a Letter, directing the
Co^^cil to allow of the preaching of some outed M ^sters, was clear from the
Councils Acts; a^ that the King designed this, was clear also from these Acts;
and this was the design which these M^nisters desired the Council to pursue, of
which the Author speaks in his Sect. 2. As for the Instruction mentioned in
Sect. 3. we have spoken alread^ And he mentions them again page 25. But (...)
Mr. Hutcheson said of full Prescriptions, d^i^ only give their L. L. to
understand, that their Instructions given, or to be given by the Council, were
not needful to be laid before them; but also that they could not receive any
Instructions to regulate them in their Ministry, but Christ's, as we cleared
before. His 4. That what the Council did in this matter, was by virtue of the
Kings Letter, appeared to them from the Councils Acts. In his 5th. he says,
It Is matter of astonishment to him, how they could acknowledge this for such an
Act of favor and clemency; and ^^r they could say, that in this Letter the
Kings singu^ar moderation did eminently appear; and then he reckons up several
things in this Letter in which such clemency does not appear.

Ans. Mr. Hutcheson did not say, that there was clemency and moderation in all
the particulars of the Kings Letter; and if in any part of the Kings Letter
clemency appeared, it verifies what Mr. Hutcheson said Mor^^^ define clemency
to be a virtue which appeaseth Superiors toward their Subjects, and moderates
punishments; or that it is a part of temperance, restraining the appetite of
punishing.

Now it cannot be denied, that the King by this Indulgence, did moderate the
rigor of the penal Statutes. As for his 6. it is clear from Mr Hutchesons
Speech, That they did ^ake the ^tion of the restraint that had been upon the
public exercise from the King and o ^cil; but what great matters he can make
of that, I do not understand. For the Kings taking off that restraint, is no
more an Act of any unlawful Supremacy, than the Councils taking it off. As for
his Sect. 7. I have showed at length before, that it was the public Exercise
of their Ministry, freed of that long Civil restraint, for which Mr. Hutcheson
gives thanks, which is the same with the peaceable public exercise of the
Ministry; yea, in this same Section he justifies what Mr. Hutcheson spoke,
though he had not mentioned any restraint; for while he grants, that it is
true, that Magistrates can hinder the peaceable public exercise, or free
public exercise, he makes the peaceable public exercise and the free public
exercise to be the same. The inferences that he would draw, viz. That these
Ministers did by this acknowledgment grant that there ought to be no public
exercise of the Ministry, without liberty granted from the Magistrate; and that
they condemned Christ and his Apostles, and other Ministers who preached
without that liberty granted by the Magistrate, are Inferences which are forged
by the Authors fancy, but do no way follow from Mr. Hutchesons words. He that
will conclude, that because they thankfully acknowledged that relaxation of the
restraint which rendered their preaching hazardous, that therefore none ought
to preach except they were freed of such Civil restraints, concludes without
reason. These Ministers preached before the Indulgence, and would preach though
the Indulgence were recalled. The Instance of Mr. Bruce's sickness through
terror of Conscience for promising silence for ten days, would suit better with
those who promised not to return to Scotland, and consequently not to preach in
it, than to the Indulged Ministers who never made such Promise. His 8. Sect. is
a foul misrepresentation of Mr. Hutchesons words; for these Ministers were not
thankful for partaking alone, as he says, but for partaking so early of that
freedom from restraint and they desire that others of their Brethren might
share with them in that liberty. I often wonder how his Conscience could suffer
him to write and print such gross and palpably false Reflections upon his
Brethren. He adds, That they suffered themselves to be divided from their
Brethren contrary to their sworn Covenant. I answer, It seems he has not
minded this Reason when he took the opportunity of the peaceable exercise of
the Ministry in Holland, when his Brethren in Scotland had it not.

Such foolish Reasonings are palpable wrestings of the Covenant, and makes
sport to those who are Adversaries to it. Can any imagine, that the Covenant
did oblige Ministers not to preach in Kirks? except they preached all in Kirks?
or if all were not suffered, then all should quit their Kirks? this would
condemn those Nonconformists who were suffered to continue in their charges,
when others were thrust out: According to this conceit, if after the Act of
Glasgow, which outed so many Ministers; if the Council had made another Act,
commanding them all to return to their own charges, except one or two, they had
been obliged not to return till those two returned with them. By the same
Reason, if a multitude of Covenanters were imprisoned, and they were all freed
from Prison except some few, they might not come out of Prison till they come
out all together; or if some few were set at liberty, they behoved to stay till
all the rest were set free. The Covenant obliged the Covenanters to united
endeavors in their places and stations, to preserve the good things, and
oppose the evils mentioned in the Covenant; and it obliged them not to turn
contrary to what they had sworn, nor to turn indifferent and neutral; but it
never obliged them to be always in the same Lot and Condition as to prosperity
and adversity; that if one were poor, imprisoned, banished, put to death, all
the rest should be so too; or that none should take the benefit of deliverance
from any distress, except all that were in distress were freed at the same
time; this had been an impossible, unnatural, sinful, and ridiculous conceit!
And yet I suppose the mistake of some wel-meaning people in this point, has
tempted them to go out of the way that they should have walked in, to seek
sufferings, because they saw others were suffering. To his 9. concerning the
leaving out of the word only, I have spoken at length before. His Sect. 10.
page 25. concerning the Prescriptions, has been also spoken to oftener than
once. He alleges, they received other Prescriptions from the Magistrate; this
is false, as we have cleared at length before. And thus we see that his
Examination of Mr. Hutchesons Speech, does not prove that the Indulged
Ministers confirmed the Magistrate in this usurpation, that Ministers may not
preach in public or private without Authority and License from the Civil
Magistrate. And as for the Speeches of those who appeared before the Council
Anno 1673. we cleared from the Authors own words, That these Ministers gave an
honest Testimony against the Instructions.

Page 96. Sect. 5. He charges all the Ministers, and himself among the rest,
with a virtual cading and yielding to Erastian Invasions and usurpations; but
he says, The Indulged Ministers did willingly submit to the Magistrates actual
usurpation of Church Power; and by accepting of the Indulgence, did put them in
actual possession of what was but notionally, and in the Theory arrogate
formerly as to Nonconformists.

Ans. Seeing he makes all the Ministers guilty of a virtual cading to these
Invasions and usurpations, if he deal with them as he does with the Indulged
Ministers upon their virtual homologation of these usurpations, he must
justify the people who withdraw from hearing of them; for as we heard before,
he does not charge the Indulged Ministers with an explicit and formal
homologating of these usurpations, but only with a virtual homologating of
them. Now if all, even himself be guilty of this virtual yiedling, as he
grants, I would enquire whom shall the people hear? Is not this the way to
scare away the people from hearing all the Nonconformed Ministers? But he will
have the Indulged Ministers more guilty; but he knows that magis and minus non
variant speciem. His Reason is false; or the Indulged Ministers did not submit
to any actual usurpation; nor did they by any deed of theirs put the Magistrate
in any actual possession of such an usurpation. He contradicts himself, when he
says, That these usurpations were only in the Theory and notion, before the
Indulgence; for the Magistrates altering of the Government of the Church, and
setting up another kind of Church Government than was before, and turning out
of Ministers, which this Author Interprets to be Deposition; were not mere
Speculations and Notions, but practices too too real and effectual.

And in this same page he says, This Erastianism and Supremacy has acted and
outed at it is pleasure. They are very far out who think the outing of Ministers
to be nothing but Notions and Theory. His 6. is but a Repetition of what he
said before; for what the Indulged Ministers did, was no virtual or real
acknowledgment of Erastianism.

The Indulged Ministers made use of what was good, and both in word and
practice testified against what was evil in the complex Acts of Indulgence. He
proposes this exception, That the Indulged did only accept of a License, which
when abstracted from its offensive circumstances, is a mere relaxation of the
rigor of former Edicts. He answers 1. If this Indulgence did respect nothing
but the persons and estates of Ministers, then it might be looked on as a mere
relaxation of the rigidity of former Edicts under which they groaned; but it is
past all denial, that this Indulgence relates more, yea, and principally unto
their Office and Function, and is designed, as is confessed, for the
establishment of an usurped power over the Function of the Ministry; yea, and
includes an acquiescing and Submission unto Acts made and proposed by such as
confessedly act from a principle of usurpation, and that for the better
establishment of the same, and confirmation of themselves in the possession
thereof; and therefore the accepting of the Indulgence cannot but contribute to
the iniquous ends proposed by the Indulgers.

2. He answers, Whatever that License (as it is called) may be, or may be
supposed to be, when abstracted from its offensive circumstances; yet taken
complexly with these circumstances, it must be condemned; and however in our
imaginations we may abstract it from these circumstances, yet we cannot do so
in point of practice, seeing it is confessed that the morality of Actions do
much at least depend upon circumstances.

I reply: His first answer distinguishes the Persons and Estates of Ministers
from their Office and Function, and distinguishes an Indulgence respecting
their Persons and Estates from an Indulgence respecting their Office and
Function; and he grants that an Indulgence respecting their Persons and
Estates, may be looked on as a mere relaxation of the rigidity of former
Edicts, but denies that an Indulgence relating to their Office and Function,
can be such a relaxation But I would know what reason he can give, why there
may not be a mere relaxation of the rigor of Edicts which relate to Ministers
Function, as well as of these which relate to their Persons and Estates? there
is very good reason for distinguishing the Persons and Estates of Ministers
from their Functions, and for distinguishing Indulgences relating to the one,
from Indulgences relating to the other. But he has given no Reason why there
may not be a mere relaxation from the rigor of Edicts relating to the one, as
well as of Edicts relating to the other. He should not so frequently have
imposed on us by his dictates. He might easily have perceived, that this was
but a blind and toome talk; and I think he has perceived it after he had
written it; and therefore he adds, That this Indulgence relating to their
Function, is designed for the establishment of an usurped Power over the
Function of the Ministry.

I answer: An Indulgence respecting Ministers Persons and Estates, may be
designed for an ill end; and if the Magistrate designed it in the one, he
designed it in the other also; now if the Magistrates wrong design in an
Indulgence relating to the Persons and Estates of Ministers, does not, and
should not hinder the Ministers to look upon that Indulgence, and make use of
it as a relaxation of the rigor of the Edicts made against their Persons and
Estates; why should his ill intention in granting an Indulgence relating to
their Function, hinder them from making use of it, only as it is a relaxation of
the rigor of the Edicts which restrained them from the peaceable use of their
Ministry? for the one relaxation considered in its self, is as good, if not
better than the other; for the free undisturbed peaceable exercise of the
Ministry, is preferable to the mere freedom of a Ministers Person, or the free
use of his Estate; And though the Magistrates ill design in relaxing, does
vitiate his Act to himself, yet it does not vitiate the Act of him that accepts
of the relaxation, and disapproves the Magistrates ill design. Although the
person who gives Alms out of vain glory, or the Magistrate who gives a Prisoner
liberty, out of an ill design, do by their ill designs vitiate their own Acts;
yet the indigent man's receiving of the Alms, and the Prisoners accepting of his
liberty, are not defiled by the ill design of the Alms-giver, or the Releaser
of the Prisoner.

The Author, as it would seem, suspecting what he had said to be but
loose-work; therefore to make all sure, he adds, That this Indulgence
includes an acquiescing and submission unto Acts, etc. But it is manifestly
false, that they acquiesced or submitted to any Acts that established
Erastianism, or any usurpation; but he has a way of alleging strongly what he
should have proven, but could not do it.

That which they accepted, was the relaxation; but he will have them to
acquiesce in the Acts, he means the complex Acts of the Indulgence; and so if
ye believe him, they could not but contribute to the iniquous ends proposed by
the Indulgers. Thus ye see he makes all as sure as his words could make it; for
if (without reason) ye will take things upon trust from him, they are as he
says, and they cannot but be as he says. Ere I come to his second answer, I
cannot but take notice of the Confession in his first Answer.

The Objection which he pretends to answer, answer, speaks of what the Indulged
Ministers accepted; he answers of the Magistrates Acts and their designs in
acting; and when he is speaking of the Magistrates Acts, he says, That this
Indulgence includes an acquiescing and submission, etc. This must, if it has
any sense, be applied to the Act of the Indulged Ministers; for as the
designing of the establishment in the words immediately preceding, relates to
the Magistrate; so this submission cannot be the Magistrates Act. This is very
confused work! if the Author has been necessitated to study this Confusion, to
wrap up a matter that could not be distinctly handled without disadvantage to
his cause, he has been put upon a pitiful Trade.

His Ans. 2. is as confused as his first. The Magistrates Act indulging,
considered morally, must be considered with its circumstances; and he knows
that the Indulged Ministers are far from justifying the same. But the Ministers
indulged did not accept of those Acts in the complex, but of the relaxation of
the restraint; they knew how to choose what was good, and refuse the evil. But
that which has deceived this Author, has been a very odd conceit, viz. That
the Indulged Ministers could not in their practice accept of the relaxation,
and not be involved in the guilt of the Magistrates design; because the
morality of Actions does much depend upon circumstances; and the end and design
is a main circumstance in constituting the morality of an action. But he was
very far out in his morals, if he thought that the morality of one man's action,
is constituted by another man's design.

Titius's design is extrinsecal to Sempronius's action; another man's bad
design, if I do not approve of it, does not vitiate my action.

I showed before, that a man may make use of relaxation from Imprisonment,
though he who relaxes him has a bad design in doing it. It Is an ill intention
in the Agent himself that vitiates his action, and not the ill intention of
another person, whose Intention he knows not; or if he knows it to be ill,
disapproves it: it is upon the circumstances of our own actions, and not upon
the circumstances of other folks actions, that the morality of our actions does
much depend.

Page 98. Sect. 7. After the repetition of what he had said often before, he
alleges, That the refusing of the Indulgence would have been a sensible
defeating of the design of Erastianism, and would have necessitated the
designers to have taken other measures. And he adds, That this supposable
defeat, is sufficient to show how suitable a medium this was unto the projected
end: and that it cannot be said, that this is but accidental; for it has a
necessary connection with the end, as not only experience has proven, but the
very nature of the thing evinceth, as is abundantly cleared above.

Ans. The absolute refusal of the relaxation of the restraint; or the absolute
refusal of the peaceable exercise of the Ministry, would not have been a right
way of defeating Erastianism. It Is a very ordinary fault in these times, in
opposing one evil, to run into another. Dum vitant stulti vitia in contraria
currunt. There were some, who a little after the Reformation from Popery, in
their opposing the merit of good works, ran into an opposite error, That good
works were pernicious to Salvation; this was not a right way of defeating the
merit of good works; for this tended rather to harden Papists in their error of
the merit of good works, when they saw how absurd this device was, which some
had fallen upon to defeat the merit of works. Prodigality is opposite to
Covetousness; but it is not Gods way to defeat Covetousness, to turn Prodigal:
To refuse the peaceable public exercise of the Ministry, and to choose and
prefer an unpeaceable exercise of the Ministry unto the peaceable exercise of
it; and to choose a way of preaching upon that account that it is contrary unto
the Magistrates will, as if the Magistrates appointment or permission to
preach, were inconsistent with Christ's call, as the Author states the question,
page 129. are so far from being right means of defeating Erastianism, that they
are rather means to harden Erastians; for to oppose that power which the
Magistrate has from God, as if that were an Erastian power, confirms
Erastians, that they who oppose Erastianism that way oppose the Ordinance of
God; And they who refuse to take the peaceable public exercise of their
Ministry under the protection of lawful Authority, but will preach contrary to
the Magistrates will, need not to think it strange, if the Magistrate think and
say, that such ways and principles as these which lead men to an unnecessary,
unpeaceable thwarting with the Magistrate, are opposite to Civil Authority and
lawful peace, and so are not of God, who is the God of Order and Peace.

The Indulged Ministers made use of what in the Indulgence was the exercise of
that power which the Magistrate has from God; and by this show their respect
to lawful Authority; and they both by word and practice, did what they judged
incumbent to them, to render any evil which was in the complex Acts of the
Indulgence, ineffectual. So far were they from doing any thing which had a
necessary connection with any wrong end; and he has not yet cleared, that
experience or the nature of the thing does evince what he says. I perceive he
has a way of forcing nature, to evince what he cannot prove.

Page 98. We have his sixth head of Arguments, in which he undertaketh to show
how prejudicial this Indulgence is unto the good of the Church. If he would
have proven any thing against the practice of the Indulged Ministers, he should
have showed that what they did, was prejudicial to the Church. His first Hist.
is not pertinent; the practice of the Indulged Ministers in returning to their
own charges, or going to Parishes that were destitute, upon the Invitation of
the people, as it does not make any precedent for thrusting out of Ministers;
(for he knew that not long before the Indulgence, not only the Indulged
Ministers, but others were thrust out) so it makes no precedent for Magistrates
putting in Ministers brevi manu; for whatever the Magistrate designed, yet
these Ministers did not enter in these Congregations brevi manu, as was cleared
before. And I suppose he will not find in Church History, that the Church was
hurt by the Magistrates restoring or placing Orthodox Ministers. He granted
before, that in the corrupt state of the Church, Magistrates might place
Ministers. If there be any strength in this first Argument, it will overturn
that concession; for if Magistrates may thrust out Heretics when the Church is
corrupted, and place Orthodox Ministers; then he will infer, that the ice being
broken, if the Magistrate turn Arrian, he will thrust out Orthodox, and put in
Heretics, and the Orthodox Magistrates and Ministers have paved the way and
broken the Ice. The absurdities which have followed upon the corruptions of
corrupt Magistrates does no more bind up Magistrates from doing right, than the
absurdities which have followed upon the corruptions of Corrupt Ministers does
bind up Ministers from doing their duty.

His 2d. as it is no parallel to the case in hand, so it shows that an
ill-disposed Ecclesiastic Court may misplant Kirks; and to reason from
prejudices arising upon supposition of men's corruptions, would exclude
Ministers as well as Magistrates from having any hand in providing desolate
Congregations. The Ministers who were Indulged, did not upon the Indulgence
leave their own charges, for they were thrust out of them long before the
Indulgence; neither did they go to other Congregations upon the Magistrates
sole call, as he supposes; so that he is but fighting with his own shadow.

To his 3d. I need say no more but this; if any such emergent fall out in
aftertimes, the carriage of the Indulged Ministers, if it be rightly
represented, will not be prejudicial to the Church; if it be misrepresented, as
it is by this Author, then he, and not the Indulged Ministers are to be blamed
for any ill use that any may make of it; if he had been as tender of the
Posterity as he should have been, he would not have so misrepresented the
practice of many honest Ministers; for he might have thought, that following
generations would lay more weight upon the practice of so many, than upon his
Authory; and that his reasonings would be no sufficient Salvo; for Posterity
would suppose that so many able and conscientious Ministers wanted not
reasonings for their practice; and would readily suspect all his reasonings as
not solid.

To his 4th. I answer: The practice of the Indulged Ministers makes no
preparative for sending all Orthodox Ministers to one small inconsiderable
corner of the Land; for he knows that the Indulged Ministers were not for the
unnecessary thrusting in of many Ministers into one Parish. If the Magistrate
by force did thrust Orthodox Ministers not only to the High-lands, but out of
the Land; I think it were unreasonable to blame the Indulged Ministers, for
that Magistrates know well enough the way of confining and banishing Ministers
that they would have been quit of many ages ago. Ministers going to Holland
when they are banished, may have the same consequences that Ministers going to
the High-lands may have.

To his 5th. I answer: The case of these Ministers who in the second Indulgence
were permitted to preach in Congregations which were already provided, was not
the same with the case of these who were invited by the people to come and help
Congregations which were destitute. And as the Ministers who are not Indulged,
contribute for the general good of the Church when they preach as they have
access, now in one place and then in another (for they cannot preach to the
whole Church at once) so do the Indulged Ministers contribute for the good of
the Church when they help these Congregations where they are settled; and their
settlement, as was said before, puts them in a better capacity to take
inspection of the flock, than if they were not settled; and their preaching in
these Congregations does not hinder Ministers who are not Indulged, to preach
elsewhere as they have access. The Indulged Ministers did not pretend to be the
only doers of the duty of the day, but they did a part of the duty of the day,
and they are glad of the success of the Ministry of those who were not
Indulged; and wish that it were as great as it is called by him in his Sect. 6.
To which I need say no more but these things.

I. That as the Indulged Ministers had no design to deprive the Lords people of
the benefit of the Ministry of Ministers not Indulged; so their practice did no
way tend to the hinderance of the exercise of their Ministry either in houses
or fields, no more than the preaching of one Minister not Indulged in one
Parish, did hinder the preaching of another Minister not Indulged in another
Parish.

II. There has been much more preaching of the Gospel in all places where
people were willing to hear, since the Indulgence than before.

III. In all appearance, an utter refusal to have made any use of the
Indulgence, would have been a greater obstruction of preaching and hearing, and
given greater color for obstruction than any thing which he alleges upon the
Indulged Ministers.

As for his 7th. about Stipends, we had enough of that before. It seems he has
laid great stress upon this business of Stipends; for he says, The hurt and
prejudice by this bondage in the matter of Stipends, is inexpressible. He
refers to his 4th. Remark in the Kings Letter, where there are several things
cited from Scripture, and the second Book of Discipline, about Stipends, which
the Indulged Ministers know as well as he; but what remedy prescribes he? He
thinks this was ground enough to have refused the favor. Surely this tale
would have told very ill before the Council; We will not preach except we get
the Stipend at our own disposal. Again, he speaks as if the Ministers had been
in equal terms with the Magistrate, and had had possession of the Stipends, and
had alienate them by their consent; whereas the truth was, they were and had
been for several years thrust from Kirks and Stipends. I think the Indulged
Ministers did much better, and that which was more becoming men of their
station, who made no mention of the Stipends at all. His next overture is, he
would have had them choosing rather to preach gratis, than any way to have
contributed to the laying on of such a yoke upon the neck of the Church of
Scotland; but that yoke was on already; and their refusing to take the Stipend
of the Church where they preached, had been to contribute to that sacrilege
which is mentioned in the place of the 2d. Book of Discipline which he cites;
for thus the whole of the Stipend would have been quit and alienate to another
use than that to which it was dedicated. The freedom and faithfulness of
conscientious Ministers, will be no more obstructed by receiving what the
Magistrates thinks fit to give, than by receiving what people think fit to
give; and they who are not conscientious, will be as much influenced by their
dependence upon the people, as upon the Magistrate. Page 100. Sect. 8. He says,
The Indulged Ministers became wholly subject to the Council, even in all
matters Ecclesiastic, whether concerning Doctrine, Discipline or manners, as
being accountable only to them, and wholly at their devotion. I answer, This is
a bundle of untruths, and injurious false aspersions. That the Indulged Misters
cannot get stayed longer than the Magistrate will suffer them, is common to
them with all the Ministers of the World where there are Magistrates who have a
coercive power, by which they can imprison, banish, etc. He himself and the
Author of the Epistle to the Reader, could stay no longer in Rotterdam than the
Magistrate pleased; as for that couping from Kirk to Kirk which he speaks of,
as if it had been merely upon the Magistrates pleasure, it will I suppose upon
trial be found an injurious aspersion; if a Minister has upon the Invitation
of a vacant congregation, where he might to the greater good of the Church, and
with the consent of the Ministers of the bounds, respectively concerned,
removed from one Congregation to another; this will not be found prejudicial,
but advantageous to the Church.

As for his Sect. 9. we have often before spoken of the Instructions. After he
has said what he pleases of a base, sinful compacting, which to him is the
basest Symony, and taking of liberty upon sinful conditions; He says, he knows
the Indulged Ministers will say they are free of compacting. And he dare not
gainsay; for he comes off with this faint; and I shall not accuse them further
than I know or have ground; but he tells us for certain, That the Instructions
were in the Kings Letter, and that the Council calls them terms. He knows the
Indulged Ministers could not hinder the Kings Secretary, or the Councils Clerks
to write what the King or Council thought fit; but he says, They who were
called before the Council 1673. did not express their dissatisfaction with
these terms, so as to quit the benefit, and cast the bargain thereupon.

Ans. He would, I perceive, have had the Indulged Ministers upon all
accusations, quitting the peaceable exercise of their Ministry; but though they
did not think it their duty to do that, yet I wonder how he can say, That they
expressed not their dissatisfaction with these Instructions; for we heard
before, that Mr. Blair gave an honest and faithful Testimony against these
Instructions, and that Mr. H. spoke the same upon the matter which Mr. B.
spoke; this the Author himself says and proves: but enough of this before.

His Sect. 10. Supposes that they subjected themselves to the Councils
Instructions to regulate them in the exercise of their Ministry; and hence he
infers, that they became as formally subject to the Magistrate in matters
Ecclesiastic, as any inferior Civil Officers, such as Sheriffs, Justices of
Peace, Baylifs. I answer: He supposes what he should prove; if we yield him his
false postulata, and give him leave to suppose what he pleases, he may no doubt
do great feats, and elect a world of absurdities out of one false conceit; but
though he will readily get many simple ones that believe every word, to believe
him, yet I suppose no person that is judicious, will belive so grievous an
accusation against so many Ministers of Christ without proof; if we must not
receive an accusation against an Elder, but under two or three Witnesses, much
less must we receive an accusation against so many Elders upon the mere word of
the Accusers, though they were never so many; and much less upon the word of
one Accuser.

In his Sect. 11. he quarrels with the Indulged Ministers, because of the want
of the free and full exercise of Discipline, and that in the lawful Courts of
Christ; and that they dispense calmly with the want of Church Discipline in
Presbyteries and Synods.

Ans. 1. As I said before, this is to quarrel against the holy Providence of
God.

2. They wanted these before they were Indulged.

3. They may sub cruce and cum periculo keep Presbyteries and Synods,
notwithstanding of the Indulgence.

4. Kirk-Sessions are one of the Courts of Christ, and one is better than none.
He excuses the Non-indulged though they have no Discipline, because all their
preaching is sub cruce, not having so much as freedom to exercise any part of
their Ministry, and so are allowed of God to do all they can, when they cannot
do all they would.

Ans. 1. The Author has here forgot himself, and the quarrel he had against
Mr. H. for acknowledging the Magistrates granting of the liberty of the public
exercise of the Ministry; as if he had thereby acknowledged, That they had the
exercise of their Ministry from the Magistrate; but if Mr. H. had used such
words as this Author does when he speaks of the Non-Indulged, who, as he says,
have not so much as freedom to exercise any part of their Ministry; O what
out-crying should we have heard, when he makes such a noise about Mr. H's.
words! though he not only adds liberty and freedom, but also public, to the
exercise of the Ministry; and subjoyns, after so long a restraint, and under
the protection of lawful Authority.

If Mr. H. had said in the words of this Author, My Lords, whereas since we
were turned out, we had not so much as freedom to exercise any part of our
Ministry; but now we have freedom to exercise our Ministry, etc. What
Commentaries and Harangues would have been made upon and out of these words!
Now if the Non-indulged want the freedom to exercise any part of their
Ministry, is it not by the penal Statutes, that they are deprived of this
freedom? were it not an advantage to have this freedom which they want? and
this they cannot have without the Magistrate; and why may they not accept of
this freedom from the Magistrate? and if they may, what ails the Author at the
Indulged Ministers for the accepting of that freedom which they wanted?

2. He deals not equally with the Indulged and Non-indulged; The Non-indulged
are, says he, allowed of God to do all they can, seeing they cannot do as they
would; but he would have the Indulged Ministers do more than they can. He would
have the Indulged Ministers keeping Presbyteries and Synods, which they can no
more do without hazard, than the Non-indulged; yea, their hazard would be much
greater than the hazard of the Non-indulged; for the Magistrate would know
where to find them if they had a mind to take them; or if they cited them, they
behoved either to appear or to lose the peaceable exercise of their Ministry,
which the Non-indulged have not, and so cannot lose. His tacit insinuation
that the Indulged are not countenanced in the exercise of Discipline and
Preaching, as the Ambassadors of Christ; and his asserting that they are under
the Leesheet of the Supremacy, as if they acknowledged any Erastian or absolute
Supremacy in the Magistrate in Ecclesiastical matters, and his reflection on
the constitution and guiding of some of their Sessions, are a new addition to
his former unproven and ill-grounded alledgances.

As for his 12. the Indulged Ministers cum periculo, as well as the
Non-indulged, ordain Ministers, they have accepted of no terms to incapacitate
them for Ordination. But this would not satisfy this Author, except they did
relinquish the Indulgence, and betake themselves to the fields; but we saw
before, why nothing but the fields will please this Author.

Page 101. We have his 7th. head of Arguments. He alleges, That the Indulged
Ministers have stepped off in such a way as cannot but be accounted a falling
off from the cause and ground of our sufferings. We have answered already these
Arguments whereby he would prove this alledgance in his first seven Sections.
His 8. Section makes much against him, and for the Indulged Ministers, as we
saw before. As for his 9th. it is no new thing to see Ministers compearing
before the Council; the first Book of Discipline was directed by Ministers to
the Council, which was much more than compearance.

He supposes the Indulged to have accepted the instructions; but it is a false
supposition, as has been before cleared. If he will make a parallel case
(either in the year 1649. or any year he pleases;) the Indulged Ministers are
content to leave to all who are fit to judge of matters of this nature, to
judge concerning their practice. As for the History which is in his 10. he
speaks as if the Indulged Ministers generally had said, they had not seen these
instructions, which is very false. His 11th. He indefinitely charges the
Indulged Ministers with laying aside the Lecture, which is another falsehood;
That any of them who do not Lecture, have forsaken it upon the command of the
Council, is another of his groundless alledgances; as some few of the indulged
Ministers, so several of the not-indulged do not lecture. But I hope he will
not say, That it is the command of the Council, that they forbear it: They have
other Reasons; some found themselves not able to lecture and preach twice on
the Lords day. His 12th. is resumed in his 8 head of Arguments, page 104. where
he undertakes to prove, That the hands of Prelates are strengthened by the
Indulgence The Prelates, I suppose, are not of that mind themselves. First,
says he, not to mention the open door that is left to them to accept of the
Prelates Collation, nor the encouragement they have to seek and obtain. He did
well not to mention this; for it is not worth the mentioning. It Is false, That
the indulged Ministers put themselves in prison under the Bishops lock and key.
As for his second, the Churches where the indulged Ministers are settled, are
not encumbred with those who own Prelacy, as they were before the Indulgence,
which is no small disadvantage to Prelacy.

It Is a false alledgance, That the indulged Ministers were content that their
Ministry should be confined within limited places, let the necessity of the
Church be what it would or could be; how knows he that the indulged Ministers
would not deny to help people that are destitute in other places, if they saw
that the necessity of the Church did require it? It would be a prejudice, and
no advantage to the Church, needlessly to leave the charges where they are
settled, and to leave the Congregations where they are, to be planted with
Conformists.

His third Section, in which he alleges the friendly and brotherly love and
correspondence betwixt some of the indulged and Neighbour-hirelings, and the
want of Zeal against Prelates wherever the Indulgence is, is grounded upon
misinformation. That Prelates will possibly say, That one Field-Conventicle
has done them and their cause more prejudice than many preachings of all the
indulged men, is another of his ground^ess guessiings, and needs no other
refutation but ^his, That possibly they will not say it. Possibile esse
possibile non esse. It Is another of his groundless gues^ings, That they use
more keenness against Field-Preachers than against Prelates. The indulged
Ministers, as they have occasion, preach against Erastianism and an absolute
Supremacy; and show from the Scripture, That the keys of the King^om of Heaven
are not committed to the Magistrate; and that all the powers on earth, have ^o
power to dispose or order Ecclesiastical matters ^t their pleasure; but that
all things in the house ^f God should be done according to the will of God
^evealed in the Scripture.

His 4th. is a begging of the question; he should ^ave proven, That the
indulged Ministers have accepted of any thing which flows from any sinful
Supremany; but that he could not do.

His 5th. supposes that they have accepted of the Instructions, which is a
false supposition, and before refuted. The paying of money to the Clerks, in
his Parenthesis page 106. was not worth the mentioning. These Clerks seek it
not by the Prelates Authority, but upon the Councils appointment, backed with
charges of horning; and whether it be rather eligible to pay a little money, or
to be put to the horn and taken with caption, let any sober person judge. The
scruples that the Author and some others have put in the peoples heads about
paying of Stipends to the Conformists and Sessors, have wasted some peoples
Estates, and tends to waste their Consciences; for when they are quartered on,
and eaten up, and plundered, they are driven to do what they thought sinful;
and this disposes them to do things that are truly sinful upon temptations; and
when they are by necessity driven to pay, they who wait for their halting,
allege they have no Conscience; and if they were put to it in other things,
they would do all that would be required of them.

Page 106. we have his 9th. head of Arguments, in which he undertakes to prove,
That the acceptance of the Indulgence is against our Covenants; but he has not
proven either here or elsewhere, That the Practice of the indulged Ministers,
was a breach of Covenant.

The Particulars which he brings to prove this charge, have been all refuted
above; and it is needless, and would be tedious to the Reader to repeat the same
things. For what he says page 107. in his fifth Section, of the design of the
Indulgers to divide, though it were proven, it would make nothing against the
practice of the indulged Ministers; for what they did, did no ways tend to
division. They declared themselves before the Council to be of the same
Judgment they were of before; and they still preach the same Doctrine, are for
the same Worship, Discipline, Government. They are against Popery, Prelacy,
Error, Schism, etc. as they were before the Indulgence. The Covenant obliges to
continue in adhering to the good things, and opposing the evils mentioned in
it; but does not oblige the Covenanters that they shall accept of no favor, or
of a righting of any wrong done to them, except they get all the same favor
and right done to them at the same time; but I remember I spoke of this before.

Page 107. We have his 10th head of Arguments, where he undertakes to prove,
That the indulged Ministers condemn themselves. His first particular to prove
this, is false; the indulged Ministers acceptance of the relaxation of the
Civil Restraint, does not condemn either field or house-meetings. In his second
he grants, That all the Indulged Ministers except one, condemn the Supremacy as
an usurpation; but, says he, they have accepted that which purely flows from
the Supremacy; and refers to his third head of Arguments.

Ans. 1. This one whom he excepts, if he had been alive, would have answered
for himself; but seeing he is at rest, I am obliged to do him right, in showing
what was his sense of the Supremacy; and I shall the rather do it, because the
Author of the Cup of cold Water says, He has beat his brains to shape a
beautiful Mask for the Supremacy, and to put a sufferable sense upon it, and
seeks to seat the eyes of others. The Author of the Cup of cold Water casts him
as no Seer; and not only rejects him from being the man of his Counsel, but
directs all the servants and people of God to stand aloof from him, as one who
stands not in the Counsel of God; who will seduce, pervert and ensnare, whose
breath is contagious, and whose speech bewrays him to have the botch of the
Court-Creed running upon him. Thus he Stigmatizes, deposes and excommunicates
him; satis pro imperio quisquis es. It seems the Author of the Cup of cold
Water has neither known that Minister, nor yet his opinion concerning the
Supremacy, and so he has ignorantly rushed into a multitude of absurdities.
The Minister whom he thus abuses, was a godly, able, painful Minister of the
Gospel; and his memory is savoury to those who were acquainted with him; he was
well versed in Polemick Divinity, a man who would not be affrighted or boasted
with toome empty words. I think I see how he would have smiled at the Author of
the Cup of cold Waters Echo; alas! it was not Eccho's, but Ergo's which he
regarded; it was not empty sounds, whether direct or reflex, but sound Reason
which would have prevailed with him.

As for his singular opinion, it is true, in his answer to the Countrymans
Scruples, he declares, That he does not think the Supremacy claimed by the
Magistrate, to be a spiritual Supremacy; and gives several Reasons why he
conceives it cannot be expounded in that sense; but it is as true, that he is so
far from putting a beautiful Mask upon the Supremacy, That he declares this
absolute power established in the King and his Successors, to do what they will
in Church Affairs, without either Council or Parliament, is and will be matter
of astonishment; and that the Act of establishing it, is more dangerous than if
it did establish Erastianism or the spiritual Supremacy. And the Reason of this
is clear, because although Erastus' did absurdly imagine, That the Magistrate
might himself exercise Ecclesiastical Functions, or employ others to exercise
these Functions in his name; yet he was so far from thinking that the
Magistrate might dispose upon, and order things sacred according to his
pleasure, that he has often declared, That he ought to order things sacred
according to the prescription of the word of God.

In his answer to Beza, page 125. of that Edition printed at Amsterdam Anno
1649. after he has ascribed all the Government of the Church to the
Magistrate, he adds, Yet as in taking the care of things profane, it is not
lawful to the Magistrate to pass the bounds of Equity, Justice, and Honesty;
that is the prescription of the Laws and Statutes of the Commonwealth: so in
disposing and ordering things sacred, or things pertaining to the worship of
God, it is far less lawful for the Magistrate in any part to depart from the
Prescription of the word of God, which he ought to follow as a rule in all
things, and never to decline from it, even in a hairs breadth. Whereas by this
Act of Supremacy (says the Minister who answered the Countrymans Scruples) a
King, if he will, may bring in Popery, yea, overturn all Religion, without
consent either of Council or Parliament, as we may see in the example of
Jeroboam, who caused Israel to sin, by setting up a Worship of his own
devising. Is this a beautiful mask, shaped for the Supremamacy? the Author of
the Cup of cold Water should be ashamed and humbled for these absurdities, that
through misinformation he has run into: is it not strange, that one Minister
so ill informed, while he is inveighing against the supremacy, should act as if
he had a Papal Supremacy, in stigmatizing, deposing, excommunicating his
fellow servants? But I perceive the truth of that saying, That man will much
sooner see a Pope in another man's belly, than when he is in his own. That
saithful Minister was seeing light in light, when the Author of the Cup of cold
Water did judge him no seer; he was admitted to the fellowship of the Saints in
Heaven, before this Sentence of Excommunication was past on earth. He was
drinking of the pure river of the water of life, when this foul, and not cold,
but scalding hot water was cast at him out of this Cup of cold Water.

The Author has verified what the Poet thought impossible, Unda dabit flammas.
I wish the other part of the verse, and dabit ignis aquas, may also be
verified, that such flashes of fire proceeding from the wrath of man, might be
turned into these waters that the Prophet Jeremiah wishes for, and be resolved
in tears of godly sorrow. Having discovered the wrong which the Author of the
Cup of cold Water, and the Author of this History have done to that one
indulged Minister: I answer, Secondly, That which the Author of the History of
the Indulgence subsumes, That the indulged Ministers accepted of that which
purely flowed from that Supremacy which they count an usurpation, is false and
a begging of the question; as he refers to the 3d. head, I refer to the answer
to it before given. His third, That the entry is founded upon any sinful
Supremacy, is also false. To his 4th. concerning the Patrons, we spoke before.
For his 5th. after he has repeated that the indulged Ministers did receive the
Instructions, which is a false alledgance, as we have cleared from Mr. H's
Speech; and what was spoken by the indulged Ministers who were called before
the Council for not keeping the 29th. of May, and from the Authors own
confession, who grants that they did not obey these injunctions, and
acknowledges that they gave an honest Testimony against them; he draws a
parallel, whereby he thinks it may distinctly appear, that their refusal of the
benefit offered by the accommodation, did condemn their accepting of the
benefit offered by the Indulgence; but he is here as far out in his
Mathematics, as we have found him before out in his Morals and Logicks.

The acceptance of the relaxation of the civil restraint, which impeded the
peaceable exercise of their Ministry, has no proportion with, or equality unto
the acceptance of the Proposals made by Bishop Lighton for accommodation; for
the acceptance of these proposals had been the accepting of a wrong form and
model of Church Government. In that Model of Government offered in these
Proposals, there is an Officer set up, a Diocesan Bishop, who is not in the
Rolls of Church Officers recorded in the Scripture; a President imposed upon,
not freely elected by the Synod, not countable to, nor censurable by the Synod,
claiming power to restrain not only single Presbyters, but Presbyteries from
the exercise of that Authority which they have received from Christ for the
Edification of the Church; Who can restrain a Presbytery from ordaining a
Minister; though the Church who has elected him, be most earnest to have him
ordained, the person elected be most fit for the charge, and the Presbytery
most desirous to ordain. The Synod is mangled in its members, wanting ruling
Elders, manacled is its power, not being free to choose its own Moderator, nor
to censure the imposed President, though he were most culpable and unworthy of
his place.

The proposals overturns the identity of Bishop and Presbyter; for in them not
only is Distinction made betwixt the Bishop and Presbyter, but the Bishop is
made Superior to the Presbytery, they destroy the parity of Ministers, and the
subjection of the part to the whole: what the Provincial Synod would have been,
who could tell? but it is like it would be less than the Dioceson; and yet this
behoved to be subject to that. The accepting of these Proposals, and entering
into, and concurring with Meetings thus corruptly constituted, had been a real
consenting to owning, settling, establishing, promoving this corrupt
constitution of Government; and no verbal declaration of their dissatisfaction
with the corruptions in the constitution, could have salved the matter; for
their voluntary constituting themselves members of a Court, so corruptly
constitute, and concurring with the Bishop while he was exercising his
Prelatical Power (for if he exercise it any where, it is in the Diocesan
Synods) had been contrary to their verbal Declaration; and whatever they said
contrary to the Bishops usurpation, or the corrupt constitution of the Court,
their deed would have effectively and most effectually established that corrupt
form of Church Government, and rendered their words ineffectual and ridiculous.

The most effectual way of establishing an Usurper, is to concur with him in
his Courts, and act in a forinsick subordination to him. Now the indulged
Ministers in accepting the relaxation so often spoken of, did neither verbally,
nor really acknowledge, own or establish any usurpation of the Council. The
Author says, That their deed was a manifest compliance with Erastianism; but
this is false, as has been before cleared; and thus he goes about to make
their acceptance of the relaxation of the Civil restraint, which is in it self
a straight line, crooked, that it might run parallel to the crooked line of
compliance with Prelacy; but this was a fault in morality, whatever it was in
the Mathematics. His first six parallels, and his second six parallels, are
nothing to his purpose, except ye let him have his conclusion by begging, in
granting that the practice of the indulged Ministers was an establishment of,
or a compliance with Erastianism; Mathematicians uses to demonstrate, and not
to beg the question. The Author wanted not will to have made a Demonstration,
but the matter would not work for him.

He has another parallel in the sixth, where he compares the acceptance of the
Indulgence with the taking of the Collation; and first he tells us what the
taker of Collation, and the taker of the Indulgence may think; and then he
tells us what both of them really does. The taker of the Collation
acknowledges and prefers the Prelate as a Minister of Christ. So, (says he)
he who submits to the Indulgence, acknowledges the Magistrate or the
Council to be the proper subject of formal Church Power; he should have proven
that the acceptance of the relaxation, etc. imports any such acknowledgment;
but it was easier to take it for granted, than to prove it.

In his third he tells us, there is in the Indulgence a formal acceptance; but
he tells us not of what; and, (says he) a plain submission; but he tells us not
to what; and a Recognizance, but he tells not of what; and a significant
transaction, but he tells not about what. It appears by the Parenthesis that
follows, viz. (if the Council be to be believed) that as he durst not before
charge the indulged Ministers with a compact, so here he only alleges a
transaction; but he is not sure, as his Parenthesis imports.

As for his 4th. he knows that Presbyterians make a great difference betwixt
the Magistrate and a Prelate; but of this before. And then it is false, That the
indulged Ministers looked upon themselves as Ministers of these Parishes, upon
the sole ground of the Magistrates Act. And thus we have done with his
parallels, which are mere Paralogisms: If the matter could have afforded better
Arguments, the Author would have readily hit upon them; but the subject matter
could not be formed in a Mathematical Demonstration; ex quovis ligno non fit
Mercurius.

Page 110. we have his eleventh head of Arguguments, in which he undertakes to
prove, That by the accepting of the Indulgence, the meetings of Gods people are
prejudged; he means the meetings nicknamed Conventicles; and he alleges, That
by the acceping of the Indulgence, they have contributed to the suppressing of
these Meetings; and that interpretatively they may he charged in part with the
severities exercised against the same. He only pretends to make this probable
and likely, and that this head of Arguments deserves some consideration; so
that the Arguments under this head, are not in his own opinion Demonstrations,
but only topical Arguments.

The Author speaks much more soberly here, than he did in the Letters which he
sent before this printed Book; for in that Letter which he wrote to a young
man, who preached at Wamfroy, he says, That the accepters of the Indulgence
could not but homologate before the Lord the Magistrates design to suppress
these Meetings of the Lords people, and contribute to the carrying on of that
end; and in another Letter he infers, That seeing the Magistrate had the same
design in the Indulgence that he had in the band, that therefore the band and
Indulgence are of a piece, and that there is no difference as to kind, betwixt
the making use of the Indulgence, and the taking off the band; Though there be
a magis and minus, that may be yielded; yet there is nothing that can alter the
kind; nor can he see how those who are favorable to the Indulgence can,
speaking consequently, condemn the taking of the Band. Here is very great
confidence, but it is very groundless; for suppose the design of all that had a
hand in the contriving of the Indulgence, were as ill as he could imagine, yet
their design could not vitiate the acceptance of the peaceable exercise of the
preaching of the Gospel, nor vitiate the hearing of the Gospel to those who
preach and hear the Gospel, for that end for which God has appointed it to be
preached and heard.

2. Whatever was the intention of the Contrivers of the Indulgence, the
preaching of the Indulged Ministers had no more tendency to hinder other
Ministers to preach the Gospel, than the preaching of one Minister who is not
indulged, hinders the preaching of another Minister; and experience has proven
this, That their preaching hindered others to preach; for several Non-indulged
preached more since the Indulgence than before.

3. He gives a strange efficacy to the Magistrates intention, in saying, That
it makes the making use of the Indulgence and taking of the band, to be of a
piece, and of one kind; for the band which he speaks of, obliges to conform to
Prelacy, and to cast off the outed Ministers, yea, and shut up their bowels
from them in their distress; and the person who takes it, declares Conventicles
to be disorderly, and the walking according to the Law which establishes
Prelacy, to be orderly walking.

They who think that the Magistrates intention can make these things contained
in that band to be of a piece, and of the same kind with the peaceable exercise
of preaching the Gospel, they give the Magistrate a power of working Miracles,
in changing the nature of things by his intention, which is more than has been
given to Magistrates by those who talk highest of their Supremacy.

I wish he had forborne that expression of Homologating before the Lord; for it
seems to be a taking of the name of God in vain.

Page 111. he desires us to ponder some Particulars; for the first about
Magistrates design, we have weighed it, and found it light. For his second, he
should have proven, That it is the necessary work of the indulged Ministers who
have Churches to preach in, where the Meetings of the Lords people are not
disturbed, to leave these Churches, and go to preach in mountains, and
needlessly expose themselves to hazard, when they may have the same ordinances
of God in the Church, and with these advantages, That they have the
accommodation of a house to shelter them from storms, that they are rid of the
fears of Invasion by armed soldiers which do much disorder folks Spirits for
the worship of God; and the place of meeting being fixed and known, peoples
uncertain wandering upon the Lords day is prevented.

It has been very sad to those who truly designed to sanctify the Sabbath, to
wander on the Lords day, to seek the word of God and not find it; and when they
had found it, to be in a continual fear of violence; or to be fleeing, or to
see some more taken up in drawing themselves up for fighting, than for drawing
near to God; or to see or hear of blood mingled with Sacrifices. He should have
proven that God calls the indulged Ministers to quit the peaceable exercise of
their Ministry in these Parishes where they are settled; where they have
opportunity to know the State, Case and Way of the people, and to apply their
Doctrine sutably to the peoples Condition; and where they have opportunity to
make full proof of their Ministry, in preaching, and ministering Sacraments,
Catechizing, visiting, exercising Church Discipline.

The indulged Ministers are not convinced, That it is the greater good of the
Church to cast these Congregations where they are desolate, and leave them to
be filled with Conformists. He says, the Indulged Ministers have given
themselves to rest under the covering of the Supremacy. This was an invidious
and false aspersion; if the giving of themselves to the work of the Ministry,
be a giving of themselves to rest; then they have given themselves to rest.
Thinks he that men cannot labor in the work of the Gospel, except they carry
the Gospel from mountain to hill? Instead of the covering of the Supremacy, he
should have said, Under the protection of lawful Authority; and as Mr. H. said
before the Council, The exercise of the Ministry under the protection of lawful
Authority, is one of the most desirable things on earth to Ministers of the
Gospel.

To his third, The case of these Ministers, who were confined to Congregations
where there were Ministers settled and permitted to preach ^n these Parishes,
was far different from the case ^f those who went to desolate Congregations. ^f
they had been permitted to preach to destitute Congregations, the Lords work
might have been ^arried on in all probability with as much suc^ess, as by their
preaching in the mountains.

To his fourth, If all had refused to make any ^se of the Indulgence upon the
grounds of this ^uthor, and the Author of the Epistle prefixed (...) this Book,
and of the Cup of cold Water; In all ^ppearance this would have been the result
of it, that the Magistrate being more provoked, ^ould have raised more forces
to have suppres^d Conventicles; and this would have exposed ^ore to suffering,
and have heightened the troubles (...) Nonconformists; so that the execution of
the penal Statutes, would have been objectively extended, and intensively
increased.

To his 5th. in which he says, That all the people of these Parishes where
indulged Ministers are, have been withheld or withdrawn from waiting upon the
Lord, at these blessed and wonderfully countenanced occasions; whereby the
followers of the Lord are broken, divided, and weakened, and so become a more
ready prey to the Adversary.

I answer, It were to be wished, That the blessing of these occasions had been
really as great as it was called; many who had no prejudice against, but loved
these occasions, have found by sad experience, that all was not Gold that
glistered; and so many people who for a time ran to these occasions, have by
their practices, which are not suitable to the Gospel, confirmed the sad truths
which outed Ministers who heard of, or observed their way, preached to them;
and they have too much verified the fearful apprehensions that they had
concerning them, and the tendency of their way. There were some observed, That
they did not find the people who withdrew from indulged Ministers, any whit
better, either in their knowledge, or in their Conversation, by their
withdrawing; but several of them to decline in both, and to become more vain
and censorious, and addicted to evil-speaking. The people who did not withdraw
from the Indulged Ministers, are very unjustly charged with dividing. If they
who attended the Ordinances of the Lord dispensed by indulged Ministers, were
following the Lord in doing so, then by their attendance they did not break off
from the followers of the Lord.

To his 6th. I have answered in speaking to his 4th. There is greater
probability of sad consequences that would have followed upon an absolute
refusal of making any use of the Indulgence, than there is of these good
consequences which he imagines would have followed upon the refusal of it.

His 7th. is a mere begging of the question; and so is his 8th. For the
indulged Minsters have not exposed other Ministers who are not indulged, to any
cruelties or barbarities. I perceive by his way of reasoning, if the Council
had a little after the Act of Glasgow, retracted that Act, and have given all
these Ministers liberty to return to their several Parishes; if they had
excepted but one or two, this Author could not have allowed of their return;
for he would have interpreted this to be an exposing of those who were
excepted, to the fury of Adversaries, and would have condemned them as guilty
of all the cruelties which the excepted persons might meet with. By the same
reason prisoners imprisoned for the truth, might not accept of freedom from
prison, except they were all released at once; by this means one wilful man who
would refuse to accept of liberty from prison upon very honest and just terms,
might keep a hundred or thousand who had freedom to accept of release upon such
honest and just terms; I say this one might keep them all in pr^son by this
Argument, That their leaving of him, would expose him to more severity.

His 12th. and last head of Arguments against the accepting of the Indulgence,
as taken from the real ground of offense, which he alleges was in the
accepting of the Indulgence, and the scandal that was thereby given to one and
other: And this he says, is valid enough alone to militate against it, and
sufficient to condemn it unto all who understand the nature of scandal; and the
dreadfulness of the sin of giving scandal by any thing we do, whether as to
matter or manner; and who remember what Christ and his Apostles have said of
this.

Ans. The all who understand the nature of scandal, are not so many as it seems
the Author has imagined; the greatest Divines, who have searched most into the
nature of Scandal, have found it very intricate and obscure.

Mr. Rutherford in his dispute touching Scandal and Christian liberty,
subjoyned to his Divine right of Church Government, page 81. says, That the
Doctrine of Scandal is more intricate and obscure than every Divine conceives.
If folk would forbear to condemn the practices of others as scandalous, until
they understood the nature of Scandal, there would be much less Scandal in the
World than there is; there are many who give Scandal by calling these things
scandalous which are not scandalous. It Is a grievous sin, though many be not
aware of it, to add to the word of God, in making more sins, and scandalous
sins, than they can prove to be sins or scandalous sins from the perfect rule
of the word of God.

Mr. Rutherford shows in the forecited dispute, That many alleged, That there
was Scandal given by telling of Bells, and Ministers preaching in a Gown; and
naming the days of the week from the Planets; as Sunday from the Sun, and
Monday from the Moon, etc. and in worshipping in Churches which had been built
in the times of Popery to the honor of some Saint. But he shows that these
were not Scandals given, but taken; for, says he, page 53. we read not of
Scandals culpable in Gods word, but there be some apparent moral reasons in
them; it is not enough to alledg that this or that is Scandalous, but we must,
if we would prove any thing scandalous, show that there is a moral reason, and
an apparent moral reason in such things, which renders them scandalous. The
Lords people would be deprived of the liberty wherewith Christ has made them
free, and brought under an intolerable yoke (...) bondage, if they were obliged
to abstain from every thing which either the malicious, or the weak would
alledg without reason to be scandalous. There is no way (says the Author) to
evite the force of this Argument, but by affirming and proving the Action at
which the offense is taken, or may be taken, is not only lawful in it self, but
as circumstantial, is expedient and necessary to be done.

Ans. The Aurhor should, if he would have said any thing to the purpose, have
proven, or at least endeavored to have proven, that the acceptance of the
peaceable exercise of the Ministry under the protection of lawful Authority; or
which is all one, the acceptance of the Relaxation of that Civil restraint
which had so long restrained the public exercise of the Ministry, That this
acceptance did give offense, or was of it self an occasion of stumbling or
ruin; or that it was inductive to sin. He should have proven, that this deed
was such a deed, quod de sui ratione haberet, quod esset inductivum ad
peccandum. But instead of doing this, he tells us, That when offense is taken,
or may be taken at an action, they who do that action must prove it, not only
lawful in it self, but that as circumstantial, it is expedient and necessary to
be done; and if they cannot prove the necessity of what they do, then the
Author concludes from the offense taken at the action, that the action gives
offense: but he should have proven, that abstinence from making use of the
Indulgence, or forbearance of the acceptance of it, was necessary, by showing
that acceptance gave offense, or was inductive to 'em. He is accusing the
indulged Mi^^^^ers, and affirming them to be guilty of giving offense, by the
acceptance of the Indulgence; and should have proven his alledgance that there
was something wrong, something inordinately done in this acceptance of this
relaxation. And beside, it is hard enough to condemn all as guilty of active
scandal, who cannot prove that their actions are expedient and necessary; for
every one who does what is really expedient and necessary, has not the faculty
of proving every expedient and necessary action to be expedient and necessary;
if the thing be really expedient and necessary which is done, there is no
active Scandal given by it, though the doer cannot formally prove the
expediency and necessity of what is done for he may possibly be so weak, as not
to understand the importance of the words or term^ of expediency and necessity,
nor to hit upon the proper grounds and midses which prove this expediency and
necessity. Suppose some did now take offense at the eating of Swines-flesh or
blood, though the person who eated blood, could not prove the expediency or
necessity of his eating Swines-flesh or blood, yet the offense would be taken,
and not given; and it were incumbent to the person that took offense, to prove
that the eating of Swines-flesh and blood were unlawful and forbidden; or if
any take offense at worshipping God in Kirks builded in the times of Popery,
for Paul, or Peter, or Cuthbert; and alledg that is is not necessary to worship
God in these Kirks, because men may worship God in the open fields, or in other
houses, which were not builded for any Saint; though every man who worships God
in these Kirks builded in the times of Popery, to the honor of some Saint,
cannot prove the necessity of worshipping in this or that individual Kirk; yet
the offense is not given, but taken; as Mr. Rutherford shows in that dispute of
Scandal, formerly cited Quest. 6. in the 61. and following pages; and shows,
That it is necessary for those who take offense at worshipping in such Kirks, to
prove by Scripture-warrant, that it is necessary to disuse these Kirks. It is
certain, says he, That the necessity of disusing the Creature in a Physical
usage in the worship of God, must have a warrant in the Scripture; and so he
shows, That the offense that some take at Bells, for convening the people to
the worship of God, is a mere passive Scandal.

And I suppose, it cannot be denied, that the protection of lawful Authority,
is more necessary for the conventions of the Lords People for his worship, than
these Houses or Bells.

The Author lays the stress of the Scandal which he alleges was given by
accepting of the Indulgence, upon this ground, That this acceptance as
circumstantial, was not expedient and necessary; and he supposes, that it will
be easily granted, That the acceptance of the Indulgence was not a thing in its
self necessary, so as it could not be refused without manifest sin against the
Lord.

Ans. It is ordinary, I perceive, with this Author in this History, to take for
granted that which he should prove; as for that which he adds, That if there be
not a manifest sin in refusing the Indulgence, then the taking of offense at
the acceptance of it, will prove that there was offense given in the
acceptance; will not be so easily granted as he supposes: For suppose that one
could not make it manifest and evident, that there were sin against the Lord in
demolishing or disusing St. Giles or St. Cuthberts Kirk, or in breaking or
disusing the Bells which had been abused in the time of Popery; it were very
hard to condemn that man, who together with the rest of the Lords people
convened for the worship of God at St. Giles's Kirk, upon the ringing of Bells,
which had been abused in the times of Popery; I say it were hard to condemn him
of the sin of giving Scandal, in his going to these Kirks upon the ringing of
these Bells.

As for the expediency and necessity of making use of the relaxation of the
rigor of the penal statutes, as before explained; or which is all one,
accepting of the peaceable exercise of the Ministry under the protection of
lawful Authority; the indulged Ministers have much to say for the expediency
and necessity of this acceptance, and for their not refusing this relaxation
and protection when offered.

1. Some things are necessary by Divine Ordination, as Magistracy; Whosoever
resists the power, says the Apostle, resists the Ordinance of God; and the
Powers that be, are ordained of God, Romans 13.1, 2. etc. And as Magistracy, so
Ministry is the Ordinance of God, 1. Cor. 12.28. And God has set some in the
Church, first Apostles, etc.

2. Some things are necessary by Divine Precept; as for example, the exercise
of the power of the Magistrate is not only necessary by virtue of Gods
instituting and ordaining Magistracy, but also by the command of God, which
obliges Magistrates to punish vice, to execute wrath upon them who do evil, to
promove, encourage and praise that which is good; to protect their Subjects in
well-doing, and to preserve peace. And so Ministers are under a necessity of
preaching the Gospel by the command of God.

3. Some things are necessary, because God has made them useful and convenient
for man, and has given them to man for his use; they are in their nature
convenient for man, given and designed of God for the good of man; thus meat
and clothing, and houses, peace, and the protection of lawful Authority, are
necessary.

4. Some things are necessary means in order to a necessary end; and these
again are necessary, either simply for attaining the end, or necessary for the
better or more easy and convenient attaining of the end; as a house is
necessary, not simply for hearing of the word, but for the more convenient
hearing of the word, because it shelters the Minister and people from storms,
winds, and scorching heat, etc. Thus the protection of lawful Authority is
necessary for the peaceable hearing of the word without disturbance.

5. Some things are necessary for preventing of evil; the evil either of sin,
or of affliction and calamity.

6. Some things become necessary, or the more necessary to be done, because of
those who urge the forbearance of them out of some erroneous principle, or for
establishing of some error. And thus Mr. Rutherford shows in the forecited
Treatise, That to forbear the cating of Swines-flesh before a Jew, who alleges
that it is a sin, or breach of the Commandment of God to do so; to forbear it
now when we are fully possessed in that liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, were to harden the Jew in his Judaism; and the way to bring us again
under the yoke of the Ceremonial Law.

Now 1. seeing God has ordained Magistracy for protection of his servants and
people, and for protecting them in the exercise of his worship, it was
expedient and necessary to accept of this Protection when offered, and not to
refuse it; for the acceptance of the effect and product of the exercise of that
Authority which is Gods Ordinance, was an acknowledgment and owning the
Ordinance of God; a honoring of those to whom by Divine appointment honor is
due. And this was a contributing to render the Ordinance of God effectual for
that end for which he had instituted and ordained it; and upon the contrary,
the refusing of this relaxation, and of the protection of lawful Authority,
would have been a slighting and despising of the Ordinance of God, and a doing
of that which tended to render the Ordinance of God ineffectual for that end
and use for which God ordained it. Now the relaxation of this restraint which
had been long upon the public exercise of their Ministry, and the protection
of lawful Authority, which Mr. H. accepted of, was the very exercise of that
Authority which is the Ordinance of God.

2. Seeing the Magistrate in loosing that restraint which hindered the peaceable
exercise of the Ministry, did his duty, he did somewhat of that which he was
obliged to do; it was necessary that the Ministers whom they were willing to
loose from the restraint formerly laid on, and whom they were willing to
protect in the exexcise of their Ministry, should in their place and station
further and promove the Magistrate in any good which he was willing to do; as
when a Minister is willing to do his duty in preaching and Catechizing, the
people should be willing to hear and be Catechized; so when a Magistrate is
willing to permit or allow Ministers to preach in his Dominions, and to protect
them in the exercise of their Ministry, it is the duty of Ministers who have the
access to the peaceable exercise of their Ministry under the protection of
lawful Authority, to accept of the peaceable exercise of their Ministry; and to
refuse this offer, were the way to mar and stifle the good which the Magistrate
was willing to do. Now when the Magistrate is willing to do any thing which is
right and his duty, it is a sin to mar, impede, and stifle any good that he is
willing to do.

3. Seeing peace and the protection of lawful Authority, and the peaceable
exercise of the Ministry under the protection of lawful Authority, are great
blessings of God, and God promises and gives them to his people as great
benefits, and his people are obliged to pray for them, Isa. 48.18. Isa. 60.15,
16, 17, 18. Isa. 11.6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Therefore it is necessary to
accept these mercies and benefits when the Lord in his Providence offers and
gives them; and to refuse them when they are offered, were to slight the
mercies of God, and to refuse what we are bound to seek, and to be thankful
for, when we get it.

4. Seeing the fixed, settled, and peaceable exercise of the Ministry, is so
necessary, as appears from the Lords taking care that Ministers might be settled
in Cities and Churches; and from the many conveniences of a settled Ministry,
which are wanting in an unfixed Ministry; for they who may not stay among a
people, cannot so know their state and case, and so cannot apply their Doctrine
suitable to their case; and cannot make full proof of their Ministry among them,
in laying the foundation in all the principles of the doctrine of God; and then
leading the people forward unto greater perfection in knowledge in declaring
the whole Counsel of God; and they have not access to Catechize, and visit,
etc. as those who have the settled and fixed exercise of their Ministry have;
and then peace and quietness in preaching and hearing the Gospel, has many
conveniences; people not only know whither they shall go to hear, but they may
come seasonably without hazard by the way, and without fear of disturbance when
they are come; so that they may more compose themselves for hearing, than they
can who are in a continual apprehension of a hostile Invasion, and often
alarmed with hearing or seeing some noise or appearance of armed soldiers.
These fears and confusions are great Impediments of the sanctification of the
Sabbath.

Now the settled and peaceable exercise of the Ministry, which is so many ways
expedient and necessary, cannot be had but by the Magistrate; and therefore to
have refused to make any use of the Indulgence, had been to refuse the settled
and peaceable exercise of the Ministry.

5. This acceptance was useful for preventing many evils of sin and calamity.
The indulged Ministers could not see how they could without sin refuse to make
any use of the Indulgence; and they conceived their refusal to take the benefit
of the peaceable exercise of their Ministry, would have given occasion of
offense and provocation to the Magistrate, and to the destitute Congregations
who desired their help; the desire of a people who are wandering as sheep
without a Shepherd, had a cry that they could not see how they could slight
without sin. The acceptance prevented the filling of the Kirk with a
Conformist, whom the people would not have heard; and freed those Parishes of
the quarterings, plunderings, imprisonments, which they were formerly obnoxious
unto; it prevented their uncertain wanderings on the Sabbath, their disquieting
and confounding fears, their running and fleeing on the Sabbath, which is such
a calamity, that our Savior directs the Jews to pray that their flight might
not be in the winter, neither on the Sabbath Day, Matthew. 24. and prevented
rendevousing, and fighting, and mingling blood with Sacrifices on the Lords
day. The many disorders and confusions, and sad sufferings, the imprisonments
and finings, and banishments, and the great effusion of the blood of the people
of God, which have followed upon the hostile clashings betwixt Magistrates and
people, may teach us how necessary the peaceable exercise of the Ministry under
lawful Authority is, and how necessary it is to take, and seek, and follow
after peace with all men; especially with the Magistrate

The Indulged Ministers cannot, nor could not see how a refusing to have any
making or meddling with the Magistrate, which these Authors urge, could consist
with the respect due to Authority, or with that command, follow peace with all
men; and if it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all
men.

6. The refusing to make any use of the Indulgence upon the grounds that these
Authors go upon, would make the refusing scandalous, because refusing upon
their grounds, would establish several scandalous errors; as for example, the
Author of the Cup of cold Water, and of the Epistle prefixed to this History of
the Indulgence, alleges, That no use should have been made of the Indulgence,
because no Proposals made by the Magistrates, should be listened to; no
Proposals should be made to them, nothing should be sought or taken from them;
that there should be no making or meddling with them; and further he asserts,
That this course is that which God calls us to; and that this is the way
wherein alone we can expect Gods approbation. And he builds these errors upon
false grounds, which we have before refuted; and the principal ground upon
which he builds these wild conceits, is, because the Magistrate has assumed an
unlawful Supremacy, which establishes this error in the minds of those that
believe him, That when the Magistrate assumes any such Supremacy, it makes void
that Authority which he has from God.

The Author of the History goes upon the same ground, and alleges no liberty,
though free of all entanglements and grounds of scrupling, should be made use
of, seeing Adversaries are not really repenting; and that any such permission
could not be supposed to flow from right principles and right designs, which
fixes that error in the minds of those who will believe him, That except the
Magistrate be really penitent, and act from right principles and designs, no
use can be made of any permission to preach the Gospel granted by him. These
are errors scandalous and of dangerous consequence; he also goes upon this
ground, That the indulgence should be refused, because the Magistrate appoints
or permits to preach in a certain place. Now we saw from the first Book of
Discipline, that the Magistrate may in some cases appoint Ministers to preach
in some places; and in the second Book of Discipline, That the Magistrate may
in some cases place Ministers; and if a Magistrate might in no case appoint a
Minister to preach in a certain place, but only might appoint him to preach;
then a Minister, if he were ill-disposed, might elude the design of a godly
Magistrate; for he might preach where there were no need of his preaching, and
not there where the Magistrate finds greatest need; or he might preach where
there were few or none to hear him; and so render the appointment and the
design of the Magistrate, who intended the edification of his Subjects, of no
effect. His concluding, that no use could be made of the Indulgence, because
the Magistrates wrote Instructions for the indulged Ministers, does establish
that error, That the Magistrate by writing Instructions for Ministers, may bind
up the Ministers Conscience that he cannot preach any where, where the
Magistrate permits him to preach, and writes Instructions for him. To have
refused to make any use of the Indulgence upon these grounds, had been to give
a great number of dangerous offenses, and to fix these errors which are of
dangerous consequence. But the acceptance of the Relaxation, and of the
Protection of lawful Authority, did not give offense, but was for edification.

If he object, as he does elsewhere, That there was no absolute necessity of
their peaceable preaching, for they might have preached with hazard as others
did in the mountains; and therefore there was no absolute necessity of their
acceptance of the Indulgence; and therefore in accepting it, they gave scandal.

I answer: That it will not follow, that the acceptance did give scandal,
because there was no absolute necessity of acceptance; for there is no absolute
necessity of making use of the Churches builded in the times of Popery to such
or such Saints; nor is there an absolute necessity of making use of Bells to
convene the people, because the people may meet elsewhere than in these
Churches; and they may be convened, though not so conveniently without Bells.
And yet Mr. Rutherford shows, That there is no offense given ^y making use of
these Churches and Bells, because they have a real usefulness, and are in a
sort, though not simply, necessary.

Again I retort: Preaching in the Mountains i^ not absolutely and simply
necessary; for if that were true, all people, though all the Reformed Churches,
behoved to forsake the Kirks, and go to the fields; and there ought to be no
preaching in any place of the World, but in fields and Mountains. But I suppose
he would have been far from saying that the preaching in the Mountains did give
offense to those who took offense at it; so that a less necessity than that
which is simple and absolute, is sufficient to prevent an active scandal.

Again, though there be not an absolute necessity of peaceable preaching,
because the Gospel has been and may be preached where the Magistrate is Pagan
and does not permit it; yet the peaceable exercise of the Ministry is very
desirable, and as we heard before, the fixed peaceable exercise of the
Ministry is very necessary, in order to many good uses, and to prevent many
ills; and therefore when the Lord inclines the heart of Rulers to grant it, it
is necessary not to neglect it.

The disputes of our Predecessors against the English Popish Ceremonies, does
no way quadrate with his disputes against the acceptance of the peaceable
exercise of the Ministry under the protection of lawful Authority; for our
Predecessors proved, That these Ceremonies were the mere Inventions and Devices
of men, will worship, contrary to the second Commandment, and that they were
nocent and hurtful; but he has not proven by his foregoing Arguments, That the
aforesaid acceptance was sinful; he says indeed, That he has sufficiently done
it, but we have seen the insufficiency of his proofs.

Again, they who pleaded for these Ceremomonies, granted that they were
indifferent, and the Nonconformists argued against them upon this supposition;
but the peaceable exercise of the Ministry, and the protection of lawful
Authority, are not the Inventions of men, but Ordinances of God, and not
indifferent; but many ways expedient and necessary.

He says also, That there was a manifest appearance of evil in this acceptance;
but he does not prove it. That place 1 These. 5.17. is rendered by some thus,
Abstain from all kind of evil. If it be rendered appearance, the ill appearance
must be in the object, and not in the distempered eye and conceit. Some folk
apprehend appearances of evil in things which have no appearance of evil in
themselves, but all the appearance is in their own fancy and conceit. Mr.
Durham in his Treatise of Scandal, page 6, 7. gives, for example, of this
appearance of evil, dangerous and doubtful expressions of Doctrine that have
been or use to be abused, and practices which are not becoming that honesty and
good report which a Christian ought to study.

The Author has not made it manifest, That this acceptance was any kind of
evil, or such an appearance of evil. It Is superfluous to run through the rest
of this head, because he does not prove that the acceptance gave offense to any
persons, only he reckons up several persons to whom he alleges it gave
offense; and if accusations make guilty, the Author has made the indulged
Ministers very guilty; but it is but a guilt of his making. I shall only clear,
That the eating of not eating of the meats the Apostle speaks of in the place
cited by the Author, was every way indifferent at that time, and so cannot be a
parallel of the acceptance of the peaceable exercise of the Ministry, and the
Protection of lawful Authority, which are not things merely indifferent. The
indifferency of eating or not eating of such or such meats at that time, is
excellently cleared by Mr. Rutherford in his forecited Treatise of Scandal;
because the Book is not common, I shall transcribe one Objection and Answer, in
which as in many other parts of that Treatise, there are several things
apposite to the present debate of Scandal. Page 67. And before I come to the
second Conclusion, an House for the worship of God, are among the things which
are necessary, by way of disjunction. in specie, not in individuo; that is, a
house is necessary in its Physical use, to fence off our bodies the injuries of
Sun, Air, and heat; but not this house; for another house may serve the turn as
conveniently.

But some object, Then this or that house dedicated superstitiously to the
religious Honor of a Saint, ought to be removed out of the worship of God. 1.
Because by your own Confession, this individual house so abused, is not
necessary. God may well be worshipped without this house, though it had never
been in rerum natura. 2. From the worshipping of God in so superstitious a
place, many truly godly are so scandalized, that for worshipping God in such
superstitious and idolatrous places, they have separated from your Church,
conceiving that in so doing, you heal the wounds of the Beast. It Is true, it
may be their weakness; yea, but be it so, that it were their wickedness, that
they are scandalized; yet by your Doctrine in things not necessary, you are not
to do any thing by which either the weak or the wicked may be scandalized, as
is clear in the eating of Meats, Romans 14.

Ans. This Argument may (1.) be retorted against those who hold with us in the
same Doctrine of Scandal; for without eating of Swines-flesh my life may be
preserved; and a malicious Jew may be, and is necessarily highly scandalized
that I, who possibly am a Jew converted to the Christian Faith, do eat
Swines-flesh before him; for he conceives me to be an Apostate from Moses's
Law; therefore I should abstain from eating Swines-flesh before a Jew, who out
of malice is scandalized by my doing a thing not necessary hic and nunc; but
the Conclusion is absurd; nor do I think, That many truly godly of the
strictest Separation, do stumble at our Churches out of wickedness; many truly
godly and sincere refuse to come to our Churches; whereas many scandalous,
well-lustered Hypocrites, who know nothing of the power of Godliness, but are
sitten down in the Scorners chair, are admitted to the Lords Supper; and as the
former cannot be excused, so I pray God that the latter draw not down the wrath
of God upon both Kingdoms. (2.) Things not necessary, which actively produce
Scandal, must not only be indifferent Physically in their natural use, as this
or that House, but they must be indifferent both Physically and Morally; for
the meats spoken of, Romans 14. at that time were both ways indifferent. 1. They
were not necessary, but indifferent Physically in an ordinary Providence both
then and now; for ordinarily my life may be preserved, and suffer little loss
by not eating Swines-flesh, or such meats; in case of extreme necessity of
starving, if any could have no other meat, they might eat then, as the Case
was, Romans 14. because mercy is better than Sacrifice at all times. 2. These
things, Romans 14. were indifferent Theologically or Morally in their own nature,
(1.) Ver. 3. Let not him that eats, d^spi^ him that eats; not and let not
him that ea^^ not, despise him that eats; for God has receiv^d him. (2.)
Because ver. 17. the Kingdom of God (...) not meat and drink. Surely in M^ses's
time, to abstain from such meats, and eat such as the Lamb of the Passover, the
Manna, to drink of the water of the Rock, was Worship, and i^ some part of the
Kingdom of Heaven; but (...) not so now, says Paul. 3. Paul clearly make^^
them morally indifferent, 1 Cor. 8.8. For m^ commends us not to God: for
neither if we ea^ are we better (morally before God) neith^^ if we eat not are
we (morally) the worse. Now this Temple or House Physically, is indifferen^ and
not necessary for the Worship of God: for men may be defended from the injuries
of Sun and Air, though this House had never been in rerum natura: But this
Temple or House, though dedicated to a Saint, is not morally indifferent, but
morally necessary; so as if you remove it from the Worship, because abused to
Idolatry, and give it no use in the defending of our Bodies from the injuries
of the Wind, Rain, and Sun, you Judaize, and do actively scandalize the Jews,
and harden them in their Apostasy; and so this House, though abused to
Idolatry, is not indifferent morally, as the meats, Romans 14. But the using of
it is necessary, and an asserting of our Christian liberty, as to eat blood and
things strangled even before a Jew. So to use all houses for a Physical end to
defend our bodies from Heat and Cold, is a part of the liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free; but Ceremonies have no natural nor Physical use; the
crossing of the Air with the Thumb, the keeping of a day religiously without
warrant of the word, are not taught in the School of Nature, and so are
naturally not necessary, as this or that House though abused to Superstition
is; and the Adversaries that say they are morally indifferent, as good and as
spiritual Ceremonies in kind and nature, may be devised in their place. But in
all this dispute of Scandal, we give, but we never grant that the Ceremonies
are indifferent; we dispute here, That they are scandalous, and so unlawful in
their use, upon the Principles of Formalists; whereas we judge them in their
Nature, because they have not God, but the will of men to be their Father and
Author to be unlawful and repugnant to Scripture, because not warranted by
either command, practice, or promise in Scripture.

So far Mr. Rutherford: from which we may see, that the using of a House,
though it has been idolatrously abused, for this end to defend our bodies from
heat and cold, is a part of the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. Now
any who will not shut their eyes, may see that the seeking and taking the
Protection of lawful Authority, is more necessary than the making use of this
or that individual House. We cannot have the benefit of public houses for
worship, without the Magistrate.

But secondly, The Protection of the Magistrate defends from injuries that are
much more injurious and hurtful, than the injuries of Wind and Rain, and
scorching by the Sun; a house can but defend from showers of Rain, Hail,
scorching-Heat, etc. but the Protection of lawful Authority defends from
showers of Bullets, and the scorching-Heat of Persecution.

Again, men might be sheltred by another house, though St. Cuthberts, or St.
Giles's Kirk, were cast down; but the peaceable exercise of the preaching and
hearing of the word in public, cannot be had without the Protection of Civil
Authority.

Now if the Scandal taken at taking the shelter of St. Cuthberts Kirk in
hearing the word, should not make folk disuse that Kirk, nor deprive themselveS
of the use of it; much less should the taking offense at the taking of the
Protection of lawful Authority for the public peaceable exercise of the
Ministry, make Ministers and people deprive themselves of the Protection of
Magistrates, whom the Lord calls the Shields of the earth; seeing the
Magistrates permitting and allowing Ministers to preach, and protecting them in
preaching, is the very exercise of that Authority which they have from God for
good.

And further, from Mr. Rutherfords words we may see, That the eating or not
eating, in the places cited by the Author, does no way quadrate with the case
of acceptance or no acceptance; for as Mr. Rutherford shows, That at that time
the eating or not eating, was both Physically and Morally indifferent.

The Author has not proven the acceptance or no acceptance to be indifferent;
and any who will take up this Club and Quarrel, will find it a hard task to
prove the acceptance or no acceptance Physically and Morally indifferent; and
so the case, Romans 14. 1 Cor. 8. do no way quadrate with this. The eating of
flesh forbidden in the Ceremonial Law, was no ways necessary at that time, when
the Apostle Paul wrote his Epistles to the Romans; and his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, it was neither Physically nor Morally necessary at that time, to
eat those fleshes before a weak Jew; for they who knew their Christian liberty,
might eat those fleshes in private, and when such weak Brethren were not
present. But the acceptance of the relaxation of the Civil restraint formerly
laid on by the Magistrate, the acceptance of the Protection of lawful
Authority, was several ways necessary, as we saw before. The peaceable, fixed,
settled preaching and hearing of the Gospel, is a very desirable end; and the
acceptance of the Protection of Civil Authority is necessary in order to this
end; for as the Reverend Author of the late Apology, printed Anno 1677.
acknowledges the peaceable exercise of the Ministry, is from the Magistrate;
page 111. where he grants, That it is within the compass of the Magistrates
power to give liberty to Ministers and people for serving and worshipping of
God in his Son Jesus Christ. This, says he, we do not deny, but cheerfully
grant, That although the exercise of Church Power, that is properly such, be
independent on the Magistrate, yet the peaceable exercise of it is truly from
him.

Page 113. Sect. 1. He says, That the accepters of the Indulgence did hereby
give offense to such of their Brethren as had the offer, but were no^ cleared,
nor convinced of the lawfulness of the embracing of such a favor at such a
time. Now how proves he this, That they gave offense? For, says he, by their
example these were encouraged and moved to do that which they judged sinful and
unlawful for them to do. I wonder how a reasonable man, who had read any thing
concerning the nature of Scandal, could give such a reason; for according to
this reason, whosoever does that which another judges unlawful for him to do,
he by his doing gives offense; this is a most false and absurd Proposition. Our
Savior did several things which the Jews judged sinful and unlawful for them
to do; but it were blasphemous to infer that therefore our Savior in doing
these things, gave offense to the Jews. This Doctrine of the Author, teaches
people that will believe him, to judge, that whatsoever they judge unlawful for
them to do, that that is in it self sinful and unlawful; for whatsoever gives
offense, is sinful; for every thing that gives offense, is some way or other
inordinate; and this makes the judgment, it may be, but of one man who judges
something sinful and unlawful for him to do, to bind up others that they cannot
do that which he thinks sinful; for if they should do it according to this
Author, they should give offense and so sin; this would make the Judgment of
one erring man, who thinks that sinful which is not, so to be a Law to others,
which were an intolerable yoke of bondage.

The Reverend Brethren who had not clearness to make use of the Indulgence,
were far from this erroneous conceit to think, That because they had not
clearness to accept of the Indulgence, that therefore they who accepted of it,
did sin and give offense.

The Scriptures which he cites, as we did show before out of Mr. Rutherfords
Dispute of Scandal, are impertinently cited; because the eating or not eating
of these meats at that time, was every way indifferent, Physically and Morally
indifferent, and no way necessary; but the acceptance was in several respects
necessary, as was showed before; especially because they could not have the
peaceable exercise of their Ministry without the Magistrate; but the eating of
these meats the Apostle speaks of, might be forborne without any prejudice to
him who was persuaded of his Christian liberty; he might forbear it without any
prejudice or hurt to his body; for he might get other meat to eat, when these
weak Brethren who took offense at eating, were present: If there had been no
other meat, and he would have been in hazard of his life if he did not eat; and
if he could not have gotten shifted out of the presence of these weak Brethren,
then the case would have been altered, and not eating in that case had been a
breach of the sixth Commandment. Thou shall not kill. In such a necessity it
was lawful for David to eat the Shewbread, and so his eating would have been
necessary, and the offense would have been taken by the weak Brethren, but not
given by the eater; but if he found these meats useful for his body, and could
get the presence of the weak shifted, he might eat them in private, as Mr.
Rutherford shows in the foresaid Dispute.

Again, he might forbear eating without any prejudice to his soul; because, as
Mr. Rutherford shows, at that time the eating was morally indifferent; there
was no sin at that time in forbearing to eat those meats before a weak Brother.
But now when we are fully possessed of our Christian liberty, it were a sin to
forbear eating such meats before a Jew, because of his taking of offense at
eating; for that were an hardening of him in his Judaism.

Page 113. Sect. 2. he says, They gave offense to others who had not this
Indulgence in their offer, yet judged the accepting thereof unlawful upon the
ground last mentioned.

Ans. What ground means he? if he means that ground which he lays down in the
last Section near the beginning, because they judged it sinful and unlawful for
themselves to have done it: We have showed the groundlesness and falsehood, and
dangerous consequence of this ground; or if he mean, That the acceptance was as
indifferent, and every way as unnecessary as the eating in the case that the
Apostles words late to, he is much mistaken, as appears from what is said
before. He says in the end of this second Section, That they should have
refused the Indulgence, seeing there wanted not who told them of the evil they
conceived to lie therein.

But 1. as I showed before, this reason is not relevant; for it makes the
judgment of one man to be an obliging Rule to another.

2. The Indulged Ministers did see and acknowledge the evils which were in the
complex Acts of the Magistrate, which related to the Indulgence.

3. The Reverend Brethren who had not clearness to make use of the Indulgence,
did not tell the indulged Ministers, That there was evil in accepting of the
relaxation of the restraint; or that there was evil in acceping of the peaceabl
exercise of their Ministry, or of the Protection of lawful Authority in the
exercise of their Ministry; so that these Reverend Brethren did not say, That
there was evil in what the Indulged accepted, for these were the things which
the indulged Ministers accepted, as we cleared from Mr. H's speech before the
Council; but on the contrary, they declare, That there is good in this, as
appears from Mr. Burnets Paper, set down in this History, page 46. Sect. 5. As
for the permission and allowance I have to preach when confined, this
permission seems very far, when I look on it abstractly without relation to
the rest of the particular Circumstances of the Act; for this would look like
the opening of the door in part which the Magistrate himself had shut; and
afterward he says, For permission to preach in any vacant Church within the
Kingdom, is so very great a favor, as for which I would desire to bless God,
and thank his Majesty most heartily. And in his Letter to my L. Chancellor,
page 48. he shows himself clear for Ministers going not only to their former
Charges, but to other Congregations as they shall have opportunity of a cordial
Invitation from the people.

And in the other Paper drawn up by the ten Ministers, set down page 48, 49,
50, 51. of this History, in the 51. page their third desire to the Council is,
That your L. L. would be pleased to deal with his Majesty to take off the legal
restraints on our Ministry and Persons, that we may peaceably give our selves
to the work of the Ministry for the edification of the body of Christ. And we
heard from page 111. of the late Apology, That the peaceable exercise of the
Ministry is from the Magistrate; so that these Reverend Ministers were so far
from accounting that evil, which the indulged Ministers accepted, that they
accounted it desirable, and did desire it; and by this it may appear how far
these Reverend Ministers were from the Sentiments of this Author of the
History, and the Author of the Cup of cold Water, and of the Letter prefixed to
the History of the Indulgence.

The difference betwixt those Reverend Brethren who did not accept, and these
who did accept, was not in their Principles anent the Government of the Church;
nor did they differ anent the ills which are in the complex Acts of the
Indulgence, which both by word and writings drawn up by the consent of Indulged
and not Indulged Ministers, is manifest; but the difference was in this, That
the indulged Ministers conceived that it was their duty to take what was good
in the Indulgence, and refuse what was evil.

The Reverend Brethren who had no clearness to aceept, conceived that in taking
the good, they would be some way involved in an interpretative approbation of
the evil; and this difference of apprehension, as it was no ground of division,
so it made no division betwixt the indulged Ministers and their Brethren who
were not indulged; only about the time of the second Indulgence, one or two at
most of Ministers that were ordained before the Revolution, began to drop first
more privately, and then more publicly, some seeds of Schism among the people
who before were profiting under the Ministry of the indulged Ministers; and
then some young men, whose Judgments had not been formed at Colleges of
Divinity under Orthodox Doctors of Divinity (which is an unspeakable loss to
many well inclined youths) and who were not studied ^n Divinity, were not
acquainted with the writings of Noncofnormists against Schism, through a
rashness very incident to young men who want experience, did further distemper
the poor people; and perceiving that some people were very fond upon those
Preachers who spoke most against the Indulgence, and cried them most up; this
was a great snare to these youths, and a great grief to the grave judicious
Ministers, who were not indulged.

It was not the Councils design, as some allege, but this stickling in
preaching things which tended to division, which divided the people. It is not
designs of Magistrates to divide which does really divide; nay any that have
sense, if they perceive that Magistrates have a mind to divide them, they will
so much the more study unity; but if the Contrivers of the Indulgence had a
design of dividing, it was those who vented divisive Doctrines in public and
private who did effectuate that design, which would never have been effectual
without this. I shall subjoyn the words of the reverend Author of the Apology,
published An. 1677. who is commended by the Author of this History. I wish the
Author of the History had learned of him to seek for peace, and to render
designs of division ineffectual; the Author of the History widens the wound
which the Author of the Apology endeavored to heal, as appears by what he
writes, page 128, and 129. of that Apology. I shall transcribe his words,
because they confirm what has been said, That there is no difference in the
professed Principles about the Government of the Church, or about the ills
which are in the complex of the Indulgence, betwixt the Indulged and not
Indulged Ministers: his words page 128. are these. For whatever difference
there has been, or yet is amongst us in our practice, in relation to the
Indulgence; we are all agreed in the preceding exceptions against it; and if
there had been access for presenting the same to our Rulers, our Unanimity and
Concord in these, had been more discovered and made known to the World than it
is; there is no change with us about our known and professed Judgment about the
Government of the Church in its true distinction from, and in dependence on the
Magistrate, as is afterward expressed; whatever was our persuasion of this,
represented to the World in our public Confession of Faith, we yet through the
Grace of God, resolve to cleave to, having never seen or heard of any thing in
all the times that have gone over our heads, to cause us to alter our
apprehensions of this matter in the least. Some (who take hold of all occasions
to reproach us) are pleased to represent some, their acceptance of this
Indulgence as contradictory to, and inconsistent with our former professed
Principles anent Church Government; yet any who consider what was shortly
hinted (...) to the Council at the receiving of this Indulgence, and what was
more largely declared by them to the Congregations at their first entry, will
be sufficiently ^onvinced of our constant adherence to our former Principles,
which by his acceptance is not at all chang^d. It is expected from the Lovers
of our righteous ^ause, that nothing shall be done by them toward ^he
furtherance of the evil intents of this Indulgence, but rather an endeavor to
contract and ineffectuate them, that our opposites may have no benefit
therefrom, to the prejudice of the Ministers of Christ, for which we contend.

Thus far that Reverend Author of the Apology; where we see that the Indulged
and Non-indulged are still united in Judgment about the Government of the
Church, and in disapproving the ills which are in the complex Acts of the
Indulgence; and that this Author is not pleased with those who are pleased to
represent this acceptance as contradictory to, and inconsistent with our former
professed Principles; and acknowledges that what these indulged Ministers spoke
before the Council, and at their entry to these Congregations, is sufficient to
convince their adherence to their former Principles. And he shows, that the
difference is only in practice; and this difference would have been less, if
some few who were against ill making use of the indulgence, had not obstructed
a written Testimony against the ills in the complex of the Indulgence; for if
that had been agreed on, more would have had clearness to have made use of the
Indulgence; and then this difference of practice would have been less, if the
case of others had been the same with the case of these who accepted; but this
made a notable disparity in the case, that several who refused to make use of
the Indulgence, refused upon this account, because they were confined and
permitted to preach in Parishes which were already provided with Ministers; so
that they thought their preaching there was superfluous, and they might do more
good elsewhere.

As to the Authors Sect. 3. we have showed before, That this acceptance was no
Homologation of any sinful Supremacy; and they who look on it so, the fault is
in their own eye; the impertinency of the Scripture cited, we cleared before,
out of Mr. Rutherfords dispute of Scandal.

As for his 4th. page 114. we showed before, That the Indulged Ministers did
not contrary to their engagements leave their Brethren. The Ministers who went
to Holland would think they were injured, if any should allege, That they had
left their Brethren, because they took the benefits of the peaceable exercise
of their Ministry under the protection of the Magistrates in Holland.

As for his 5th. it is false, That the hands of those who were not indulged,
were weakened, the number of the bearers of burdens waxing smaller; for the
indulged did still continue to be bearers of burdens; and the favor showed to
them, encouraged other Ministers to adventure to preach more and more publicly
than they had done before; and there was this further advantage, That many
people heard the indulged Ministers, who would not have ventured to ^ear other
Ministers preach; so that the Indulgence was to the furtherance of the Gospel.
The ^ndulged Ministers did not step off, but stepped ^o their work in the
Congregations to which they ^ent; and it was no preposterous tenderness to
forbear preaching in those places which were provided with Preachers, where
there was so many places where no Presbyterian Ministers were settled.

To his 6th. I have answered before, That the practice of the Indulged
Ministers, did not confirm the Prelates, etc. in any defection.

To his 7th. They gave no offense to Rulers, but edified them; they did and
said what tended to their edification; if they had (as the Authors would)
refused to make or meddle with them at all, they would have offended by
provoking them to wrath, in refusing what was good; but they took what was
good, and by word and deed did show, That they disapproved of what was ill in
the complex of the Indulgence.

As for the 8th. If the practice of the indulged Ministers be rightly
represented to posterity, it will edify and not stumble. His 8th is founded
upon that false foundation, that the indulged Ministers have complied with
grievous usurpations.

And his 9th. upon that false ground, That the indulged Ministers have
submitted to the exercise of Erastianism. It Is they who spread such false
aspersions of honest men, who give offense to Posterity, and the reformed
Churches abroad Let a true Narration of the practice of the indulged Ministers
be given to the Reformed Churches abroad, and the indulged Ministers doubt not
of the approbation of those Churches and they doubt as little, that all the
reformed Churches, if they heard the strange Tenets and divisive practices of
their Authors, they would condemn them as erroneous of dangerous consequence,
and some of them as striking at the very foundation of all order Civil and
Ecclesiastical.

It Is sad, That offenses, real offenses, do so abound, and that so many stumble
at these offenses, and that many make offenses where there is none, and stumble
where there is no Stumbling Block; and some stumble at the Lords Ordinances,
and some stumble at others, because they hear the word; and this Author
furthered that stumbling by a Letter, in which he asserted, That there was sin
wrapped up in hearing the indulged Ministers; and thus poor people are taught
to stumble at the means of others Edification.

Having answered his Arguments contained in his History, I shall take some
notice of some things which he has in his Letters, that nothing which has any
shadow of reason in this Authors writings, may seem to be neglected. In one of
these Letters he says, Who, I pray, amongst these Indulged men, as I say, as
such (for otherways I honor such as are known to me, and shall entertain
charitable thoughs of others) can be called the Ambassadors of Christ, who
depend as to the actual exercise of their ministerial Function, ^n such
immediately who never were entrusted, ^ven as to kind, with Church Power.

Ans. It Is hard enough to reconcile this profession of Honor and Charity
toward the indulged Ministers with some of his grievous reproaches which he
has cast upon them, which have a direct and manifest tendency to render them
base and contemptible, and to cast them out of the hearts and affections of all
who hear and believe them.

His Question which he brings in with such a Phrase, Who, I pray, is a very
idle Question. I suppose he is the first man, into whose head this idle
imagination, That the indulged, as indulged, are the Ambassadors of Christ, did
enter; did he ever hear, That any indulged, or any for them, thought or said,
That they were Ambassadors for Christ, as indulged? they were Ambassadors
before they were indulged, and would be Ambassadors although the Indulgence
were retracted. The Magistrates Indulgence supposed them Ambassadors, and did
not constitute them Ambassadors; but it may be he intends to argue thus: The
indulged, as indulged, are not the Ambassadors of Christ, and therefore they
are not the Ambassadors of Christ; this is a pitiful quibble! like that, An
Ethiopian as he is black, is not a man; and therefore the black Ethiopian is
not a man; a Physician as he has the Magistrates Patent to practice Physic,
is not a Physician; and therefore the Physician who has the Magistrates
Patent, is not a Physician. A Minister as he is banished, is not an Ambassador
for Christ; and therefore a banished Minister is not an Ambassador for Christ.
The antecedents are true, because blackness does not c^nstitute the Ethiopian a
man, nor has any essential or necessary connection with his humanity ^or does
the Magistrates Patent institute a Physician, nor does banishment constitute a
Minister; but the consequences are naught; for the Propositions to be supplied,
are manifestly false; as for example, he who is not a man as he is black, is
not a man, etc. And beside, the Syllogism is made up of Negatives, and so is no
Syllogism at all. I shall subjoyn the words of a Minister not indulged, who in
a Letter directed to this Historian, has solidly refuted his Letters; and in
answer to this passage of his Letters, says, We grant that indulged Ministers
as indulged, are not Ministers, being taken reduplicatively by a specific
reduplication; and so neither banished nor imprisoned Ministers, are Ministers,
as banished or imprisoned; for none will say, That the Indulgence is the
formality under which they are Ministers, or the form constituent of their
Ministry: We think you wrong them, and your Readers, who would obtrude such an
assertion. As banished is not the constituent form of your Ministry, neither is
the Indulgence, adjectum repugnans, any more than banishment or imprisonment
is; that because he is indulged therefore hoc ipso he is no Minister; neither
is your assertion which ye bring as a proof of this, any more true or
warrantable, viz. That they have all their power of preaching derived from the
Magistrate; for it is only a Civil Allowance, freeing the exercise of their
Ministry in the places to which they are restricted from molestation or
restraint. This Civil allowance takes away the execution of penal Laws which
were against them -- this they have from the Magistrates here, as you and some
others have from the Magistrate where you are these years bygon for the
exercise of your Ministry there; but the Ministry it self and its exercise they
have from Jesus Christ: As when the Civil Magistrate convocates a Synod, and
gives a civil Tollerance and Protection to them in going, coming and sitting,
which they could not have without his Command or Warrant, though they have the
intrinsic power of meeting, sitting and voting from Christ, and not from him;
howbeit the outward quiet and security of their sitting (so as none may molest
them) is from him; even so Ministers as they are indulged, have the outward
civil liberty of a quiet and secure preaching of the Gospel, so that no
inferior Courts, Officers, or Soldiers, may molest them for their preaching.
-- The simplex indulged Ministers implies two things, 1. As Ministers, they had
before that Indulgence, and still have, a power from Christ to preach and
administrate the Sacraments. 2. As Indulged, they have the quiet and safe
exercise of that power, etc.

The Historian in another of his Letters misrepresents the indulged, as a
fainting Party, who have departed from their suffering Brethren; and that they
strengthen the hands of the Adversary, and are for the peoples sinful
compliance with this evil.

Ans. I suppose I have touched upon some of these things before. I shall only
say, These Ministers have labored, and have not fainted; they have not shunned
to declare the whole Counsel of God, nor have they withholden what was
convenient for the people; they have given the people faithful warning to
beware of those evils of the time, which the people were in hazard; and though
they think it not their duty to turn the preaching of the Gospel of peace into
bitter wrathful invectives against any, especially absent persons (which is a
smooth preaching to those who are present, who use not to be humbled, but
rather puffed up by such invectives against others); and though they dare not
bring railing Accusations against, nor revile nor curse those who are in lawful
Authority; nor despise dignities, nor say any thing which tends to put an evil
Spirit betwixt Magistrates and people; yet they have been far from flattering
any Rulers or people in their sins, but have endeavored to bring persons of
all ranks to Repentance, as they have had access and occasion from the word to
discover the evil and danger of sins of all sorts; and they pray for Repentance
to persons of all ranks; as they think it not their duty to design to provoke
any person to wrath, so they study not to please any in their sin; but think
themselves obliged to endeavor to please all unto edification, and to commend
themselves, though not to the humors, yet to the Consciences of all in the
sight of God. They were not, as was showed before, by Covenant bound to be
always actually under the same sufferings, that all who entered in Covenant,
did fall under; the Lord distributes sufferings among his Servants and People
as he sees meet. Christ is at liberty when John Baptist was in Prison. It had
been a very reasonless reasoning, Christ is not to be heard because he is not
in prison as John is: the rest of the Apostles are not to be heard, because
they are free when James and Peter are in Prison; the Angel and Church of
Philadelphia are to be disowned, because they are not under the trial that
other Churches are under.

Again, there are diverse kinds of suffering; the indulged Ministers have had
their share of reproaches, which uses to go further than the skin; Reproach,
says David, has broken my heart; reviling Speeches are Persecutions, Matthew.
5.11. Jer. 18.18. they incite one another to devise devices against Jeremiah,
and to smite him with the Tongue.

I remember not of any thing in the Letters which I have missed, except his
Predictions: for the Historian is a sort of a Prophet; he has a faculty of
foretelling things to come. I know not how he has fallen upon it, or whether
it be be ill come, or not; he very confidently affirmed in the year 1677. That
if Mr. John Welsh had hearkened to the desire of drawing near to the shelter of
an house for meeting with the people but for one Sabbath (though that might
have contributed for taking off all Sentences against himself and others, and
to an Universal Liberty for all outed Ministers to preach without Molestation)
that then he would have forefaulted all the protection and countenance he had
singularly enjoyed before that time. This was far said. No sober judicious
Person will think that it could be unlawful in such Circumstances at least, to
preach at a house; but though there had been somewhat wrong in it, how comes he
to know, that for that failing Mr. Welsh would have lost the Protection and
Countenance which he had formerly enjoyed? it was presumptuous boldness for him
to take upon him to determine so peremptorily concerning the forefaulting of
the Protection and Countenance of God, who has mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and does for his names sake, even when his peoples sins testify against
them, and remembers his Covenant and Mercy for his People.

Another of his Predictions is, That all indifferent Spectators will judge as
he says, and that Posterity will see and say as he says, whether the indulged
men will or not. But I think they are over-credulous who will believe that he
had the foreknowledge what way the Judgments of men present, and of the
Generations to come, would incline and determine.

There is yet a third Prediction of another Author, which is, That the
Indulgence should become as odious and detestable to all the godly in the Land,
as ever Prelacy was. To this Prophecy the Author of the History and Letters,
makes an Addition, while he says in one of his Letters, That what that person
was persuaded of, will quickly appear; the first had only said it would be; but
he says it will quickly appear, augur augurem; but these Prophets were so
fearfully mistaken in seeing things that were, that there is very good reason
to doubt of their foresight of things to come; yet there is more Art in this
inartificial Argument founded upon the Authority of a man who has but
confidence to say boldly what he says concerning things to come, than in many
artificial Arguments; and these Predictions will go further with weak credulous
people, than very solid reasons; for people of that sort especially, if they be
curious, think more of a man who will take upon him to tell but some things
that will be, though the event be of small consequence; than they will think of
a solid, judicious man, who can tell them from the word of God what they should
do, that they may glorify and enjoy God; and therefore there is such flocking
of people to Fortune Tellers, Speamen, Dummeos, Wizzards and Southsayers. Now
if curious people have such a conceit of those who foretell, though they be
suspected to have their Knowledge from the Devil, they will think much more of
men who are in reputation for Religion; if they take on them to foretell things
to come, they will readily be very desirous that such Predictions may not fail.
I know one who pressed some of his acquaintaince to get weapons for fighting in
such a year upon this ground, That if there were not Blood that year, then such
a person who had foretold that there would be Blood, would prove a false
Prophet.

These Predictions are very taking, when they suit with peoples Inclinations,
and when the fulfilling of these Predictions contribute to their honor; and
when they who are not active in fulfilling them, are casten as ungodly and
despicable; and therefore these Predictions of Ministers which did foretell,
That the Indulgence would become despicable, could not but be very taking with
people who were inclined to despise it; and this could not but be very
effectual to press them to despise it, that if they did it not, then they would
be known to be none of the godly; and this would press others to despise it,
that they might not be ranked among the ungodly.

I have observed, that several have an Art of bringing about several things by
foretelling them; some make people offend at these things which they would
never have offended at, by foretelling that the people will be offended. So
Satan has brought about many mischiefs by foretelling them and the Actors of
them; this was a very effectual trick to render the Indulgence despicable, to
foretell that it would become odious and detestable to all the godly; for they
who believe these Predictions, would reason them, If we do not detest and hate
the Indulgence, we cannot list our selves among the godly; and then if the
Indulged Ministers did not relinquish the Indulgence and hate it, that they
could not be reckoned among the godly; and if they did not make haste to hate
it and detest it very shortly, that then they could not be accounted godly,
because this Prediction was to be quickly accomplished. It was no great matter
to foretell that the Indulgence and indulged Ministers would become odious,
when there was so many Letters and Copies of printed Books full of odious
reproaches cast at the Indulgence and Indulged Ministers, when such causes were
working, and such Fireballs cast, and the people were so prepared to take
fire; it was an easy thing without any Spirit of Prophecy, to foretell a Fire
when such trains were laid and kindled.

Again, when a poor Church is going to ruin, the ordinary Forerunner of that
ruin, is the contempt of the Ministers, 2 Chronicles. last. They mocked the
Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the
wrath of the Lord rose against his people, till there was no remedy. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou who killest the Prophets! read Matthew. 23. ver. 34.
to the end; so that if these two Ministers had spoken a little more
indefinitely, they might have passed for pretty good Guessors, if they had said
only, that the Indulgence would be detestable to the godly; but taking on them
to foretell that it would be detestable to all the godly, and that quickly, has
quite broken their credit as Prophets; for there are many of the godly who have
always been far from detesting the Indulgence; and they are much further from
detesting it now, than before. And the Authors of these Predictions, have by
these Predictions, and some other Practices of that nature, much wronged their
own Reputation.

This is ordinary when a Church is going to ruin, the Despisers of the Lords
Servants go before; this contempt uses to begin at some, but it spreads like
Fire; and they who are most busy to bring their Brethren into Contempt,
suddenly lose their own Credit; or if they continue a while to take pleasure in
that Fire that consumes their Brethrens reputation, that pleasure will be
readily as short as the pleasure that an envyful neighbor takes in warming
his hands at the fire which consumes his neighbors house; for the consuming
Fire taking hold of his own house, does quickly spill that sport, and turns the
pleasure into sorrow and vexation.

There is yet another piece of high Presumption in one of these Letters, which
is solidly refuted in a Letter directed to this Historian; I shall set it down
in the words of that Letter.

You say the sin of the Indulgence, and of the Ministers throughout the Land
favoring it, has been such an unparalled Provocation, as God cannot forgive
it till vengeance be proportionably inflicted on the Land and Posterity.

This must be indeed a very heinous and great wickedness, that is an
unparrallel'd provocation, so that none has been so great before it, nor
co-existent to it; but this is a very Catachrestick Hyperbolie proceeding from
excessive heat and irritation of Spirit. Is the preaching of an honest Minister
after the removal of the Magistrates restraint, a greater wickedness than
whoredoms, Incests, Witchcrafts, Idolatries, Persecutions that have been or are
acted; the abominations of Popery in Doctrine, cruel Massacres, Torturing,
Death, taught, authorized and practiced by the Man of Sin, on whose forehead
are written Abominations? This is an unparrallel'd excess of expressions!

His Hyperbolick exaggeration is very presuming upon the Sovereign power of
Gods mercy and will not go well down with those who have sound and high
thoughts of God's Soveraignity; it will be to them dur^us sermo and audax.

Gods power either of doing or forgiving, is either potentia absoluta, which is
considered as abstracted or prescinded from his Decrees; whether revealed or
secret; of this we suppose you do not speak; for if he had not decreed temporal
punishments, none will say, but that God might thave not decreed them, and so
not executed them, and yet have pardoned the sin upon believing in Christ; and
this even those who say, That primitive Justice is essential to God, do grant,
that as to the egressions of it, in its acts on the creature, its free.

This Owen in his Diatrib. de Jure and Justitia Dei does yield, and yet he does
very strenuously, contrary to Twisse and Rutherford, assert, That primitive
Justice is essential to God, prescinding from all Decrees.

Or, 2. Gods power is potentia ordinata by himself, which is either by his
secret Decrees, or such as are revealed in his word. Now as that potentia Dei,
to do or forgive sin, which is secret and not revealed, we are not to search
into it, far less to determine what it is; and as for that potentia ordinata,
by his Decrees revealed, we ought to search, and may assert what we find
himself determines it to be; so that if it be revealed, God will not pardon
such a sin without vengeance proportionably executed upon the Land and
Posterity; one may say, God will not pardon it till vengeance, etc. But it is a
harsh word, even then and in that case, to say God cannot pardon it till
vengeance be executed; but where is it revealed in the word, That God cannot,
or God will not pardon it till vengeance, etc? This therefore may seem to be
great and temerarious boldness to be so peremptour in it; how many great and
horrible wickednesses have been acted, which has not been visibly pursued with
proportionable vengeance, etc. in this world? And thus to determine how much
affinity has it with Enthusiasm, which the Writer has well confuted in
writing against the Quakers; and therefore we hope does not with advertency or
deliberation fall into it. We shall only mind you of a much approven and
commended saying of Augustine, pertinent to this case. That God does signally
punish some heinous Wickedness, lest men should deny Providence; and forbears
to punish as great Wickedness here, that we may expect and certainly conclude
there will be a day of Judgment wherein he will render vengeance to such wicked
doers.

I shall add the words of Mr. H. in his excellent Exposition of the Book of Job
page 37. where he is showing the errors of Jobs three Friends, he reckons
this among those errors, That they maintained, that there was always an actual
execution of such Judgments upon all the wicked in this life. But Job agreeably
to the Scripture, maintained That God exercises a great variety of
dispensations toward wicked men in this life, Chap. 21.23, 24, 25. and as may
be gathered from the scope of most of his speeches, that ofttimes God sees it
fit to spare wicked men in this life, yea, and to heap prosperity upon them
until their death, that so he may exercise the Faith and Patience of the Godly,
and may teach all to look out to a day of Judgment, and the eternal reward of
wickedness and piety.

Page 115. The Author of the History of the Indulgence, pretends to answer what
can be said in the defense of the accepting of the Indulgence. Having thus
shown (says he) how sinful the accepting of this Indulgence was, upon many
account^, it remains that we remove out of the way what can be said in the
defense thereof, to the end we may give all satisfaction possible.

Ans. If he really intended to give all possible satisfaction, he should not
have withholden the state of the question, which in all questions is absolutely
necessary, in order to satisfaction.

It Is a wonder how he could imagine to give any, let be all satisfaction, or to
give any usual ordinary satisfaction; let be all possible satisfaction, and yet
withhold from his Readers the state of the question, without which he can give
no satisfaction at all; no not the least degree of absolutely necessary
satisfaction, which in all controversies, especially about sin and duty, should
and must be given; and far less all possible satisfaction, which takes in not
only all that must be said, but all that can be said for the Readers
satisfaction.

The Authors way of handling this question, will give satisfaction to none,
except they be such as are satisfied with ignorance, and confusion, and vain
jangling, understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. But
though there be no candor, yet there is craft in concealing the true state of
the Controversy, when the cause is bad, and cannot stand if it be rightly
stated. If this Author had but prefixed the true state of the question to his
Reasons against the accepting of the Indulgence, the many accounts upon which
he alleges he has shown the sinfulness of its acceptance, would have come to
no account, and all his showing would have been clearly seen to be nothing but
a vain show. He has not, nor can any for him show that those of the outed
Ministers, to whom the Magistrate had granted the peaceable public exercise of
their Office in some Parishes, in their returning to those Parishes where they
were formerly ordained Ministers, or not having access to the peaceable
exercise of their Ministry in their own Parishes, upon the ^nvitation of
destitute Congregations, with the consent of Presbyterian Ministers concerned,
going to exercise their Office in those destitute Congregations till they might
have access to return ^o their own Parishes; That these Ministers in so doing
did sin. Of what Law of God is this practice of theirs a Transgression. Is it a
sin for Ministers whom God has called to the work of the Ministry, to exercise
their Office in the Parishes where they were ordained Ministers, or to help
destitute Congregations who desire them to come and help them? Is it a sin
because the Magistrate permits them to preach? The Author himself dare not say
this, as appears from his first Answer to the first Objection. A Minister ^ins
not in preaching the Gospel, though an U^urper, a Robber permit him to preach;
and much ^ess does the Permission of the lawful Magistrate render his preaching
sinful.

Object. The Magistrate appoints them to preach, and to preach in such or such
a parish; and therefore it is sinful.

Ans. 1. If it were a sin in the Magistrate to appoint a Minister to preach in
such or such a place, and a sin for the Minister to preach, because the
Magistrate appointed him to preach in such a place, then the Ministers who
wrote the first Book of Discipline, and the Church of Scotland who approved it,
did sin in desiring the Magistrate to appoint Ministers to preach in such and
such Parishes. We did show from the first Book of Discipline, That they desired
the Magistrate to do this and more too, even to compel them to preach.

2. This Author grants in his Answer to the third Objection, That the
Magistrate may place Ministers when the Church is corrupt, and all things are
out of order; the vanity of his evasion by which he seeks to elude that
Argument taken from the 10th. Chapter of the second Book of Discipline, is
before discovered.

3. Suppose it were unlawful for the Magistrate to appoint a Minister to
exercise the Office of the Ministry in a particular Parish; yet it would not be
sinful for that Minister to preach in that Parish, if the Parish were vacant,
and earnestly desired him to exercise his Ministry among them; and if his
preaching there, were not injurious to any; if the Magistrates appointing a
Minister to preach, etc. in a Parish, render the Ministers preaching in that
Parish sinful, then the Magistrate by such appointments, might make the
exercise of the Ministry in any Parish, or in all Parishes in his Dominions,
sinful; which is a most absurd Conceit. Or is it sinful to accept of the
peaceable exercise of their Ministry in such or such Parishes, because the
Magistrate gives them Injunctions and Rules to regulate them in the exercise of
their Ministry?

But 1. These Injunctions were the Magistrates Acts, and not the Ministers.

2. The Ministers accepted not of these Injunctions, but declared they could
receive no such Ecclesiastic Rules from the Magistrate; and that they had full
Prescriptions from Christ, which they behoved to observe, as they would be
answerable to him of whom they had received their Ministry.

3. The Act of Instructions, as it was distinct from the Act of Indulgence, in
which the public peaceable exercise of their Ministry was granted, and came
not to the Ministers hands for a considerable time after they had received the
Act of Indulgence; so there was a great difference in the nature of the Acts;
and the Indulged Ministers did right in making use of what was good, and
refusing what was evil.

4. If the Magistrates sending Injunctions to Ministers, renders the exercise
of their Ministry sinful, then the Magistrate may render the exercise of the
Ministry in any place, in every place of his Dominions sinful, by sending
Instructions to all the Ministers in his Dominions, which is another absurd
Conceit; which if it were received, would make it easy for an ill-disposed
Magistrate to mar all preaching by writing and sending Acts of Instructions to
all the Ministers in his Dominions.

Object. The Act of Indulgence flowed from a sinful Supremacy, and therefore it
was sinful to make any use of it.

Ans. To say nothing of the making use of a Pass given by a Captain of Robbers,
or of a Covenant of peaceable commerce made with an Usurper, who has no just
title, which Casuists do not condemn; I answer, That that Act which indeed was
the Act of Indulgence, and which the Indulged Ministers made use of, viz. The
Relaxation of the Civil Restraint, which hindered the peaceable exercise of
their Ministry, or the granting of the public peaceable exercise of Ministry,
was no Act of any sinful Supremacy, but the exercise of that power which the
Magistrate has from God for doing good.

As from the right stating of the question, it evidently appears, That this
accepting of the public peaceable exercise of the Ministry was not sinful; so
it evidently appears, That it was lawful and commendable, and a duty to which
they were obliged; as the work of the Ministry is a good work, so the peaceable
settled exercise of it, under the protection of lawful Authority, is a great
mercy, that has many blessings and advantages in it; it is a promised blessing,
it is a blessing for which the people of God should pray; and because the
peaceable settled exercise of the Ministry cannot be where Magistrates are,
without their allowance or permission, therefore it is duty to pray, That the
Lord would incline the heart of Rulers to grant the peaceable public exercise
of Religion in their Dominions; and when the Lord inclines the hearts of Rulers
to this, we should not slight such a promised Mercy, nor refuse the return of
our Prayers, but thankfully receive this blessing of God, conveyed by the hand
of the Magistrate; and make use of this Talent to the Glory of God, and
edification of his Church.

I remember I have spoken before of the advantages of the peaceable settled
exercise of the Ministry, and of the necessity of accepting of it, especially
in answering the last head of the Authors Arguments; and shall say no more of
the state of the question, but this, That they who but understand the terms of
the question, will see, that all the Arguments which the Author brings to prove
the accepting of the Indulgence sinful, do evanish as smoke, and lose all
color, when they compere before the light of naked Truth. And they will see,
that what these Ministers did, in exercising their Ministry in these desolate
Congregations, when the Lord in his good Providence had given them peaceable
access thereto, was so evidently a religious work, a labor of love, a work of
mercy, a seasonable, expedient, necessary work, that they will wonder that any
do call the lawfulness thereof in question.

If the Author would have done the part of a Candid Disputant, he should have
brought forth all the Arguments made use of by the Indulged Ministers in their
full strength; but he brings several of his own Conceits, which he knew best
how to deal with; and passing the strongest Arguments which were not for his
handling, he intermixes with these which he brings, something of his own, which
may furnish him occasion of saying something, though nothing to the purpose.

The first Objection as he propones it, runs thus; May not the Magistrate, for
ends known to himself, discharge Ministers to preach for a time, and thereafter
permit them to preach? and seeing the business of the Indulgence was but of
this nature, why might it not be acquiesced unto? I wonder how he came to
allege the Magistrates discharging Ministers to preach in this place, as if
the discharging to preach were any part of the business of the Indulgence,
which was not a discharging to preach, but the just contrary, a permission and
allowance to preach? but the Author had something to say concerning the
Magistrates discharging of Ministers to preach, that he behoved to say
somewhere, but he could hardly have devised a more impertinent place to speak
it, than this. The Magistrate should not have hindered these Ministers to
preach, he should not have restrained them from preaching, but it was his duty
to take off the restraint which he had laid on, and to permit them to preach;
this was the exercise of the power which the Magistrate had from God, and
therefore the Ministers might lawfully make use of it in accepting this
Relaxation of the Restraint formerly laid on, and the peaceable exercise of
their Ministry; but if he had formed the Argument thus, he would have had
nothing to answer.

His first answer is, That the Indulgence is a far other thing: It Is true, it is
a far other thing than the discharging of Ministers to preach, which he
impertinently foisted in into the Objection; but, says he, it is one thing to
permit Ministers to exercise their Office without Molestation, and it is a far
other thing to appoint and order them to take upon them such or such particular
charges. He does not condemn the Magistrates permitting Ministers to preach,
but he has a quarrel at the Magistrates appointing to take such or such
particular Charges, etc. but if he would have dealt fairly with the Magistrate,
he should not have foisted in words of his own, but taken the Magistrates words
as they are in the Acts of Indulgence, in which they do not say that they
appoint and order the Ministers to take upon them such and such particular
Charges, but that they appoint them; and in the second Indulgence permit and
allow them to preach, and exercise the other parts of the Ministerial Function
in such a Parish. If he quarrel at the Magistrates appointing Ministers to
preach at such or such Kirks, he must quarrel with the first Book of
Discipline, and much more with the second Book of Discipline, which Chap. 10.
makes use of the word placing; but enough of this before.

But suppose that Appointing were not a proper term, yet he cannot but
acknowledge that the Magistrate did in their permitting, allowing, appointing
these Ministers to preach at such and such Kirks, really and effectually relax
the Civil Restraints formerly laid upon these Ministers, which hindered the
peaceable public exercise of their Ministry in any Parish within the Nation,
and freed them from the Molestation which they would have been obnoxious to, in
preaching in such or such Parishes before these Acts of Indulgence; and in so
far as these Acts did relax that undue Restraint, they were good; this is so
evident, that it cannot be with any shadow of Reason denied. And hence I reason
thus: When the Magistrate does right in relaxing undue restraints which
hindered the peaceable public exercise of the Ministry, Ministers may lawfully
make use of that Relaxation, but the Magistrate in permitting, allowing,
appointing these Ministers to preach in such and such Parishes, did right in
relaxing, etc. and therefore these Ministers might lawfully make use of that
Relaxation. I would gladly hear an answer to this Argument: What he subjoyns of
their plainting and subjecting the Ministry in its exercise to themselves, by
giving Injunctions, etc. as he foists in words of his own, which were not in
the Acts of Indulgence, so he unreasonably confounds the Act of Instructions
with the Act of Indulgence, which were Acts in all respects distinct; the Act
of Instructions was no Act of Indulgence; for these Instructions were no
Indulgence, but clogs superadded; the Act of Indulgence did take off
Restraints; and that the Ministers accepted; the Act of Instructions did lay on
Restraints, which the Ministers did not accept of, as was fully manifested
before. But this is the ordinary fault of this Author, that when he should
reason against the Indulgence, as it was accepted by the Ministers, or against
their pactice in accepting the Releaxation and the peaceable exercise of their
Ministry, and the Protection of lawful Authority, he falls to speak of what was
wrong in the Magistrates acting, to which the Indulged Ministers had no
accession: but ye must excuse him; for if he had not done this, he would have
had nothing to say; and yet it had been much better to have said nothing, than
to have spoken so impertinently, and so injuriously, in charging the indulged
Ministers with the fault that they had no accession to. If the Authors
reasonings were reduced to form, they would be very ridiculous; as for example,
the Magistrates Act of Instructions which laid on wrong restraints, was not
right; and therefore the Magistrates Act of Indulgence which took off wrong
Restraints, was not right.

Again, the Magistrate should not have made the Act of Instructions, and
thefore the Ministers should not have made use of the Act of Indulgence;
Baculus stat in angulo, ergo pluit; the Club stands in the Corner, and
therefore it rains. This third Argument is as good as the other two; and yet of
such Sand-ropes are the Arguings of this Author twisted. Before I leave this, I
cannot but suspect, that all that the Author seems to allow to the Magistrate,
at least to our Magistrates in reference to the exercise of the Office of the
Ministry, is this, That they should permit and not molest Ministers in the
exercise of their Office; for he is against their appointing of Ministers to
preach at such or such a Kirk; I am the more confirmed in this by some passages
of the Cup of cold Water, and some late actings; if this be his Opinion, it is
a new one: for all Orthodox Divines; and the Church of Scotland in the second
Book of Discipline, Chap. 1. maintains, That the Civil power should command the
Spiritual to exercise; and in that same Chapter it is granted, That the
Magistrate ought to command the Ministers to observe the Rule commanded in the
word, and punish the Transgressors by civil means; if he ascribe no more to our
Magistrates but this, That they should merely permit, or not molest, or as the
Cup of cold Water has it, page 42. forbear to persecute the Mediators
Ambassadors; he gives no more to the Magistrate, than is given to a strong
Captain of Robbers, who has Ministers under his power, and at his disposal,
which were most absurd. But even upon this absurd supposition, That the
Magistrate might not command, or appoint Ministers to preach; and that
appointing were an overstretch, yet even upon this supposition, the Ministers
might lawfully after this appointment of the Magistrate, have gone to those
Parishes, to which they were appointed to go, upon the earnest desire of those
destitute people. I clear it by this similitude: Suppose a Captain of Robbers
has by force subdued an Island, in which there are two Ministers and four
distinct Parishes, this Usurper commands these Ministers to be brought before
him, and tells them he will not suffer them to return to their former Charges,
but appoints them to preach at the two vacant Churches, though he have no
Authority to appoint them to preach in these two other Parishes, yet these
Ministers having no access to their own Parishes, being debarred by strong
hand, might upon the earnest desire of the two vacant Congregations, go and
help them till they might have regress to their own Parishes; and their doing
so, would be no owning of the Authority of the Captain of Robbers to appoint;
and it were but folly to say to that Captain, If ye only suffer us to go, it
may be we will go; but if ye appoint us, we will not go at all; for that were
but the way to hinder themselves from all exercise of their Office, and deprive
the whole Island of the benefit of the Gospel; or if that Captain should
appoint or command a Physician to make his residence in such a Town of the
Island, or else he would not suffer him to exercise his Calling in the Island;
the Physicians going, would be no acknowledgment that the Captain had a lawful
Authority to command or appoint him; the exercise of the Ministry and of
Medicine, are works of necessity and mercy, and so necessary in order to the
Glory of God, and the good of man, that whenever and wherever they who are
called and fitted of God to exercise their Offices, have lawful access to do
these works of necessity and mercy, they should not neglect the occasion; and
it is a Fantastic and Childish Conceit to think, that if men who have no
Authority over Ministers or Physicians, or they who have lawful Authority, but
claim more in reference to Ministers, etc. than God has given them; if they
take upon them a power in reference to Ministers, which they have not; and in a
way not competent to them, appoint Ministers or Physicians to do the work of
the Ministry or Medicine, which God (antecedently to any thing that those who
usurp upon them, do in reference to them) has called them to. I say it is a
Fantastic and Childish Conceit to think, That such Usurpations can make void
the call which they have from God, to do those works of necessity and mercy,
when they have access thereunto without doing Injury to any.

His 2, 3, 4. Answers about the Magistrates discharging Ministers to preach,
are in answer to what he was pleased impertinently to object to himself; That
the Magistrate may for ends known to himself, discharge Ministers to preach;
and so though the purpose in his Answers be good, yet they are nothing to the
purpose in this place. I have only one question anent somewhat he says. In the
end of his 4th. Answer he grants in the beginning of it, That the Magistrate
may indirectly and consequently silence a Minister for a civil Crime, as
Solomon did Abiathar; but he says, For an Ecclesiastic Transgression, the
Magistrate cannot indirectly or consequently remove any Minister from the
exercise of his Ministry, where the Church is settled in his power; except only
causative, by commanding the Church-Judicatories to do their work. First, that
is first to judge: for in prima instantia, he may not do it; or
corroboratively, by backing the Service of the Church-Judicatory with his Civil
Sanction and Authority. Now my question is, Suppose a Magistrate has commanded
a Church-Judicatory to take course with a Minister who preaches Heresy or
Doctrine tending to Idolatry, or preaches Schismatick-Doctrine, and rents the
Church; and yet the Church-Judicatory through Ignorance or being themselves
tainted, or through want of Zeal, take no effectual course to remedy these
evils; this is a case supposable: for we see the Church-Judicatory of Pergamus
suffered them that held the Doctrine of Balaam, and that held the Doctrine of
the Nicclatians, and the Church-Judicatory of Thyatria, suffered the Woman
Jezabel, that called her self a Prophetess, to teach and seduce the Servants of
God to commit Fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to Idols; in this case
shall the Magistrate do no more but command the Church-Judicatory to their
work? He has done that, and yet the Judicatory does nothing, or nothing to
purpose; and the Church is like to be undone through these Doctrines that fret
like a Gangreen. And the other member of his distinction makes no help: for the
Church-Judicatory, I suppose, passes no right sentence which the Magistrate may
corroborate; shall he who is Gods Vicegerent suffer the people of God, and his
Subjects, to be poisoned with damnable Doctrine? may he do nothing indirectly
to restrain these Heretics from preaching such damnable Doctrines? and
therefore it seems, that though the Magistrate cannot depose an Heretic that is
a Minister, yet he may do more to restrain a Heritick from destroying the
people of God, than is comprehended within the members of his distinction of
causatively and corroboratively; and he himself seems to grant with Voetius in
his Answer to the second Objection, That the Magistrate may hinder an Heretic
from preaching Heresy either publicly, or from house to house --

As for his second Objection, if he had formed it thus: When the Magistrate
grants the peaceable public exercise of the Ministry, Ministers should
thankfully accept of this grant, he would have had no Answer; but he kept out
peaceable out of the Objection; and then he answers, that the Magistrate should
not discharge the public exercise of the Ministry; well, but what is that to
the purpose? will he infer from thence, that therefore he should not allow to
Ministers the public peaceable exercise of their Ministry?

The third Objection he proponeth thus; Our second Book of Discipline grants,
That Magistrates may place Ministers when the Kirk is corrupted, and all things
out of order; and so it is now with us. The Argument may be framed thus; if the
Magistrate when the Church is corrupted, and all things out of order, may place
Ministers, then the Magistrate may appoint, permit, allow Ministers to preach
in such and such Kirks; For if the Magistrate may do what is more, then they
may do what is less in the corrupt state of the Church; But the state of the
Church is such: and therefore if the Magistrate may in this case place, etc. he
may much more permit, etc. He grants all the major is evident from the place
cited; and he grants it to the minor, which was as he proponed it, but so it is
now with us; he answers, that our Church was a constituted and well-ordered
Church -- but that now Confusion is come, and so in effect he yields all; but I
remember he spoke to this before. What he says of the Magistrates bringing on
this Confusion, is no evasion; for the Book of Discipline does speak generally
of a Church corrupted, whatever way it has been corrupted, whether by
Magistrates or Ministers, that is neither up nor down. A Magistrate that has
disordered the Church, is so much the more obliged to right those disorders;
and if a Magistrate has disordered the Church by thrusting Ministers from the
peaceable exercise of their Ministry, he ought to retract what he has done, by
allowing them the peaceable exercise of their Ministry; if he did wrong in
thrusting them out, it is right to let them in; and the Church of Scotland in
that place cited, has declared, That in that case Ministers should not refuse
to preach in any place, because the Magistrate has interposed his Authority
for settling them. He insinuates in the end of this Answer, That this Concession
gives the Magistrate all Church Power; but this is a groundless and injurious
alledgance; the Authors of that Book, and the General Assemblie's, which after
exact examination of every part of it, concluded it to be subscribed by every
Minister of the Church of Scotland, understood the Nature of Church Power much
better than he did; and they were so far from thinking, That the Magistrates
who in the corrupt and disordered state of the Church, interposes their Civil
Authority for settling Ministers, does in so doing assume unto themselves, and
exercise all Church Power; that they commend what they did in that case as a
practice well-becoming godly Kings, and Princes, and Emperors. This Insinuation
is highly injurious to those wise and godly men who compiled and approved,
subscribed that second Book of Discipline; for if this Concession did yield all
Church Power to the Magistrate, then those who compiled and subscribed it, do
quite subvert what they had immediately asserted, viz. That the Magistrate may
not usurp any thing which belongs not to the civil Sword, but belongs to the
Offices which are merely Ecclesiastical, as is the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments, using Ecclesiastical Discipline, and the Spiritual Execution
thereof, or any part of the power of the Spiritual Keys which our Master gave
to the Apostles and their Successors: As it cannot be supposed, that so wise
men would so quickly contradict themselves in a Book so deliberately, and after
so many Debates concluded; so it cannot be imagined, that they would design
Kings and Princes godly for doing that which would quite swallow up, and
subvert the holy Calling of the Ministry.

This one passage in the second Book of Discipline, does quite ruin the cause
of the Author of the History of the Indulgence, and approves the practice of
the Indulged Ministers; so that what they have done, they have done it
according to the mind of the Church of Scotland expressed in the second Book of
Discipline. The Book says, That godly Kings both in the old and in the light of
the New Testament, have placed Ministers when the Kirk was corrupted, etc. This
not only may be, but it has been; and the Author denies not that the Church
was corrupted at the time of the Indulgence, and all things out of order and in
confusion; and thus he really yields the cause, and concedes all; when the
Church is corrupted, and all things out of order, the Magistrate may place
Ministers, and Ministers may be placed by Magistrates; but at the time of the
Indulgence, as the Author grants, the Church was corrupted, and all things out
of order; and therefore at the time of the Indulgence, the Magistrate might
place Ministers, and Ministers might be placed by Magistrates according to the
10th. Chapter of the second Book of Discipline. It Is true, that the Magistrate
should not have broken the order of the Church; ^ut to conclude that the
Magistrate cannot place Ministers, because he thrusts them out, or that he
cannot do them right in granting to them the peaceable exercise of their
Ministry, because he did them wrong in restraining them from the exercise of
it; or to conclude, That ^he Magistrate by breaking the order of the Church,
loses all Authority to do any good to ^he Church afterward; or that we may make
^o use of any good that the Magistrate does, because he has done evil, or
because at the ^me time he does some things right, and some ^ings wrong, that
we cannot choose the good because we must refuse the evil, is a most
unreasonable way of reasoning; and at this rate a man may conclude quidlibet ex
quolibet, any thing he pleases from whatsoever he pleases; any Conclusion he
pleases from any premises. Neither does the acceptance of the peaceable
exercise of the Ministry from the Magistrate (who had formerly restrained
Ministers by penal Statutes, that they could not without molestation exercise
their Ministry) teach Magistrates a way how to usurp all Church Power; for the
taking off of Restraints, was a doing of right, and no Usurpation. He might as
well allege, That if one by strong hand wound a man, and put him out of his
own house, and take his Goods, and afterward be willing to cure the wound, and
admit the man to return to his House and Goods, that the injured man by
admitting the Cure, and returning to his own House and Goods, teaches the man
who injured him, to wound, intrude and spoil.

To the 4th. Objection taken from the examples of Hezekiah and Josiah, who
commanded the Priests and Levites to do the work of their Calling, he answers
nothing to the purpose. If Hezekiah and Josiah did right in setting the Priests
in their Charges, and the Levites in their Courses, and in commanding them to
do the work of their Calling; and if the Priests and Levites did right in
obeying those Commands; then Magistrates may not only permit and allow, but
also command (when there is need) Ministers to do the work of their Ministerial
Calling, and Ministers may and should obey such Commands; but the former is
true, for these Kings are commended for doing so, 2 Chronicles. 35.2. etc. 2 Chronicles.
29.2, 3, 4, 5. etc. 2 Chronicles. 31.2. and therefore the latter is true also.

He answers, That our Rulers have done many evil things which these Kings did
not; but will he conclude, that because they have done evil which these Kings
did not, that therefore they may not imitate these Kings in doing good, in
permitting, allowing, commanding Ministers to preach the Gospel, and do the
other parts of their Ministerial Office? this was the Act of Indulgence which
the Indulged Ministers made use of; and the Magistrate in this Act did not
destroy the Order and Beauty of the Church, etc.

The Author in his Answer would make his Reader believe, That they who make use
of this Argument, bring it to prove that the Magistrate might make the Act of
Instructions; but it has been often answered, That the Act of Instructions was
not the Act of Indulgence; the Act of Indulgence permitted and allowed the
exercise of their Ministry; of this Act they made use; the Act of Instructions
which was super-added to the Act of Indulgence, the Indulged Ministers did not
observe, and told the Magistrate they could not receive such Instructions.

I am wearied of these Repetitions; the Question is, Whether the Magistrate may
command Ministers to do the work of their Ministerial Calling? the Question is
concluded in the affirmative, That they may from the Scriptures cited; and if
they may command, they may permit and allow them to preach, and do the other
Functions of the Ministry. He diverts his Reader from considering the force of
the Argument, by making a Comparison betwixt Hezekiah and Josiah, and other
Rulers; as if this were the design of those who argue from the forecited
Scriptures, to prove that our Rulers were as godly Reformers as Hezekiah and
Josiah; but this is but a trick to escape the dint of the Argument: As we
should mourn, that neither our Rulers nor we, are like those eminently holy
Kings, who were very singular for uprightness and tenderness; and pray that the
Lord who has the hearts of Rulers and Subjects in his hand, would give them
and us such uprightness and tenderness as those Kings had; so when our Rulers
do any thing for which those Kings were commended, we should thankfully
acknowledge it; and this is one of those things for which they are commended,
That they commanded the Priests and Levites to do their work; and is not
preaching and the exercise of the other Functions of the Ministry, the work of
the Ministers of the Gospel? and if it was good, and a part of the Reformation
of those godly Kings, to command this, why should it be judged evil in our
Rulers to do what they did?

Object. 5. But what can be said of such of the Indulged, etc? the Argument may
be formed thus; When the Magistrate appoints, permits, allows Ministers to go
to their own Charges to exercise their Ministerial Office, Ministers may
lawfully go, yea, they should go to their own Charges; but the Magistrate
appointed those Ministers whom the Objection concerns, to go to their own
Charges, to exercise their Ministerial Office, and therefore they might
lawfully go, and it was their duty to go.

He answers, 1. That it was a mere accidental thing that they were sent to
their own charges, viz. because at that time they were vacant.

Ans. 1. He puts in his own word of sending, and not the words used in the Acts
of Indulgence, which is not fair dealing.

2. What means he by a mere accidental thing? if he mean that the Council did
not intend that they should go to their own Charges, but that this fell out
beside the Magistrates intent, this is false; for as it was appointed by the
Kings Majesty, That they should return to preach and exercise the other
Functions of the Ministry in the Parish-Churches where they formerly served; so
the Council appointed them to go to these Churches; and therefore their going
thither was not beside the intent of the Magistrate, but was a thing designed
and intended by the Magistrate: Their going to their former Charges, was not in
respect of the Magistrate, like the finding of a Treasure by a man who is
plowing the ground.

But 3ly. Suppose this had been a mere accident, will this militate against
these Ministers returning to their own Charges? It was accidental that those
Parishes were vacant, and therefore it was unlawful for these Ministers to
return to their own vacant Parishes; had not these Parishes been vacant, these
Ministers had been appointed either to go elsewhere, or had not been indulged
at all; and therefore it was unlawful for them to return to those Congregations
which were accidentally vacant. These are reasonings which have no shadow of
Reason; but the Subject Matter could not furnish him with any better.

But it would seem from page 19. That he opposes accidental, to that which is
necessary, and cannot be otherways than it is; for when he is proving, that
this was an accidental thing, he labors to make it appear by Mr. John Park his
disappointment, because the Prelate prevented his coming to the Kirk designed,
by thrusting in a Curate, notwithstanding of his pleading the benefit of the
Act of indemnity in his own defense, against what was objected against him,
and thereby acknowledged himself to have been a Traitor in all his former
actings, and that all the work of Reformation was but Rebellion. Here the
Author grants, That Mr. John Park's own Kirk was designed for him, and so his
accidental thing is not here opposed to a designed thing, but to a thing that
is so necessary, that it cannot be hindered or prevented; and if he take
accidental in this sense, the Argument must run thus; The returning of
Ministers to their own Charge was not a necessary thing, which must be, and
cannot but be; but only a contingent thing, which may not be, and whose being
may be prevented; and therefore it was not a thing lawful, or a duty. But this
Argument is as ridiculous, if not more ridiculous than the former; for there
are many things which may lawfully be, and should be, which yet never have any
existence. I doubt not but the Reverend Brother, Mr. John Park, can abundantly
clear himself from the foul aspersions that this Author would cast upon him. I
know not the Matter of fact, which might yield many grounds of defense; but it
seems the Author has been too intent, to have a hit at Mr. Park, seeing he
brings, or rather impertinently drags him upon the Stage to be beaten; and that
because he pleaded the benefit of an Act of Indemnity. It seems very
unreasonable and injurious dealing to allege, That any man who pleads to have
the benefit of an Act of Indemnity as it does free a man from Skaith and
Damage, does hereby acknowledge, that he has been a Traitor in all his former
actings, or that he acknowledges any real crime at all.

2. Says he, They were not barely permitted to go to their own Charges by
rescinding of the Act of Glasgow, or taking off the Sentence of Banishment;
which might easily have been done, if the Council had intended no actual
Invasion.

Ans. They were not barely permitted to return to their own Charges, and
therefore they should not have returned. The Council intended an actual
Invasion in their returning, and therefore the Ministers sinned in returning. I
am wearied in repeating such Arguments that are so palpably absurd.

His 3d. is, That their right to their former Charges, is nothing but the
Councils Order and Appointment. This is a manifest falsehood; the Councils Act
gave them access to the peaceable use of the right which they formerly had.

His 4th. That their case was worse than the case of other indulged Ministers;
and that they did renounce their old right to the exercise of their Ministry;
but how proves he that? very easily, viz. by saying it. These things are so
absurd and gross, and are so far from having any shadow of Reason, that to
repeat them, is to refute them; and the truth is, they are not worthy of
repetition, let be of Refutation.

His 5th. And why may they not also repair to Presbyteries and Synods, upon the
Councils order? etc.

Ans. If the Magistrate would set up Presbyterial Government by Presbyteries
and Synods, would he have Ministers refuse to go to these Presbyteries and
Synods? if he mean Presbyteries and Synods Prelatically constitute, in which
the Prelatick Power is exercised, and they who constitute themselves Members of
these Courts, own the Prelatick Power which gives them their being; his
Question is impertinent; for there is a great disparity betwixt a Ministers
going to a Court Prelatically constituted, and going to preach to his own
Parish. The Magistrates discharge does not invalidate the right that Ministers
have to meet in Presbyteries and Synods; but it hinders the peaceable use of
that right.

The 6th. Object. He propones thus; If it be a ground sufficient to reject the
benefits of the Indulgence, because it is supposed to flow from the Supremacy;
then much more more might we refuse to preach if the Magistrate should command
it expressly by virtue of his Supremacy; and if this be yielded, then it is
manifest, that if the Magistrate had a mind to banish all preaching out of his
Dominions, he needs use no other medium than only tell the Ministers, That he
commanded them to preach by virtue of his Supremacy. This is a piece of one of
the Arguments made use of by the Indulged Ministers: it may be formed thus; If
the Ministers of the Gospel may not lawfully preach the Gospel in any place
where the Magistrate who claims to himself a Spiritual Supremacy, appoints or
permits them to preach; and if Ministers may not lawfully preach the Gospel, if
Magistrates command them, by virtue of their Spiritual Supremacy, to preach it,
and write Ecclesiastical Instructions and Injunctions to regulate them; then
the Magistrate may, if he be so disposed, easily banish all preaching out of
his Dominions, by writing Papers, in which he claims the said Supremacy, and
sets down Injunctions, etc. But this latter is most absurd; and therefore so is
the former; the absurdity of this, that the Magistrate by his claiming to
himself a Spiritual Supremacy, and giving Instructions to Ministers, which is
his proper deed, which the Ministers cannot hinder, and to which they have no
accession, can make Ministers preaching unlawful; I say, the absurdity of this
conceit is so evident, that any who have common sense, and will make use of it,
may clearly perceive it. Now let us hear what he answers:

1. He says, That he has seen and manifested, that the Indulgence has a real
relation to, and dependence upon the Supremacy.

Ans. He has never manifested, That the Indulgence, as it was accepted, has
any such dependence upon any unlawful Supremacy; or that the Magistrates Acts,
which were indeed the Acts of Indulgence, viz. his appointing, permitting,
allowing Ministers of the Gospel to preach the Gospel, flow from any unlawful
Supremacy.

2. He says, That he has adduced many other heads of Arguments against it.

Ans. These many heads are cut off in the answers before adduced.

In his 3d. he grants, That the command to preach simply, cannot be said to
flow from, nor to have such a dependence upon this usurped Supremacy; for to
command Ministers to do their duty in preaching the Gospel according to the
Command of God, belongs to the Power which God has granted to the Magistrate,
and so natively flows from his Office. Now seeing the Author has granted
this, I hope he will no more quarrel at the indulgence upon the account of the
Magistrates using the word appointing Ministers to preach; for commanding is at
least as much as appointing. He adds, But to set down Limitations, Restrictions
and Conditions, regulating the exercise of the Ministry, does not so flow; and
when they are such as are opposite to the Rules of Christ, it must of necessity
be by virtue of an usurped power; whence it is apparent, That this Indulgence,
containing such limitations, etc. does not flow from the Office of the
Christian Magistrate, etc.

Ans. It has been often answered, That the Act of Instructions was an Act
distinct from the Act of Indulgence; and the Ministers did never accept the
Instructions, and gave Reasons to the Magistrate why they could accept of no
such Instructions, as was showed before. He adds, Therefore though in the case
of simple preaching, the Injunction ushered in with an express mention of the
Supremacy, as it is ground and rise, would be but a ridiculous Scarcrow; yet in
this other case, which is the case of the Indulgence, it would be an open
spreading of the Net in the sight of the Bird, and more than a sufficient
warning for wise men to beware.

Ans. If the Supremacy set before the Injunction to preach the Gospel, be but a
ridiculous Scarcrow, that should not hinder Ministers from preaching it; then
certainly the Act of Instructions which was set behind the Injunction to preach
the Gospel, is as ridiculous a Scarcrow, and should hinder no Minister from
doing the work of the Ministry; yea, it seems more ridiculous: for the Scarcrow
of the Supremacy is by the Author supposed to be before the Injunction of
preaching; but this Scarcrow of the Instructions comes behind the injunction of
preaching. Now those Scarcrows which are betwixt Crows and the Corn, scars them
more than those Scarcrows which are beyond the Corn. And if Ministers need not
scar at the Injunction of preaching, though the Magistrate wrapped in his
Supremacy in the Injunction, then Ministers need far less scar at any
Injunction to preach the Gospel, because there is another Act of Instructions
lying at some distance from it; for if judicious Ministers may and should make
use of the good injunction to preach the Gospel, though the Magistrate did
endeavor to wrap his Spiritual Supremacy in it; if they may untwist his Act,
and take the Injunction, and leave his Spiritual Supremacy, as having nothing
to do with it; I am sure they may far more easily take the Injunction to
preach, and leave the Act of Instructions, which is not twisted in with it; but
as it was distinct in it is Nature, so it lay at a pretty distance from it; but,
says he, this is an open spreading of the Net in the sight of the Bird.

Ans. 1. The more open it be, there is the less hazard, except men be more
silly than Birds, who do not use to entangle themselves in a Net that is openly
spread in their sight; and therefore crafty Fowlers use to hide their Snares.

2. The Supremacy which he supposes to be wrapped in with the Injunction to
preach, is as open a Snare; and if folk would be scarred without Reason, they
would have a fairer pretense for making no use of an Injunction to preach,
ushered in with, and founded upon a Spiritual Supremacy; than for making no use
of an Injunction to preach, because of another Act of Injunction, which, as it
has no connection in nature with the Injunction to preach, so it has not so
much as a connection in the Contexture of the Magistrates Act, being framed in a
distinct Act. He adds, This is more than a sufficient warning for Wise men to
beware.

Ans. But of what? I hope not of preaching the Gospel; and yet he must say
this, or he says nothing to the purpose here; for if he mean of the
Instructions, this makes no difference betwixt this case and the former; for so
must Ministers beware of the Spiritual Supremacy, by which the Injunction of
preaching is ushered in; but yet the Author would not have Ministers scarring
at preaching, because of the Supremacy; no more should they beware of
preaching, because of the Instructions.

In his 4th. he says, Though a command to preach according to the Rules of
Christ, cannot be accounted to flow from this corrupt Supremacy, even though
the Magistrate shall say so much in plain terms; yet a command to preach in
this place, and not in another place; and to preach so and so according to such
Limitations, Rules and Prescriptions, and according to no other, as it is in
the case of Indulgence, may be said to flow natively from the corrupt Supremacy
-- And so he infers the accepting of the Indulgence cannot be justified, though
in the granting of it, no mention was made of the Supremacy, much less if this
were expressly prefixed.

Ans. 1. As to the matter of fact, the Author misrepresents the Magistrates Act
of Indulgence; for though the Magistrates appointed, permitted, allowed the
Ministers to preach in such places, yet they did not command them to preach in
no other place. Again, though they gave Limitations and Prescriptions, yet they
never limit the Ministers so to these Prescriptions, as to exclude all other
Prescriptions. Seeing he had a mind to make such terrible Amplifications, he
did not wittily in setting down the Acts of Indulgence, which are a sufficient
refutation of those additions which he has made to them. If any allege, that
the Magistrate confined them, and that restrained them from preaching in any
other place; the Author answers, p. 116. That the Magistrate by banishing and
confining, may consequently and indirectly silence Ministers, as Solomon
removed Abiathar from the Priesthood. Now this was a worse confinement than
that of the Indulged Ministers in this respect, because Abiathar could not
exercise the Priests Office but at Jerusalem, from which Solomon banished him;
but the Indulged Ministers not only might, but they might without hazard,
preach in the Parishes to which they were confined; but though he grant this,
yet he denies that the Magistrate can directly discharge Ministers to preach;
and therefore the Act of Confinement will not warrant what he says here, That
the Magistrate commanded them to preach in one place, and not in another; if
they preach in another place beside that to which they are indulged, they run a
hazard; but the Magistrate has not in the Act o^ Indulgence directly
discharged them to preach in another place.

2. He cannot prove, That the Magistrate^ commanding a Minister to preach in a
certai^ place, is an Act of Erastianism, or an Act tha^ flows from a corrupt
Supremacy; yea, he has granted, according to the tenth Chapter of the second
Book of Discipline, That the Magistrate may in some cases place Ministers; the
Ministers who went to their own Parishes had the antecedent Judgment of the
Church at their Ordination, for preaching in such Churches, and the Magistrate
in appointing them to go thither, appointed them to do what the Presbytery had
before ordained them to; they who went to other Churches than their own, as
they had the antecedent Judgment of the Church of Scotland in that tenth
Chapter of the second Book of Discipline, to warrant their Act; so before they
went to the Council, they had the advice of, or consent of the generality of
the outed Ministers to do what they did; and before they went to these
Parishes, they had Invitations from the respective Congregations.

3. As for the Instructions, enough has been said before; they were not the
Act of Indulgence which the Ministers made use of; and therefore whatever be
the fountain whence they flowed, the Indulged Ministers are not defiled, seeing
they drank not of those streams.

But 4ly. The Author has forgot the Argument which he should have answered; he
does not evite the absurdity of the banishing all preaching out of the Land,
mentioned in the end of the Objection he proposed; And therefore I shall again
resume it; for suppose that it were not only unlawful for Magistrates to give
Instructions, but also to appoint or permit Ministers to preach in certain
places, that will not make it unlawful for Ministers whom they appoint to
preach in such places, to preach there, suppose the Instructions be superadded:
for if this should follow, then the Magistrate, if he were ill-disposed, and
would render Ministers ridiculous, he might banish all preaching, by order^ng
Clerks to write Papers, and send to these Ministers; for wherever they should
or would preach, or people would hear them, he might send his Commands to them
to preach there, and his Instructions to regulate them; and then forfooth it
would be unlawful for them to preach in that place; or if he would not have
them to preach in the Fields, he might hinder them by commanding them to preach
in the Fields, and sending Instructions to them; and if he would have them
preaching in plain open Fields where Soldies, horse and soot, might win at
them, he might command them to preach in flowmosses, and particularly design
the mosses in such and such Shires, and then all preaching in these mosses
would become unlawful, and so people behoved either to have no preaching, or
come to the plain open Fields where the Soldiers might easily take or kill
them; and thus they would not only lose preaching, etc. but also render
themselves ridiculous.

In his 5th. he says, The visible ends of Magistrates in giving forth of
Commands which may be known by several circumstances, may do much to clear and
determine Christians to obey or not obey, and so a Command materially the same,
may in some cases be obeyed, in some cases not; so that when the Magistrate
manifesting his intent to root out the Gospel, shall command all Ministers by
virtue of an usurped Supremacy, to preach the Gospel, the material Commands may
be obeyed, and yet the Magistrate frustrate in his Intentions. But when he
commands a few, and only a few by virtue of his Supremacy to preach here or
there, as he pleases, and upon such terms as he is pleased to prescribe, and
under such and such Limitations and Restrictions as he is pleased to enjoin to
the manifest hurt and detriment of the Kingdom of Christ, he is to be disobeyed
and frustrate of his pernicious ends; whence we see how different the cases are.

Ans. Yes, the cases are different, as ye have made them, because in the first
case where all Ministers are commanded to preach, ye held out the Limitations
and Restrictions; but in the second case, where a few Ministers are commanded
to preach, ye put in the Restrictions and Limitations; and thus ye make an
unequal and iniquous comparison. But first, to leave Christians to determine
and clear themselves from the visible ends of Magistrates, which again are to
be known from several Circumstances, looks rather like the Advice of a
Politician, than the solid advice of a Divine to honest simple Christians. The
like of these resolves, puts honest simple people from the plain Rules given in
the word of God for directing their actions, to take their measures from
Magistrates and States-mens intentions and ends; and because States-mens ends
are seldom visible when they think it their interest to conceal them; so when
they please, they can give out designs which they do not really intend; and can
order circumstances so, as to give a fair color to these pretended designs;
and is not this a pitiful Directory for plain honest Christians? I would not
have noticed this, if I had not heard it regrated by many, that by Directions
of this kind, simple people are brought to entangle themselves in the
intreigues of State, and to guess at the designs of Statesmen, and to
counter-work the designs which they guess the Magistrate has against them; and
thus while they should be conferring upon the word of God, upon the chief end
of man, and the means that leads to that end, they waste their time in guessing
at the Magistrates ends, and in setting the World upon Stoups, and parts more
foolish and confused than when they met.

2. He grants in the first case, That the Magistrates Intention is to root out
the Gospel, though it be manifested by him, should not hinder the Ministers
from obeying the Magistrates Command to preach. This Concession overturns all
his former reasonings from the Magistrates bad intentions; for if this be true,
that when the thing commanded by the Magistrate is good, it may be done though
the Magistrate command it by virtue of an usurped Supremacy, and command it for
an ill end, viz. the rooting out of the Gospel; then the Magistrates assumed
Supremacy by which he commands, and his evil design for which he commands the
preaching of the Gospel does not vitiate the Ministers preaching of the Gospel;
and thus a great part of his Book is by his own concession evanished in smoke,
and all the Batteries he has raised against the Indulged Ministers upon these
grounds of the Magistrates Spiritual Supremacy, and evil designs, has been a
building of Castles in the Air; and hence it appears, That the bad
circumstances of the Magistrates actings, in permitting, allowing, commanding
Ministers to preach the Gospel, does not vitiate the Ministers preaching of the
Gospel; who as they do not approve of what is wrong in the Magistrates acting,
nor have any accession to the wrong Principles and ends of the Magistrate; so
they preach the Gospel upon right Principles, and for right ends.

I see the Author can allow Ministers in some cases to abstract good from evil,
to obey what is good in the Magistrates command, and leave what is evil in the
Principles upon which, and the end for which he commands; why did he then gybe
at the Indulged Ministers for making such Metaphysical abstractions, as if they
had not been manly, or such as became honest men and Ministers? but now he
himself has spoilt all the sport that was in these gybings; and as he has
exposed himself to laughter, alleging that me^aphysical abstractions, which
are one of the things which distinguishes men from Beasts, are not manly; so he
has made himself obnoxious ^o just Censure, in alleging, That the Indulged
Ministers abstraction in the foresaid case, was not honest nor suitable to
Ministers of the Gospel; and yet granting that honest ministers may make such
abstractions.

3. I argue from his Concession, If all the Ministers in the Magistrates
Dominions may obey the Magistrates Command to preach, though it be ushered in
with an usurped Supremacy, and designed for an ill end; then some of these
Ministers may do what all of them might have done; for few, as well as many,
may choose the good and leave the ill; why should the preaching of the Gospel be
sinful to a few Ministers, if it be lawful to all? what if the Magistrates had
commanded all the Ministers that were outed, to preach, except one or two,
would it have been sinful to them to preach so long as these two were excepted.
I suppose no sober person will say so, and yet the deduction of these two, mars
the Universality; for if two be excepted, then all are not commanded to preach;
suppose the total sum of these Ministers were 42. shall the Magistrate
excepting or passing by 2, or 10, or 20, or 30 of the 40, render it unlawful to
the 38, or 30, or 20, or 10, whom he indulges, to preach? if the passing by of
two makes it not unlawful for the 38 to preach, why should the passing by of
10, or 20, etc. render it unlawful to the rest to preach? must the sinfulness
or unlawfulness of preaching be calculated by Arithmetic figures? This is a
new use of Arithmetic, that I suppose Marcheston himself never imagined. If
the accepting of one or two, does not make it sinful for the rest to preach
when the Magistrate commands them, would know if the exception of 4. or 8, will
render it unlawful to the rest to preach? and if not, where shall we sist? what
is the number that will alter the morality of preaching, and turn what was
right, to be wrong? who can determine the maximum quod sic, or the minimum quod
sic, the precise number quo non datur ultra? but enough of this.

4. What he adds to make the case of the few different from the case of all,
viz. That the few are commanded to preach here and there, and Limitations and
Restrictions superadded to the Command, should have been added in the first
case, if he would have dealt fairly, and to have encountered the Argument in
its full strength; but he framed the first supposed case so, as he might make a
way for himself to escape; but he must not go so. I shall therefore reinforce
the Argument thus. If it be unlawful for all the Ministers, or all the outed
Ministers in a Kingdom, to preach the Gospel, if the Magistrate by virtue of an
usurped Supremacy, and for an ill end, command them to preach here and there
and under such and such Limitations and Restrictions; then a Magistrate by such
a Command without any more ado, may banish all preaching out of his Dominions;
but the latter is absurd, and so is the former. I see not how upon his
Principles this absurdity can be evited; for if a few Ministers may not
lawfully preach, if they be so commanded and restricted, how can many preach
lawfully, ^f so commanded and restricted? but ye will say, there is a great
difference betwixt many and few; I grant there is an Arithmetical difference,
but it is nothing to the present purpose; for if the Restrictions do vitiate the
preaching of a few, it will also vitiate the preaching of many; for moral filth
is not like natural filth, diminished by spreading, but is rather increased. If
it be said, That, if all Ministers were so commanded to preach, they might
frustrate the Magistrates ill Intentions, and sinful Instructions, by driving
on the great design of the Gospel, and observing Christ's Instructions. I
answer; A few of them might do the same; what should hinder a few of them to do
what all may do?

5. If a small number may not lawfully preach if there were such restrictions
superadded to the command of preaching, then it were still easy for the
Magistrate to put all from preaching, by writing such and such Restrictions;
for it would take but a little more time to do it; for first he might send his
command to preach, and his Instructions to a few; and they might not lawfully
preach, because they were but a few; and when they are laid by, he sends his
command to preach with Instructions to another small number of them, and so on,
till he had put all of them from preaching; for many smalls will amount to All
be-time.

In his 6th. he grants, That when that which the Magistrate commands by virtue
of his Supremacy, is not only lawful, but necessary by virtue of a Command of
God; the prefixing of the Supremacy cannot alter the nature of the Duty. He
might have added, That the affixing of the Restrictions can no more alter the
nature of a Duty than the prefixing of the Supremacy can alter it; but he adds,
That he has above cleared, that what was done by the indulged Ministers, was
neither expedient nor lawful; but he has never cleared it, but it has been
cleared, that what the indulged Ministers did in preaching in the places to
which they were indulged, was lawful, expedient, and in many respects necessary.

In his 7th. he grants, If this supposed command came to Ministers already
preaching, the Supremacy might be sufficiently delete by a Protestation or
Declaration, that they preach by virtue of Christ's Supremacy; but if it were
given to cuted. Ministers detained from their work till they should thus
acknowledge the unlawful Supremacy of the Magistrate, He supposes there might
be ground here for a demur.

Ans. I do not understand what this thus acknowledging means, or this thus
relates to; I doubt if he could well explicate this; if he thinks that the
preaching of these outed Ministers would be an acknowledging of that unlawful
Supremacy, why should not the preaching of the already settled Ministers be so
too? Why might not a Declaration salve all in the Ministers that were out, as
well as in these who were in? If this were an acknowledging of the unlawful
Supremacy, I wonder why he should be in any demur. The Argument I perceive has
strangely puzzled him. If he be not positive, that a command to which the
unlawful Supremacy is prefixed, should be refused, why is he so positive, that
a command to preach should be quite refused because of Instructions superadded
in another Act; I can see no shadow of Reason for this: now he is far from
being Peremptour in the former case, but very, very modest; I suppose, says he,
there might be ground here for a demur; he does not positively assert, That
they should refuse to preach in this case, but he only supposes; not that there
was actually, but that there might be ground; not for a refusal, but only for a
demur. I wish he had pondered his Argument in its full strength; it is like it
would have put him in a demur as to the writing of this History, and spared him
a great deal of needless labor, and much waste of his precious time, which
might have been improven to the good of the Church and his own edification. I
leave him in this demur, and come to the 7th. Objection, which he proposes in
this question. It seems then you would not be for Ministers returning to
their own charges, if the Magistrate should grant such an order or permission;
he who will not be for a Ministers doing his duty, is wilful without and
against Reason; but he who will not be for a Ministers returning to his own
Charge, will not be for a Ministers doing his duty; and therefore he is wilful
without and against Reason.

In his first he grants, That though the Order or Permission did expressly
mention the Supremacy, as it is ground, that yet it might be made use of with a
Protestation.

1. I see the Author in this case, would not scar at the Magistrates ordering;
and why then makes he such a business about the word appointing?

2. That their returning to their own Charges, though the Magistrate order it,
is not a renouncing of their former mission and old right, nor a renouncing of
their dependence upon Christ, nor a deriving of their Ministry from the
Magistrate; for if it were such, the matter could not be salved by a
Protestation. This Concession overturns a great part of his Book.

3. There was no mention made of the Supremacy at all in the Indulgence; and
therefore there was no need by his own Concession of such a Protestation.

4. Though there had been mention of it, Ministers returning to their own
Charges, would have been, according to this Concession, but a seeming
Homologation of the sinful usurpation.

In his 2d. he thinks, if the permission were not universal, but a permission
of some only, that then they should not go; and why? because the Magistrates
intention to divide, is manifest; suppose that to be true, yet the Ministers
returning to their own Charge, has no tendency to division. If men must not do
their duty because they who permit them to do it, have ill Designs, this would
be a new device for torturing men's Consciences, and would make Ministers as
dependent upon the Magistrates intention, as to the lawfulness of their
ministerial actings, as the Papists are dependent upon the Priests intention,
as to the validity of their Sacraments. If a Minister should not go to his own
Charge, because the Magistrate has an ill design in permitting him, by the
same reason a Prisoner should not go home to his Wife and Children, because the
Magistrate has an ill design in letting him go home. He says, This is contrary
to our Covenants; it is strange how any man could imagine, that Ministers going
to their places and stations, could be contrary to the Covenant, which
supposes that every man should keep him within the bounds of place, station
and vocation; such wild conceits tend to render the Covenants ridiculous. He
grants that the Ministers permitted, would be freed from trouble, and the
Congregations receive some advantage; yet the public good of the Church would
be prejudged; but what advantage could Congregations receive from them if that
were true, that they were not the Ministers of Christ, but of men, etc? He
destroys what he had formerly builded; but he does well in casting down what he
had sinfully builded. The public good of the Church is nor to be measured by
any particular man's fancy; and Ministers must not leave their stations, or
refuse to go to them, because this or that particular person judges that the
Church is prejudged by their so doing; and their returning to their own
Charges, does no way tend to confirm the Magistrate in usurpations or
encroachments, but to confirm him in doing his duty, in setting Ministers in
their Charges, as Josiah set the Priests in their Charges, 2 Chronicles. 35.2.

In his 3d. he thinks, That the Ministers should not go to their own Charges,
if they were confined, though the liberty were granted to them all, because of
the ill design of the Magistrate; and many inconveniences that would follow.
We have spoken enough of the Magistrates intention. The inconveniences do no
way urge the indulged Ministers, who never promised to keep their confinement.
Their returning to their proper Charges does not incapacitate them for
preaching elsewhere; they may with hazard after their returning, preach
elsewhere, if it be found necessary by those to whom it is competent to
determine matters of that nature. If his reasons conclude, they will not only
conclude, That outed Ministers should not return to their Charges; but that
though they had not been outed, they should have outed themselves to preach in
other Congregations where there was so great ignorance, etc. If a corruption of
a great part of the Land be a good reason for Ministers not fixing, then how
comes it, that the Apostles fixed Ministers, when the whole World almost was
corrupt with Paganism? and it is loose work to loose every one, and let them go
and preach where they list.

In his 4th. he says, Though this liberty were without confinement, yet if any
one or other of those Prescriptions were added, with which the indulgence was
clogged, that the liberty could not be accepted, for the reasons against the
indulgence would militate against that liberty. But may not rational men make
use of a grant of due liberty, and yet not take on clogs? The Magistrates
making clogs, does not clog them, except they take on the clogs; may not a man
return to his own house to do the Duty of the Master of a Family, though the
Magistrate prescribe Injunctions to him, which he cannot in Conscience obey? We
have seen the vanity of his militating Reasons, which fight against the wind,
and conclude nothing against the indulged Ministers.

In his 5th. he says, That though the grant of liberty were Universal, and
without intanglements, and grounds of scrupling, that he leaves it to Christian
Prudence to consider, whether, as matters now stand, the Lord be not rather
calling them to preach his Name on the mountains, seeing that way has been so
blessed, and Adversaries are not really repenting, and that such a Permission
could not flow from good, but ill Principles. I remember, I have answered to
this before, and showed the vanity of these Reasons; and hence it appears, that
his design is to put Ministers and people in a State of Hostility with the
Magistrate; he is not for receiving from them, according to the dictates of the
Author of the Cup of cold Water; but enough of this before. I hope no judicious
person will imagine, that such wild conceits, viz. That it is unlawful for
Ministers to settle in any particular Charge, when a great part of the Land is
prejudged against the work of God, that the peaceable exercise of the Ministry
granted by the lawful Magistrate, is to be refused, if the Magistrate be not a
real Penitent, and if he have not gracious Principles and good designs in
granting that which he ought to grant; I say, I hope that no judicious person
will imagine, that because the Author is designed a Presbyterian in the
Title Page, that these and the like Conceits scattered through the History, are
the opinions of Presbyterians.

The 8th. Objection may be thus proponed; The peaceable, safe exercise of the
ministry graned by the Magistrate, is a mercy promised by the Lord, and of
great import to Souls, etc. and therefore it should not be rejected but
accepted. What he answers, That the Gospel may be preached, though the
Magistrate grant not the peaceable exercise of preaching, as it was by Christ
and the Apostles, is true; but it is nothing to the purpose: he should have
showed, That Christ or his Apostles refused the Magistrates Permission to
preach when it was granted. Paul was so far from rejecting such a grant, that
he entreats for it, Act. 21.39. I beseech thee suffer me to speak unto the
people. 2. He would make the world believe, That the outed Ministers had left
their Charges out of a Principle of reasonless fear, and were like Solomon's
Sluggard, who imagines a Lion to be there, where Lions use not to be; Lions use
not to haunt Ways and Streets: but the hazard of those Ministers was not
feigned; they did not fear where no fear was; he should have remembered how this
Lion frighted himself so far, that in his fear he engaged to put the broad Sea
betwixt him and that Lion. He says, The Gospel might have been preached without
this Indulgence, though with less ease, peace and quietness to the Preachers
and Hearers; yet he is sure with more inward quietness of mind, and acceptance
with God, and with more ground of hope of a rich Blessing to follow their
pains, as experience has proven.

Ans. 1. These are his own imaginations. 2. Experience has not proven that
they who have rejected the peaceable exercise of their ministry, when they
might have had it in a lawful way, have had more success in preaching, or more
inward peace in choosing a way of preaching, that exposed them to molestation,
than they would have had, if they had embraced the peaceable exercise of their
ministry. Indulged Ministers could not have peace and quiet in their minds to
reject the offer of the peaceable exercise of their ministry. And the assurance
of this Author. That they would have had more quietness in refusing than in
choosing the peaceable exercise of their ministry, is no evidence to the
contrary this is no Demonstration. The Author of the History of the Indulgence
was sure, that the indulged Ministers would have more peace and success in
refusing, than in embracing the peaceable exercise of their ministry; and
therefore they should have refused it; the indulged Ministers must have better
surety for the consequence than his assurance.

The 9th Object. is very confusedly proponed and as confusedly answered,
interrogativis dan^ sunt debita responsiva. I have some other thing t^ do, than
to be his Interpreter in unravelling such ravelled Discourses; any thing that
he saw in his Answer against the indulged Ministers has been frequently
refuted.

He answers to the 10th. Objection, by saving That we saw that by the
Indulgence, there (...) express Deputation, etc. He has a faculty of seeing
that which is not really visible, vitium est in organo, we are not obliged to
see with his eyes which were vitiate with an ill humor. The indulged Ministers
were lawfully settled in their respective Charges, as has been often cleared.

He has vitiate the 11th. Argument by foisting in it one of his own
Imagination, That the relaxation of the Restraint formerly laid on, was sinful
upon the Granters part, which is a notorious falsehood; for it was the
Magistrates Duty to grant such a Relaxation. After several Discourses which are
not to the purpose, he grants in his 5th. Answer, That after an Universal
overthrow of the Privileges of the Church; we may lawfully accept of little,
when more cannot be had; and so he yields the Cause, and undoes what he has
been formerly doing. What he adds, That that little must be such as was not
unlawful at any time to be accepted of; and that we must accept it in another
manner than could ever have been accounted a sinful compliance, is no evasion
for him; for the Relaxation was lawful in its self; and the manner of
acceptance was no sinful compliance, and could never truly be accounted sinful.

To his 6th. I answer, That the peaceable liberty of public preaching cannot
be had without the Magistrate; and until he prove, that the peaceable exercise
of the Ministry is a needless thing, and the Relaxation or the Grant of ^he
peaceable exercise of the Ministry, an Usur^ation; he cannot prove the
Acceptance of that Relaxation to be a needless compliance with, or a
Confirmation of any Usurpation.

In the 12. Objection he has foisted in one of his own suppositions, That the
Relaxation (so often mentioned before) was an insufferable imposition, which is
manifestly false; If there was any defect in the Ministers when they were at
first turned out, the Author of this History was as defective as his
Neighbors. By resisting unto blood, I suppose he does not mean, that Ministers
should have continued preaching in their own Pulpits, till they had been killed
in them; our Savior allows Ministers, when they are persecuted in one City, to
flee to another; he did not himsef continue preaching at Rotterdam after he was
commanded by the Magistrate to remove, till his Blood was shed. The indulged
Ministers accepting of a part of what was formerly taken from them, is not a
parting with a hoof, nor does it put them in any incapacity to use any lawful
means in their places and stations for recovering former privileges.

He supposes in the 13th. Objection, That the Magistrates principal Design in
this matter, was the establishment of his own Supremacy; but how can that be
proven, That the Magistrate in granting the safety of the exercise of the
Ministry, did intend the establishment of any sinful Supremacy? this cannot be
proven from the Magistrates Act of Relaxation; for this was an Act of that
Authority which is of God, an Act of lawful Civil power; if this Act have no
tendency to such an intent, how can he conclude, that this was confessed by the
Magistrates Design? for the Magistrate has not by deed or word confessed it;
but the Author, like some others, concludes many things by guessing; they lay
Foundations by guess, and build up conjectural Superstructures upon these
conjectural Foundations. But suppose the Magistrate had such a Design, this
could no way vitiate the practice of the indulged Ministers, as has been
frequently manifested.

The 14th. Argument may be proposed thus; When the Magistrate grants to
Ministers the peaceable exercise of the ministry in one Act, and in another
Act, by way of command, and not by way of paction, superads Instructions, which
those Ministers cannot observe; if these Ministers accept of the peaceable
exercise of their Ministry, and not only observe not the Instructions, but also
declare to the Magistrate, That they cannot receive such Instructions; these
Ministers do their duty in choosing what is good, and refusing what is evil; but
the indulged Ministers did so, and therefore they did what was their Duty.

He answers, 1. That though the Magistrate thought it below them to act any
otherways than by way of command; yet the nature of the thing says, That the
accepting of the first, does virtually engage to the second; both making up one
complex grant, or one Indulgence so qualified.

I reply, 1. That he knew by experience, that the Magistrate can come so low,
as to require consent by Subscription; but the Magistrate did not require of
the indulged Ministers to promise either by word or writ to observe these
Instructions.

2. I perceive when the Author knows not what to answer, he alleges* That the
nature of the thing says what he would say; but neither the nature of this
thing, nor the nature of any other thing says, That the accepting of good, does
virtually engage to the accepting of evil; nor does Nature say, That the Act of
Instructions was an Act of Indulgence; it being a gravaminous Act; now an Act
imposing things that are grievous, is not an Act of Indulgence, nor does nature
say, that these two Acts are one Act; for though they were made by the same
Magistrate, for the same Ministers; yet they were different Acts, and as
distinct in their natures, as good and evil are; and the Ministers did wisely
distinguish them one from aother, in accepting the one, and giving Reasons why
they could not receive the other.

2. He says, Though the Council did not call for any formal or express
engagements from them unto the performance of these Injunctions, yet their
carriage to Mr. Blair upon his renouncing of these Injunctions, shows, that
they meant those Instructions for Conditions; this also they declared in their
after-Proclamations. I answer, If the Injunctions, as he grants, were not at
first given as Conditions by way of paction, seeing the Council did not call
for any engagement from the Ministers to the performance of these Injunctions,
no After-acts of the Council could turn what the Council had long before acted
by way of command, into a pactional transactation; if the After-act of any
person or Society could turn their own Commands, or Directions given to others,
into Pactions, without the consent of those to whom such Commands or Directions
were given, it would make a strange reel in the World, and men should thus be
involved by Paction to perform Conditions, though they never consented, yea,
though they declared they did not, nor could not consent.

2. Although the Council had showed by their imprisoning of Mr. Blair, that
they meant those Injunctions for Conditions, that being so long after the
Indulgence, it could no way constitute the nature of the Indulgence, which had
its being and existence long before.

3. The meaning of one Party, though showed, will not make a Paction, except
the other party consent.

4. The Author grants, That Mr. H. spoke the same upon the matter that Mr.
Blair did; and so did several others who were before the Council at that time;
and the Magistrate, as I am readily informed, said, That it was some
circumstances of what was done by Mr. Blair, that occasioned his imprisonment.

But 5ly. Suppose he had been only imprisoned upon that account, because he
would not receive those Injunctions; that will not prove, that the Magistrate
did mean them for Conditions; for the Magistrate often imprisoneth men for
disobeying Acts of Council, though the persons imprisoned have made no promise
to obey those Acts; and though the Injunctions which they obey not, were never
meant by the Council for Conditions.

6. Suppose the Magistrate had in the very Acts of Indulgence, signified that
they had meant those Injunctions for Conditions; and had put in those
Injunctions as Conditions in the Acts of Indulgence. I do not see how this
would have rendered their ministerial actings in the Parishes to which they were
indulged unlawful, nor rendered those Ministers any ways guilty, providing that
they had no ways consented unto those Injunctions. Suppose Pharaoh had granted
liberty to the Midwives to do their Office to the traveling Hebrew Women, upon
condition that they should kill the Male-Children; this should not have barred
the Midwives from that work of mercy toward the Hebrew-Women in Childbirth;
and if the Midwives had no way consented to this Condition, they would have no
ways been guilty of any sin; though necessary Duties be clogged with sinful
Injunctions imposed by men, they should not be omitted; but the Duties should
be done, and the sinful Injunctions disobeyed. And suppose the Midwives knew
that Pharaoh would have restrained them from doing that Labor of Love, that
work of necessity and mercy to the Laboring Women; if they had foretold, that
they would not kill the Male-Children, I think they did better to hold their
Tongue, than to put themselves out of a capacity to do so needful a Duty to the
Travailing-Women; but there is no need of this for vindicating the practice of
the indulged Ministers, because they declared to the Magistrate, That they had
received full Prescriptions from Christ, which they behoved to observe; and
that they could not receive such Prescriptions as the Magistrate gave.

What he says in his 3d. about accepting a favor with a burden; and the
similitude of a Father granting a Portion of Land, and enjoying the payment of
Debts, is before answered. The impertinency of that Similitude is very
palpable; if a Father should command his Son to worship God in secret Prayer,
and withal give him some superstitious Directions; the Son were not to neglect
secret Prayer, because of those supeardded superstitious Injunctions. But it is
time for me to weary of Repetitions.

In Object. 15. he supposes, That the acceptance of the favor, had need of a
Purgation by a Protestation; but the granting of the safe and peaceable
exercise of the Ministry, ought not to have been protested against. The many
accounts upon which he says the accepting of the Indulgence was so foul, that
no Protestation could have salved the matter; we have found upon examination to
come to no account.

To the 16. Object. which rationally concludes. That the Magistrates allowance
being directed to none but to Ministers antecedently ordained, cannot be a just
ground of Scruple. He answers, That this allowance being more than a
Permission, did flow from the Supremacy, and import the deriving of a Power to
exercise the Function in such a place from the Magistrate. I reply, the
allowing of Ministers to preach the Gospel, is the Magistrates Duty, and flows
from no other Supremacy, than that which every Magistrate has, as supreme
Magistrate in his own Dominions. If Magistrates should maintain, defend,
protect Ministers in the exercise of their ministry, they should allow them to
preach; otherways they should be obliged to maintain, etc. what they do not
allow. He granted before, That the Magistrate may command Ministers to preach
the Gospel, and command imports allowance, and something more; and where there
is no settled Judicatories in the Kirk, which outed Ministers own, to settle
Ministers in particular Charges, if the Magistrate may not in that case settle
Ministers in particular Charges, but only command them to preach where they
please, some places where there were most need of preaching, might be left
utterly destitute, and the Magistrate could do nothing to remedy that evil.

We heard that the second Book of Discipline is for the Magistrates placing
Ministers in some cases; and therefore to offend at the word Allowance, is not
the kindly work of a well-informed, tender Conscience; but an effect of
Ignorance Although we should be displeased at sin, yet we should never offend or
stumble (for offending properly imports stumbling) at sin much less at what is
lawful: all stumbling is sin, and flows from sin, and not from due Tenderness.

His answers to the 17 Obj. are his own false imaginations; for what the
indulged Ministers did, was no virtual invalidating of their prior Ordination:
Nor 2. did it say, That as to the Ministry, they depend upon any power in the
Magistrate, as the fountain of their Ministry: It Is true, the peaceable and
safe exercise of their Ministry is from the Magistrate under God, who has
appointed Magistrates to be the shields of the earth, and nursing fathers to
his Church. Nor is the acceptance of this favor a subjection unto any
incroachment. Nor is this the Question, whether the restraints, formerly laid
on, were vincible or not, but whether the relaxation of these restraints was to
be accepted or rejected. He cannot but acknowledge, that the Magistrates
enjoining and warranting, as he words it, includes a permission to Preach, and
is a real relaxation of former restraints, and in so far might be made use of;
but if the Author would have dealt fairly, he should have retained the words,
which the Magistrate made use of in the Acts of Indulgence, and not foisted in
his own words. The refusal of this relaxation, when the Magistrate offered it,
would have been an offense and scandal to many persons; and it would have been
so far from defeating Erastianism, that it could only have evidenced the
refusers to be ignorant of the Erastian Controversy, and bred this false
conceit, that the Magistrates relaxing of Civil restraints, which hindered the
peaceable exercise of the Ministry; or that the Magistrates granting the
peaceable exercise of the Ministry, by permitting and allowing Ministers to
Preach and exercise the other parts of their Ministry, is the exercise of
Erastianism. The right way which the indulged Ministers took, was to accept of
what was good, and to refuse what was evil, and to give Reasons for their
refusal.

Neither did they virtually acknowledge any of the Magistrates wrongs, as he
alleges in his 4 where he adds, that their plain Declaration to purge
themselves, will be but a contradiction and condemnation of their own deed,
because the imposer can only put a sense and gloss upon his own injunctions,
and the granter of a warrant and favor, on the same; and in his sense, it is,
at least, virtually accepted, by all who accept of it, if plain dealing be
owned; and I suppose Ministers when dealing with the Council, should not walk
upon fallacies, or on mental reserves, or on what is equivalent. Answ. The
Indulged Ministers declared plainly to the Council what they did accept, and
what they could not receive, as we heard before; but he thinks, that if they
accepted of the favor, they could not by the plainest Declaration purge
themselves from acknowledging the Magistrates wrongs; that is a hard case, that
men cannot accept of what is good and right from the Magistrate, but they must
necessarily acknowledge the Magistrates wrongs: That Is strange, that they
cannot distinguish and separate good from ill, and right from wrong; and that
their purging themselves from acknowledging what is wrong, is a contradiction
to and condemning their own deed, whereby they accepted of what was good. It
seems the Author has had some newfound Laws of contradiction, for by the old
rules by which contradictions were wont to be judged, there will be no
appearance of a contradiction found here. Was the Magistrates wrongs the
Ministers deed? But he will prove what he has said; let us hear how he will
convince these Ministers, that they have contradicted and condemned themselves.
Because, says he, the imposer can only put a sense and gloss upon his own
instructions, and the granter of a warrant and favor on the same: And in his
sense it is at least virtually accepted by all who accept of it. And therefore
the Ministers who accepted of the favor of the peaceable exercise of their
Ministry, did condemn this acceptance, by their plain Declaring, that they
could not receive the instructions. Answ. A goodly Demonstration, only it has
two faults; that it has neither Reason, nor the appearance of Reason in it,
and deserves no other answer but laughter. 1. If injunctions imposed be
ambiguous, and are as capable of one sense as of another, then the imposer can
best show what is the sense, which is his sense, and they on whom such
injunctions are imposed, should desire the imposer to declare his meaning, that
they may be clear. If he do not explain his sense, then if the words be capable
of a good sense, and of an ill, they should deal so heartily as to show the
imposer that they cannot keep such an injunction in the ill sense which it is
capable of, but if the injunctions be given in words which are not in
themselves ambiguous, but are clear, according to the common and generally
received acceptance of them, then the imposer cannot in reason find fault, if
these injunctions be observed according to the common received sense of the
words; neither can he put any sense he pleases upon words, which by common use
have a determinate sense, for this would breed nothing but confusion; for if
the sense of plain words in an injunction did depend not upon the common sense
of all men, who use such words, but upon the mere will of the imposer, then by
the word, light, he might mean darkness; and by the word, good, he might mean
evil; and by the word, East, he might mean West; and by true Holiness, he might
mean Superstition and Idolatry: And therefore this assertion of the Author,
that the imposer can only put a sense and gloss upon his own injunctions, must
be taken with a grain of salt. 2. This assertion is nothing to the purpose in
hand, for the sense of the Magistrates injunctions in the act of instructions,
was clear enough: If the Ministers had received them in one sense, and the
Magistrate had given them in another, there had been some reason for this
Discourse about the sense of injunctions; but there was no Question betwixt the
Magistrate and Ministers about the sense of the injunctions; the Ministers were
clear enough, as to the Magistrates meaning, but they declared, they could
receive no such Ecclesiastical instructions from the Magistrate, and that they
had full prescriptions from Christ to regulate them in the exercise of their
Ministry, and that they behoved in the discharge thereof, to be accountable to
him. Now seeing they did not receive the injunctions at all, they received them
in no sense, and therefore his Discourse about the sense of injunctions, is to
little sense, and to no purpose in this place. 3. As to the favor of the safe
exercise of their Ministry in the paroches, to which they were indulged; the
sense of the Magistrate was clearly enough known by the Acts of Indulgence,
which did show, that notwithstanding of restraints formerly laid upon them,
they might now have the peaceable safe exercise of their Ministry, in these
paroches. And Mr. Hutcheson in his Speech to the Council, in name of his
Brethren, accepted of the favor of the free liberty of the Public exercise of
their Ministry, after so long a restraint, and of the Protection of Lawful
Authority. This was very plain dealing with the Council, and was not a walking
upon fallacies or mental reserves, nor on what was equivalent to these, as this
Author falsely alleges. If any be pleased to imagine, that the Magistrate had
some sense lurking in his own mind, which was not expressed in the Acts of
Indulgence, the Indulged Ministers are not accountable for such imaginary
senses. What they accepted was plainly imported in the Acts of Indulgence; and
they plainly declared, what it was that they did accept. So that this Authors
reasoning, that because the imposer can only put a sense upon his own
injunctions, etc. therefore the Indulged Ministers in declaring they did not
acknowledge any of the wrongs of the Magistrate, did contradict and condemn
their own deed, is a because that has no cause in it, a fallacy, a non causa,
pro causa; or rather it has not so much color as to deserve the name of a
fallacy; and it will deceive none who have any skill of Reasoning, except it be
such as have a mind to be deceived.

To the 18. and last Objection, which says, That the acceptance of the
Indulgence, imports no subjecting of the Ministry to men's arbitrary disposal,
but only a subjecting of the persons of Ministers to the Magistrate. He
Answers, That the Act of Indulgence did not only mention Ministers repairing
to such or such places, but spoke likewise of the exercise of their Ministry,
which it allowed them. I Reply: This is an ill Argument; the Act of Indulgence
spoke of the exercise of the Ministry, and allowed the exercise of it, and
therefore the acceptance of the Indulgence was a subjecting of the Ministry to
men's arbitrary disposal. If the Magistrates allowing of the exercise of the
Ministry, does subject the Ministry to the will and arbitrary disposal of men,
then the Magistrates allowing of the exercise of the Ministry must be an ill
thing, no way desirable; and so the Magistrate would be obliged not to allow of
the exercise of the Ministry; these are pitiful absurdities. What he adds
concerning the prescribing of several Rules, is impertinent, for the Act of
Instructions was not the Act of Indulgence, and it was not accepted by the
Indulged Ministers: But he will prove that their Ministry was subject to the
arbitrary disposal of men, because they were made liable to punishment, for not
observing the Rules and Injunctions prescribed. If this Argument were good, it
would prove all the Non Conformists in Scotland to be Conformists, and subject
to Prelacy, because they are all liable to punishment by the Law, for not
observing the Laws requiring Conformity to Prelacy: But these things are not
worthy to be repeated. In his 2. he says, These Sufferings indeed declared a
subjection of their Persons, but their silence shall be found, I fear, to have
done more, and their former sin can be no ground to justify their present
practice, in accepting of this Indulgence, which instead of being a relaxation,
is a further wreathing of the yoke about our necks. I Answer, He had done
better to have expressed his fears concerning his own silence, than to have
expressed his fears of the silence of the outed Ministers of the Church of
Scotland, they might preach as they had access, though he did not know of it,
it became him to be very sparing in censuring others for silence, who by his
own subscription obliged himself not to be, and so not to preach in Britain or
Ireland. I have seen this deed of his loaded with a great many Absurdities, and
aggravated from this, that he was in no hazard of his life, or of any great
suffering: But having heard from one intimately acquainted with him, that the
man was naturally timorous, though he were alive, I would pity him, but being
dead, I shall not so much as repeat the Absurdities, with which, this deed of
his is loaded: Only it needs not seem very strange if he who was so far
transported with the passion of fear, when there was no great hazard, as to
quit the exercise of his Ministry in these three Nations, has been so far
transported by other passions, as to inveigh against the Lawful exercise of the
Ministry, of these who could not in Conscience neglect the opportunity of the
peaceable exercise of their Ministry, when the Lord in his good Providence
inclined the heart of the Magistrate to grant it. That which they accepted was
no yoke of bondage, but a very desirable Liberty, the Liberty of the peaceable
exercise of their Ministry, under the Protection of Lawful Authority.

Having answered the Authors Reasons against the Indulgence, as it was
accepted, and refuted his Answers to the Objections, which in his conceit
contained all that could be said in defense of that acceptance. I refer the
refutation of the falsehoods, which are in the Historical part of this History,
to those who are better acquainted with the matters of Fact than I am. It were
fit that the Brethren who find themselves wronged by this Historian, should
truly represent matters of Fact, relating to them which are misrepresented by
this Historian; that both the unreasonableness of his Reasons, and the falsehood
of his stories might be known to all.

I shall only say somewhat for the Vindication of these of the Indulged
Ministers, who appeared before the Council in July, 1673. that the Honesty and
Faithfulness of those Ministers, and the unreasonableness of the slanders of
this Historian may appear. I shall the rather take some notice of this part of
his story, because as it takes up a great part of his Book, from Page 58 to 85,
so the Author has here done all he could to render those Ministers
contemptible. And I have now before me, not only the Narrative, a part whereof
this Author has insert in his Book, which was written by one, as I am
informed, who was not present, but also a Narrative written by one who was
present, who has written a full answer to this History of the Indulgence,
which, if it come to the hands of the Author of the Epistle prefixed to this
History, it will, I hope, convince him that he was far out in his Prognostics,
when he said, that the Reason of this History would never be answered but by
clamor, for in it he may see his own and the Historians unreasonable clamours
solidly refuted by sound Reason. In this Answer, the Reverend Author, who was
one of those Ministers, who were cited before the Council, for not keeping the
29th. of May, has set down the matter of Fact, and refuted the quibblings of
the Author of the History. I refer the Reader for full satisfaction to the
Authors Answer, and shall only make use of so much of his paper as may
sufficiently clear those Ministers, and Evidence that they refused Obedience to
those Instructions, and gave a sufficient testimony against them. Those
Ministers were interrogate by the Council, whether or not they had Preached
upon the 29th. of May? Two or three of them who had Preached that day, upon the
account that it was their ordinary Lecture-day, replied that they had Preached;
whereupon they were commanded forth: All the rest answered, that they had not
Preached; and being interrogate wherefore they did not Preach? They Replied (as
they had before agreed) that they were not free to observe any Anniversary day
of Humane institution for Religious Worship, and that because they saw no
ground for it in the Word of God; besides which they could not act in the
matters of Gods solemn Worship. Whereupon they were fined by the Council in the
half of a years stipend, which Act was intimated to them the Tuesday following.
1. Hence it appears that there was no ground to allege, that those two or
three who Preached, did observe the 29th. of May: And it had been a reasonless
and ridiculous thing to have forborne to preach upon their ordinary Lecture-day
because it was the 29th. of May. 2. Nor any ground for quarrelling at the
Indulged Ministers, for not speaking against the Narrative of an Act of
Parliament, that was neither in their Summons, nor yet in their Sentence, and
which was really made void by that Act made in the foregoing August, which was
put in the place of that Act, which was in Sess. 2. of Parliament 1. 1662.

The Brethren being removed, some of them were called in together upon
particular Summons, for Baptizing of Children in other Congregations: and that
defense, which the Informer speaks of, that the instructions had not been
intimate, did, as the answerer of the History of the Indulgence informs, drop
unwarily from the mouth of one. He says further that there were other Indulged
Ministers there, who had never seen a double of the Instructions, and hence
very rationally infers, that they could not be the condition upon which they
received the Liberty to exercise their Ministry without molestation. If the
Council had designed them for Conditions, they would have sent them as soon as
the Indulgence, and would have made surer work in their intimation. And
whatever was their Design in giving these Instructions, they cannot be with any
Reason or Sense supposed to be the Condition upon which the Ministers accepted
the Indulgence, seeing it was accepted by them ere they saw the Instructions,
and many of them had not seen the Instructions for some years after they had
exercised their Ministry in these Parishes to which they were Indulged. He
shows also that the inferences which the Historian draws from that defense,
viz. That it contained a tacit acknowledgment, that they would not have done
what they did, if the Act had been intimate to them, and that in time coming,
they would willingly obey them, and consequently, that the injunctions were
just and righteous, and such as neither they, nor any other, should, disobey,
whether because of the matter, or because, of the power enjoining them, are
without all Reason, and will not follow from that Antecedent, by thrice
nineteen. Seeing this only follows, that therefore they ought to be free of
all damage intended, because of that Fact. And further, he shows, that the
Answer which the Historian suggests, viz. That they might not be answerable to
their Master, to refuse to Baptize any Child within the Covenant, brought to
them for that end, is a lax tale; for 1. (says he) it will be hard for him to
make out such an Obligation. 2. The Order of the Church determines the
contrary. 3. They must have it testified that they are within the Covenant. 4.
That the Parents, at least the presenters, are not scandalous. 5. And that they
are not grossly ignorant, or if the testimony be not from one who takes
inspection of their knowledge, they must examine them in the grounds of
Religion. He adds after all this; there was a Macer sent to the utter Council
House, who summoned the whole number of these Ministers, to compear before the
Council on Tuesday next.

He adds, that in the interval betwixt that Thursday and the Tuesday in the
ensuing week, they met frequently every weekday, and twice upon the Tuesday:
And partly from memory, and partly from draughts of papers, which he had by
him, he shows, that at their very first meeting, one of their number told them,
that he heard a whisper, that subscribed doubles of the Instructions would be
delivered to them at their next compearance. Whereupon they thought fit, that
there should be a draught of a paper, bearing in it a Testimony, not only
against the matter of the injunctions, but also, and mainly against the undue
power of Ecclesiastic Supremacy, assumed by the Magistrate, from upon some of
them at least (as was generally apprehended) had both their formation and
injunction, and not only against it, as productive of these, but also of all
other things of that Nature since the year 1660. Afterward there was a draught
produced, containing in its Narrative a thankful acknowledgment of the taking
off Restraints, and for granting the safe outward Liberty of the exercise of
the Ministry, as also, a sad complaint of what was grievous in the three Acts
of Council, Sep. 3. 1672. complexly taken. Next there was a full and clear
Assertion and Declaration of what was due to the Magistrate about Ecclesiastic
Affairs, and what was not due to him in Ecclesiastic matters, in a strict
consonancy unto the Judgment and Expressions of the greatest of the
Anti-erastian Divines. Then there was a representation of Grievances, in seven
full Paragraphs, more particularly of all contained in the foresaid three Acts,
and most particularly of those contained in the Act of Injunctions; all which
carry in their bosom a testimony against the sinfulness and Usurpation
manifested in these matters of Grievance. And lastly, There was a full Petition
for Redress. This Paper was looked upon, as too large, and therefore a shorter
draught was fallen upon, not differing as to Method, nor yet as to Matter and
Substance, but only contracted in fewer words; a double whereof (says the
Answerer of this History) I have in my hand; and I remember it was much
debated, as to the alteration, detracting and adding of words and clauses; but
what those particular Debates were, I cannot so distinctly remember, only one
thing I do distinctly remember, that the principal Debate was about the adding
of a Clause unto the close of a Paragraph about the Injunctions or Instructions
for the further clearing of it, the Clause was conceived in these words, That
we cannot receive from the Magistrate any Instructions in Regulating us in the
exercise of our Ministry. How this Debate came to a close, the Informer does
truly relate; for it being overtured, that instead of the former Clause, this
should be insert, viz. We cannot receive from the Magistrate Instructions
formally and intrinsecally Ecclesiastical, for regulating us in the exercise of
our Ministry. All did acquiesce.

This Paper being complete upon Tuesday before twelve hours it was appointed to
be drawn in fair writ, that after Dinner it might be Subscribed before their
Appearance before the Council. But at that time, on a sudden the turning of it
into a Directory (as the Informer says) and the appointing of one in their name
to declare the substance of it before the Council, was generally consented unto
by Indulged and not Indulged. In voting who should be their mouth, the whole
votes ran upon Mr. George Hutcheson and Mr. Alexander Blair, and each of them
voted to other, and Mr. H. had the greater number by very few. Upon their
compearance before the Council, the Clerk of the Council did read in their
hearing an Act, wherein each of them were fined in the half of a years stipend;
after the reading whereof, Mr. Hutcheson, addressing his Speech to my Lord
Chancellor, after he had spoken somewhat relative to the Act of Fining, added,
That their Lordships would be pleased, not to burden them with Impositions in
the matter of their Ministry, wherein they were the Servants of Christ, and
they being men who demeaned themselves as became Loyal Subjects: The Ministers
thinking themselves dismissed, turned toward the door, my L. Chancellor
required them to stay, and did appoint the Clerk to deliver to each of them a
subscribed Copy of that Act of Injunctions of Sep. 3. 1672. A good number of
those who were first in the Roll, and to whom these Instructions had not been
sent before, did take these papers in their hands, looking and expecting that
Mr. H. should have spoken the things agreed upon amongst them formerly; but he
having spoken somewhat already, thought he was not called to speak till the
Paper came to his own hand: When the Officer came to Mr. A. B. he taking the
paper in his hand, among other things, had these words, or to that purpose.

That he could not receive Instructions from them for regulating him in the
exercise of his Ministry, for if he did so, he should not be Christ's
Ambassador, but theirs: Whereupon he was by the Chancellor committed to a
Macer. Upon Mr. A. Blairs commitment to the Macer, one Minister, to wit, of
those who were in the Roll before him, said to my my L. Chancellor, He
believed that the rest of the Ministers of that Company, were of Mr. Blairs
judgment, whereof himself was one. And another said, That one of these Rules
did bring Ministers in direct subordination to Prelacy, contrary to their
Principles. Let me add; and one said, That one of these Rules was
impracticable; and all of them spoke more fully in these purposes than is here
expressed.

The very next Person in the Roll to Mr. Blair, and so ranked in the Printed
Act containing the Fining, when upon the back of that confusion, the paper was
offered to him, did to my certain knowledge, though this be omitted by the
Informer, turn toward my Lord Chancellor, and with an audible voice said, My
Lord, I adhere to that which Mr. Blair has spoken; in speaking of which words,
my L. Chancellor did stare him in the face, but yet did not commit him to the
Macer, and no wonder, seeing he spoke these words with much composure of
spirit, and without the least appearance of distempering Passion; with a
suitable Ministerial Gravity, and also with a suitable Respect unto Lawful
Authority, both in expression and gesture. Mr. Hutcheson stepping in to take
off Mr. B. and to remove any prejudice, that he apprehended the Council might
have at him, he 1. humbly desired their Lordships not to misunderstand his
Brother, Mr. Alexander Blair; for as for Rules intrinsecally Ecclesiastic for
regulating Ministers in the exercise of their Ministry, he hoped their
Lordships intended not to make or impose any such upon them, who were the
servants of Christ in these matters. He uses just the words that Mr. B. made
use of, only with the addition of intrinsecally Ecclesiastic, (a term both
intelligible, and that ought to be understood by all who meddle in these
matters) for clearing of them as was agreed upon in the paper; and so not only
homologates what Mr. B. had spoke, but also, though in modest terms, requests
for the retracting of these Rules, refuses Obedience to them, and gives a
Reason wherefore Ministers could not yield Obedience unto them; and albeit, as
the Informer says, he was dissatisfied with some circumstances in Mr. B.
speaking, and with the defectiveness of what was spoken, yet, with the matter
of it, he was never dissatisfied: Here then is a clear and plain testimony
given by Mr. H. in his own name, and in the name of his Brethren, not only
against the matter of these Rules, but also against the Power imposing them in
so far as undue. 2. In the other part of his Speech, which was in these words:
But as for the Magistrates Power objectively Ecclesiastic, whereby they might
judge of matters of Religion, in order to their own Act, whether they would
approve or discountenance such a way, he knew no Reformed Divine that did deny
it unto them; and did humbly desire again, that their Lordships would not
mistake his Brother. He added this part of the Speech to the former, because he
conceived that the Council did think that Mr. B. granted not this piece of
Power to the Magistrate, and that therefore the Chancellor was incensed; and
to rectify this mistake, he did show that this was the judgment of all
Reformed Divines, and so the judgment of his Brother, Mr. B. whom he accounted
to be one of these Reformed Divines; and he had good ground to be assured of
his assent to what he spoke, because what was due, and what was not due to the
Magistrate in, or about Ecclesiastic matters, was condescended upon in that
paper, agreed upon among themselves in private. After Mr. H. had spoken this,
another Minister said, He could not receive Ecclesiastic Canons from their
Lordships, but, as for Civil significations of their pleasure, under the hazard
of Civil Penalties, he could say nothing to that: And then another Minister did
homologate what he had spoken.

In the close of all, Mr. H. in the name of all, spoke as was formerly agreed
upon; and in the former part of his Speech did show, that a formal
Ecclesiastic Power could not be allowed to the Magistrate, though a Power
objectively Ecclesiastic was allowed to him, and did so clearly signify, that
they could not obey these Injunctions, that my Lord Chancellor answered him in
these words, and no other, Then, Sir, we will punish you: Unto which Mr. H. did
not reply in words, but only by gesture. Although this Historian sets himself
always to represent Mr. B. as separated from his Brethren, and acting in a
divided way from them, yet he was ever one with them as to Judgment, Affection,
and Action, though to their very great grief he was separated from them, as to
his suffering. 1. He agreed with them in one and the same paper to be presented
to the Council. 2. He consented wi^^ others to turn it into a Directory, and to
choose one who in the name of the rest should speak the substance of it before
the Council. 3. He had many votes, almost the half, to speak the mind of the
rest. 4. What he spoke was in the paper, and some did adhere formally, and all
did cordially and really adhere upon the matter to what was spoken by him. 5.
And what was spoken by others to that purpose, did agree with what he spoke, as
to matter, sense, and meaning. 6. After that Mr. Hutcheson had spoken to take
him off, he was offering to say, that he meant the same things which Mr. H. did
express. 7. In the Prison he made offer to some of his Brethren (a thing
certain to me, albeit the Informer speak doubtingly of it) that if it could be
a mean to liberate him, he would give it under his hand, That what Mr. H. spoke
was his very judgment. It will not be fit to take notice of every expression,
which in that Rhetorical flaunt, and to say no worse, that windy rant, which
the Historian has about page 53. But as that worthy man Mr. B. if he were
alive, would abhor the Historians overlashing commendations of him, to the
defaming of all his fellow Brethren: So it will not be unfit for the
vindication of these, whom the Historian labors to defame, to add a few
particulars. 1. Some of these Ministers who were before the Council did not
take any of these papers in their hands, albeit they had never seen an
authentic Copy before; others did, and so did Mr. B. whether he let his Copy
drop out of his hand, I can neither affirm, nor deny, neither think I it any
thing material: Others, for any thing I know, might also have dropped them
after the same manner; but whether they did that, or whether they carried them
away in their hands or pockets, is little to the purpose; for what ever
Testimony he gave against the things contained therein, all the rest gave the
like, and large as much: and so whatever he did in perpetuating the Testimony
of the Church of Scotland, the rest did the like. 2. That his Imprisonment
raised some noise in the City, I grant; but how it could carry with it some sad
reflection on the rest, I cannot see, seeing they had given as full a Testimony
as he had given, and they were not obliged to commit themselves to Prison,
because he was committed. 3. True it is, these Ministers met together after his
commitment, to deliberate, if possibly they could do any thing for his
Releasement, with whom also there met some serious and judicious Ministers in
the Town, who had met with them several times before. It is true, that some of
these having heard the Forgeries and Lies which presently flew from about the
Parliament House, did overture and press the doing of something for owning and
seconding Mr. Blairs Testimony, etc. And this they did not out of shame and
sorrow for the unfaithfulness of the rest, as the Historian insinuates, but
for obstructing the obloquy and clamor of the Vulgar. But every thing done and
spoken before the Council by any, either in their own name, or in the name of
others, being brought forth, considered, canvassed and examined, they were
convinced, that any such thing was needless and impertinent; yea, the taking of
a groundless guilt upon them: What he has farther here, is the forgery of his
eccho's at Edinburgh: 4 What he has further here is nothing but forgery and
calumny; as that the proceedings of these Ministers were point blank contrary
to the actings of the Kirk of Scotland, and the Faithful in it, and that there
was a motion made of writing about the Magistrates Power in Church matters, and
that there was need of new Principles to justify their proceedings. 5. I
cannot pass his raking into the ashes of worthy Mr. H. If the comparison were
not a disparagement to a Person of such worth, I would say, that for grace, for
gifts, for Ministerial qualifications of all sorts, for usefulness in his
Generation, and service unto his Lord and Master therein, and for usefulness to
the Church of God in after Generations also. Mr. G. H. was a Person above the
Historian, and that he was free both of Pedantus and Plagiarie, his most useful
Works left behind him does declare; wherein every thing is judiciously drawn
out of the Fountain of the Word of God, and not by way of cloutry out of Humane
Authors, and that he had the least tincture of the Opinion of Vedelius, is a
thing that cannot be made out from his Writings or Actings.

Although I need not add any thing to the commendation of Mr. Hutcheson, whose
Works praise him in the Churches; yet having had occasion to be intimately
acquainted with him, and having found him misrepresented by some, I cannot
forbear to do him right, after his death, in representing him justly as I found
him, in frequent conversing with him. I found him to be a very lovely man, of a
sweet, amiable, loving and compassionate disposition; a man of great candor
and ingenuity, and though of eminent gifts, yet very lowly and condescending to
these, who were of low degree. I found him ready to receive light in Theology
from those who were every way far inferior to him, as might be made out by
many pregnant instances, and how much he was regretted, and his death lamented
by the Godly Ministers and Professors in the place he lived, and through the
Land is so well known and notore, that it were needless to be at pains to clear
it to any that is in this our Church; his name for eminency in abilities
Ministerial of all kinds, and Piety, being so savoury and Famous therein, and
his Works for the Churches good, so much approven, and applauded by eminent
Divines abroad, together with the experience both of Godly and Judicious
Ministers and Professors at home, do sufficiently to the stopping of the mouth
of all detraction and envy, commend him in the gate. 6 That the rest of the
Ministers did reproach their Brother Mr. Blair, is a forgery, either minted in
his own brain, or coined by some of his correspondents. It Is true, that some of
these Ministers, who did go to my L. Chancellor that Afternoon, to plead for
his Releasement, did declare, that my L. Chancellor did not lay the weight of
his being Imprisoned, upon what he spoke, but upon other things which he did
highly aggravate, and I forbear to mention further, and it wa^ also said, that
he left out some words, which ha^ been agreed upon, but none can with any (...)
of Reason, call such speeches reproaches. I^ (...) false, that Micajah carried
rudely before (...) and Ahab, he carried with that compo^^^ mind and
affections, with that gravity and reverence to Lawful Authority, that did
become a Prophet of the Lord. 7. I pass his uncharitable insinuation, That the
rest of the Ministers had not prayed that day for Counsel and Courage, in Order
to their appearance, etc. and Mr. Blairs telling of his seize, though it
be well known, that he never had the humor to talk of such things; and some
could have informed, That he bowed not the knee that morning, but in the
company of, and in conjunction with two, who were lodged with him in the same
Room. I pass several other amplifications of this Historian, and shall mark a
thing which he omits, which is this: Not long before his death, 24 hours at
most, two serious and judicious Ministers of the Gospel visiting him, and
seeing that his time could not be long, did tell him, that he was now very
shortly to compear before his Judge, and therefore did urge him to tell, if he
had Peace, in his accepting of the Indulgence, and use making of it, these
years by gone: To whom he replied, That he had not the least Challenge upon
that account; and added moreover, that he could not have had Peace, in staying
from his Charge, Forcible and Legal restraints being removed. But our Faithful
Historian passes this in silence, and also on the contrary, falsely infers, That
he Witnessed against the Indulgence, page 54. It Is true indeed, that he with
others Witnessed against the Instructions, but that he Witnessed against the
Indulgence, is most false. From this it is clear also, that in his judgment, it
was not necessary to Witness before the Council against these Instructions, or
any other thing, supposed, as intended, to be a concomitant to the Indulgence,
unless they were particularly put to it; seeing without this, he had exercised
his Ministry some years upon the account of the Indulgence, and that without a
challenge. This Narration of the matter of Fact I have taken out of the Answer
of the History of the Indulgence: The Reverend Author of that Answer is a
Person of that Piety, Candor, and Integrity, that none who know him, will call
in Question the truth of what he relates concerning his own actings, and the
actings and speeches of his Brethren, of which he was an eye and ear-witness;
and which he was so much concerned to observe and remember, upon many accounts,
and which were kept in remembrance, not only by Papers, but by the Debates
which presently did arise upon these matters of Fact. I shall not say, that the
Author of the History of Indulgence has Industriously forged falsehoods in
matters of Fact, but has written according to the Informations sent to him
from some of his Correspondents. Yet, I cannot but wonder, that seeing he would
turn an Historian, and write a part of the Church History of the time in which
he lived, that he has so palpably transgressed the Laws of History, in
concealing truths, which tended to the Vindication of the Indulged Ministers,
in misrepresenting and misconstructing, and perverting their actions and
speeches, in publishing gross untruths to their prejudice: And it will not
justify him that he had no better Information. For, 1. This was a fault to
publish a History of Church Matters, of such importance and consequence,
without full and certain Information. 2. He might have had better Information,
if he would have sought for it, and seeing he would write a History, he was in
Conscience obliged to have made a most diligent search for truth, and
impartially received and related it. 3. It was a fault, that he received his
Informations from Persons disaffected to the Indulged Ministers, and did not
send to the Indulged Ministers, to hear what they had to say, concerning their
practice, and the Reasons of it, he should have had two ears, and followed the
old direction, audi alteram partem, and the rather because, he not only as an
Historian, relates matters of Fact, but upon these, he forms grievous Libels,
Accusations, and Censures, he should have heard them before he had publicly
condemned them. 4. If he had considered, that it is one of the Devils grand
designs in this time, to bring the Ministers of the Gospel, and the Gospel with
them into contempt, and had considered how effectually a lying Spirit works in
some of this generation, and how many shameless, senseless lies, which have no
appearance of truth, or probability, but have manifest Evidences of falsehood in
their face, are confidently vented against Ministers, especially Indulged
Ministers, it would have made him more cau^elous, in receiving Informations of
that nature; and he would not have suffered himself to be so miserably abused,
in receiving, nor would he have abused others, in publishing such falsehoods.
It Is sad to see how much the Father of Lies, and the accuser of the Brethren,
has prevailed by these calumnies and slanders, to bring almost all Ministers
to be despised by some. But the Lord who is excellent in working, and brings
good out of evil, has confirmed many in their adherence to the Ministry of his
Servants, and particularly to the Ministry of Indulged Ministers, and has
reclaimed some, who were beginning to be disaffected to them, by making them to
observe the activity of the Father of Lies, in calumniating these Ministers;
for the Lies being palpable, that any who will not shut their eyes, may see
them to proceed from the Father of Lies. They conclude, that there must be good
in the Ministry of the Indulged Ministers, seeing the Father of Lies does set
himself so much against it.

From the preceding Relation of the matter of Fact, the Faithfulness of these
Ministers, who were convened before the Council, July 1673. is very evident.
For suppose, it had fallen out, that they had gotten leave to speak nothing
before the Council, yet their unanimous agreeing in the paper before mentioned,
and their appointing one of their number in their presence to speak the
substance of that paper to the Magistrate; and their declared Resolution, to
adhere to what was spoken according to it, does evidence their Faithfulness and
Integrity. 2. Although, it is likely, that if that jumble had not fallen in,
through the Commitment of Mr. B. to a Macer, more would have been said; yet
that which was spoken was a Faithful Testimony, even in the judgment of the
Author of the History of the Indulgence; for he grants that Mr. B. gave an
honest Testimony, and he asserts, and very rationally proves, that Mr. H. spoke
the same upon the matter with Mr. B. and added some more, That a Power formally
Ecclesiastical could not be allowed to the Magistrate, and several others spoke
to the same purpose with Mr. H. and Mr. B. 3. That Obedience to these
Instructions, was refused, is clear from the Chancellours Answer to Mr. H.
which was in these words, Then we will punish you. And hence it is evident,
that as the Impositions and Rules intrinsically Ecclesiastical, Ecclesiastic
Canons, Rules regulating Ministers in the Exercise of their Ministry, were fit
terms to design the Impositions and Instructions which were in the Council's
Acts, as the Author of the History acknowledges; for he acknowledges, that some
of them were indeed formally and intrinsically Ecclesiastical, page 65. And he
cannot but acknowledge that all of them were Impositions; and as the words they
used, so the time, and place, and occasion, upon which they were spoken to the
Council by these Ministers, and the special Reasons given against some of these
Instructions, did clearly Evidence, that these Ministers spoke of the
Injunctions and Instructions under debate; so we see that the Magistrate
understood it so; for he would not have threatened to punish them for not
observing Instructions which he had not given to them: And as they declared
they could not receive these Instructions, so they declared they could not
accept of any Instructions of that nature from the Magistrate, and so this was
not a blind, as he alleges, page 65. but a vidimus: By which the Magistrate
might see, that they could not receive any such Rules from their Lordships.
This cuts off a great many of the Historians Quibblings. Having sufficiently
cleared these Ministers, I shall briefly touch upon some things which the
Historian carps at. He quarrels, page 64, 65. at that Assertion, That we would
not receive from the Magistrate Instructions formally and intrinsically
Ecclesiastical, for regulating us in the exercise of our Ministry. And says,
That he would not have been for subscribing a Paper, which had this in it, nor
yet for using it as a directory. He is for the Assertion, if the words formally
and intrinsically Ecclesiastical were out; but the putting of these words in
did put him out of all conceit with this Assertion. This is strange, that words
which do no way overturn or vitiate that Assertion, but clear it, should have
made such an alteration upon him; that which was a mean of harmony, and ended
all debate among the Brethren, would have divided him from his Brethren, in
this matter: I see he would have done ill, if he had been present, and no good;
and yet it may be if he had been present among his Brethren, and heard their
reasonings, he might have been better Informed. It Is a great loss to some,
especially if they have much of self-conceit, to be alone, and left to their
own solitary imagination. But let us hear what he has to say against this
Assertion: He falls upon it with Dilemma's, which threaten with two terrible
horns. Which (says he) in my judgment, was either nothing to the purpose, or
which is worse, was a betraying of the Cause. How! nothing less than Folly,
Foppery, or else Falsehood and Treachery: These Brethren had need to take heed
to themselves, for he has a dreadful Design upon them, to bereave them either
of their Wit or Honesty; he will be sure, if they be not aware, to push one of
his horns through their head, and if that miss, he will gore with the other
through the heart, he will have them to be either Fools or Knaves. If the
pushing of this horned Argument be answerable to its bellowing and lowing,
there will be a dreadful Encounter and great loss. But now having shaken these
two terrible horns, and given them fair warning, what parts to guard, he makes
a nearer approach. For (says he) either this was understood in reference to
those Rules, which the Council prescribed in their Act, Sept. 3. 1672. or not.
Yes; be sure it is either the Fox or the fern-bush: But he makes surer work
than so, for the horns of this Dilemma are contradictory, and the Brethren must
of necessity fall upon one of them; but there is no hazard yet, for the one of
the horns is harmless, it is for them, and they for it; their assertion had
reference to these Rules. He insists, and shows them two new horns: For (says
he) if it was understood with this reference, then either hereby, they meant to
justify and defend their refusing to accept of these Instructions, or to
justify their accepting of them. This last horn has a terrible appearance,
it is an uncouth, unexpected horn; but there is no hazard, for be what it will,
it is no horn; for it has no solidity when ye gripe it; and no wonder, for it
is but a Phantasm, one of the Authors vain imaginations; the Brethren never
dreamed of such a thing, as accepting, or justifying of acceptance; and as the
Author lightly made this fantastic horn, the Brethren do as lightly make
nothing of it, by disowning it, and so it is evanished; light come, light gone.
The Brethren meant by this Assertion, to refuse, and to justify their refusing
to accept of these Instructions. But he will prove that they meant not to
refuse, and justify their refusing to accept of these Instructions. 1. Says
he, Why then was Mr. Blair so much condemned, who did but refuse the accepting
of these, that had been expressed in the Act, and were then exhibited. The
Argument runs thus; The Brethren condemned Mr. Blair for refusing the
Instructions, and therefore they meant not to refuse them. The consequence is
pretty good, but the antecedent is naught, it is manifestly false; never did any
of the Brethren condemn Mr. Blair for refusing of the Instructions, for that
was the thing which they had all agreed to do, and which they did. But 2. Says
he, Why was it not plainly affirmed, that they would not receive these, which
the Council tendered unto them. Answ. It was so plainly affirmed, that the
Chancellor said, Then we will punish you. And as Mr. Blair did plainly refuse
them, so did others, and particularly Mr. H. as the Author of the History not
only grants, but proves, when he proves that Mr. H. said the same upon the
matter with Mr. B. 3. Sath he, Why was there so much debate about a general
Thesis, when the clear assertion of the Hypothesis, would have salved both
Credit and Conscience? Answ. This Argument is of the same nature with he rest,
that is, stark naught; there was a great d bate amongst the Ministers about the
wording of ageneral Thesis, and therefore they meant not to refuse the
Instructions, and to justify their refual. If it had been a Question among
them, whetler they should accept of these Instructions or not, ^e might have
made so mething out of that Question, against any that had held the
affirmative, if they had continued in that Opinion, but that was not so much as
brought under debate; they were clear, they could not receive these
Instructions; and to prevent the imposing any more injunctions of that nature
upon them, they resolved to set down a general Thesis, which might exclude all
Instructions and Injunctions of the Magistrate, which might incroach and
entrench upon the Calling of the Ministry. And any who have studied and
understood that Question of the bounds of the Magistrates, and Ministers Power
and Authority, will not wonder, if there was a considerable time taken up in
that Debate, De finibus. They who are most ignorant, are often most confident
in their decisions of these questions; but I suppose it will be ordinarily
found that they who think there is no difficulty in ridding these Marches, are
either Persons who have not read these questions, or have not understood what
they read. If I had been present with these Brethren, at that Debate, I could
have better answered his Question, Why there was so much debate about this
general Thesis: Yet as it is obvious, that it was very convenient, that they
should agree upon a general Thesis, which might prevent invasions upon the
Ministerial Calling, or at least discover them, that they might not be complied
with: So it was not easy to set down a general Rule in such ticklish matter,
which would admit of no except^ons, and prevent all cavils. The Brethren, wh^
thought the Assertion might stand, as it was first ^onceived, without the
addition of the words formally and intrinsically Ecclesiastical, had much to
say for their Opinion; that it was not competent for the Magistrate to instruct
and teach Ministers, how to exercise their Ministry, or to form Instructions,
Regulating Ministers in the exercise of their Ministry: For the forming and
prescribing Rules or Canons of that nature, is the proper Formal, Intrinsic
exercise, of Ecclesiastic Governors: As it is not competent for Ministers to
make Civil Laws and Statutes, so it is not competent for Magistrates to make
Ecclesiastic Instructions, Rules, or Canons, Regulating Ministers in the
exercise of their Ministerial Function; for this would bring the Magistrate in
upon the Calling of the Ministry, and confound these Callings, which the Lord
has made distinct. Again, the Brethren, who thought it convenient to add the
words formally and intrinsically Ecclesiastical, have considered, that although
the Assertion, without this addition, in its genuine sense, was sound, yet it
might be Interpreted by Persons disposed to Cavil and Calumniate in a wrong
sense, which would not agree with the judgment of Antierastian Divines; who
though they do not allow to the Magistrate a Power Formally Ecclesiastical, and
so allow not to him a Power of forming Canons Ecclesiastical, Regulating
Ministers in the exercise of their Ministry; yet they allow to the Magistrate
Power to Command Ministers to exercise their Ministry, and to do their Office
according to the Word of God. In the first Chapter of the Second Book of
Discipline we have these words. The Civil Power should Command the Spiritual to
exercise, and do their Office according to the Word of God. And afterward, in
that same Chapter, The Magistrate neither ought to Preach, administer the
Sacraments, nor execute the Censures of the Kirk, nor yet prescribe any Rule
how it should be done, but Command the Ministers to observe the Rule Commanded
in the Word, and punish the Transgressors by Civil means. And Chap. 10. which
is of the Office of a Christian Magistrate, in the Church, we have these words:
That it pertains to the Office of a Christian Magistrate to see, that the Kirk
be not invaded, nor hurt by false Teachers and Hirelings, nor the rooms thereof
be occupied by dumb dogs and idle bellies: To assist and maintain the
Discipline of the Kirk, and punish them Civilly, that will not Obey the Censure
of the same, without confounding always the one Jurisdiction with the other.
And afterward they add, To make Laws and Constitutions agreeable to Gods Word,
for advancement of the Kirk and Policy thereof, without Usurping any thing that
pertains not to the Civil Sword, but belongs to the Offices that are merely
Ecclesiastical, as is the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, using
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and the Spiritual execution thereof; or any part of
the Power of the Spiritual Keys, which our Master gave to the Apostles and
their true Successors. And although Kings and Princes, that be Godly,
sometimes by their own Authority, when the Kirk is corrupted, and all things
out of Order, place Ministers, and restore the true Service of the Lord, after
the Example of some Godly Kings of Judah, and diverse Godly Kings and Emperors,
in the Light of the New Testament; yet, where the Ministry of the Kirk is once
Lawfully Constitute, and they that are placed, do their Office Faithfully, all
Godly Princes and Magistrates ought to h^^r, and obey their voice, and
reverence the Majesty of the Son of God, speaking in them.

The Author of the History of the Indulgence, page 62. grants that concession
of Orthodox Antierastian Divines, That Magistrates may and should put Ministers
to their Duty, in following the Rules and Injunctions prescribed by Christ, in
their Political way, and by their Political Penalties: And hence it will
follow, that Ministers should not refuse Christ's injunctions, because the
Magistrate commands them to observe them, and by their Political Power and
Political Penalties, puts them to observe them. He grants also, That
Magistrates may Civilly confirm, and enforce Canons and Rules, Ministerially
cleared and concluded by Church Judicatories. And page 63. He distinguishes
Instructions, into these which are concerning such things, as are always
necessary to the right exercise of the Ministry, or are concerning alterable
Circumstances; which only hic and nunc, can be called necessary: And
concerning the former, he says, That the Magistrate cannot enjoin these
Ministerially, as holding forth the mind of God, because so he would not be a
Magistrate, but a Minister. But he grants, That the Magistrate may Politically
enforce these Instructions, in a well Reformed and Instituted Church, after
they have been Ministerially held forth, by the Authorized Ministerial
Interpreters of the Word. And in a Church confused and needing Reformation, he
does not deny to the Magistrate a Power to enjoin such things, as are at all
times necessary, to the right exercise of the Ministry: But he alleges, This
latter Case is not ours. But it seems he has not considered the Case of this
Church, or has had very bad Information concerning it. If the Case of this
Church had not been confused, he durst not have written and Printed such a
History, nor written Letters to encourage some young Men to counteract the
Suffering Ministers of this Church, and to refuse to be subject to them; he
might possibly, when he was in another Nation, in his study among his Books,
imagine that this Church was not confused, but well ordered, and needing no
Reformation. But alas, our Confusions and Disorders are more real than to be
removed by the force of his imagination: We see them, we find them, and they
who have any sense groan under them; and we want these Assemblies, which were a
part of the Order of this Church, and the means to preserve Order, to prevent
Confusion, or rectify Disorders, if they had entered. But he will prove, that
this Church is not confused and needing Reformation. I wish he could prove
this; but I have found his former Arguings so fallacious, that I fear this
proof prove like the rest; that is, prove nothing. But let us hear him: The
latter Case (says he) is not our Case, unless by this concession we would grant
Power and Liberty to any Magistrate to overturn the best Reformed Church; that
is, to the end he may order all things in it as he pleases, which was never
understood by the users of this distinction. The Argument runs thus: If we
grant that this Church is confused, and needs Reformation, we grant a Power and
Liberty to the Magistrate to overturn the best Reformed Church, etc. but we
cannot grant a Power to the Magistrate to overturn, etc. and therefore we
cannot grant that this Church is confused, and needs Reformation. The first
proposition is manifestly false: This is a hard case, that a poor Church
confused and disordered, may not confess to God, nor declare before Men, that
it is confused, and needs Reformation, may not relate its case, as it is, but
it must, by the confession or concession of the truth, become guilty of giving
Power and Liberty to the Magistrate to overturn the Church. There Is no shadow
of Reason for this connection; although the Church confess that the Magistrate
has overturned her, that grants no Power and Liberty to the Magistrate to
overturn the Church. Does a poor man's complaint, that his Neighbor has come
in and made Abuse and Disorder in his House, grant a power and liberty to his
Neigbour, to make Abuse and Disorder, or a Power to Order all things in it as
he pleases? Shall the complaint of an injurious Fact grant a Power and Liberty
to do injury? The Magistrates Ordering all things in the Church as he pleases,
is impertinently brought in under this head, for he is speaking of Instructions
set down in the Word of God, and which are concerning things, at all times,
necessary to the right exercise of the Ministry. If the Magistrate would give
only such Injunctions, I suppose few would complain; for all grant, that the
Magistrate may put Ministers to do their necessary Duty, prescribed to them in
the Word of God. As to the alterable circumstances, he excludes the Magistrate
from any Power in reference to these; but he does not prove what he says, for
though the Church have power to determine such Circumstances, according to the
general Rules of the Word, it will not follow, that the Magistrate has no
power in reference to these Circumstances: If he had said, that the Church
only has that power, and proved what he said, he would have said something.
If the Church has Power (says he) by what Law can the Church be robbed of
that Power given by Christ? They will easily Answer, That the Magistrate may
have power, in reference to some Circumstances, and exercise that power, and
yet not rob the Church of any power which Christ has given to it. For both the
Magistrate and Church may have some power, in reference to these common
Circumstances, and exercise it, and yet not rob one another of the power which
they have; as there are some Commons for Pasturage, which all Persons in the
adjacent bounds may make use of for Pasturage, and yet not rob one another.
Then he questions, by what right can the judgment of this matter be committed
in prima instantia, at the very first unto the Magistrate, or rather wholly and
solely to him. But this Question alters the state of the Question; for the
Magistrate may have power, in reference to these Circumstances, though he have
not the sole power; the Author of the late Apology, page 169. and 170. shows,
That both Magistrates and Ministers may upon the dispensation of Mercy and
Judgment call for Thanksgiving or Humiliation, indict days of Humiliation and
Thanksgiving; and acknowledges, that for more harmony in this public work, and
convenient following of it, with benefit and advantage, to Church and State, it
were expedient that Magistrates and Ministers did previously consult. And page
167, 168. He shows, That Magistrates may Convocate Synods: But this is not
privative of the power of Church Officers, who may and ought to come together
of themselves, as the necessities of the Church requires.

The Author of the Answer to the History of the Indulgence, has very
rationally showed, that if the Magistrate appoint the Thursday of any week, to
be a Muster-day in every Parish of his Dominions, he may discharge any Public
Sermon upon that Thursday: This is an extrinsecal circumstantial regulating or
limiting of the Public exercise of the Ministry, which cannot in Reason be
denied to the Magistrate, who finds it necessary to have a Muster of all his
Subjects who are fit to carry Arms in one day. To give the Magistrate an
unlimited power in Circumstantials, were to give him a destructive power; for
so he might appoint a House for Public Worship, which would not contain the
third part of the Parish: And to give him no power in reference to
Circumstantials, were unreasonable; and to imagine the Marches betwixt
Magistrates and Ministers, can be Mathematically defined, and brought to a very
Mathematical point, is a conceit that will not readily come in the head of any
man, who has read and understood any thing of these Questions: And I perceive
the Historian himself has a Latitude to come and go upon; for page 81, and 82.
where he says, And I shall willingly grant, that what agrees to Magistrates,
as such, agrees to all Magistrates good and bad; yet it may be maintained that
more may be allowed in such Magistrates, as are really minding Reformation,
etc. than in such as are open Enemies thereunto, etc. And, I suppose, this is
one Reason of difference among Divines in these matters; some who have lived
under Reforming Magistrates, have allowed more, and others who have lived under
Magistrates who abused their power have allowed less; and when these
concessions are calculated, according to the disposition of Rulers, which are
so variable, and not according to the Rule of the Word of God, and the natures
and ends of the Magistratical and Ministerial Offices; What wonder, if their
concessions vary one from another? All these things being considered, it was no
wonder, that these Brethren thought it convenient, to add the clause Formally
and Intrinsecally Ecclesiastical, to cast off the Cavils of these who would
have alleged, that the Assertion without this did deny all power to the
Magistrate about the extrinsick Circumstantials of the exercise of the
Ministry. And thus, I have given some Reason, why there was so much debate
about that general Thesis: The Brethren who were present at the debate, can, no
doubt, say much more than either ^e or I could dream of; for there were many
there who could have taught both him and me in these matters, or in any
Theologick Question. In wording of the Assertion, they were to look not only
to the salving of their Credit and Conscience among their Friends, who would
heartily Interpret their words, but also to obviate the cavils of Adversaries,
who were waiting for their halting, and would have been glad of any pretext to
have rendered them odious to the Magistrate. The Historian goes on in that 65
page upon that supposition, that the Assertion was thus qualified, to justify
their accepting of these Rules, and upon this supposition, he infers, that then
the cause sure was betrayed, etc. uno absurdo dato mill sequuntur. If ye will
give him leave to lay a Foundation in the Air of his own fancy, he will build
Castles in the Air; but it were a very idle work, for me to spend time in
casting down these Castles, which have no Foundation but his false imagination.

Further (says he) I suppose it will be found, that some of these Instructions
were indeed Formally and Intrinsecally Ecclesiastical, and if these were
excepted, they should have been particularly mentioned, that all might have
been clear. Answ. Then the addition of the words Formally and Intrinsecally
Ecclesiastical, to the Assertion, did exclude these, and all of that nature,
and so was added to good purpose; and why then would he not have subscribed
this Paper, or used it for a directory? Was it the worse that it did directly
exclude these Rules, which did entrench most upon the Ministerial Office? If he
say, that the excepting of these, was an accepting of the rest: I Answer, He
grants, that Mr. B. refused all, and that Mr. H. said the same upon the matter,
with Mr. B. and therefore all were refused. The confinement with all the rest
of the Injunctions, was spoken against by Mr. H. as Impositions burdening their
Ministry, and Reasons given why their Ministry should not be burdened with
these Impositions. And the addition of the foresaid words, was no ways
destructive to the words that Mr. B. spoke to the Chancellor; for if Mr. B.
had thought them to be so, he would never have acquiesced to them, in the
meeting, nor have acknowledged afterward, that Mr. H. spoke his mind; and
therefore if the words, as spoken by Mr. B. were an honest Testimony, then Mr.
Hutcheson's words, which were the same, and more ample, were an honest
Testimony; but enough of this before. And thus we see, that the horrible horned
Argument, with which he so terribly threatened these Brethren, has done no
hurt, but to himself; he has raised dust, which has blinded his own eyes, and
exposed himself to the laughter or pity of the beholders: And it is really a
great pity, that he who was fit for better work, should have so abused himself,
and wasted his precious time, in passing judgment against his Brethren, who
were Judicious and Conscientious Ministers, as men who after a long Debate,
concluded, that which was nothing to the purpose or a betraying of the Cause:
And instead of evident Reasons to confirm this Charge, bringing nothing but
falsehoods and ridiculous Fopperies.

It were but a wasting of time, and an abusing of the Readers patience, to go
through all his jumblings against the Informer; for many things in his Answers
are nothing to the purpose in hand.

His insinuation, page 65. That the Lord was away from these Brethren, and so
Light and Counsel could not remain with them, is full of Insolent boldness and
rashness; he ought in Charity to have supposed that these Brethren were met in
Christ's name, and that the Lord was in the midst of them, and with them. If he
had considered what he says in the end of that page, and beginning of the next,
of the inconsiderableness of one or two abandoning the rest of their Brethren,
it might have made him and his Colleague a little more modest in their singular
and extravagant conceits so contrary to the sentiments of the Suffering
Ministers of the Church of Scotland. He alleges, page 66. That they who were
not clear for giving in a subscribed Paper to the Council, could not be very
clear, as to the matter of the Paper: The proof of this is in a Parenthesis, (I
judge) ipse dixit; and so all is sure, and the Reader must acquiesce, it is res
judicata, and so there is no more place for Debate. His thinking strange that
these Ministers could not do that which he thinks every Minister and Servant of
Christ should be ready to give, upon less than a few hours warning, yea, at the
first demand, makes me apprehend, he has not well understood the difficulty of
ridding Marches, betwixt Magistrates and Ministers. He who thinks that any
Servant of Christ, can at demand, and off hand, decide that Question, de
finibus, does not understand it, or else he is a man of great abilities, and
withal so Charitable, as to think every Minister as able as himself. If I had
been upon the Historians Counsel, I would have advised him, to have forborne the
Imprecation which he has, page 67.. 4. and that for his own sake; for if he by
other papers, and by this History, has not administered fuel to this fire, very
many are much mistaken. Page 68. he inveighs much against Mr. H. for not
speaking sooner, and not insinuating Reasons, why they could not in Conscience
accept of these Impositions; but he himself has cleared Mr. H. for before
these papers were delivered, Mr. Hutcheson gave an honest Testimony against
these Impositions, for he said the same, upon the matter, which Mr. B. said,
which the Author commends as an honest Testimony. And page 70. proves that
there was upon the matter no difference betwixt Mr. H. and Mr. B's. words. Page
71. he wrongs the Informer, in alleging that he gives to the Magistrate a
diatactick power in an illimited and unqualified manner, as he does (says the
Historian) when he talks of the diatactick power of both; for this is a
manifest homologating of the Supremacy, as lately explained by the Parliament:
For the Informer speaks not of the manner of the Magistrates diatactick power
at all, and much less of an illimited manner of his power. The Author has in
the beginning of this page, blamed the Informer, for putting one term more than
he should in a Syllogism, and yet I find not that Logical escape in the
Informers paper, which I have, and if the Informe^ be the Person whom I take
him to be, he can make a Syllogism as well, if not better than the Author of
the story could. But I wonder, how he who blamed the Informer for putting one
term more than enough in a Syllogism, should add two terms of his own to the
Informers words, and then conclude from terms of his own making, a mani^^^
homologation of the Supremacy, as lately explained in the Act of Parliament:
This is not fair, b^^ very foul dealing. The Informer says only, tha^ the
Magistrate has a diatactick power, and the Author of the Answer to the History
of the Indulgence very rationally shows, that all power of Government is
diatactick; so that if the Magistrate ha^^ any power of Government about things
Sacred, ^^ must have a diatactick power. But to Reason th^^ he who ascribes to
the Magistrate a diatactick power, ascribes it to him in an illimited, and
unqualified manner, and homologates the Supremacy, as lately explained by the
Parliament. But the Informer ascribes to the Magistrate a diatactick power, and
therefore he ascribes it in an illimited manner, etc. and therefore, etc. is to
reason without any shadow of Reason; for there is a manifest difference, and no
appearance of identity betwixt a power diatactick and the illimited manner that
he speaks of, res differt a modo rei and praecipue a modo illimitato hoc est a
modo, qui modum nescit. Neither the word power, nor the word diatactick, nor
both of them joined together, do import an illimited boundless manner, and to
infer from the term diatactick, illimitedness, is to draw confusion, out of
Order, and quidlibet ex quolibet. I wonder that the Author did not allege
also, that the Informer ascribed this illimited, unqualified manner of
diatactick power, and a Spiritual Supremacy, to Church Judicatories; for he
ascribes this diatactick power to these also, and has not the least
insinuation, that he ascribes it in an illimited manner to the Magistrate, but
in a limited to them. But the Author has been in an ill humor, and ill
humors makes ill Arguments: Passion prompts men to make Reproaches, but has
no patience to make Syllogisms, or to take leisure to examine, whether they be
right or wrong: It disfigures both body and mind, and puts men in an ill mood,
and therefore it is no wonder, if it keep neither mode nor figure, in Reasoning.
Page 171, 172. he takes upon him to be an Instructor to the Informer; but the
Informer knew as well as himself, if not somewhat better, that the Magistrate
has no Power to make Rules Formally Ecclesiastical, for that is the work of
Ecclesiastical Governors, nor to give injunctions, or commands, which are not
good to Ministers; but after all his Instructions, the Informer, I suppose,
would have inquired at him, if the Magistrate, when it is needful, may not
command lazy Ministers to be diligent in the work of the Ministry; if he be
certainly informed, that Popish Emissaries are sent in among his Subjects, to
poison them with Error and Idolatry, may he not command the Ministers of his
Dominions, in their Doctrine, and Catechizing to guard the People against
Popery; if he find some preaching for the Worship of Images, or mispending the
time in repeating Greek and Latin Sentences to ignorant People, who knows
neither Greek nor Latin, may he not discharge them to teach Idolatry, and
command them to speak in a known tongue? If he find some not observing some
good and necessary Acts of the general Assembly, may he not command them to
observe these Acts? May he not discharge Preaching, in public, in a general
Muster-day? I suppose, the Historian would not, if here-membred the concessions
of Orthodox Divines, and the Second book of Discipline, deny this to the
Magistrate. Then the Informer would inquire, if Ministers obeying of these
Commands, were a denying of Christ, to be only head of his Church, or a
receiving injunctions from an Usurper, and a ceasing to be Ambassadors of
Christ. Is their doing that, which the Magistrate may Lawfully, and in some
cases ought to command, a crime of so horrid a nature? If it be not, then the
Informer is where he was, and he will tell him, that then the Magistrate,
though he may not make Ecclesiastic Canons, yet he has a diatactick Power, or
a commanding Power, to enjoin Ministers to do their Duty, and ought to make use
of it when there is need: And to enforce these Magistratical commands, with
Civil Penalties; as Ministers may, as Ambassadors of Christ, exhort
Magistrates to do their Duty; so Magistrates, as Gods Vicegerents, may command
Ministers to do their Duty, and yet neither Ministers may make Civil Statutes,
nor Magistrates Ecclesiastic Canons or Rules.

The Arguments by which he would persuade the Indulged Ministers, in the end of
page 72 and page 73. not to Preach in the Parishes to which they were confined,
would conclude, if they concluded any thing, that John should not have
exercised his Ministry in Patmos, nor Paul in his hired House at Rome, for they
were declared no free Subjects, and were under the scandal, as he calls it, of
disloyal and censured persons: And this exposed them, and their Ministry to
contempt in the World; but this did not render their pains fruitless, as he
alleges Paul's bonds were to the furtherance of the Gospel, Philip. 1.12, 13,
14. I wish the Author and some others had not been too like to these, who added
affliction to Paul's bonds. I wish that all concerned, may examine, whether
there has not been Preaching and Writing, out of strife and envy, and
contention. After all he has said, about Ministers confinement, it is but too
clear, even from what he grants, that their confinement is an extrinsick, local
restraint of the exercise of their Ministry. In that 73 page he grants again,
that Mr. H. spoke the same upon the matter with Mr. B. and that another said,
that diverse Ministers (the Brother who has Answered this History, who was
present, says, it was the rest of the Ministers) of that company, were upon
the matter of Mr. B's. judgment, whereof himself was one; and the answerer
adds, that one said, with an audible voice, I adhere to what Mr. B. has
spoken: And another added, That one of these Rules did bring Ministers into a
direct subjection to Prelacy contrary to their Principles. And after he has
observed, that the consternation was not so universal, as the Informer did
hint, (the Informer did speak of affliction of Spirit, but universal
consternation was minted by himself, but not hinted by the Informer) he says,
he passes these small matters, and is that a small matter, that the rest of
these Ministers, were upon the matter of Mr. B's. judgment, etc. But any thing
which was so manifestly right, in these Brethren, that he knew not what he
could say against it, he passes it as small, and makes nothing of it. But I
wonder with what face or Conscience, he could call these Brethren, who in the
face of the Council did homologate what Mr. Blair said, Mr. B's. deserting
Brethren, page 54. where he says, Mr. B. was rescued from the reproaches of his
deserting Brethren. O the mischievous efficacy of prejudice and passion, in
perverting not only men's minds and sayings, but their studied deliberate
writings, designed for the Press! This should put all, to be much in Praying,
that they be not led into temptation. And page 53. he says they left Mr. B.
alone; did they leave him alone before the Council, when they, according to the
Authors own confession, spoke the same upon the matter, and declared they were
of his judgment? Or does he design to render them odious, because they left Mr.
B. in Prison? Would he have had them imprisoning themselves, and deserting
their Paroches, and the exercise of their Ministry, because Mr. B. was
imprisoned? Had there been either Knowledge, or Conscience in shutting up
themselves in Prison with Mr. B. but any thing will furnish matter of
Accusation to an angry and prejudiced Person. Page 74. he again brings out a
horned Argument against Mr. H. Who, he says, by Rules intrinsically
Ecclesiastical, meant either the Rules which were then offered to Mr. B. or
some other. I Answer, he meant both these Rules and all other of the same
nature; and so his two horns are turned into one. He goes on: If some other,
then he could not desire their Lordships not to misunderstand Mr. B. for Mr. B.
meant and spoke of the Rules, which were tendered to him. Answ. No doubt he
spoke of these which were tendered to him, but any body that reads Mr. Blairs
words, will see that Mr. B's. words are more universal, than to relate only to
these Rules; for, he says, he could receive no Rules, etc. He adds, Nor could
he then be supposed to be speaking any thing in favors of Mr. B. whether by
way of Apology, Defense, or Explication. Answ. He is far mistaken in his
supposition; for what Mr. H. said against all Rules of that nature, was a
justifying of Mr. B. refusing of these Rules, and all of that kind, any such,
as Mr. H. words it, he justified the refusal of all Rules of the Magistrates
making and imposing, which did entrench upon Ecclesiastical Authority: And
thus, he both defends and explains Mr. Blairs Speech; and gives a Reason, why
their Lordships could not make such Rules, because they were intrinsically
Ecclesiastical, and so the making of them was the intrinsic and formal
exercise of the Ecclesiastical Authority of Church Officers. He adds another
Reason, That in these matters, which were the exercise of their Ministry, they
were the Servants of Christ; and therefore the Magistrate should not impose
upon them, in these matters. The Author grants, that some of these Rules were
formally Ecclesiastical, which the Magistrate could not make, and all of them
are burdensome impositions, clogging the exercise of the Ministry. The enjoining
the Religious observation of the 29th. of May, by commanding cessation from
work, and affixing a special kind of Worship to that day, was contrary to the
Principle of these, who think none can make Holy Days but God; the discharging
of the Lecture, the reading and giving the sense of Scripture, was not to
Edification, but an impeding of a mean of Edification; the referring causes,
from Sessions to Presbyteries, as now constitute, was contrary to the Principle
of Presbyterians, who cannot put themselves in a subordination to Prelacy; the
restraining Ministers from Baptizing Children of other Congregations, etc.
though formerly it did well, yet did not quadrate with the present state of the
Church; the injunction to have the Communion in one day, was impracticable; the
confining Preaching to Kirks, hinders Ministers from Preaching in several other
parts of their Paroches, where Preaching is sometimes very requisite upon
weekdays, and renders the Celebration of the Communion in some places
impracticable, when People will not go out from the Tables except there be
Preaching without, and they were burdensome, and hindered Ministers from making
full proof of their Ministry, in being an occasion of stumbling, to People, who
not knowing how to distinguish, betwixt the Indulgence, which was a permission
to Preach, and these impositions, nor knowing how to put a difference betwixt
prescribing of these Instructions, and accepting of them, did take up
prejudices, first against these Ministers, and then against their Ministry and
the Ordinances dispensed by them, and some of them went that length, to make it
their work, to render these Ministers and their Ministry contemptible, and to
count it Service to God, to despise his Servants, and to hinder the work of
their Ministry: And if the very prescribing of these Rules, had such effects,
what would the acceptance and observance of them have done? Mr. H's. words
uttered before the Council, excludes all the Magistrates impositions, upon
Ministers, in the matters of their Ministry, and so excludes these
Instructions, which were impositions of that nature; and all impositions of
that nature, even the confinement, is comprehended, which did restrain the
exercise of their Ministry, and tended to hinder them from making full proof of
their Ministry: The denying to the Magistrate a formal Ecclesiastical Power,
excludes the Magistrate from all Acts, which are the formal exercise of
Ecclesiastic Functions, and so from making Ecclesiastical Canons, or Rules,
formally Ecclesiastical. Again, in asserting, that Rules intrinsically
Ecclesiastical, given by the Magistrate, are impositions, he shows, that the
Magistrate has not a warrantable Power, to make, and impose such Rules upon
Ministers. And in asserting, that they were the Servants of Christ, in the
matters of their Ministry, he did show that they could not be ruled by the
Magistrates will or pleasure, in these matters; but behoved to be ruled by his
will, whose Ministers they were; and that therefore they could not accept of
and receive any Rules of the Magistrates making, or imposing, which would
either hinder or mar their Masters Service; and the acceptance of which, would
any way hinder them from making full proof of their Ministry, or mar them in
doing these matters, in which they were not the Magistrates Servants, but
Christ's. These things are imported clearly in, or clearly follow from Mr. H's.
words, and they do manifestly exclude all encroachments of the Magistrate upon
the calling of the Ministry, and its exercise, and so explains and confirms Mr.
B's. words, in their genuine sense. He goes on: If he meant (says the
Historian) the same Rules, etc. then he confirms Mr. Blairs Argument. Answ. So
he does; he both clears what he said, and confirms it: He clears, in showing
that the Rules, which they and Mr. B. could not receive, were Rules made and
imposed by the Magistrate, for Regulating Ecclesiastic Canons, Rules
intrinsically Ecclesiastical of the Magistrates making, and the enjoining of
which to Ministers, was an imposition. And besides Mr. H's. words do more
clearly obviate exceptions and objections, than Mr. B's. do (though Mr. B's.
words, taken in their genuine and native sense, and the sense which Mr. B. took
them in, and be not wrested, are clear enough. For Instructions and
Instructions to Regulate and to Regulate Ministers in the exercise of their
Ministry, sounds at the first hearing to all, who have but common sense of
matters of that nature, Ecclesiastical Canons, or Canons formally and
intrinsically Ecclesiastical, which the Magistrate should not form and impose.)
For if any should Object. 1. May not the Magistrate (according to what is said
in the first Chap. of the second Book of Discipline) command Ministers to
Preach, Baptize, Exercise Discipline, according to the Rule of the Word of God?
Answ. No doubt, but the Rule of the Word of God, is not a Rule of the
Magistrates making, and his enjoining Ministers to observe the Rule of the
Word, in the exercise of their Ministry is no imposition upon them, nor does
that command of the Magistrate any way hinder, but further the Service of
Christ. Object. May not the Magistrate enjoin Ministers to observe the Acts of
a Synod, which he has ratified by his Civil Sanction? Answ. These Canons or
Acts, are not formed by the Magistrate, but by the Synod. Obj. May not the
Magistrate form Acts of the same nature with these, that general Assemblies and
Synods form, for Regulating Ministers in the exercise of their Ministry? Answ.
That were to confound the Office of the Magistrate with the Office of the
Minister, and to bring the Magistrate in upon the calling of the Ministry, to
elicite and exerce Acts which are intrinsically Ecclesiastical: It belongs
intrinsically to the Office of Ministers of the Church, to explain and apply
the Word of God, and these Ecclesiastic Rules, must be drawn from the Word of
God; the forming of such Canons, has in all Ages, been looked upon, as the
work of Ecclesiastical Synods, who had no Power of the Sword, and therefore
that work is the exercise of the Spiritual Keys, and not of the Civil Sword. As
the forming of Rules of Physic, and forming Medicinal Receipts, is intrinsical
to the faculty of Physic; so is the forming of Ecclesiastic Canons,
intrinsical to the calling of the Ministry. Obj. May not the Magistrate
interrupt the Preaching, though on the Sabbath, when an Enemy is coming to
Assault the Town, and call the People from the Church, to the Walls of the City
to defend it. Answ. That is no burdensome imposition upon the Minister, in the
exercise of his Ministry, it is a work of Necessity, and the Lord declares his
mind, that in such cases he will have mercy and not sacrifice. Obj. May not the
Magistrate make a general Muster through all his Dominions in one day of the
week, and discharge Public Sermon upon that day? Answ. That is no imposition
prejudging the Service of Christ, for Ministers may Preach, as conveniently,
and readily more conveniently, upon any other day of the week.

It pertains to the Magistrate to make Laws and Constitutions, for the
advancement of the Kirk, and Policy thereof, without Usurping any thing that
pertains not to the Civil Sword, etc. 2. Book of Discip. Chap. 10. cited, if I
remember before, the Magistrate should make Laws for advancement of
Church-Policy, but not for its detriment; his Power about Church matters is
cumulative not destructive: And if he should not make Civil Laws, prejudicial
to the Policy of the Church, far less should he make Ecclesiastic Canons, and
Canons that would be hurtful, though they were formed by a Church Judicatory;
for here there are two faults: 1. Taking on him to do, what belongs to
Ecclesiastic Courts. 2. Making Rules which upon the matter, hinders Ministers
from making full proof of their Ministry. In his 2. he quarrels at the terms,
intrinsically and formally, as general and not obviously intelligible, nor
understood by every one. Answ. These are terms ordinarily made use of by
Orthodox Divines in matters of this nature: They are special and specific
terms, and distinguish Ecclesiastic Rules from these Civil Laws and
Constitutions, which are intrinsically and formally Civil, but are
extrinsically and objectively conversant about Ecclesiastic matters. Now we
heard from the 10 Chap. of the 2d. Book of Discipline, that it pertains to the
Magistrate to make Laws and Constitutions, according to the Word of God, for
advancement of the Kirk and Policy thereof. What he says in the end of page 74.
about the Imprisonment and Confinement of a Ministers Person, that it is wholly
Political, and no more Ecclesiastical than any other thing which concerns a
Ministers Person, as his Hat, Books and Clothes, and the like. This shows, that
the Ministers, who simply refused to receive Rules and Instructions formally
and intrinsically Ecclesiastical, and distinguished these from such Political
Acts, as the Confinement, in refusing of which they were not so peremptory, but
would observe or not observe them, as they judged of them, in their Conscience
upon their peril, did in this Act very rationally. That Hats, Clothes and
Books, do immediately concern a Ministers Person, are terms not obviously
intelligible, every one does not understand, how these do immediately concern a
Ministers Person; he who would have others speak, as every one may understand,
should have spoken more plainly, to make Ministers Clothes wholly Political,
without any distinction, was a little kittle; but it is like he has not had
mind of Surplices, etc. when he wrote this. He adds, Or will Rules made
concerning the length of time which a Minister is to spend in the exercise of
this or that Act of his Ministry, or the like, be accounted Rules extrinsically
and materially Ecclesiastic; as to such Rules, he says, page 75. It is a
Question, if Magistrates may either solely, or in prima instantia, prescribe
such Rules to Ministers, however this being at best but dubious -- and it
(being to me at least) very uncertain, what Rules these are, which may be
called externally and materially Ecclesiastical, I could have wished, that some
instances hereof had been given, etc. Answ. 1. If he would have dealt fairly,
he should have used the ordinary terms, and not made terms of his own, for
Rules formally and intrinsically Ecclesiastical, are distinguished from Civil
Laws and Constitutions, objectively and extrinsically Ecclesiastical: And i^
his calling them Rules externally and materially Ecclesiastical, is a
miscalling of them, that he may make a knot in a Rush, where he finds none. 2.
If an Indulged Minister had made a Question, if the Magistrate might limit the
length of time which a Minister is to spend in the exercise of this or that Act
of his Ministry, and had but doubted of it as a thing dubious, it is very
probable that the Historian would have made this no less than a betraying of
the Cause: He makes hideous outcries against them, upon as little ground. But
seeing he himself grants that some of the Instructions, given by the
Magistrate, were formally and intrinsically Ecclesiastical, page 65. He is as
much obliged as the Indulged Ministers, to show what are the Rules, which are
contra-distinguished from these, they might be clear with him that some of
these Rules were such, and why might it not be Lawful for them, as well as for
him to doubt, concerning others of them. The Brother who has answered this
History, -- shows, that the paper in which these Ministers agreed, would have
informed him; and if he had been so desirous to know, he might have sent for it
for his Instruction. But not to go further than the instance which he brings.
If the Magistrate make an Act, if there be Sermon in a City upon a Market Day,
that the Congregation shall be dismissed against such an hour, here is an Act
extrinsically regulating or limiting the exercise of the Public Worship; and
if the time preceding that hour be a time of the day at which it is convenient
for the People to meet, I see no cause of complaining or clashing with the
Magistrate in that matter. But if the Magistrate should take upon him, to
prescribe to the Minister how he should explain his Text, and in what method he
should prosecute his Doctrines, that would be an intrenching upon the Calling
of the Ministry; there are some things which are intrinsical to every Calling
and Art, and Rules for ordering these, are to be drawn from the Principles of
that Art and Calling; and the forming of these Rules, is the formal and
intrinsic exercise of that Calling, and Art. And there are some
Circumstantials that are so extrinsick, that they make no moral alteration upon
an Action, but it may be every way as well done, and to as good purpose, with
one of these Circumstances as another: As for example, whether the Sermon in a
City shall begin upon the weekday, at eight hours, or half nine; and if there
be two Kirks alike convenient, for the Congregation to meet in, it is all one,
as to the morality of the meeting, whether it be here or there: And in such
circumstantials as these, if the Magistrates Acts do not prejudge, impede, or
mar, the exercise of the Ministry, Ministers have no Reason to complain, that
such Acts intrenches and incroaches upon the exercise of their Ministry, or
marrs them in the managing of these matters, in which they are the Servants of
Christ. Seeing the Historian was so desirous to have this matter cleared, and
thinks it is not cleared, by what these Ministers said, why would he not
endeavor to Resolve this Question? And seeing he looked upon these Ministers,
at least some of the ablest of them, as pedants, after he had removed them off
the Field, and left it fair for himself, why would he not Triumph and glory
over them, in teaching these pedants, and doing that alone, which they all
could not do? and so Reign alone as the Basilisk does, according to the Verse,
-- Late sibi submovet omne,
Vulgus, ut in vacua regnet Basiliscus arena.


But he is so far from being resolute here, from coming forward, as a Doctor
Resolutus, that he sneaks away, inter doctores dubitantes; and yet I have no
doubt that he could have said something to it, if he had liked; but his
business there was not to stinguish, resolve, and clear confused, perplexed,
dark things: but to render things, which were distinct and clearly resolved,
confused, dark, and perplexed. And, I suppose, this History is one of the most
confused, and to ignorant people one of the most confounding Books that ever
was written upon matters of this nature. And I think upon trial, it will be
found, that one may learn more solid knowledge in the matters which this Author
treats of, in reading a few lines of the confession of Faith, or of the second
Book of Discipline, or of the course of Conformity, where these matters are
handled, than from all that this Author has written in 162 pages.

I come next to what he says, page 75.. 2. to the other part of Mr. H's.
Discourse, which was, But for the Magistrates Power objectively Ecclesiastical,
whereby they might judge of matters of Religion, in order to their own Act,
whether they would approve or discountenance such a way, he knew no Reformed
Divine that did deny it unto them, and therefore desired, that his Brother Mr.
A. B. might not be mistaken. The other part of the Discourse, says the
Historian, is as useless, for any thing I can perceive, for clearing of Mr. B.
or his Discourse. Answ. Some ill humors does vitiate and dis-enable some men's
eyes, and their perceptive faculties, that they cannot see nor perceive what is
very visible and perceptible. 2. Though this part of the Discourse did not
clear Mr. B's. Discourse, yet it did complete it, and so was not useless; yea,
what compleats a Discourse which was defective, does also clear it, as two
lights joined do enlighten one another, and the whole compounded of both, is
more luminous. So truths which have connection one with another, being joined
together, clear one another; he might have remembered, that some subjects of
Discourse cannot be sufficiently cleared, except they be treated of, both
affirmatively and negatively, and he who speaks both affirmatively and
negatively of the Magistrates Power, speaks more clearly than he who speaks
only negatively: And he who not only shows what Power the Magistrate has not
in matters of Religion, but also what Power he has about these matters, speaks
more clearly, than he who shows only what Power the Magistrate has not, but
says nothing of what Power he has in these matters. And there was the more
need of this, in the matter in hand, because of the question betwixt
Magistrates and Ministers, of the bounds of their Power. And as these questions
of marches are very kittle, because of Interest, so the ridding of marches, in
the matter of Power and Authority are most ticklish; for Authority is a very
tender thing, and it is scarcely to be expected, that any Person in Power, will
not be displeased with one, who speaking of that matter, tells only what he
may not do, but never speaks a word of what he may do. And therefore Mr. H.
perceiving my L. Chancellor displeased with Mr. B. and having a clear ground
to conceive that this was at least one thing that the Chancellor was
displeased with, that Mr. Blair seemed not to allow to the Magistrate what did
belong to him, which manifestly appears by my L. Chancellours questioning him,
if the Council might confine him? To which Question Mr. B. answered, that he
did not deny that the Council might confine him. Mr. H. I say, perceiving this,
did very seasonably step in, to remove my L. Chancellours mistake of and
displeasure against Mr. B. showing, that though they could not allow to the
Magistrate a Power to make and impose Instructions intrinsically and formally
Ecclesiastical, yet all Orthodox Divines, and consequently Mr. Blair, was so
far from denying to the Magistrate a power of confining, which is an Act, both
formally and objectively Civil, that they granted to the Magistrate a Civil
Power which was objectively Ecclesiastical, and therefore desired that his
Brother Mr. A.B. might not be mistaken, as if he denied this, which all
Orthodox Divines grant; and, as what Mr. H. spoke, was right and very full, as
to the matter in hand, so it was very apposite, for showing what was Mr. B's.
mind in these matters, and to remove mistakes; and thus we see that the
Historian is much mistaken when he takes up Mr. H's. words, as useless for
clearing of Mr. B. or of his Discourse; for he clears Mr. B. to be of the same
judgment with all Orthodox Divines, as to the Magistrates Power objectively
Ecclesiastical; and this part of Mr. H's. Discourse, added to Mr. B's.
assertion, as it was explained by Mr. H. by adding the terms agreed upon in the
meeting, did give much light for clearing the sense of Mr. B's. words. Let us
hear the Historians Reasons to prove the uselesness of Mr. H's. words. 1. Says
he, There was nothing in Mr. B's. Discourse, giving the least hint of his
denying that Power to the Magistrate, which all Orthodox Anti-erastian Divines
grant. Answ. That Is true; but it is as true, that there is nothing in Mr. B's.
Discourse, giving the least hint of his giving this power which is granted by
all Orthodox Divines to the Magistrate. 2. It Is clear enough that my L.
Chancellor has taken Mr. B's. words as a denial that the Magistrate had any
Power over Ministers, which appears by his Lordships question to Mr. B. if the
Council might confine him? Nor 2. Says the Historian, does this piece of the
Discourse, in any manner of way, clear in what sense Magistrates may give
Instructions to Ministers to Regulate them in the exercise of their Ministry.
Answ. That Is true; but it clears, that though Magistrates may not make
Instructions formally and intrinsically Ecclesiastical, etc. yet they might
make Civil Laws and Constitutions, which have Ministers and their Ministry for
their Object, and so are objectively conversant about Ecclesiastical matters,
about Ministers and the exercise of their Ministry. He adds, That he cannot
imagine to what purpose this Discourse was brought in, or what it was that gave
the least occasion thereto. Answ. This is very strange, for the Author had an
imagination that was pretty fertile in other matters, and pretty sagacious, to
find out the purpose of the Discourses of the Adversaries, whose Writings he
examined. And the purpose of this Discourse was so obvious, 1. From the
Objections of the Adversaries of Presbyterians, which allege that they give
too little to the Magistrate; and some of them are not ashamed to calumniate
Presbyterians as if they gave as little to the Magistrate as Papists do. 2.
From the touchy sense that all in Authority have of any thing that diminishes,
or but seems to diminish their Power, or to derogate from it. 3. From my L.
Chancellours displeasure at Mr. B. and his question proposed about the
Magistrates Power of confining, and Mr. H's. beginning and ending his Discourse
with that desire, that their Lordships would not mistake Mr. B. That it is a
wonder how a Person that had any imagination at all, could miss the purpose of
this Discourse: But yet all these objective Evidences, which might have as
Guides led his imagination to the true design of Mr. H's. Discourse, were
overswayed by two more intimate Guides, which, like ill Ghosts, haunted his
imagination in the matters relating to Indulged Ministers, I mean his Passion
and Prejudice, which habitually mis-guided him in these matters, and led him
out of the right way, which was obvious, into extravagant phantasms and
imaginations, which are so wild, that it is a wonder how any man who had but
common sense to rectify his imagination, could give way let be with-gate to
them, or how he could suffer them to arise; or if they had started when he was
not adverting, how he could behold them without laughter or indignation, but
that he should have entertained them, and bewildered himself and his followers
in following them, is one of the wildest Wild-goose Chases imaginable. There is
one thing somewhat singular in this Authors imagination in these matters, that
his imagination has a habitual mishap of missing the right way, and taking the
wrong. I do not remember of any Person to whom I can compare him in this,
except one, who was a Servant to a Gentleman of my Acquaintance, of whom I
heard his Master say, that when his Servant took the guiding of the way, he
constantly mistook; when he came where there were two ways, he was sure to take
the wrong way: which his Master having often observed, he resolved when there
was any doubt of the way, never to take the way which his man took, but the way
which he left, and so he was sure not to be mistaken. But yet I must give the
Historian the pre-eminence in wandering, for that Servant took but one wrong way
at once, but the Historian, when he has prosecuted one wrong imaginary way, in
which no foot has trod before him, and followed it out, till he could win no
further, he immediately comes back, and at the same pass where he began to
wander he takes another wrong way, and then another, and so forth, till he has
wearied himself and his followers to no purpose; and which is yet worse, after
all these wanderings, he never comes right. That Servant I spoke of came back to
his Master to the right way, but the Author having no other Guide but his own
imagination, miscarried by Prejudice and Passion, wanders habitually when he
begins to guess at the Indulged Ministers meaning; and upon a false
imagination, that they meant something which never came in their head, he
pursues after them in a way which they never took nor dreamed of; and then to
be sure to overtake them some way, he begins again, if they meant not that,
they meant this; and then again pursues, and so fashes himself in following his
own fancies, but for the true meaning of these Ministers, he ordinarily misses
it, though it be most obvious to any who will not hood-wink himself. Any who
looks but with half an eye into this Controversy about the limits of the
Magistrates and Ministers Power, and into this business which was before the
Council, will see that it was most necessary to add what Mr. H. added to Mr.
B's. words, both for clearing Mr. B's. meaning, and for preventing the
Objections that the Magistrate or others for the Magistrate might make against
an Assertion which seemed to exclude the Magistrate from having any Power about
Church Canons, or the exercise of the Ministry; to which there was nothing
added to clear what Power the Magistrate had in reference to matters of
Religion. Might they not have Objected, Ye will, we see, take no Instructions
from Magistrates, nor commands to Regulate the exercise of your Ministry: Ye
will make Rules your selves for Regulating your Ministry, but ye will admit us
to make none, for any thing we hear from you? Ye ascribe no Power to us about
matters of Religion: What, can the Magistrate do nothing for the Reformation
and preservation of Religion, and for Reforming Ministers? Is the Magistrate
bound up, that he cannot hinder the making or execution of wrong Canons? What
if a Church-Assembly, a Council agree upon Arrianism, and resolve to Preach
this to the Magistrates Subjects? What if they make Canons for Idolatry, for
adoring Images, as the 2d. Nicen Council did? What if they agree to publish the
error of Transubstantiation, and to lift up the Bread in the Eucharist to be
adored by the People? What if they agree upon a Church-policy manifestly
contrary to the Scripture, and require the Subjects to subject themselves to be
ruled by these Rules of Policy of their own making? Shall the Magistrate suffer
his Subjects to be poisoned with Heresy, Idolatry, corrupt Church-mens
Tyranny? Can he do nothing to hinder the making of such Heretical, Idolatrous,
Tyrannical Canons, or to crush them, and hinder the execution of them when they
are made? Must he blindly assent to all the Canons Kirk-men enact, and add his
Civil Sanction to them, and see to the execution of them, that is to promove
the eternal destruction of his own Subjects? Does not the confession of Faith
allow to the Magistrate a Power for Reformation and conservation of Religion?
And our latest Confession of Faith, though it assert, Chap. 31. Sect. 3. That
it belongs to Synods and Councils Ministerially to determine Controversies of
Faith, and Cases of Conscience, to set down Rules and Directions for the better
Ordering of the Public Worship of God, and Government of his Church, to
receive complaints in cases of male Administration, and Authoritatively
determine the same; yet it does not assert, that though these Decrees be
contrary to the Word of God, that they are to be received by any, and much less
by the Magistrate; for it is added in that same Article, Which Decrees and
Determinations, if consonant to the Word of God, are to be received with
Reverence and Submission, not only for their agreement to the Word, but also
for the Power whereby they are made, as being an Ordinance of God appointed
thereto in his Word. And though that same late Confession, Chap. 23. Article 3.
affirm, that the Civil Magistrate may not assume to himself the Administration
of the Word and Sacraments, or the power of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
yet he has Authority, and it is his Duty to take Order, that Unity and Peace
be preserved in the Church, that the truth of God be kept pure and entire; that
all Blasphemies and Heresies be suppressed, all corruptions and abuses in
Worship and Discipline prevented or Reformed, and all Ordinances of God duly
settled, administered, and observed; for the better effecting whereof, he has
Power to call Synods, to be present at them, and to provide that whatsoever is
transacted in them, be according to the mind of God: Thus might they say, the
Confession of Faith acknowledges that the Magistrate has Authority for doing
much in reference to the Reformation and preservation of Religion, but we hear
nothing from you of any Power the Magistrate has in reference to matters of
Religion; ye only tell what the Magistrate may not do in reference to you, and
the exercise of your Ministry, and is this all the respect ye have to
Authority? Now this and much more would have been Objected; and had not Mr. H.
then very good reason to add this second part of his Discourse? The Learned and
Judicious Author or Authors of the Course of Conformity saw it necessary after
they had showed what the Magistrate might not do in matters of Religion, to
subjoyn a Discourse showing what they might do; and because the Book is not
common, I shall transcribe somewhat to this purpose. Page 147, 148, 149. ye
will see how tender they are in the matters of God, and how respectful also to
Lawful Authority; they show, page 147. that no man may command what he will, in
any controverted matter Ecclesiastical. And then they relate this History, When
Alexander the Great came to Jerusalem, he desired his Image to be erected in
the Temple: The High Priest was willing to please him in any thing, wherein God
was not displeased; and therefore refusing with all Reverence that Idolatry,
what he might, and what served more for the Kings Honor, he offered
cheerfully; first to begin the Account of their times from his entry into
Jerusalem; and 2. To name all their firstborn Sons Alexanders from him. Then
they add, What is Civil, what is Domestic, what is Caesar's, what is ours, let
them be forbidden Water and Fire, and their City sown with salt, who refuse it;
let Christ's Royal Prerogative, who will not give his Glory to another, be kept
for himself: May we not in so narrow a strait, where we can see no way to turn,
neither to the right hand nor to the left, open our mouths with the Obedient
Ass? Have we used to serve so in other matters? Then they cite Peter Martyr,
who shows, that if a Minister teach or administer the Sacraments against the
Word of God, he is to be repressed by the Civil Magistrate, and yet not from
him, but from the Word of God shall he seek the Rules and Reasons of his
Function. And then they cite Franciscus Junius saying, 1. By what Authority or
example is the Magistrate moved to think that the holy Kirk of God, and the
simplicity of the Mysteries of Christ (whose voice alone his sheep know and
follow, because the Father commanded that it should be heard only. John
10.27.) should be clothed about with humane Traditions. 2. To what end,
thinks he, must his things be sowed unto the Ordinances of God; for if it be
that she may be conform to others, it were more equitable that other Kirks
should conform to them, who come nearest to the Word of God, according to
Cyprian's Counsel; not that they should join themselves to other Kirks: If it
be that all things may be more decent, what can be more decent, than the
simplicity of Christ? What more simple than his decency? If it be fulfilling of
his own will, let it be so; but it must be remembered that the Will of God is
the greatest necessity, and that the Kirk of God, in things Divine, is not
subject to the will of Men, and what events may follow upon humane Traditions,
as daily experience has showed. Then Archippus excepts, saying, You ever tell
me what he should not do, but I would hear something positive of his Power in
things Ecclesiastical, what he should, and may do in times of contention
especially. Epaphras Answers, That is not my part, ye know, yet this I may
say, that as in the matter of Heresy, so in the time of Schism, for matters of
Ceremony, the Magistrate calls a Synod, representing the whole Kirk, having
Power definitive, and the judgment of Jurisdiction according to the Word, right
as naturally in the Soul of Man, to make it plain by a comparison, the Imperial
power of the Will, may command the understanding, quoad exercitium, that is, to
pause upon a certain purpose, and to give her determination, but not quoad
specificationem, that is, to assent or dissent, or to determine to the one side
more than to the other; and as the same will has actum elicitum, as her
essential, and most proper operation; and actum imperatum, produced by another
power of the Soul at the commandment of the Will, as the Understanding to
ponder and consider, the Appetite to exercise Temperance, Fortitude, etc. and
out of her desire and choice of the Sovereign good of the Soul and Body,
sets all the Powers of Soul and Body to work; even so the Magistrate has,
actum elicitum, in Civil Affairs, his essential and most proper Object. In the
matters of Gods Kirk, whether for Order or Jurisdiction, albeit he has not
actum elicitum, he may neither Preach the Word, nor minister the Sacraments,
nor define by himself regularly; yet he has actum imperatum, he may command
Ministers to Preach the Word, to Celebrate the Sacraments, and to Convene and
determine according to the Word.

Archip. And say you no more, is that all?

Epaphras. And more than this, he has in all Ecclesiastical Canons or
conclusions a threefold judgment: One common, as a Christian; another proper,
as a Magistrate; the third Personal, as a man singularly gifted. As a
Christian, the judgment of Discretion, that he believe not or practice any
thing of all that which the Kirk concludes, if he find it to be against the
Word. As a Magistrate, he must have the judgment of his Vocation to discern
what concerns the Spiritual weal and Salvation of his Subjects, and
accordingly to add, or suspend the Sanction. And as a singular Magistrate,
having more than ordinary gifts of Knowledge and Piety, he ought to have such
Interest in Determination and Jurisdiction with the Kirk as others who have
more than ordinary gifts. Thus we see these Godly Learned Ministers saw it
necessary to show, not only what Power the Magistrate had not, but also
positively what Power he had in things Ecclesiastical; and Divines generally
who treat of these matters use to do so for preventing mistakes in so ticklish
a matter. And therefore Mr. H. did as became a Godly, Learned, and Wise man,
and a man who had a tender respect to Lawful Authority, and that from a
Principle of Conscience. He speaks against all the Magistrates impositions
which burdened their Ministry; he spoke against a Power formally Ecclesiastical
in the Magistrate, against the Magistrates exercising this Power in forming
Instructions intrinsically Ecclesiastical, for Regulating Ministers in the
exercise of their Ministry, that the matters of their Ministry were Christ's
matters, and so not at the Magistrates Arbitrary disposal, nor at the Ministers
disposal either, they being but Servants in these matters. And as he denies to
the Magistrate that Ministerial Power which Christ has given to his Servants,
so he ascribes to the Magistrate that Magistratical Power which God has given
them; and so obviates the Objections and Exceptions formerly mentioned: For the
Magistrates Power about Religion is summarily comprehended in these words, the
Magistrates Power objectively Ecclesiastical, etc. And he shows, that the
Magistrate is not, as Papists say, obliged blindly to execute the Ecclesiastic
Sentences of Churchmen, but has the judgment of his Vocation, whereby he may
judge whether he will approve or discountenance their Canons or Sentences, or
any way or course that they take.

But (says the Historian) as to the main business, I would further enquire
whether the Brethren do judge the matter of giving these Instructions, about
which the Debate did arise, did belong to the first part of the Discourse, and
so to be intrinsically and formally Ecclesiastical; or to the latter part, and
so belong to that power of the Magistrate which is objectively Ecclesiastical:
This Question must be judged necessary, unless that whole Discourse be
accounted unnecessary and impertinent. Answ. 1. Whatever come of his question,
the necessity and pertinency of the whole of Mr. H's. Discourse, is already
cleared to any who will not shut their eyes against the light. 2. There is one
of these Instructions by his own consession wholly Political, viz. the
confinement; and therefore it is neither formally not objectively
Ecclesiastical (and yet it was spoken against by Mr. H. in his first Speech, it
being a burdensome imposition in the matter of the Ministry) and so his question
is not comprehensive enough, and if it be resolved into a disjunctive
Assertion, it is by his own grant false. 3. If he apprehend that all these
Instructions must either wholly belong to the first part of the Discourse, or
all of them only to the second part, the proposition is not necessary, for
some of them may belong to the first, and some to the second part of the
Discourse, and yet all of them be burdensome impositions. If the former be said
(says the Historian) then why was any troubled at Mr. B's. refusing the
Instructions? Answ. None was troubled for his refusing these Instructions, for
they all agreed not to receive them. Why (says he) were not these condemned
who had received them? Answ. There were none who received them; if he think
that the taking of them in their hand, was a receiving of them or accepting of
them, this is one of his false imaginations: Will any say that a man who is
unjustly Banished, or Condemned to die, does approve of the Sentence as right,
because he takes it in his hand? The Author himself does not condemn but
commend Mr. B. and yet he took them in his hand. He adds, Why did not such as
had received them cast them back again? Answ. Because that would have been ill
manners; the Author is none of the best of Historians, and I perceive he would
be no good Master of manners; the casting of papers at Magistrates is no good
cast of that craft; if he had advised them to lay them down civilly, with all
respect to Authority, there would have been something of Civility here: But to
cast papers at any Magistrate, let be at the Kings Councillors, is an ugly
rudeness, that I suppose has not been heard of where there has been any
shadow of Civility. Though the Magistrate had cast these papers at them, it
would have been ill manners to have cast them back; but when the Magistrate
very civilly delivered them to the Ministers, if the Ministers had cast them
back to the Magistrate, it would not only have argued unmannerly and absurd
rudeness, but a manifest contempt of Authority. I think the Author did not cast
back his Act of Banishment at the Magistrate: Some have better manners when
they are before the Magistrates face, than when they are behind their back. But
they who from a principle of Conscience honor Magistrates, will neither
contemn them before their face, nor behind their back. Although this casting
back the Magistrates papers was ill manners, yet it may be he thought it good
Policy, that though it was Morally ill, it was Politically good, as
Ahithophel's Counsel was, and that it was subservient to the grand Design of
the new Policy, which has broken out lately in the late bond and Sanchar
Declaration; for this casting back the Magistrates Papers would have been a
mean pretty fit to have made an outcast betwixt Magistrates and Ministers, and
a step to the casting off the Magistrate.

He adds another Question. How came it, says he, that all of them did not
unanimously agree in this Testimony? Answ. In what Testimony? That all these
Instructions were formally and intrinsically Ecclesiastic Rules? But this,
even in the Opinion of the Historian, had been to agree in a false Testimony;
for he says, that one of them was wholly Political. And page 65. he does not
say, that all of them, but he supposes that some of them were indeed formally
and intrinsically Ecclesiastical. Why, would he have had these Ministers
agreeing in a Testimony, that he could not have agreed to himself? This is not
fair, but false dealing, to quarrel with Ministers because they would not agree
in a falsehood, and in a Testimony that he could not have given himself. He
adds, Or how came it that their common mouth did not speak what was the common
Opinion of all. Answ. Their common mouth spoke the Opinion of all, when he
called all these Instructions impositions burdening them in the matters of
their Ministry. He spoke also the Opinion of all, when he said, that they could
not receive Canons intrinsically Ecclesiastic, etc. from their Lordships. He
spoke also the Opinion of all, when he said, that though the Magistrate had not
a Power formally Ecclesiastical, yet he had a Power objectively Ecclesiastical;
and in these Mr. B. agreed with all the rest. He adds, Why was it not more
distinctly and in fewer words said, that they could not receive these
Instructions, as being Rules intrinsically and formally Ecclesiastical. Answ.
He himself grants* that all these Rules were not intrinsically and formally
Ecclesiastical: And why would he have them distinctly in few words telling a
lie, and that which he himself thought false? It Is strange that this Author
has such an habit of erring, that he seldom misses to miss the right way; it is
yet more strange, that he who is so habituate to wander, has so great
confidence in directing others: but it is strangest of all, that he has the
confidence to direct them to go in a way which he himself counts wrong, and
has told them that it is wrong; that he will needs have honest men testify
that before Rulers, which he himself has declared to them that it is false;
that he will have them to tell that, which, if he himself may be trusted, is a
lie.

The Historian goes on. If the latter (says he) be said, then was not only
Mr. B's. both Practice and Discourse condemned, but the whole Cause was basely
betrayed, because under the pretext of the Magistrates Power Objectively
Ecclesiastical, that, which is as intrinsically and formally Ecclesiastical as
many other at least are, was granted to the Magistrate: Will the Magistrates
Power to act as a Man, and not as a Brute, in his Magistratical work about an
Ecclesiastical Object, that is his Power to judge by the judgment of
Discretion, which is common to all the Members of the Church; yea, to all men
as men, which Papists deny unto Magistrates, allowing them only to see with
the Churches eyes, but Protestants grant unto them: Will this Power warrant
them to give Instructions, etc? Answ. The Author having, according to his
manner, mistaken his way in mistaking the manifest Design of Mr. H's. second
speech, in both the parts of it; the further he goes, the more he bewilders
himself; they say, an Error in the first concoction, is not afterward
rectified. Mr. H's. design in that speech was to show, that though Mr. B. did
not grant to the Magistrate a Power formally Ecclesiastical, to make Rules
intrinsically Ecclesiastical, yet he did not deny to him a Power objectively
Ecclesiastical; his wandering imagination, misled with Prejudice and Passion,
has put him to all these blind gropings in his queries and ifs. I suppose the
Indulged Ministers have never said, that all these Instructions were the
exercise of the Magistrates objectively Ecclesiastic Power, nor are they any
way obliged to say it by any thing which Mr. H. said for clearing Mr. B's.
meaning; but he would fain have them saying something, that he might carp at
it; and though they say it not, yet he says it, that he may have something to
say against his own idle suppositions when he had nothing to say against Mr.
H's. true and pertinent positions. But suppose that some of these Brethren did
think that some of these Instructions were the exercise of the Civil Power
objectively Ecclesiastical, as that first anent Marrying and Baptizing: I say,
suppose that any of them thought that that Injunction could hardly be called
formally and intrinsically Ecclesiastical, but objectively only, because it is
conversant about an Object which had been in former times Ecclesiastically
concluded in Lawful Church-Judicatories; yet the thinking or saying so, would
not have been a condemning of Mr. B's. Practice or Discourse, for all of them
agreed with Mr. Blair, in refusing to receive from the Magistrate Rules
formally and intrinsically Ecclesiastical of the Magistrates making. Again, all
of them agreed with Mr. Blair, that the Instructions which were at that time
given by the Magistrate, were burdensome impositions upon Ministers, in the
matters of their Ministry, which they could not approve: They looked upon the
confinement which the Author counts wholly Political, as a grievous imposition:
The Historian seems here to imagine that the acknowledging that the Magistrate
has a Power objectively Ecclesiastical, does oblige these who acknowledge it,
to receive all his Injunctions which are objectively Ecclesiastical; but this
is another of his false imaginations, for as the Kirk-Judicatories have often
abused their Power, which is formally Ecclesiastical, in making wrong Canons,
as the 2d. Council of Nice did, in concluding the adoration of Images: So does
the Civil Magistrate often abuse his Civil Power, which is objectively
Ecclesiastical, in adding his Civil Sanction to, and enjoining the Observance
of sinful Canons, Canons either in themselves unlawful, or Canons, which though
at the time which they were made were very convenient, yet afterward through
the change of the Constitution of Ecclesiastical Courts, and the alteration of
Circumstances, becomes very inconvenient and prejudicial to the Church. So that
though some of them had differed from others about the nature of some of these
Instructions, whether they were the exercise of a Power formally
Ecclesiastical, which the Magistrate should not have assumed; or the exercise
of a Civil Power objectively Ecclesiastical, but abused and misapplyed: Yet
seeing they all agreed in this, that they were burdensome impositions, which
they could not receive, and they were all agreed, that the Magistrate had not a
Power formally Ecclesiastical to form Canons intrinsically and formally
Ecclesiastical: They were far from condemning Mr. B's. Practice or Discourse,
and much farther from betraying the Cause. The most that he could make of this
would amount to no more than this, that some of these Brethren might be
mistaken concerning the Nature of some of these Instructions in thinking they
were not formally but objectively Ecclesiastical; and must honest men, who
minded nothing but Honesty, and who agreed together that these Instructions
were bad, and not to be received, be charged with Treachery? Because they were
mistaken in a Question of that nature, which yet made no difference in their
practice. But seeing he thinks that if any one of these Ministers had judged
that all these Instructions were objectively Ecclesiastical, that then he would
have b^trayed the Cause; I shall give to him, but not grant, that Mr. H. judged
all these Instructions objectively Ecclesiastical, and not intrinsically
Ecclesiastical: Yet he could not conclude that Mr. H. had basely betrayed the
whole Cause; for 1. Seeing Mr. H. did not declare this to be his judgment, he
cannot be justly charged with betraying the whole, or betraying any part of the
Cause; for causes are not betrayed by men's secret thoughts and judgings which
they do not vent. The Author is very desirous to have these Ministers found
treacherous, for when he can find no treachery in what they did, or said, he
enquires after their thoughts and secret judgment, and upon supposition that
they judged thus or thus, as he supposes, though they never vented their
judgment, concludes their treachery. 2. Though Mr. H. had thought all these
Instructions objectively, and not formally Ecclesiastical, yet Mr. H. in
granting to the Magistrate a Power objectively Ecclesiastical, could not be
supposed to have granted to the Magistrate a Power to make these Instructions,
because Mr. H. had declared these Instructions to be impositions, burdening
Ministers in the matter of their Ministry. Now the Power objectively
Ecclesiastical, which all Orthodox Divines, and Mr. H. with them, ascribe to
the Magistrate, is that Power which God has given to them for good, to the
Church it is cumulative, and not destructive; the King of Kings, by whom Kings
Reign, has not given to Kings a Power to impose upon his Ministers impositions
burdening them in the matter of their Ministry, and hindering and marring the
work of the Ministry, in which they work the Work of the Lord, and are workers
together with God. And thus, whether these Instructions were formally or
objectively Ecclesiastical, seeing Mr. H. looked upon them as wrong, he can
never be supposed to have granted to the Magistrate a Power objectively
Ecclesiastical to enjoin these Instructions, and therefore though this were
supposed that Mr. H. had judged these Instructions to be objectively
Ecclesiastical, yet he could not be charged with betraying the Cause in
granting to the Magistrate a Power objectively Ecclesiastical. Yet he will have
them guilty of base Treachery, though he cannot prove it from any thing they
did or said, nor yet from any thought which he imagined they had about the
nature of these Instructions, but the Reader may readily think, that it is not
possible for him to fasten the charge of betraying the whole Cause upon them,
whose deeds, words, thoughts afford no Evidence of Treachery. Yet he will do
it; the Reader who has observed the man's disposition, will readily say, that
he doubts nothing of his good will to render the Indulged Ministers odious: But
he thinks it impossible to him to prove out of Mr. H's. words, that they basely
betrayed the whole Cause, seeing his words are the very words of Orthodox
Anti-erastian Divines, when they speak most distinctly of these matters. But it
seems the Reader knows not the man's might, and where his strength in this cause
lies, when he thinks this impossible for him to fasten this guilt, this horrid
guilt upon so many honest men: What talk you of impossibility? He not only can
do it, but he can do it very easily, and that by a maxim which passes current
without any contradiction, a maxim that this Author makes much use of in a
mister, and when other places of invention fails him the maxim is this,
Calumniare audacter aliquid adhaerebit, when all his why's, and how is, and if's
have failed him, he boldly avers, that these Ministers, under the pretext of
the Magistrates Power objectively Ecclesiastical, granted to the Magistrate
that which is intrinsecally and formally Ecclesiastical. That is, they first
denied to him a Power formally Ecclesiastical, and then they gave it again to
him in granting him a Power objectively Ecclesiastical; if ye say, that Power
objectively Ecclesiastical is ordinarily when it is ascribed to the Magistrate
contradistinguished from Power formally and intrinsecally Ecclesiastical. He
will Answer, that if they had given a Power formally and intrinsecally
Ecclesiastical to the Magistrate in plain terms, this had been plain dealing
above board, but their conveying of it to him under a pretext and cover, that
none would suspect their cunning conveying this intrinsic Power under the
cloak of objective Power, their slipping the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven into
the guards of the Civil Sword, or cunningly shouldering them together, and so
delivering them both together to the Magistrate, this was indeed Treachery: And
say what they will to purge themselves, yet do not ye believe them; for they
who have so basely betrayed the whole Cause, are not to be believed; or if ye
have any Charity to believe them when they say they intended no such thing, yet
be sure it was the intention of the work, though not of the worker, intentio
operis, though not intentio operantis. And thus he has proved that the whole
cause was basely betrayed by a demonstration from the Cause, for he brings it
in with a, because, under the pretext, etc. and so by a demonstration which
they call (...), the charge of betraying the whole Cause is strongly concluded
(...). This Demonstration does strongly conclude that the Author of it was
strangely transported with Passion and Prejudice against the Indulged
Ministers, but it proves nothing against the Indulged Ministers, but by virtue
of the foresaid maxim; Calumniate boldly, and something will stick; for
whatever was the nature of these Instructions, this is a manifest calumny that
Mr. H. made a pretext of the Magistrates Power objectively Ecclesiastical to
grant that which was intrinsecally and formally Ecclesiastical to the
Magistrate: For suppose Mr. H. had thought that none of these Instructions were
intrinsecally and formally Ecclesiastical, yet in granting to the Magistrate a
Power objectively Ecclesiastical, he did no way approve of the Magistrates
giving these Instructions, because he had designed these Instructions, and
impositions burdening Ministers in the matter of their Ministry; and so
whatever Power he gave to the Magistrate about Ecclesiastic Objects, he could
not be supposed to yield to him a Power to make these impositions, and could no
ways be supposed to have a design to grant to the Magistrate a Power
intrinsecally Ecclesiastical, which he manifestly denied, and to make a pretext
of a Power objectively Ecclesiastical to cover this design: But whither will
not Passion and Prejudice carry men when they are once engaged in a wrong
Cause? For so long as they are under these woeful distempers, they will make,
ere they want something to say against their Adversaries. I think all who reads
these things should be thereby stirred up to pray, that they may not be led
into temptation. But whatever was Mr. H's. or Mr. B's. or any other of these
Ministers judgments, concerning the nature of every one of these Instructions,
I do not know, and therefore cannot determine; but I perceive the Author of
this History has not been clear himself; for if he had been clear to have
asserted all the rest, besides the confinement intrinsecally Ecclesiastical, he
would not have failed to have done it in this place, and to have proved it with
all his pith, seeing it would have concluded, as he thinks, the betraying of
the whole Cause, which is the conclusion he would have been at with all his
heart, seeing he makes so many fetches to bring it about; but when all is come
to all, we see it amounts to no more but this: That that which is as
intrinsecally and formally Ecclesiastical as many other at least are, etc.
which clearly shows, that the man has been in the mist as to the nature of
these Instructions, for he does not say, that all these Instructions were
intrinsecally and formally Ecclesiastical, or that any one of them was such
absolutely, but only that somewhat that was as intrinsecally and formally
Ecclesiastical as many other at least are. But what if these many other which
he means, be not intrinsecally Ecclesiastical, for he tells us not what these
many are, nor does he tell us any one of these many, that we might compare them
with the Instructions in question; and then his adding at least shows that he
has been in the dark in this matter, and durst not determine positively or
particularly concerning the nature of all or any of these Instructions. He
durst not determine which of them belonged to the formally Ecclesiastic, or
which to the objectively Ecclesiastic Power, nor durst he determine that they
were all intrinsecally and formally Ecclesiastical; and if he was in doubt
himself, what wonder if there were doubts of this nature amongst these
Brethren. And though I cannot certainly assert, that they had different
apprehensions in this matter, yet I conjecture that there was something of it
from what I read in an excellent Vindication of the Ministers who made use of
the Indulgence, written, as is supposed, by that faithful and judicious
Minister, Mr. Thomas Wily, who was, as I am informed, present with these
Ministers at their Meetings, though he had not then made any use of the
Indulgence; for after he has in Assertion 5. asserted, that it is granted
without debate, that the Supreme Magistrate has a Supreme Power objectively
Ecclesiastic about Church Matters: And Ass. 7. That as it is the Magistrates
sin to restrain Ministers from Preaching the Gospel, so it is condescended to
by all of the Presbyterian persuasion, that it is the Duty of the Magistrates
not only to permit and allow the Preaching of the Gospel in his Dominions, but
upon supposition of neglect or necessity it is his Duty to command Ministers to
Preach the Gospel. 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8, 9: Jehoshaphat sent the Levites and
Priests with the Book of the Law to teach all the Cities of Judah, and they
went through all the Cities of Judah and taught the People. Romans 13.4. The
Magistrate is to them a Minister for good. Mr. Rutherford, See Durham of
Scandal, Part 3. Chap. 14. page 250. -- Also by their negligence in not
providing faithful Teachers, page 252. -- To countenance with their Authority
the Ordinance of Discipline, to confirm by their Authority the Ordinance of
Preaching the Gospel. page 254, Magistrates might and ought to put Ministers,
etc. to their Duty, in case they be negligent, etc.
in his Treatise against Toleration, expounds that not only of Civil good, but
also of the Spiritual Soul good of his Subjects, which the Magistrate, as he is
a nursing-father of the Church, and as he is Custos utriusque tabulae, is to
procure by suppressing Heretics and Heresies, and countenancing faithful
Ministers. And some pages after, he says, by virtue of which Power (contained
in the former Assertions) he may, moving in his own sphere, and acting only in
a Civil capacity, give command that all things be done in the House of the God
of Heaven according to the will of the God of Heaven, and even in the matters
in hand it may by some be alleged, that the Magistrates fail is not in the
Formality of the rise of his Rules, but in the sinful and grievous mat^er of
them. And then he supposes, that if the Magistrate had in the first Rule
permitted and ^llowed Presbyterian Ministers to Baptize the Children of Persons
in adjacent Parishes, and admit them to the Communion, if they were not clear
to join with the incumbents who had conformed: And if in the second Rule they
had appointed that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper should be as often yearly
celebrated as the convenience of the respective Congregations would admit; and
had appointed that Congregations lying together should not have it on the same
day, and allowed at such occasions Preaching without, and so of the rest: If
they had put Ministers to their Duty, who would, or who ought to have
quarrelled with the Magistrate, as out of his Duty? So it is not the Formality
of the rise, or conveyance, but the faultiness of the matter, considering our
present Constitution that makes the Rules sinful, and not to be practiced by
honest men. I may add, if the Magistrate had appointed the Indulged Ministers
to meet Presbyterially, that cases which were formerly referrable to
Presbyteries might be still so referred, and not determined by Kirk-Sessions, I
suppose none would have had reason to complain: And if it had been appointed
that these Presbyteries should have Clerks, and pay them their dues, I suppose
none would have alleged that this was Erastianism, but a restoring of
something of the former Order. Something also of the different apprehensions of
Ministers about these Rules, which of them were formally Ecclesiastical, and
which mis-applications of the Civil Power objectively Ecclesiastical appears in
the Answer of the History of the Indulgence, of which I spoke before; but that
made no division among these honest Ministers, who looked upon them as
impositions that were not to be received. And I suppose any who will
impartially consider the matter, will think that these Ministers did wisely in
forbearing to determine peremptorily concerning the nature of every one of
these Rules, whether they were the exercise of a Power formally Ecclesiastical,
or mis-applications of the Civil Power objectively Ecclesiastical. From what is
said we may see the Vanity of all the Historians endeavors whereby he labors
to prove that Mr. H's. words were useless, or a base betraying of the Cause;
and whatever Mr. H. thought of the nature of these Rules, he gave an honest
Testimony against them, as the Author is forced to confess in acknowledging
that he said the same upon the matter with Mr. B. but he spoke more fully and
distinctly; for in his first Speech, which the Historian acknowledges to be the
same upon the matter with Mr. B's. he uses the words, impositions burdening in
the matters of the Ministry, which comprehends not only Rules formally
Ecclesiastical of the Magistrates making, but also all Civil injunctions which
impose grievous burdens. And I suppose it was Mr. B's. design to refuse both,
though his words seem most directly to relate to the former, and my reason is
this, because the Reason which Mr. B. adds does clearly exclude all Arbitrary
Civil injunctions which impose upon the Ambassadors of Christ, who are to
adhere to their Masters Instructions in the discharge of their Office. And as
Mr. H. shows, that Mr. B. did not intend to deny the Magistrates just Power, so
the Reason which he adds justifies what Mr. B. said more expressly, and what he
meant, and clearly enough insinuate by the Reason which he added to his
Refusal. What the Author further adds, page 75 and 76. to prove that the
granting to the Magistrate a Power objectively Ecclesiastical, does not warrant
him to make Rules regulating the exercise of the Ministry and its intrinsic
administration, is a very needless work, which his ignorant mistake of Mr. H's.
design in speaking, and then his uncharitable, that I say not perverse,
wresting of Mr. H's. words, and design against all Reason and common sense,
has put him to; as little wit makes meickle travel: So it is no wonder, if
they who travel with such a mischievous design, as that is, to prove honest men
to be base betrayers of the cause of God, be put to a great deal of pains in
traveling to bring forth such a Monster, and to put some face upon such an
ugly deformed Birth, and then to get it fathered upon them, who can give their
Oath of verity they have nothing to do with it, and may safely say, that the
Father of lies has helped to breed it, and bring it forth.

I only observe two things: 1. That in the end of the 75 page, and in the
beginning of the 76, he mis-represents the judgment of Protestants, as if they
gave the Magistrate no more but the judgment of Discretion, which is common to
all Christians, and distinguishes Men from Brutes: He might have learned from
the writings of Protestants, and from the course of Conformity in the place
before cited, that beside the judgment of Discretion, they give to the
Magistrate the judgment of his Vocation. 2. Page 76. He restricts the
Magistrates consideration too much, when he limits it only to the outward
good, quiet, and advantage of the Commonwealth. He might have learned from the
forecited place in the course of Conformity, See Durham on Scandal, Part 3
Chap. 14. page 256.
that the Magistrate, as Magistrate, is to discern what concerns the
Spiritual well and Salvation of his Subjects. And from Mr. Rutherfurd, in his
Treatise of Toleration, that the Magistrate, as Nurse-father of the Church, and
custos utriusque tabulae, is not only to procure the Civil good, but the
Spiritual Soul-good of his Subjects. See also Mr. Rutherfurd's Divine right of
Church Government, page 550. Chap. 24. Q. 20. Assert. 4. Where he says, That
the Magistrate, de jure, is obliged not only to permit, but also to procure
the free exercise of the Ministry -- and to procure the good of the Souls of
the Subjects.

I am sensible that I have insisted too long in following the Historian in his
rovaries and blind gropings, the Author who has answered his whole Book
sufficiently, has fully answered this part of his Book in a few lines, by
showing what was Mr. H's. design and meaning in this second Speech, and then
shows, that the Historian hood-winks himself, and then quibbles and quaeries,
this is the meaning of it, or that is the meaning of it, and starts questions
that were never started by a man of Letters in this matter, and such as there
were no ground for here; and having set up his own fancy, he beats it down
again, that it might appear to the less judicious, that he was doing something,
while as he was doing nothing to the purpose. This is a full Answer, and all
that these quibbling Discourses deserved. In the rest of page 76, and in page
77, we have eight of his Magisterial dictates, to which the Brother who answers
him, sets down so many contradictory propositions, which is a sufficient
Answer. He shows, That the Indulgence which the Ministers made use of, did
neither tend, nor was intended to carry on an Invasion of the Rights of the
Church, or of the Prerogatives of Christ. 2. He shows, That it is full, and a
fuller Testimony than that which the Historian so much commends. 3. That it is a
plain Vindication of the Doctrine of the Church of Scotland in that particular,
according to former Engagements. 4. That it was candid, ingenuous, and
pertinent. 5. That it was expressed in terms solid and significant, made use of
by the ablest Divines, including the very words made use of by Mr. B. and
commended by the Historian for a faithful Testimony: Ministers are not obliged
to make every one that hears them capable to understand what they very clearly
speak. 6. As it homologates Mr. B's. words, and made up the defects of it, so
it contained no dis-ingenuous reflections upon Mr. B. 7. Though it was spoken
with all due respect to the Magistrate, yet seeing a Power formally
Ecclesiastical was denied to the Magistrate; and seeing they asserted
themselves to be the Servants of Christ in the matters of their Ministry, and
so obliged to follow the will of Christ, and not the Magistrates impositions in
these matters; they excluded the Magistrate both from the formal and elicitive
Acts of the Ministerial Calling, and from Arbitray disposal of the matters of
the Ministry. And 8. The terms are so solid significant, and so much in use
among Orthodox Divines, that they cannot be alleged to give too much or too
little in this matter, except the generation of Anti-crastian Orthodox Divines
be condemned.

Page 77. the Historian falls foul upon the Brother, who said, He could not
receive Ecclesiastical Canons from their Lordships, but as for Civil
significations of their Pleasure under the hazard of Civil Penalties, he could
say nothing to that: And upon another who did homologate this Speech.

The Historian replys first merrily with the ordinary Preface of Courtesy,
that what he was to say might not be ill taken. But, says he, under favor,
this is secundum artem volatilizare densa and densare volatilia, a pretty whim
wham good for nothing. And then on a sudden he turns very sad and serious, and
begins with an Oh. Oh (says he) a serious, solid, zealous Minister should have
been ashamed to have substitute such whitty whatties in the place of a plain
Testimony clearly called for in the case: But these two Persons not only break
their own Order, and might have occasioned some consternation to the rest as
well as Mr. B's. speaking did, but also spoke indeed nothing to the purpose,
and might as well have been silent. Answ. He who prefaced for favor should
have spoken more favorably, according to the common saying, Ut ameris amabilis
esto; but he very quickly spits the courtesy in a bitter gyb, which he thought
would touch a Physician in the quick, as an Arrow taken out of his own Quiver;
he would kill him with his own weapons: And because Physicians ordinarily love
to speak Latin, he speaks in his own Dialect, Secundum artem, etc. but under
favor, though there be bitterness, I see not any Art, or any thing smart in
this tart ill broken Jest. I perceive so little salt, either volatile or fixed
in it, that it seems to me a very insipid piece of Drollery. If he design by
these Chemical terms to put the complement of a Cheat upon a serious, solid,
zealous Minister, as he afterward designs him, there was much sin in this
sport; and the pleasure that is taken in doing what is displeasing to God, is
but a sport for fools, and the end of that mirth is sadness; the casting of
such firebrarnds is a sport for madmen, to compare the serious Speech of a
Minister, who by his Calling is a worker together with God, and a worker of the
work of God, to the cheating operations of Alchymy, the product whereof is
ordinarily some counterfeit thing, was a very odious comparison; and if this be
the thing he means, then, as I observed before, that the Historian would have
made no good Master of manners: So from this cast of his sporting craft I
perceive he would have proved but a spur-galled sporter. When he speaks of a
whim-wham he has forgot the half of the tale, for if I be remembered, the whole
of that insignificant tale is a whim-wham for a Goose-bridle; if I be wrong,
the Children will correct me, the bridle was ill left out, it might have been
good for something, if it had been but to have restrained the volatile things,
of which he was immediately speaking, that they might not get away; for if ye
hold not these subtle Birds by the head, it is folly to think of laying salt on
their tail, if they once slip the bridle: And to follow them when they are
flown, is the wildest of all Wild-goose Chases; for if they once get out of
your hand, ye will never more get your eye upon them again, let be your hand,
for they evanish and turn to that which is next to nothing; and whether they be
good for any thing or nothing after they are gone, I leave the Chemists to
enquire, who are taken up with these whitty whatties, as the Historian terms
them: But enough, if not too much of this. The Historians unworthy abusing of
so worthy and deserving a Person, and his treating of so grave a Person in so
ridiculous a way, did not deserve any serious Answer. If that Reverend and
Learned Minister had spoken his mind in subtle evanishing words, having no
sensible sense, or a sense not easily perceptible; or if he had used terms of
Art, or words borrowed from Physic or Chemistry, or spoken Latin before the
Council, there might have been some pretext for this ridiculous Drollery; but
there is nothing of all these in his Speech. The first part of his Speech is
the same upon the matter with Mr. B's. and large as plain, if not more plain
than his Speech; and it has this advantage, that it is more comprehensive: For
Mr. B's. Speech does only exclude the Magistrate from making Rules to Regulate
Ministers in their Ministerial Actings: This Speech excludes the Magistrate
from making all Ecclesiastical Canons. Now there are many Ecclesiastical Canons
besides these which Regulate the exercise of the Ministry: As for Example, If
the Magistrate would make an Act that no Person should bring a Child to be
Baptized by a Presbyterian Minister, or outed Minister, this would be an
Ecclesiastical Canon, laying an undue restraint upon Ministers who have
Children to be Baptized, not in the exercise of their Ministry, but in that
which is common to them with other Christians who have Children to be presented
to Baptism. This Speech excluded this, and in general all Ecclesiastic Canons.
The Historian alleges, that it was nothing to the purpose; sure he would not
have said so of the first part of the Speech, if the second part had not been
added. Now the addition of the second part was very much to the purpose for
removing the mistake which the Magistrate had conceived from Mr. B's. Speech;
and the words are in my Opinion more apposite than if he had said Civil Laws or
Statutes; for the Instructions which he had an eye to in this part of his
Speech, were neither properly Laws nor Statutes, such as the Confinement, and
it may be the Act for paying the Clerks Fees. It Is hard to find a more apposite
and more short designation of Acts of that nature than that which he used, to
wit, Civil significations of the Magistrates pleasure under the hazard of Civil
Penalties. And if I knew not the Historians prejudice against Indulged
Ministers, I could not but wonder that he makes such Tragical outcries against
so plain and apposite words. The Brother who has Answered this History, in his
Answer to this part of it, shows, that it was uncontroverted among these
Brethren, that the greatest part of these Instructions were Ecclesiastic
Canons. He shows also, that the paper offered to them by the Council contained
Injunctions (one at least) of a Civil nature. The first sort are refused, the
last he did not either directly refuse or accept, resolving to do as he should
(all things considered) find best. What could be more plain or ingenuous? Yet,
says the Historian, 1. by this distinction (little better than a Mental
reservation) they might have scrupled at nothing that the Magistrate might
attempt to prescribe in Church Matters; no, not at his giving Rules
intrinsecally and formally Ecclesiastical, for these might also pass as Civil
significations of their pleasure, etc. Answ. His Parenthesis about Mental
reservation, which is a Jesuitical Cheat and trick, confirms the suspicion that
his Latin Sentence was a periphrasis of cheatry. The Historian could hardly
have done the Author a greater injury than to have charged him with one of the
worst of the Jesuits lying tricks; but his ingenuity is so well known to all
who know him, that the Historians Tongue and Pen will not make this slander
stick to him. The Historian might rather have alleged, that it was a piece of
Oratory, an Aposiopesis: For the Person of whom he speaks is a good Orator, and
they say, Supprimit Orator quod Rusticus edit inepte: But to make it little
better than a Mental reservation, which even some Popish Writers, as Scotus and
Covarruvias condemn as a lie, was a very injurious slander. They who make use
of these Mental reservations speak that which is false, and which they know to
be false, and think they shun lying by adding in their mind somewhat to what
they speak to make it a truth; as when they are interrogate by a Judge, even
upon Oath, if they spoke, or did this or that? They will swear, that they
neither did, nor spoke it, the Judge hears no more from them, but then they
think they have not lied nor perjured themselves, because they have this
thought in their mind, I did not say, or do this or that, to tell it to you who
Questions me. So that what they speak is manifestly a lie, but what that
Brother spoke was truth, and I believe he spoke the last words in great
simplicity and singleness, as not knowing what he would do, when put to it by
such Civil significations of the Magistrates pleasure, and so could not give
any determinate Answer what he would do; he spoke like a wise and Conscientious
man with great ingenuity. What would the Historian had him saying? Should he
have said, I will Obey no Civil Acts by which ye signify your pleasure,
whatever be the hazard or penalty: Or would he have had him saying, I will Obey
all the Civil Acts whereby ye signify your pleasure: both these had been rash
and unwarrantable Answers, which no Conscientious man who understands what he
says, can give to any Magistrate who has Civil Authority over him. And I
suppose if the Historian had been in his case, and had absolutely refused to
keep the confinement, or pay the Clerks Fees; if the Magistrate had certified
him, that if he kept not his confinement, he would lay him by the heels in a
Prison; and seeing the Magistrate did allow him the stipend; and yet he would
not pay a little money at their command, that they would Authorize the Clerk to
take him with caption. I suppose in this case the Historian would have been in
some swither what to say or do, and would have taken some time to advise. And
it is very strange that he imagines, that they who spoke thus might have
scrupled at nothing; no, not at the Magistrates Rules intrinsecally
Ecclesiastical, seeing they had expressly declared they could not receive such
Rules. But, says he, these may pass under the notion of Civil significations of
their pleasure. He might have as well said, that black may pass under the
notion of white, and the Magistrate may pass under the notion of the Minister,
and the State under the notion of the Kirk: For Ecclesiastical Canons, and
Civil significations of the Magistrates pleasure were as clearly
contra-distinguished one from another as these things spoken of; so that Canons
intrinsecally Ecclesiastical coming from the Magistrate to these Brethren,
could never have passed with them as Civil significations, etc. except they had
passed from what they had presently asserted in the Magistrates hearing, and to
his face: And the coming of these Canons from the Magistrate would not have
turned them into Civil significations or the Magistrates pleasure; for they had
said, that they could receive no Ecclesiastical Canons from their Lordships.
Now if their coming from the Magistrate had turned them into Civil Acts, and
these Brethren had thought that the Magistrates giving of them would change
their nature, they would have thought it impossible for the Magistrate to give
any Ecclesiastic Canons, and so it had been a very ridiculous tale to have
told they could not receive that from the Magistrate which it is impossible for
the Magistrate to give; it had been just as if a man would gravely assert, I
will drink no water out of the fire; for its impossible that fire can give
water, and as impossible upon the foresaid supposition, that the Magistrate can
give Ecclesiastic Canons, because his very giving them would make them Civil.
It Is as wild an imagination, that he thinks these Brethren by Ecclesiastical
Canons meant only Canons framed and given by men in Church Office, as if they
had said, we cannot receive from your Lordships, who are Magistrates, Canons
which ye cannot give, because they can only be given by Kirk-men, and your
Lordships are not men in Church-Office. It Is a foolish thing to follow the
Historian in the rest of his Extravagancies. Page 78. He Argues as if these
Brethren made no distinction betwixt the nature of Ecclesiastical Canons and
Civil Acts signifying the Magistrates pleasure; and as if they had declared,
that they would receive all which the Magistrate gave under the notion of Civil
significations, and if ye will grant him these concessions (which are
manifestly false, and contrary to the express words of these Brethren) then he
will, ex concessis, prove that the Cause was plainly given up. I wonder much
how such fancies could enter in his Head, but I wonder much more that upon his
own groundless imaginations he could conclude such horrid slanders against
honest Ministers. The Brother who has Answered this History, after he has
solidly cleared these two Brethrens words, and vindicate them, he concludes.
Thus our Historian here hood-winks himself again, and, like a Boy playing at
belly blind with a bonnet over his face, gropes here, and gropes there, and
makes several false suppositions, coyns several false senses, sets them up and
dings them down, bravely and Orthodoxly indeed. What the Historian says, page
79. of these two Brethren, that they hinted by their Answers and Distinction,
that a Power formally Ecclesiastical is denominated so, not because it is so in
it self, but merely because it is exerted by Churchmen, is manifestly false:
This is a hint minted by his own prejudice and erring imagination, which was
woefully habituated to such false and injurious imaginations. For the first part
of their Speech, which relates to Canons Ecclesiastical, makes no mention at
all of Churchmen, nor speaks of any reference of Ecclesiastical Canons to
Churchmen; they only say, they could not receive Ecclesiastical Canons from
their Lordships.

Page 79. The first part of Mr. H's. Speech, which he resumed, as has been
often observed, does overturn Erastianism, and excludes the Magistrate from
making Rules intrinsecally Ecclesiastical, whether for Regulating Ministers or
Church Members; for he who has not a Power formally Ecclesiastical, cannot
form Canons which are formally and intrinsecally Ecclesiastical. The Historians
additional Answer is already Answered. As to these words which follow,
Intimating withal, that the Brethren would either observe or not observe their
Directions, according as they judged of them in their Conscience upon their
peril. The Historian Answers, And was this all? Is it all one at whose hands
Ministers receive Directions, etc. to Regulate them in the exercise of their
Ministry, etc. I Answer, although the words as they are related by the
Informer, who was not present, but did write no doubt according to his
Information, will bear a fair construction: For if Mr. H. has spoken as the
Informer relates, I think it is more than probable that be has been speaking
of the Councils commands in general and indefinitely, and I am confirmed in
this from the words as they stand. The Brother who Answers the History, says,
there were other things spoken beside what the Informer relates; and I am very
much inclined to think that the speeches which passed betwixt my L. Chancellor
and the Ministers, and Mr. H. has carried Mr. H. to speak in the general
concerning the Brethrens Obedience to the Councils Directions, that they would
either observe or not observe their Lordships Directions as they judged of them
in their Consciences upon their peril. I say, I am confirmed in this by the
words as they stand, for he does not say these Injunctions, or Instructions, or
Rules, which are the terms by which these Instructions were expressed: But he
says Directions; and then he says, not these Directions, but their Directions,
comprehending all commands which might come from the Council: If this was the
thing he designed, there is no occasion of carping at his words; for no person
can with any shadow of Reason say, that a Subject speaking thus to the
Magistrate, I will observe or not observe your commands according as I shall
judge of them in my Conscience: I say, none can say, that that Subject gives
more than enough to the Magistrate. But suppose his words relate only to these
Directions, yet no Person of Candor can allege, that they were undetermined
as to their observing or not observing the Instructions, which they judged
intrinsecally Ecclesiastical; seeing they had declared to the Magistrate they
could not receive these from their Lordships, that was a thing that they had
judged in their Conscience already; but the Confinement, and it may be the Act
for paying the Clerks Fees, has occasioned his Answering in that manner, not
being peremptory as to such things, according as the two Brethren had said
before that as to Civil significations, etc. But from what I find in other
papers of Brethren who were present, whose words, none who know them will
question. I perceive that the Informer has not gotten full Information, for
one of these Brethren relates, that the Brother who was chosen to make use of
the paper that was drawn as a Directory for what he was to say in their name,
upon supposition the paper with Instructions were offered, did in the face of
the Council declare, that it was not in the Magistrates Power to make Rules
intrinsecally Ecclesiastical to Regulate Ministers in the exercise of their
Ministry, and that their Lordships knew our Divines say so: To which my L.
Chancellor answered, Sir, we know what belongs to our Office as well as you,
what belongs to your. And as to my Lord Chancellours Answer, which contained a
threatening to punish, I related before from the Answer of this History, written
by a Minister who was present, that it was in these words, and no other, Then,
Sir, we will punish you. Unto which Mr. H. did not reply in words, but only in
gesture; hence, says he, it is needless to debate upon things that were not
spoken: Only, 1. It Is clear by my L. Chancellours reply, that he understood
these Ministers as refusing Obedience to these Injunctions, otherwise he would
not have uttered these words. 2. That the Historians alledgeance that the
punishment threatened by my L. Chancellor might comprehend Ecclesiastical
punishment, as he calls it, is groundless and irrational. The Kings Letter
grants not to the Council the Power of inflicting Church censures, if the King
had given them that Power to inflict Censures, they would also have had Power
to take them off; but as he shows in his Answer to the first Remark of the
Historian on the Kings Letter, they sisted to Indulge some whom they intended
to Indulge, till the Bishop had taken off the Sentence of Deposition. So that
the Council did not pretend by virtue of the Kings Letter, to impose or remove
Church Censures. And the Council knew that the Indulged Ministers would not
submit to the Bishops Censures, and therefore it is a groundless dream, that by
punishment Church-censure is meant. He adds, That the Magistrate might have
commanded the Indulged Ministers to inflict Censures upon themselves, as they
used to do formerly in Presbyterial Courts.

Page 80. We heard (says the Historian) of Rules intrinsecally, etc. but we
heard of no assumption that such were the Rules contained in the paper tendered
unto them, nor of a conclusion, that therefore they could not, they might not
in Conscience accept of them. Answ. The Historian has not considered, 1. Who
these Ministers were, they were not Schoolboys, tied to the formalities of
Arguing Categorice in modo and figura. Nor 2. Where they were, they were not in
the School, engaged in a School-dispute, but before the secret Council, where
formal Syllogisms are accounted pedantry. Nor 3. Has he considered the part
they sustained there, for they were Defendants, and if the Defendant deny and
distinguish, he does enough; and if he give also a reason of his denial, he
does abundantly. Now these Ministers acted all these parts very distinctly and
rationally, as we have seen already. When the Apostles are brought before the
Council, Acts 4. they get another manner of Injunction than any in the Act of
Instructions; for they are commanded not to speak at all, nor teach in the Name
of Jesus. This was an Instruction which tended to the destruction, not only of
the Gospel Ministry, but of all Christianity: This was one of the worst
Councils, and this one of the worst Instructions that ever was; for this
Council was gathered directly against Christ, and this Instruction was for the
total destruction of Christianity root and branch, and for the total Subversion
of the Kingdom of Christ, of the Church, the Ministry, the Gospel, and of all
private Conference about Christ, etc. This was worse than any Sect of
Erastianism we have yet heard of, let be seen, and yet the Apostles enter not
in debate with that Council about the Councils Authority to meddle in such
matters; they do not make Syllogisms against the Councils capacity of Acting,
nor against the Act they had made; yea, they do not in terminis, say, they will
not obey the Councils command: Nor say they, in terminis, that they would speak
and teach in the name of Jesus. They forbear a direct and formal Contradiction
in terminis, but they do that which was less irritating, but much better, and
more for the Advantage of their Cause. Their Answer (which is in these words,
Acts 4.19, 20. Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more
than unto God, judge ye; for we cannot but speak the things which we have seen
and heard) is a real and rational refusal to do what the Council commanded, and
the Council understood it so, and therefore threatened them further; and such
rational qualified Answers, which are real refusals of wrong commands, are much
more to the Conviction and Edification of all that hear them, than flat
Contradictions not qualified with solid Reasons. When the Apostles come to
their Company, they relate the matter, and they are well satisfied with their
behavior; they say not, why entered ye not a Protestation against that
Antichristian Council, that was not gathered in the Name of Christ, but
against Christ, etc? Why did ye not in express terms say, that ye would receive
no commands from them? Why said ye not in express terms, that ye would speak at
all occasions, and teach in the name of Jesus, and so flatly, and in terminis,
contradicted the Councils Injunction? Why spoke ye in such general terms of
speaking the things that ye had heard and seen? Why said ye not, in terminis,
that ye would obey God, and that ye would not obey the Council, and that the
command of the Council was contrary to the command of God? Testimonies cannot
be too plain, ye should have been more particular. Why did ye not frame an
Argument against them thus, When the command of men is contrary to the command
of God, then it is not to be obeyed; but your command that ye have given to us
at this time is contrary to the command of God: And therefore we will not obey
this your command. But these good honest Primitive Christians, who were Acted
by the Spirit of Love, were not so captious nor censorious. In the 5th. Chap.
After they had beaten them, they commanded that they should not speak in the
Name of Jesus, and let them go. We do not hear that the Apostles said any thing
after they were beaten, against that new Injunction, but they had not a mind to
Obey it, and they make that clear by their practice, for they ceased not to
Preach Jesus Christ daily in the Temple, and in every House. The Disciples do
not refuse to hear them because they had given no verbal Testimony against that
last Injunction, or because they had not the last word; seeing they did really
disobey that Injunction in Preaching the Gospel, they made no quarrel either at
their speaking, or at their silence when beaten, they were glad that the
Council had let them go, and had not shut them up in Prison, nor put them to
death; they were glad that they were living and at liberty to Preach in the
Name of Jesus. 4. The Historian commended Mr. B's. Speech, and yet he made no
Assumption nor Conclusion; and why finds he fault with Mr. H's. Speech upon
this Account, that he did not subsume and conclude. 5. The Author of this story
could not have subsumed that all these Instructions are formally and
intrinsecally Eeclesiastical, for he grants at least that one of them was
wholly Political, and the Brother who answers his History, says, that that
Instruction about Bursers and Clerks is about (...), a thing pertaining to this
life, and of very small consideration, and no way regulative of the Ministry; a
thing also that falls immediately and directly under the Superiority and
Jurisdiction of the Supreme Civil Magistrate, although for its remote and
mediate end it have a Spiritual good. And it may be the Brethren had different
apprehensions about some of these Rules, and so some would have subsumed more
in the assumption than others, and this would have made a difference of their
apprehensions manifest before the Council, which was needless, seeing they were
all agreed that they were gravaminous impositions, and that these who were
intrinsecally Ecclesiastical, regulating the exercise of the Ministry, could
not be received.

That the Historian could not understand to what purpose the Magistrates Power
objectively Ecclesiastical was conceded except for justifying the Magistrates
giving, and the Ministers receiving these Instructions, did proceed from his
Passion and Prejudice, which blinded his understanding, as we have clearly
manifested by showing what was Mr. H's. design in that part of his Discourse. I
suppose he as much mistakes the Informers design, page 81. In that same page he
craves leave to add, that the Ministers Declaration was annulled by their
receiving of the papers. We could not hinder him to make that addition, but we
protest, that it may be added to the rest of his false imaginations, and so let
it pass with the rest of his Errors; he has forgotten that this condemns Mr.
Blair, and annuls his Testimony, for he took the paper in his hand, which
several of the Brethren did not. It Is as false that the Power imposing these
Instructions was so lightly passed; for Mr. H. declared, that the Magistrate
had not a Power formally Ecclesiastical, and gave a solid Reason why they could
not impose burdens upon Ministers in the matters of their Ministry, because
they were the Servants of Christ, and so at his will, and not at the will and
pleasure of men in these matters. The Informer will deny what the Historian,
page 82 says, was hinted by him. I perceive by what the Historian has here,
page 81 and 82, that he can allow more to a Godly Reforming Magistrate, than to
Magistrates that are open Enemies, and yet he has granted before that all that
agrees to a Magistrate as Magistrate, agrees to every Magistrate, and so he can
allow more to a Godly Magistrate, than agrees to the Magistrate as Magistrate.
Again, he grants, that in a time of universal defection and deformation, which
can no other way be remedied, that Magistrates may give Rules and Injunctions
to Regulate Ministers in the exercise of their Ministry, for he grants that
Godly Divines have granted this to be given to extraordinary and immediately
inspired Magistrates, etc. Or they have granted it in a time of universal
defection, etc. For the first of these concessions, that more may be allowed to
Magistrates really minding Reformation, than to Magistrates as Magistrates: I
would enquire what Warrant he has for giving this allowance for these diverse
Weights and Measures to the good and bad Magistrate, in defining the limits of
their Power and Office, as the Informer speaks. By what Rule gives he one grain
of more Power and Authority about these things which are the matters of God, to
one Magistrate, than God has given to all Magistrates? The Power of the
Magistrate about things Sacred is given and determined by God, and is not to be
enlarged and restrained by men's allowance or disallowance: This is kittle work,
if the Magistrates Power about holy things may be enlarged by men's allowance,
why may not Ministers Power in the administration of Holy things be enlarged
also, and more allowed to eminent Godly Ministers, who minds Reformation? This
has been a pretext for Prelacy, and it will go far to make a Bishop. Again,
how much more would he allow to Reforming Magistrates, when he has once past
the limits that God has set, where will he stay? What Rule have we for setting
bounds to this allowance in the matter of Power and Authority; the most part of
men loves well to have ulterius for their Motto; must this depend upon the will
of Kirk-men? But as the misguided will of Kirk-men set up an Ecclesiastic
Pope, why may it not also set up a Civil Pope? If the goodness and disposition
to Reform be the Rule, then the more a Magistrate minds the glory of God, he
must have the more Power allowed. What if a Magistrate seem very Zealous for
Reformation, till he has gotten very much Power, and then he turn an
Adversary; how will ye get back the Power which ye have given away? The
Magistrate will not readily give Subjects allowance to take back what they have
given. Again, how can ye fairly refuse to a bad Magistrate who succeds to a
good Predecessor what was allowed to his Predecessor? Such a refusal would be
a great temptation to make a bad Magistrate worse. I shall not insist on this
further, but the little that has been said may show, that it is much safer to
hold that all Magistrates have the same Official Power in reference to
Church Matters; and that even Nero, as Mr. Rutherfurd says, had that, as all
Ministers that are Ministers have, the same Ministerial Authority. And all
Magistrates have in a time of defection and deformation the same Authority for
reducing things to Order, when they can be no other way remedied. If an
Indulged Minister had granted that the Magistrate might in any case give Rules
and Injunctions to Regulate Ministers in the exercise of their Ministry, which
yet the Historian grants in a time of universal defection and deformation,
which can no other way be remedied; it is very like the Historian would have
charged them with the betraying of the whole Cause. I wonder that he who grants
this to the Magistrate at some times, should have made such horrible outcries
against the Indulged Ministers, though they had done what he alleges upon
them: He has foreseen this Objection, and therefore he subjoyns, This cannot
be applied to our Case. But might not honest men be of that Opinion, that this
was our case, and though mistaken in their Opinion, is that a sufficient ground
to charge them with betraying the whole Cause? Our case looks very like a case
of defection and deformation, and this Book of his has helped on the
deformation. He looks on the Indulged Ministers, and the Ministers who are for
hearing of them, and those who adhere to them, as in a course of defection. But
though at other times he makes a very general defection, and alleges that the
outed Ministers who are not Indulged, are Acted by a Spirit of Antichrist, yet
here he will not grant a defection or deformation, for fear lest he be obliged
by his own concession to grant the Magistrate a Power of making Rules, and I
suppose before he granted that, he would deny all that he has said in other
places, of the defection and deformation of the Church. And further, says he, I
wonder how he thinks any can judge otherwise than that Interpretatively at
least the receiving of these papers on these terms was a giving up of the right
of the Church with their own hands. But what if his wondering be, as ordinarily
wondering is, the Daughter of Ignorance, O not so, his wondering is the
Daughter of manifest Light, for he subjoyns, Seeing it is so clear and manifest
by what we have said. And then he makes another Inference from the manifest
clearness of what he has said: And what is that? And (says he) seeing it is
so, himself (that is the Informer) will, I suppose, grant, that every Minister
is called highly to resent this Treachery. And thus he supposes that the
Informer is turned one of his Proselytes, if ye will do him the favor to
believe, without any Evidence, that all that he has said is clear and
manifest, he will bring you to believe that the Moon is made of green Cheese:
He will set every man's hand against his Brother, and bring every Minister to
account all that Treachery which he himself calls Treachery. But the Informer
is none of these credulous Persons, to grant any thing that the Historian would
impose upon him as clear and manifest, because he has said it. What follows
has been answered before; his mistaking of Mr. H's. purpose in ascribing to
the Magistrate a Power objectively Ecclesiastical, has led him into many
absurdities. Page 83. he looks on it as an absurdity to infer from the judgment
of Discretion, which every private man has to judge of his own Act about
things Civil, to infer that therefore private Persons can prescribe Rules to
Regulate Magistrates in the exercise of their Function; and he had good Reason
to judge so. But the seeds of Sedition and Schism, of the contempt of
Magistracy and Ministry which are sown in this History, and the Letter before
it in the Cup of cold water, and in other Letters written by these Authors,
have grown up so fast (for ill Weeds wax well) that they have brought forth a
late Band and Declaration, Published at Sanchar, in which private Persons does
much more, than the giving Rules to Magistrates and Ministers amounts to, for
they in these papers exauctorates the Magistrates, and appoints their execution
for purging the Land, and overturns the established Civil Government, and
appoints a new one, and new Laws for this new Commonwealth, and they renounce
communion with all who join not with them in these things; and will own no
Ministers who differs from them for Ministers, till they stand in judgment
before the Ministers who are of their way, which at most, for any thing I could
learn, were but three, and two of them young men, whose Ordination was
questioned. I hear now also of a new Excommunication which I have not seen.
There is neither judgment nor discretion in these Practices, but a dreadful
judicial giddiness, which should make all tremble and take heed of the first
Seeds of Sedition and Schism, which leads to confusion and desolation. His
granting, page 83. to the Magistrate a Power about the same things wherein the
Ecclesiastical Power is exercised in, so far as concerns the outward
disposing of Divine things in this or that Dominion; and then leaving it
without explication to limit this outward disposing, is a concession that if an
Indulged Minister had said it, all the explications he could have added would
not have cleared it from a homologation of the Act of Supremacy. O, what
Tragical exclamations would the Historian have made against them! This outward
disposing of Divine things would have been made as much of as the Act of
Supremacy amounts to. This Author has been one of the unhappiest ridder of
Marches betwixt the Magistrates and Ministers that I have met with, for he is
ordinarily in extremes, either giving too much or too little. In the end of
page 84. he says, That this Testimony was general, impertinent, confused,
indistinct, and defective -- and that there was much pusillanimity,
dis-ingenuity, carnal consultation in it, and that it was a mere cothurnus,
that is, that which may be turned any way. Answ. It Is strange that the Author
who professes elsewhere, that Testimonies should be made much of, that he could
make nothing of this Testimony, but makes it worse than nothing, even a
betraying of the Cause. Seeing there were none who had said so much before the
Magistrate by way of Testimony to the Truth, as the Indulged Ministers did: If
he had not been much distempered and biased with Passion and Prejudice, he
would for the Truths sake have made as much of this Testimony as he could in
truth, but he contrary to truth and common sense, perverts and wrests it to
turn it into Treachery. The Reverend Brother who has Answered this History,
has showed, that the Indulged Ministers had concurred with the rest of the
outed Ministers, 1. In a real and practical Testimony, which consists
positively in adhering to all their former Principles, Professions, and
Engagements, and in practicing them as far as was possible: And negatively, in
keeping themselves free from every piece of defection, and from all impositions
inconsistent with the truths and Institutions of Christ, their former
Principles, Professions, and Engagements, which was a holding fast of their
Profession without wavering, Heb. 10.23. The keeping of their Garments clean,
Rev. 3.4. And being faithful to the Death. This is the principal thing, upon
the account whereof those who suffered in the Primitive times were called
Martyrs, and the faithfulness of the Indulged Ministers in holding up this
Testimony he clears at great length. 2. In a Doctrinal or Concional Testimony
in Preaching against the evils of the Times, discovering and confuting them
from the Word of God, and exhorting to abstain from them: And herein, says he,
the Indulged Ministers have not been behind with any other faithful Ministers,
though they made not this the All of their work, having many other necessary
Gospel Truths to explain, inculcate, and press. 3. As for that third sort of
Testimony, by way of public Declaration in their own name, and in the name of
all adhering to them, which is the proper work of a Church-Judicatory, and more
formally of a general Assembly, or National Synod, and which hardly can be
expected from the hands of a broken and scattered remnant, who hardly can meet
together without great hazard; he shows, that in reference to this, the
Indulged Ministers have not been behind any Godly Ministers in endeavoring it.
As for the fourth sort of Testimony, spoken of, Matthew. 10.18. Dan. 3.16, 17,
18. the Indulged Ministers have done more this way than others in their
respective appearances before the Council at the giving of the first
Indulgence, and the appearance occasioned by their not keeping the 29th. of
May: And any who will but consider what is Recorded and remembered of these
matters, will see a very clear and distinct confession before Rulers of the
truths especially called in question in these times. Consider their Declaration
with a reference to these Questions, and this will be very evident.

Quest. 1. From whom have ye received your Ministry? Answ. We have received our
Ministry from Jesus Christ. Q. From whom have ye your prescriptions to Regulate
you in your Ministry? A. From Jesus Christ. Q. Are these prescriptions full, or
defective, so that other prescriptions may be superadded? A. These
prescriptions are full. Q. To whom must ye make account of the discharge of
your Ministry? A. To Jesus Christ. Q. Whose Ministers are ye? A. The Ministers
of Jesus Christ. Q. Will ye be faithful Ministers to him? A. We purpose and
resolve so. Q. What is your Judgment in Church Affairs? A. Our Judgment in
Church Affairs is known, that it is the same it was, and that is no secret, but
well known. Object. But your known judgment in Church Affairs is opposite to
the Government now settled in the Church by the Magistrate, and therefore it
can hardly be expected that ye will be Loyal to the King, who has settled a
Government which consists not with your known judgments. Answ. Notwithstanding
of our known judgments in the matters of Church Government, yet we will behave
as becomes Loyal Subjects. Object. But your Loyal behavior will only be from
fear, and for your own ease. Answ. We look upon Lawful Authority as the
excellent Ordinance of God, and will be Loyal Subjects from a Lawful Principle
of Conscience: These things are clear in Mr. H's. Speech. Q. Has the
Magistrate a Power formally Ecclesiastical? A. A Power formally Ecclesiastical
cannot be allowed to the Magistrate. Q. Can ye receive Instructions Regulating
you in the exercise of your Ministry, or Instructions intrinsecally and
formally Ecclesiastical Regulating you in the exercise of your Ministry, from
the Magistrate? A. We cannot receive Instructions intrinsecally and formally
Ecclesiastical Regulating us in the exercise of our Ministry, from the
Magistrate. Q. Whose Servants are ye in the matters of your Ministry, whose
will and pleasure ye must obey? A. In the matters of our Ministry we are the
Servants of Christ. Q. May not the Magistrate lay on burdens upon you in the
matters of your Ministry by his Authority? A. Such commands are impositions;
it is our earnest desire that the Magistrate may not burden our Ministry with
such impositions, for we are the Servants of Christ in these matters; but if he
do lay ^n such impositions, we cannot approve or receive them, for we are the
Servants of Christ in these matters; as these matters are the matters of
Christ, and we his Servants in these matters, so we must be at his will in
these matters. Obj. Then ye give the Magistrate no Power in reference to you
that is Ministers, and your Ministerial actings; and is not this just the Popish
error, who exempts their Clergymen from Subjection to the Magistrate? A. We
willingly grant to the Magistrate all that Power that God and Orthodox Divines
gives to him; for though the Magistrate may not make Religious and
Ecclesiastical matters which God has not made, and though he may not exerce
any Act which formally and intrinsecally is a Ministerial Act, yet he has a
Power conversant about Ecclesiastical matters or objects, which they call a
Power objectively Ecclesiastical, by which he may command Ministers and private
Persons in his Dominions to do what God has commanded them to do, and put both
Ministers and others to serve God in their stations, he may add his Sanction to
Ecclesiastical Canons made by Ecclesiastical Courts, and press the observance
of them, under Civil Penalties. Obj. Yes, yes, any thing that Kirk-men does, he
may come after and back it, and is that all? A. We do not say, that the
Magistrate must blindly execute what the Ecclesiastical Courts concludes; we
acknowledge that he has the judgment of his Vocation, whereby he may judge
whether their Conclusions be for the Spiritual weal and Temporal Peace of his
Subjects, and according as he finds cause, either countenance or discountenance
them in what they do. If a Synod were so far wrong, as to make an Act for
Worshipping Images, as the second Nicen Council did, he may discountenance
them, and punish the makers or keepers of that Idolatrous Decree: If they make
Decrees contrary to Religion and Righteousness, he should discountenance them,
and not suffer his Subjects to be abused by such Canons. If any object, that
this concession gives the Magistrate Power to overturn all, I answer not at
all, for it is only a Power to preserve the matters of God (which are the
object about which his Power is conversant) where they are in purity, or to
restore them to their purity and integrity. If ye say, what if the Magistrate
err, and be mistaken? I answer, what if Kirk-men be mistaken, and conclude
wrong things? Both these are very caseable suppositions that has followed upon
that woeful supposition of Adam's fall; but the errors that both Magistrates and
Ministers are subject to, must not make us deny either of them the Power which
God has given to them, or confound their Offices, which God has made
distinct. The Historian says, it was general. Answ. It behoved to be so,
because it was to comprehend many particulars. Again, Mr. B's. Testimony, which
he commends, was general; beside, some of the Brethren made particular
exceptions against particular Instructions, against one, as bringing them in
subordination to Prelacy, contrary to their Principles, against another as
impracticable. If he mean that it had no particular reference to these
Instructions, this will be like the rest of his imaginations. The time, the
place, the occasion of these Speeches, the particular pointing at some of the
Instructions, the comprehending of them in the more general designation of
impositions, and others of them in that description of them, Instructions
formally and intrinsecally Ecclesiastical, Regulating the exercise of the
Ministry, shows, that these Ministers were not speaking of Instructions in
Utopia, and my L. Chancellor knew well enough that they were speaking of these
Instructions, for he would not have threatened to punish them for not observing
Instructions which the Magistrate had never given to them. Then, he says, it
was impertinent, confused, indistinct. Answ. He has by his confused quibbling
endeavored to make it appear so, but the pertinency and clearness of it is
manifest to all who will not shut their eyes, and the impertinency of his
confused questions, which have their rise from his own confused fancy, and not
from the matter, which gave no occasion for them, is sufficiently discovered.
He says, it is defective. Answ. I refer the Reader to the Answers of the
foregoing Questions, which are the words, or the obvious and manifest sense of
their words before the Council, and then to the consideration of all the
genuine consequences, which necessarily and clearly follows, from these truths
asserted in these Answers; and then let him judge, whether their Testimony was
defective.

In denying to the Magistrate a Power formally Ecclesiastical, all Erastianism,
properly so called, is excluded; and in asserting that in the matters of the
Ministry, they are Christ's Servants, and consequently not the Servants of men,
in these matters; and in designing Acts burdening their Ministry, by the name
of impositions, they have clearly showed, that these matters are not at the
will and pleasure of men; for if the Magistrate might warrantably command what
he pleased in these matters, his commands would not be impositions, but Lawful
commands. Now if the Lord would incline the hearts of Rulers to forbear to
assume a Power formally Ecclesiastical, that is the Power of the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and to forbear to burden the Church with impositions,
commanding what the Lord has forbidden, or forbidding what the Lord allows;
or hindering and marring the Servants of Christ in his Service: I suppose none
who were judicious, would complain, though they used their objective Power, in
commanding what God has commanded, and forbidding what he has forbidden, and
pressing these commands, where there is need, with Civil Penalties: And the
Servants of Christ would rejoice to see the Civil Magistrate using the Civil
Power, which he has from God, for the glory of God, in putting the Ministers
of Christ to their Duty. He says, There was in this way of vindicating Truth,
much pusillanimity, disingenuity, carnal consultation, occasioning
misconceptions, and blindness. Answ. The Historians blindness in and
misconceptions of this matter, has occasioned and caused this false and
uncharitable accusation: All who know these Ministers, knows their candor and
ingenuity; and their Brethren, who were with them at their meetings at that
time, can witness their integrity; and their words uttered before the Council
do evidence. They evidenced much more courage before the Magistrate than the
Author did, when brought before the Magistrate, for any thing I can hear; but
ordinarily men who have least courage, are most vehement exacters of it in
others, and most ready to upbraid others with pusillanimity; they use to talk
much of courage when they are at a good distance from the place where danger
is, but when they come where the fray is, they are as afraid as other folk. The
Brother who has answered this History, relates, that a Minister who was
brought before the Council in the year 1662. for calling his Neighbor a Knave,
because, contrary to his promise, he had gone to the first Diocesan Synod,
being interrogate, wherefore he called his Neighboring Minister a Knave? He
answered, because he said one thing, and did another. This Answer was much more
general and abstract from Prelacy or Supremacy and Covenant Breaking, than the
Answers of the Indulged Ministers; the reason why he called him a Knave really,
was his conforming to Prelacy, established by the Supremacy, and his
Covenant Breaking. But the Brother who is so much for particular, plain,
distinct Testimony in others, he contented himself with this confused general.
He adds, that another Brother, who in the preceding year, was brought before
the Parliament for asserting the Obligation of the Covenant, in a Sermon; when
he compeared, all his Testimony was, a mincing of these expressions made use of
in that Sermon. But, says he, I pitied him, because he was in hazard of his
Life. And yet both these Brethren have exclaimed much against the Indulged
Ministers, for not giving a plain, open, full Testimony before the Rulers.
Several People would have a Testimony, as the Cat would have fish without
wetting their feet; Catus amat piscem, sed non vult tangere lympham; or as the
Ape would have Chestnuts out of the fire, without burning their own fingers, and
therefore makes use of the Cats foot to pull them out. They would have Indulged
Ministers giving plain Testimonies to the Magistrates face, but all their own
Testimonies are given behind the Magistrates back, and they look rather like
Satyrick invectives, and railing accusations, than the Gospel-Testimonies of
Gospel Ministers, who should with meekness Instruct, even those who oppose
themselves, if God peradventure will give them Repentance; and who should not
do any thing, that really tends to harden or irritate; but do all things that
are allowed of God, to mollify the hearts, even of these who oppose
themselves. Their way puts me in mind of the way of some fresh water Soldiers,
who when they are called to fight and shoot, have neither heart nor hand to
draw or present their Muskets, let be to give fire, but flees as fast and far
as their feet will carry them; and when they are at a great distance, they give
brave fire, and shoots abundance of great volleys at the wind; and if upon the
Report of these volleys they be enquired after, they disappear, nusquam
apparent.

The Historian shuts up this matter by desiring the Informer to tell him, If he
think not, that more plain, clear, and full expressions might have been fallen
on. Answ. Here he seems to grant that their expressions were plain, clear, and
full; for the comparative supposes the positive; and must honest men be
condemned of Treachery, because they fell not upon the plainest words and
fullest expressions? Must there be Confusion and Treachery in every Testimony
that is not clear in the superlative degree? These Brethren used the
expressions, which Divines who writ most deliberately, and distinctly, and
soundly in these matters, use; and I am very confident if they had known
clearer expressions to have expressed their mind, in that matter, they would have
used them.

The Author of this History has no^ fallen upon more distinct words, for any
thing Is remember. For the words which he suggests, page 75. where he says, Why
was it not more distinctly, and in fewer words said, that they could not
receive the Instructions, as being intrinsecally and formally Ecclesiastical,
Regulating them, who were the Servants of Christ in these matters. For 1.
Though this had been distinct, yet it would not have been true; for by his own
confession, the confinement was wholly Political. 2. It Is confused, at least, I
do not distinctly understand what matters these matters are, which are in the
end of his distinct words; no doubt, these words mean matters, but what matters
he means, I can hardly imagine. If he had spoken before of the matters of the
Ministry, as Mr. H. did, it would have been clear; but there is no matters
before in his Speech, but the Councils Instructions, and a description of them;
now if these matters have not a reference to these Instructions, they have a
reference to nothing, that the hearer or reader of them can understand, though
the matters he meant might be distinct enough in his own mind, they could not
be distinctly taken up by his hearers or readers, except he had some way
signified his mind: He is now speaking of distinct Testimonies, and Testimonies
are not given by mere thinking; so that the Instructions of the Council must be
meant by these matters, or else they will have no sense at all, that we can
understand from his words; and words that have no sense, are not distinct
words. If by these matters, he means the Councils Instructions, then the
Council might have urged them to obey these Instructions: Thus, seeing ye are
the Servants of Christ, in these Instructions, then why will ye not serve
Christ, in observing these Instructions, or doing these matters, in which ye
are the Servants of Christ? Why refuse ye to receive these Instructions, or
these matters, in which ye are the Servants of Christ? And does he not here
fall in the fault, which he very unreasonably charges Mr. H. with? He alleges,
that Mr. H. in giving to the Magistrate a Power objectively Ecclesiastical, did
give him a Power to make Rules intrinsecally Ecclesiastical, for Regulating
Ministers in the exercise of their Ministry, and to give these very Rules,
which he had said, he could not receive from the Magistrate, there was neither
Reason, nor shadow of Reason for charging Mr. H. with this contradiction; but
the Author of the History has laid himself very open to this charge. For if
these Instructions be matters wherein Ministers are the Servants of Christ,
then he has yielded to the Magistrate a Power to command Ministers to observe
them; for Magistrates may command Ministers to serve Christ in doing these
things, in which they are the Servants of Christ, If it be said, that he meant
the matters of their Ministry, and not the Councils Instructions, then his
meaning was good, but his words were not distinct at all, and far less more
distinct than Mr. H's. It Is true, his words are some fewer, that he leaves out
some of Mr. H's. words, but they are so much the worse and confused, and by his
brevity he falls in obscurity -- brevis esse laboro, obscurus fio. These words
of his, which he prescribes for a form, as more distinct and short, than Mr.
H's. words, are either not good Grammar, having a Relative without any
Antecedent in the preceding words, to which they can relate, and so they are
without sense, I shall not say nonsense, or they have a bad sense in
acknowledging these Instructions to be matters in which Ministers are Christ's
Servants; and such a fault in Morality was large worse than a Grammatical
failing in speaking nonsense: And they involve a contradiction, or they give a
Reason why they could not receive these Instructions, which will infer the
conclusion that is contradictory to their Assertion. But make the best of them
that may be, they are not more distinct than Mr. H's. nay, for any thing that I
can see, they are words very confused, and if they relate to all the
Instructions, as I showed, they are manifestly false. By the Historians own
confession one of them had no Ecclesiastical Being at all, being wholly
Political; and therefore they could not truly say of all of them, that they
could not receive them, as being Rules intrinsecally, etc. It is strange that
the Historian, who is here finding fault with the Indulged Ministers words, as
a dis-ingenuous, indistinct, confused cothurnus, could not speak more truly and
distinctly himself; he who would teach others to speak, should have learned his
Grammar better; and he who blames honest men for dis-ingenuity, should not have
endeavored to put a lie in their mouth; and that even in the form of speech,
which he prescribes as more distinct, he should be so very confused, is a very
strange thing. The more I examine the Historians quibblings against these
Brethrens words before the Council, I think the more of these Brethrens words,
and am confirmed that the Lord was with their mouth, and gave them what to
speak; and I am the more confirmed in this, by observing that this Historian
could not mend what they said, without falling into a manifest falsehood, and
into a form of speech, which either is nonsense, or has an ill sense, and
destroys it self, by giving a Reason in the end of the speech, for refusing the
Instructions, which does prove that they should not be refused, and so the end
destroys the beginning of it.

And thus the integrity and faithfulness of these Ministers is cleared; and
whether or not all the Cavils and Quibblings of the Historian against their
acceptance of the peaceable exercise of their Ministry, and against their
Speeches before the Council, be not sufficiently, if not superabundantly
refuted, I leave it to the impartial judgment of the judicious Reader.

The Brother who has Answered this History, has showed the falsehood of the
two Observations which the Historian makes, page 56. by showing, That upon the
call of the Congregation of Irwin, that Reverend Brother (after his Confinement
was changed by the Council, upon the supplication of the said Congregation) did
remove to Irwin. And that the Act of Council, which came to that Ministers
hand, made no mention of the Instructions. So that his seeing that the Act of
Council is the All and only ground of transportation, and that the
Instructions always go with the Indulgence, are two other of his false Visions.

And thus I have considered all the Historians Reasons against the acceptance
of the Indulgence, and discovered their unreasonableness, and have considered
his Answers to these Objections, which he was pleased to propose to himself,
and have found his Answers to be indeed no Answers. I have also examined all
his quibblings against the Speeches of these of the Indulged Ministers, who
appeared before the Council; and have discovered how vain they are, and I refer
it to the judgment of the judicious Reader, if I have passed any thing in his
Arguings, that had any appearance or shadow of Reason. I am so far from
apprehending that the judicious Reader will censure me for omitting any thing
which deserved an Answer, that upon the contrary, I fear, I shall be censured
by the judicious, for refuting many things which are so manifestly false, that
they did not deserve to be noticed. I shall only desire such to consider, that
many things which are manifestly false, may appear true to those who are weak,
and who have not their senses exercised to discern both good and evil: And so
that which is needless to the strong, may be necessary for those who are weak.

It remains that I examine his Vindication of such as scruple to hear and own
the Indulged Ministers, which begins page 128. and continues to the end of his
Book. He makes some fashion here of staring a Question.

1. He grants, That the Indulged Ministers are Ministers of the Gospel. And in
his 28 Questions (which were as vant-couriers sent before this History, where
the main body of his forces are drawn up) he says, he cheerfully grants them to
be Ministers, and nothing doubts, but the people would willingly hear these
same Indulged men, if they would relinquish the Indulgence, and go to the
fields and Preach with the rest. He says here, That he does not make this the
Question, whether or not these Indulged Ministers are true Ministers of the
Gospel, or ought in any case to be acknowledged and looked upon as such.

2. He grants, That it is not simply unlawful to hear these Indulged. In his 28
Questions he says, He durst not say, that it were simply unlawful to hear the
Curats.

3. He grants, That they may be lawfully heard at some time, and in some
Circumstances; as for example, if there were no other to be heard in all
Scotland. In his 28 questions he says, I should readily grant, that in some
cases, and in some circumstances, they might not only be Lawfully heard, and
joined with, but also should and ought be heard: As for example, if there were
no other in all Scotland to be heard but such as were settled by the Councils
Orders. And I would (says he) yield as much even as to the Curats, I mean such
of them as were not openly flagitious and profane, or are not notoriously
ignorant. If there were no other in all Scotland to be heard.

The Reason moving him to make these concessions, is, that they have the
essentials of the Ministerial Office, and so their Ministerial Actings are
valid, and are not nullities; for so says he, if they are not Ministers, all
the Children whom they have Baptized are yet unbaptized; and all their
Ministerial Acts are null: And to evite this Absurdity, he will not say, that
they are not Ministers. We have heard what he grants, let us hear what he
denies. 1. He denies, That the People among whom the Indulged Ministers are
settled, are to own these Ministers as their Ministers, their Pastors or
Overseers, set over them by the Holy Ghost. 2. He denies, That it is Lawful and
expedient to hear them, when there are other Ministers in Scotland to be heard.
Then he affirms, That it is these Peoples Duty to withdraw from the Indulged to
hear and countenance other Ministers, who are not Indulged; and he insinuates
Reasons, why they are to withdraw from the one, and countenance the other. 1.
The Non-indulged Preach upon Christ's call, but the Indulged Preach not upon
Christ's call, but by man's Order. The Indulged Ministers are not over the People
in the Lord, are not set over them to be their Pastors and Overseers by the
Holy Ghost, but the Non-indulged are over them in the Lord, and set over them
as Pastors and Overseers by the Holy Ghost. The Non-indulged Preach contrary
to man's Order, or as it is in his 28 questions, they Preach upon the call of
Christ, and not upon the Warrant and Order of the Council, but contrary
thereto; but the Indulged Preach not contrary to the Warrant and Order of the
Council. There are not such exceptions against the Non-indulged, as there are
against the Indulged. The Non-indulged are owned and countenanced of the Lord
in a remarkable and wonderful manner. The Indulged are not so countenanced,
etc. Though he do not expressly deny all to the Indulged, which he ascribes to
the Non-indulged; and though he do not expressly ascribe to the Non-indulged,
what he denies to the Indulged; yet, seeing he is making a comparison to show
the difference betwixt the Indulged and not Indulged; and seeing he is in this
comparative balancing the Indulged and not Indulged, whatever he puts, as
ponderous and advantageous in the one Scale, he must keep it out of the other;
and upon the contrary, what is wanting or naught in the one, must be, or be
right in the other, or else his comparison would not be fair, and his Weights
and Balance false.

Thus we have the state of the Question before us, let us examine how it
stands, and if it be consistent with the Historians tenets. 1. He grants the
Indulged Ministers to be Ministers of the Gospel; then his own mouth condemns
him, for if they be Ministers of the Gospel, they have not renounced their
Ministerial mission and their dependence upon Christ: And therefore the
Historian grants, that he said false, when he said they had done so. They who
renounce that which essentially constitutes the Ministerial Office, they are
not Ministers of the Gospel; and they who are Ministers of the Gospel, have not
renounced what is essentially constitutive of the Gospel Ministry. Thus the
Historian has eaten in all these horrid calumnies of this nature, which in his
Letters and this History he has cast upon the Indulged Ministers. 2. If they
be Ministers of the Gospel, they ought to Preach the Gospel: But this Historian
says, they should not Preach; for he says, none should hear them, but all
should withdraw from them; and thus they should Preach the Gospel, because they
are Ministers of the Gospel, and they should not Preach, because none should
hear them, and Ministers are not obliged to Preach, where there are none to
hear, and when none should hear: And thus he makes them Ministers and no
Ministers; for a Minister who should Preach, and whom none should hear, is a
Minister and no Minister. He grants that the Ministerial Acts, which they have
done, are valid, they are not nullities; but if this Historian get his will,
they shall be incapacitate to Baptize, etc. any more; and thus he turns them
into mere insignificant ciphers. The only comfort in this sad case is, that if
they will but come out of the Kirk to the Fields, and so change the place of
their Preaching, they shall make as significant figures as the Non-indulged:
For he who is but a cipher in the Kirk, will make a great figure in the Fields,
though he stand there alone, and no other Minister be with him: This is a new
Arithmetical invention, to make a cipher, which signified nothing, by a mere
local removal, to become a very significant figure, though no figure be
prefixed to it, to add any virtue to it. I wonder whence it comes, that the
Fields and Mountains in Scotland have such virtue, and have it not in any other
part of the World, that we hear of; for in Scotland, according to this Authors
Opinion, a Minister who signifies nothing in a Kirk, where the Magistrate
allows him the peaceable exercise of his Ministry, if he will take the Fields,
he shall not only be a man, a Minister in the Fields, but cheerfully heard, and
countenanced, and owned, not only of men, but of the Lord in a wonderful
manner: And the Blessing which was withheld from the People in the Kirk,
justly because of their sin, they shall find it in the Fields, notwithstanding
of their provocations. See page 133. Or if the Author thought that the Fields
had this force every where, I wonder how he did not take the Fields in Holland,
where they say the Magistrate claims more Power, in reference to matters of
Religion, than the Historian allows; but on the contrary, he stayed with in the
Kirk, as long as the Magistrate allowed, and even when the Magistrate would not
suffer him to Preach in the Kirk, he never went to the Fields, for any thing we
could hear, but kept himself within doors. I see the change of places makes a
change in some men's minds, and therefore that does not hold always: Coelum non
animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt, And that the Fellow who said, Si tu hic
esses, aliter sentires, was not altogether senseless.

But again, if the Indulged Ministers be Ministers of the Gospel, and do indeed
Preach the Gospel, then the People who received them as their own Ministers,
formerly ordained by the Presbytery to take the charge of them; or who in their
destitute condition, invited them as Ministers, ordained, to come and Preach
the Gospel to them, are obliged to own them as Ministers of the Gospel, and to
countenance them in Preaching, and if they withdraw from them, and break off
that Communion in the public pure Worship of God in which they formerly
joined, they are guilty not only of ingratitude, in deserting the Ministers of
the Gospel, who come upon their invitation, to help them in their destitute
condition, but they are guilty of Separation or Schism.

2. He grants, That it is not simply sinful to hear the Indulged Ministers.
Then he said false, when he said, These Ministers were not Christ's
Ambassadors, for to hear these, as Ministers, as Christ's Ambassadors, who are
not sent by him, but sent by men Usurping Christ's Authority, were simply
sinful, if they have renounced their dependence on Christ, etc. 2. And he
speaks a gross untruth, when he says, That the hearing of Indulged Ministers is
an homologating, countenancing, approving of a sinful Supremacy, and that the
hearing of Curats is an approving of Prelacy; for the approving of that which
is sinful, and in its own nature sinful, is simply sinful; the approving of
that which is in it self ill, and always and at all times evil, that is, not
only now and then, but always, and in all cases sinful, and simply sinful. 3.
He grants, That if there were no other Ministers in Scotland, that none would
scruple to hear the Prelates Curates: And in his 28 questions, That in that
case not only might the Indulged and the Curats be heard, but they should and
ought to be heard. Then he must quit that conceit, that the hearing of Indulged
Ministers, and of Curats, is an approbation of sinful Supremacy and Prelacy;
for men should never approve that which is in its self evil. 2. He miserably
torments the Consciences of the poor simple People, who will believe him; for
he tells them, it is unlawful to hear Indulged Ministers while there are others
in Scotland to be heard; but if there be no others, then it is not only Lawful,
but a Duty to hear the Indulged Ministers: So that the People, in Order to the
resolution of this case of Conscience, whether they do right or wrong in
hearing or not hearing the Indulged Ministers, they must inform themselves,
whether there be any other Minister alive in Scotland; and so long as they hear
there is any one alive, though he were living in the Mull of Galloway, and they
were living at John a Grots, it were sinful for them to hear Indulged
Ministers; but if he were dead, it were a sin not to hear: And so the People
would be in Conscience obliged to keep up a constant Intelligence, that they
might know how soon that Minister died, that they might not neglect their Duty
in hearing Indulged Ministers. His advice to hear the Curats or Indulged
Ministers, in case there were no other to hear, comes too late to the People
whom he commends for their leading of Ministers, arid breaking the ice, for
they are far before him here; for they will choose rather to hear none at all,
than to hear either Bishops Curats, or Council-Curats; and some of them say,
they like the last worse than the first: And if the Historian were living,
there are some of these People who would not hear himself, if they knew he were
of that Opinion, that either Indulged Ministers or Curats should be heard in
any case. Some of them would tell him, that he is all mistaken, when let thinks
that the Baptism administered by Curats is valid, and is not a nullity; for they
judge it to be much worse than a nullity, to be even the mark of the Beast. And
seeing he acknowledges the People for Guides, he must follow them, they will
not come back to him; if he cry after them, that he meant not flagitious and
ignorant Curats, but those who are knowing and of sober conversations, they
will cry back, we who are common People, are not for distinctions, as ye your
self said: We will hear none of them in no case; whole Sale is good Sale: And
therefore follow us, who have guided you, who are Ministers, now a long time,
and ye your self have commended us for good Guides, and if ye will not follow
us, we and you will shed, for ye are slipped aside, we are where we were, ye
are fallen off, and so we are not to be blamed for the breach. And if the
Historian have no other Reason for hearing the Indulged, or the Conformists,
when folk can do no other ways but that which he mentions, viz. the shunning of
that absurdity, that if they were no Ministers, their Baptisms, etc. would be
nullities, and the Children were unbaptized: If this be all, it may be made use
of to persuade the People in a mister to hear a Popish Priest, for the Baptism
that he administers is not a nullity, and Papists when they turn Protestants,
are not rebaptized; and where away this will lead, let any who have any
discerning in these matters, judge.

The Reasons for which he would have the People withdrawing, are, 1. That they
are not called by Christ, nor set over the People by the Holy Ghost, but by the
Council. If it be reduced to form, and heartily proposed, it must run thus: The
Council permitted and allowed the Indulged Ministers the peaceable exercise of
their Ministry, in such and such Congregations, and therefore they were not
called by Christ, nor set over these Congregations by the Holy Ghost: The
consequence is manifestly false, for if the Magistrates Civil allowance of the
public peaceable exercise of the Ministry, do make void the potestative
mission, which Ministers have from Christ, in their Ordination; and if it
destroys the Peoples invitation, and the advice and consent of Ministers
concerned, all which the Indulged Ministers had, as has been showed before;
then it will follow, that where ever the Magistrate permits, allows, appoints
Ministers to Preach, that there there are no Ministers called by Christ, or set
over People by the Holy Ghost; and of what pernicious consequence this is, and
how destructive to the Ministry of the Gospel in all places of the World, where
the Magistrate allows of it, any may see with half an eye. Again, may not the
People of these Congregations reason thus, if these Ministers, who either were
Ordained our Ministers by the Presbytery, or those whom we in our destitute
condition did invite to come and help us, and who came with the advice and
consent of the generality of the Ministers, which was all could be expected in
such a broken time for setting them among us, and applying their Ministry to us
for a time: If these be not our Ministers, then certainly there are none whom
we can call our Ministers. Is not this the way to shake these People loose of
all relation to any Ministers, as their Ministers, or as sent by Christ to
them. If the Historian will not deny that the Ministers not Indulged are called
of Christ to Preach to the People who are not of the Congregations where they
were formerly Ministers, why should he deny this to the Indulged Ministers, who
have much more to make up a Relation betwixt them and these People, than they
have to make up a Relation betwixt them and other Ministers, whom it may be
they never heard nor saw before, and are not sure whether they be Ministers or
not? Such wild fancies as this Author and others have suggested to the People,
have brought some to that, that they have respect to no Ministers, and others
care for none, except one or two, of whom others who are more discerning, are
much ashamed.

As for that Reason, that Indulged Ministers Preach according to man's Order,
and the not Indulged Preach not upon the Warrant and Order of the Council, but
contrary thereunto. If it be truly proposed, it must run thus: The Indulged
have a Civil Order or Warrant for the peacable exercise of their Ministry, and
so their Preaching in these Parishes to which they are Indulged, is not
contrary to the Magistrates will, seeing the Magistrate allows them to Preach
in these places, and therefore People are to withdraw from hearing them, that
they may countenance these Ministers, who have no such Civil Warrant for the
peaceable exercise of their Ministry, but Preaches contrary to the Magistrates
will. Now what Reason is in this, that the Indulged Ministers should be
discountenanced and deserted, because the Magistrate allows them the peaceable
exercise of their Ministry, and that these Ministers should only be heard, who
Preach contrary to the Magistrates will: The Indulged were as far from
receiving their Ministry or Instructions to Regulate them in the exercise of
their Ministry, as the not Indulged were. This was the difference, that the
Magistrate did countenance or allow the Preaching of the Indulged, and
discountenance and disallow the Preaching of the Non-indulged; and should the
Indulged be discountenanced, because the Magistrate did permit and allow their
Preaching? This bewrays a great disrespect to the Magistrate: Why would not the
Author try this in Holland, and with some of his Proselytes have taken the
Fields, and called away the People from the Ministers, who were countenanced by
the Magistrate, to hear them who Preached without and contrary to the
Magistrates Order. The People might have countenanced the Non-indulged, and yet
not deserted the Indulged; for there were many other places besides Indulged
Parishes, who desired the help of outed Ministers, and the countenance of the
People, who deserted Indulged Ministers, did not continue toward the
Non-indulged, who would not humor them in all things, and hold up their yeas
and nays; and as soon as any of these outed Ministers began to signify their
inclination to have the peaceable exercise of their Ministry under the
Protection of Lawful Authority, these People who measured Ministers
faithfulness by their Preaching contrary to the Magistrates will, did cast at
them as Apostates. This I suppose is a new Test for trying what Ministers are
called of Christ, which has not been before this heard in the Reformed
Churches, viz. They whom the Magistrate allows to Preach, they are not called
of Christ, and are to be withdrawn from; they who Preach contrary to the
Magistrates will, they are called of Christ, and to be countenanced: But it is
a detestable test, for it would cast all the Ministers of the Gospel through
the World, who have the countenance and protection of Lawful Authority. But
though this Test had neither Foundation in Scripture, nor Reason, being
contrary to both; yet it was pretty well calculate for the new Commonwealth,
which was to be raised upon the Ruins of the present Magistrates. As for that
Reason, that there are not such exceptions against the Non-indulged as against
the Indulged: I have showed before, that the exceptions against the Indulged
are calumnies, and if Ministers shall be cast and deserted upon calumnies, it is
an easy thing to depose them all. It has been observed, that the best
Ministers have been most calumniate, and they whom the Lord put in greatest
capacity to do him Service, the Devil and his Instruments did cast most filthy
calumnies at such; how many calumnies were cast upon our Lord Jesus, the chief
Shepherd, when he was Minister of the Circumcision: Many exceptions were made
against Paul, the chosen vessel of Christ. Athanasius was horribly calumniate
by the Arrians. As for what he says of the wonderful success of the
Non-indulged, and rich Blessing attending their Ministry, it has been observed
by many who were not Indulged, that the Lord blessed the Ministry of these not
Indulged Ministers, who made it their business to Preach the Gospel, and to
teach the things which made for Peace and Edification; but as for those few,
who made it their business to divide the People, and draw them away from the
Indulged Ministers, that they left the People worse than they found them: For
the People who listened to them, became more careless or learning the grounds of
Religion, and had little heart to any thing but these jangling Debates, which
did not tend to Edification, but Division and Confusion; and that they become
more vain, and self-conceited, and censorious, and some of them become great
and manifest liars, and calumniators, and of a bitter invective disposition.
And if trial be made in these Parishes, where the Indulged Ministers are, it
will be found, that these deserters of the Ministry of the Indulged Ministers,
are far inferior in knowledge, love, diligence to others who have constantly
countenanced the Ministry of Indulged Ministers. But this Reason of deserting
the Indulged Ministers, is also of most dangerous consequence, and would break
the best constituted Church of the World, if it were reduced to practice, and
therefore the general Assembly of the Church of Scotland made an Act against
such as withdraw themselves from the public Worship in their own
Congregations; and this Act was made, as appears in the Act it self, for
preserving Order, Unity, and Peace in the Kirk, for maintaining that Respect
which is due to the Ordinances and Ministers of Jesus Christ, for preventing
Schism, noisome Errors, and all unlawful Practices, which may follow on the
Peoples withdrawing themselves from their own Congregations. And any may see,
that if People ought to go to these Ministers, who are most eminent for gifts,
grace, utterance, success; then all the Congregations of Ministers, who are
less eminent for gifts and graces, and have less success in their Ministry,
would be quite dissolved. And oft-times weak Ministers have more success in
their Ministry, than those who are every way more eminent, as to gifts and
graces: Is not the great Pastor of all Pastors brought in by the Prophet,
regretting he had labored in vain? Had ever Christ in the days of his flesh
such success as Peter had in one Sermon? Acts 2. Mr. Rutherfurd, in his Due
right of Presbytery, shows, that even the Independents would not allow of a
Separation from a Congregation where all the Ordinances of Christ are, though
the Ministers were less Powerful and Spiritual, to another Congregation, where
incomparably there is a more Powerful and more Spiritual Ministry, page 74. the
Independents alleged, that it was the want of something which Christ
commanded, which caused them separate. To which Mr. Rutherfurd, after several
other things, answers, page 72. That it is not Christ's command, Mat. 23.10. to
separate from these Churches, and to renounce all communion with them, because
these, who sat in Moses Chair did neglect many Ordinances of Christ; for when
they gave the false meaning of the Law, they stole away the Law, and so a
principal Ordinance of God: and yet Christ I believe forbad Separation, when he
commanded that they should hear them, Mat. 23. But the Independents were not so
in love with Separation, as to allow Separation from a Church, where all the
Lords Ordinances might be enjoyed in Purity, though not in so Powerful a manner
as in another Congregation. The Historian dare not deny the Indulged to be
Ministers of the Gospel, he dare not say, that the Ordinances are not dispensed
by them in Purity, according to Christ's Institution; he dare not say, that
there are any of Christ's Ordinances wanting in the Kirks, which are to be had
in the Fields; he dare not say, that any thing sinful is required, as a
condition of Church Fellowship in the Congregations where Indulged Ministers
Preach; he dare not say, that these Indulged Ministers did intrude themselves
upon these Congregations against the will of the People, for they were invited
to come, and the People evidenced their consent to their coming, by a cheerful
attendance upon the Ordinances dispensed by these Ministers: and yet he
concludes, that it is unlawful for the People to hear them, and that it is their
Duty to break off from that Church Communion and fellowship, in which they did
formerly join with them; for he presses withdrawing: And he makes this
withdrawing from the Indulged Ministers, which is so easy to every profane
Person, as he is profane, to be the Duty of a necessary Testimony against
sinful Usurpations; and so these profane Persons, who profanely withdraws from
the Lords Ordinances, in which they never had any delight, and are glad of any
pretext for absenting themselves, are put in conceit that their profanity makes
them Martyrs, or Witnesses to the Truth, and against sinful Usurpations. Any
may see from his stating of the Question, that he has been miserably
confounded and perplexed. In one of his Letters he says, There is sin wrapped up
in hearing the Indulged, which would seem to make the hearing of them
intrinsecally, and so simply sinful; here he makes it only unlawful, by reason
of some Circumstances, and that which he gives as a Circumstance, is one of the
oddest Circumstances that ye have readily heard of; it stands so far off, and
at so great a distance from hearing, that it is a wonder how it should have any
influence to change it in its Morality. He says, it is unlawful to hear the
Indulged while there are any other Ministers in all Scotland to hear; but when
there are no other, then it is not only Lawful, but it is Duty to hear; that
then not only they may be heard, but they should be heard: It Is strange, that
the Life of a Minister living, it may be 40, 50 miles from People, who live in
places where Indulged Ministers are, should make their hearing of these
Indulged Ministers unlawful, and then his death should make it Duty. Seeing he
was of Opinion, that such remote Circumstances, which come not near by many
miles, make this change in hearing; it was a very ill wailed expression which
he used in his Letter, viz. That sin was wrapped up in hearing the Indulged: It
had been mare consonant to this unlawfulness, which arises from Circumstances
which are so remote, that they cannot be so much as called adjacent, they lie
so far off, and keep at such a distance from the Person who is concerned to
know whether his hearing be sin or Duty, that though he keep up a most exact
Intelligence, it will be two or three days ere he can hear of the Circumstance
that alters the nature of his hearing the Indulged Ministers. I say, it had
been more consonant to such a circumstantial unlawfulness, to have said, that
sin was wrapped about it, or rather that it was wrapped up at a great distance
from it, than that sin was wrapped up in it: For seeing he had a mind that this
unlawfulness should be taken off by the change of some very extrinsecal things,
he did foolishly to put this unlawfulness within, for it is not so easy to
pick out what is within, as to slip off that which is without. I heard from a
grave and judicious Minister, who had occasion to meet with one of the young
men, who Preached confidently what this Historian wrote, that that Youth kept
to this expression, That sin was wrapped up in hearing Indulged Ministers, as if
it had been his Text; and the poor People drunk in this Schismatic poison, and
it has taken with their affection, that in all appearance, though the
Historian were alive, and would write a hundred Letters, and print twenty
Books, and declare in them, that there is no sin wrapped up in hearing Indulged
Ministers, these People would not believe him, but would adhere to his first
Letter: It Is an easy thing to drop in the poison of Error and Schism in simple
Peoples heads, and hearts, but it is not so easy to purge it out again: It Is
easy to beget prejudices against Gods Ordinances, and draw People from the
Kirk, but it is not so easy to remove these prejudices, and bring them again to
the Ordinances. The Heart is naturally corrupt, and corrupt Doctrines are
kindly to it, and it takes well with them, and they with it: And Error is like
a fretting gangreen, the longer it continues, it rots and spreads the more. And
it is observed, that when People drinks in erroneous Doctrines, upon the bare
word of these, who teach Division, and their heart and affection takes with
Error, though they have neither shadow of Scripture or Reason for it, that they
are hardly recovered from these delusions; for People who are misled by some
wrested Scripture, or captious Reasoning, they may be more easily recovered, by
showing the true meaning of the wrested and mis-applyed Scripture, and the
captiousness of the false Reasoning. But when People will err, and love to
wander, and will stumble, though they wot not at what, and are so
affectionately addicted to their erroneous Opinions, that they will hear
nothing that makes against them, there is little probability of Cure; for as
they received them without Reason, because they would receive them, so they
retain them against Reason, and cannot endure to have these beloved tenets
brought under examination and trial, and therefore they readily flee out in
Passion, upon any who would inform them; as men's Lusts are their Idols, so are
their Errors, when they are once settled in their hearts. Augustine said, that
his error was his God, Error meus erat Deus meus.

Now if this Historian, who was a man of letters, be so confounded and confused
in stating this Question, and is involved in gross contradictions, what wonder,
if the poor people, who are not fit for Debates, be whirled round by such
whirl-winds, and contrary winds, into a confused giddiness, that they wot not
what they say, or affirm, and know not what to do; and be like Children, that
have so long run about, that they fall down, as unable to stand or move any
more: So they are so confounded with these perplexed Questions about hearing;
which cannot be propounded, and far less resolved, without manifest Absurdities
and Contradictions, that many of them are fallen over in a careless laziness
and indifferency about all hearing of the Word, and spends the Lords day in
sleeping, loytering, and idle wandering.

The Historian does but waste time and paper, when he says, that in our best
times, People were not so tied to the hearing of their Ministers, as that they
might never, or in no case hear others; for that is not the Question: But this
is the true state of the Question, Whether People who have these Ministers to
hear, who were formerly Ordained by the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, to be their Pastors, and those who have these Ministers to hear,
whom they invited to come and help them, when they were destitute, and had none
to Preach to them? If these People who have consented to receive the Lords
Ordinances from these Ministers, and have waited on their Ministry, and joined
with them in the Lords Worship, if they ought to break off that
Church Fellowship, and though they acknowledge these Ministers to be Ministers
of the Gospel, and though these Ministers Preach the Gospel, and dispense the
Lords Ordinances, according to the Lords Institution, yet if they ought to
withdraw constantly from hearing them, and that because it is unlawful to hear
them, and there is sin wrapped up in hearing them, and that they are called of
God to withdraw, that in doing so, they may bear witness against the sinful
Usurpations manifest in the Indulgence, and the many evils in accepting it; or
more shortly, If it be sin for these People to hear these Ministers, and if it
be their Duty to desert them, and separate themselves from these Congregations
where they exercise their Ministry. This Historian seems to be for the
Affirmative, and so confident that these People do right in withdrawing, that
he says, One might think it strange, that there should be any necessity to
vindicate them, considering what he has said above. I am one of these, who
have considered what he has said above, and I thought it very strange how he
could vent such gross and manifestly false Calumnies against faithful
Ministers, and how he could wrest and pervert their true, right, honest words,
contrary to common sense and equity; that he might wring out of them that which
never entered in the thoughts or heart of these Ministers. And again, I think it
strange, that by these false and groundless Calumnies which he has cast upon
these honest Ministers, he should labor to rent the Church of God by Schism,
by breaking these who will listen to him, off from communicating with the true
Church in the true Worship of God, and by pressing them to disown and desert
these Ministers, whom they formerly owned and countenanced, and whom they are
still obliged to own, and have no just cause to desert, except his false
Calumnies be accounted just causes.

Having observed the confusion and contradictions in which the Historian has
involved himself in stating the Question, it remains to consider, what he says
for the vindication of these who scruple to hear and own the Indulged
Ministers. But seeing he says nothing but what he has said before, and is
formerly refuted, I hope the Reader will not expect that I should play the
goke, in repeating again his Cuckows, and refuting them, although I followed
him before in his extravagant wanderings; when he without, and contrary to all
sense and reason, imagined that this or that, or the other thing was the
meaning of the Indulged Ministers words; yet I cannot have any pretext for
making mere repetitions in his wanderings, there was variety of vain
imaginations, which made the refutation of them less tedious, but to repeat the
same things to no purpose but to waste time and paper, would be intolerably
tedious and nauseating. I shall only by answering his first Question, show the
way of answering the rest. 1. Seeing by what is said under our first head of
Arguments, etc. Answ. Seeing by what is said, in answer to your first head of
Arguments, it is manifest that the Indulged, in and by their accepting of the
Indulgence, have not wronged our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the only Head of
the Church, and King in Zion, in any of these nine several particulars (which
are nine several Calumnies, the ordinary Arguments which he makes use of
against the Indulged Ministers, for he could find no true Arguments to his
purpose against them.) How can they but be blamed, who out of a sinful
credulity, make up or take up such vile Reproaches against faithful Ministers,
and then out of these Calumnies create to themselves scruples, which scare them
from hearing these whom the Lord has sent to Preach the Gospel to them. And so
through the rest of his Questions, where he refers to his heads of Arguments, I
refer to the Answers, which cuts off both heads and tails of these captions.

As for the Arguments taken out of the late Apology, which, contrary to the
intention of the Apologist, he abuses (for he perverts the words both of the
dead and living) they make nothing against the hearing of the Indulged
Ministers; (let the Conformists say for themselves) for the applications which
the Historian makes to the Indulged, are manifestly false, as has been already
manifested in Answering the Historians Captions and Cavils.

It cannot be denied, that some who have taken upon them to discuss that
question about hearing Conformists, have used Arguments, and laid down Grounds,
which are new conceits, and contrary to the Principles of the old
Non-conformists, and tend directly to Schism. I shall only relate some of the
words of a Godly Learned Minister, who in Answering the 28 Questions, which
this Historian sent over before his History, has spoken somewhat with great
Modesty, to this purpose. In Answering the Historians 8th. Question, after he
has showed how great difference there is betwixt the Indulged Ministers and
the Conformists, he says, But there is one thing I would gladly enquire of him:
In his Parenthesis he seems to hint, that the hearing of these Ministers who
have complied in their own charges, where they were orderly fixed by the Church
of Scotland, is a complying with Prelacy: For my own part, I see not how he
will instruct this; and if the sinfulness of hearing them, upon the account of
compliance, which is their own personal guilt, be maintained. I see not how
that Doctrine can be justified from owning the Principles of Separation, but I
shall be glad to learn of him: I confess my judgment hitherto has been, that
it is the Duty of the People to seek their Edification by Presbyterian
Ministers, whether in Houses, Fields, or Kirks; and that it is their Duty to
discountenance Curates of all kinds: And for intruders, I am not clear for
hearing of them, except transiently; for it is very hard to say, that it is
sinful in it self to hear them at any time. But for them who comply in their
own charges, and Preach Orthodox Doctrine, without corrupting the Ordinances,
so as there be no corruptions that are made the conditions of Peoples
Communion, I see not how in that case it can be made out, that it is sinful for
People to hear them when they can get no better to hear, which the Author
himself grants, in stating the Question, and therefore is the more concerned to
see to it. It will be necessary we reconcile our practices with our old
Principles, for if we drink in new Principles, and once remove March stones,
it is hard to know where we may hold; and we had need to be jealous of that new
Light which drives us from our old Principles.

In Answering his 26th. Question, he says, This is new Doctrine, that hearing
of Ministers will involve the People in the approbation of their sinful entry:
It is easy to assert such things, but he will put his Reason upon the Rack
before he prove this. 3. When he speaks of the Curates, why does he confound
countenancing and hearing, as he does several times in this Paper? May not
Ministers in dispe^s^ (...) Ordinances without the mixtures of men's inventions,
if they be true Ministers, be heard in many cases, without countenancing their
entry and their course? I do wish from my heart, that the People in this
Question about hearing had been more distinctly informed, so as they might
guard against Rocks on both sides, for I fear the neglect of this shall be the
occasion of drinking in of Principles against, or contrary to the former
Principles of the Church of Scotland.

And in the close of that Answer, he entreats the Author of these 28 Questions,
to ponder how the Doctrine which he delivers, agrees with the Doctrine of our
Divines, against Separation. It is the common assertion of our Divines against
Separatists, that where the corruptions of a Church are not made the condition
of our Communion, it is not Lawful to Separate: And Mr. Rutherfurd, in his
Peaceable Plea, Chap. 10. makes this the Question, Whether or not it be Lawful
to Separate from a true Church visible, for the corruption of Teachers, and the
wickedness of Pastors and Professors, where faith is begotten by the Preaching
of the professed Truth. And through that Chapter he asserts and clears the
Negative of that Question. Also (says he) Mr. Broune, in his Book against
Volsogen, pleads against Separation, because of the corruption of Ministers,
where Christ's Ordinances are pure, and the Essence of the Ministry is not
destroyed by their corruptions. And so, though the Indulgence had been sinfully
accepted, which yet we deny, it would not destroy the Essence of their
Ministry, for the Historian grants they are true Ministers, and he does not
charge them with corrupting the Ordinances, and therefore the Historian is
condemned by Mr. Rutherfurd and Mr. Broune. The Non-conformists might have kept
up all due respect to Presbyterian Ministers, and constantly adhered to them
and their Ministry, though that new Doctrine of the sinfulness of hearing
Conformists had never been taught to them; but some folk cannot do, except they
over-do; and in running from one extreme rush upon another. I know some
allege, that they see further in these matters than the old Non-conformists
did, and they think that the old Non-conformists in writing against
Separatists, have wronged the Cause. But it is not want of Ignorance that
aileth such People, we are far behind these Godly and Learned men, both in
Heavenly Wisdom, and true tenderness, and Zeal; and that which many take for
Light and Zeal is Ignorance, Error, Humor, and the wrath of man which perfects
not the Righteousness of God. Any who have read what is said before, will see
that these Arguments of the Apologist does conclude nothing against hearing the
Indulged Ministers, for the applications are manifestly false. I never heard of
any Indulged Minister, who entered into the Congregation of a living outed
Minister, save one, who had the consent of that Minister, who was out of the
Country, and had no access to his People. As for what the Author says in the
application of the Apologists 7th. Argument, that the hearing of Indulged
Ministers is enjoined and required by Law, as a sign of compliance with, and
subjecting to Erastianism, and the Supremacy, is so manifest an untruth, that I
wonder how his Conscience could suffer his hand to write it: And yet I have
found so many falsehoods of this kind before, that I need not wonder; and it
were unreasonable to expect any other Arguments against Truth and Innocence,
and for Schism, but such as are patched up of lies and calumnies. After all his
Questions, I may propose one Question, Why in his Paper sent over before this
History, and in this History, he does not Argue positively, that it is unlawful
to hear the Indulged Ministers, but only moves Questions, if they should be
condemned, who do not own and hear the Indulged, as they did formerly: And
after he has done with his mis-application of the Apologists Arguments, where
he seems more positive, yet he ends all with a Question, which he refers to the
judgment of the Reader, page 159. I apprehend the Historian durst not for his
Conscience conclude, that it was sinful to hear, or that it was a Duty to
withdraw from hearing the Indulged Ministers; he knew, and his Conscience put
him to declare, that the acceptance of the Indulgence and the Councils Order,
as he calls it, settling the Indulged Ministers, did not make it sinful to hear
these Ministers, for he confesses, that notwithstanding of the settling of
these Ministers by the Councils Order, yet, if there were no other to be heard,
they not only might be Lawfully heard and joined with* but they should and
ought to be heard. See the stating of the Question in his 28 Questions. But
though he durst not positively conclude the sinfulness of hearing the Indulged
Ministers, yet the poor People thinks that he has done it; and they are run so
far from hearing the Indulged Ministers, that they are without his cry to bring
them back, though there were no other to hear: And too many by these questions
about hearing, are become careless of all hearing, and some place their
Religion in no hearing. It had been good for many they had never intermedled
with these questions about hearing, for they are by the wind of Erroneous and
Schismatical Doctrines, driven from the Public Worship of God: And they take
the profanation of the Sabbath in despising the Public Ordinances to be a
piece of tenderness and Religion; and if the Lord prevent it not, they are like
to turn Quakers, Pagans, Atheists, and to shake off the very form of Religion,
both in public, private, and secret. The Lord in mercy pity and prevent the
ruin that the poor People are blindly running upon.

Page 159. He proposes Objections to be answered.

The first Objection should have been proposed thus. Ministers of the Gospel,
who are Ordained and admitted Ministers of their respective Congregations, and
Ministers who not having access to these Congregations, where they were
Ordained Ministers, are invited by desolate vacant Congregations to Preach the
Gospel to them, and who, upon their invitation and consent of the Ministers
concerned, come to help these destitute, desolate Congregations, should not be
disowned, discountenanced, deserted, while they are doing the Work of the
Ministry, to which God has called them by these People, who invited them to
Preach the Gospel to them: But the Indulged Ministers were either Ordained,
etc. o^ invited, and come with consent of the Ministers concerned, etc. And
therefore they should not be deserted while they are doing the Work of the
Lord, to which these respective Congregations invited them. If he had thus
proposed the Argument, he could not have evaded the force of it, but it is his
way to make Objections so, as he may leave some way for himself to escape. The
true state of the Question is, Whether these respective Congregations should
disown and reject these Ministers of the Gospel, whom they had invited, and
with consent of the Ministers concerned, had received and appropriate to
themselves, to whom they had submitted, and whom they had countenanced in the
exercise of their Ministry. Now, why should they reject them, as if they had
nothing to do with them, whom they received? Why should they disown them, whom
they owned, and whom they desired to own them? Why should they withdraw from
hearing these, whom they invited to Preach to them? Should they leave them,
because they Preach the Gospel to them? While this Author calls in question, if
the Indulged Ministers be Lawfully called, and appropriate Pastors of this
Church, he calls in question, if this Church have any Pastors; for they were
Ordained by laying on of the hands of the Presbytery according to the Order of
the Gospel; and if this make them not Pastors of this Church, I would know who
are Pastors of it.

As for his second Objection, taken from Mr. Livingston's Advice to hear Mr.
John Scot, an Indulged Minister, he had better forborne to mention it, than to
have past it with such Answers as he gives. Mr. Livingston, whom he
acknowledges an eminent Seer and Servant of Christ, advised to hear the
Indulged. This Historian advises to withdraw from hearing the Indulged: And
it is no disparagement to the Historian, to say, that Mr. Livingston's Advice
was preferable to this Historians Advice, who for Learning, Piety, Prudence,
Experience, and Age, was far inferior to Mr. Livingston: The only thing which
Mr. Livingston missed, so far as I remember, was a Testimony; and if he had
been well informed of the Testimonies which the Indulged Brethren gave, upon
several occasions, and particularly before the Council, and of the consonancy
of their Practice to their verbal Testimony, and their former Principles, he
would have been much confirmed in advising to hear Indulged Ministers. The
Historian says, that he does not certainly know whether this Advice of Mr.
Livingston proceeded from want of full information of Circumstances, or from
Ignorance of the Magistrates design, or from fear, that Field-meetings would
cease; but he inclines to the last, because Mr. Livingston speaks not of his
Peoples going to the Field-meetings.

Answ. We have seen that any Light which this Historian has gotten from
Circumstances, is darkness. And I am very confident, if Mr. Livingston had
lived to see what Erroneous and Schismatic inferences this Historian has made
from the information which he has gotten of many Circumstances, and had seen
the horrid Divisions and Confusions following upon these Erroneous dividing
Doctrines, he would either have judged, that that Circumstantial Light was
darkness, or if it was light, that this Historian did draw darkness out of
light. But I know no Circumstance of any importance which could make any thing
against the Indulgence, which was unknown to Mr. Livingston. Mr. Livingston was
a wiser man, than to take his measures of judging of the Lawfulness or
Unlawfulness of hearing Indulged Ministers, from the Magistrates designs and
intendments: Though Ministers and People were clear, that the Magistrate had an
ill design, in permitting or allowing Ministers to Preach the Gospel, and
People to hear, or in permitting Masters of Families to pray in their Families,
or in permitting Physicians to cure Diseased People; yet no rational man, who
is not blinded with Humor or some prejudice, will conclude from the
Magistrates ill design, which is his Act, and no way approved, but disapproved
by these Ministers, Masters of Families, Physicians; that it is unlawful for
them to Preach, Pray, or Cure Diseased Persons. Mr. Livingston's fears that
Field-meetings would cease, it seems have been better founded than the
Historians confidence, that they would continue. And though it cannot be
supposed that Mr. Livingston was an Enemy to Field-meetings, yet none who knew
him, will think that he was so fond of the Fields, that he would have preferred
the Fields to a Kirk, if the Kirk could have contained all who were to hear
him. And seeing he speaks nothing of Field-meetings, it seems he had not
learned that new Doctrine of the Historian, that fatning Feasts and the
wonderful continuance and Blessing of God, was only to be found in Fieldings;
and that People from whom God justly withholds the Blessing in the Kirk,
because of sin, may find it in the Fields, notwithstanding of their
provocations; for if he had been of that Opinion, he would not have failed to
exhort his People to go to the Fields. And although he had heard, that the Lord
did countenance the Preaching of the Gospel in the Fields, he would not have
Advised his People to run at random, to hear any body who Preached in the
Fields. No, no, Mr. Livingston was more Advised, and sicker in his Advices than
so, for wise men, like Mr. Livingston, use to foresee evils, and prevent them,
while the simple pass on, and are punished. For Mr. Livingston could not but
fear, that if his People did run to hear any who Preached in the Fields, though
they knew not who the Preacher was, and whence he came, that they might readily
find instead of Ministers a cheating Cobbler, or a Tanner; instead of a solid,
judicious Minister, some ignorant rash young man, who instead of the sincere
Milk of the Word, would give the People the windy froth of his own Conceits;
and instead of the wholesome words of Christ, would give them his own ill
Humors and Reproaches of honest Ministers, and his own doltings about
Questions and doubtful Disputations, which would divert the People from the
main thing, and fill their Heads with confounding notions, and their Mouths
with vain janglings, and so alienate their minds and hearts from these things
which make for Peace and Edification. Or that they might, perhaps, find instead
of a Protestant Presbyterian Minister, a Popish Priest or Friar; and so instead
of Food find Poison, and instead of a Blessing, find a Curse. Mr. Livingston
knew the tricks of Jesuits better than the Historian, and therefore would have
rather Advised them still to hear Mr. John Scot, who he knew was a Godly
Orthodox Minister, than have exposed his People to run such risks; he knew the
saying, Qui amat pericula, peribit in illis, He who loves hazards, shall
perish in them.

To the third Objection, That the People heard the Indulged Ministers, and were
Edified by their Ministry, till some inconsiderate Persons took it in their
Head, to cry out against the unlawfulness of hearing the Indulged, as if that
had been the only thing necessary, for which many even of the Non-indulged are
offended with them.

The Historian Answers, That the Curats might allege that as well as the
Indulged.

Answ. He is a little out of that story, as well as in many other: Any who
knows the truth, knows how great a disparity there was in the cases; so that
his, as well, had been as well, and better out than in, for it makes his
Allegiance false. He says, he is not fit to judge if these Persons be
inconsiderate, but he wishes that they who call them so, would remember that,
Judge not, lest ye be judged, etc.

Answ. He was very unfit by Reason of his distance and misinformation of many
other things, which yet he has very peremptorily judged. I wish he had sooner
considered his unfitness to judge of others, and had, ere he began to write
this History, remembered that, Judge not, lest ye be judged; it might have
prevented his writing this Book, which is mainly founded upon rash and false
judgings, and reproaches. The inconsiderateness of these Persons he speaks of,
was so evident, and so sensibly felt in the effects of it, that they who had
any consideration or common sense, could not but see it: And the second
thoughts, and third thoughts of these who were displeased with their way, makes
no change upon these Brethren, but confirms them the more. He found not himself
fit to judge whether they were inconsiderate or not, yet he finds himself fit
to judge them worthy of praise: But if he was not in a capacity to judge them
considerate, he could be in no good capacity to judge them worthy of praise:
For if they were inconsiderate Persons, they were not to be praised; and till
he had evidence that they were considerate, he might have spared his praises,
and his Blessing of God in their behalf, till he had been better informed.

As for his hopes that the fruits of their labor proclaim their insisting upon
the one thing necessary. I see not what ground he had for this hope, for the
ordinary fruits of their labor, was the kindling of the fire of Contention,
Strife, Debate, Confusion, Reproaches of these who followed not with them: But
for the fruits of the Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, I wish we could see them in these, who
with him did so much cry up these Preachers. He tells us, that at the beginning
of the Indulgence, People called them the Councils Curats; and he will not
enquire how it came, that that spark did not break forth into a general flame;
and insinuates his desire, that this flame had spread sooner, and that the
first ten had been discountenanced; but he acquiesces in Providence.

But if he had known what I learned from a Gentleman, who has good
Intelligence, that it was the late Archbishop of St. Andrews who was the first
Inventer of the name of Council-Curats, and did so convey the casting of this
spark, that he might not be seen to be the kindler and caster of it, and how
pleasant it was to these of the Prelatick party, to see the flame kindled by
this little spark, running, as the Historian speaks, like Moorburn among the
People. If the Historian, I say, and these of his way had known this, it may be
they would have taken less pleasure in this Moorburn, which was so pleasant to
these to whom the Historian, I suppose, did not desire to make sport.

Then he alleges, that some suppressed their judgment about the Indulgence,
out of a preposterous affection to the Brethren Indulged, whom they much
honored and esteemed, and that deservedly, for their eminent endowments, and
sometimes usefulness in the Church, or out of a tender care of keeping up
Union, and guarding against all motions apparently tending to troublesome
distractions and divisions: And it is not unlike, says he, that many were really
in the dark, as to the thing, but however light is light, whoever they be that
bring it, how inconsiderable soever the Instruments be, who are employed, and
whether they come sooner or later; the light when it is come, should be made
welcome, because of him who sent it, etc.

Answ. These Brethren not only were, but are yet useful, notwithstanding of
all his endeavors to render them useless: And affection to them is not
preposterous, but a commended Duty; for whatever Infirmities they be compassed
about with, yet they should be esteemed very highly in love for their works
sake. I think, when he was speaking of the tender care to keep up Union, and to
prevent Division, his heart should have smitten him, who has been so untender
and so careless in this matter. It Is true, light is light; but,

1. There may be an unseasonable bringing forth of light, as if a man would
bring a light to a large dark Room, where a man fleeing for his Life, had hid
himself, to let the pursuer see to find and murder the lurking man: Or if one
told what way an innocent man had fled, to his Enemy, who were pursuing for his
Life; though Light be Light, and Truth Truth, yet that Light was unseasonably
brought in to the dark Room, and that Truth unseasonably brought forth. But ye
will say, that does not hold as to truths revealed in the Scripture. I shall
Answer in the words of Mr. Durham, whose memory is precious in the Churches, in
his Treatise concerning Scandal, which was his Testament to the Church of
Scotland, Part 4. Chap. 11. Page 358. A second way of composure, is, when such
agreement in judgment cannot be obtained, to endeavor a harmony, and keep
Unity, notwithstanding of that difference, by a mutual forbearance in things
controverted, which we will find to be of two sorts.

The first is to say so, total; that is, when neither side does so much as
Doctrinally in writ, word, or sentences of Judicatories, press any thing that
may confirm or propagate their own Opinion, or condemn the contrary, but do
altogether abstract from the same, out of respect to the Churches Peace, and
for the preventing of Scandal; and do in things, wherein they agree, according
to the Apostles direction, Phil. 3.16. Walk by the same Rule, and mind the same
things mutually, as if there were no such differences, and waiting in these,
till the Lord shall reveal the same unto them.

This way is safe, and where the Doctrine upon which the difference is, is
such, as the forbearing the decision thereof, does neither mar any Duty that
the Church in general is called to, nor endanger the Salvation of Souls through
the want of clearness therein; nor in a word infer such inconveniences, to the
hurt of the Church, as such unseasonable awakening, and keeping up of
differences and divisions may have with it: Because the scope of bringing forth
every truth, or confirming the same by any Authoritative Sanction, etc. is the
Edification of the Church, and therefore when the bringing forth thereof does
destroy more than Edify, it is to be forborne: Neither can it be ground enough
to plead for such decisions in Preaching, that the thing they Preach for is
Truth, and the thing they condemn is Error.

Because, 1. It is not the Lawfulness of the thing simply that is in Question,
but the necessity and expediency thereof in such a case; now many things are
lawful, that are not expedient, 1 Cor. 10.23.

2. In these differences that were in the Primitive times concerning Meats,
Days, Genealogies, etc. there was a truth or an error upon one of the sides, as
there is a right and a wrong in every contradiction of such a kind, yet the
Apostle thinks fitter for the Churches Peace, that such be altogether
refrained, rather than any way, at least in public, insisted upon or decided.

3. Because no Minister can bring forth every Truth at all times, he must then
make choice; and I suppose some Ministers may die, and all do so, who have not
Preached every truth, even which they knew, unto the People. Beside, there are
(no question) many truths hid to the most Learned, neither can this be thought
inconsistent with a Ministers fidelity, who is to reveal the whole Counsel of
God, because that Counsel is to be understood of things necessary to men's
Salvation, and is not to be extended to all things whatsoever; for we find the
great Apostle expounding this in that same Sermon, Acts 20.20. I have kept back
nothing that was profitable unto you; which evidenceth that the whole Counsel
of God, or the things which he showed unto them, is the whole and all that was
profitable for them; and that for no by-respect or fear whatsoever, he shunned
to reveal that unto them.

Also it is clear, that there are many truths which are not decided by any
Judicial Act, and among other things, sparingness to decide truths, which are
not fundamental judicially, has been ever thought no little mean of the
Churches Peace, as the contrary has been of Division.

The third way (which is the second sort of the former) of composure, is mixed,
when there is some meddling with such questions, yet with such forbearance, that
though there be a seen difference, yet there is no Schism or Division, but that
is seriously and tenderly prevented; as upon the one side, some may express
their mind in Preaching and Writing on a particular Question, one way, others
may do it differently; yet both with that respect and meekness to those they
differ from, that it does beget no rent, nor give just ground of offense, nor
mar Union, in any other thing; or it may possibly come to be decided in a
Synod, yet with such forbearance upon both sides, that it may prove no
prejudice to Union. Those who have Authority for them, not pressing it, to the
prejudice of the Opinion, Names, Consciences of the other, or to their
detriment in any respect; but allowing to them a liberty to speak their minds,
and walk according to their own light in such particulars; and on the contrary,
the other resting satisfied in the Unity of the Church, without condemning
them, or pressing them to condemn themselves, because so indeed their Liberty
is no less than others, who have the decision of a Synod for them.

And he adds an instance in the Church of Africa, where that Question was first
debated, If Heretics after their Conversion, should be again Baptized? And a
Synod of 300 Bishops concluded, that they should be rebaptized; yet that Synod
carried so, that they did not only not censure any that dissented, nor pressed
them to conform in practice to their judgment, but also did entertain most
intimate respect to them, and formality with them. And upon the other side, we
do not find any in that Church making a Schism, upon the account of that
Judicial erroneous decision, though at least by three several Synods it was
ratified; but contenting themselves to have their Consciences free, by
retaining their own judgment, and following their own practice, till time gave
more light, and more occasion to clear that truth.

And we will never find in the Writings of any time, more affection among
Brethren, and more respect to Peace, than was in that Church at that time,
amongst those that differed: And there is not any practice more commended in
all the Church History and Writings of the Fathers, than this practice; and
partly may be gathered from what was formerly touched out of Augustine: And if
we will consider the case rationally, we will find that it is not impossible to
have Union in a Church, where there is such a difference, and Authoritative
decision, even supposing that side on which the Error lies, to be approved.
For, first, there is no necessity for such as have Authority for them, to press
others in their judgment and practice in such things; neither can it be thought
that such a decision can of it self satisfy all scruples; neither yet, that
men doubtingly may follow.

Nor lastly, that such Controversies can bear the weight of troubling the
Church, by censuring such, as otherways may be faithful; seeing sometimes even
unfaithful men have been spared with respect to the Churches good, as has been
said.

And Secondly, upon the other side, such a constitution of the Church does not
involve all that keep Communion therein in the guilt thereof, if personally
they be free, as in the instance of the Jewish Church is clear; where, no
question, many corrupt Acts have been established, yet did it neither make
Communion in Worship or Government to be unlawful, where the matter and manner
of carriage was Lawful. Beside, this would infer, that no Judicatory could keep
Union, where there were contrary votes or a Sentence passed without unanimity,
because that is certainly wrong to them who think otherwise, and if so, there
could be no Judicatory expected, either in Church or State; for it cannot be
expected that they shall be still unanimous, or that the greater part shall
cede to the lesser, and rescind their own Act. And suppose there should be such
a Division upon one difference, can it be expected, that those who unite upon
the divided sides respectively, shall again have no more difference among
themselves, and if they have, shall there not be a new Division, and where
shall this end? And seeing men must resolve to keep Unity, where there are
faults of such a nature, or to have none at all, it is as good to keep it at
first, as to be necessitated to it afterward.

The Orthodox urge this Argument against the Donatists, who would not keep
Union with them, because of pretended corruptions in the proceedings of
Judicatories and Ordinations; yet were constrained to bear with such amongst
themselves, and particularly, to receive and unite with the Maximinianists;
whose Communion they had once rejected, though a branch of their own Faction,
because they saw no end of Divisions, if they did not resolve to dispense with
such things amongst themselves: And Augustine often asserted that they were
never able to Answer this Argument, when it was propounded to them; to wit, why
they did not give them that same Latitude in keeping communion with them, which
they had given to the Maximinianists, who were guilty of such things as they
imputed to them? We conceive then, that even in such a case, there may be
Union, for prosecuting the main work of the Gospel, notwithstanding of such a
Circumstantial difference, if men otherwise set themselves to it, and the
general grounds formerly laid down do confirm this.

Thus far I have transcribed the words of the Godly, Learned, Peaceable Mr.
Durham. I would desire the Reader to read also his 12th. Chapter, and his whole
Book, which is a precious Treasure, which if the Historian had pondered and
practiced, he, and they who follow him, might through the Lords Blessing been
kept out of these divisive and destructive ways.

If the Historian would have followed Mr. Durham's Advice, first, he might have
forborne to vent, and to press others to vent this which he calls Light, thought
it had been Light indeed: For it is no Fundamental truth, that he and they call
Light: He cannot charge the Indulged Ministers, that they maintain Doctrinally
any Erastian Error: All that he alleges upon them, when he explains himself,
is, that they have by their practice Interpretatively homologate the Supremacy.

Now seeing these Ministers taught no erroneous Doctrine concerning the
Magistrates Power about Church Matters; but maintain the Principles of all
Orthodox Anti-erastian Divines: And seeing they are known to be conscientious
men, and declare upon all occasions, that their practice in making use of the
Indulgence, is not contrary to, but consistent with and according to the
Principles of these Anti-erastian Divines. The most that the Author could make
out of this, was, that they were mistaken in the application of these
Principles to that particular Fact of acceptance of the Peaceable exercise of
their Ministry from the Magistrate.

Now what necessity was there in venting this Light? This Interpretative
homologation of the Supremacy, which yet is but confounding darkness to the
poor People, who know not what he means by these words by which he explains,
how these Ministers are guilty, they cannot Interpret his Interpretative
homologation: His light is to them darkness. He clears these Indulged Ministers
of having any Erastian Error in their Head; he grants, they had no ill
intention in their mind and heart when they accepted the Indulgence: He grants
there was no ill intention in the worker, but in the work done by them; and
that what they did, did not formally and explicitly import any approbation of
any sinful Supremacy, but only implicitly, virtually, and interpretatively.
What necessity was there of telling the People this implicit Error, in a
matter of Fact, seeing, when he tells it most distinctly, it is so subtle a kind
of fault, that the People cannot understand it; it is so wompled up in Latin,
implicit, perplexed words, that they cannot get a sight of it? And though the
Historian did really intend to diminish the sin of the Indulged Ministers, when
he said they themselves did not intend any ill in their acceptance, but it was
only the intention of the work: And when he said, that the work did not
formally and explicitly tend to ill, but virtually, implicitly, and
interpretatively: Yet the People are not capable of understanding these
diminishing terms; and so thinking it to be some ill thing, these words that
are unintelligible by them, increases the apprehension of the ilness or evil of
it; even as when simple People knows that the thing commended is good, if ye
commend it in words that they do not understand, it heightens their conceit of
the goodness of it. What effect could the Historian think that this dark light
could have upon the minds and affections of the poor People, but to beget an
ill Opinion of, and prejudice against, and hatred of these honest men, who, as
he grants himself, meant no ill. Now, did this any way tend to the Peoples
Edification? Did it not, upon the contrary, tend to their hurt? For, whereas
before they were Edified by the Ministry of these Ministers, they are put in an
incapacity of getting that good by their Ministry, which they were wont
formerly to get; so that they are no way Edified, but prejudged, and their
Edification hindered.

But 2. If he would have been Advised by Mr. Durham, he might well have forborne
to have vented this light, because the forbearance of venting it could no way
have endangered the Salvation of the Souls of the People, nor marred them in
any Duty that the Church in general is called to, nor could he in Reason think,
that the withholding of this light could have so many inconveniences following
upon it, as the venting of it would have, by an unseasonable awakening and
keeping up of Divisions, and all the mischiefs which follow upon Divisions.

3. If he would needs vent this Light of his, and press others to do the like,
he might have done it in the way which Mr. Durham points out, viz. with that
meekness, tenderness, and respect toward his Brethren who differed from him,
that the difference might make no Division, nor mar Union. But he is so far
from this, that he will have this Light, and those who bring it, made welcome,
though it be brought for this very end to make Division, and to distract and
rent the Church.

But 4. The worst of all is, this Light of his is not Light, but Darkness; a
confused mass of false Calumnies, published to scatter the poor sheep, and
drive them away from their faithful Pastors, who fed them with knowledge and
understanding. If they who will not forbear to vent Truths, which are not
necessary, when the venting of them is unseasonable; or if they, who will vent
such Truths in a factious and divisive way, be justly censurable, O! how
hateful is their temper, or rather distemper, who cannot be persuaded for
Peace-sake, to withold their Lies and Calumnies, but will vent them, upon
design, to rent the Church, in drawing away the People from the Lords
Ministers, and the Lords Ordinances. They who come to publish untruths, to make
Discord and Division, come not by the Commission of the God of Truth and Peace.
I shall again transcribe some of Mr. Durham's words, in his excellent
Exposition of the Song of Solomon, Chap. 1. v. 8. page 91. --

6. Believers would make use of public Ordinances and Christ's Ministers,
especially in reference to snares and errors, and they would take their
directions from them, and their Counsel would be laid weight upon.

7. Allowed dependence on a Ministry is a great mean to keep Souls from error,
whereas on the contrary, when no weight is laid on a Ministry, unstable Souls
are hurried away.

8. Christ has given no immediate or extraordinary way to be sought unto, and
made use of, even by his Bride in her difficulties; but the great mean he will
have her to make use of, is a sent Ministry, and therefore no other is to be
expected. It Is no wonder then, that the Devil (when his design is to cry down
Truth, and spread Error) seek to draw the Lords People from the Shepherds
Tents; and no wonder, that Souls who do cast off respect to their Overseers, be
hurried away with the temptations of the times, as in experience has often
been found a truth.

9. Ministers should have a special eye on the weakest of the flock; their care
should be, that the Kids may be next them: Our blessed Lord does so, When the
Lambs are carried in his own bosom, Isa. 40.11. And therefore seeing weak
Believers have most need of Christ's oversight, if they begin to slight the
Ministry and Ordinances, they cannot but be a ready Prey, and the Devil has
gained much of his intent, when he has once gained that. O! that men would try
whose voice it is, that says, Come back from the Shepherds Tents, when Christ
says, abide abide near them; it is as if a Wolf would desire the Lambs to come
out from under the Shepherds eye.

And lastly, when Christ gives this direction to his own Bride, we may see he
allows none to be above Ordinances in the Militant Church; it will be soon
enough then, when they are brought to Heaven, and put above the reach of
Seducers.

In these words, that Holy man of God, who was a burning and shining light, who
had the mind of Christ, and the bowels of Christ, does clearly from the words
of Christ warn us, that the voice which says, Come back from the Shepherds
Tents, is not the voice of Christ; this is not light from the Sun of
Righteousness, from the face of Christ; but darkness from the Prince of
darkness, who can transform himself into an Angel of Light.

Obj. 4. All or most of the Non-indulged, Faithful, and Zealous Ministers in
the Land, are for hearing of the Indulged; and only a few, and those of the
younger sort, with the ignorant People are against it.

He Answers, That he would hope few should lay weight on this Objection, and
thinks it enough to refer any such to consider John 7.47, 48, 49. with Mr.
Hutcheson's Notes, especially 7 and 9, and then tells us, that in all the parts
of our Trial, God has made use of the nothings, to break the ice to others.
And in the Introduction to his 28 Questions, he says, That in all our carriage,
that is this day approveable, as to the grounds of our Suffering, the Lord has
(for the most part) made the poor flock go before the Shepherds, and lead the
way to them, rather than the Guides to break the Ice, and lead the way to the
flock, as might have been expected.

I reply: His hope is as groundless and reasonless as his imaginations, but he
would hope his affection guides his hope, Credimus an quia amant ipsi sibi
somnia fingunt. And indeed it seems he was dreaming when he hoped that more
weight would or should be laid upon the Opinion and Practice of a few young
Preachers, and of the ignorant People, than on the judgment and practice of
all, not only Indulged Ministers, but of all or most of the Non-indulged,
Faithful, and Zealous Ministers. And I know none who will join with him in this
Dream, except it be such, who love to be singular, and hope to be more noticed
and talked of, when they take odd and singular ways, and who lay down that for
a Principle, that the fewest number, especially if they be in greatest hazard
and danger, must certainly be right, and all others wrong. And when their party
grows numerous, they grow suspicious, that all is not right, and so they break
again, as the English Separatists did at Amsterdam.

Any may see how strongly this Historian has been Acted by a spirit of
Division, seeing he with a few young men, take upon them, by themselves,
without the knowledge and concurrence; yea, contrary to the known and declared
mind of all or most of the Non-indulged, Faithful, Zealous Ministers, to drive
the poor People upon the Rock of Schism, contrary to the Word of God, and to
the Covenant. Many of the Non-indulged thought it fit to forbear to move that
Question about the acceptance of the Indulgence in their Sermons, to the
People; they knew weak People, though they be well inclined, yet, having, as
Children, strong Passions, and little knowledge, and less prudence, to direct
their affections, can hardly differ and not divide. Some others, who did touch
upon that Question, yet were against Separation; but now perceiving that the
People have gone further than they intended, are, I suppose, grieved that they
should have started that Question at all among them; and if it were to do
again, would be better advised, and are very desirous to have the divisive
Distempers of the People cured, and the Preachers of Schism discountenanced.
And yet this Historian, with two or three of the younger sort, would contrary
to the mind and heart, to the tears and prayers of all his Brethren, increase
the Disease, which they were studying to cure, and encourage these rash and
inconsiderate Youths to cast more firebrarnds, and add Oil to the flame.

I have considered the 47, 48, 49 Verses of the 7th. Chap. of John, with Mr.
H's. Notes, and the more I consider it, I think it the more impertinently
alleged: For these Pharisees and Rulers were Enemies of Christ; they believed
not themselves, and they endeavored to hinder others to believe on Christ, and
are enraged that the People did believe on him. Now, the Ministers of whom he
is speaking, are not Enemies of Christ, but his Servants, and faithful
Servants, and zealous for his Glory, and are so far from hindering People from
believing in Christ, or from looking on them, as ignorant and cursed, upon that
account, that they study to bring People to believe in Christ, and are grieved
that this Author and his Associates withdraws them from Christ, by withdrawing
them from his Ordinances, where he comes and blesses his People, and is in the
midst of them, and withdraws them from hearing these, whom Christ sends to
Preach to them, and so hinders them from believing, for Faith comes by hearing,
and it increases by hearing. Mr. H. takes notice, that these Pharisees were
puffed up; and I leave it to the consideration of the Reader, if the way of
these Faithful and Zealous Ministers seems not to be farther from this, than
the way that this Historian has taken in this History. He shows it is an old
Engine to keep men from Christ, by the opposition of able and eminent
Churchmen: But the stress of the Argument, which he proposes to answer, did
not lie most upon that, that they were Churchmen in eminent place, of great
parts; but on that, that they were Faithful and Zealous Ministers: and that
they were not seeking themselves, or their own things, but the things of
Christ, and the Edification of the Body of Christ, appears in this, that they
are not like the Historians Youths, who cry down all but themselves, and draws
away the People from all others, to hear themselves, and tells the People,
there is a cursed thing in other Meetings, and warns them to beware of it: But
their Faithful Ministers does not seek to engross all the Peoples affection to
themselves, but they are for their hearing of others; they behave, as the Lords
Ministers were wont to do in the Primitive times, and as we find the Apostles
doing in their Epistles, they commend and recommend their fellow laborers to
the Churches, and strengthens their hands.

Again, these Pharisees took it as an evidence of the Ignorance and Misery of
the People, that they believed on Christ. These who speak of the Ignorance of
the People, who withdraw from hearing Indulged Ministers, are far from thinking
them Ignorant and Cursed upon that account: But they know, that many of them
are very ignorant of Christ, and of the way of Salvation; and it is sad to them
that are drawn away from the means of Knowledge, Preaching, and Catechizing,
from learning the grounds of Religion, and their Heads filled with vain
janglings: And they learn not to know their own sins, in order to their
Humiliation and Self-denial, but learns to know the sins of others more than
their own, and that readily puffs them up.

What he adds, about the Peoples guiding and breaking the Ice, it blows up the
People with a conceit that God has made them Guides and Leaders, to go before
the Ministers, and made the Sheep to lead the Shepherds. There was enough of
wind in this Bladder before; the Historian might have without any hazard,
spared his breath here, and not blown up the People with the ill wind of an
antiscriptural conceit. When the Lord guides his People in his way, he guides
them according to his Word, in the use of the means that he himself has
appointed; he leads his People, like a Flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron;
and for my part, when I observe, that these whom the Lord has not made Guides,
and Leaders, and Shepherds wilfully refusing to be guided and led by these whom
God has made Guides and Shepherds, and confidently taking upon them to lead
their Leaders. I am very suspicious, that all is not right, and that both the
Leaders, and they who are led by them, are wrong. But this is an old trick used
by these who stir up People to Schism or Sedition, to give the People fair
words, and make much of them. Corah, Dathan, and Abiram do highly complement
the People; All the Congregation, say they, is holy, every one of them, and the
Lord is among them. Such fair words will easily beguile unstable Souls. I
remember a judicious and sober Countryman said of one of these Preachers, who
made it a great part of his work to draw away the People from hearing Indulged
Ministers, That he thought he clapped the Bairns heads too much. The Historian
was mistaken, if he thought, that withdrawing from the Indulged Ministers had
it is rise from the People; for it was some Preachers, who by private
conferences, and public Preaching drew them away. He alleges, that the matter
about hearing the Curats, is a sufficient instance of the Peoples good guiding:
Yet, I perceive, by what he says, that he would not follow the Peoples guiding,
even in this matter, for he does not think the Baptisms administrated by them,
to be no Baptisms: But some of the People have thought their Baptism to be the
mark of the Beast, and that is much worse than nothing. He does not think the
hearing of Curats simply unlawful, and thinks, if there were no other to hear,
they should be heard. But some of the leading People have thought the hearing
of them simply unlawful. I heard of some, who said, that the hearing of them
was as unlawful as Fornication, Adultery, as the Worshipping of the Calves of
Dan and Bethel: And I suppose, the Historian will not deny, that Fornication,
etc. are simply unlawful. Some have been so far from thinking, that hearing
them could ever become Lawful, that they have placed their Religion and
Sincerity in this. A Minister informed me, that when he was enquiring
concerning the estate of a dying woman, he got no other account of any
Evidence, that it was well, or would be well with her, but this, that she had
never heard a Curate; and I suppose, the Historian would have looked on this as
a Soul-deluding and destructive Error, to make that an Evidence of Sincerity,
which a Lazy, Profane, Atheistical Person can so easily forbear, and that from
a Principle of Laziness, Profanity, or Atheism. From this it appears, that the
People are none of the best Guides, in the matter of hearing, seeing they have
been so far from breaking the Ice in the right Foord, that they have broken it
above Whirlpools, and have plunged themselves so palpably, that the Historian
himself could not follow them. And I am so far from seeing sufficient Evidences
of the Peoples good guiding of their Guides, that I am very hopeful, that all
sober People will, upon serious consideration of the Errors and Confusions that
some People, who would needs guide matters, have run unto, will acknowledge,
that it is the good and acceptable will of God, that every one should keep
within the bounds of their own vocation, and not take upon them that which the
Lord has not called them to, and that the sheep should not lead the Shepherds,
but be led by them. And I suppose that several Ministers have by sad experience
found, that they have been indeed led upon the Ice, by following the humors of
some headstrong leading People, who were fitter to break themselves and the
hearts of their Ministers, than to break the Ice to make safe passage for their
followers.

The 5th. Object. Now when we are in hazard to be overrun with Popery, is it
seasonable, that such Questions should be started to break the remnant in
pieces, and thereby to make all a Prey to the man of sin? Were it not better
that we were all united as one, to withstand the Inundation?

He Answers, That he fears, that the Lord by Popery and Blood will avenge the
quarrel of his Covenant, and the contempt of the Gospel. I Reply, He should
have remembered, that we did covenant to extirpate Schism, which he endeavors
to plant and water in this History. And has he not exposed the Gospel to
contempt, in tempting the People to cast off all the Indulged Ministers, as no
Ministers of Christ, and all almost, who are not Indulged, as acted by the
spirit of Supremacy, the spirit of Antichrist? He could not have taken a more
compendious way to render the Preaching of the Gospel contemptible, than to
render the Ministers of the Gospel contemptible. Then he Advises, That we
should -- acknowledge our selves the basest of sinners. This Advice is good,
but his Schismatic directions are contrary to it: A Schismatic Spirit is a
proud and self-conceited Spirit. They who see themselves the basest of sinners,
would, if they could, rather separate from themselves, than others; they will,
in lowliness of mind, esteem others better than themselves; they will
acknowledge themselves less than the least of mercies, unworthy of any remnant
of the Lords Ordinances, unworthy to whom the Lord should send any of his
Messengers; such will be far from casting at any of the Lords Servants or
Ordinances.

Then, he says, Union, so long as the accursed thing is amongst us, is a
Conspiracy. I suppose, the Indulgence is the accursed thing which he means; but
the Magistrates permitting and allowing the peaceable exercise of the Ministry
is a good thing: This is a curse of his own making, a causeless curse; this is
one of the tricks of the Devil, to divert People from taking notice of the sins
they are really guilty of, by bogling them with imaginary sins, alleging, that
there is sin wrapped up in hearing the Ministers of the Gospel Preach the
Gospel; and so he turns Duty to sin, and by making them take up the peaceable
exercise of the Ministry, under the protection of Lawful Authority, as if it
were a curse or cursed thing; and so flegging poor People, that they flee from,
and forsake their own mercies; and it is a dreadful delusion to mistake
blessings, as if they were curses. He adds, If we be not tender of Christ's
headship, and of what depends thereupon, and of the least pin of his Tabernacle
pitched among us -- I Answer; If he had been more tender of Christ, as head of
his Church, he would have been more tender of the Union of the Members of his
Body, and would have been afraid to have rent the members of that Body asunder.
His divisive Doctrine looses all the pins of the Tabernacle, he has cast fire
into the Lords Tabernacle, which, if the Lord prevent not, may burn up the
Synagogues of God in the Land. His Doctrine tends to dissolve all Meetings for
the public Worship of God, except these, who meet at the Separate Meetings,
molded after his conceit.

He Prophesies, That they who follow his way, shall find a shelter and a
Chamber of Protection. But, he has been so far mistaken in taking up things
past and present, they are not wise who will believe him, when he Prophesies of
things to come; a false Historian is not an Infallible Prophet: He is so far
wrong in his Precepts for Direction, that I have no Faith to believe his
promises of Protection. He recommends Union upon the old grounds of our
received and sworn Principles and Maxims: But they who know these old grounds,
see his grounds to be the grounds of the English Brownists, which were solidly
refuted by the old Non-Conformists. Next,

He threatens, That if there be not an Union in the way that he prescribes;
that is, if there be not a Separation from these Congregations, where Indulged
Ministers are, and also from these Meetings where Non-indulged Ministers, who
are for hearing Indulged Ministers Preach (for he Reproaches these Ministers
also, as Acted by the Spirit of Supremacy, the Spirit of Antichrist) that then
this Division from his Separated party will be the certain forerunner of a
dark and dismal Dispensation. And then he Advises every man that would have
Peace in the day of Gods contending against these back-sliders and revolters,
to mourn for this Abomination of the Indulgence, among other Abominations, and
to adhere to the Lord, and to our Principles, which the Lord has owned and
countenanced, though he should be in a manner left alone.

Answ. This Division and Schismatic renting of the Lords People, this driving
of them away from the Lords Ordinances, is more than a forerunner of a dark
and dismal Dispensation; it is an Evidence of the continuance of the Lords
Anger, and that his hand is stretched out still. Schism is a grievous sin, a
dreadful plague, which uses to end in ruin and desolation; and they who drive
on this vile and destructive Schism, and scare the Lords People from joining
together in the Worship of God, they are back-sliders and revolters from the
Principles and Covenant of true Presbyterians: They adhere not to the Lord, who
has commanded his People not to forsake the Assembling of themselves together,
and has promised to be with them, when met in his Name, and to come and bless
them, where he Records his Name, and to be with his Servants, Preaching and
Baptizing in his Name, to the end of the World. They who forsake the
Ordinances, in which the Lord has trysted a meeting betwixt himself and his
People, they who will not come where the Lord comes, they who will be absent,
where the Lord promises to be present, and where he commands his People to
present themselves before him, they do not adhere unto the Lord, but depart
from the presence of the Lord; and they who run away from the Society of the
People of God, they are not left alone, but have left their Company, they have
left the Shepherds Tents, and wander alone, as a Lamb in a large place, as a
bewildered Lamb, which being alone, is a prey to every Wild Beast; and woe to
him, who is, and will be thus alone. It is above sufficiently cleared, that the
Magistrate, as Magistrate, is the Minister of God for good: As the
Nursing-father of the Church, not only may, but should take off Civil
restraints that hinder the peaceable exercise of the Ministry of the Servants
of Christ, and should grant to Ministers the peaceable exercise of their
Ministry, and take care that the Lords People in his Dominions, be fed with the
sincere Milk of the Word of God; and that it is the Duty of Ministers to accept
thankfully of the peaceable public exercise of their Ministry, when the
Magistrate grants it; and to make the Magistrates Duty in allowing the
Preaching of the Gospel in his Dominions, or the Ministers Duty in making use
of the Magistrates grant of the peaceable exercise of their Ministry, in
Preaching the Gospel, or to make the Peoples Duty, in hearing the Gospel
Preached by these Ministers, an Abomination, to be mourned for, is to teach
People to pervert their own Mercies, and to turn them, to Curses, and to divert
them from laying to heart real Abominations, which are real causes of mourning,
to mourn for that, for which they should give thanks. Such false visions are
matter of mourning, and were among Jeremiah's Lamentations, Lam. 2.14. Thy
Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee, and they have not
discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy Captivity; but have seen for thee
false burdens, and causes of Banishment. The good old Principles of
Presbyterians did not lead them to despise Dignities, they feared God and
honored Rulers, and did humbly Supplicate for Liberty for Preaching the
Gospel, and did thankfully accept of any such Liberty, when it was granted by
the Magistrate.

He adds, page 162. Will not, I pray, many of these who have complied with
Prelacy, and with the courses that have been carried on, profess an abhorrency
at Popery? And is this ground sufficient for us to think of uniting with them,
notwithstanding of all they have done, that we may be the more fortified to
withstand that torrent?

Answ. What is the importance of his praying in this place: Or if it be an idle
insignificant word, is not worth the enquiry: But it may be he was sensible
that his Arguments had no force to convince his Readers judgment and
Conscience, and therefore he makes use of earnest Supplication to work upon his
Readers Affections; that what he could not extort by the strength of Reason, he
might obtain it by importunate praying and begging of the Question; and so gain
the thing in question, by requesting as Beggars, who have no price to purchase
what they would be at, do importunately seek what they cannot buy; and thus he
would have the Question, Si non justo pretio, saltem prece and precario. When
his praying is done, let us see what he says to the Cause: His Reasoning is to
this purpose. If the professed abhorrence of Popery be no sufficient ground for
us to think of uniting with these who have complied with Prelacy, that we may
be the more fortified to withstand the torrent of Popery, then the
Presbyterians may break off that Fellowship in the Worship of God, which they
had in these Congregations, where Indulged Ministers Preach, and may disown
these Ministers, whom they once owned as Ministers, and their Ministers, and
withdraw from hearing them, whom they invited to Preach to them, and whom they
did hear and countenance in the exercise of their Ministry. But so it is, that
the abhorrency of Popery, professed by these who have complied with Prelacy,
etc. is no sufficient ground of Uniting Presbyterians with these complyers, and
therefore Presbyterians should break off, etc.

The connection is very ill knit, it is loose work; for although the professed
abhorrency of Popery, and the design of withstanding Popery, were not
sufficient to make up Union betwixt the Presbyterians and the Prelatick party,
it would not follow, that Presbyterians who are United in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government, should break off their Communion in the Worship of
God, and, as it is in the Objection, by breaking themselves in pieces, expose
themselves as a Prey to the Man of Sin; there is no shadow of Reason for this
Consequence: For this ground of Uniting Presbyterians and complyers with
Prelacy, may be insufficient, and yet there may be a vile Schism in
Presbyterians breaking themselves in pieces.

Although the Invasion of a common Enemy be not thought a sufficient ground of
Uniting two distinct Parties in a Nation, yet it may be a very strong motive to
keep these of the several Parties United in these things, in which they are
United, and it should keep them from making sub-divisions, for the more
Divisions, the Nation is the more weakened, and the more exposed as a Prey to
the Invader.

It seems the Author has been against all sort of Uniting with these who
comply with Prelacy. It Is true, Presbyterians should not Unite with them, in
their compliance with Prelacy, nor join with them in any ill course: But there
are many things wherein we may Unite with Papists themselves; do not
Protestants join with Papists against the Jews, in believing that the Messiah
is come? If an Arrian were like to put a Popish Doctor out, would it not be the
Duty of a Protestant Minister, if he were present, to assist the Popish Doctor,
in maintaining the Trinity, and the Deity of the Son of God? May not Papists
and Protestants Unite in defending their Native Country against the Turks? May
not Christians Unite with Pagans, in doing some work of necessity? Paul wrought
with the Pagans, with whom he sailed, in casting out the tackling of the Ship.
May not Christians join with Pagans, in saving and helping Ship-broken men to
shore? May not, should not Protestants, whether they be Non-conformists, or
Conformists, join together in the abhorrency of Popery, and in withstanding the
current of it? Would the Historian have Protestants more demented than the very
Jews, when they were Judicially plagued with intestine Divisions and Seditions,
while the Romans besieged Jerusalem; yet they had so much sense remaining, that
they left off their inward fightings when the Romans made any Assault, and
joined together in defending the Walls of the City. We must abhor what is evil
in men, and must have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness; but
we should not abhor that which is good, even in Papists or Pagans. Mr.
Rutherfurd, in his Peaceable Plea for Paul's Presbytery in Scotland, Chap. 10.
page 124. Consideration 8. Says, We Separate not from men, but Errors; we
Separate from Papism kindly, properly, and totally; from Christian Articles in
no sort. And page 123. We have not Separate from Rome's Baptism and Ordination
of Pastors, according to the Substance of the Act, nor from the letter of the
twelve Articles of the Creed; and Contents of the Old and New Testament, as
they stand with relation to the mind and intent of the Holy Ghost: Howbeit, we
have left the false Interpretations of the Lords of poor Peoples Faith and
Conscience.

The Historian himself in some cases grants, that we should join in the Worship
of God with these who comply with Prelacy, notwithstanding of all they have
done, as we saw from his concessions in the stating of the Question; and yet
here he speaks, as if all Uniting with them were sinful. If the hearing of
these who have complied with Prelacy, be at any time a Duty, then the hearing
of them is no compliance with Prelacy; and if the hearing of them who have
really complied with Prelacy, be not a compliance with Prelacy; then suppose
the Indulged Ministers had really complied with an Erastian Power in the
Magistrate, yet the hearing of the Indulged Ministers would not have been any
compliance with Erastianism. How much then is this Historian in the wrong, to
the poor People, who would fright them from hearing the Indulged Ministers, who
have never complied with any Erastian Power, or sinful Supremacy in the
Magistrate, as if the hearing of the Word of God Preached by them, were sinful,
a homologating of a sinful Supremacy.

He adds, Alas, this our strength will prove our weakness; let us remember that
of Esaias 8.11, 12, 13, 14. He means, that Uniting in the Worship of God in these
paroches, where Indulged Ministers are settled, is our weakness, and so that
it is Peoples strength to withdraw from the Worship of God in these Paroches.
This must be his meaning, or he says nothing to the purpose in hand. This is
one of the Historians Paradoxes, that Union in the true Worship of God, is the
Churches weakness; and that the breaking off that Union, is the Churches
strength. That is to say, a Church divided shall stand: It seems, a Church is
not like other Societies, for our Savior says, A House and Kingdom divided
cannot stand. This is a pitiful Paradox, for it is contrary to Scripture,
Reason, Common Sense, Experience; and the Author brings no shadow of Reason to
give it any color of probability, but as he began his last Reason with
praying, so he Ushers in this pitiful Paradox with lamentation, that seeing it
had nothing in it, nor upon it, to plead for it is admission, it might be
received of mere pity. He should have considered, that a Printed Book would
readily come to the hands of Rational men, who regard not Passions that are
void of Reason, and who will not be prayed or lamented out of their wits: Yet
this will pass current among weak People, who will be more moved with an Oh, or
an Alas, than with ten solid Reasons or Scripture-Testimonies.

The Scripture which he exhorts us to remember, makes nothing for withdrawing
from hearing the Word of God Preached by the Lords Ministers: When the Lord
Instructed the Prophet, That he should not walk in the way of that People, nor
say a Confederacy to all them, to whom that People said a Confederacy. He did
not discharge the Prophet to hear the Word of God, or to join with the Lords
People in the Worship of God. The way of Gods Ordinances is the way of God, in
which the Lords goings are, and in which his People walk with him, and in which
he has commanded them to walk; but the way of that People was their sinful
ways, ways of their own which were not Gods ways; the Confederacy discharged
was not joining together in the Lords Ordinances, for the Lord had commanded
his People to Assemble together for his Solemn Worship, Deuteronomy. 12.11, 12, 13.
Deuteronomy. 15.19, 20. Deuteronomy. 16.7, 8.16.17. But the Confederacy discharged, is a
Confederacy with the King of Assyria.

He cites Amos 4.12, 13. Where the Lord directs his People to prepare to meet
their God. This Scripture is as little to the Historians purpose as the former,
for the way to meet with God, is not to withdraw from the Worship of God; but
upon the contrary, they who would meet with God, must come to his Ordinances,
for there he meets with them, Exodus 25.22. Exodus 29, 42, 43. He has said, That
they who hear his Servants, hear himself, and has blessed these who hear him,
and watch daily at his gates, and wait at the Posts of his Doors. That Is the
way to find him, to find Life, etc. Prove. 8.32, 33. He has promised, that
where he Records his Name, he will come to his People and bless them.
Separation from the Lords Ordinances is no preparation to meet with God, but it
is a departing from God: And if this Separation from the Lords People, and from
his Worship, be comprehended under the Separating of our selves from every
sinful course, the Christian compliance which he speaks of, is an unchristian
mis-application of that word in the 4th. of Amos: And if he thought that they
who have heard the Indulged Ministers, must utterly forsake that way, as a way
provoking the Lord to wrath, he was quite out, and utterly mistaken about this
utter forsaking.

The Scripture with which he closes, Zeph. 2.1, 2, 3. is not for his
scattering of the Lords People, but for the gathering of them together to the
Solemn Worship of God. If the Author had pondered this Scripture, and observed
the directions of the Spirit of the Lord, which are given in it, he would not
have endeavored to scatter the Lords People; and if he had made more
Conscience of seeking Righteousness, he would not have done so many and great
wrongs and injuries to his innocent Brethren, who had done him no wrong, and
who were doing right things; and if he had made more Conscience of seeking
Meekness, he would have been more quiet, and either altogether been silent, or
spoken and written of these things with more calmness and composure of Spirit:
If meekness (as they say) were lost, it would be a hard work to find it in this
History, in which there is much of the wrath of man, which perfects not the
Righteousness of God. He concludes well with two Petitions of the Lords Prayer,
Thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done. If he had looked to the Exposition of the
Second Petition of the Lords Prayer in the larger Catechism, he would have
found, that this is a part of the meaning of that Petition, that the Church may
be countenanced and maintained by the Civil Magistrate; and to confirm this,
the 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. is cited, I exhort therefore that first of all
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and Thanksgivings be made for all men,
for Kings, and for all that are in Authority: That we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty. Which shows, that the Assembly of
Divines at Westminster did not think, that the Kingdom of Christ is to be set
up by ruining earthly Kings and Kingdoms, and that they take not the right way
to advance Christ's Kingdom, who reject the Magistrates countenance, and
maintenance of the Church: Or who by despising and provoking Magistrates to
wrath, tempts them to discountenance the Church. And seeing they look on the
Church as Christ's Kingdom, the Historian has not taken the right way to
advance this Kingdom, but has taken the way to ruin it, by dividing it; For a
Kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand. And if he had pondered the
explication of the third Petition, it might have been a mean to have prevented
his giving so much place to his own Humor and Will in this History, and helped
him to more submission unto the Holy Providence of God, than does appear in
this History. I wish he had, ere he began to write this History, put up that
Petition, And lead us not into temptation: Or at the close of it, put up that
Petition, And forgive us our sins. We have great need, ere we begin Debates and
Controversies, even when they are necessary, to pray, that we be not led into
temptation: And great need to close such Debates, even when the cause
maintained is right, with praying, Lord, forgive us our sins. I have examined
all that had any appearance of Reason in this History, and refuted many things
which needed no refutation, if it had not been for the sake of simple People,
who are often deceived by big words, where there is no show or color of
Reason. I have often by Reason refuted the unreasonable clamours, both of the
Author of the Epistle, and of the History; whereas I might have opposed clamor
to clamor, for what is founded upon mere clamor, may be as easily cried down
as it is cried up. Let none because of the Authors errors in this History, cast
at other useful Books which he has published; nor reject any thing that is
true and right in this History. Good men have their failings, and we may not
take our measures of them from their miscarriages under a fit of temptation.
Job's Friends had a just hatred against Hypocrisy, and they mistake Job, and
falls foul upon him, as a Hypocrite, and speaks many things that are not right
things, in the heat of Debate. This Author had a just indignation against
Erastianism, and a Spiritual Supremacy in Magistrates; and he apprehended that
his brethren had interpretatively homologate this Erastian and Spiritual
Supreme power in the Magistrate, and having mistaken them, he has fallen
foully upon them, and spoken much evil of them without cause. These things
which in the Epistle and History are wrong, are things for the most part, which
several people had drunk in, and the printing of these errors, has given
occasion to rectify the mistakes of erring people, if they will not shut their
eyes against the light. The Lord who is excellent in working, draws good out of
evil, and makes all things work together for good to them who love him, and
are the called according to his purpose he can overruled the darkness of error,
so as it shall be subservient to clear the truth. In the worst times the Elect
has obtained and shall obtain. The Lord reigns and rules in the midst of
Enemies, he can when men are scattering the dust of Zion, be making way for
laying a solid foundation, in the deep humiliation of his people, for building
his house: The Church has been before, as dry and scattered bones, as bones
scattered at the graves mouth; and yet he who raises the dead, has made these
bones to come together and live. It Is our best to leave the answering of that
Question, Can these Bones live? To the Lord himself, to Jehovah, who makes
things that are not, to be; who does great things and unsearchable, mavelous
things, and without number. If we would take shame and confusion of face to our
selves, and would humble our selves in the sight and sense of our sins, our
darkness, and stumblings, and justlings in the dark; and justify the Lord in
his judgments that are come upon us, and yet ascribe to him the glory of his
Mercy; and out of our depths and darkness cry to him, that he would cause his
face to shine and enlighten our darkness, and send out his Light and Truth, and
pour out the Spirit of a sound mind; and that he would quicken us by the Spirit
of Life, that is in Christ Jesus, that we might call on his Name, and look on
him whom we have pierced and mourn; and that when men's endeavors to gather the
scattered sheep, are not effectual, that he the great Shepherd would seek out
his sheep, and deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in
the cloudy and dark day. And if we would wait on him in the way of his
Judgments, and hope in his Word, his Covenant, which he uses to remember for
his People, and to repent according to the multitude of his Mercies; and though
we have no ground of hope in our selves, yet hope against hope, on the Lord,
who is the hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof in the time of trouble, and
that because with him there is Mercy and plenteous Redemption. And so continue
humbly praying, hoping, waiting for him. He could soon redeem us from all our
Iniquities, and all our Troubles, and cure all our distractions and distempers,
and give Light, and Life, and Unity, and Peace. Let us take shame to our
selves, and give him the glory due to his Name; that his Name may endure for
ever, and be continued as long as the Sun, that men may be Blessed in him, and
all Nations call him Blessed. Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who
only does wondrous things, And Blessed be his Glorious Name for ever and
ever, and let the whole Earth be filled with his Glory. Amen, and Amen.

The Conference continued.
Farmer. SIR, there are many things considerable in this Answer to the History
of the Indulgence, which I purpose to consider; but there is one thing which
not a little troubles me: That the withdrawing from hearing the Indulged
Ministers is called Schism. Now I remember we are by Covenant bound to
extirpate Schism, and if I have been practicing Schism, in withdrawing from
hearing the Indulged Ministers, I have been Acting contrary to the Covenant.


Minister. They who deal truly in the matter of the Covenant, will study to
fulfill their Vows, not only in some things, but in all things.

Schism is a dissolution of that Union which ought to be among Christians, and
especially it appears in refusing that Church Fellowship or Ecclesiastical
Communion, which ought to be observed, or in an unwillingness to communicate,
or to have communion with the true Church in Holy Actions.

Casuists show, that it is a most grievous sin.

1. Because it is contrary to Charity toward our Neighbor.

2. It is contrary to the Edification of him who Separates, in depriving him of
Communion in Spiritual good.

3. It Is contrary to the Honor of Christ, as being contrary to the Unity of
his Mystical Body.

4. It makes way for Heresy, and Separation from Christ.

If ye would be cleared of the unlawfulness of this Schism, or Separation, in
your withdrawing from the Indulged Ministers, and these Congregations where
they Preach; or, which is all one, in withdrawing from that Church Communion in
the Worship of God, which ye had formerly in these Congregations, as if it were
unlawful to join with them in the Worship of God: I desire you would read the
Writings of the Old Non-Conformists against Separatists; particularly I
recommend to you Mr. Rutherfurd's Peaceable Plea for Paul's Presbytery in
Scotland, Chap. 10. from page 120. to page 149. Where he proves that it is
unlawful to Separate from the true Church visible for the corruption of
Teachers, and the wickedness of Pastors and Professors. Where Faith is
begotten by the Preaching of Professed Truth, it is not every Error or
Corruption in Ministers or Professors, which will warrant Separation, as he
shows. A Minister who Preaches the body of Divinity soundly, howbeit he mixes
Errors with it, may be heard, and yet we may be no way defiled with his Error,
if we reject it. We are, says he, to hear the Pharisees, but to beware of
their leaven, and finding it to be sour and unsound Doctrine, we are to reject
it. What think ye would he have judged of your Separation? Seeing ye Separate
from a Church, where the Minister, and People who submits to his Ministry, do
profess and hold the whole Doctrine of Salvation, contained in the Word of God,
and particularly in the Confessions of Faith, of this National Church, and
rejects all Errors contrary thereto; they have all the parts of Worship of
Divine Institution, and no false Worship.

3. They own and submit to the Discipline of the Church, which is of Divine
Institution, and owns no Offices or Officers in the Church of God, but such as
the Lord has appointed to be in his House.

Again, your Separating from a particular Church, where the Worship of God is
in every thing according to Christ's Institution, is by necessary and undeniable
consequence a Separation from all other Churches, where the Worship of God is
celebrated according to Christ's Institution, and so is a Separation from the
Universal Church, and from Christ in it.

The tendency and efficacy of this sinful Separation, may be seen in the
mischievous effects of it, in dissolving the Bond of Love, in taking People off
from the Duties of Love and mutual Edification, and tends to Malice, Hatred,
Envy, Whispering, rash uncharitable judging, Censuring, Lying, Backbiting,
Slandering, Reproaching, Defaming, Vain jangling, Strife, Contention, and the
evil works which follow thereupon.

This Separation is one of the most groundless Separations that ever was in the
Church, and so one of the most vile Schisms that ever has been heard of. And
the more groundless any Separation is; as it is the more sinful, so it produces
ordinarily the more sin; for when People have groundlesly Separate, and cannot
give an account of the cause of their Separation, and yet will not Repent and
return, they are under a dreadful temptation to make up, or take up false
Reproaches and Calumnies against these from whom they Separate, that they may
have something to say for themselves; and this increases to more and more
ungodliness, and unrighteousness, to Strife, Envy, Confusion, and every evil
work.


Farmer. I cannot deny, that some have run into a great height of contempt of
Magistrates and Ministers. I confess I am astonished at this late Band and
Sanchar Declaration.


Min. The Seeds of the Confusion which is in these Papers, were sown here and
there in some Papers, which were before scattered among the People, who did not
consider whereto they would grow.


Preacher. I wonder why there should be so much out-crying against that Band,
seeing it has so excellent a Design, the Glory of God, the Propagation of his
Kingdom, Reformation of Religion, Extirpation of what is contrary to the
Kingdom of Christ.


Min. Such Designs do usually beguile simple People, who think if the intention
be good, all is right; but, Sir, you who are a Preacher, know that there are
many more things required to make any one Action good, beside a right
intention: We must not do evil that good may come of it; the intention of good
will not justify the doing of evil. Some have, as they thought, designed the
serving of God, when they were killing his Servants; but this did not justify
their Murder.


Preach. What are these evils which are in that Band and Declaration?


Min. It would take a long time to relate them, let be to refute them: I have
seen two Refutations of that Band. I shall give you some short Observations out
of one of these Papers.

1. They have been very injurious to Presbyterians, in arrogating to themselves
the Title of the True Presbyterian Party, seeing their Principles and Practices
are contrary to the Principles of Presbyterians, which are published in their
Confessions of Faith and Covenants: And they have in this very Bond, so clearly
distinguished themselves from, and constitute themselves a Party Separate from
the generality of the Presbyterians, that they who would gladly have fastened
and Fathered this Band and Declaration upon Presbyterians, have given over that
unreasonable attempt, for they saw that tale would not tell.

2. The whole contrivance looks like an Act of Enthusiasm, or of men desperate,
rushing upon ruin and Death: They say, they are put to it by God, which looks
like an Enthusiastic impulse. Some endeavored to excuse them from Enthusiasm,
by the words of the first Article, where they take the Scriptures to be the
object of their Faith, and Rule of their Conversation; but when they looked
more narrowly to the words, and found that they say not the Word of God in the
Scriptures, but his Scriptures and Word, they found that they had not
sufficiently cleared themselves of Enthusiasm; for this seems to say, that
there is a word distinct from the Scriptures, which they also take for the
Object of their Faith, and Rule of their Conversation, some Enthusiastic
expressions dropped in Sermons did increase the suspicion.

3. When they say, their Conscience and Men put them to it, how shall we know
that it was not an erring Conscience; they must show us by what Rule their
Conscience was directed. And men are fallible both in making and breaking
Covenants. They like men, says the Lord, by the Prophet Hosea, have
transgressed the Covenant. These men might have consulted with flesh and blood,
and imagined that by getting others engaged in the same danger with themselves,
they might be safer in a throng. Me^ are not to lippen to, except these H^ly
men of God who spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

4. They engage in the 2d. Art. That they shall to the utmost of their Power,
etc. and so have altered a very necessary clause in the League and Covenant,
viz. We shall endeavor in our several Places and Callings, Art. 1. And in our
several Vocations, Art. 3. They saw that if they had kept within the bounds of
their Callings, they could never have had access to make that terrible
Confusion in Kirk and Kingdom which they designed: Their Places and Vocations
did not allow or warrant them to overturn King and Kingdom, and bring all
Ministers that were not of their way, to stand at their Bar. And therefore
being resolved to pass the bounds of their Vocation, they left out these words
of the Covenant, which manifestly crossed their Designs.

4. They say in that 2d. Art. We shall to our Power, relieve the Church and
Subjects of this Kingdom (we being called thereto by his giving of us Power,
Power being Gods call to do good) of that oppression, etc.

1. This is, I suppose, a new Principle in Christendom, that Power or Strength
is Gods call. The Turk thinks he has a Call and Right to take all that he has
might to Conquer; but this is a part of Turcism, which Christians detest. It Is
good that Malefactors who deserve Death, be Executed; but every man who has
strength or pith to kill them, is not called of God to put them to death. It Is
good that there be Magistrates to govern a City, it is good that the Gospel be
Preached; but every man who has ability to Govern a City, or to Preach, is not
called of God to Govern or to Preach. If this Principle were reduced to
practice, it would turn the World up-side down. It Is good that a Master, who
has injured his Servant, should be punished: May therefore a Servant, if he be
stronger than his Master, punish him? Is he called of God to do it? If ability
to do good, were Gods call, the man who desired Christ to speak to his Brother,
to divide the Inheritance with him, might have answered to our Saviors
Question, Man, who made me a Judge or a Divider over you? That seeing Christ
had ability to judge and divide, that therefore he was called of God to judge
and divide.

2. Seeing they had not power or strength to effectuate these great things,
which they undertake in this and the following Articles; and seeing there was
no probability, that a few private Persons could ever be in a capacity to do
these things: And so seeing, according to their own description of Gods c^ll;
they neither had, nor ever were like to have Gods call to do these great
things, how could they swear to do these things which they were not yet called
to do, nor were ever like to be called to do them? To swear to do what we are
not called to do, and which is not in our power, and is never like to be in our
power, is a rash taking of the Name of God in vain; it is not a swearing in
Judgment.

5. The Method they take to overturn P^^^^^ and Er^stianism, by overturning and
ruining ^he Civil Government and Governors, is mere ^onfusion, and tends to
havoc and desolation. P^^^byterians think themselves bound in their plac^ and
stations to seek the removal of Prelacy an^ Erastianism, but they do not think
it their D^ overturn Civil Government to erect Presbyt^^^ Governmen^; to
destroy Civil Order in the Kingdom, to erect Ecclesiastical Order in the Kirk
(...) do not think it their Duty to break the third A^^^cle of the Covenant, to
keep the preceding ^^^^cles. As God has appointed Order in the Church so he
has appointed Order in the State, and the one of these should not be
overturned to establish the other. It Is the earnest desire of Presbyterians,
that the removal of all disorders in the Church, and the reparation of the
Ruins of the Church may be by the hand of their rightful Rulers.

6. What confidence can the Subjects have, that they who have so easily shaken
themselves loose of subjection to Lawful Rulers, to whom God has commanded
them to be subject for Conscience Sake, will be very tender of the Consciences
of others, and will not exercise oppression upon the Consciences of these who
would be under them? No great tenderness can rationally be expected from these,
who have so lightly loosed themselves from the Obligation of the 3d. Article of
the Covenant. Or what confidence can they have, that their Banders will not
dispossess them of their Civil Rights, if they find any fault in them, seeing
they engage themselves to dispossess the King and Subordinate Magistrates of
their places, to which they have undoubted right? Or that they who make not
Conscience to attempt the greatest desturbance that can be imagined in the
whole Kingdom, will regard the quiet or disturbance of private Persons?

Again, the Subjects do not desire to be relieved in the way laid down in this
Bond, which is indeed the way of Disorder, Confusion, and Desolation; they
think the Remedy would prove worse than the Disease. And what Right can be
expected from these who makes Power and might to be a Call and Warrant for
their Actings.

7. It may seem strange, that they could in the 3d. Article mention the
National Covenant and Solemn League and Covenant, without terror and shame.
Seeing they have so manifestly in many things departed from these Covenants,
and gone cross to them, in this very Bond; for although in words they engage to
extirpate Popery, in all the Articles of it, yet they really and effectually
plant and establish several Popish Articles. It Is a Popish Article, that the
Ministers of the Reformed Churches should not be owned as Ministers, that
Communion should not be kept with them, nor with these who join with them, in
the public Worship of God: The Authors of this Bond say the same of all the
Ministers of the Church of Scotland, who are not of their own Opinion and way;
and, for any thing known, when this Bond came forth, these whom they own for
Ministers, were but two or three at most, and they renounce Communion in the
Worship of God, with all who join not with them in their wild and furious
conceits. And thus they yield this to Papists, that there are no Ministers nor
Churches in Scotland with which Christians should join in Christian or
Church Fellowship. It Is a Popish Article, that the Pope may depose Kings and
Magistrates, and free Subjects of their Allegiance to Kings and Rulers, and
that any private Person may kill these Rulers whom the Pope has Excommunicated
and Deposed.

The Authors of this Bond in their Deposing the King and Subordinate Rulers,
and in declaring them no Rulers, and in engaging to execute Judgment upon them.
(I shall forbear to speak of their late Excommunication of them, because I have
not seen it) they have confirmed the Papists in these Errors, for they will
think that the Pope may claim as much Power over Kings to whom he is not
Subject as their own private Subjects claim.

Again, it is one of the Popes pranks to interdict Countries, or Cities, that he
has a quarrel at, in discharging all public Worship of God in them; these
Banders have done the same upon the matter, in going about to hinder, as far as
their Power reaches, all public Worship of God, except in these parts where
their Preachers come.

We are by Covenant obliged to extirpate Schism; this Bond engages these who
take it in one of the vilest Schisms that has been heard of in the Church, as
appears Article 6.

The Covenant is for the extirpation of Prelacy; but these Banders, though in
words they engage to do so, yet they really make these Ministers of theirs, who
are far from the number of fourteen, in effect Prelates, and will have all the
Ministers of the Church to stand in Judgment before these Judges, and to be no
Ministers, except these Ministers of theirs will.

And thus they really overturn Presbyterial Government, which the Covenant
obliges to preserve. The Covenant obliges to preserve the Privileges of
Parliament, Liberties of the Kingdoms, and the Kings Majesty's Person and
Authority. This Bond engages to destroy the King and his Authority, and to
alter the very form of Government; so that if it should take effect, there
would be no King, nor Parliament, nor Kingdom in the Nation.

And contrary to the 4th. Article of the Covenant, they make Factions among the
People, and go about to divide the King from the People, by a most destructive
Division in destroying the King.

The Covenant keeps every man in his own place and Calling, but all who take
this Band, bind themselves in this 3d. Article, to execute Righteous Judgment
impartially according to the Word of God, and degree of wickedness upon the
committers of Blasphemy, etc. So that all who take this Band, Ministers and
People, Man and Woman, engage themselves to Act the part of Judges, in
executing Righteous Judgment. But who made them Judges? They should have staid
till they had gotten a call to Judge, and had been in a capacity of Judging,
before they had sworn to execute Righteous Judgment.

Again, if all of them had been Judges, executing Righteous Judgment, then all
would have been Rulers, and so there would have been none of them to be Ruled
and Judged; and thus not only their Ministers, but also all their Men old and
young, and their Women, are engaged to pass the bounds of their Calling, and to
perform that which would have been impractical and impossible.


Preacher. But, Sir, are not the Saints to have a sharp Sword in their hand, to
execute vengeance upon the Heathen, and punishment upon the People; to bind
their Kings with Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters of Iron? To execute upon
them the Judgment written, Psalm. 149.6, 7, 8, 9. And is it not promised to him
that overcomes, and keeps the words of Christ unto the end, that Christ will
give him Power over the Nations, and that he shall Rule them with a Rod of
Iron? Rev. 2.26, 27.


Minist. You might have learned from the Orthodox Interpreters of the
Scripture, that the word there, is not a Carnal Sword, but the sharp two-edged
Sword of the Word of God, which binds and looses Persons of all Ranks,
according as they Repent, or are obstinate, and contains in it the Sentence of
God, which will be in due time executed; it is by the Word, by Spiritual Weapons
that the Saints overcome the World, the Flesh, and the Devil.

And for that place in the 2d. of Rev. Mr. Durham shows, that it is no
Earthly Dominion which is there meant; for,

1. It Is to be performed after the full Victory.

2. All overcomers are not capable of Temporal Power over the Nations. It
imports then these two.

1. An excellent Dominion that the Believer may expect.

2. A joint sharing in Christ's Conquest over the Nation, 1 Cor. 6. They shall
judge Angels and all the Wicked in the day of Judgment -- Though often
Believers are now oppressed by the Wicked of the World, yet the day is coming,
when it shall be otherways; Believers shall not only be free from their
oppressions, but shall be as absolute Kings, having Dominion over them in the
morning, as it is in the 49 Psalm 14. When the condition of the Wicked in Gods
Justice shall be most miserable.

I have heard of late, that some of the People are so far deluded, as to
imagine, that the place of Scripture which ye first mentioned, warrants every
private Saint to take the Sword and execute Judgment upon all evil doers. But
ye may easily perceive, that this is contrary to the Analogy of Faith, and the
Confessions of Faith of all the Reformed Churches, and is the dregs of that
Dream, that the Saints shall have a Temporal, Earthly Monarchy; and we who
profess our selves to be Teachers of the People, should be so far from pleasing
People in such Delusions, that we should faithfully discover their Errors unto
them, and reprove them sharply, and not suffer sin to be upon their Souls, and
especially Errors of this nature, that tends to the Ruin of all Humane
Societies, and to utter Confusion and Desolation: And you will have little
Peace if you see them by their practicing these Erroneous Principles brought
unto bonds, and under the lash of the Civil Sword.


Preach. Proceed in your Observations.


Min. 8. The formers of this Bond seem to have been unacquainted with the
judgment of Presbyterians concerning the National Covenant; for in this Band
they speak, as if Prelacy were not excluded by the National Covenant, but only
by the League and Covenant. They who engrossed to themselves the Title of the
true Presbyterian Party, should not have been so ignorant of the sentiments of
Presbyterians.

9. They who take this Band and adhere to it, cannot subscribe the Covenants:
And I heard of one of this way, who said, if the subscribing of the Covenant
were to do again, his hand should rather be cut off, than subscribe it: This
shows, that this Band is inconsistent with these Covenants.

10. In the 4th. Article there are many horrid things vented of the
Magistrates; as for Example, That their Government cannot be called a
Government, but a lustful rage, and that they can be no more called Governors,
but Public Grassators, that is, Highway Robbers, and public Judgments, as
Sword, Famine, Pestilence raging among us; and for a Conclusion, they say, that
none can judge us bound in Allegiance to them, unless they say also, we are
bound in Allegiance to the Devil, they being his Vicegerents, and not Gods. If
this be not an instance of speaking evil of Dignities, and of railing
accusation against them, it will be hard to find an instance of such railing
elsewhere.

11. It Is very strange, that they say, that it cannot be thought that there is
hope of the Magistrates Repentance. Was it not enough to them to exaggerate the
Magistrates sins beyond the bounds of Truth and Soberness? But they must also
magnify and multiply them above the multitude of the great Mercies of God. Who
can limit the Sovereign grace of God, who has Mercy on whom he will have
Mercy? The example of Manasseh's Repentance might have restrained them from
this bold encroaching upon the Sovereignty of Free Grace.

12. It Is a terrible stretch that they say they have showed their enmities
against all Righteousness; this is a part of the Description of Elimas the
Sorcerer, Acts 13.10. They cannot but be exceedingly blinded with prejudice
against the Magistrate, who sees not some Righteousness in the exercise of
their Government.

13. If Private Persons may take upon them, because of the sins of their
Superiors, to disown their Authority, and take Power to themselves, and
execute Judgment upon these who are their Parents, Masters, Magistrates; this
would overturn the Foundations of all Humane Society, and fill the World with
Confusion.

Though Saul was an ungodly man, and Persecuted David without a cause, and
drove him out of the Land, from the Ordinances, and exposed him to the hazard
of serving other gods: Though he unjustly and very summarily slew eighty five
Priests of the Lord, and contrary to the manner of the Kingdom, which obliged
him to maintain Religion and Righteousness, did put the Foundations of the
Earth out of course, yet David did not think himself obliged to disown Saul to
be King, nor did he think himself obliged to kill Saul when he had Power and
Opportunity to do it; he will not suffer his Men to do it, 1 Samuel 24.6, 7. 1 Samuel 26.8, 9. He did not think that his killing of Saul was the way to free the
Land from Guiltiness; yea, his heart smote him for cutting off the lap of his
Garment. He judged Abner worthy of Death, because he had not been careful to
preserve Readiness Life: And though David was appointed of God to be a blessed
Instrument of Reformation, and Saul stood in his way, yet he will not destroy
him, but waits Gods leisure.

There were many ill Kings in Judah, but the Lord never directs private Persons
to disown them, and dethrone and kill them.

Ahaz is frequently called by the Lord, King Ahaz, notwithstanding of all the
ill he had done, and was doing.

Daniel calls Darius King, after the Blasphemous Decree which he had Signed.

Christ directs to give Tribute to Caesar, and gives it himself: And Paul owns
Nero's Judgment Seat, and Appeals to Caesar; and what Monsters Tiberius and
Nero were, is known to all who know the Histories of the Roman Emperors.

If this Device of nullifying the Authority of Rulers, because of their faults
real or alleged, were put in practice, it would quickly turn the World
upside-down. For though Magistrates, as Gods Vicegerents, be singularly obliged
to represent the Holiness and Righteousness of God in the exercise of their
Government; yet if we consider that they have the same Corruption by nature
which others have, and that they have greater temptations than others; and that
there are often with them, men who for their own ends will tempt them to sins,
which they would never have thought upon: As for Example, That abominable
Decree which Daniel's Enemies cheatingly obtruded upon Darius, as a great
Complement; and when they have gotten them to Enact any thing that is not
right, they will allege they are in point of Honor bound to maintain their
own deed: And seeing there are many Flatterers, who will praise all that great
Persons do, as if it were right: And seeing faithful Counselors, who singly
design the Glory of God, and the true Happiness and Interest of Rulers, are
very rare: Dum non vult alter, timet alter dicere verum, Regibus. And
considering how many provocations Rulers use to get by bitter invectives and
scurrillous Pamphlets, which tend to render them contemptible; and by slighting
and misconstruing their favors, and by affronting of their Authority.

These things being considered, I mean, their inward Corruption and allurements
to sin upon the one hand, and irritating Provocations upon the other hand, it is
like enough that they who will nullify their Authority, because of their
faults, will not want pretenses; and they who are of this humor of Deposing
Rulers, if they find not faults enough, they will make where they want; or they
will magnify their faults, and make them worse than they are. If Men of this
disposition made Insurrection against Moses, and alleged upon him who was the
meekest man upon Earth, and whom God had extraordinarily raised up, That he
lifted up himself above the Congregation of the Lord, and that he had brought
them out of a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, to kill them in the Wilderness,
and made himself altogether a Prince over them, and had not brought them unto a
Land flowing with Milk and Honey, nor given them Inheritance of Fields and
Vineyards: And that he would put out, or bore out their Eyes. If they found, or
made so many pretenses against Moses, who was so blameless, O! how many faults
would they find in the Persons and Government of the generality of Rulers,
through the World in these last times, in which Iniquity does so much abound in
Persons of all ranks?


Preach. But if Kings and Rulers do not what they ought to do, but do the
contrary, then the Subjects are free from any Oath of Allegiance, and from any
Covenant made to preserve their Persons and Authority.

In the National Covenant we swear to defend the Kings Person and Authority
with our Goods, Bodies, and Lives, in the defense of Christ, his Evangel,
Liberties of the Country, Ministration of Justice, and Punishment of Iniquity,
against all Enemies within this Realm and without, as we desire our God to be a
strong and merciful defender to us, in the day of our Death, and coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

And in the Solemn League and Covenant we swear to preserve and defend the
Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the Preservation and defense of the
true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms. And thus our Promise to preserve
and defend his Person and Authority is restricted; and when he does not what is
his part, we are not bound to own or defend him and his Authority: As when two
agrees that the one shall pay so much money upon the others delivering so much
Corn or Meal; if the Victual be not delivered by the one, the other is under no
Obligation to pay the Money.


Min. That comparison may beguile simple People, but it is strange that any
Preacher should be deceived with it; for this is clear, that there is no other
ground upon which the one is obliged to pay the Money, but the delivering of
the Victual by the other, according to their agreement: But all Inferiors,
Servants, Children, Subjects, are bound by the Law of God and Nations to honor
their Superiors, Masters, Parents, Magistrates, although their Superiors be
undutiful, as appears from 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20. Servants be Subject to your
Masters with all fear, not only to the good, but to the froward, or perverse,
as it is also rendered. This Scripture is cited in the larger Catechism, in
explication of the fifth Commandment, to show what is the Honor that
Inferiors owe to Superiors.

If the miscarriages of Magistrates, Masters, Parents, or the miscarriages of
Inferiors, did dissolve the Relation, and make it void: And if the
miscarriages of Married Persons did nullify the Marriage-relation, and loose
the Party wronged from all Obligation toward the Party that is injurious, this
would quickly dissolve the Bonds of all Humane Society, and make Men like a
multitude of loose Cartel.

If Subjects were not bound to give due Obedience to Magistrates, except they
did preserve the true Religion, then all the Directions that Christ and his
Apostles gave to Honor, and be Subject to, and pay Tribute to, and pray for
the Magistrates and Powers that then were, did not oblige the People to whom
they were first directed; for all the Magistrates then were Infidels and
Idolaters.

In the Confession of Faith, Chap. 23. Art. 4. It Is the Duty of People to pray
for Magistrates, to Honor their Persons, to pay them Tribute, and other dues,
to obey their Lawful Commands, and to be Subject to their Authority for
Conscience sake. Infidelity or difference of Religion, does not make void the
Magistrates just and Legal Authority, nor free the People from their due
obedience to him.

And the General Assembly, Anno 1639. in their Supplication to the Commissioner
and Council, say, We have Solemnly sworn, and do swear, not only our mutual
Concurrence and Assistance for the cause of Religion; and to the utmost of our
Power, with our Means and Lives, to stand to the Defense of our dread
Sovereign, his Person and Authority, in the Preservation of true Religion,
Liberties, and Laws of this Kirk and Kingdom; but also in every Cause which may
concern His Majesty's Honor, shall concur with our Friends and followers, as
we shall be required.


Preach. Subjects are not obliged to concur with, and assist Rulers in doing
ill.


Min. That Is true; for to concur with them, in assisting them to do evil, were
to partake of their sin: But though we may not partake of their evil, yet that
will not follow, that we must not maintain their Person and Authority. Although
the Israelites would not assist and concur with Saul in destroying Jonathan,
but rescued him, yet they thought themselves bound to defend Readiness Person and
Authority. It Is one thing not to concur with Superiors in evil, and another
thing to destroy their Persons and their Power, because they do evil.

But ye cannot deny, but the Covenant obliges to defend and maintain the King
in so far as he maintains the true Religion and Righteousness; and I think ye
will not deny that the King does in part maintain the true Religion and
Righteousness, and therefore ye are bound to defend his Person and Authority;
and how can ye defend his Person and Authority in doing any good, if ye destroy
his Person and Power, as is designed and sworn in this Band.

There are many other Absurdities in that fourth Article of the Band, which
were tedious to repeat and refute.

In the fifth Article they say, We then being made free by God and their own
doings, he giving the Law, and they giving the transgression of that Law, which
is the cause that we are loosed from all Obligations Divine and Civil to them.

It Is strange that men who cry out against these who break other Articles of
the Covenant, should so boldly shake off the Obligation of the third Article of
the Covenant, and so increase the sin of the Nation by adding the breach of the
Civil part of the Covenant to the breach of the Religious part of it.

To make out what they assert, it is not enough to prove that the Rulers have
transgressed the Law of God, for they must also show from the Law, that it is
the will of God, that Subjects should upon such and such transgressions, shake
off all Obligations toward such Rulers: But this they have never attempted,
because they could not. I would enquire at them, does every transgression loose
these Obligations? If not, then how many, and how great must these
transgressions be? And then shall a few private Persons, who have very little
Interest in the Nation, determine this Question, How many, and how great
transgressions makes Rulers no Rulers, and Subjects no Subjects?

Then they promise to set up Government and Governors according to the Word of
God, especially Exodus 18.21. Moreover, thou shall provide out of all the People
able Men, such as fear God, Men of Truth, hating Covetousness, etc. I wish they
had pondered Prove. 24.21, 22. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with them that are given to change: For their Calamity shall rise
suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

The Dutch Interpreters expound it of these who are addicted to changes and
novelties, departing from the Obedience which they owe to God and their Lawful
Magistrates, and rising up in Rebellion against them.

Moses was King in Jesurun, and his setting up subordinate Rulers, is no
pattern for their shaking off the Yoke of Subjection, and setting up Usurpers
and an unlawful Government: The 16 of Numbers, where Subjects do Seditiously
exalt themselves against Moses and Aaron, quadrats better with their case than
the 18 of Exodus, where Moses makes subordinate Rulers for his own and the
Peoples ease. And how could they in Reason expect, that able men, wise and
prudent men, fit for Government, or men fearing God, or men of Truth, would
undertake to be Governors over them? For wise men would see the sin, and
snare, and hazard in breaking down the hedge of Civil or Ecclesiastical
Government, Eccles. 10.8. Men fearing God they also fear the King, and fear an
Oath; and men of Truth will not deal falsely in the matter of their Covenant
with God or Man: And who but foolish rash Persons would take upon them to Rule
such an unruly and disorderly People, who had destroyed all Order Civil and
Ecclesiastical?

It Is strange that they durst speak, as they do, of Kingly Government and
Lineal Succession, seeing the Lord established both among his People in the
House of David, the man after his own heart.

Kingly Government, as established in these Nations, in which King and
Parliament make Laws, is a form of Government so excellent, that few, except
Persons biased with prejudice, will find fault with it: The faults of Rulers
should not be imputed to the form of Government.

They engage to set up the Judicial Law, but they apprehend it would not reach
far enough, and they reject some parts of it; but beside these things which
they mention, there are several other things, which would not suit with us:
Some, even of their Capital Laws, have intimate connection with their Ceremonial
Law, and derive much of their strength and equity from it: By that Law
Fornication in the Priests Daughter was Capital, and so was the gathering of
sticks upon the Sabbath Day; and this seems to be a lesser breach of the
Sabbath than the mispending of a great part of the Lords day in drawing up Men
and Horse, and learning them how to handle their Arms; as if the Lords day had
been a day of Rendevouz, or Weapon-shewing. The restoring of four or five-fold
would not sufficiently restrain Theft in this Nation.

The Judicial Law was not given to other Nations. See Confess. of Faith, Chap.
19. Art. 4. To them also as a Body Politic, he gave sundry Judicial Laws,
which expired together with the Estate of that People, nor obliging any other
now further than the general equity thereof may require.

Our Savior and the Apostles never offered to impose the Judicial Law upon the
Gentiles: The Apostle Paul submitted to be Judged by the Roman Law at Caesar's
Judgment Seat, and exhorts Christians of all Nations to submit themselves to
the Government and wholesome Laws of the Nations, in which they lived. There
have been Heretics, who were for restoring of the Judicial and Ceremonial Law;
and some wild Persons in the Netherlands have, of late, written for this Error;
and there is the more need to take heed of restoring the Judicial Law, because
of its connection with the Ceremonial Law. This is a strange Age, some are
seeking to draw the World by Pelagianism and Quakerism to old Paganism; and
some seeking to draw men under the shadow and vail of Judaism.

They are not very much concerned, though they be called Fifth-Monarchy-men.
But this contrivance of theirs is so strange, that it is hard to find a name
for it; it is rather an Anarchy and Confusion than a Government: And it is hoped
that it will never have any such proportion to the four Monarchies, as to get
the name of a Fifth-Monarchy: And it is fit that such a Monstrous thing die ere
it get a Name. I know nothing so like to it, as the Insurrection of the Boors
in Germany, who believed Thomas Munster and Nicholas Stork, that God was
setting up a new Kingdom, in which the Saints should Reign, and that the
present wicked Magistrates were to be killed, and Godly Magistrates set up in
their stead: These Teachers pretended Revelations and Christian Liberty.

The poor People believed these delusions, and rejected the wholesome
Instructions of Luther and Melancthon; and in their Fury, which they imagined
to be true Zeal, they would needs fight, but when it came to fighting, they
could neither fight nor flee; and in one Summer fifty thousand of them were
killed. Munster at his Death confessed his Error, and exhorted the Princes to
use more clemency toward poor Men, and so they needed not fear any such
hazard; and withal exhorted them to read diligently the Book of the Kings.

If they who contrived this Bond of Confusion, had considered the Confession of
Faith, and the Questions in the larger Catechism, which explain the fifth
Commandment, and the Scriptures confirming the Articles of the 23d. Chapter of
the Confession, and the Answers of the foresaid Questions, it might have
prevented this furious and mad design, Confess. Chap. 23. Art. 1. God the
Supreme Lord and King of all the World, has ordained Civil Magistrates, etc.
Romans 13.1, 2, 3. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers, for there is
no Power but of God; the Powers that be, are ordained of God: Whosoever
therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation, etc. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your
selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King
as Supreme, etc.

And Art. 4. It Is the Duty of People to pray for Magistrates, to Honor their
Persons, to pay them Tribute, and other dues, to Obey their Lawful Commands,
and to be Subject to their Authority, for Conscience sake.

Infidelity or difference of Religion does not make void the Magistrates Just
and Legal Authority, nor free the People from their due Obedience to him, from
which Ecclesiastical Persons are not exempted; much less has the Pope any
Power or Jurisdiction over them in their Dominions, or over any of their
People; and least of all, to deprive them of their Dominions or Lives, if he
shall judge them to be Heretics, or upon any other pretense whatsoever. 1 Timothy
2.1, 2. I exhort therefore that first of all, Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all Men, for Kings, and for all
that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all
Godliness and Honesty. 1 Pet. 2.17. Romans 13.6, 7. For this cause pay you
Tribute also, etc. Titus 3.1. Put them in mind to be Subject to Principalities
and Powers, to Obey Magistrates. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. and 16. As free, and not
using your Liberty as a Cloak of maliciousness, but as the Servants of God. 1
Kings 2.35. Acts 25.9, 10. Then said Paul, I stand at Caesar's Judgment Seat,
where I ought to be judged -- I Appeal unto Caesar. 2 Pet. 2.1.10, 11. But
there were false Prophets also among the People, even as there shall be false
Teachers among you -- But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the dust of
Uncleanness, and despise Government; presumptuous are they, self-willed, they
are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities; whereas Angels, who are greater in
Power and might, bring no railing accusation against them before God. Jude 8,
9, 10, 11. Likewise also these filthy Dreamers defile the Flesh, despise
Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities. Yet Michael the Archangel, when
contending with the Devil about the Body of Moses, durst not bring against him
a railing accusation, but said, the Lord rebuke thee: But these speak evil of
these things which they know not, but what they know naturally, as brute Beasts
in these things they corrupt themselves: Woe unto them, for they have gone in
the way of Cain, and run greedily after the Error of Balaam, and perished in
the gainsaying of Come. 2 These. 2.4. Rev. 13.15, 16, 17. In the larger
Catechism.

Quest. Who are meant by Father and Mother in the fifth Commandment?

Answ. By Father and Mother in the fifth Commandment are meant not only Natural
Parents, but all Superiors in Age and Gifts, and especially such as by Gods
Ordinance are over us in place of Authority, whether in Family, Church, or
Commonwealth; and they cite Isa. 49.23. And Kings shall be thy
Nursing-Fathers, and Queens thy Nursing-Mothers.

Quest. Why are Superiors styled Father and Mother?

Answ. Superiors are styled Father and Mother, both to teach them in all
Duties toward their Inferiors, like Natural Parents, to express love and
tenderness to them, according to their several Relations; and to work
Inferiors to a greater willingness and cheerfulness in performing their Duties
toward their Superiors.

Quest. What is the Honor that Inferiors owe to Superiors?

Answ. The Honor which Inferiors owe to Superiors, is, all due Reverence in
Heart, Word, and Behavior, Prayer and Thanksgiving for them, imitating their
Virtues and Graces, willing Obedience to their Lawful Commands and Counsels,
due Submission to their Corrections, Fidelity to defense and maintenance of
their Persons and Authority, according to their several Ranks, and Nature of
their places, bearing with their Infirmities, and covering them in love, that
so they may be an Honor to them, and to their Government.

And for confirming this Answer, beside places cited in the Confession, they
cite Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7. 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20. Servants be Subject to your Masters
with all fear, not only to the good, but to the froward; for this is
thank-worthy, if a Man for Conscience toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully; for what glory is it, if when ye be buffetted for your faults, ye
shall take it patiently? But if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it
patiently, this is acceptable with God. Titus 2.9, 10. 1 Samuel 26.15, 16. --
Wherefore have thou not kept thy Lord the King -- This thing is not good which
thou have done; as the Lord lives, ye are worthy to die, because ye have not
kept your Master the Lords anointed. 2 Samuel 18.3. -- But now thou art worth ten
thousand of us. Esther 6.2. Matthew. 22.21. -- Render unto Caesar the things
which are Caesar's, and unto God the things which are Gods. Romans 13.6, 7. Genesis
9.23. And Shem and Japhet took a Garment, and laid it upon their shoulders, and
went backward, and covered the nakedness of their Father, and their faces were
backward, and they saw not their Fathers nakedness.

If we compare this Band with the Confession of Faith, and Catechisms, and the
Covenants, and the Scriptures which are cited in the Confession of Faith, and
larger Catechism, we may see, if we will not shut our eyes, that this Band
cannot be reconciled with these, but manifestly clasheth with them; and
therefore they who adhere to this Band, are a party who by their tenets and
practices, distinguish themselves from these, who do adhere to the Confession
of Faith, Catechisms, and Covenants.

I had forgot that they also design themselves Persons whom the Magistrate has
declared no Lawful Subjects, which shows, that their number is not great, and
yet there are many who fall under the lash of these Declarations, who think
themselves bound by the Covenants to maintain the Kings Person and Authority;
and who disclaimed Ruglen Declaration, and would undergo a thousand Deaths, ere
they subscribed this Band: And it is hoped that the Magistrates will think it
true Policy to put a difference betwixt these who own their Authority, and
these who disown it.

This shows how inconsiderable the number of these who own this Band are, and
how unfit they are to make a Representative of the true Presbyterian Church and
Covenanted Nation of Scotland.

Very ordinarily they who are for destroying Magistrates, are no great friends
to Ministers: Having rejected the Magistrates in the preceding Articles, they
fall upon the Ministers in the sixth Article, at least the greater part of
them, as being defective in preaching and testifying against the Acts of the
Rulers, etc. and then for hindering others who were willing to have testified,
etc. It was a long time a mystery to many what some people meant by a
testimony, which they were always calling for; because although Ministers
plainly preached as their Text led them, against Prelacy and Erastianism: and
did show the people from the Scripture, that God has given the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven to Ministers, and not to Magistrates; and that the things of
the House of God, Ecclesiastical matters, must be done according to the will of
the God of Heaven, and not according to the will of the Magistrate. And though
they with grief regrated the breaches made in the Order and Government of the
Church, yet these people would still exclaim against them, as not bearing
testimony against the ills of the time: but at length it appeared what was the
testimony which they meant: for if one instead of preaching the Gospel, had
made an invective discourse against the Rulers, and treated them at the rate
that they are treated in this band, and so rendered them and their Authority
despicable and hateful; O! that was a preaching of the whole counsel of God,
though they brought neither Scripture nor Reason for what they said, and they
made nothing of what was brought from Scripture and Reason against Prelacy and
Erastianism, by other Ministers, because they also did preach the duty which
subjects owed to the Magistrate, and maintained their lawful Authority, as Gods
Ordinance; and prayed for the King and subordinate Magistrates.

The Testimony which some of these people, who were upon the secret which has
now broken out, were seeking, was something which might render the Magistrate
hateful, and cast him out of the affections of the subjects, and so make way
for driving on the design which is now discovered in this band and declaration,
viz. the rejection of the King and Kingly Government, and all subordinate
Magistrates deriving their Authority from the King.

They are highly injurious to Presbyterian Ministers, in alleging that they
have not born testimony to that truth which Christ witnessed before Pontius
Pilate, viz. That Christ is a King: for they declare it privately and publicly
in their places and stations, That Christ is a King, and that he has a
spiritual Kingdom distinct from the Kingdoms of this world, but no ways
prejudicial to earthly Kingdoms; but where it comes into any Kingdom of this
world, it is, if it be received, the establishment of that Kingdom.

Not to repeat what is said in several Papers, which do show the several sorts
of testimonies both verbal and real, given by Presbyterian Ministers, I shall
only say, That their testimony concerning the Church and the Government
thereof, and the power of the Magistrate in reference to Church Matters, is in
the Confession of their Faith and Catechisms, Directory for Worship and
Government; and as it could hardly be expected that these Ministers, being so
scattered, could meet to agree upon new Confessions; so though they had met,
they could not readily have fallen upon a better confession than what is
already extant, and to which they add here.

In chap. 25. of the Confession of Faith, Art. 2. it is asserted, That the
visible Church is the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, the House and Family of
God -- Art. 3. Unto this Catholic visible Church Christ has given the
Ministry, Oracles and Ordinances of God, for gathering and perfecting of the
Saints. Art. 6. There is no other head of the Church but the Lord Jesus Christ.
Chap 30. The Lord Jesus as King and Head of his Church, has therein appointed
a government in the hand of Church Officers, distinct from the Civil
Magistrate. Art. 2. To these Officers the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are
committed -- Chap. 31. Art. 3. It belongs to Synods and Councils ministerially
to determine controversies of Faith, and cases of Conscience; to set down Rules
and Directions for the better ordering of the public Worship of God, and
government of his Church. Art. 5. Synods and Councils are to conclude nothing
but that which is Ecclesiastical, and are not to meddle with Civil affairs,
which concern the Commonwealth, unless by way of humble petition, in cases
extraordinary; or by way of advice for satisfaction of conscience, if they be
thereto required by the Civil Magistrate. Chap. 23. Art. 3. The Civil
Magistrate may not assume to himself the administration of word and Sacraments,
as the power of the keys of the kingdom of heaven; yet he has authority, and
it is his duty to take order that unity and peace be preserved in the Church,
that the truth of God be kept pure and entire; that all blasphemies and
heresies be suppressed, all corruptions and abuses in worship or discipline
prevented or reformed, and all Ordinances of God duly settled, administered, and
observed, for the better effecting whereof, he has power to call Synods, to be
present at them, and to provide that whatsoever is transacted in them, be
according to the word of God.

These Articles, and the Scripture-proofs, do clearly hold out, and confirm,
That Christ, not the Magistrate, is the Head, King, Lord of the Church, which
is the Body, House, and Kingdom of Christ; that Church, and not the Magistrate,
is the Fountain of the Spiritual Power of the keys of the kingdom of Heaven;
that the Offices in the Church are of divine institution, given by Christ; and
that these Offices which Christ has given, are sufficient for gathering and
perfecting the Church, seeing he has given them for that end, and that they
are Ministerial, and not Lordly; and hence it follows, that the Office of a
Prelate (who claims a majority of Directive and Coercive power over Ministers,
who not only takes upon him, without election, to moderate Synods, but also is
above the censure of the Synod, and who can hinder the Synod from concluding
any thing, how necessary soever they find it, and without whose Authority the
Synod is no Synod; who imposes Moderators upon the meetings for exercise, and
to whom these meetings are countable for their actings, without whom there can
be no ordination, deposition, excommunication, relaxation from it, who exacteth
an Oath of Canonical obedience from Ministers) not being in the Rolls of the
Offices and Officers given by Christ; and being a Lordly, and so more than a
Ministerial Office, Presbyterians cannot own it, nor judge it useful for
gathering or perfecting of the Church. They show also, that the Magistrate to
whom God has given the Lordly power of the sword, is so far from having a
spiritual Supreme power of the keys of the kingdom of heaven, that he has not
the power of the keys of the kingdom of heaven given to him at all; for the
power of the keys which Christ has given, is Ministerial, and makes those who
are invested with it, Ministers of the Church; but the power of the Sword is
Magistratical, and a Lordly Dominion; and that it belongs to Synods and
Councils, and not to Magistrates, to make Ecclesiastical Rules, etc. and that
none, neither Magistrates nor Ministers, may order Ecclesiastical matters
according to their mind and pleasure; but those things must be ordered
according to the mind and will of God revealed in his word.

And all true Presbyterians believe, That seeing both the Lordly Power of the
Magistrate in general, and in special the Kingly Power, and the Ministerial
Power of Church Officers are of God, and his Ordinances, that they are not
contrary to one another; for the Ordinances of God do not justle one against
another, but sweetly agree; and any justling or clashing which has proceeded
from the corruptions of Magistrates or Ministers, are not to be imputed to the
Lords Ordinances; and it is the earnest desire of all truly godly and loyal
subjects, who seek the glory of God, and the Magistrates true honor and
interest, That whatsoever in the actings of their rightful Magistrates has
exceeded the bounds which the Lord has set to them, may be in mercy discovered
to them, and in time reformed. That all occasions of grief and stumbling may be
taken out of the way of truly loyal subjects; and all occasion of doing
mischief may be cut off from those who take advantage from those excesses to
render the Magistrate contemptible, and to overthrow that Power which they have
from God.

As for what they say of Ministers hindering those who would have given a
testimony, and censuring others who did give it; the truth is, Presbyterian
Ministers endeavored to restrain some young men, who instead of preaching the
Gospel, made it their work to revile the Magistrate, and Ministers, who made
use of the liberty granted by the Magistrate; but these youths discovered
themselves not to be of Presbyterian Principles, by their refusing to be
subordinate to the Ministers, and by reproaching them who would have reclaimed
them from their disorderly and Schismatic practices. By this the Magistrate
may perceive if the Presbyterian Ministers, who are Presbyterians indeed, had
by allowance of the Magistrate, the peaceable exercise of their Ministry, and
liberty of meeting for regulating their own actings, and the actings of those
who profess themselves to be Presbyterians, such unruly persons who stir up the
people to Schism and Sedition, would not be admitted to the Ministry; or if
they, after their admission, discovered themselves to be of pernicious
principles, they would be put from the Ministry, and so the people who are true
to Presbyterian Principles, would not own them, and so they would not have
access to pervert the people with Seditious and Schismatic doctrine; this
would be found the most proper Remedy for these distempers. But what wonder is
it, if young men, who are ordinarily rash, being but Novices, who have not
studied the Body of Divinity, and who have no experience, and know not the
Principles and Practices of Presbyterial Government, who are not put to
Presbyterial Exercises for their trial and instruction, and who it may be have
never seen any thing of the Exercise of Presbyterial Government in Presbyteries
or Synods, and who are not under the i^spection of meetings of Presbyterians,
but wander to and fro at random, not thinking themselves accountable to any
meeting of Ministers, nor censurable by any. What wonder is it, if such
persons, when they are blown up with the vain applause of some ignorant and
humorous people, who under their sad sufferings have taken up such prejudice
against the Magistrate, and all to whom the Magistrate shows any favor, that
they think what is most cross to the Magistrate, is most right; and any thing
which the Magistrate allows, they think it wrong; and so they cry up those
Preachers most who speak most invectively against the Magistrate, and against
those Ministers to whom the Magistrate shows any favor. I say, what wonder is
it if such youths, blown up with the wind of popular applause, fall into many
snares, and take courses that tend to bring all things sacred and civil into
confusion. They add, For which, together with other causes, etc. we may say God
has left them to do worse things -- This is among their rash sayings; it was
the duty of Presbyterians to censure such unruly youths. They add, But also
have voted in that meeting which they are pleased to call an Assembly of
Ministers, but how justly, let men judge, an acceptance of that liberty founded
upon, and given by virtue of that blasphemously arrogated and usurped power --
Their alledgance that that meeting is not to be called an Assembly of
Ministers, will beget no prejudice against it in the minds of men who have any
sound judgment in matters of that nature. And sober and judicious men would
have suspected that meeting, if it had pleased their banders, or any of such
principles as they maintain. And none except ignorants, or persons blinded with
prejudice, will say that the liberty of the peaceable exercise of the Ministry,
granted by the Magistrate, is founded upon any unlawful powor, or supremacy.
The Magistrates granting liberty of the peaceable exercise of the Ministry, is
the exercise of that power which the Magistrate has from God. That which the
Magistrate ought to do, does not flow from any unlawful power, but the
Magistrate ought to grant to the Ministers of the Gospel liberty to exercise
their Ministry peaceably; and therefore such a grant of liberty, etc. or such
liberty granted, does not flow from, nor is founded upon any unlawful or
usurped power or supremacy. They add, And has appeared before their Courts to
accept of that liberty, and to be Enacted and authorized there as Ministers,
and so has willingly (for this is an elicite act of the will, and not an act
of force and constraint) translated the power of sending out, ordering,
censuring; for as they accept of their liberty from them, so they submit to
their censures and restraints, at least all of them who were yet tried with it;
and others of them appeared and acknowledged before their Courts, that they
would not have done these things that they were charged with, if they had
thought it would have offended them. Ministers departing from the Court of
Christ, and subjection to the Ministry to the Courts of men, and subjection to
the Magistrate (which had been impious and injurious to Christ and his Church,
though they had been righteous and lawful rulers; and by their changing of
Courts according to common Law, has changed their masters; and of the
Ministers of Christ are become the Ministers of men, and bound to answer to
them as often as they will; and as by the acceptance of this liberty in such
manner, they have translated the power, so they have given up and utterly quit
the Government, and a succession of a Presbyterian Ministry; for as these were
not granted them of their masters, so they exercise their Ministry without
them, and so by this as the Ecclesiastical Government is swallowed up in the
Civil, if the rest had followed them, the Ministry should have also been
extinct with themselves, and the whole work of Reformation had been buried in
oblivion, not so much as the remembrance of it kept up. --

Ans. If the Magistrates will see these Ministers, for whom the people
supplicate, why should they refuse to appear? what solid reason can be given
for such a refusal? and what ill is there in the Councils recording in their
Act, that upon such a day, such a Minister, for whom such a Parish had
supplicated, was allowed to Preach in such a Parish? That they appeared to be
authorized as Ministers, if they mean, as it seems they do, that they appeared
to receive their Ministerial authority from the Council, or that they appeared
to be made Ministers of the Gospel, it is a manifest slander; for as they had
their Ministerial authority before their appearance before the Council, so the
Council did not pretend to make them Ministers, but presupposed that they were
Ministers, by enquiring where they were Ordained Ministers; and the Council
cannot well be blamed, to inform themselves concerning the persons whom they
permit to Preach, that they may not allow they know not whom, but may be
assured that they are Ministers, and that they are not seditious, turbulent
persons. But if by authorizing, they mean the Magistrates Civil allowance,
maintetenance, protection; it is the Magistrates duty thus to authorize those
who are Ordained Ministers of the Gospel in the public exercise of the
Spiritual power and authority of their Office, as all Orthodox Anti-Erastian
Divines grant.

And because the Authors of this Band seem to have been unacquainted with the
judgment of Presbyterian Divines in these matters, I shall for their
information, and the information of others, who are bold to speak of things
which they do not understand, set down the judgment of Presbyterian Divines in
this matter, as it is holden forth in that famous Book, The Divine right of
Church Government, Chap. 6. Page 55.

2. The power or authority of Church Government is a derived power: for
clearing of this, note there is a Magisterial, primitive, supreme power, which
is peculiar to Jesus Christ our Mediator, as has been proved, Chap. 3. and 5;
and there is a Ministerial, derivative, subordinate power, which the Scripture
declares to be in Church-guides, Mat. 16.19. and 18.18. Joh. 20, 21, 23. Mat.
28.19, 20. 2 Cor. 10.8. and 13.10. and often elsewhere, this is abundantly
testified; but whence is this power originally derived to them? here we are
carefully to consider, and distinguish three things touching this power and
authority from one another, viz. 1. The Donation of the authority it self, and
of the Offices whereunto this power does properly belong. 2. The designation of
particular persons unto such Offices as are vested with such power. 3. The
public protection, countenancing, authorizing, defending, maintaining of such
Officers in the public exercise of such power, within such and such Realms and
Dominions; this being premised, we may clearly thus resolve, according to
Scripture-warrant, viz. the designation or setting apart of particular
individual persons to those Offices in the Church, that have power and
authority engraven upon them, is from the Church, nominating, electing and
ordaining of such persons thereunto. See Act. 13.1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 4.4. and 5.22.
Tit. 1.5. Act. 4.22.

The public defense, maintenance, etc. of such Officers in the public
exercise of the power and authority of their Office, in such and such
Dominions, is from the Civil Magistrate, as the nursing Father of the Church,
Isa. 49.23. For it is by his authority and sanction, that such public places
shall be set apart for public Ministry, that such maintenance and reward shall
be legally performed for such Ministry; that all such persons, of such and such
Congregations, shall be (in case they neglect their duty to such Ministry)
punished with such Political penalties, etc. But the donation of the Office and
spiritual authority annexed thereunto, is only derived from Jesus Christ our
Mediator, he alone gives all Church Officers, and therefore none may devise or
superadd any new Officers, Ephesians. 4.7, 8, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 12.28. And he alone
derives all authority and power Spiritual to these Officers, for dispensing the
Word, Sacraments, Censures, and all Ordinances, Mat. 16.19. and 28.18, 19, 20.
Joh. 20.21, 22, 23. 2 Cor. 10.8. and 13.10. and therefore it is not safe for
any creature to intrude upon this Prerogative Royal of Christ to give any power
to any Officer of the Church.

And thus we see that these Learned and Godly Ministers, who solidly in that
same Book refute Erastianism, yet assert that it belongs to the Magistrate to
protect, countenance, authorize, defend, maintain Ministers in the public
exercise of their Ministry which they have received from the Lord Jesus. But
it is the ignorance of the solid writings of Presbyterians which makes some
folks so confident, that they are true Presbyterians, and adhering to
Presbyterian Principles, when in the mean time they are publishing to the
world, that they are strangers to the solid writings of sound Presbyterians.
And there is no Orthodox Divine who would find fault with these Ministers, who
when they appeared before the Council, did give humble thanks to the Kings
Majesty, and the Lords of his Majesty's Council, for the peaceable exercise of
the Ministry which they had received from the Lord Jesus.

The elicite act of the Will is too Philosophical for common people to
subscribe or swear to, for they can hardly be made to understand it. And what
they say concerning it, is not Philosophical enough to be approven by those who
understand what an elicite act is; for elicite acts of the Will are such as
immediately flow from the Will, as love or hatred, volition, or nolition. Now
translation of power from Ministers to Magistrates, is not made by these inward
acts of the Will, but by some external imperate acts, as speaking, writing,
etc. Politic acts of surrender, or translation of power, are not effectuate by
mere elicite internal acts of the Will. But their ignorance of the nature of an
elicite act of the Will, and their opposing acts of force and constraint to
elicite acts; whereas elicite acts use to be contra-distinguished from imperate
acts; and their insinuating, That if an act be not an elicite act of the Will,
it is an act of force and constraint; whereas the imperate acts of the Will are
not elicite acts, and yet being commanded by the Will, they are not acts of
force and constraint; these are more harmless mistakes. But it is a very
injurious calumny, that those Ministers who appeared before the Council
translated the power of sending out, ordering and censuring Ministers to the
Magistrate; It Is a ridiculous ignorant conceit to imagine, that what these
Ministers did in appearing before the Council, was a translation of the power
of order, of Potestative mission, or else such censuring to the Magistrate, or
changing their Master, and making themselves the Ministers of men, and a
quitting of the Government and succession of a Presbyterian Ministry.

These are mere calumnies, and ridiculous fopperies, that none who understand
any thing in these matters, will think worthy of any answer. They were very
injurious to the poor people, many of whom are simple and ready through
prejudice to believe any ill word spoken against indulged Ministers, who in
their Papers and Pamphlets abused them with such slanders. But they are more
injurious to them, who would have them to subscribe and swear such injurious
calumnies, and ridiculous fopperies, which are not only far from truth, but
from any appearance of truth. And so much has been said in several Papers
written in vindication of the practice of the Indulged Ministers, that it were
to waste time and paper to answer any more to these Calumniators; and the best
answer to them, is to pray, that the Lord would give them repentance for these
abominable reproaches, whereby they have very actively driven on the design of
Satan, and his instruments the Papists and Quakers, etc. which is to render the
Ministry contemptible. And it was seen and told long ago, that they would not
rest satisfied with the reproachieg of a few Ministers, but would proceed to
render all contemptible. The contrivers of this Bond have made a great progress
in this Devilish work of rendering Ministers contemptible and useless; for they
have casten all, except some few, who for any thing known, did not exceed the
number of four, and some think that they were but three at most, and one of
them was casten by the other two.

It is strange that any person who had the use of reason, could be so far
blinded with prejudice, as to think that these Ministers did translate the
power of sending out Ministers, or the power of Potestative mission to the
Magistrate; for, as was said, the Magistrate supposed them to be Ordained
ministers, and so to have a Potestative mission to Preach the Gospel already;
for ministers are potestatively sent to preach the Gospel, when they are
Ordained ministers; and this clearly appeared by the Councils inquiring, if
they were, and where, or by whom they were Ordained ministers; if the Council
had called some persons who were not Ordained, and sent them to Preach and
Baptize, etc. then they might have alleged that the Magistrate did assume the
power of sending out ministers, or of a Potestative mission; but they never
pretended to any thing like that.


Preacher. But, Sir, did not the Council send these ministers to these
Congregations?


Minist. 1. The Council did not so much as use the word of sending.

2. Suppose they had used the word of sending, that would not have imported a
Potestative mission, because the Magistrate did suppose that they were already
Ordained. Ye heard also that Mr. Welsh in his Preface to King James desires the
King to send ministers throughout the Land; it were great ignorance and
perverseness to gather from that word, that he translated to the King the power
of a Potestative mission.

3. Suppose the Magistrate had said nothing concerning their being Ordained
Ministers before, it had been great perverseness to have concluded from the
Magistrates sending of them, that they ceased to be the Ministers of Christ,
and became the Ministers of men. Will any be so perverse as to conclude,
because Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17.8, 9. sent Priests and Levites through all the
Cities of Judah to teach the people, that therefore these Priests and Levites
ceased to be the Lords Ministers, and became the ministers of the King?


Preach. But Jehoshaphet was a godly reforming King?


Minist. That is nothing to the purpose in hand. Ye might have remembered that
Mr. Rutherford shows that the magistratical power in reference to the Church,
is the same in Nero, and in a Christian magistrate; and if a godly King's
sending ministers, does not annul their ministry, then no magistrate's sending
ministers to preach, etc. does make them no ministers of Christ.

Did Ezra cease to be a Scribe and minister of the Lord, because Artaxerxes and
his seven Councellers sent him to do the work of a Scribe in Judah and
Jerusalem? Ezr. 7.13, 14. For as much as thou art sent of the King and of his
seven Counselors.


Pr. If Artaxerxes had destroyed the Temple, and the Worship of God, Ezra would
not have taken any benefit of such a Decree and Commission.


Min. What warrant have you for that? if Nebuchadnezzar who destroyed the
Temple, had made a Decree, That the Priests, and Levites, and people, should
return and worship God at Jerusalem, would they have been such fools to refuse
to return, till Nebuchadnezzar were dead, and some other King made such a
Decree? Did Jeremiah reject the favor which was appointed by Nebuchadnezzar?
Jer. 39.11, 12. and conferred upon him by Nebuzaradan, Jer. 40.4. who had burnt
the House of the Lord? 2 King. 25.9.


Pr. But these were Heathens, who had never professed the true Religion, and so
had not backslidden.


Min. The backsliding of Rulers makes them not incapable of doing good
afterward. Manasseh had been Religiously educated, and became monstrously
wicked, and yet was an instrument of Reformation afterward; and Judah did not
refuse to serve the Lord, because Manasseh, who had so fearfully fallen away,
did command them to serve the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 33.16.


Pr. Manasseh repented.


Minist. But do ye think that if he had commanded Judah to serve God, or the
Lords Priests to sacrifice to the Lord before he repented, that these commands
should have been rejected, because he was not truly penitent? It Is the duty of
all Kings, whether they be penitent or not, to command the Lords ministers and
people to serve God.

The Orthodox ministers who had been banished in the time of the Arrian
Persecution, and Athanasius among the rest, did not refuse to return to the
exercise of their ministry upon the Edict of Julian the Apostate, who had been
a professed Christian, and turned Pagan, and a despiteful enemy and mocker of
Christ; and though he made that Edict for ill ends, yet these godly zealous
Servants of God made use of it. Ye may read the History in Zozomens
Church History, Book 5. Chap. 5. -- where he shows, that he afflicted the
Church in all things most bitterly and grievously, except that he recalled the
Bishops and Priests which were banished in the time of Constantius; and that it
was said, he gave not that command out of mercy or pity; but that either they
by their mutual contentions might fight against the Church by an intestine War,
and so fall away from their own Laws and Institutions, or that he might wrong
the Estimation of Constantius, and might raise up hatred against him through
the whole Empire, etc.

And Georgius Horsnius in his Ecclesiastic History, Page 93. says, That
Julian recalled Athanasius from Banishment to the place of one George an
Arrian, a most naughty man, who had been slain a little before Athanasius's
return. There is no man more famous for Learning and Zeal, and stedfastness in
the Church History, than Athanasius; and I am sure, if ye have read the History
of Julian the Apostate, ye will be ashamed to say that any of our Rulers are so
ill as he was, and yet none of these holy and Learned ministers made any
scruple to obey his command when he called them to the work of their ministry.
If many would compare their practices with the Scripture-rule, and examples in
Scripture, and in Church History, they would find that what they take for light
and zeal, is but ignorance, and an humourous peevishness; who would have
thought that ever any who had been members of the Church of Scotland, that
besides the obligation common to them with other Protestant Churches, are by
solemn Covenants obliged to extirpate Schism, and maintain the Kings person and
authority, would have so far degenerate as to place their zeal and Religion in
scarring at the Preaching and Hearing of the Gospel, because the ministers who
preach it are permitted and allowed to preach it by the magistrates, who are
bound as magistrates, as Christians, as Protestants, to permit, allow,
countenance, protect by their authority the Preaching of the Gospel in this
Kingdom?


Farm. Sir, I desire ye would return to answer what is said against the
Ministers in that sixth Article of the Band.


Min. As for what they say of Ministers submitting to the Magistrates censures,
and saying they would not have done the things they were charged with, if they
had thought it would have offended them; it is a confused charge, and it is not
easy to guess what they mean; they cannot prove, that any of those Ministers
have done any thing that will import an acknowledgment, that the Magistrate
has power of inflicting Ecclesiastic Censures, or of making Ecclesiastic
Canons. And as for Civil Restraints of Imprisonment and Banishment, if they
condemn submission to these, they will condemn all who have been imprisoned and
banished; and among the rest the Ministers who went to Holland, who did not
only passively submit to Banishment, but also by their Subscription engaged not
to return.

If any Minister has done any thing which warrantably might have been forborne,
or which might have been done as conveniently, or more conveniently at another
time, in another place, in a way that would not have irritated or provoked the
magistrate; if such a person has made the foresaid acknowledgment, who can
with reason condemn it; for we owe thus much even to any private person, whom
we should not needlessly provoke to anger if we can conveniently help it: but
the contrivers of this bond, and those who go their way, are for needless
provocations of the magistrate; and if there be many ways of doing what is
right upon the matter, they will choose the way that is irritating to the
Rulers, because it is irritating; and shun that way which will not provoke the
magistrate; as if it were a duty to provoke the magistrate to wrath. And if any
have needlessly provoked them, they will not allow him to give an innocent soft
answer to turn away their wrath. But it is no wonder that they who are for
overthrowing the magistrate and the Government, be against all things that make
for peace with them, or may tend to pacify them when they are angry, and be
for grievous words and things, which may stir up strife, and put evil betwixt
the magistrate and subjects.

What they add, That these ministers have departed from the Courts of Christ,
and subjection to the ministry, are mere calumnies. Do they think that
ministers appearing before the magistrate when called, that by the magistrates
Civil allowance of the peaceable exercise of the ministry, they might without
disturbance preach the Gospel in such or such places, will prove that these
ministers have departed from the Courts of Christ, and have changed their
Courts, and so by common Law have changed their masters, and are become, of the
ministers of Christ, the ministers of men. These are mere forgeries, that have
no foundation but in their own fancy; nor any consonancy with common Law, but
are against common sense and reason.

Although these ministers had bound themselves to answer when the magistrate
would, it had been no more than men who compear before the magistrate use to do
when required, that till they be called, they may in the mean time have their
freedom. Now the peaceable exercise of the ministry, is in many respects
preferable to Civil liberty. But it was the people, and not the minister, who
gave bond to the Council, to present the minister when called, under such a
penalty. It Is another groundless slander, that they have given up, and utterly
quit the Government, and a succession of a Presbyterian Ministry: for they have
not by their making use of this liberty, bound up themselves from doing any
thing in their places and stations which they might have done before, for the
Government of the Church, and succession of a Presbyterian Ministry; and it is
but a melancholy dream to imagine that the settled, fixed, peaceable exercise
of the Ministry of the Gospel, under the protection, of lawful authority, does
swallow up the Government of the Church, extinguish the Ministry, and bury the
work of Reformation. Is not the Preaching of the Gospel a part of the exercise
of Christ's visible Kingdom? Does the exercise of the Ministry destroy the
Ministry? Or does the Preaching of the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, bury
the work of Reformation?

Next, they charge these Ministers with Preaching the lawfulness of paying that
tribute declared to be imposed for the bearing down of the true Worship of God
which they falsely termed seditious Conventicles.


Pr. Sir, before ye speak any thing as to the paying of that tribute, I desire
that ye would consider, that there were several Ministers who Preached against
the paying of it, and I hope ye will not be rash in giving your opinion in that
matter.


Min. I wish those who Preached against the paying of it, had made less haste,
and had conferred with their Brethren, and heard what they had to say from
Scripture and Reason, e're they had adventured to preach such a new Doctrine,
That subjects should not pay a tribute, which was concluded by a meeting of the
Estates of the Nation, and for an end which is unquestionably good, the
resisting of foreign Invasion.

It Is, I suppose, a new Doctrine, That subjects should not pay tribute; and the
preaching of new Doctrines is dangerous; it has been the rashness of some that
they were too hasty to preach their own private and very singular opinions; it
were good, Ministers of the Gospel would forbear to say any thing to the people
in preaching, but that of which they might say, Thus says the Lord. They
should have considered what danger they exposed the people to by this Doctrine:
for either those who believed this Doctrine would persist in refusing to pay,
and this would expose them to be eaten up by Soldiers; or they being
distressed, would at length pay it, though they thought it unlawful, and this
would debosh and waste their Consciences, and prepare them to do other things
which they thought unlawful; and this would encourage those who differed from
them in other things, to take the same method in pressing them to conform to
them; and some of the poor people who have stood out long, and at length
yielded to pay, have exposed themselves to the scorn and derision of those who
uplifted that Sess.


Pr. Seeing they declared that this Sess was imposed to bear down the true
Worship of God, how could any with a good Conscience pay it?


Min. Any who reads this part of the Band, and had not seen the Act of the
Convention of Estates, would think that they had declared, that it was for
bearing down the true Worship of God; now there are no such words in the Act of
Convention. Again, any who had not seen the Act, might think that if their
words were true, that then the Convention of States were for bearing down
whatsoever was the true Worship of God; or that there was no true worship of
God but in these meetings which the Magistrate calls seditious Conventicles. We
should not make either words or things worse than they really are; and we
should at least deal as fairly with the Magistrate as with other men.

It has been reported by persons of Honor, and of great candor, that the
motion of setting up Prelacy (which has been the cause of the sad suffering of
Presbyterians) in Scotland, did not come of the Kings Majesty, but was repelled
by the King, when first moved by some Scots men; and if they who moved it, had
not vehemently insisted, and strongly alleged, that it would be easily
effectuate, and would be acceptable to the people of Scoland, the King would
never have set up Prelacy in Scotland. And any favor that has been showed to
Non-conformists, has principally flowed from the King himself; as Dr. Owen in
his Answer to Dr. Stillingfleets Sermon declares. And in some places of his
Majesty's Dominions, Presbyterians have the public worship of God without any
disturbance; which shows, that the King does not look upon all the Meetings of
Presbyterians, for the worship of God, as seditious Conventicles; so that
suppose that were said (which yet no judicious person will allege) that there
were no true worship of God, except in these Meetings which are called
Conventicles; it would not be alleged, that it were the Magistrates design to
bear down the true worship of God, seeing these Meetings in several places of
these Kingdoms are not suppressed; and if some Preachers had not vented
Doctrines which were really seditious at some of those Conventicles,
Presbyterian Ministers and people, who designed nothing but the preaching and
hearing of the Gospel of peace, would not have been molested as they were; but
the seditious turbulent Doctrine of some, did breed much trouble to others, who
were innocent.

It cannot be denied, that there were some Meetings where such Doctrine was
taught by the Preachers, and applauded and practiced by hearers, that it was no
wonder that the Magistrate called them seditious. And if the Contrivers of this
Bond, had set themselves to devise a way to confirm the Magistrate, in calling
Conventicles seditious, they could not have fallen upon a more effectual way,
than this Contrivance; which is indeed seditious, and will readily be imputed
to many who abhor the seditious designs and principles which are in this Bond.

As for the reason why this Sess should not be paid, viz. because it is declared
to be imposed for an ill end; they who are free to pay it, will retort, It Is
imposed for a good end, viz. to put the Kingdom in a posture of defense against
Invasion; and therefore it should be paid. I know a judicious Gentleman, who
said he would pay his Sess for that end, which was unquestionably good, viz.
the resisting of Foreign Invasion. If an ill design intended by those who lay
on a Sess, render the paying of it unlawful, then suppose a Magistrate should
impose a Sess for twenty necessary ends and uses, if there were but one ill end
designed by him in imposing it, it would be unlawful for Subjects to pay that
which is necessary for twenty good ends and uses, which were very absurd. If
the Payer have no ill design in paying, the Magistrates ill design in imposing
will not vitiate the Act of him that pays. Suppose a Robber say to a traveling
man, I and my men must live, and therefore I require you to give me out of your
hand so much money to maintain me and my men, or else I will kill you, and take
all the money ye have; the Traveller would not be guilty of the abusing of the
money to maintain Robbers; he gives it not for that end, but to preserve his
life; and gives a part to preserve the rest.

Christ commanded to give Tribute to the Roman Emperor, which was exacted by
the Romans to maintain the Government over the Jews, which was destructive both
to their Religious and Civil Liberties. Paul directs to give Tribute to those
who were then Magistrates, who were Heathen Idolaters. Now the Lord has
declared in his word, That every unrenewed man serves diverse Lusts and
pleasures, and makes provision for the flesh to fulfill the Lusts of it; they
are Idolaters, make their belly or their Riches, or their Pleasures, their God;
they act from carnal Principles, and for carnal ends. They who pay the Sess,
are not certain that the Magistrate will employ it for bearing down
Conventicles, they may put it to some other use; they might get some other
thing to do with it; but we are certain, that Heathen Rulers, Idolaters, and
every unrenewed man will serve his Lusts with the Tribute, or Rent, or Debt
that is paid to him; or with the Alms that is given to him in his distress; and
yet Subjects are commanded to pay Tribute to Heathen ungodly Emperors; and
Tenants and Debtors should pay their Rent and Debts to ungodly Landlords and
Creditors, though they declared when they were requiring it, that they had a
mind to misimploy it to some ill use; if the Declaration of the Magistrate,
that he will abuse the Tribute, make it sure that he will abuse it, and so bar
Subjects from paying; the Declaration of the God of Truth, That every ungodly,
unrenewed man will abuse what is paid to him, or given him out of charity, is
much surer; and so men would be bound up to pay or give any thing to any person
that were in an unrenewed state; and thus we should be obliged to defraud
ungodly men, in not paying them their Debts; and to let Heathens, Pagans, and
ungodly poor people starve; because we know from the Scripture, that they will
make what they get, Provision for their Lusts, which they serve, and offer it
to some Idol-lust; this were a new method of effectuating what some of the
furious Anabaptists designed, to kill all the wicked, that there might be none
but Saints in the World.

I shall subjoyn the words of the Author of the exercitation concerning usurped
powers, who was supposed to be Mr. Herle. Chap. 3. 2. Payment of Taxes, and
bearing other Impositions for the usurped power, where and while we are under
his compulsive power; because such Contributions may and will be taken whether
I will pay them or not; and I yield them under his enforcement, as a Ransom for
my life, or liberty, or somewhat ese, that is better to me than the payment;
and consequently I am to choose the parting with it, as the less evil, rather
than with that which is better; which to lose, is to incur a greater evil for
avoiding of a less.

In this point Mr. Ascham the aforenamed Author, part 2. Chap. 1. page 35.
determines well, had he not contradicted (as I understand him) that he
delivers in this and the next Chapter, with that Assertion of his, part 1.
Chap. 6. page 25. distinguishing rightly betwixt that which cannot be had, nor
the value of it, unless I actually give it; and that which may be taken,
whether I contribute it or not: Of this latter kind is paying of Taxes in this
case. Nolite igitur fortunam inculpam convertere, neque Regis injuriam, hujus
crimen putare, nec consilium ex necessitate, nec voluntatem ex vi interpretari.
Cicero Orat. 39. pro C. Rabbino Posthumo. So he defends Posthumus his
changing his Roman Gown to a Cloak at Alexandria, as compelled by King Ptolomie.
Herein I am but morally passive, as a man that is fallen into the hands of a
pack of bloody Thieves, and being demanded it, takes his Purse out of his
Pocket and delivers it to them; though with his own hand, says the Author, he
puts his Purse into their hands, yet the Law calls that not a gift, nor
excuses the Thief for taking it, but all contrary; or a man apprehended by a
party of the invading Enemies, or Usurpers Army, walks or rides along with them
to their muster or battle, when as he cannot escape them; and otherways they
would draw him. But it is commonly objected thus.

Object. This payment, or ^ther charge, is taken, and will be used to an evil
^se, as to maintain Usurpation.

Ans. But that is beyond my deliberation, not in my power to prevent: It will
not be avoided, by putting them to force it from me, but rather more Gain will
accrue to them, and Damage to me; if I stand out, my denying will be made an
occasion to them to take more. This cause is like that of entering into a
Covenant with th^se, that in covenanting, we know before hand, will swear by a
false God; wherein Divines Augustinus ad Publicoram Epist 154. Genesis 21.31, 3^.
resolve the Party swearing by the true God, participates not in his sin, that
swears by a false one; inasmuch as he communicates with him in the Covenant,
not in the Oath taken in his part, and provides thereby for his necessary
security; and thus did Abraham and Jacob in their respective Covenants with
Abimelech and Laban.

I shall add the words of another Presbyterian Minister, Edward Gee Minister in
Lancaster, in his excellent Treatise of the Divine Right and Original of the
Civil Magistrate, published Anno 1658. page 368. where he is showing what may
be lawfully done by people under the power of an Usurper. He says, 2. And
therewithal such as are peculiarly arising from that state of subduedness, as
the necessity that is incumbent to do, or part with the thing required, for the
avoidance of greater loss, or suffering to come; if the Subject detect it, or
the greater convenience, safety or emolument, which there is to ones self, to
his Neighbor, or to the public, in doing them, in denying, as the
circumstances of the Imposal lie, though were it not so imposed, it would not
be eligible; though we are obliged to nothing jussu ejus, or upon the intuition
of his Command, yet we may do many things, eo jubente, he commanding; and
should do, eo premente, he enforcing them; and we have many things to do, ipso
seu volente, seu nolente, whether he will, or forbid the doing of them, etc. By
which passages it appears, That those godly learned Presbyterians in those
Treatises, which they wrote of purpose to maintain the Kings Authority when he
was thrust from it; and to show that the Subject might do nothing which might
prejudge his right; or which might be interpreted to be an owning of the title
of the then Usurpers, who had forced the King out of his Dominions; yet they
show, that Taxes might be paid to the Usurpers; and that they who paid it,
were not accountable for the abuse that the Usurpers made of it; which lets us
see how far they would have been from refusig to pay Tribute to the rightful
Magistrate, though imposed for some wrong end. And I cannot but here take
notice, how constantly and courageously Presbyterians owned the Kings
Authority, when he was thrust from the exercise of it; and how careful they
were, that Subjects might do nothing which might be prejudicial to his Title,
when he was violently disposessed of his Kingdoms.

I shall not speak of the Testimonies they gave in preaching and in print,
against the Usurpers, upon the account of their usurpation, and for asserting
of the Kings Title. I wish their Loyalty had been better remembered; but any
suffering they have met with since, will not make them repent of their constant
adherence, from a principle of Conscience to their Allegiance, and covenanted
Duty to their rightful Sovereign.

If any will but look to the frontispiece of Mr. Gee's Book, where there is an
empty Chair of State, and the Scepter and Crown lying upon the ground; and
below, the King standing, and above his head, non est potestas nisi a Deo, Romans
13. and under his feet (...), and opposite to him upon the other side, an
Armed-Soldier with his hand in the handle of his Sword, meaning the Parliament;
and under his feet (...), and below, Absalom hanging upon a tree, and Joab
darting him, 2 Samuel 18. and the Woman of Abel casting Sheba's head over the
wall, 2 Samuel 20. They may see Presbyterians Loyalty and courage in a time of
hazard; when others, who afterward would have engrossed all Loyalty to
themselves, were very calm; and some of them speaking in another Dialect.

Mr. Rutherford used to keep Family-fasts, to pray for the King in his
distress. There is no Loyalty comparable to that which is founded upon the word
and Covenant, and the Principle of Conscience, bound by the Word and Oath of
God. The late King advised those who were desirous to befriend him in his
straits, to preach the Obligation of the Covenant, which binds to maintain his
Person and Authority.

The new Principles of Confusion, which are opposite to the Magistrates
Authority, and to the paying of Tribute to Rulers, are directly opposite to,
and inconsistent with the Principles and Practices of Presbyterians; and seem
to have been devised by Jesuits, and then craftily conveyed into the heads of
weak people, distmepered with sad suffering; or having Zeal without Knowledge,
that they might at once render those people ridiculous, and expose their
possessions as a prey, and their lives to the Sword and their profession of
Religion to contempt and scorn; as if it made men frantic, and deprived them
of the use of common Reason and sense.

I heard from a godly and learned Minister, That he heard a great Zealot
against the paying of the Sess, say, That whatever was unlawful for a man to do
voluntarily, was unlawful for him to do upon Legal or Physical constraint; and
another said, If men on constraint might pay Sess, which they should not
voluntarily do, without Legal and Physical constraint feared to follow; then
the three Children might have worshipped Nebuchadnezars Image, because they
were under constraint. And when it was answered, that there were some actions
in the substance of the fact sinful, that no constraint could make lawful, such
as Idolatry; and some, which outward Circumstances made lawful or unlawful:
that distinction was denied; such is the ignorance of some of those Teachers.

Another made the paying of the Sess, like the offering of Children to Moloch.
It Is a great pity, that well-meaning people, who from a Principle of
Conscience, are willing rather to suffer, than to sin, should be misguided by
ignorant men, and drawn into needless calamities, to the ruin of their
Families, and the reproach of Religion.

They add, That these Ministers advised the Prisoners to take the Bond, etc.

Ans. Those Prisoners being taken at Bothwel-bridge, were pressed to bind
themselves not to take up Arms against the Kings Person and Authority, under
the Certification of no less punishment than Death.

Now as we heard from the larger Catechism, It Is the duty of inferiors to
defend and maintain the Persons and Authority of their Superiors; which imports
much more than the not taking up Arms against them and their Authority.

2. Though they had not been Subjects, but only Prisoners of war in the victors
power, to deprive them of life or liberty for ever; I suppose they could not
have been blamed for the preservation of their life, to have given in such a
Bond; some who were taken Prisoners by Cromwell, for their liberty engaged not
to carry Arms against him; and I do not remember, that any censured them for
it; what they say in a Parenthesis, that hazard will not make a moral change in
actions, is a palpable error; if there were twenty with drawn-swords, waiting
at the Church-door to kill a Minister, if he should come to preach; it were
rash, furious, self-destroying, self-murdering Zeal for a Minister to venture
to go to preach at that time, in despite of the hazard, so certain, visible,
and unavoidable, and yet it were his duty at another time to preach, where
there were no such hazard; for a Merchant to cast his Wares in the Sea in a
calm, were wicked folly, contrary to the 8th. Command, a stealing from his
Family and himself; and yet in a storm, Paul and the Passengers and Mariners
thought it their duty to cast out both Goods and Tackling of the Ship.

This Subscription would have no ways condemned innocent self-defence against
the unjust violence of Papists, which the Reformed Churches made use of, when
they did cast off the yoke of the Whore. David and his men had Arms, but they
were not taken up against Saul's Person and Authority, as appears by David's
practice, who would neither himself kill, nor suffer his men to kill Saul, and
that upon the account of his Authority, being the Lords Anointed; and though
Saul in his distemper, calls David his enemy; yet in his lucide intervals, he
calls him his Son.

Indeed the engaging not to take up Arms against the Kings Person and
Authority, and any lawful Oath of Allegiance, could not consist with such Arms
as the Contrivers of this Band, and Sanchar Declaration would be at; for their
Arms are designed to destroy the Magistrates person without mercy, and their
Authority, and the established Civil Government which has no parallel that I
know of, except that of the Boors in Germany under Thomas Munster; and after,
under John of Leyden; which Usurpation being not only of private persons, but
also being against the Magistrates person and Authority, was justly condemned,
as a fury, by all the Reformed Churches.

At length after this long Indictment, they come to give sentence against these
Ministers who have accepted of the peaceable exercise of their Ministry, and
all who voted for that acceptance, all who have heard and pleaded for them,
trafficked for union with them; all that do not testify against them, and
deport themselves suitably to their testimony; all who do not join publicly
with the Brethren, who testify against them. The sentence is in effect
deposition as far as their power reaches; they say indeed that they have not,
nor assume to themselves authoritative sentences of deposition and suspension
against these Ministers; there is some modesty here; yet they specify the
censures, which should be inflicted upon these Ministers; no less will serve
than deposition or suspension. It Is somewhat strange that they who had the
confidence to depose the Magistrate as formally as they could, did not formally
depose these Ministers also; but though they do not formally depose them, yet
they do it materially and effectually, in that they will neither hear them, nor
receive Sacraments from them. And no wonder, seeing they had before declared
them to be the Ministers of men, and not of Christ; the ground of this sentence
is a Scripture (2 These. 3.6.) but misunderstood, and so misapplied; for the
Apostle is not there directing to withdraw from the Lords Ordinances, from the
hearing of the Word, or Administration of the Sacraments, or from fellowship
with the Church in the Worship of God; but he forbids ordinary, familiar,
private converse with disorderly persons, (it is a metaphor taken from Soldiers,
who keep not their rank) idle, and yet busybodies, busy about that which did
not belong to them, such as are spoken of 1 Timothy 5.13. who were idle, wandering
about from house to house, tatlers, busybodies, speaking things which they
ought not. The authors of this Band have made such a breach upon all order,
both in speaking and engaging to do things which they ought not, and which tend
to all confusion, that if they had understood this Scripture, and their own
way, they would have seen their way condemned in this Scripture, from which
they would condemn others.

2. Orthodox Interpreters think that the withdrawing which is enjoined in this
Scripture, is to be after the Church has taken due notice of the disorder of
such persons, and they after admonition continue disobedient, see the Dutch
Annotations, which cite Mat. 18.15. 1 Cor. 5.11. as parallel places; and
Diodate, Mr. Dickson, and Mr. Ferguson upon the place.

If private persons were left to Excommunicate all whom they thought
disorderly, it would breed great confusion; and if private persons be not to be
thus withdrawn from till the Church has noted them, and proceeded by lesser
censures to the censure of Excommunication; How insolent an act is this, for a
few inconsiderable persons, who, as they confess themselves, have no capacity
to inflict any censure, to declare that they will carry themselves toward so
many ministers, who have never been convened or heard, much less censured by
any Church-Judicatory; and others who adhere to them, and all who testify not
against them, and do not publicly join with those who testify against them,
as if they were deposed and Excommunicate? and the insolency was the greater,
because they knew that the ministers who were not indulged, did think these
young men who had not come to this height of Schism, censurable.

I am certainly informed, that this spirit of Schism has prevailed so far in
some, that they will not have private Christian fellowship with any who hear
Indulged ministers; though they be persons of so blameless and Christian
conversation, that they have nothing to cast at them for, but this, that they
have clearness to hear Indulged ministers. This joining in the Worship of God
where these ministers preach, they account a joining with the people of these
abominations, ignorantly perverting that place, Ezra 9.14. as if joining in the
commanded Worship of God, were like the Israelites joining in forbidden
marriages with the cursed Nations. But as the fool thinks, the bell clinks.

The least that they require of these deposed and Excommunicate ministers, is,
that they stand in judgment before these ministers, and be judged by them who
have followed the Lord, and kept themselves free of these defections. The least
I perceive that they will accept of, is no less than an acknowledging of
Prelates, and setting up Prelacy.


Pr. Sir, ye seem now to be jesting, and not in earnest.


Min. No, Sir, I am in good earnest; and if ye will consider what Prelacy is, I
suppose ye will not deny what I say. Ye know your self, that these Ministers
whom they mean, and who fall not in one of the Classes mentioned, were never
for any thing known above four, and some say they were but three, and a little
after this Band one of them was laid aside from Preaching. And a Gentleman told
me, that he was credibly informed, that he went hence to Ireland, and joined
with the Conformists there. But suppose that they were four, yea fourteen, that
would not make them the Plurality in a capacity to judge, to suspend, or depose
the Indulged, and not Indulged Ministers of the Church of Scotland; and yet we
see they have a jurisdiction over all the rest of the Ministers, who must stand
before them, and be judged by them, and stand and fall in judgment, as these
judges shall determine. And as they engross the power of suspension and
deposition, so consequently the power of Ordination; and in their last Article
they talk of a Gospel Ministry, rightly chosen, and rightly Ordained, and they
promise to rectify what was amiss in former Ordinations. Now two or three, or
four persons engrossing the power of Ordination and Jurisdiction over all the
Presbyterian Ministers of the Church of Scotland, are Prelates.

Doctor Gauden defines the Office of a Bishop thus: Episcopal presidency and
authority, is a Sovereign power, and Spiritual jurisdiction in Ordination,
Confirmation, Censures, rebuking, silencing, Excommunication, Absolution, and
other exercises of Ecclesiastic power, without, above and against Presbyters
and people.

This description, if ye will take Confirmation out of it, seems to agree much
better to these new Prelates than to the old. They arrogate a Sovereign power,
a power above all Presbyterian Ministers, who must stand before them when they
set to judge them; and they must stand and fall as they are pleased to
determine. Their Sovereignty is the more absolute, that their Dignity proceeds
of themselves; and men use not to limit their own power when they have it, at
their own making or taking; the old Prelates depend upon the King, and they are
sent from Court. It Is true, Athanasius Epist. ad Solitariam vitam Agentes.
finds fault with that ubi ille Canon ut e palatio mittaturis qui futurus est
Episcopus. Yet any thing that is in its nature excessive, and inclined to pass
bounds, is less dangerous when it is limited by some other thing on which it
depends, than when it is left to its own indefinite appetite or inclination.
Their new Prelates depend neither upon King nor Kesar, but are independent,
their Prelacy proceeds of themselves; this makes it very dreadful, like the
Dominion of the Chaldeans, Hab. 1.7. They are terrible and dreadful, their
judgment and dignity shall proceed of themselves. They were terrible, because
as Mr. Hutcheson upon the place says, They would be their own carvers in all
matters of advantage and honor, standing to no law either of Nature, or
Nations, in dealing with a terrified and subdued people, but merely following
their own will, armed with power.

If, ye say, they are not designed Lords, nor a Sovereign power ascribed to
them in the Bond, but they are designed Ministers, that is, Servants. I answer,
if folk will be beguiled with names, the Pope will call himself Servus
servorum, a Servant of Servants; but there is a real Sovereignty given to them,
when a Jurisdiction over all Presbyterian Ministers to suspend, depose, and
dispose of their Ministry as they please, is ascribed to them. And the other
Prelates deal more heartily in taking the name of Sovereignty and Lordship,
seeing they have the thing.

Is it not a strange arrogance that a Presbyter, or two or three Presbyters,
shall claim a stated Jurisdiction over a great multitude of Presbyters, who
have the same office with themselves? they either have that power over their
Brethren by virtue of their Ministerial Office, as they are Presbyters, or by
virtue of some other Office: not by virtue of the Office of a Presbyter or
Minister; for then one and the same Office should make one Presbyter a
Sovereign and Lord, and another Presbyter his subject; a Presbyter as a
Presbyter cannot have dominion over a Presbyter; for one and the same Office
cannot make a man Sovereign over another, who has the same Office that he
has. If they have this Sovereign power over their Brethren by virtue of some
other Office than the Office of a Minister or Presbyter, then let them tell us
what Office this is, if it be not the Office of a Prelate.

2. It has not yet been proven that the Lord gave a Sovereign power, and
Spiritual jurisdiction to any one of his Ministers, no not to the Apostles over
the rest. Paul Bains in his Diocesan Trial, Page 73, 77. shows, that a majority
of directive and corrective power, such a power as Bishops claim, is more than
Ministerial. And Mr. Rutherford in his Divine Right of Church Government,
says, Nor do we find that the Apostles had jurisdiction over Pastors in the
Scripture, nor in any Ecclesiastic Records, but where Papacy was working. See
Page 21.

There is but one Lord in the Church, Ephesians. 4. and Christ has forbidden
Lordship, and enjoined ministry, and serving, Luke 22.24. 1 Pet. 5.3. Non
requiritur in dominatione humilitas, sed ipsa. Dominatio prohibetur, says
Whitaker. Christus de re dominantur, non autem de modo dominandi, hoc vel illo
modo dominantur, says Junius. The work of all Church Officers is a Ministerial
work, not only Doctors and Pastors, but Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists were
appointed, (...), For the work of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4.12. 2 Cor. 4.5. Paul
calls himself a fellow servants with Epaphras, Col. 1.7. with Tychicus, Col.
4.7. Paul's dignity consisted not in Lording over other Ministers, but in
laboring more abundantly than others; the Apostles claimed no Mastery, or
stated jurisdiction over other Ministers, but they did draw with them as
yoke-fellows, and fought with them in their Spiritual warfare, as fellow
Soldiers, and wrought with them as fellow laborers, Phil. 4.3. Phil. 2.25.
Phil. 2. Romans 16.3. they engrossed not the power of Jurisdiction in the Synod
of Jerusalem to themselves, for the Presbyters judged with them, the Decrees of
the Council, Act. 16.4. were Ordained by the Apostles and Elders, (...). The
Church at Antioch sends Paul to Jerusalem, Act. 15. the Officers of the Church
at Antioch lay hands on Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13.1, 2, 3. Paul and Barnabas
are sent with a Collection, Act. 11.29, 30. the Apostles claimed no negative in
Presbyteries or Synods, in Ordination, Excommunication, etc.

The Apostles were extraordinary Ambassadors, had infallible instructions by
their Doctrine and practice, did show the Platform of the Church, were not
limited to any fixed charge, and so might exercise their Ministerial authority
in all places where they came; they were to lay the foundations of Churches.
But that they had any such stated Jurisdiction over other Ministers, as
Prelates claim over Presbyters, is yet to be proven, for any thing I know;
their instructing Ministers and Churches in their duty, and reproving their
sins, will not prove it, for the Prophets did so, and yet they had no stated
Jurisdiction over the Priests. Paul reproved Peter, but had not jurisdiction
over him.

That Timothy or Titus had such a stated Jurisdiction over the Ministers of
Ephesus and Creet, is yet to be proven; that they had the sole power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction, and that the Ministers of Ephesus and Creet had no
power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, is not yet proven. The Apostle directs
them to Ordain, but that they are directed to do it alone, and not in
conjunction with other Ministers; is yet to be proven; Lay hands suddenly on no
man, is a Direction applicable to every Minister; there are multitudes of
Directions given them, that cannot be denied to be given to all Ministers; and
that some Directions are given to them, as Prelates, and some as Presbyters, is
as easily denied as affirmed.

But though it were granted, that those extraordinary Officers in founding
Churches at first, might do some things which ordinary Ministers might not do;
this would be no warrant for these two or three, who were but very ordinary
persons, to claim a Jurisdicton over the rest. Whence have they their power? No
man can receive any thing of this nature, except it be given him from Heaven,
Joh. 3.27. Let us see their Patent, that we may know if it be leill come.

They must first show a Warrant from the word for such a Prelatical
Sovereignty, and then let ut see how they came by it; no man should take any
Honor in the Church to himself, at his own hand; he must be called of God, as
was Aaron. If they say, That such a Sovereign Jurisdiction is hot discharged,
and therefore it is lawful. I answer,

1. The Offices and Officers of the House of God, which are in the Scripture,
are positively instituted and constituted of God, 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set,
etc. Ephesians. 4.11. God has given, etc. Romans 12.6, 7, 8. If God has not set
these new Sovereign Judges, Ministers should not stand before them, as Judges;
if God has not given them for Sovereign Judges, we should not receive them;
and if they be not given, their Office is not a gift of Grace. It Is a graceless
thing, and we have nothing to do with it.

2. It Is not enough that an Office which is exercised in the name of another,
be not discharged or forbidden, it must be charged and commanded; if a man
should claim to himself some new Office of Justice, or should intrude himself
into some Office which were settled by Law, would that be a sufficient defense
for him, that such an Office was not discharged, nor he forbidden to take such
an Office? it would be replied, He had no Law nor Command, or Warrant for what
he did: it is not enough to make a man an Ambassador, that he is not discharged
to go Ambassador, he must have a positive Commission.

3. The Lord in forbidding us to add to his word, has discharged to add any
Spiritual Offices to those which he has instituted in the Word; and I see not
how those who take on them to make new Spiritual Offices in the Church, can
hold out new Spiritual work for those new Officers; and so we shall have new
significant Symbols and Sacraments, new worship; when they made the Office of
the Pope, they out out new work for him, to make new Articles of Faith, to
dispense with the Laws of God, etc. or if they do not this, they take somewhat
from the formerly established Officers, and appropriate it to those new ones;
the Presbyters were first bereaved of the power of Ordination, and then of the
power of Jurisdiction, ut aliquid faceret Episcopus, quod non faceret Presbyter.

If they object, That the rest of the Presbyters need not, except they please,
subject themselves to these Ministers; and if they consent to subject
themselves to them, and stand in Judgment before them, and submit their
ministry to their disposal, then they get this Sovereign power by the Ministers
voluntary consent; and then volenti non fit injuria; may not Ministers part
with their power, and put it in the hand of one, or two, or three for unity and
order? I answer,

1. They do as much as they can to necessitate and force the Ministers to
subject themselves to those new Sovereign Judges; for as far as in them lies,
they effectually despise them; and in effect excommunicate them by withdrawing
from them, until they stand in Judgment before their new Lords and Sovereigns,
and come in their will.

2. It Is a great and dangerous error to imagine, that Ministers of the Gospel
may dispose of their ministerial power, as a man may dispose of his money; and
so may either quit all, or give part and retain the rest; retain the power of
preaching, and quit the power of governing, in conjunction with others; for a
Minister has not Dominion over his ministerial Function, as a man has over
his money; but he is obliged to retain all that Authority that the Lord has
given him for edification, and to make full proof of his Ministry, as he will
be answerable to his Master, who will require an account of the Talents he has
given him to occupy with; and therefore suppose the Presbyterian Ministers were
so demented, as to renounce their ministerial Authority, in favor of their new
Judges, this could not make their Sovereign Jurisdiction warrantable, because
this surrender made to them, would be a non habente potestatem; for Ministers
cannot give away their Authority to another, and therefore their new Judges
would still be Usurpers, both in usurping a Dominion which the Lord has not
given to Ministers, and then taking it to themselves without any title.

The next thing in Dr. Gaudens Definition, is the exercise of this Sovereign
power and Spiritual Jurisdiction in the several Acts, as Ordination,
Confirmation, Censures, Rebuking, Silencing, Excommunication, Absolution, etc.
If we may conclude from the practice of these new Prelates, how Sovereign, high
and absolute, they will be in their acts of power, we have some ground to
think, they will outdo any Prelates that have been before them; for they have
really, though not formally deposed and excommunicated the Ministers who differ
from them, before any Process, Trial or hearing granted to these Ministers; and
one of them has very summerly excommunicated the King, the Duke of York, the
Duke of Monmouth, and several Peers and Officers of State. This is pretty high
flown at the first flight, it is but now and then that the Bishop of Rome, the
Pope himself, plays such pranks as these. Ordinary Bishops use to have formal
processes, and they allow Presbyters to have some share in the trial, and
leading of the process against persons to be Excommunicate, and they do not use
to Excommunicate Kings and Princes.

Ambrose the Bishop of Millain was somewhat singular in his censure of
Theodosius the Emperor, in keeping him seven months from entering within the
Church-doors. I grant, says Hornius in his Church History, this censure of
Ambrose is not approved of all; but there are none who can or ought to
disapprove the humility and repentance of Theodosius, who patiently endured the
sharp reproofs of Ambrose, and did give example to the whole Church. But it is
rare to find great ones of Theodosius disposition; there are considerable
difficulties objected against the Excommunication of Supreme Magistrates. And
the fault of Theodosius was so singular; for in his passion at a popular
sedition in Thessalonica, in which the President and some Noblemen were killed,
he sent in Soldiers, who killed seven thousand persons of all ages and sexes,
both guilty and innocent. And then the Emperor was a man so holy, humble and
tender, and Ambrose a Bishop of so great authority, and so venerable and
beloved, that if any ordinary Bishop would attempt to imitate Ambrose in this,
he would readily find that he had mistaken his measures, and would not find
that he had to do with a Theodosius, or that he himself were an Ambrose. But as
this is certain, that the Excommunication of Magistrates, Masters and Parents,
does not make void their Magistratical, Masterly and Paternal authority; so
this is granted, that as it is Church-Judicatories, and not single persons that
should Excommunicate; and Rutherford's Peaceable Plea, Page 5. says, The
Church, not one single man, has the power of Discipline; if one Pastor himself
alone should Excommunicate, the Excommunication were null both in the Court of
Christ, and his Church.
that these Judicatories must not only consider, whether the fault deserve
Excommunication, but also whether they have authority over the person or
persons who are scandalous; and withal, as Mr. Durham upon the Commands says,
they would consider when censures, by reason of some circumstances, prove not
edifying but hurtful to the Church and persons concerned. For, says he, that
which warranteth debarring and censures of all sorts, is edification; and when
that end cannot be gained to a people or person, such censures may be omitted.
-- Or upon the censure would probably miss its end, which is edification, and
would weaken the authority of the Ordinance of Discipline, if not hazard the
liberty of the Gospel; in that case he thinks that exclusion from the Sacrament
by a sentence, may be forborne.

But as for this late Excommunication, judicious sober persons are grieved and
much ashamed to hear of it; and it is matter of sport and derision to others;
and it is more than probable that Jesuits take advantage of the distempers of
weak persons, to drive them under pretext of zeal to such Pope-like pranks, to
make the Popes Excommunications of Princes less odious, and to render
Presbyterians odious to Rulers; but any who will not shut their eyes, may see
that such extravagancies are inconsistent with Presbyterian principles and
practices.

Dr. Gauden adds, That this Sovereign Jurisdiction is without, above, against
Presbyters and people. In all these their new Prelates have the pre-eminency.
For the first it is indeed true, that Prelates need not, if they please, desire
the presence or advice of Presbyters, for they claim the sole authority of
Ordination and Jurisdiction, and the Presbyters have no concurrence in
authoritative acts.

The Author of the seasonable case, speaking of the Bishops nomination of the
Moderators of the Meetings of Exercise, has written, that the Bishop did it
with the Synod; this seemed to give the Synod a concurrence in the nomination
of the Moderators, and therefore all the Printed Copies which I saw were mended
with a Pen, and the with was turned to in, which turned the Synods concurrence
into a mere presence.

A Diocesan Synod, says Mr. William Scot, is only an Episcopal Visitation, and
not a Council properly so called: and cites Bellar. de Council. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Diocesana concilia sunt in quibus convenient tantum Presbyteri unius
Episcop^^us and it is Episcopus praeest, cujus ge^eris paricissima exstant, nec
immerito, nam vix dici possunt concilia, cum in iis nullus sit qui
jurisdictionem habet, praeter unum Episcopum, qui praeest. A Council is,
wherein those who are assembled have every one of them a part of the
joint-power and jurisdiction belonging to that Council, as every Senator has
in the Senate. The comparing of the Act of Glasgow, June 3. 1610, anent
Visitations, with the Act of Parliament relating to it, shows that Diocesan
Synods are Episcopal Visitations; the Bishop summons to them in his own name,
makes the Clerk appoint a Substitute or Vicegerent when he pleases; he only
sententiates, deposes, suspends; if he at any time number votes, and conclude
according to the plurality, that is not done by virtue of the Act of Glasgow,
but by tolerance of the Bishop; who does it to settle himself in possession.
But when they please they will not so much as suffer a matter to come to
voicing and therefore they who cannot come to a Bishops particular Visitation,
when he or his Substitute visits the Kirks of his Diocese severally, which was
wont to be called Visitatio plena, he cannot go to the Diocesan Synod, which is
nothing but a superficial shuffled Visitation, devised to hold in the Bishops
travel in going through the Diocese to make a full Visitation.

But suppose they were Councils, yet they are not fre, for the Bishop by his
negative, whether in the Synod, or out of the Synod, even in a Court inferior
to the Synod, may dash all done in the Synod; yea he may do it by his
Affirmatives in the very Synod, so that the Presbyters are only in the nature
of Counselors. Thus far he.

From which we see the Bishop claims the sole authority, and he might act
without Presbyters if he pleased; yet they use not to act without their
Presbyters; and use to seek their advice and counsel; but their new Prelates do
not desire the advice or presence of Presbyters; the old Prelates are so
discreet, that they suffer the Presbyters to sit beside them as Counselors,
but these new ones do neither admit them to sit or stand as Counselors, but
require them to stand as guilty to be judged. And so Dr. Gauden's definition is
more verified in them than in the former Bishops.

As for the next Clause in the Doctors description, viz. above Presbyters, it
agrees also to their new Prelates; and their superiority over Presbyters, is
the more intolerable, that there is no kind of pretext for it, for they are
designed only Ministers; now a Minister as a Minister to be above Ministers, is
an usurpation the more intolerable that it is not colorable with any pretext,
either Divine or humane. The old Prelates plead a superiority Jure Regio, which
King James they say thought their surest title, and that they had best to hold
them by Jure Jacobi. Some plead from Analogy, that as the high Priest was over
the Priests, so the Bishop may be over the Presbyters. But to let pass the
answer of the Typicalness of the Office of the high Priest, I have not yet seen
any argument to prove that the high Priest had a Sovereign Jurisdiction over
the rest of the Priests; he might do several things which the rest of the
Priests might not do, as some servants have more eminent service in a family,
and yet no masterly or Sovereign power over other servants, who have not so
eminent service allotted to them. They have a pretext also from the Asian
Angels, because there one Angel in the singular number is written to; it is
true, that reason taken from the singular number, to prove that it must needs
be a single person, is no solid argument, especially in a mystical Book, such
as the Revelation is, in which sometimes one is spoken of in the Plural number,
as in the first Chapter, the one Spirit of God is called seven Spirits. The
four Beasts, the four and twenty Elders, are not four individual persons, or
four and twenty single Elders. The seven Angels, Rev. 8.2, 6. and 15.1. are not
to be restricted to seven individual Angels. The Woman clothed with the Sun,
the Whore, the Beast, the Dragon, are names of the singular number, and yet
signify a collection of many Individuals. When the Angel of the Lord is said
to incamp about them who fear the Lord, it is expounded of Angels, because one
Angel cannot be properly said to incamp.

Again, they have a pretext of Superiority, as Bishops over Presbyters. It Is
true, Presbyterians make it evident from Scipture, that Bishop and Presbyter
are one there. And Dr. Hammond to evite the dint of this argument, was forced
to alledg, That all the Presbyters mentioned in the Scripture, were Bishops and
not Ministers; for he saw that he behoved either to lose the Bishop or the
Presbyter in the Bible; for not only are Presbyters called Bishops, but they
are made Bishops by the Holy Ghost; now to say that the Holy Ghost made them
nominally Bishops, but not really Bishops, is very injurious to the work of the
Spirit, as if it were productive only of an empty name. And it takes away the
force of the argument, Feed the flock of God over which the Holy Ghost has
made you Overseers, or Bishops. If they had only the name of Bishops, and not
the Office, the argument would not be cogent; for a mere empty name and title,
does not oblige a man who gets it, to any work. And as Paul says, That the Holy
Ghost made the Elders of the Church of Ephesus Bishops: So the Apostle Peter
exhorts Elders to take inspection to do the work of Bishops, (...). Neither
does the name of Bishop import any primacy of one Minister over others; for the
Apostle John takes the love of pre-eminence or primacy in Diotrephes; but Paul
commends the desire of the Office of a Bishop, which shows that the Office of a
Bishop does not import a primacy.

But though Bishop and Presbyter be one in the Scripture, yet it cannot be
denied, that afterward the name of Bishop began to be appropriate to some
Ministers in eminent Cities, and afterward Ordination, and then Jurisdiction,
was by degrees taken from the Presbyters. It Is true, Presbyterians when they
are urged with these humane stories, and with the holiness of the Ancients, who
were Bishops; they do not deny, but praise the holiness and zeal of these
Ancients, who were Bishops; but neither the holiness of the men, nor the
Ecclesiastic custom will prove the Divine right of the Episcopacy pleaded for.
If any would plead for Polygamy from the holiness of Abraham the Father of the
Faithful, and of Jacob, who as a Prince did prevail with God in weeping, and
making supplication; Or from the long continuance of that Polygamy; the answer
were easy, From the beginning it was not so; God made male and female. So when
they plead that Bishop and Presbyter were distinguished in aftertimes, it is
answered, From the beginning it was not so, God made Bishop and Presbyter one;
man should not have made them two, nor made the one less to make the other
greater than he was by Divine constitution. Yet it cannot be denied that this
is a very plausible pretext, for setting up Bishops above Presbyters. But their
new Prelates have no pretext, nor color imaginable for their Jurisdiction over
Presbyters; for they pretend to no other name but Ministers, and yet they will
Lord it over their fellow Ministers; and thus their Sovereignty is more
intolerable, because it has no kind of color or pretext for it.

The last clause in the Doctors Definition against Presbyters, is pretty
ingenious; for Prelates engross the power that Presbyters should have; Prelacy
rises upon the ruins of Presbyters; yet I suppose the generality of those who
are for Episcopacy, will give the Doctor no thanks for that clause of the
Definition; but it agrees very well with their new Prelates; for at their first
appearance in the world, they stand in a posture of opposition against the
Presbyters of the Church of Scotland; they libel them, they effectually depose
them, if not excommunicate them; nor can they expect to be absolved, till they
make these their Accusers their Judges, and stand in Judgment to be judged by
them; and if we may guess by the Libel which the Judges themselves formed, the
sentence would not be very comfortable.

There is yet another thing which would make them a very dangerous sort of
Prelates, and that is, That they not only engross this Sovereign and Peerless
power over Presbyters, but also (which other Prelates use not to do) they
engross a singularity in Holiness, as if they, and they alone, had followed
God, and were free of Defections, which other Ministers are involved in; and
it is like, this is one of the Foundations of their new Sovereignty, that they
think themselves, though the lesser, yet the sounder part of the ministry. It
puts me in mind of a Countryman, who understood not Latin, who heard some
talking great things that the senior pars Ecclesiae could do; he enquired what
is he, that Sanior? he sems to be some great man? but except they be Judges
themselves, they will not be accounted by men of sound minds, to be the sounder
part of the Church; Nay, Orestes himself would say it, and swear it, That the
contrivance of this Bond was not the work of a man sound in his mind.

Non sani esse homines non sanus juret Orestes. Any may see with half an eye,
that this is not a Presbyterial form of Government; for in Presbytery, the
Plurality carries matters, and the part is ruled by the whole; but here the
part, and a very little considerable part, and a part not in conjunction with
the whole, but that has disjoined it self from the whole, takes upon it to
govern the whole, even as if a little Toe should disjoyn it self from the Body,
and then take upon it to judge the whole Body, and dispose of it at its
pleasure.

It is a wonder, that so few men, so inconsiderable for number and parts, were
not ashamed to think of their sitting and judging so many Ministers; let be to
publish it to the world. As their high Court of Justice would have made strange
havoc of Magistrates, and readily dispatched some Presbyterian Minister for
Loyalty, as Mr. Love was dispatched in England to be a terror to others; so
this Ecclesiastic Judicatory in all appearance, if Ministers had been such
fools as to have owned them, would have made great havoc of Ministers; for a
few weak men, not sound in their Principles, and transported with Passion and
Impatience, and possessed with a Conceit of their singular Purity and Zeal, and
usurping a pre-eminency over the generality of Ministers, and taking on them to
be their Judges, and talking of no less than deposition, before they were in
any capacity to depose, would have made a very Kittle-Court.

It Is a sad spectacle to behold many through ignorance and blinding humors,
running into the same evils which they in words disclaim. They in words
disclaim Independency, and yet really make the people and not Church Officers
to be Rulers and guides to direct Ministers what to preach and do, and to
depose them if they obey not these directions. They who called themselves the
Council of the Army which was broken at Bothwel-Bridge, were highly displeased
with the indulged Ministers, because the secret Council had sent instructions
to them, though the indulged Ministers did not accept of them; and yet these
same persons took upon them to prescribe to those Ministers and Preachers that
were with them, what Doctrine they should preach; which was an encroachment
beyond any thing done by the secret Council.

Some talk of Presbytery and Presbyterian parity, and of their detestation of
Prelacy; and in the mean time, set up Prelacy; it is a great evidence of a
Spirit of giddiness, when people run round, as those who run in a Circle, and
so run to that point from which they once did run.

The Declaration at Sanquair is refuted in the Confutation of the Bonds; and
the truth is, such principles and practices are so absurd and destructive to
all Rule and Government, that they are not worthy of Refutation, and should be
answered with detestation and abhorrence. They conclude that Declaration,
hoping that none will blame them for, or offend at their rewarding those that
are against them, as they have done to them; if they had considered Prove.
20.22. Say not thou, I will recompense evil; but wait on the Lord, and he shall
save thee; and Prove. 24.29. Say not, I will do so to him, as he has done to
me: I will render to the man according to his work. Romans 12.14, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 1 These. 5.15. 1 Pet. 3.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. They might have seen how
groundless and absurd this hope was. The 8 and 9 veses of the 137 Psalm are
wrested, when applied to justify such unchristian Practices; for that
Scripture is a prediction of the prosperous success that the Medes and Persians
should have in destroying Babylon; which is also foretold, Isa. 45.1, 3, 4, 13.
and not a Rule to warrant us to revenge our selves, and to dash out the brains
of Infants. It Is among the delusions of the time, that some know not of what
Spirit they are, and imagine that to be the Zeal of God, which is nothing but
the wrath of man, which works not the Righteousness of God.

It is meet to shut up this sad Subject with humble and earnest Supplications,
That the Lord would humble us in the sight and sense of our sins, which have
procured the dreadful Judgments and Plagues which have come upon this sinful
Generation; That he would convince us of our sins, and make every one sensible
of the Plagues of his own heart, and of the Plagues that are upon the hearts of
others, which are among the most dreadful evidences of the anger of God, that
Magistrates, Ministers, people of all ranks, may take with their sins, and take
shame and confusion of face to themselves, because of their own sins, and the
sins of others.

That he would so turn in mercy and loving kindness, and turn us again, that
our backslidings be not perpetual; and turn the hearts of Rulers and the hearts
of people to himself; and the hearts of Rulers to the people, and the hearts of
people to the Rulers; the hearts of the fathers to the children, and of the
children to the fathers; that Rulers may have the love, kindness, pity and
compassion of fathers toward the people, and may not by rigor and severity
provoke the children to wrath, and may pity those who are distempered by sad
sufferings; and that the Lord would incline their hearts to take speedy course
that the poor people who wander as sheep without shepherds, and who through
their own ignorance, and humors, and distempers, are exposed as a prey to
seducers, to Jesuits, and those who are influenced by them, who drive poor
unstable people (who are destitute of faithful Teachers to discover to them the
devices of Satan, and of his Instruments) into snares and mischievous
practices, and makes them imagine that those paths of the destroyer are the
way to an outgate from their calamities. That the Lord would incline, I say,
their hearts to take speedy course that these poor wandering sheep may be
provided with Pastors after the Lords heart, who may feed them with knowledge
and understanding, with sound doctrine, with the wholesome words of Christ,
that they may not be turned from the truth unto fables, but by the words of the
Lords mouth they may be kept out of the paths of the destroyer, and any who
are entangled through the devices of Satan, and subtle deceivers, may be
recovered in time out of these snares. And that the Lord would incline the
hearts of people to be subject to principalities and powers, and to obey
Magistrates, to fear God, and honor the King, and keep them that they be not
tempted by grievous pressures to cast off the yoke of lawful Authority, but may
possess their souls in patience; and wait on the Lord in the way of his
judgments, who often makes use of lawful Magistrates to punish his people for
their sins; and though the Magistrate may be wrong, yet God is righteous, and
we should be humbled under his hand. It Is a very humbling dispensation, when
Parents and Magistrates are alienate from, and rigid against their children and
subjects; and we should not be chafed and enraged, but humbled under the mighty
hand of God; and carry with that lowliness and meekness, patience and respect
to lawful Authority, that we may commend ourselves to the consciences of all in
the sight of God, that being reviled, we may bless; being persecuted, we may
suffer it; being defamed, we may entreat.

And seeing the Devil is so active to rent the Church, and to ruin it, and to
render the Ministers of the Gospel, and so the Gospel it self, contemptible; we
should, if we can do no more, pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and that the
Lord would let people see the devices of Satan and Seducers, who draw them away
from under the eye of the Shepherd, that they may destroy them; and that he
would convince people, that it is their duty to esteem Ministers very highly in
love for their works sake, and for their Masters sake; for they who despise
them, despise Christ, and the Father who sent Christ.


Farmer. Sir, I think my self much obliged to you for the pains you have taken
for my information; and I ingenuously acknowledge I am by what I have heard,
instructed in many things of which I was ignorant. I shall desire, before we
part, that ye would give me some directions how to order my way in this dark
and dangerous time in which my lot has fallen; it is seldom that I have
occasion to converse with Ministers, which makes me the more desirous to make
the best use of their company I can, when any of them come this way.


Minist. There are many excellent directions in several of these Papers that I
was speaking of before, it were your advantage to have them. I shall only give
you a few.


1. Let that be your earnest study to be in Christ, and to walk in him; to know
him, and to be found in him, having his righteousness; and to be conformed to
him, to walk at he walked. The Apostle Paul counted all things loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ, and to be found in him, etc. and he
traveled as in birth to have Christ formed in the Galatians. It Is to this
fellowship with Christ that God calls us in the Gospel; and then give all
diligence to make your calling and election sure. It Is sad to see several
people who will talk great things of the interests of Christ in the Land, so
ignorant of Christ, and of union with him, and so unconcerned as to their own
interest in Christ, that though they have no assurance of it, and cannot give
one mark of interest in Christ; yet they are not sensible of this, nor
regrating it, nor earnestly seeking in public or private to know him, to be in
him, to know if they be in him, but they are taken up with other things. Christ
is not in their mind, heart, and mouth; they are not speering after him in
their private converse, as the Spouse does in the Song: Saw ye him whom my soul
loves? They are more in seeking to know some useless barren notion, some
jangling debate, than they are in seeking to know Christ and him crucified;
more taken up in apprehending some unedifying empty conceit, than in
apprehending Christ, or seeking to be apprehended by him. Who can think that
they are truly careful about Christ's interests in the Land, who are careless
about their own interest in Christ, and give no diligence to make sure their
calling. If folk were taken up about the one thing necessary, it would take
them off their vain janglings about these things, which tend neither to
edification nor peace. They who are striving to enter in at the strait gate,
and taking the kingdom of heaven by violence, and working out the work of their
salvation with fear and trembling, and giving diligence to make their calling
and election sure, will not find leisure to dote about questions and strifes of
words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, and evil surmisings. That weighty
question, What shall I do to be saved? would take folk off from unedifying
questions, and doubtful disputations.

2. Be much in the exercise of Faith and Repentance; ye must live and walk by
Faith, and be daily searching out your sins, looking into the sink of original
corruption, that loathsome, stinking, corrupt body of Death that is ever
present with you, to hinder you from good, and incline you to evil; and to the
innumerable swarms of actual sins, which compass you about; and ye must be
daily confessing your sins, judging your self, lamenting after the Lord, lying
at the Fountain opened to the house of David, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
coming through the great High Priest Jesus the Son of God, to the Throne of
Grace, to obtain Mercy and find Grace to help in the time of need. These
exercises would hold you doing, and keep you from meddling, as a busie-body, in
things too high for you, and that do not belong to you; and are not within the
compass of your calling: if ye were thus exercised, ye would walk humbly with
God, and humbly with men; ye would be so far from bidding others stand by
themselves, as if ye were holier than they, that in holiness of mind ye would
esteem others better than your selves; and so far from casting at fellowship
with the Lords people in public Ordinances or private worship; that ye would
rather judge your self unworthy of their fellowship; and if ye could do it,
would rather separate from your self than from others, ye would think it a
great mercy and privilege, that the like of you had any access to wait at the
posts of the Lords doors, and any place in his Courts; beware of those who
undervalue the preaching of Faith and Repentance, for this was the Doctrine of
the Prophets, of John the Baptist, who came preaching the Doctrine of
Repentance, and directing his hearers to the Lamb of God, who takes away the
sins of the World. Christ himself preached, that men should repent and believe
the Gospel; and the Apostle Paul taught Repentance toward God, and Faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

Repentance and Faith are as necessary for the beginning and progress of our
motion toward Heaven, as our two legs are necessary for walking; and the
exercise of Faith and Repentance cease not, till all tears be wiped away, and
Faith be turned into sight; to cut off the exercise of Faith and Repentance, is
to cut off the legs of a man, who is fleeing from sin and wrath to the true
City of Refuge. Ye may be sure, that those Teachers who make it their business
to discover to you your sins and diseases, your poverty, nakedness, filthiness,
and direct you to Christ, as the Savior of sinners, as the Physician of souls,
as full of grace and truth, who has fine white Raiment, fine Gold, who is a
fountain opened, who teach you to loath your selves, and to love Christ; to
have no confidence in the flesh, but to rejoice in the Lord Jesus; who teach
you, that you are nothing, and he is all; that you may not glory in your
selves, but in the Lord; you may be assured that they preach the same that
Christ and his Apostles preached; and if you were rightly sensible of your own
sins, and humbled for them; then the consideration of the sins of others, would
not puff you up, but humble you further, Dan. 9.5, 6, 7, 8. Beware of the way
of those who talk of the sins of others, as if they were accusers, leading a
process against others, and commending themselves by condemning others; for
that looks like the strain of the Pharisee in the 18. of Luke The sins of our
Rulers, Ministers, and of persons of all ranks should make us ashamed, Ezr. 9.6.

3. Let the Glory of God, and the enjoying of God, be your chief end, and take
his word, which is contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament,
for the only Rule to direct you how to glorify and enjoy him; deny your self,
beware of self-seeking, self-pleasing, of pleasing your own humors or the
humors of others. Let that be your great design to please God, to be accepted
of him; if you can please others to their edification, become all things to all
for gaining of them; but beware ye displease not God, to please any; make no
man's Testimony, though it were given immediately before his death, the rule of
your Faith or Practice; so long as men are here on earth, they know but in
part, and even good men may err in their judgment and practice in several
things; some are so easily misled, that if a Paper come to their hand, that
pleases them in some opinion that they are addicted to, they take all the rest
of it for unquestionable truth without examination; or if a Preacher be of
their party, they implicitly follow him in any thing he says or does: beware
of listening to Impulses and Revelations, which ye find born in upon you, even
though ye be in a good frame of Spirit when they are cast in; for Satan can
turn himself into an Angel of light, and wait such occasions of suggesting
errors; and he can delude people by suggesting, that such or such a Scripture,
makes for his deluding suggestions. Peter roved even when he was in the Mount,
beholding Christ's Transfiguration, when he moved, that Christ might abide in
the Mount; and after he had given that excellent Confession of Christ, That he
was the Son of God, which not flesh and blood, but the Father had revealed to
him; Satan suggests to him, to dissuade Christ from going to Jerusalem to
suffer, which drew that sharp rebuke from the blessed mouth of Christ, Get thee
behind me Satan.

The Devil can back his suggestions with Scriptures, which he perverts, as we
see he did, when he tempted Christ to cast himself down from the Pinnacle of the
Temple; and therefore there is the more need to search the Scripture, and to
compare Scripture with Scripture, and to consider what goes before, and what
follows in the Scripture; and to know the Analogy of Faith from the
Scriptures that are more clear; and as it is holden forth from the Scriptures
in the Confession of Faith and Catechisms, that ye may not receive any sense of
Scripture which is contrary to the Analogy of Faith, to the Doctrine which is
according to godliness received in the Reformed Churches. Beware of adding to
the word of God, by making these things Duties, which God has not commanded;
or making any thing sinful, which God has not forbidden; there are too many
who will confidently impose their Conceits upon others, and too many who are
easily imposed upon; simple people who believe every word, and are tossed to
and fro with every wind. Study to be well founded in the Scriptures, that with
the Bereans ye may try Doctrines and Practices by the Rule of the holy
Scripture. It Is lamentable, that there is so great ignorance of the Scriptuees;
and many are more in reading other writings than in reading the holy
Scriptures. Walk exactly according to the light which the Lord has given to
you from his word, detain it not in unrighteousness, and beware ye go no
further than the light of the word directs you; for if ye go out of the light,
and be in the dark, ye know not how far ye may wander; they who without
direction from the word, do blindly follow the example of others, and know not
whether it be right or wrong, or take what others do to be right, because such
or such persons does it, they are in an ill taking. Beware ye go not without
the word, walk in the Law of the Lord, in the light of the word, which is a
light to the feet, and a Lamp to the paths.

4. And that ye may be nourished up in the knowledge of the Scriptures of
truth; go to the public Ordinances, forsake not assembling together with the
Lords people, who meet in his name; the Lord has commanded his Ministers to
teach and baptize, etc. and has promised to be with them to the end of the
world, and has promised, That where he records his Name, there he will come
and bless his people; he has appointed Ministers for this end, to feed his
people with the knowledge and understanding of the word, with the sincere Milk
of the word; and therefore if ye would glorify the Name of the Lord, if ye
would have fellowship with God, if you would have his presence and his
Blessing, if ye would know his mind and will revealed in his word, frequent his
Ordinances, beware of those who would draw you away from the Shepherds Tents,
for they draw you away from Christ himself; for it is there that he feeds and
makes his Flocks to rest. Believe not those who say, That he is not to be found
in his own Ordinances; for there he is, and has trysted his people to meet him
there; and he has promised to come there and bless them, whenever they are met
in his name. He is present, he is not to come, when they are met in his Name;
for he is come already; There am I, says he, in the midst of them. The sins of
those who are present at the Lords Ordinances shall not deprive those who, upon
his call, comes to record his Name of his Presence and blessing; for he is
faithful who has promised; and they who come according to his appointment, to
glorify his Name in his own Ordinances, may be assured, that he comes and
blesses them, though it may be, they do not sensibly discern it; and they are
bound to believe it, that he has come and blessed them, because he has said
it.

Beware of those who think they are the best and most tender Christians, who
are readiest to cast Ministers as no Ministers, and Churches as no Churches;
there were many great faults in the Church of Corinth, in several of the
Churches of Asia, and their Angels; and yet Christ himself owns them and their
Angels, as Chuches, and Angels; and we find not that the Lord directs any to
separate from these Churches, or their Assemblies for public worship, because
of those scandalous sins, which were among them. We find, Christ himself
present in the Church of Lacdicea, which was the worst of them, and standing at
their door and knocking. It Is insolent boldness to cast these as no Churches
and Ministers, whom Christ owns; or who condemn going to these Meetings where
Christ himself comes and blesses his people; remember that your great business
in Ordinances, is with the Lord himself; for they are his Ordinances he has
appointed them; the efficacy of them, depends upon his Institution and
Blessing, and not upon the worthiness and intention of Ministers; whoever
absent themselves, ye may be sure he is present whom your soul should seek;
come, because he calls you, and because he comes and blesses his people, where
he causes his Name to be recorded. Learn to hear the Word, not as the word of
man, but as the word of God. Esteem the Ministers of Christ very highly in love
for their works-sake, and for their Masters sake. Beware of the way of those
who cast at the Ordinances if they be not dispensed by Ministers of the most
eminent gifts, or by Ministers who are in all things of their opinion; receive
the Lords message of the hand of any of his Messengers. Beware of idolizing any
Minister; Remember that neither he that planteth, nor he that waters, is any
thing, but God who gives the increase; And beware of undervaluing any of the
Lords Ministers, seeing they are the Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1. In which
Chapter the Apostle disswades the Corinthians who overvalued some, and
undervalued others of their Ministers, from this comparing and rash judging of
Ministers; and among other Arguments uses this, That they judge before the
time; he desires them to let alone that judging till the Lord come, ver. 5. who
knew the counsels of the heart, and the hidden things of darkness.

Neglect not the private exercises of Religion upon the Lords day, but beware
of the way of those who neglect the public Ordinances, though they have the
opportunity of them; these private Meetings which were kept in England in a
separating way from the solemn Assembly, became the Seminaries of error and
heresy; when the sheep leave the shepherds tents, and the green Pastures of
the Lords own Ordinances, what wonder if they wander, and grow sick, and dote
about questions.

5. In your private converse seek for the things which make for peace, and for
mutual edification; beware ye waste not your time in vain janglings, and
unedifying debates which distemper the minds and hearts of those who dote upon
them, and diverts them from edifying purposes. When ye meet with those who are
given to these janglings, if ye can by Scripture and reason reclaim them from
that snare, essay it with meekness of wisdom. If ye find them impatient to be
contradicted, and not capable through passion and prejudice to receive
instruction, then fall upon some good ed^fying purposes, wherein you and they
agree, that whereunto ye have attained, ye may walk according to the same rule.
If you find that they will neither hold off their janglings, (and that is very
ordinary for a spirit of error or schism, to hold people perpetually upon those
things which foster error or division) nor yet receive instruction; your
converse with such is not like to be fruitful; employ others to deal with them,
and be much in praying for them, and be ready to do them any good that they
will admit or accept of.

Beware of wasting your time in speaking ill of absent persons; remember the
words, Tit. 3. To speak evil of no man, etc. Make not that your design to wrong
the fame of any person, as the word imports; hate the way of such whose work it
is to render Ministers and those who differ from them, in any thing hateful,
and to put them out of capacity as far as in them lies to serve the Lord in
their generation and station. Beware of rash determinations of questions which
ye understand not; some people are so rash, that no question is started but
they will presently determine it; and having vented their judgment, they will
not readily retract. Meddle not as a busie-body in other men's matters, and in
things too high for you, which are not within the compass of your calling.
Waste not your precious time, as many people do, in State-intrigues; It belongs
to the Representatives of Nations, and not to private persons, to determine
matters of that nature. What the Representatives of Nations may do for righting
what is wrong in the Government of Nations, is a question which the
Representatives of Nations, and not private persons should move and resolve.
It Is a trick of Satan and seditious Jesuits to divert people from the duties of
their Christian and particular callings, and to break and crack their brains in
over-stretching them to reach things that are above them, and to grasp matters
which they can never comprehend; and though they could understand them, have no
call to meddle with them. And if private persons take the sword which God has
not given to them, to right what they think wrong, by strong hand; And if
private persons take upon them to depose Ministers for real or apprehended
faults, this is the highway to all confusion, to turn State and Church upside
down, and to fill the world with murders and butcheries, to turn it into a
Butcher-house, and to fill the Church with schism, and damnable errors. These
are the methods of the lying and murdering spirit, to make havoc of the souls
and bodies of men.

6. Imitate the example of our Lord Jesus, Ephesians. 5.1. Be followers of God as
dear children, and walk in love as Christ also has loved us. Let all
bitterness and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away
from you, with all malice; and be ye kind one to another, tender hearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. Put on
therefore as the Elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another. If any man have a quarrel against any, even as Christ
forgave you, so also do ye. And above all things put on charity, which is the
bond of perfectness. Love them that hate you. Bless and curse not. Be not
overcome with evil, but overcome evil with good. Learn of Christ to be meek and
lowly in heart, show all meekness to all men. The ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit is of great price in the sight of God. When ye are injured and
persecuted, learn of Christ to be patient, and in your patience possess your
souls. Look above men who wrong you, unto God, who is correcting or trying you,
and be humbled, and patient under the mighty hand of God, fret not at the
prosperity of those who for a while bring evil devices to pass, but trust in
the Lord, and be doing good. And delight thy self in the Lord: Commit your way
to him: Wait on the Lord, and in well-doing commit your self to him as to a
faithful Creator. Take heed to your spirit, beware that ye be not deluded by
Satan, and brought to imagine, that wrathful revenge is zeal. Who is a wise
man, and endued with knowledge among you? let him show out of a good
conversation his works with meekness of wisdom; hut if ye have bitter envying
and strife in your hearts, glory not, and be not against the truth. This wisdom
descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish; for where envying
and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work. But the wisdom that is
from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated,
full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy. And
the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace. The Spirit
of Christ opposes that spirit which lusts to envy and revenge. When James
and John would have been at fire from Heaven to consume the Samaritans, Christ
turned and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of,
for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. Let
that be your constant design and endeavor to express the praises, the virtues
of Christ in resembling him in loveliness, in love, in bowels and mercies, in
humility, lowliness of heart, in self-denial, in gentleness, meekness,
patience, long-suffering, forbearance, forgiveness; that the same mind may be
in you that was in Christ Jesus; that ye may be in the world as he was in the
world; that ye may walk in his steps; that ye may be conformed to the Image of
the Son of God, and Christ formed in you. He countenanced the Ordinances, he
heard John, was baptized of him, when the people were baptized; he was
Circumcised, he Prayed, Preached, and eated the Passover, when Judas the
Traitor was present; he directed the Lepers whom he cured to show themselves to
the Priest; he was subject to Joseph and his Mother; he paid tribut to Caesar,
and directed others to do so.

It adorns the Doctrine of God, when those who profess it, are dutiful in their
several places and Stations; when they join Righteousness with Religion, when
they fear God and honor the King, when they are subject to Magistrates out of
a principle of Conscience, when they are obedient Children, faithful servants,
doing their work heartily, as to the Lord. And when it is other ways, the name
of God is blasphemed, and the way of God is evil spoken of.

7. Beware of the first beginnings of sinful courses, beware left any root of
bitterness spring up; if ye give way to the first motions of evil, they will
increase to more ungodliness; if the desire after the sincere milk of the word
begin to languish, if ye look not to it in time, ye may come to an
indifferency, whether you hear the word or not, and that may increase to a
loathing and lightlying of the word, and that may increase to a contempt of the
Preaching of the word, and then God in his righteous judgment may leave you to
be plagued with Papers and Pamphlets, and Teachers after your own lusts, which
will foster you in the contempt of the Ordinances; and make you imagine, that
it is tenderness and zeal, and a testimony, to despise the Lords Ordinances; and
so far delude you as to make you imagine that profanity is Religion. If you let
that honor and respect which by the command of God is due to Magistrates
decay, you may come next to despise them, and curse them in your heart and
thought, and then mutter out these revilings in private, and then vent them
openly, and from virulent words come to open violence, to design and endeavor
to turn them out of their places, and murder them, and then be plagued with
Papers and Doctrines, deluding you to that height as to bring you to think that
this fury is the zeal of God. If ye lose the esteem, and love that ye should
have to the Ministers of Christ, ye may come by degrees to despise them, and
revile them, and to think it good service to God to make their Ministry useless
and contemptible; yea, ye may come to that, to think it good service to God to
kill his servants; and in the righteous judgment of God, you may be left to the
delusions of Satan, to imagine that these abominations make you holier than
others; tremble at the deceitfulness of the desperately wicked heart of man,
and at the dreadful but holy judgments of God, who gives over the backslider in
heart to be filled with his own ways, and plagues those who receive not the
truth in love; and who harbors and entertains lusts contrary to the word of
God with strong delusions, and with deluding Teachers, who tickle the itching
ears of those who after their lusts heap up Teachers to themselves, with
Doctrines which are suitable to their lusts.

8. That you may see the mischief of error and schism, and be guarded against
it, Read Mr. Durham's excellent Treatise of Scandal, and the Preface prefixed
by Mr. Robert Blair, that eminent Servant of the Lord, in whom holiness,
learning, wisdom, prudence, zeal, experience, Ministerial authority, and
gravity, were contemperate in an eminent degree; in the end of that Preface he
says, (...) much longer the Reader from the Treatise it self, having added
these few considerations for heart-uniting in the Lord, which of all other, I
conceive, ought to be most weighty in the judgment, and on the affections of
all the lovers of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. From Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16, 17. the
great peacemaker in offering up himself in a sacrifice for the sins of the
Elect, intended with the reconciling of them to God, to unite them in one body
among themselves; yea even those who were at furthest distance, and greatest
enmity, Jew and Gentile, and consequently other his Elect, in their several
differences and divisions throughout their generations. He took on him the debt
of their sins and enmities, and l^f^ed up with himself these on his Cross,
representatively, virtually, and meritoriously to exp^^te them in his flesh,
and by his Spirit efficiently to slay and abolish them in due time by making
them one (...) in himself Mark, I pray, from that Scr^^^^re cited, that this
complex business is the great (...) of our blessed and great peacemaker.
(...), 2ly, in the Sacrifice-feast of his Supper, this is still represented and
exhibited, till he come again. So that this standing Ordinance destinated and
appointed of God, to carry on and seal up uniting with God, and one with
another till he come again; at his coming will stand up and testify against
all who comply not with Christ, but following their own inclination, act rather
against his design. And, 3ly, in his solemn prayer, Joh. 17. which is a
Specimen of his future Intercession, he mainly presses after the Salvation and
Sanctification of those that are given him, v. 21. That they also may be one,
as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one in us, that
the world may believe that thou have sent me. Do not these words significantly
and shiningly hold out what the Mediator is still about, and that uniting in
God is his design still? And, 4ly, upon the same very ground the great Apostle
speaking to Jews and Gentiles, who had embraced the Gospel, and in them to all
dissentients who love the Gospel Truths and Ordinances, says, Romans 15.7.
Wherefore receive ye one another as Christ also received us to the glory of
God. Meritoriously and virtually, the Elect are received to the glory of God.
And to the end they may be actually received, Receive one another, says the
Apostle; as it were suspending the one upon the other. And now upon these
grounds Christ our Lord, his grand design being so conspicuous, his
Supper-Ordinance standing as a landmark in the way, having this engraven upon
it, Union, Communion, the Glorious Mediator, his Intercession, running in the
same channel, and the blessed Apostle making ^his the upshot of his Doctrine,
what lover of our Lord, well advised and recollecting himself, dare stiffly
stand out from complying with him to satisfy their own inclination, and
habituated custom and carriage. My fear is, that every one of us will look to
some others, rather than themselves, as obstructing the desired uniting in the
Lord. But upon mature after-thoughts, it will be found the mind of Christ, that
we narrowly search our selves, every one of us, how we have provoked the Holy
One to smite us so in his displeasure, and accurately to try what yet remains
in us obstructive to this union; and withal to flee to our slighted duty, as in
a city they run to the quenching of a public burning, laying this evil to
heart more than Sword or Pestilence. All the writings and actings against
Presbyterian Government, which is the wall of the house of God, have never
wronged or hurt it so much as our ill-raised and worse continued contests. Our
nakedness-discovering writings, what have they done but added oil to the flame?
For Christ's sake, my reverend and dear Brethren, hearken to this word in season
from the Oracles of God, and treasures of pure antiquity, pointing out the way
of a godly and edifying peace. It will be no grief of heart, but sweet peace
and consolation, when we are to appear before the Judge of the quick and the
deed. Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be like-minded one
toward another, according to Christ Jesus. So heartily prays your Brother
and fellow-^ervant, ROBERT BLAIR.

Thus far Reverend Mr. Blair, who was both a Son of Thunder and a Son of Peace,
a Peace maker. O with what authority and seriousne^s did I hear him press
unity, in Preaching before a Synod from these words, Phil. 2.1. If there be
therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy that ye be like
minded; having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. And I heard him
say upon Preaching before a general Assembly, That he could be content to be
carried from the place in which he was Preaching, to his grave, to have the
rent that then was in the Church cured. Ignorant and rash youths, who have not
experience, and consider not what an abominable sin Schism is, and what are the
mischievous consequences of it, and how it ordinarily ends in the ruin and
desolation of a Church, they know little what they are doing, when they are
blowing up the fire of contention; and it is a sport to some to cast such
firebrarnds. But they who have Heavenly wisdom, see that that sporting is
mischievous madness, and that it will be bitter in the latter end. It is not
for naught that the Spirit of God directed the Apost. Paul in writing to the
Church of the Corinthians, in which there were many things wrong, to fall first
upon the ill of divisions, 1 Cor. 1.10. and when he is shutting up that
Epistle, he exhorts, that all these things be done with charity, and to greet
one another with an holy kiss. And when he is shutting up the 2 Epist. he
concludes, Finally, Brethren, farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of
one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. Greet
one another with an holy kiss. So thus he begins and ends with this unity and
peace.

9. And because no speaking nor reasoning will prevail against the working of a
spirit of error and schism, without the effectual working of the pirit of the
Lord, let us humbly and earnestly pray, that the Lord would have mercy upon us,
and for his Sons sake who came to destroy the works of the Devil, pour upon us
the spirit of grace and of supplications, the spirit of faith and repentance,
that we may look on him whom we have pierced, and mourn; the spirit of a sound
mind, the spirit of love and peace. And that every one, Magistrates, Ministers
and people, may be made sensible of their own sins. We should pray that the
Lord would send his Spirit, that convinces the world of sin, to let us see our
sins, and to let us see them written in our judgments, that we may accept of
the punishment of our sins, and justify the Lord when he judges. The Lord
often writes the sins of men in so great and legible letters in their
judgments, that they who run may read them. David despised the Lord, and
occasioned the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, by his adultery and murder;
incestuous filthiness breaks out in his house, the sword departs not from his
house, his people despise him, and follow Absalom. Shimei, an exasperate
Benjamite, is let loose upon him, to revile and curse him, and cast stones at
him; he disowns him as no King, gives him no title of honor, but only calls
him a man, and which was worse, a bloody man, a man of Belial: and does not
cry, and then flee; but goes along in the sight and hearing of the King,
Courtiers, and Soldiers, cursing and casting stones and dust. David sees, that
though Shimei did this contrary to the Law of God, which says, Thou shall not
revile the Gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people; Yet that he did it not
without the overruling Providence of God; he saw that the Lord had let Shimei
loose upon him, and is humbled under the hand of God. Uzziah will needs go to
the Temple, and exercise the Priests Office, and the Lord by Leprosy cuts him
off from the House of the Lord, and from the exercise of his Kingly Office.
When the Priests did not impartially apply the Law of God to reclaim the people
from their sins, no doubt they thought thus to keep in with the people; but
this brought them to be base and contemptible before all the people, Mal. 2.9.
The Jews that remained in the land, after the ruin of the Temple, though they
had but one Prophet, yet they despise him, they will not hear the word which
Jeremiah spoke in the name of the Lord, but they would do what went out of
their own mouth; and therefore the Lord leaves them to live like Pagans, and
swears by his great name, that his name should not be named any more in their
mouths; they should not have so much as the form and profession of the worship
of the true God, Jer. 44.16, 26. they would not be reproved by Ezekiel. chapter 3.26.
and they are plagued with the want of a reprover. When people will reject the
counsel of the Lord, and will not hearken to his voice, nor take his gracious
offer made in the Gospel; when they will not endure sound Doctrine, nor desire
the sincere milk of the word, nor receive the truth in love, the Lord justly
gives them up to their own hearts lusts, to walk in their own counsels, to
strong delusions, to believe lies, to be tossed to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine, to turn aside to fables. When they despise his servants, and will not
receive his m^ssengers, and their message, and count them enemies for telling
the truth, the Lord removes his servants from them, and leaves them to be
deluded with teachers, which are after their own humors and lusts. When people
refuse to hear the Lords words, and walk after the imaginations of their own
heart, Jer. 13.10. the Lord fills them with drunkenness, that they destroy one
another like drunken men, who know not what they are doing, v. 13. Behold, I
will fill all the Inhabitants of this Land, even the Kings that sit upon David's
Throne, and the Priests, and the Prophets, and all the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, with drunkenness. And I will dash them one against another, even the
Fathers and the Sons together, says the Lord: I will not pity, nor spare, nor
have mercy, but destroy them. Hear ye, and give car; be not proud, for the Lord
has spoken. Give glory to the Lord your God before he cause darkness, and
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while ye look for light,
he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness.

When folk will follow their own imaginations, and will not walk in the light
of the word of God, the Lord fills them with drunkenness, and leaves them to
dash upon one another, and destroy one another like drunken men fighting in the
dark. But neither words nor rods will be rightly understood or laid to heart,
till the Spirit be poured from on high. If the Lord would pour out his Spirit,
we would not only be brought to see our sins, but to be ashamed of them, to
take shame and confusion of face to our selves; we would sorrow and mourn, and
lament after the Lord; we would turn from our sins to the Lord, and join our
selves to the Lord, and we would join together in seeking the Lord in his
Ordinances; then the Wilderness would be a fruitful field, the dead and
scattered bones would be joined together and live; then Judah and Israel would
be one stick in the hand of the Lord, Ezekiel. 37. Then the Children of Israel and
Judah would come together, going, and weeping, seeking the Lord their God,
asking the way to Sion with their faces thitherward, saying, Come and let us
join our selves unto the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be
forgotten, Jer. 50.4, 5. When the Spirit is poured out from on high upon his
people, then the Lord turns to them a pure Language, that they may call upon
the Name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent; then they turn humble
Suplicants, and pour out their hearts in groans and sighs that cannot be
uttered; then Pride and Haughtiness is taken away, and people become poor in
Spirit, and have no confidence in the flesh, but trust in the Lord, and rejoice
in the Lord Jesus, Zeph. 3.9, 10, 11, 12. Romans 8.26, 27. Phil. 3.3. Till the
Lord come, till he return with mercy and loving kindness, and turn us again,
and cause his face to shine, and see our ways, and heal us, we will but wax
worse and worse; there is no remedy for us, but in his Sovereign Gracc, and
those mercies that have been of old, and endure for ever. Let us look to him
who is exalted to give Repentance to Israel, and Remission of sins; that he
would turn us, that we may be turned, and heal our backslidings, and heal our
breaches, that he may utter that quickening word, Ezekiel. 37.9. Come from the four
winds, O breath, and breath upon these slain, that they may live; O Lord come,
and overcome our evil with thy goodness; for who is a God like unto thee, that
pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the Remnant of thy
heritage, and retains not anger for ever; because thou delights in mercy, who
will turn again, and will have compassion upon us; he will subdue our
iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins in the depth of the Sea; thou will perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which thou have
sworn to our Fathers from the days of old, Micha 7.18, 19, 20. We have not
remembered our Covenant, but have spoken words falsely, in making a Covenant.
Nevertheless, O Lord, remember thy Covenant, and establish to us an everlasting
Covenant, that we may remember our ways, and be ashamed. Establish thy Covenant
with us, that we may know that thou art the Lord, that we may remember and be
confounded, and never open our mouth any more, because of our shame, when thou
art pacified toward us for all that we have done. O Lord, Righteousness belongs
to thee, but unto us confusion of faces, as it is this day to all of us; to our
Kings, Princes, Fathers, Ministers, people of all ranks, belongs Confusion; but
to the Lord our God belongs mercies and forgiveness, though we have sinned
against him. Lord, give us Repentance, and turn us, and we shall be turned. Let
thy power be great, according as thou have spoken, saying, The Lord is
long-suffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and transgression. Lord,
humble our uncircumcised hearts, that we may take with our sins, and accept of
the punishment of them, that we may remember them with shame and sorrow; but do
not thou remember against us former iniquities, but according to thy mercy
remember us, for thy goodness sake. O Lord, remember for us thy Covenant, and
repent according to the multitude of thy mercies, and for thy names-sake pardon
our iniquities, for they are many and great. And when Wisdom, and Council, and
Strength, when Light and Life is gone, and when Unity is gone, when there is
none to help, and none of the Sons of Zion to take her by the hand in her
distress, when there is none to make up the breach, no Intercessor, let thine
own arm bring salvation. When all earthly Glory is stained, blasted and gone,
appear in thine own Glory, in the glory of thy wisdom, power, and Sovereign
grace, in building Sion, build the house, and bear the glory; that when thou
have done the work by thy Spirit, grace, grace may be glorified, and that this
may be written for the Generations to come, that the people which shall be
created, may praise the Lord. We do not present our Supplications before thee
for our righteousness, for we are all as an unclean thing, and our
righteousness as filthy rags; but for thy great mercy, O Lord, hear, O Lord
forgive, O Lord hearken, and do; defer not for thy own sake, O our God! for
this people are called by thy Name. O Lord, the hope of Israel, the Savior
thereof in the time of trouble, though our iniquities testify against us do
for thy name sake, if thou mark our iniquity, we cannot stand, but there is
forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared; there is mercy with thee, and
plenteous redemption; and thou redeemest Israel from all his iniquities and
troubles. O remember not against us former iniquities; let thy tender mercies
speedily prevent us, for we are brought very low; help us, O God of our
Salvation, for the Glory of thy name; and deliver, and purge away our sins for
thy name sake, save this people, bless thy Inheritance, feed them also, and
lift them up for ever. Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us to give thanks
unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise. Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel from everlasting to everlasting; and let all the people say Amen. Praise
ye the Lord. Unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be
Honor and Glory for ever and and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

