A PRESENT For such as have been SICK and are RECOVERED;

Or a DISCOURSE concerning The GOOD which comes out OF THE EVIL of AFFLICTION.

Being several Sermons, Preached after his being raised from a Bed of
Languishing.

By Nathanael Vincent, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

Psalm. 119. 75. I know O Lord that thy Judgments are right, and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me. (...).

(...).

Metrodor. London, Printed by T. S. for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three
Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers-Chappel, 1693.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY. To his Honored Elder, and only Brother, Mr. John
Vincent of North-hill in the County of Cornwall.
Dear Brother!
THough you affect to lead a retired Life -- Procul negotiis -- Ut Prisca Gens
mortalium: Yet I presume this Dedication will not be unacceptable to you; since
it signifies my Recovery from those Distempers, which I thought would have left
you without a Brother in the World. Many indeed were concerned for me; Desired
and Prayed, that I might be spared and restored; I wish my Pains may be blesst
and beneficial to them; according to their Hopes and Expectations. They are
thankful to God, that they still enjoy my Labors; and I know the restoring of
my Health, will be matter of your Thanksgiving, who are so full of Brotherly
Affection. It Is Pity a Man of your Learning, Parts, and Prudence, has not
appeared in a more Public Station. You might have been a more Common Good,
more your Countries Ornament and Benefactour, if your excess of Modesty had not
cast a Veil over your great Abilities. I take it for granted, that as you have
done, so you will still adhere to His Opinion who said -- Been qui latuit, been
vixit -- And may you much enjoy your self, My Dear Brother! and which is
infinitely better; may you enjoy much of God in your Beloved ^olitude! May that
small Company, which have the Happiness of your Acquaintance; be directed by
your Advice, when they need it; and bettered by your Example! And may all the
Gentry in my Native Country of Cornwall, look upon all Debauchery and
Wickedness, as Brutish; and as much below them; as you do! I wish the Sword of
Justice were in your hand; if it were; I persuade my self, that the Profane who
deserve it; woul feel the Edge of it; and your unblemisht Life falling under
greater Observation, would make those, that are otherwise, ashamed of the Spots
wherewith their Lives are stained.

I know you are not a Stranger to Afflictions of diverse kinds; This Book which
I here Present you with; is not improper for your Perusal. It Is my Desire that
no good thing may be withheld from You or Yours; and that all Evils by their
Sanctification to you, may have their Nature quite altered, and work together
for your good! May Divine Grace be sufficient for you; till you are brought
safe to the Heavenly Glory and Kingdom! There are the best wishes for you that
can be; and are the constant, daily ones of

Your most Affectionate Brother, and humble Servant for Christ's Sake. Nathanael
Vincent.

TO THE READERS, Especially those who attend upon my Ministry.
AFfliction is an Argument much Discoursed of, and the thing it self is
commonly felt, for Man is born unto trouble as the Sparks fly upward: And yet
how few know how to improve Affliction so as to be indeed the better for it!
Judgments, though dreadful ones, have little amended this Present Age. Rods
have been spent in vain; for men have received no Correction. Sin is an
inveterate and stubborn malady hard to be cured; the League between the Heart
and its beloved Lusts is not easily broken. Sinners are inexcusable in not
hearing when God speaks to them; but when he smites them, and yet they are as
if they were without Sense; how void do they show themselves both of Grace and
Reason! Affliction in this World, is in Order to amendment; and so to prevent
future Sorrows and Wrath in the next; And Happy those who turn to Him that
smites them; and are afraid of feeling the uttermost of Sin's desert and God's
displeasure! But they who will not be purged in the Furnace of Affliction now;
but hold fast Deceit and refuse to return from their evil and destructive Ways;
shall be thrown at last, into the flaming Furnace of Hellfire, whose heat will
never end or abate; and unalterable Confirmation in Wickedness, will be a great
part of their Eternal Misery.

The Word of God commands that the Rod should be heard; and how feelingly does
it teach? and how dull and stupid are they who will not learn the Lessons of
it! The design of this Treatise is to make Affliction beneficial to them that
labor under it; that they may not endure a great deal of Sickness, Pain, and
trouble to no purpose. Corporal Distempers are Spiritual Physic; and this Book
shows what the Regimen Government is; which they should be under that use it;
that it may work well, and conduce to the soundness of the Mind, and the Souls
Healthiness.

Now the Prosperity and Health of the Soul is beyond all Conception valuable.
Where this Health is; how clear is the Judgment! how Pure the Conscience! How
Conformable the Will unto the Will and Law of God which is so Holy, Just and
Good! How rightly are the Affections placed! Sin being most hated which is
really most hateful! and the Lord being loved above all, who is most worthy to
be loved! Such an Healthy Soul has a good Appetite unto spiritual Food, is
strong to walk with God and to work hard for God, it is strong to resist
Temptations to Evil, and to maintain the Combat with spiritual Enemies, and to
bear Persecution for the sake of Righteousness. Finally, an Healthy Soul is
strong through Faith, Fear, Love, and Patience; to persevere in well-doing till
Glory, Honor, Life, and Immortality are attained.

Such Healthy Souls, I wish all afflicted Ones: and that the following
Instructions, and Counsels may have a mighty Influence and Efficacy this way! I
my Self of late have again and again drunk of the bitter Cup of Affliction. I
desire and hope to Experience more and more the Medicinal Virtue of it! And
much good may this Cup do to all that have it put into their hands!

The Text I handle was the first I preached upon, after I come out of a
Sickbed into the Pulpit. My design in Publishing these Sermons, is that the
Hearts of the Afflicted may be steadfast with God, after he has thrown the Rod
out of his Hand; and that the Rod may bring forth more lasting Fruits of
Righteousness!

N. V.

These Books written by the Reverend Author, are sold by Tho. Parkhurst at the
Bible and ^hree Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel.
Worthy Walking: Pressed upon all that have (...) Call of the Gospel: From
Ephesians. 4. 1. I therefore the Prisoner of the Lord beseech you, that ye walk
worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called.

The Spirit of Prayer: Or, a Discourse, wherein the Nature of Prayer is opened,
the Kinds of Prayer are handled, and the right manner of Praying discovered:
Several Cases about this Duty are Resolved: From Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always
with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, etc. Unto which is added, a
Direction for the Attaining the Gift of Prayer: That Family-Duty may not be
omitted, nor Secret Duty discouraged through Inability of Utterance and
Expression.

A Heaven or Hell upon Earth: Or, a Discourse concerning Conscience; on Acts
24. 16. Herein do I exercise my self to have a Conscience, etc.

The True Touchstone; which shows both Grace and Nature: Or, a Discourse
concerning Self-Examination, by which both Saints and Sinners may come to know
themselves. Whereunto are added sundry Meditations relating to the Lords Supper.

The more Excellent Way to Edify the Church of Christ: Or, a Discourse
concerning Love: The Design of which is to Revive that Grace (now under such
decays) among Protestants of ALL Persuasions.

The Conversion of the Soul: Or, a Discourse Explaining the Nature of that
Conversion which is sincere; and Directing and Persuading all to cease their
Loving Sin and Death, and to Turn to God and Live.

A Warning given to Sinners to prepare for Judgment, to flee from Wrath to
come, and turn from All Sin; but especially the Sin which does most easily
beset them.

The Little Child's Catechism: In which the Principles of the Christian Religion
are in plain Words and short Answers laid down, and suited to the Memories and
Understandings of Little Children. Whereunto are added several short Histories,
which may both please and profit them, as also Directions how to Pray.

The Principles of the Doctrine of Christ: Or, a Catechism, in which is
contained the Sum of the Christian Religion; or what is necessary to be
believed and done in order to Salvation. The Answers being but Seventeen in
number; and in very plain words, easy to be understood. Unto which is added, a
Catechism for Conscience; wherein the Consciences of the Ignorant, the grossly
Profane, the Young, the merely Mortal, and the Hypocrites, are examined, in
order to their Instruction and Awakening; and the Consciences of the sincere
Christians are tried in order to their Peace and Comfort.

The Saints Triumph over the Last Enemy: In a Sermon Preached at the Funeral of
that Zealous and Painful Minister of Christ, Mr. James Janeway. Unto which is
added, His Character. His sore Conflict before he died: And afterward, His
Triumphant manner of departing from Earth, to the Heavenly Inheritance. On 1
Cor. 15. 55. O Death, where is thy sting? --

Isreal's Lamentation at the Death of a Prophet. In a Sermon Preached at the
Funeral of that Holy, Learned, and Painful Minister of Christ, Mr. Thomas
Cawton. And now published at the earnest Desire of the Hearers. On 1 Samuel 25.
1, And Samuel died, and all the Israelites were gathered together, and lamented
him. --

A Funeral Sermon: Occasioned by the Death of Mr. George Baker. First Preached,
and then Published, at the earnest Desire of his Relations. On 1 (...) 1. 17.
-- Pass the Time of your Sojourning ^^re in Fear.

The Great Change: Discoursed of in a Funeral Sermon, occasioned by the Death
of Mrs. Martha Thompson, late Wife of Captain William Thompson in Wapping. On
Job 14. 14. -- All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change
come.

The Good of Affliction.
Psalm 119. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted; that I might
learn thy Statutes.
THough I appear not in the face of this Assembly as One risen from the dead,
yet as One raised from the very brink of the Grave, and am again sent to Preach
the Word of Life, the Gospel of Salvation. Since I was last in this place, I
have been brought very near to another World; and when I had a clearer view of
it, I found that God was All; and that all this World was nothing, less than
nothing and vanity. When Sickness lies heavy, and the last Enemy Death, seems
entering in at the door; believe me, then it appears that Divine Favor is
better than Life; the succors of our merciful and faithful High Priest the
Lord Jesus; the supports of his Grace; and that Peace of God which passes all
understanding; are things of real and of the highest value. I did not know but
that my Work and Life might be just ending; but that I might quickly be in that
place, where I should see Man no more; nor Preach any more the Word of
Reconciliation. But behold! in Answer to the prayers of many, health is
restored; and my Sickness will prove good both to me and you, if I am more
sincere in the exercise of; and you are more serious in your attendance upon my
Ministry.

I have been Once and again brought back from the gates of Death; my obligation
is increased to live more to God; and to endeavor to do more good to the Souls
of men. I wish these ends of my life, toward the conclusion of it, may be
attained more than ever. The dealings of God with me of late have been very
remarkable; I desire aright to regard the operation of his hands; and wisely to
consider of his doings. He has come into my house with a Rod in his hand; and
to one Member of my Family he gave a deadly blow; and others he has struck
down; though not quite; yet near to the Grave. I my self have been of late
twice seized with a Death threatening Malady; and am here before you all to
accept the punishment of my iniquity; whereby infinitely worse has been
deserved, than what I have undergone: I kiss the Rod for the needful healing
strokes of it, which I have felt; and great reason I have to proclaim my
Chastizers faithfulness and love; and how good it is for me that I have been
afflicted.

In the words which I have read; these particulars are observable.

1. Here is an Exercise sharp and sore to Nature; and which will put Grace upon
the Trial, and prove the truth and strength of it; and this Exercise is
Affliction.

2. The Person thus exercised is the Psalmist, who was both Saint and Preacher.
Saints are afflicted, that they may be more thoroughly sanctified: Preachers are
afflicted, that they may Preach and labor to better purpose.

3. From whom came the Psalmists Affliction? the Rod which he felt was in God's
hand: To Him he speaks in the Text; being sensible he had to do with God; and
God had to do with him. Rods, though of sins meriting; are of God's making: All
bitter Cups, are of God's own mingling: the kind, the measure, the continuance
of Affliction is of the Lord's own appointment.

4. The Issue of Affliction follows; it issued well in the Psalmists truest
good; it made him really better than he was before; therefore good for him
indeed: It was medicinal to his Soul; the inward man was more renewed; heart
and life both very much amended.

5. Here is a demonstration; that Affliction was thus beneficial to him;
because in the School of Affliction he learnt God's Statutes better; he learned
to prize them; for in the following verse, he preferred them before thousands
of gold and silver: And thus looking upon them as an invaluable Treasure, here
is an intimation that he kept them, with a conscientious and affectionate care
and diligence.

I raise two Doctrines from the words.

The one is, That Saints are afflicted for their good.

The other is, That the Rod of God is a means to make his Word to be the better
learned.

Doct. I. I begin with the first of these Doctrines; That Saints are afflicted
for their good; they are the better and happier for being chastened; Job 5. 17.
Behold, happy is the man whom God corrects; therefore despise not thou the
chastening of the Almighty. Chastening is despised, if it be looked upon only as
a misery; which has so great a tendency to promote our happiness; Jam. 5. 11.
Behold we count them happy which endure: Ye have heard of the patience of Job,
and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender
mercy. Both these passages have Behold prefixed to them; they seem Paradoxes to
carnal reason; but if the Eye of the Understanding be opened to look into the
matter, it will be perceived that Affliction and Happiness are not disparata,
which never meet in the same subject; the Saints are the more blessed the more
they are corrected! That passage may be called a Threatening, because Affliction
is a punishment of Iniquity; and also a Promise, because Correction ends in
Amendment; Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32, 33. If his Childrrn forsake my Law, and walk
not in my Judgments; If they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments;
then will I visit their Transgression with a Rod, and their Iniquity with
Stripes: Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor
suffer my faithfulness to fail.

In the handling of this Doctrine I shall,

First, Demonstrate the Truth of it by several Arguments.

Secondly, I shall specify what that good is which accrews to the Saints by
Affliction.

Thirdly, Conclude with the Application.

In the first place I am to demonstrate that Saints are afflicted for their
good.

The Arguments demonstrating this, are these.

1. Afflictions are of God's own sending, whose goodness is manifested in the
sending of them. The Afflictions which the Saints feel, are ordered in Heaven
for them. Job regards not so much the malice of Satan, nor the injustice and
violence of Man, in that sore Calamity which so suddenly fell upon him; but his
Eye looks as high as God in it; Job 1. 21. The Lord has taken away; blessed be
the Name of the Lord! Well may he be blessed; for the Lord ceases not to be
good to his People when he takes a Rod into his hand to beat them. Afflictions
in Scripture are compared to Waters; and these Waters come out of Paradise, and
savor of it. Give me leave to search the Springs of these Waters, and trace
them to the Fountain head; and upon due search it will be found that they flow
from the truest love, the wisest care, the greatest faithfulness.

1. The Saints Afflictions flow from the truest love; Heb. 12. 6. Whom the Lord
loves, he chastens; and scourges every Son whom he receives. Now Tokens of
Love, are to be reckoned among the good things, not the evil. The Lord chastens
his Children whom he delights in; that he may make them more lovely; and his
delight in them may be the greater. Indeed in Nature it is otherwise; The same
Fountain cannot at the same place send forth sweet Water and bitter; Jam. 3.
11. Yet certain it is, that all the sweetnesses, and bitternesses of a
Christian, come from one and the same Fountain, the Everlasting Love of God in
Christ Jesus.

2. The Saints Afflictions flow from the wisest care. God cares for his People,
and bids them cast all their care upon him; 1 Pet. 5. 7. Casting all your care
upon him, for he cares for you. When Nebuchadnezzar's countenance was full of
rage; and the three Children were threatened with a fiery Furnace seven times
heated; they were confident of God's care; and had said and stood to it; We are
not careful to answer thee; but be it known to thee, we will not serve thy
Gods, nor worship the Golden Image thou have set up; Dan. 3. 16, 18. God's care
of them was great in this extreme peril. And he cares for all his Saints; their
life, their health, their comforts are precious in his Eyes; and they shall not
be touched, but when necessity and convenience calls for it.

3. The Saints Afflictions slow from the greatest faithfulness. The Church in
the very depths of trouble cries out, Great is thy faithfulness! Jer. 3. 23. I
know, O Lord, says the Psalmist, that thy Judgments are right; and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me; Psalm. 119. 75. The Physicians faithfulness
appears in giving very bitter Potions, which are a means to save the Patients
life. Sharp Afflictions are often necessary to recever the health of the Soul;
divine faithfulness is manifested in this method of recovery. This faithfulness
of God debates with the Rod when it shoots forth, lest it should be too heavy,
and rather make an end of, than mend his Children; Isa. 27. 8. In measure when
it shoots forth thou will debate with it; he stays his rough Wind in the
day of the East Wind: For if both these Winds should blow together, the Saints
might not be able to stand against them. That is the first Argument to prove
the goodness of Affliction; it is of God's sending; and in sending of it, his
love, and care, and faithfulness is manifested.

2. Afflictions are sent with a design that afflicted Saints may be benefited.
He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men: The Lord sees
they have need of it, and therefore they are in heaviness: But when Affliction
is as it were plowing upon the backs of the Saints; and long and deep furrows
are made; the Lord at that very time is sowing both light, and grace, and joy;
and how plentiful will the Harvest be! Psalm. 97. 11. Light is sown for the
righteous, and joy for the upright in heart; Heb. 12. 11. Chastening does yield
the peaceable fruits of righteousness to them who are exercised thereby.
Earthly Parents are oftentimes transported with passion, and act after their
own humor and pleasure in correcting of their Children; and then their
Children are rather provoked to anger, and discouraged, than amended. But
hereby it most evidently appears; it is good for the Saints that they are
afflicted; because their Father, who is the Father of Spirits, does chastize
his Children for their profit, that is, their spiritual profit and advantage;
that they may be partakers of his holiness; Heb. 12. 10. And the truth is, we
are never more profited, than when we are most sanctified.

3. The Afflictions of the Saints are dispensed to them through Christ Jesus;
therefore they must needs be good for them; for nothing comes to them through
Him, that is otherwise. He has born the Saints sins, so that they are neither
condemned nor commanded by them: He unstings death, before it seizes upon any
of his Members; so that the venom and poison of death, which is sin, is gone;
and death without a sting is not to be dreaded. And Christ has also born the
Saints Sicknesses and Infirmities; Mat. 8. 17. and so the cause of them is
removed: God does not demand satisfaction to his Justice in the Afflictions of
his People; for Christ by his Sufferings has made full Satisfaction. He does
not exact Law Payment of them, for Christ was made under the Law, and fulfilled
it, and bare the Curse due to Believers for transgressing of it. The Blood of
Jesus Christ, how does it alter Afflictions! it turns them into profitable and
healing Medicines! Oh Blessed Troubles, in which Christ himself Sympathizes
with Souls that are troubled! Isa. 63. 9. In all their Afflictions, he was
afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved them. It Is certain^y good to be
in the Furnace, if the Son of God be there with us; to mitigate the heat of it,
and to consume the dross only, while the Metal is secured, and purified!

4. Afflictions make the Saints Conformable to Christ their Head, and it is
never better with the Members; than when there is the greatest resemblance in
them to their Head and Lord. He was perfected as Mediator through Sufferings.
At length he suffered so much, that he cried out, It is finished; he paid a
full Price for his Churches Redemption; and made her Everlasting Peace. His
Members also must be perfected in Mortification and Holiness by Sufferings
also; these help to pull down Pride, and Self-confidence; to tame the Flesh,
and to check and kill the Affections and Lusts of it. Happy Afflictions! which
make afflicted Believers more like to their Lord in whom they do believe! In
Conformity to Christ lies our Excellency and Safety. This Conformity is in a
special manner designed, Romans 8. 29. For whom he did foreknow, he also did
predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might be the
first born among many Brethren. The Image of the Earthly Adam is our Shame, the
Image of the Heavenly Adam is our Glory.

5. The Afflictions of the Saints are under a Promise that they shall work for
good. The Medicines which the great Physician of Souls gives to Believers do
Work well, as they are very proper, so very Effectual, Romans 8. 28. We know says
the Apostle, we are assured of it by Faith, and we find it true by Experience;
That all things Work together for good, to them that love God; who are called
according to his purpose. God himself will Work along with Calamities and
Troubles of all sorts, and bring forth much good out of the very worst of them.
They work upon the Hearts of the Saints, and better the frame and temper and
Inclinations of them. They work upon their Tongues, and lay a Bridle upon them;
and bring them under the Law of Holiness, Love and Kindness; they work upon the
Actions, making them more agreeable to that Rule, which whosoever walk
according to, Peace and Mercy shall be upon them. Nay Afflictions work no less
than Glory, and when the Apostle considered the Weight and Eternity of that
Glory, he made light of the heaviest Afflictions; the Benefit is unconceiveably
vast, that quickly is reaped from them, 2 Cor. 4. 17. For our light Affliction
which is but for a Moment, works for us a far more Exceeding and Eternal
weight of Glory. Not that Affliction and Suffering though for Righteousness
sake, does deserve this Glory, but it makes it the more Minded and Desired, and
is a means to make us meet for the Enjoyment of it; and the Promise is sure,
that if we suffer according to the Will of God, we shall also Reign with him.

6. Afflictions must needs be granted to the Saints, for they purge out the
worst evil of all; and that is Sin. Oh! (...) out of measure sinful Sin! No
Name so bad as thy own! No Evil so great as thou art! Let all the Calamities of
the Earth, and all the Miscries of Hell, be put into the One Scale together;
and Sin into the other; as Sin is the Cause of them all, so it will outweigh
them all. It Is the abominable thing which Gods Soul hates. It Is the great Evil
and Enemy whereby Man's Soul is ruined. How much is Affliction good for! since
it is a Sovereign means, whereby such an Evil as Sin, is purged away, Isa. 27.
9. By this therefore shall the Iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the
Fruit, to take away his Sin.

7. The Afflictions of the Saints are means to prevent their Eternal Sufferings
in the other World. The Rod is of their Fathers own Appointment, to deliver his
Childrens Souls from Hell. Present Castigation prevents Eternal Condemnation, 1
Cor. 11. 32. But when we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we might
not be condemned with the World. Not that, Sin has not ill demerit enough to
make us obnoxious to Sufferings in both Worlds; not that Chastizement makes
satisfaction for Transgression: But it makes the Saints to fly to the Lord
Jesus, for the making up of all breaches between God and them; which Sin has
made; and it is effectual to make them truly Humble and Penitent: Now Faith and
Repentance have the Promise of Life annexed to them. Whosoever believes on the
Son of God, shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life, Joh. 3. 16. And
Repentance is said to be unto Salvation and consequently not be repented of, 2
Cor. 7. 10.

8. Afflictions bring the Saints nearer to God; and to be near to Him, how good
is it for them! Psalm. 73. 28. God expects a more serious seeking, and a nearer
approach when he afflicts his People, Hos. 5. 15. I will go and return to my
Place, till they acknowledge their Offense, and seek my Face; in their
Affliction they will seek me early. And his People Answer his Expectation, Hos.
6. 1. They say, Come and let us return to the Lord, for he has torn, and he
will heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up. Afflicted Saints inquire
after God, they come with their Penitential Acknowledgments; and desire more
fully to know wherefore it is that he Contends; that the ground of the
Controversy may be removed. It is meet that the Afflicted Saint should say,
and with his Heart he does say it unto God. I have born Chastisement, I will
not offend any more; that which I see not, teach thou me, if I have done
Iniquity I will do no more, Job 34. 31, 32. All that is within him now yields
unto God, and being melted in the Furnace of Affliction, he desires to be cast
into the mould of his Word. Happy blows! which drive the Saints to God, and
strengthen their Resolutions to abide with God! Thus have I demonstrated that
Saints are afflicted for their good.

In the Second Place, I am to specify that good which accrews to the Saints by
Affliction.

1. One good consequent of Affliction, is a greater Power of Spiritual
Discerning. Prove. 29. 15. The Rod and Reproof give Wisdom. If Man's Rod does so,
then it follows, that the Rod of God does it much more. Gods Teaching
accompanies his Chastning, and who Teaches like him? Afflictions clear the Eye
of the Soul; so that it is more Single and Piercing. It sees now plainly,
through the deceitfulness of Sin. It sees the Worlds emptiness and Vanity, and
an End of all its Perfection. It sees the Subtilty of the old Serpent, and how
much it concerns all neither to believe, nor follow him. It discerns the
Insufficiency, Weakness, and Wickedness of Self; and that it is neither to be
trusted in, sought, or pleased. It sees the greatness of that Salvation which
is in Christ; and what an All-sufficient and Eternal Portion the Lord Jehovah
is. And the Afflicted Saints Knowledge of all this, is more than Notional. He
knows by Experience as well as Speculation the Evil of Sin; and the
unsuitableness of the World is plain to his Spiritual Sense, and so is the
Power of the Grace of Christ. In Affliction, the other World opens, and the Eye
looks into it; and what a Cipher then is this whole Globe of Earth and Waters!
The Apostles outward Man perished: He was exercised with Affliction; and what
clear views had he then of things unseen? 2 Cor. 4. 16, 18. For which cause we
faint not, but though our outward man perish; our inward man is renewed day by
day. While we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are
not seen; for the things that are seen are Temporal, but the things that are
not seen are Eternal.

2. Another good Consequent of Affliction, is a more Pure and tender
Conscience. How great a Misery is it to have a stupid Conscience, that is
without or past feeling! When a man has all his own Guilt, and the Wrath of God
abiding upon him; not a Promise in the Bible belonging to him, all the
threatenings full charged with Curses and Woes, just ready to be discharged at
him: And He himself is upon the very brink of Hell, just ready to tumble in
every Moment; and yet is altogether unsensible of any danger! Such a senseless
Conscience is a deadly Sign; it argues Spiritual Death to have full Power; and
Eternal Death to be at the door; In the depths of Despair there is more
Probability of Salvation; than in the height of Presumption. But Affliction
startles the Conscience, how quick is its Sight and Sense then! The Saints have
recourse to the Blood of Christ to purge their Consciences from all the Dead
works in which they have been formerly employed. And that Blood is sufficient
for their Purgation and Peace, Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the Blood of
Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit offered up himself without Spot to God;
purge your Consciences from dead Works, to serve the Living God! And afflicted
Saints are exceedingly afraid of making new wounds in their Consciences, since
the Smart of former wounds in their Spirits was so intolerable, Lam. 3. 19, 20.
Remembering my Affliction and my Misery, the Wormwood and the Gall; my Soul has
them still in remembrance and is humbled in me.

3. Another good Consequent of Affliction, is the Mortification of the Sin of
Pride. Pride is a Sin hateful to God, it strikes at his Glory which God aims at
in every thing he does. And Pride is very hurtful to man, it is the hindrance of
the Help which Divine Grace affords; for God who gives Grace to the Humble,
instead of assisting does resist the Proud, 1 Pet. 5. 5. And this Pride is the
forerunner of falls into Sin and Ruin, therefore says Solomon. Pride goes
before Destruction and an haughty Spirit before a fall The Lord cannot endure
this Pride in his Saints, and Affliction is sent to kill it: The Troubles which
the Israelites met with in the Wilderness, when they were encountered with Fiery
Serpents and Scorpions, and Drought; and many other Calamities, the end of them
all was to Humble them and Prove them, and to do them good in the latter end.
Deuteronomy. 8. 15, 16. A Saint who comes out of the Fire of Affliction with a Meek
and humble Spirit; his high Conceits and Thoughts of himself all cast down;
seeing himself to be nothing, but what he is by the Grace of God; this man
looks like Silver coming out of a Furnance of Earth purified seven tunes, and
what a shining brightness and luster is upon him.

4. Another good Consequent of Affliction is a more perfect Subjection of the
whole Man to God. There is a Submission to Him, by a Penitential Acknowledgment
of Offenses against him, and justifying of him in his severest Dispensations,
Neh. 9. 33. Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us, for thou have
done Right, but we have done Wickedly. There is a Submission to his
Righteousness, a great sense, that it is by the Righteousness of One only the
second Adam; that the Free Gift comes upon all that are in him unto
Justification of Life. Romans 5. 18. So Romans 10. 4. Christ is the end of the Law
for Righteousness to every one that believes. There is likewise a Subjection
of Body and Soul unto the commands of God, which reach the whole man, and
require service from the whole. And Affliction quickens Desires after Grace, to
keep these Precepts better; so that there may not be a wandering from them,
Psalm. 119. 10. With my whole Heart have I sought thee, oh let me not wander
from thy Commandments. Sin's service becomes more irksome, the Law of Sin more
grievous; but the Lords service is accounted Liberty and Life, Romans 6. 22. But
now being made free from Sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your Fruit
unto Holiness, and the end Everlasting Life.

5. Another good Consequent of Affliction is greater Exactness and Spirituality
in Duty and Obedience. Affliction causes Saints to Eye their Hearts more, which
God does Eye Principally. Lip Labor, Bodily Exercise, outward Ceremonies; are
perceived to be, when alone, altogether insignificant. Afflicted Saints give
God their very Hearts: The Strength and Vigor of their Spirits and Affections:
it is very evident to them, that He alone is Worthy of them. And Christ, not
Self, has their Confidence, Phil. 3. 3. We are the Circumcision, who Worship
God in the Spirit; rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no Confidence in the
Flesh. Afflicted Saints lift up their Souls to God; in his hand they are safe,
and this is the Way to have them satisfied and filled with Joy, Psalm. 86. 4.
Rejoice the Soul of thy Servant for unto thee O Lord do I lift up my Soul.
Duties to God are performed with more Grace, and Duties to Man are done with a
greater regard unto God Himself. Gods Approbation is more minded; and the Eye
being single looks not so much at other things, but aims at this, that God in
all things may have Glory; which indeed of Right appertains to Him.

6. Another good Consequent of Affliction is a more full and complete Victory
over the World, and silencing the God of it. When Sickness seizes upon the
Saints; the Love of the World is hereby struck more dead. The World is out of
Countenance, and ashamed now to appear; it is alluring Power and Charms are all
gone. And Satan the God of it, does not so much care now to offer it. Mammon
can neither cure the diseased Body, nor ease the afflicted Mind. Affliction
takes off the fine Mask upon Mammons Face, and then it is plainly seen how sorry
a Master he is; and how poor all his store. The World cannot yield true
Contentment to any, for that little while they are the Inhabitants of it; and
can any thing of this World be carried away into another World? Ah no! 1 Timothy
6. 7. For we brought nothing into this World, and it is certain we can carry
nothing out. He that has most of the World, what is it all to him, when he is
leaving the World and all behind him?

Suppose the greatest Possessour of Earthly Riches, lying upon a Deathbed; in
his fainting Fits, and dying Agonies; lay some baggs of Gold upon his Pillows,
bring in the sweetest Consort of Music, show him the costliest Raiment he ever
^wore; let a Table be spread and furnished with the choicest Dainties, and let
the greatest Beauties stand by him, proffering themselves and their service to
him. Alas! Alas! what is all this to a Man that is breathing out his last
Breath; and ready to appear and give an account of himself unto the Judge of
all? Affliction gives a smart Admonition, that this World is to be contemned in
Comparison of the better and enduring Substance. Satan, notwithstanding his
Subtlety, is easily baffled in Affliction; think seriously of Death and
Judgment; and all that He offers is just nothing; though he should make as
large an offer, as he did to Christ in the hour of his Temptation, when he
showed him all the Kingdoms of the World and the Glory of them.

7. Another good Consequent of Affliction, is an Increase of Grace, and an
abundance of the Fruits of Righteousness. Wicked men receive not Correction,
being put into the Furnace, they are found, and rejected as Reprobate Silver;
but the Correction of the Saints, is the Probation, Augmentation, and
evidencing of the Grace of God in them. Faith is tried, and by trial is
strengthened, Patience, Experience, Hope augmented, Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. Tribulation
works Patience, Patience Experience, Experience Hope, and Hope makes not
ashamed, because the Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost
which is given to us. The Lords tender Compassions toward his afflicted
Children, exceedingly endears him their Father to them! His gracious Visits,
His stretching forth his own Everlasting Arm for their Sustentation, when ready
to sink under their Burdens; His remembering Mercy in the greatest Severity,
His being within call, and readiness to hear and help; fills their Hearts with
Love, and Resolution to live and cleave to him. With how much Tenderness and
Compassion, does the Lord express himself toward his afflicted ones! Psalm. 69.
33. For the Lord hears the Poor and despises not his Prisoners. And Psalm.
22. 24. For he has not despised nor abhorred the Affliction of the afflicted,
neither has he hid his Face from him; but when he cried unto him he heard.

Saints are great gainers by Affliction, because Godliness which is great Gain,
which is profitable for all things, is more powerful than before. The Rod of
Correction by a Miracle of Grace, like that of Aarons, Buds and Blossoms, and
brings forth the Fruits, of Righteousness, which are most excellent. A rare
sight it is indeed to see a man coming out of a bed of Languishing, or any
other Furnace of Affliction; more like to Angels in Purity, more like to Christ
who was Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, and separate from Sinners; more like unto
God himself, being more exactly Righteous in all his ways, and more exemplarily
Holy in all manner of Conversation.

8. Another good Consequent of Affliction, is an high esteem of Time, and
affecting Apprehensions of Death, Judgment, and Eternity. Affliction brings
Death within view. Jobs Calamity makes his Mortality much thought of; the
things of the World had left him; he speaks as a man just ready to leave the
World, Job 17. 1, 13, 14. My Breath is corrupt, my Days are extinct, the Graves
are ready for me. If I wait the Grave is my House, I have made my Bed in the
Darkness. I have said to Corruption, thou art my Father; and to the Worm, thou
art my Mother and my Sister. He claims kindred to the Worms and Corruption,
Death was most familiar to his Thoughts; and in his Imagination, the Grave was
his Bed already.

Now at Death the Saints consider, that Time comes to a full stop; and Judgment
will follow, and fix them in Eternity. It is of great use to us; when our
Thoughts dwell in Eternity, before we our selves enter upon Eternity; this
makes an Holy and Happy Eternity infinitely desirable in our Eyes! And how do
we look unto Jesus! through whom Eternal Life is given! and with what
Circumspection is the way of Holiness walked in, which ends in Life
Everlasting! Romans 6. 22, 23. Affliction awakens the Saints care, to improve
Time, to work while it is day; for it will be too late to work, when the Night
is once come; and how are they concerned, that there time be not ended, before
Eternity be well provided for!

9. Another good Consequent of Affliction, is Serious Diligence to make the
Calling and Election sure. When Affliction finds us at uncertainties in
reference to our Spiritual State, our doubts and fears are amazing and
tormenting. It Is sad for a man to look upon himself as dying, and then to say,

O animula vagula blandula,
Quae nunc abibis in loca?
O my Soul thou art departing hence, but whither, oh whither art thou going?
What is like to be the place of thy Eternal abode, which must never be changed?
To be dying and doubting at the same time is very sad, though we are really
never so safe. What is a well grounded Evidence of the Love of God in Christ,
worth upon a bed of Sickness? How valuable and comfortable the Spirits
Testimony concerning our Adoption! Now Affliction puts the Saints upon a more
strict and impartial Self-examination; and upon a more through and perceivable
turning unto God, Lam. 3. 39, 40. Wherefore, does the living man complain, a
man for the Punishment of his Sins? Let us search and try our ways and turn
unto the Lord our God. Affliction makes that Admonition of the Apostle to be
heeded, 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Wherefore the rather Brethren give diligence to make
your Calling and Election sure; for if ye do these things ye shall never fall:
For so an entrance shall be administered to you abundantly into the Everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

When once a Christian has attained unto a Sense and Assurance of the savor of
God; how prepared is he for whatever may befall him! He can lie easy upon a
Sickbed; because his God makes his Bed for him, Psalm. 41. 3. The Lord will
strengthen him upon the bed of Languishing; thou will make all his Bed in his
Sickness. Nay the presence of his God makes him fearless in the gloomy Valley
of the Shadow of Death, Psalm. 23. 4. Though I walk through the Valley of the
Shadow of Death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me.

10. Another good Consequent of Affliction, is spiritualized Affections, and a
Conversation more in Heaven. Saints are cast down by Affliction, that they may
rise with Christ and feel the Power of his Resurrection more. That Is a lesson,
which every Rod is sent to teach, Col. 3. 2. Set your Affection on things
above, and not on things which are upon the Earth. The harder the Ball is flung
to the ground, it rebounds the higher; when God flings a Saint down with a
mighty Hand, his Heart should rebound higher toward Heaven, imitating those
excellent and faithful Ones; who confessed they were strangers and Pilgrims on
the Earth, who declared plainly they sought a better Country, than any
Country on Earth, because they sought an Heavenly Country. And God was not
ashamed to be called their God, for he prepared for them a City. Heb. 11. 13,
16.

The Psalmist was very much helped toward Heaven by Chastisement, Psalm. 73.
14. All the day long (says he) have I been plagued, and chastned every Morning.
And though for a while Temptation prevailed, yet at length his Thoughts and
Eyes are fixed right, upon that Glory promised to such as give up themselves to
God, and to be guided by his Counsel, V. 23. 24. Nevertheless I am continually
with thee, thou have holden me by my right Hand. Thou shall guide me with thy
Counsel, and afterward receive me to Glory. Afflicted Saints study and
endeavor to show forth the Power and Virtue both of their Lord's Death and
Rising again. How profitable is it to Dye, and to be Crucified with him! to be
Dead to the World and all the Evil of it! And how Sweet and Pleasant is it to
rise with him, and by earnests and foretasts of Glory to sit with Him in
Heavenly Places. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 6. But God who is Rich in Mercy for the great
Love, wherewith he loved us, Even when we were dead in Sin has quickened us
together with Christ, (by Grace ye are saved:) And has raised us up together,
and made us sit together in Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus.

How great and good are these Consequents, which follow upon Affliction!

I come in the last Place to the Application.

And shall begin with some Corollaries drawn from the Doctrine.

If Saints are afflicted for their good,

1. Hence we may infer, Afflictions are not Sings of Gods hatred, rather
Tokens of his Love, They are the Lot of the Righteous. Psalm. 34. 19. Many are
the Afflictions of the Righteous, but the Lord delivers them at length out of
them all. They are trained up under the Yoke; and bearing it well, is greatly
beneficial. Man is born unto Trouble, as the sparks fly upward. Troubles like
sparks of Fire are innumerable, which fill the few days of the Life of Man. But
those who are born again usually have more troubles than other men. God cares
for them, Hedges up their way with Thorns, which they may be afraid to break
through; into Paths which are destructive. Hos. 2. 6. Therefore, behold I will
Hedge up thy way with Thorns; and make a wall, that she shall not find her
Paths. Happy Saints in their Afflictions! who have both a Thorny Hedge, and
also a wall between them, and the broad Road which leads unto Eternal Perdition!

The Saints make an ill Comment upon their Afflictions, when they say, God
cares not for them, nor how he deals with them. Several of them have born the
Yoke in their Youth, and have still carried it to their Graves. It is said of
One who lately died, that upon his Deathbed being asked, How long he had been
ill? made this Reply, that he had been ill for fifty Years together. Christ was
a Man of Sorrows, and yet the Son of Gods Love. You may be very much beloved of
God, and yet be very much and often acquainted with griefs.

2. Saints in their Afflictions should not be censured because afflicted. Holy
Job, was stripped naked, and deprived of all that he had; and was smitten in hi^
Person from Head to Foot; yet he was truly and eminently good, and under all
these Evils held fast his Righteousness and Integrity. His Censorious Friends
were blameworthy in concluding him an Hypocrite, because of his Sufferings. He
had a greater understanding in the things of God, a sounder Judgment, and more
Grace in his Heart than they. The excellent young Elihu spoke right indeed,
when he pronounced Job, a man to be justified as to his State, Job 33. 32. But
he blames him because in vindicating himself, he spoke that, which too much
reflected upon God himself, and therefore tells him, Job 34. 23. That God will
not lay upon any Man, not upon the best of Men, more than is Right, that he
should enter into Judgment with God.

But as for the other three Friends of Job, who judged Job unsound in his
Religion, because of Gods heavy hand upon him; they are very sharply rebuked.
The Lord owns his Servant whom they had so censured, Job 42. 7. The Lord said
to Eliphaz the Temanite, my Wrath is kindled against thee and against thy two
Friends, for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is Right, as my Servant
Job. And they are commanded to make use of Job as an Intercessour for them,
that they might not be dealt with according to their Folly. To censure a Saint
is ill, but to censure him in Affliction, and only because of Affliction is
worse, because this adds so much to his Affliction.

3. There is no ground or reason for impatience in the Saints, whatever
Afflictions are their Exercise. It may be a check to impatience, to consider,
the very best have deserved worse a thousandfold, than ever they have suffered,
but the most effectual Remedy against Impatience, is the Consideration of the
Profit of Affliction. Why should Saints repine and murmur at that which is so
good for them? When their Father is humbling, purifying, and healing of them;
when he is carrying on the good Work begun in them, toward greater Perfection;
why should they count themselves hardly dealt with? The Father of Spirits, is
not like the Fathers of our Flesh, Will and Humor appears in their
Corrections; but He gives not a blow, but what is for his Childrens Profit.
Heb. 12. 10. And why should any be impatient at their being Profited and
Advantaged? Considering the blessed issue of the Saints Troubles; they should
be born with all thankfulness; for sanctified Afflictions are great Promotions,
and hereby mighty advances are made in Heavens way.

4. It Is unreasonable for the Saints, because of their Afflictions to question
Divine Providence, or to conclude that Religion is vain. The Psalmist under the
Rod and Temptation together, was ready to draw such Conclusions. Continued
chastning made him to think of God, and to speak of Religion unbecomingly and
indeed impiously. He was so foiled by the Tempter, that his Feet were almost
gone; and 'twas hard for him to recover; strange kind of Language he utters,
Psalm. 73. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Therefore his People return hither, and Waters of
a full Cup are wrung out to them. And they say how does God know, and is there
Knowledge in the most high? Behold these are the ungodly, who prosper in the
World, they increase in Riches; Verily I have cleansed my Heart in vain and
washed my hands in Innocence; for all the day long have I been plagued and
chastned every Morning.

But at length the Psalmist comes to himself, V. 15. If I say, I will speak
thus: behold I should offend against the Generation of thy Children. And he
gives himself very bad Words, but such as his yielding so far to that
Temptation very well deserved. V. 21, 22. Thus my Heart was grieved, and I was
pricked in my Reins, so foolish was I and ignorant: I was as a beast before
thee. But he is cured of his brutishness, and speaks like a Saint, expressing
desires after God above all things in Heaven and Earth; concludes it good to
draw near to God, and rejoices in him as the Strength of his Heart and his
Portion for ever.

Suppose a Saint never so much afflicted; yet to be, and continue a Saint, is
certainly good for him, and a wise part in him. Job when sitting upon the
ground among the Ashes, full of Boyls, and Scraping himself with a Potsheard,
was still dear to God. And so was Lazarus lying at the Rich man's Gate; desiring
to be fed with the Crumbs which fell from the Rich man's Table. Saints under the
greatest Troubles cannot be miserable; for God is Theirs, and They are His
still; and these very Troubles do promote their Holiness and their Happiness.

5. The Prosperity of the Wicked, and their Freedom from Affliction, should not
raise the Saints Envy. Saints are frequently tempted to envy the wicked their
good things, and sometimes this Envy has prevailed, and has been their fault
and failing; it has proved their great both Sin and Torment, Psalm. 73. 3. I was
Envious at the Foolish, when I saw the Prosperity of the Wiched. That Caution
is but needful, Psalm. 37. 1. Fret not thy self because of evil doers, neither
be thou envious at the Workers of Iniquity. For a man that is made wise to
Salvation, to be envious at the Foolish; for a man that is enriched with Grace,
to be envious at the Workers of Iniquity, because of their Prosperity; there is
no Reason at all for it. Alas! this Prosperity of theirs is greatly to their
Prejudice, and helps forward their Perdition, Prove. 1. 32. The turning away or
the ease of the simple shall slay them, and the Prosperity of Fools shall
destroy them. And this Destruction is hastening, and comes unexpectedly,
suddenly, and so the more unavoidably upon them, and 'twil be utter and Eternal
Destruction, Psalm. 73. 17, 18, 19. Until I went into the Sanctuary of God, then
understood I their End. Surely thou did set them in slippery places, thou
castest them down into Destruction: How are they brought into Desolation as in
a Moment, they are utterly consumed with terrors!

The greatest Wealth and Glory of the Ungodly; considering how soon 'twill end,
and what will follow when it ends; should not stir our Envy, but rather our
Pity and Compassion; for they walk in a vain show full of vain Confidence,
till their Feet go down to Death; and their steps take hold of Hell.

6. To be Incorrigible under Affliction is inexcusable. As it is good for Saints
to be afflicted, so all should be bettered by Affliction. It Is a great
Aggravation of Sin to smart and bleed and groan, because of it, and yet still
to Love it. If Saints are afflicted for their Good; when Sinners are afflicted,
a great price is put into their hands, which may be improved to an Eternal
Advantage. In Prosperity, the Ungodly are usually hardened in Pride and
Earthliness, and Wickedness, and Sensuality; the Lord not rebuking them, nor
presently executing Sentence against their Evil Works, they are apt to think
Him altogether such an one as themselves. Psalm. 50. 21. and that he dislikes
Sin no more than they do. Whereupon their Hearts are fully set in them to do
Evil, Eccles. 8. 11.

But when wicked Ones are visited with Troubles, and they feel the smart of the
Rod; God is really very near them; and if they would but cry to him with their
Hearts; how readily would he hear and turn them to himself, and turn his anger
away from them! Jer. 31. 18. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself
thus; Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised; as a Bullock unaccustomed to
the Yoke; turn thou me and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God. And
according to his desire, he was turned and instructed, he obtained sure Mercy,
and became a dear Son, a pleasant Child, notwithstanding all his former foul
Sins and reproachful Abominations, V. 19, 20. But when Sinners are smitten in
vain; and receive no Correction: Nay like Ahaz in their Affliction trespass yet
more; this Argues a great Love to Sin: and the more provokes the Lord to
Jealousy and Indignation. Judah was strangely fond of, and wedded to their
Idolatry and other Wickedness, when the Sorest Judgments could not be a means
to divorce them from it, Jer. 5. 3. O Lord are not thine Eyes upon the Truth?
Thou have smitten them, but they have not grieved, thou have consumed them, but
they have refused to receive Correction, they have made their Faces harder than
a Rock, they have refused to return. It Is the highth of Madness to be Sins
Martyrs, and not only to suffer trouble in this World; but for the sake of it,
to venture burning in Hell for evermore!

7. How great is the goodness of God, who can make the Evil of Affliction to
Work for good to his People! It Is the Physicians great art so to temper Poison,
as to turn it into a powerful and wholesome Medicine. What is Evil in it self,
and evil, and Destructive to Nature, God does make it become very good to the
Saints, and to further the work of Grace in them. How securely may such a
Gracious God be relied on! who can make the worst things, a Saint meets with in
this World, to prove Helps and Advantages! This goodness of God is firmly to be
believed, admired, and confided in; and considering the greatness and freeness
of it, too much cannot be expected from it. Much of it is manifested, and laid
out at present, and much more is laid up for the Saints in the other World,
Psalm. 31. 19. Oh how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them
that fear thee, which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the
Sons of Men! If the goodness of God turns Evil into Good; what may be expected
from the good things he gives his People! how much good shall they do them! how
beneficial shall the Ministry of the Word, Holy Ordinances; and the Privileges
of the Sanctuary prove to the Saints! Psalm. 65. 4. Blessed is the man whom thou
choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts;
we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy House even of thy Holy Temple.

8. Saints are exceedingly culpable and to be blamed, when after Affliction
they decline, instead of growing better. It argues Corruption very strong when
Affliction does not purge it out. Folly is but too fast bound up in the Heart;
that the Rod of God does not drive it away. Gods Love is accompanied with
Jealousy; let Saints therefore be jealous of themselves, lest after Affliction
their Hearts deal treacherously and prove unstedfast.

Good Hezekiah was Sick, and had the Sentence of Death pronounced upon him; but
he falls a praying hard, and weeping sore; his Tears deorsum fluunt, sed coelum
petunt, fell to the Ground, but Heaven is affected at shedding of them. He is
heard, he is spared, he is healed; and brought into the House of God, when he
expected to have been carried to the Grave. And such a Sign was given him, to
assure him of going to the Temple; as amazed the World, the Sun in the
Firmament went so many degrees backward. Now how much Faith, Humility,
Gratitude, Obedience, might have been expected from so good a man, to whom such
singular goodness had been manifested! But Alas! Hezekiah rendered not again
according to the Benefit done to him, for his Heart was lifted up; therefore
there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. His
Riches and Honor, which he had in abundance might puff him up; and the thought
of that Sign, which declared him a special favorite of Heaven, as he supposed;
unto the King of Babylon, might also make his Heart to swell within him.

No Saint that is Wise, will be Self-confident; for after the removal of
Affliction, there is great danger of Security and Backsliding; Self-jealousie
therefore, and a sense of natural impotency, and unfaithfulness to our selves,
should make us cry to be upheld by Him, who is of Power to establish us. If
Saints receive not Correction; how soon may they be taken in hand and again
lashed! And their not profiting by the Rod, fills Satan's Mouth with Accusations
against them; and their own Consciences with Reproaches; Gods displeasure grows
hotter, and more smarting blows may be expected, Lev. 26. 23. 24. And if ye
will not be reformed by me by these things, but will walk contrary unto me;
then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times
for your Sins.

USE II. Of Advice to more Notorious Sinners, whose scandalous Lives witness to
the badness of their State; and by their constant Evil Works they show they are
Children that have no Faith; or if their Sin be not so apparent to others, it is
apparent to themselves; Conscience, if they would but heed it; charges them
with secret wickedness, which is committed with great Presumption and Boldness.
If such as these, are seized upon by Sickness, or feel any other smarting Rod;
I would give them such Advice, as if it be followed, their Affliction will have
a good issue and effect upon them, as bad as they are.

1. When Affliction overtakes you, that are very wicked; Take notice how your
Sin has found you out. That threatening, Number. 32. 23. is accomplished. Ye have
sinned against the Lord, and be sure your Sin will find you out. It has been
hunting you, with Evils at the heels of it; and now it has actually overtaken
you. You dreamed not of this in the hour of Temptation, when Sin was
represented to you by your subtle Enemy, as all Gain and Pleasure; Affliction
shows the Misery it has brought you to; and that it is full of Gall and
Wormwood. Thus Sin found out Judah of old, Jer. 2. 19. Thine own wickedness
shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee; know therefore and
see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy
God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of Hosts. Sin your
Enemy has found you; and you feel to your Cost and Woe, that it is an Enemy
indeed. Wickedness was once sweet in your Mouths, and you did hide it under
your Tongue; you spared it and would by no means forsake it; but now in your
Bowels it is turned, and is the very Gall of Asps within you, Job 20. 12, 13, 14.

2. Behold you that are wicked, how God is come forth in anger against you;
there is a Rod in his hand, frowns in his face; and he is full of just
Indignation against you. And who can stand before that Indignation? Nah. 1. 2.
God is Jealous, and the Lord Revengeth; the Lord Revengeth and is furious; the
Lord will take Vengeance on his Adversaries, and reserveth wrath for his
Enemies. Such Potsheards of the Earth as, the strongest and stoutest Sinners of
you all, are; cannot stand before your Maker, when he is Contending with you,
Ezekiel. 22. 14. Can thy Heart endure, or can thy hands be strong, when I shall
deal with thee? If the Wrath of a King, be as the Messenger of Death: What is
the anger of Him, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who does what he
will, in the Army of Heaven and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, and none
can stay his hand, or say to him, What do thou? since all the Inhabitants of
the World are reputed as nothing before him, Dan. 4. 35.

This Anger of God has Almighty and Irresistible Strength joined with it, and
therefore it is very terrible, Psalm. 90. 11. Who knows the Power of thine Anger?
even according to thy Fear, so is thy Wrath. Though there be never so much fear
and dread of God in the Hearts of any; the Anger of God, if ready to fall upon
them, deserves all that fear; the Devils believe and feel this wrath, and are
apprehensive of its continuance and increase, therefore they tremble, Jam. 2.
20. See O Sinner, that the glorious and dreadful Majesty of Heaven and Earth,
is angry with Thee in Particular. Thou art the man, who have bitterly provoked
him. Thy Iniquities are hateful to him. Now if God is not at all taken notice
of; if his anger is not at all minded; nor any course or care taken to appease
it; it will be blown up to the greater fierceness, and this fire may quickly
devour, consume; and having begun with thee, make a speedy and utter end of
thee.

3. It concerns you to fear Him, under whose Power you are, and who is able to
destroy both the Body and the Soul likewise, Luke 12. 4, 5. And I say unto you
my Friends, Be not afraid of them, that kill the Body, and after that have no
more that they can do; But I will forewarn you, whom you shall fear; fear him
who after he has killed, has Power to cast into Hell, yea, I say unto you,
fear him. His hands did make that Earthly House of your Tabernacle; and he can
bring it to the dust again. Your Souls, he can require when be pleases, and if
you dye in your Sins, your Souls will be doomed to the place, where other
damned Spirits are; and they are lost beyond all hopes and possibility of
recovery. Oh! sanctify the Lord of Hosts, in whose hand you are, under whose
hand you groan; by making him your fear and dread; he can command both first
and second death to seize on you, Rev. 6. 8. And I looked and behold a Pale
Horse, and his Name that sat on him was Death, and Hell followed with him.
Death is the King of Terrors, but Hell is ten thousand times more terrible. Oh!
be afraid of that mighty hand, which with one blow can both kill and damn you
together. You cannot secure your selves by Hiding, by Flight, or by Resistance;
for Gods Eye is all-seeing, his Power and Hand is irresistible, and extends it
self, all Heaven and Earth and Hell over; therefore humbling your selves, and
Submission, would be the best and wisest way that you can take.

4. In this ill Case in which you are, remember now your evil ways, and your
doings that have not been good, Ezekiel. 36. 31. Then shall ye remember your evil
ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your
own sight for your Iniquities and Abominations. Your remembering of your
Transgressions, is one way to have God forget them; loath your selves, and he
will not loath you; condemning your selves, is the way not to be condemned by
him. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he will lift you up, Jam.
4. 10. Oh smite upon your thighs and say, What have we done? How manifold are
our Transgressions! How mighty are our Sins! What guilt have we incurred! How
monstrously black and foul are our Defilements! What wrath have we provoked!
How hot and low a place in Hell have we deserved! Innumerable Evils compass us
about; our Iniquities have taken hold upon us, so that we are not able to look
up; they are more than the Hairs of our Heads, therefore our Hearts fail us.
Psalm. 40. 12. See how deceitful polluting and damnable the Nature of Sin is;
call your selves by the right Name, Fools; foes to your selves; Self-murtherers
and Self-destroyers; in giving way to Iniquity. Be utterly displeased with your
selves for sinning against God, and wronging your own Souls; and fall out with
all sin for ever.

5. Be Inquisitive what you must do to be saved? You that are outwardly
afflicted, and also pricked in the Heart, and wounded in your Consciences;
should very seriously inquire whether the door of Hope be not yet open to you,
and what course you* must take to be saved from Sin and Wrath, and to have your
Peace with God made. Indeed the Lord speaks confoundingly and terribly to
wicked men in their Calamity, Prove. 1. 26, 27, 28, 29. I will laugh at your
Calamity, and will mock when your fear comes; when your fear comes as
Desolation, and Destruction as a Whirlwind, when Distress and Anguish comes
upon you; then shall they call upon me, but I will not Answer: They shall seek
me early, but they shall not find me: for that they hated Knowledge, and did not
choose the fear of the Lord. And do you acknowledge that the Lord might justly
speak such Language to you; but withal know, that these distressed Sinners, had
these cries extorted from them merely by Calamity; but had no desire to be
turned from their Iniquities. Therefore you that are brought very low by
Affliction; do not only cry to God to deliver you from your trouble; but that
he would also purge away your Sins for his Name sake. Psalm. 79. 9. And let not
your Disconsolate Spirits doubt; for there is hope in Israel concerning you,
Psalm. 130. 7, 8. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is Mercy,
and with him is plenteous Redemption, and he will redeem Israel from all his
Iniquities.

6. Look upon God as accessible, and reconcilable in a Mediator, who is his
beloved Son the Lord Jesus. Christ has suffered once for Sins, the just for the
unjust that he might bring men to God, 1 Pet. 3. 18. And God is in Christ
reconciling the World to himself, not imputing their Trespasses to them, 2 Cor.
5. 19. Now then, says the Apostle, We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though
God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to
God. God is more forward to be at Peace with you, then you are aware. He
entreats you to accept of that Pardon, which you desire, and so much need, but
fear you shall not obtain; and if you value his favor in Christ, and entreat
it with your whole Heart; you shall not die under his Displeasure, Psalm. 119.
58. I entreated thy favor with my whole Heart; be merciful to me according to
thy Word.

Are you willing upon any terms to have the breach made up between God and you?
Do you consent to be any thing, to do any thing, to part with any thing which
he would have you; so you may be but His, and He Yours; a God in Covenant with
you; and a Father to you? Then let your drooping Hearts revive, for there is an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, who is the Propitiation
for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2. 1, 2. His Blood speaks better things
than that of Abel; cries louder for Mercy, than your Sin can cry for Vengeance.
Here you may safely venture your Faith, for Christ's Blood is the Blood of him,
who is God as well as man; and he is able to reconcile God and Men together,
and those men who have been never so much alienated and Enemies in their Minds
by Reason of wicked Works, Col. 1. 21. In your Affliction be sensible of Gods
anger; and readily grant the justness of it; but do not look upon if, as not to
be appeased. If you come to him by Jesus Christ, you will find his Fury all
gone, Isa. 27. 4, 5. Fury is not in me; let him take hold of my Strength, that
he may make Peace with me, and he shall make Peace with me.

7. Pray to be turned from Sin it self; as well as have the afflicting hand of
God removed. It Is an ill thing to choose Iniquity rather than Affliction, Job
36. 21. Many under Sickness, cry to have bodily Health restored, but the
Diseases of their Souls they feel not; neither is the health of the Soul
valued. Many a man in Affliction and Pain, does call upon God, saying, Lord
heal my Body! but he was a man after Gods own Heart, who said, Lord be merciful
to me, heal my Soul for I have sinned against thee, Psalm. 41. 4. Pharaoh cried
to be delivered from the Plagues of Egypt; but not from the hardness of his
Heart, neither did he desire to fear the Name of God; if he had: both his
Drowning and Damnation might have been prevented. You who are afflicted, I
grant, may pray for the sparing of your Lives; with Submission to the Will of
God; and that his stroke may be removed away from you. The Psalmist prays for
both, Psalm. 39. 10, 13. Remove thy stroke away from me, I am consumed by the
blow of thy hand. O spare me, that I may recover Strength before I go away from
hence, and be no more: But before, he had prayed, that he might be delivered
from Sin; for this was the greatest Evil, Ver. 7, 8. And now Lord what wait I
for? my Hope is in Thee; deliver me from all my Transgressions. This he Hopes,
this he Longs, this he Waits upon God for; that he might be delivered from his
Transgressions, not some only but from all of them, that neither the guilt of
Sin might lie upon him, nor any Iniquity have the Dominion over him*

You that have lived wickedly, and God is rebuking of you with the blows of his
hand; have great cause to be Self-suspicious least all your Religion and
Devotion at present, be only forced; by what you feel and fear: You had need
therefore to beg that a through and lasting change may be wrought in your
Hearts, or else your hot fit of Religion will quickly be off; Your goodness
will be as the Morning Cloud, and as the early Dew, so it will go away, Hos. 6.
4. Oh cry for the Sanctifying Spirit, that he may dwell in you continually; and
Consecrate you as Temples, for himself to abide in; and cause you to walk in
the Laws and Ways of the Lord unto the very end.

And if You that are Notorious Sinners are spared; and God does send his Word
and heal you, and deliver you from the Pit of Destruction. I would farther
advise you in these following particulars.

1. Think with your selves, if Affliction had carried you off in your Sins into
another World; whither Oh! whither had you gone? At Death all Souls are
disposed of in the place which they are fit for. Holy Souls are made meet to be
partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, and when separated from
the Body, they enter upon that Inheritance. The Souls of the Wicked were
continually fitting themselves for Destruction; at Death they are ripe for it,
and are thrown into it. The Wicked who die in their Sins, what a woeful place
are they turned into! Psalm. 9. 17. The Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and
all the Nations that forget God. That Rich and sensual Israelite, who called
Abraham Father, but chose the Pleasures of Sin for a season, before
Righteousness and Life Eternal; what became of him? After Death, the next News
we hear of him was this; He was in Hell, he sees Heaven afar off, too far for
him ever to Hope to come thither. He saw too late, what he had mist of; and how
hot and unquenchable were the Flames in which he was tormented! Luke 16. 23,
24. On! Sinner, if thon had died in thy Wickedness and Enmity against God,
thou had been dealt withal as an Enemy, sent away with a Curse into
Everlasting Fire; without Hopes of Reconciliation or Release.

2. Admire the Patience and Goodness of God toward you. You burdened him with
your Iniquities, it is a wonder he did not ease himself of the Load; that, that
Word did not take hold of you, Isa. 1. 24. Ah! I will ease me of my
Adversaries, and avenge me of my Enemies. He might have glorified his
Righteousness, Purity, Power, and Truth, in your just Condemnation and Misery;
but he has pitied and spared you; and still waits to be Graoious. Now do not
show your selves such rebels, as neither Severity nor Goodness will overcome,
as neither fair means, nor foul will work upon and better. Do not Act, as if
you were delivered to work Abomination. Though the Patience of God be
wonderful, yet it is not Eternal, and when abusing it, brings it to an end; the
following Fury is dreadful to the Abusers.

3. Remember, the Sparing of you is owing to the Lord Jesus. He interceeds that
the fruitless Fig Tree may be spared, and tried a little longer; and how well
will it be, if at length it bring forth fruit which is good. Whatever
Deliverances and Salvation wicked men partake of; Christ is the Author of them,
for he is affirmed to be (...) the Savior of all men, though (...) especially
of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. And as the Lord Redeemer has interceded for
your sparing, so he offers a far greater Benefit if you will accept it; to make
Peace for you, to work true Grace in you, to Open your Eyes and to turn you
from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God, that you may
receive forgiveness of Sins, and an Inheritance among them that are Sanctified
by Faith which is in Him. Act. 26. 18.

4. Be sure to Sin no more Presumptuously, least a worse thing come next, Joh.
5. 14. Jesus found the man whom he had healed in the Temple, a proper place,
after his recovery to be found in, and he says to him. Behold, thou art made
whole, Sin no more, least a worse thing come to thee. If after the return of
health, and the removal of the Rod. you turn away from the Holy Commandment
delivered to you; and it happens to you according to the Proverb, The Dog is
turned to his own vomit again, and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in
the Mire. You becoming worse than ever, and more inexcusable than ever in being
so; worse than ever from Gods hand is to be expected. Greater Distress may
quickly seize you; and the loudest cries may have a deaf Ear turned to them,
Psalm. 18. 41. They cried but there was none to save, even to the Lord, but he
answered them not. That may be the Lords Determination concerning you, Ezekiel. 8.
18. Therefore will I also deal in fury, mine Eye shall not spare, neither will
I have pity, and though they cry in my Ears with a loud voice, yet will I not
hear them.

Though Gods hand be off from you, remember he can quickly lay it on again; and
it may be so heavy, as to make you fall under it. See what is threatened to the
tree which brings not forth good fruit, Mat. 3. 10. And now also the Ax is
laid to the Root of the Trees, therefore every Tree, which brings not forth
good Fruit is hewn down and cast into the Fire: And if this bringing forth no
good Fruit brings the Tree to Everlasting burning, what fierce Flames, will
burn those Trees, which bring forth a great deal of bad Fruit? Such as you read
of, Deuteronomy. 32. 32, 33. For their Vine is of the Vine of Sodom, and of the Fields
of Gomorrah; their Grapes are Grapes of Gall, their Clusters are bitter, their
Wine is the Poison of Dragons, and the cruel Venom of Asps. To go on in Sin,
after recovery from Sickness may shorten your days, and make Sentence against
you to be speedily executed.

5. Though Death is a little delayed, yet it will certainly and quickly come;
let it not find you unprepared. Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed unto men once to
dye; and after this the Judgment. And this appointment is concerning you, as
well as others. Therefore speak every one of you, as Job did, Job 30. 23. For I
know that thou will bring me to Death, and to the House appointed for all the
living. It Is not more certain you are alive, than it is certain, that you shall
shortly die. And woe to you if you lie still, and at last die in your
Wickedness. If Sin be the sting of Death, then so many Sins as you have been
guilty of, so many stings will your Death have. A King of Terrors indeed it
will be found; when with so many stings it is armed! Pray hard that a saving
change may be wrought in Heart and Life, before the great change come; and that
you may pass from Death to Life in a Spiritual Sense, before in a Natural Sense
you pass from Life to Death.

USE III. Of Direction more generally unto all; and here I shall direct you,

How to carry it under Affliction.

And likewise how after Affliction; that you may receive much good by
Affliction.

In the first place, I am to direct you, how to carry it under Affliction.

1. Under Affliction be persuaded and take great notice that God himself is
come to visit you. Though he be not the Author of sin, yet Penal Evils are all
from him; chastning is called the Chastning of the Lord, Heb. 12. 5.
Chastisements are styled his rebukes. His Providence is so extensive, that not
a Sparrow falls to the ground without Him. Nothing then befalls any of the
Children of men; but by Divine Appointment. Fix your Eyes therefore upon God.
He has taken you in hand, and out of his hand none can rescue you; and the
wound that is made, will remain uncured; till the same hand heal, which gave
it, Job 9 13. If God will not withdraw his anger, the Proud helpers do stoop
under him. The Chaldeans were the Ax; but Gods hand hewed Israel with it; they
were the Saw, but Gods hand did shake it. And when you see, it is really God
himself that visits you in Severity; behave your selves as Creatures ought to
do toward their Creator; who is infinitely above them; has been greatly
offended by them; can easily crush them; and yet is able and ready upon
Humiliation to cure them.

If the Invisible God, who corrects, were more eyed, in all the strokes he
give, you; this would have a mighty Efficacy to abase you before him, and to
make Affliction attain its end upon you, that an end might be put to your
Affliction.

2. Under Affliction, Justify God, and accept the Punishment of your Iniquity;
in Affliction Conscience may speak very plain and home, and so as that you have
nothing to reply; and the Spirit of God may set in with Conscience, and make
its charge more unanswerable. Heedfully listen to Conscience, and Mind the
Convictions of the Spirit. Oh search and try your ways, the ways that your
Hearts and Affections have gone; as well as the Paths you have broken with your
Feet. Be better acquainted with the evil nature of your own ways, and their
pernicious and destructive Tendency. Lay blame where it ought to be laid, upon
an evil Heart especially; for that is the fruitful womb, in which Sin is
conceived, that brings forth all the Evils, wherewith the man is defiled. It Is
the Evil Heart, which through unbelief departs from the Living God; and is
inclined to dead works, and lying Vanities.

Fail not to clear the Justice of God, as it is written, That thou might be
justified in thy sayings, and might overcome, when thou art judged, Romans 3.
4. Judge likewise and condemn your selves, and your Sin as the meritorious
cause of all your Sorrows and Sufferings. Never look upon Sin, but behold the
long train of Evils that follow after it; and if you were not delivered from
Sin it self, this train of Evils would run Parallel with Eternity. God requires
the Heart should be humbled, and accept the Punishment of its Iniquity. The
Heart must firmly believe that Sin is that, whereat God is displeased; that Sin
is the procuring Cause of all other Evils that are felt, and that the true
Reason of Gods Controversy, is because, even because his Word and Commandments
have been cast behind the back, despised and broken, Levit. 26. 41, 43.

3. Under Affliction, be sensible of the Plagues of your own Hearts; and
Consent with Earnest Desire to have them presently and thoroughly healed. The
Sickness and Perishing of the outward man, is for the restoring the inward man
to Health. The Humors, and Appetites, and Inclinations of the Body, are an
occasion of much Sin in the Soul; which should make you the more contented,
that the Flesh should be diseased, and pained, and ready to perish, that the
Spirit may be healed, and saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Corporal
Diseases, attain not their end, unless they make you sensible of Spiritual
Maladies. Is thy Head, thy Breast, thy Back, or any part of thy Body out of
Order? presently look with a diligent search into thy own Heart, to know what
that ailes; that there may be the more serious and speedy Application to the
great Physician of Souls.

Ephraim when chastized was sensible of the stubbornness of corrupted Nature,
and its backwardness to come under the Yoke of God. I was says he, as a Bullock
unaccustomed to the Yoke, and he prays not so much for the removal of the Rod,
as for Grace that might Convert him unto God, who did correct him. Afflictions
are Spiritual Medicines much made use of by the Lord who heals his People.
Sick-beds are the places where he Works great cures; when the Face is Pale,
when the Pulse beats disorderly, when the Blood is boiling hot, and the whole
Body in a Flame, and the frame of Nature seems just ready to be dissolved; all
this has a mighty Influence unto the Souls Healthiness and Prosperity. How are
dreggs then purged out, and how Pure, Humble, and Heavenly minded is the Heart
then!

4. Under Affliction, desire Instruction, and that you may learn all the
Lessons, which the Rod is sent to teach you. You are commanded to hear the Rod,
Mic. 6. 9. The Lords Voice cries unto the City, and the Man of Wisdom shall
see thy Name; hear ye the Rod and who has appointed it. The Rod has a Voice,
and it is strong and startling; if you will but heed it, it will be very
articulate and plain to you. Chastning is truly beatifical, makes the chastized
blessed, when the Lord does chastize and teach together, or gives Instruction
with and by Correction, Psalm. 94. 12. Blessed is the man, whom thou chastnest O
Lord, and teach him out of thy Law. When the Schoolmaster has a Rod in his
hand, has given several Lashes, and is ready upon neglects and new faults to
give more; how does the Scholar mind every Word his Master speaks to him! with
what Care and Diligence is his Lesson learned* The Rod of God should quicken
Attention to his Voice, and cause a most serious regard to his whole Will and
Pleasure.

Is the Lesson of the Rod concerning thy Pride? 1 Pet. 5. 5. Be clothed with
Humility, for God resists the Proud, but gives Grace to the Humble. Is the
Lesson of the Rod concerning thy Love to the World? 1 John 2. 15. Love not the
World, neither the things that are in the World; if any man love the World, the
love of the Father is not in him. Is the Lesson of the Rod concerning thy
Sloth? Heb. 6. 12. That ye be not slothful, but followers of them who through
Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. Is the Lesson of the Rod concerning
thy foolish fleshly and hurtful Lusts? 1 Pet. 2. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech
you as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly Lusts which war against the
Soul. Finally, Is the Lesson of the Rod concerning thy unruly Passions? Prove.
14. 29. He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding, but he that is
hasty of Spirit exalts Folly. So that it is very visible and exposed to the
view of all, Jam. 1. 20. The Wrath of man works not the Righteousness of God.
Ephesians. 4. 31, 32. Let all bitterness and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil
speaking be put away from you with all malice; and be ye kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another; even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you. Whatever the Lesson of the Rod be; let it be your care to be
thoroughly instructed in it; and practice in those who have learned to purpose.

5. Under Affliction, sincerely turn and seek to that God who smites you. A
thorough Conversion is the end of Correction. Take notice of the false ways in
which you have gone astray, and how near you were to the brink of Eternal
Perdition; venture not to take so much as one step farther, in Hells Road. But
return to God unfeignedly and with your whole Heart. Consent to be wholly His;
that your whole man should be at his Command, and have respect to all his
Precepts without Exception, Psalm. 119. 5, 6. Oh that my ways were directed to
keep thy Statutes! then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all
thy Commandments.

Judah is branded for this, that they refused to turn to him that smote them.
No wonder that Gods anger did abide, and that his hand was still felt very
heavy upon them, Isa. 9. 12, 13. For all this his anger is not turned away; but
his hand is stretched out still; for this People turns not to him that
smites them, neither do seek the Lord of Hosts. The hand that smites you, if
you will not turn, can give worse blows; nay it can give a deadly blow, that
may strike you quite down, both into the Grave and Hell together. The hand that
smites, alone can heal, therefore it concerns you to humble your selves under
it.

How great is the goodness of God, that he gives you leave to turn to him! that
he requires you to seek him! and that for no less than his Favor, his Grace,
and Eternal Glory, and Blessedness! And all this shall be yours, if you seek
diligently.

6. Under Affliction, take heed of despising the chastning of the Lord. Heb.
12. 5. Ye have forgotten the Exhortation, that speaks unto you as unto
Children, My Son despise not thou the chastning of the Lord. Chastning is
despised, when the Lords hand in chastning is not taken notice of, nor his end
in Correcting is Minded or Complied with; when neither his displeasure
manifested in rebukes is observed; nor Sin mourned for, which does displease
him. Thus for a while chastning was despised by him, you read of, Isa. 57. 17.
For the Iniquity of his Covetousness was I wroth and smote him, I hid me and
was wroth, and he went frowardly on in the way of his Heart. But at last he was
brought to a better temper. The Lord humbled him, and healed the frowardness of
his Heart; and likewise removed his stroke from him, V. 18. I have seen his
ways and will heal him, I will lead him also, and restore Comfort to him and to
his Mourners.

In Affliction take notice of God as the Afflicter, else you contemn him; take
notice of Sin, as the cause why you are afflicted; for if Sin be not laid to
Heart, that God whom you Sin against is disregarded. Nay Saints in a sense
despise chastning, if they don't behold that the Rod they feel is in their
Fathers hand, (for the Exhortation, the Apostle tells us, speaks as unto
Children,) and that it is a token of his Paternal Faithfulness and Love, Prove.
3. 12. Whom the Lord loves he corrects, even as a Father the Son in whom he
delights. To look upon Afflictions merely as evils is to despise them. They
ought to be looked upon as Arguments of Gods Fatherly Wisdom and Care; and as
Talents improvable to great Spiritual Advantage. The Cup is in the hand of a
Father, and all the Ingredients in it are healing. Every Member of Christ,
therefore should speak that Language, which his Head spoke before him, Joh. 18.
11. The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it?

7. Under Affliction, faint not, neither be weary of Correction. He is
infinitely wise who does correct, and therefore Correction shall not be
excessive but in measure, Jer. 30. 11. I am with thee, says the Lord to save
thee, I will not make a full end of thee, but will correct thee in measure and
not leave thee wholly unpunished. The measure of Affliction is such as he, who
is best able to judge, sees to be needful, and no more; 1 Pet. 1. 6. Now for a
season if need be, ye are in heaviness through many Temptations. God will
lighten your burden; or if he should add to your Load, he will proportion
Strength, that you may be able to bear it. Faint not under his hand, for when
he strikes he also sustains, and in Wrath remembers Mercy. Be willing that
Affliction should remain, till it is sanctified, and has done its work for which
'twas laid upon you. It Is sad, when Affliction goes off without doing any good
to the afflicted; when the Rod is like the first King that Israel had, given in
Gods Anger, and taken away in his Wrath.

When the Lord afflicts; his Dispensations are mixed Checker-work; Black and
White; Goodness and Severity together; and there should be a Mixture of Holy
Affections that are diverse one from the other, answerably in your Hearts. This
is notably represented by one of our English Poets, and his Verses have a great
deal of Sense and Direction in them.

Ah my dear angry Lord,
Since thou do Love yet strike; Herberts Bitter-sweet. P. 165.

Cast down yet help afford;
Sure I will do the like.
I will complain the Praise;
I will bewail, approve:
And all my four-sweet days,
I will lament and love.
Be not too eager for the removal of the stroke you smart under; that removal
is but a common Mercy; but the Sanctification of it, is peculiar kindness, that
which accompanies Salvation. If the Plaster lies not on long enough, it heals
not the Sore; if the Potion be cast up again, as soon as taken down, it works
not a cure. God knows when it is fittest to remove your trouble; therefore be
dump with Silence and wait with Patience till this fittest time comes. David
did so, though he was in an horrible Pit in the Miry Clay, he was not over
eager to be plucked out, but exercised Patience, and how Happy was the issue!
Psalm. 40. 1, 2, 3. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me and
heard my cry; he brought me up also out of an horrible Pit, out of the Miry
Clay, and set my Feet upon a Rock and established my goings. And he has put a
new Song in my Mouth, even Praise unto our God; many shall see it and fear and
trust in the Lord.

8. Under Affliction, let there be a most profound Subjection to the Father of
Spirits, Lights and Mercies. The Father of Spirits, will take special care of
Souls; and consult their Health and Reace, and endless welfare. If the Soul be
safe, the Body must be safe in the same Bottom. The Body that belongs to a
sanctified Soul, must be a Glorious Body at the Resurrection of the Just. And
since the Lord is the Father of Lights, you may conclude he perfectly
understands, what is most conducive to your Interest, and what kind and degree
of Affliction, is most expedient and best for you; and because he is the Father
of Mercies; Mercy he delights in, as a man does in his own offspring; he will
deal tenderly with you, Mercy shall not be forgotten in the greatest Severity,
Psalm. 103. 13. Like as a Father pittieth his Children, so the Lord pittieth
them that fear him; for he knows our frame and remembers we aye dust.
Subjection to God when he afflicts becomes you, and besides this Subjection is
the way of Life. Heb. 12. 9. Furthermore we have had Fathers of our Flesh, who
corrected us, and we gave them Reverence; shall we not much rather be in
Subjection to the Father of Spirits and live? Subjection to God is the wisest
course to have temporal Life prolonged, and lived to purpose, and Eternal Life,
at length vouchsafed.

In the second Place, I am to direct you how to carry it after Affliction; now
is a time of great danger, when the Heart is apt to show both its Wickedness
and Deceitfulness together, and to grow secure as if all Peril were over;
therefore,

1. Keep alive in your Hearts, the same Apprehensions of things after
Affliction which you had under Affliction. Things are really as they were,
though we of Sick grow well again, therefore our thoughts of them should not
alter. The great Truths revealed, and so much insisted on in the Word of God;
in Affliction had deep Impressions upon our Spirits. How clearly and
concernedly, did we then perceive, that Christ is the only Savior! that all
things were justly to be accounted loss that he might be gained! We looked upon
time as too precious a thing to be spent Idly or Wickedly. The Soul was looked
upon as more worth than the whole World, and more to be regarded; not to be
neglected for the Worlds sake, Mat. 16. 26. What shall it profit a man, if he
shall gain the whole World and lose his own Soul? or what shall a man give in
exchange for his Soul? How did the thoughts of Eternity affect our Hearts, when
we were in the depth of Affliction! Our Apprehensions of this Truth were
amazing. That all must quickly be in Eternity, and all must be unto Eternity,
either in Joy or Woe. Our Conceptions of these and such like things, were most
rectified in Affliction; therefore when Affliction is removed, our Judgments
should still remain the same. The concerns of another World should always be
esteemed far greater, than the highest concerns of this. Seriousness well
becomes us, in those matters which are of Everlasting Consequence, where
carelessness or mistake will issue in endless ruin; understanding Diligence in
Eternal Happiness.

2. After Affliction, be very Jealous over your own Spirits, which are so very
prone to deal treacherously both with God and your selves. You are not
naturally trusty to either; but unfaithful to God, and unfaithful to your own
Souls. Hearken how the Lord complains, Hos. 6. 7. They like men have
transgressed the Covenant, they have dealt treacherously against me. You do not
know your selves to be men, if you don't know your selves to be treacherous;
and strongly inclined to break through all obligations in Point of Duty,
Gratitude, and Interest it self; which you are under: ever since the first
Adams Apostasy and fall from God, his Posterity have a vehement Propension to
start aside alike deceitful bows.

A notable instance of the Hearts treachery in Afflictions, and instability
upon the removal of it, you have, Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36, 37. When he slew them
then they sought him, they returned and inquired early after God, they
remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God their Redeemer;
nevertheless they did flatter him with their Lips, and lied unto him with their
Tongues, for their Heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in
his Covenant. Men's Resolutions in Afflictions, are like Nautarum Vota, the Vows
of Mariners in a Storm, the first things that are broken when once they get
safe to Shore. Be sure therefore to check your hearts and lift them up to God
to secure them, when first you perceive them so much as begin to start aside.
Apostasy begins in the Heart, that does first turn back from God, then
afterward the steps decline from his ways; distrusting therefore your own
Hearts follow Solomon's Counsel, Prove. 4. 23. And keep them with all diligence,
and unto your own strictest Vigilance, add fervent Prayer, that the Lord would
make your Hearts clean Hearts, and that he would renew and keep your Spirits
right with him, Psalm. 51. 10.

3. Cry for Strength to be vouchsafed continually from above, to perform your
Resolutions made in the day of your Affliction and Distress. If you are not
strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his might, you will be too weak to do,
what your selves with the greatest firmness have seemed to purpose. And you
must pray hard, and it is worth praying for, that this Power may rest upon you.
The Psalmist saw his need of Strength from Heaven, he begged for it, and had
it, Psalm. 138. 3. In the day, when I cried thou answeredst me, and
strengthnedst me with strength in my Soul.

There are two sorts of Resolutions which are most commonly made, but neither
of them are kept; so as the Resolvers thought they would be. Resolutions merely
to stop and gag the Mouth of a clamorous Conscience; and Resolutions which are
made in men's own strength, who Question not, nor trouble their Heads much
about, their Ability and Integrity to perform them. These Resolutions shows
their falsehood, and fickleness; and how bold men are to dissemble with God; and
how foolish in trusting and cheating themselves.

But the Religious Purposes of the Psalmist were of another Nature, in another
manner. He is indeed very serious and Peremptory in his Resolution, and
confirmed it with a Promissory Oath; Psalm. 119. 106. I have sworn and I will
perform it, that I will keep thy Righteous Judgments. But he is sensible, that
neither his own Power, Promise, nor Oath were strong enough to hold him; and
keep him steadfast to these Testimonies of God, therefore he prays twice
together to be upheld, Psalm. 119. 16, 17. Uphold me according to thy Word that
I may live, and let me not be ashamed of my Hope. And again, Hold thou me up,
and I shall be safe, so shall I have respect to thy Statutes continually.

After Affliction, take heed of that which your Hearts naturally are most prone
to Idolize. Whatever has had Gods Room, that is to say, the highest Room in
your Hearts; is certainly your Idol. Be very strict in the Inquisition to find
the Idol out, and be sure to depose it; let it be at the Footstool, while the
Lord alone in the Throne, and has by far the Preeminence above it in your
Affections. If any of you Love Pleasure more than God, Pleasure is your Idol,
or if you love Gain more than God, or if you love Relations, Preferments, or
Ornaments more than God; these things are Idolized; now remember how vain the
Idol was in your Affliction and Distress, and how helpless then it was found.
The delights of Sense, the earthly Treasures, the Relations; and other things
you were so fond of, you were forced to see that help was not in them.

The Heathen Poet notably expresses this.

Non domus, and fundus; non aeris acervus and auri;
Aegroto domini deduxit corpore febres;
Non animo curas -- Horat. Epist 2. l. 1.
Which may be thus Englished.

Nor House, nor Lands, nor heaps of golden Ore;
Can feverish owners unto Health restore;
Nor ease their Minds of Care. --
Idolatry in a special manner provokes the Lord to Jealousy; The bowing of the
Knee to Images, as Pagans and Papists do; displeases the Only true God. But if
that leading affection of Love, which is one of the highest pieces of Worship,
is placed principally upon any thing besides God; hereby his anger and
jealousy is blown up to a great heat and hight; and mark, what the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 10. 22. Do we provoke the Lord to Jealousy? are we stronger than
he? As his Strength is infinitely beyond ours; so there is an Infiniteness in
the Folly and Madness, when any Adventure to provoke him to Jealousy. Love is
the greatest Grace, 1 Cor. 13. 13. Love is the first and great Commandment;
what ever therefore is most apt to steal away your Love from God, keep your
Hearts, while you live, shut against it with an Holy Indignation, Hos. 14. 8.
Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with Idols? I have heard him and
observed him: I am like a green Fir Tree, from me is thy Fruit found.

5. After Affliction, be diligent against the Sin, which does most easily beset
you, Heb. 12. 1. Let us lay aside every weight, and the Sin which does so
easily beset us, and let us run with Patience the race which is set before us.
Every Sin is a Weight and Clog. I wish that every one looked upon it as such!
But the Sin, which by Reason of our Complexions, Callings, or the general
Practice in the Age and Place we live in; is most apt to Prevail; that is the
heavy Weight, and the worst Clog of all to hinder us in our running the
Christian Race.

You had need to be watchful against the Corruption of your Nature which though
there be the Grace of God in Truth in you, is far from being perfectly healed;
and is ready upon all Occasions, and Temptations, to break forth, to the
displeasing of God, the wounding of your Consciences, the defiling of your
Souls, and the disturbance of your Peace.

And whatsoever Iniquity it is, which because it pretends your Security from
danger, or your Pleasure and Gain; you find your selves most strongly addicted
to; verily there is need of the stricter watch, and more fervent Prayer; that
you may not be overcome by, nay that you may not so much as enter into
Temptation. The Sin which does most easily beset you, has already done you the
greatest mischief, and is likely to do you more still; and if you should at
last fall into Hell; This would be one of the heaviest weights to sink you
thither.

6. After Affliction beware of sloth and Idleness. Live the rest of your time
in the Flesh, not to the Lusts of men; but to the Will of God, 1 Pet. 4. 2. Let
not your own Lusts, as so many Cormorants devour your time, while you are
making Provision for them, and fulfilling them. And let not the Lusts, Humors
and Pleasures of others have you and your time at Command. And though they
think it strange, that you run not with them to the same excess of Riot,
speaking evil of you, yet be not discouraged; for they shall give an account
unto him that is ready to Judge the quick and the dead, 1 Pet. 4. 4, 5. And
that Judge will condemn them, and will Approve and Reward your Diligence in
seeking him, and working for him.

You have not improved your Afflictions, if you have not ceased to wast, if you
have not learned to improve your time. In your Sickness and Distress, what a
view had you of Eternity? and what a trouble was it to you, that such a deal of
time had been stolen away and lost in Sin and Vanity? Perhaps Eternity was so
amazing, in the vastness and unchangeableness of it; that you concluded, that
if you were to live Methuselahs Age; 'twould be unreasonable to mispend
wilfully one hour of it. Now after Affliction is over; and so little of your
time is behind; will you be lavish of that time still: will you lose any more?
Oh see the Wisdom of redeeming Time, Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. See then that ye walk
circumspectly not as Fools but as wise, redeeming the time because the days are
evil. And fear the loss of time, 1 Pet. 1. 17. If ye call on the Father, who
without respect of Persons judges according to every man's work; pass the time
of your sojourning here in fear.

Be sure to lose no more; for to lose all your time; is most certainly to lose
your selves, and that for ever. In the other World there is no obtaining Mercy
by those who all the while they were in this World, slighted Mercy. There is no
working out your own Salvation after death; if all your Lifetime Salvation be
neglected.

7. After Affliction be full of gratitude, Holy Ingenuity and Love. The Calves
of your Lips, most acceptable Sacrifices; should be offered frequently, nay
continually, with an enlarged Heart, with a willing mind. David was in danger
of losing his Life among the Philistines, God preserves it. How Fruitful are
his Lips in Praises! Psalm. 34. 1, 2, 3, 4. I will bless the Lord at all times,
his Praise shall continually be in my Mouth; my Soul shall make her boast in
the Lord; the humble shall hear thereof and be glad. Oh magnify the Lord with
me, and let us exalt his Name together! I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and
delivered me from all my fears. Hezekiah had been delivered from deadly
Sickness, he was raised by special Favor and Power; when according to Nature,
Death was unavoidable. Coming so unexpectedly and so quickly from a seeming
Deathbed to the Temple, how does he make that Temple Ring with his
Thanskgivings! Isa. 38. 17, 19. Behold for Peace, I had great bitterness; but
thou have in love to my Soul delivered it from the Pit of Corruption; thou have
cast all my Sins behind thy back. The living, the living, he shall Praise thee
as I do this day: the Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth.

Not only must your Mouths be filled with Praises, but your Hearts with Love;
and Ingenuity should make you study what to render unto God. Observe the
working of the Psalmists grateful Breast, after God had delivered his Soul from
Death, his Eyes from Tears and his Feet from falling, Psalm. 116. 1. I love the
Lord because he has heard my Voice and my Supplication. V. 3. The Sorrows of
Death compassed me, the Pains of Hell got hold upon me. V. 5, 6. Gracious is
the Lord and Righteous, yea our God is merciful; I was brought low and he
helped me. V. 7. Return to thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee. V. 12. What shall I render to the Lord for all his
Benefits toward me? He thought nothing too good, nothing too much for that
God, who had been so good to him; who had done so much for him!

Still you should be contriving to make more suitable returns for what you have
received, and with your Praises and Service, your Hearts and Love must be the
Principal part of the returns you make. Love lies in Desire and Delight; no
Mercies so desirable as the Father of Mercies; God Himself is more to be
delighted in than any of the Benefits he bestows. Take heed of loving
Deliverance more than your Deliverer. Mercies themselves are Idolized, and it
provokes the Lord to Jealousy; if they are prized and delighted in, more than
the Lord God of your Mercies. Therefore the Psalmist, though he valued
Deliverance from Enemies, and Trouble; yet principally rejoices in God himself,
Psalm. 9. 2. I will be glad and rejoice in Thee, I will Praise thy Name O thou
most High! Rejoice in God more than in the return of Health, more than in the
Prolongation of Life, or any other Comfort and Enjoyment. Mercies attain their
end, when God is more endeared to you by them. God will be all in all in
Heaven; and the more he is your all at present, the more of Heaven you enjoy on
Earth.

8. After Affliction be sensible you are not safe in your own Hands; therefore
commit the keeping of your Souls to God, 1 Pet. 4. 19. Let them commit the
keeping of their Souls to Him in well-doing, as unto a Faithful Creator. If you
are indeed wise and know your selves, you will distrust your selves.
Self-Confidence is an undeniable Argument of Self-Ignorance. Trust your selves
in no hands, but those out of which none shall ever be able to pluck you, and
those are hands of Christ and the Father, Joh. 10. 27, 28, 29. My Sheep hear my
Voice, and I know them and they follow me, and I give unto them Life Eternal,
and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand; My
Father which gave them me is greater than All, and none is able to pluck them
out of my Fathers hand. Not only in the Hour and Agony of Death; but all your
lives long; every Day and Hour, you have need still to be commending your
Spirits unto God: for they are safe with none besides, Psalm. 31. 5. Into thy
hands do I commit my Spirit, thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth.

USE IV. Of Counsel more peculiarly to Saints, who are afflicted. Show your
selves to be Saints indeed, and let your Graces now be much in Exercise. Spices
beaten in the Mortar, are the more Fragrant; Afflicted Saints should manifest a
rare and excellent Spirit; but no Dissatisfaction or Discontent; considering
the Truth of this Doctrine, that they are afflicted for their good. You that
are Saints; in your Troubles you need Counsel; and it is not to be doubted but
you will heed it; I shall give it in these particulars.

1. Be Patient whatever your Affliction is. That God whom you serve is patient
toward Man; has been patient toward you; how many affronts and Provocations
has he born, put up, and pardoned! The Lord Jesus Christ was a Pattern of
Patience and Meekness; When he was reviled of Men, he reviled not again; when
he suffered he threatened not, 1 Pet. 2. 23. Nay many had Life by his Blood, who
imbrued their hands in that Blood and shed it. And when it Vivificat^^ Christi
sanguine, etiam qui fudit sanguinem Christi; Talis est Christi ac tanta
patientia; quae nisi talis existeret; Paulum quoque Apostolum Ecclesia non
haberet. Cypr. de bono Patientiae. p. mihi 316.
pleased his Father to bruise him and to put him to grief, yet as a Lamb
brought to the slaughter; and as a Sheep before her Shearers is dumb; so he
opened not his Mouth. Isa. 53. 7. The Members of the Body should imitate Christ
the Head in Patience.

It may be an Inducement to a quiet bearing of Affliction; that far worse has
been demerited by the very best, than is endured, Ezr. 9. 13. Thou our God have
punished us less than our Iniquities deserve. But the Benefit of Affliction,
proves that Patience is a Grace with a great deal of Reason in it; for who can
rationally take it ill, when good comes to them; and spiritual kindnesses,
which are the most real kindnesses, are done them?

I have demonstrated the good of Affliction to the Saints; I shall now
demonstrate, the good of Patience.

Patience is your great Security, and makes you to keep Possession of your
Selves, Luke 21. 19. In your Patience, possess ye your Souls. A Patient man,
whatever he loses, whatever he suffers, is still himself, not discomposed, not
distracted and hurried away from the Conduct and Satisfaction of that Holy
Wisdom, and the Grace of God which is in Him. By Patient Continuance in
well-doing, and by patient Suffering rather than he will cease in well-doing,
his Soul is safe, and shall never be lost; for he that endures to the end, the
same shall be saved. Mat. 24. 13. And in what a calm has he Possession of his
own Spirit, when his outward Condition is most Stormy and Tempestuous! He has
cast Anchor within the Vail; and that Anchor is sure and steadfast, Heb. 6. 19.
Keeps his Mind from Fluctuation and tossing too and fro. Patience is the Souls
Garrison, and preserves it in that Peace; which neither Earth nor Hell are able
to disturb.

Patience is that which makes you perfect, Jam. 1. 4. But let Patience have its
perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire wanting nothing. The more there
is of Christian Patience, and Strength to persevere both in Active and Passive
Obedience, which God calls you to; it is an Argument you are arrived to the
greater Degree of Perfection* in Grace and Holiness. And besides this, Patience
will make you less concerned at those Wants; which to impatient Creatures are
so sensible an Affliction. He that is very Patient under Sickness, may truly be
said not so much to want health; He that is Patient under Poverty, does not so
much want Riches. The Christian is not disturbed at the want of those things,
which he can be contentedly without. Patience made the Apostle go through great
variety of Conditions with a most even and composed Mind and Spirit, 2 Cor. 6.
4, 8, 9, 10. In all things approving our selves as the Ministers of God in much
Patience, in Affliction, in Necessities, in Distresses; By Honor and
Dishonor, by evil Report and good Report, as deceivers and yet true; as
unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold we live; as chastned, and not
killed; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as Poor, yet making many Rich; as
having nothing and yet possessing all things.

Patience very well becomes you, considering the Relation you stand in to God,
who is a Father too Good and Wise, to give to any of his Children, a just
ground for unsubmission, things cannot be ordered better or with more Wisdom
than He orders them. The compliance of your Wills with His; will be a great
evidence that you are renewed in the Spirit of your Minds, and that you have
the new Heart promised in the new Covenant. And this Patience of yours being
manifested in whatever you feel from the Hand of God or Man; will be a great
Credit to Religion; and a Conviction to the World, that there is a great
Efficacy in the Truth of the Gospel, and in the Grace of God, which can carry
you so far beyond the Strength of Nature.

Patientia est quae nos Deo commendat and servat. Ipsa est quae iram temperat;
quae linguam fraenat, quae mentem gubernat, pacem custodit, incendium
simultatis extinguit, coercet potentiam divitum, inopiam pauperum refovet;
facit humiles in prosperis, in adversis fortes; contra injurias and contumelias
mites; tentationes expugnat, persecutiones tolerat, passiones and martyria
consummat. Cyprian. De Patientiae bono, page mihi 319.
Finally Patience will make and keep you acceptable to God, it will restrain
Anger, and every other disturbing Passion, it will bridle the Tongue; keep the
Spirit under Rule and Government, it will extinguish Contention, and keep Peace
from being broken. It will be coercive of the Power of the Rich; and it will
refresh the neediness of the Poor. It will make you humble in the height of
Prosperity; so strong as not to faint in the depth of Adversity; it will make
you mild against the greatest injuries, it will break the force of Temptation,
and fortify you against Persecution; though it should rise so high as
Martyrdom. Let all this persuade you to the exercise of this admirable Grace of
Patience; and see that it fail not in Affliction. Cry to the Lord for the
increase of it, and that nothing may be too hard or heavy for it. He is called,
(...). The God of Patience and Consolation; the more Patience is wrought in
you; you are likely to Experience the greater Comfort.

2. You that are afflicted Saints, Pray that your Faith may be so far from
failing, that it may continually be increasing. Faith is a Grace of great
Necessity and Use; the Christian lives by Faith; he sees by Faith; he stands by
Faith; he works by Faith; and is kept through Faith unto Salvation. In
Affliction Faith is the Saints mighty support; for Faith bears hard upon the
Faithfulness of God, which will never fail; God is faithful not only in giving
the good things he has promised; but also in vouchsafing Correction which he
sees it is needful. The Psalmist speaks thus. I have believed, therefore have I
spoken, I was greatly afflicted, Psalm. 116. 10. The greatness of Affliction
hindered not the Acting of his Faith; but his Faith hindered his fainting under
the greatest Affliction, Psalm. 27. 13. I had fainted, unless I had believed to
see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living.

God may be trusted in, though he hides his face; though there are rebukes and
frowns in his Countenance; God may be trusted in, though his ways are Dark and
Cloudy, and his Hand heavy. Nay Holy Job says, Though he slay me yet will I
trust in him, Job 13. 15. Though the Providence of God seems hardly
reconcilable with his Promises; but looks as if it thwarted his Promises; this
is only Deceptio visus, the Eyes mistake. Let Faith believe what Sense cannot
discern, and Sense will be forced at last to grant, that Faith was in the right.

In all Afflictions God is making good his Everlasting Covenant, which is well
ordered in all things and sure, he is still pursuing his design of Mercy
toward his People, and promoting the Work of Grace, and Salvation. Believe
this and rest satisfied, only let desires be strong, that what God designs in
sending Affliction, may be attained; and that his Discipline may be to good
effect and purpose.

3. You afflicted Saints, give Glory to God, who afflicts you. Here you must
know that God is of none, but of himself; his Perfections undenied; He is
unchangeable, no Addition can be made to his Essential Excellency or his
Blessedness. As all that come to him find him All-sufficient, so, which is a
great deal more, He is Self-sufficient; Infinitely more must be to the
Blessedness of God, then would be enough, for the Blessedness of ten thousand
Worlds of Men and Angels. So that your glorifying of God is apprehending,
acknowledging, and declaring his Glory, not making him really more glorious
than he was.

Glorify God by Believing him to be what he has revealed himself, by giving
him the highest room in your Hearts; depend upon him for all things. This
Fountain of living Waters is glorified, when Saints always lie at it,
perpetually derive Streams from it, and the broken Cisterns are forsaken.
Glorify God by an higher Valuation of his Favor in Christ; and a greater
Contempt of earthly things in Comparison. Glorify God by more willing service,
and resolute cleaving to him. God is honored indeed, when nothing can separate
the Saints from him: When neither the fiercest Wind (to allude to the Tabb) can
blow away, nor the hottest Sun can make them to cast away that change of
Raiment with which he has clothed them. When they can say with the Church of
old, Psalm. 44. 17, 18, 19. All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten
Thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant; Our Heart is not turned
back from thee, neither have our steps declined from thy ways; though thou have
sore broken us in the Place of Dragons, and covered us with the Shadow of
Death.

Finally, Glorify God by such Works, as are not a denial of God; but a
Demonstration, what a Lord he is; and what his Grace is able to effect. The
Works of many Professors prove them Atheists, Tit. 1. 16. They profess that
they know God, but in Works deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and to
every good work reprobate. But when Saints by good Works are shining Lights;
hereby Glory redounds to their Heavenly Father. For as the Works of Creation,
are an Argument to prove most plainly an Eternal Power and Godhead; so the
Works of New Creatures, so different from, and so excellent above the Works of
others; make it evident that God is in these New Creatures; and his Grace is
with them of a Truth.

4. You afflicted Saints, observe the Special Sins, for which your Father is
angry with you, and corrects you. That Grace which is in you makes you weary of
its contrary; and the more Grace you have, the more weary you will be of Sin
which remains in you. Cry to be cleansed from faults that are so secret; that
they hardly are discerned to be faults, Psalm. 19. 12. Lurking Fevers, how
dangerous are they! and much more dangerous are latent Corruptions. Therefore
Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born Chastisement, I will not
offend any more; that which I see not teach thou me, if I have done Iniquity I
will do no more. Job 34. 31, 32. Find out, and purge out all the old Leaven,
whether it be the Leaven of Pride, or Hypocrisy, or Earthly-mindedness, or
Uncharitableness or any other Wickedness, that ye may be a new Lump as ye are
unleavened. The bitter Cup is intended as a purging Potion. Earnestly therefore
desire, that the Iniquity which has most prevailed, and defiled you, may be
taken away.

5. You afflicted Saints answer the Lords Expectations from you, lest Wrath
from the Lord be upon you. He is sometimes very severe to them, that are very
dear to him. He forgives their Iniquities, but takes Vengeance of their
Inventions, Psalm. 99. 8. That eminent Moses being provoked in his Spirit spoke
unadvisedly with his Lips, Psalm. 106. 33. And that Word cost him his Life. He
falls, before Israel entered into Canaan. Hezekiah was a Gracious Man, full of
Faith himself; and a Prince very zealous for the Reformation of Judah. See what
a Character is given him, 2 Chronicles. 31. 20, 21. Thus did Hezekiah throughout all
Judah, and wrought that which was good and Right, and Truth before the Lord his
God; And in every Work, that he began in the Service of the House of God; and
in the Law, and in the Commandments to seek his God, he did it with all his
Heart and prospered. And yet this Excellent King after Affliction, not watching
his Heart, but Suffering it to be lifted up; Wrath it is said was upon him, 2 Chronicles. 32. 35.

Though Gods Love to his Children be never turned into hatred; yet
notwithstanding his Love to them, he may be very angry with them; he may take
them up and lash them in the view of all, to vindicate his Holiness, and to
make it evident, that he takes no pleasure in Wickedness by whomsoever it is
committed. After you have felt his strokes, fear your Fathers Frowns and Anger;
please him in all things and abound in so doing; this he justly looks for,
after he has shown Care and Kindness both in Correcting you, and in flinging
the Rod out of his hand.

6. Let the Rod, you have been chastized with, cause you to mend your Pace in
Heavens way. Why should Saints be as so many Snails, who ought rather to be
swifter than Eagles hasting to the Prey? Is there such an Holy and Mighty
Spirit to help your Infirmities? Are there such Promises of assisting Grace? Is
there such a glorious Crown and Prize at the end of the race? And does your
Salvation grow nearer and nearer every day? Oh put on with greater speed. And
let not a greater Violence be used by earthly men for mere trifles; than is by
you, for the Heavenly Kingdom. Imitate those wisely eager ones, Mat. 11. 12.
From the days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
Violence, and the Violent take it by force. Imitate the Apostle Paul, who
though he had labored so abundantly, was far from tiring, but press't on still
with greater forwardness toward the Mark, for the prize of the high Calling of
God.

7. Abound in that Work for God here upon Earth, which cannot be done when you
come to Heaven. Fill up your Time, well with that business, which will cease
when you enter upon Eternity. The Preachers of the Gospel may do much at
present, which they cannot do hereafter. Now they may warn Sinners to flee from
the Wrath to come. Now they may call them to turn from their evil ways and
live; now they may pray them in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God. Now they
may take heed to all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made them
overseers to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own Blood,
Acts 20. 28. And take heed to their Ministry which they have received in the
Lord, that they may fulfill it, Col. 4. 17. Now they may show themselves in all
things Patterns of good Works, Examples to the Flock; always laboring
fervently for them in Prayer, that they may stand perfect and complete in all
the Will of God.

Christians also have their Work now to do; which cannot be done in the other
World. Now they may adorn the Doctrine of God their Savior in all things. Now
with well-doing they may put to silence the Ignorance of foolish men, 1 Pet. 2.
15. Now by a Conscientious Performance of Relative Duties, they may be great
Blessings to their Relations, and greatly promote their Eternal Interest. They
may be blameless and harmless without rebuke; in the midst of a crooked and
perverse Nation, acting like the Children of God, shining as Lights in the
World, holding forth the Word of Life, Phil. 2. 14, 15, 16.

But when once Death has seized on the Preachers of the Word, their Mouths are
stopped with Earth, and they are effectually silenced; they can speak unto, and
oversee the Church no longer. At Death also Christian's Work is at an end in
this World; therefore before the approach of Deaths Night, when it will be too
late to work; Let all in the mean time work the harder.

8. Though you are delivered out of Affliction, recovered from your Distempers,
be sure to die daily. So did the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 31. Dying daily, implies a
daily Meditation of Death, looking upon your selves every day within the reach
of Death, and a continual preparedness for Death, and a steadfast Resolution
rather to suffer Death, than to make Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience.
Do not reckon upon long Life; but be persuaded, to live well is to live indeed.
Live as those that must die certainly; as those that may die suddenly. Be not
offended at the Cross of Christ, though it should ly so heavy upon you, as to
press you to Death. Sinful saving the Life, is losing it; but they who are
valiant for the Truth of Christ, and will venture the losing of Life for
Christ's sake, shall find it, Mat. 16. 25. And if natural Life be continued; be
earnestly desirous that Spiritual Life and liveliness may be increased. Pray to
be quickened, as the Psalmist often does, Psalm. 119. and look unto Jesus, who is
a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45. The first Man Adam was made a living Soul,
the last Adam was made a quickening Spirit. As he has given you Life, so he is
ready to give it more and more abundantly; this will make you to live to him,
and to be unweariedly active for him. The quickened Apostl's earnest desire was
that Christ might be magnified by him; his Life was at his Lords Service; and
he was ready to die also to serve him. Phil. 1. 20. According to my earnest
Expectation and my Hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that with all
boldness, as always, so now also, Christ shall be magnified in my Body, whether
it be by Life or by Death.

USE V. Of Consolation to Saints to whom it is so good, when they are
afflicted. Unto the Righteous there arises Light in the Darkness. The Rainbow,
the emblem of Peace and token of the Covenant, is often seen in the blackest
Cloud. The Saints are never in such depths; but Comfort belongs to them, it is
good for them to be as they are; nay all things considered; it is best for them.

Quod sis, esse velis, nihilque malis. Believers should never say, they had
rather it might be otherwise with them; than God sees it fit it should be; when
the Plough of Affliction pierces deepest, Light and Joy is sowing; and the
Hopes of what at last will be reaped, should allay the Sorrow wherewith the
sowing is attended. The Grounds of Consolation to afflicted Saints are these.

1. Gods goodness is unquestionable, however he is pleased to deal with his
People. Let them be plagued, let them be chastned never so sore; yet God is
good to Israel, even to them that are of a clean Heart, Psalm. 73. 1. God is
their God, and his dealings are ever according to his Gracious Covenant. His
wounding of them, is not like the wounds given by an Enemy, but like the
Chyrurgians Lancings in order to greater soundness and for Life's Preservation,
Isa. 27. Has he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? No no, great is
the Difference between the Rod and the Scorpion; between Believers being
chastned as Children; and the Wicked their falling into the hands of the Living
God, who takes Vengeance upon them.

2. That good which Saints receive by Affliction is Spiritual. The Soul has a
great kindness done to it. The Conscience is bettered as to calmness and
cleanness, the Heart is made more pure, the Spirit of the Lord works a greater
change into the Image of God; so that there is an advancing from Glory to
Glory. When Job had been some while afflicted, his Spirit began to run more
clear, Job 23. 10. But he knows the way that I take, when he has tried me, I
shall come forth like Gold. The Fire and Furnace in Zion purges the Dross, and
how then does the Gold shine!

3. That good which the Saints reap by Affliction, is peculiar and
distinguishing. Wicked men are either stupid under Affliction; or if they are
startled; they return to their former Security after Affliction. To have
Affliction sanctified is a favor peculiar to Gods peculiar People.

4. This good which the Saints receive by Affliction at present, is an earnest
to them of Eternal good things in the other World. Afflictions are part of the
Purgatory, through which the Saints pass and are made meet for Glory. The
Popish Purgatory is a mere Invention for that Antichristian Churches secular
Gain. The Dead find it to be nothing; but vast is the Worldly gain accrueing
hereby to the living; by this Craft comes in the Priests Wealth. But the
Purgatory of Affliction, promotes Purity, and is really Beneficial. The Rod at
present yields the peaceable fruits of Righteousness, and when these are
brought forth a Crown of Righteousness is assured, 2 Timothy 4. 8.

I have done with the first Doctrine, That Saints are afflicted for their good.

I shall be Brief in the Second which follows.

D. 2. The second Doctrine, which I raised from the Text was this. The Rod of
God is a means to make the Word of God to be the better Learned, Psalm. 119. 67.
Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy Word. Affliction
was the means to put a stop to the Psalmists wandering; it brought his Feet into
the right Path and established his goings. What a light shines in the School of
Affliction? Things are seen naked there! Sin; the World, Hell and Destruction;
are all naked. The great things of the Word, are plainly seen to be great and
good indeed; and are no longer looked upon as strange things.

In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall,

1. Show you when the Word of God is indeed learned.

2. What influence the Rod of God has unto the better Learning of his Word.

3. Make Application.

In the first Place, I am to show you, when the Word of God is indeed and
aright learned.

1. Learning the Word implies, a Persuasion of the Words Divine Authority and
Truth. He has not learned the Word, who does not believe it to be indeed the
Word of God, who cannot lie, 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is given by
Inspiration of God. Men's Contradictions to the Word are audacious and damnable
falsehoods. And if Angels from Heaven should speak contrary to it, they must not
have our Assent, but our Anathema, Gal. 1. 8. But though we or an Angel from
Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you; than that which we have preached unto
you; let him be accursed. They who have learned the Word of God, perceive the
Harmony of all its parts; and believe the whole, and are influenced by that
belief, for the certain Truth of the Word makes it most Encouraging and
Comfortable to the Saints; and with what Sweet Security do they rest upon it!
And the same Truth should make it very Terrible to all impenitent Sinners!

2. Learning the Word implies, an observing the Scope and Design of the Word of
God; now the Design and Scope of it is, the Glory of God; and Man's Happiness
and Salvation. God cannot have an higher end in what he does, than Himself, for
he is above all; therefore he has made and does all things for Himself; and
truly since of him and through him are all things; he is worthy that all things
should be referred to him, and that in all things, he should always be
glorified, Romans 11. 36. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things
to whom be Glory for ever, Amen. In Subordination to his own Glory; the Lord
designs man's welfare, Luke 2. 14. Glory be to God in the Highest, on Earth
Peace, good will toward men. When the Word of God is truly learned; great
notice is taken of its design; and the Learners aim is accordingly directed.
The Glory of God and man's truest good are inseparably conjoined. So that this
is past doubt, when man most Minds Gods Honor, he Minds most his own Interest
and Happiness.

3. Learning the Word, implies taking due notice of the Purity and Holiness of
the Word of God. Psalm. 12. 6. The Words of the Lord are pure Words, as! Silver
tried in a Furnace of Earth purified seven times. The Psalmist saw this Purity,
and did not take offense at it, but very much liked it, and loved the Word the
better for it, Psalm. 119. 140. Thy Word is very pure; therefore thy Servant
loves it. God the Author of this Word is of Purer Eyes than to behold
Iniquity; no wonder that the Word is purer than to allow of any Iniquity. The
Word will not permit Sin in the Tabernacle, Job 11. 14. If Iniquity be in thy
Hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacle. The Word
prohibits our contentedly Suffering Sin to ly upon our Brother, Levit. 19. 17.
Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy Heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
Neighbor; and not suffer Sin upon him. The hands must be cleansed, and so must
especially the Heart, Jam. 4. 8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to
you, cleanse your Hands ye Sinners, purify your Hearts ye double minded. If
Sin commands the Tongue, Religion is but vain; if Sin be regarded in the Heart,
Prayer is to no purpose. How excellent and pure is this Word of God! and those
that learn it see both the Necessity and Excellency of Purity and Holiness; and
they hunger and thirst, and follow after Righteousness and true Holiness.

4. Learning the Word, implies beholding wondrous things in the Word of God,
Psalm. 119. 18. Open thou my Eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy
Law. And V. 129. Thy Testimonies are wonderful, therefore does my Soul keep
them. The Light which shines forth from hence, is mavelous, 1 Pet. 2. 2. That
ye should show forth the Praises of him, who has called you out of Darkness
into mavelous Light. The Mercy is amazing; which saves from so much Sin;
prevents no less than endless Misery; and brings those to Eternal Life, who
deserved to die the Eternal Death, Jud. v. 21. Keep your selves in the Love of
God, looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal Life. That
Wisdom, which appears in the contrivance of Man's Redemption by Christ the
Mediator, is the Admiration of the elect Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 3. 10.
To the intent that now unto thee Principalities and Powers in the Heavenly
Places, might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God. And the Love
of God in Christ, is most sweetly astonishing! It Is without Motive, without
Measure, without Alteration, its height and length and depth and breadth are
past our reach and finding out. And how highly are those who are interested in
this Love, advanced! 1 John 3. 1. Behold what manner of Love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God! and all his Sons
are heirs of Everlasting Glory.

5. Learning the Word, implies knowing the Truth as it is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 20,
21. But ye have not so learned Christ; if so be that ye have heard him, and
been taught by him, as the Truth is in Jesus. To know the Truth as it is in
Jesus, is to know Christ himself, and all Divine Truths with respect to Christ.
He is the Center in which all the Lines in Scripture meet. If God be looked upon
without respect to this Mediator; the remembrance of the Holy and Righteous and
Almighty Jehovah; must needs be terrible and confounding to guilty and defiled
Sinners. But the Knowledge of God in Christ, is beneficial and reviving; for in
Christ he is accessible, and a God in Covenant; and how encouraging is the
Knowledge of Duty; when we look to Jesus, because in Christ we have assisting
Grace to do it sincerely; and when it is thus done, in Him we have acceptance, 1
Pet. 2. 5. Ye also as lively stones are built up a Spiritual House, an Holy
Priesthood to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
Though the House be Spiritual; though the Priesthood be Holy, though the
Sacrifice be Spiritual; yet it is not upon their own, but upon the account of
Jesus Christ, that they are acceptable. Looking to Jesus, we may look upon Sin
and Misery without dismay, nay with thankful Hearts, for He saves from both,
and through him an abundant entrance is administered into the Everlasting
Kingdom. He has not learned the Word to any purpose, who does not know that
Christ is all in all, and fills all in all.

6. Learning the Word of God, implies feeling the Power and Efficacy of this
Word; till the Spirit accompanies it and sets it home upon the Heart; and there
is an experience of its Power; the Word is not aright learned. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5.
Our Gospel came to you, not in Word only, but in Power also, and in the Holy
Ghost and in much Assurance. The Holy Ghost made you sensible of the Gospels
Efficacy, and its Efficacy assured you of its Divinity. So 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Ye
received it not as the Word of men, but as it is in Truth the Word of God,
which works effectually in you that believe. This Word shows its Power in
pulling down strong holds, in casting down Imaginations; and every high thing
that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God; and in bringing thoughts
into Captivity and Obedience to Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. The Spirit of God
wrought Signs and Wonders and diverse Miracles, according to his own Will; for
the Confirmation of the Gospel when first it was published in the World; and
these were part of the Spirit's Demonstration of its Truth. And Miracles in the
New Creation cease not to be wrought still by the same Spirit. The Word is made
an effectual means, to make the dead in Sin alive to God, to make the Blind to
see, and the Lame to walk in the Way of Gods Commandments.

7. Learning the Word, implies a ready and Hearty embracing, what the Word of
God Offers and Promises. Mammon and Satan make but very poor and mean offers
and their Promises are deceitful, they can offer nothing but what is temporal,
the things they boast of are only good in appearance; and they quickly vanish
away. Indeed there is something that is Eternal, but it is Eternal Woe and
Misery, that abides the worldly and the wicked; but this Satan studiously
endeavors to conceal from them. Whereas the offers of the Gospel are great and
glorious, worthy of all acceptance, and by all to be accepted; the Promises
here are so firm, that they shall remain, when Heaven and Earth shall pass
away, Psalm. 119. 152. Concerning thy Testimonies, I have known of old, that
thou have founded them for ever. If the Children of men might have their wish,
and would wish but wisely; they would wish, for what the Word assures to all
Accepters of it. Here is justifying Righteousness for the guilty and Condemned;
here is Healing, Sanctifying Grace for the Diseased and Defiled; here is
Strength for the Weak, and Comfort for them that are cast down; and for lost
Souls great and Everlasting Salvation. How can he be said to have learned the
Word of God; or to know when he is well offered; by whom such offers are
refused?

8. Learning the Word, implies the Subjection and Conformity of the whole man
to the commands of the Word of God. Promises and Privileges are to be studied
and embraced; and Precepts and Commands are to be received. He that casts the
commands behind his back, is very Presumptuous in applying Promises to himself.
That Hope will make a man ashamed, which is not accompanied with Obedience.
Hearken to the Psalmist, Psalm. 119. 166, 167, 168. Lord I have hoped for thy
Salvation, and done thy Commandments. My Soul has kept thy Testimonies, and I
love them exceedingly, I have kept thy Precepts and thy Testimonies, for all my
ways are before Thee. He that has learned the Word of God, knows that the Law
is not made void by Faith, but established, Romans 3. 31. Do we then by Faith,
make void the Law, through Faith? God forbid, yea we establish the Law, Christ
the Churches Head and Prophet, in his Sermon upon the Mount, shows the extent
of the Law, requiring Purity in the Heart and Thoughts, as well as in the Life
and Actions, condemns them who shall break the least of these Commands and
shall teach men so; but those that teach and do them, he owns as great in his
Kingdom, Mat. 5. 19. The Law spoken from Mount Sinai is established by the
Legislator Christ, in Mount Sion as a Rule of Righteousness. And they who are
rightly instructed, which walk according to this Rule, both Heart and
Conversation will be ordered according to its Direction, and Peace and Mercy
will be upon them, and hereby they show themselves indeed the Israel of God.

9. Learning the Word, implies a living in Expectation and Hope of that Glory
which God in his Word has revealed, Romans 5. 2. By whom we have access by Faith
into this Grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God. The
Apostle tells that our Savior Jesus Christ has abolished Death, and has
brought Life and Immortality to light by the Gospel. What Joy is set before us
to encourage patient continuance in Faith and well-doing! Were it not for this;
the Disciples of Christ would be of all men most miserable: 1 Cor. 15. 19. But
since the Glory hoped for is so sure and near; they are the only Happy ones in
the World. He that learned the Word aright, Heaven is in his Eye; there is his
Heart and Treasure. He knows he cannot be perfectly Holy or Happy, till he come
thither; and when once come there; Holiness and Happiness will be perfect in
degree; and endless in Duration. Nothing therefore can move him away from the
Hope of the Gospel. He abides in the Word, and the Word in him; and stands fast
in the Lord himself, and at last receives the blessed Life that is promised, 1 John 2. 24, 25. Let that therefore abide in you which ye have heard from the
beginning; if that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you;
ye also shall continue in the Son and in the Father; and this is the Promise
that he has Promised us, even Eternal Life.

And if all this be implied in Learning the Word of God;

How many may Conscience reproach for never having learned the Word to this
day! Strangers they are to its Power, and haters of its Purity, and most
foolishly and wickedly neglect that Grace and Salvation, which is there
tendered to them!

How many may Sigh for Sorrow, that they have learned the Word of God no
better! that their Faith is no stronger, their delight in the Word of God no
greater! and that there are so many defects in their Obedience to it!

How should we all groan with earnest desires, that God Himself would be our
Teacher, and make us right Learners of his Word! And if He is pleased to teach
us, how Blessed, Holy, and Wise will his teaching make us! and such also we
shall continue; for that teaching will have a lasting effect upon us, Psalm.
119. 33, Teach me O Lord the Way of thy Statutes, and I shall keep it unto the
end.

In the second Place, I am to show the Influence, that the Rod of God has to
make his Word the better Learned.

1. The Rod of Affliction awakens the Conscience. So that it is very punctual
in doing its Office; Conscience being startled causes fear; Where there was too
much unconcernedness and stupidity before. The Consciences of Joseph's Brethren
after the great Injury they did him; lay in a deep sleep for many Years
together; but Distress and Affliction awakened them, Genesis 42. 21. They said one
to another, We are verily guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the
anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is
this distress come upon us. Conscience being awakened is full of remorse,
because the Word of God has been observed with no more care. Conscience also is
still urging, To the Law, and to the Testimony. This is the way to be freed
from Trouble, and to attain to Peace, Psalm. 119. 165. Great Peace have they
that Love thy Law. Gal. 6. 16. And as many as walk according to this Rule,
Peace be on them, and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

2. The Rod of Affliction, takes off from worldly Business and Diversions; and
hereupon they that are afflicted, are at better leisure to consider their ways,
Eccles. 7. 14. In the day of Adversity consider. God is not to be complained of
for punishing Sin; but men who are punished should search and try their ways
and turn to Him. Lam. 3. 39, 40. Inconsiderateness is spoken of, as the
occasion of a World of Wickedness, and it is exclaimed against as very offensive
and inexcusable, Isa. 1. 2, 3. Hear O Heavens and give ear O Earth, for the
Lord has spoken; I have nourished and brought up Children, and they have
rebelled against me; The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but
Israel does not know, my People does not consider! Now the more any consider
what they do; the greater heed they will take to the Word of God; for this Word
Counsels safely; it directs and leads in the way of Peace and Truth, and Life,
Prove. 6. 23. For the Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is Light, and Reproofs
of Instruction are the way of Life.

3. The Rod of Affliction brings God to remembrance, whose the Word is; and God
being remembered, his Word is the more awfully regarded. Most men forget the
Lord all their days, Jer. 2. 32. Can a Maid forget her Ornaments? or a Bride
her attire? yet my People have forgotten me days without number. And forgetting
the Lord they forget themselves, their Duty and their Interest. Affliction is a
means to bring God to mind; and his hand being lifted up, and there being a Rod
in his hand; there is a more heedful looking into his Word to know his
Pleasure, and what is the ground of his present displeasure and controversy.
Job was desirous to know his Transgression and Sin; and wherefore it was that
God hid his Face and counted him for his Enemy, Job 13. 23, 24.

4. The Rod of Affliction, brings Iniquity to remembrance, which is contrary to
the Word of God. The very first stroke of Correction, how of a sudden has it
opened men's Eyes, and marshalled their Sins more terrible than an Army with
Banners before them! Psalm. 50. 21. I will reprove thee and set them in Order
before thine Eyes. Now the remembrance of Sin is a great ingredient in true
Contrition and Repentance, which the Word of God so often calls for, Ezekiel. 36.
31. Then shall ye remember your evil ways, and doings that have not been good,
and shall loath your selves in your own sight for your Iniquities and
Abominations. To remember Sin in Hell, will be to remember Sin too late; and
the Eternal Remembrance of it, and the Folly and Perverseness in giving way to
it; will be a great part of the Sinners Eternal Torment. But to remember Sin,
in Affliction; is very profitable; how evident now is the deceitfulness of it!
All its pretenses of Impunity, Gain, and Pleasure; are found altogether vain.
This is One great Lesson of the Rod. Sin cheats all its Servants, and quickly
ends in Sorrow.

5. The Rod of Affliction, brings Duty to remembrance, which the Word of God
requires. Omission and neglect of Duty, and negligence in Duty, are then
reflected on with grief; for if Duty had been more seriously and frequently
performed, possibly the stroke might not have been felt; and suppose it had;
improving of Ordinances might have furnished the Heart with more Faith and
Patience to have born it. And now says the Rod be better acquainted with the
Word, know thy Duty, and from what Principle thou art to act; after what
manner, and to what end. Act from Spiritual Life, let Faith work by Love; and
the more there is of the Heart and will, in Obedience; it is the better; and let
it be the constant design, that God in all things may be glorified through
Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 4. 11. Affliction vehemently urges unto practical
Godliness, and unto walking in newness of Life. Doers of the Word are blessed
in their deed, whereas those Professors are Self-deceivers, who satisfy
themselves with a Faith which Works not, but is dead, Jam. 1. 22. But be ye
doers of the Word, and not hears only deceiving your own selves. V. 25. Whosoever
looks into the perfect Law of Liberty, and continues therein, he being not a
forgetful hearer, but a doer of the Work; this man shall be blessed in his deed.

6. The Rod of Affliction brings Death to remembrance, and Death brings the
Night, when the Work, which the Word of God calls for, can be done no more,
Joh. 9. 4. I must work the Works of him that sent me while it is day, the night
comes when no man can work: When a man seriously meditates on Death, how wise
will it make him! he will number his days aright, and do the Work for which
time and days are given him, Psalm. 90. 12. Teach us so to number our days, that
we may apply our Hearts to Wisdom.

And if Death be brought to remembrance by Affliction; Judgment which follows
at the heels of Death will also be thought of. And this Judgment will be
according to the Word of God, for this Book among others will be opened at the
great day; and Sentence passed according to it, Joh. 12. 48. The Word which I
have spoken the same shall judge him at the last day. The Consideration of a
future Judgment how will it quicken to the study, search, and Practice of the
Word! If the Word now bind thee, because of thy Unbelief and Impenitency in
Sin; thou art bound in Heaven. If the Word now condemns thee; continuing as
thou art; the Judge also will most certainly condemn thee. But if the Word at
present does acquit thee, the Judge also will absolve thee. If the Word
pronounces thee blessed, because Poor in Spirit, Meek, a Mourner for Sin, one
that hungers and thirsts after Righteousness, because pure in Heart, a
Peacemaker, and one that is willing to suffer Persecution for Righteousness
sake; rather than cease the Practice of Righteousness, Mat. 5. 3, 10. Being
thus pronounced Blessed by the Word; Our Lord will never contradict himself;
but at last will say to thee, Come thou Blessed of my Father inherit the
Kingdom prepared for thee from the Foundation of the World, Mat. 25. 34.

I come in the last place to the Application.

USE I. Of Information: From the Doctrine we may learn several useful Lessons.

1. We may be instructed concerning the end of Affliction, which is our truer
Knowledge and Holiness. The Rod sends us to the Word, from whence Wisdom comes,
Prove. 2. 6. For the Lord gives Wisdom, out of his Mouth comes Knowledge and
Understanding. And this Word is the Word not only of Wisdom but of Grace also;
a means to work, and to increase it; until it is perfected in Glory, Act. 20.
32. And now Brethren I commend you to God and to the Word of his Grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them that are
sanctified.

2. God is very much provoked when his Word is contemned; therefore he afflicts
that his Word may be regarded; surely then a disregard to it angers him. It Is
great Condescension in God to speak to man; it is great kindness to speak to man
for his own good; but when man shall neither regard his own good, nor the Lords
condescending kindness; this very much incenses God against him. The Apostles
Caution is very strict, and with a great deal of Reason, Heb. 12. 25. See that
ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not who refused him that
spoke on Earth; much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from Him that
speaks from Heaven. When lighter Afflictions are ineffectual to make men
stand in awe of the Word of God; desolating Judgments many times follow, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. But they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his Words,
and misused his Prophets, until the Wrath of the Lord arose against his People,
till there was no remedy.

3. When God is very angry; a believing Subjection to his Word is the way to
have his Wrath appeased. Indeed nothing satisfies the Justice of God, but
Christ's Sacrifice of himself upon the Cross for Sin; nothing Merits the favor
of God; but the Obedience and Sufferings of his Dear Son. But yet Obedience to
the Word of God, is like taking away the fuel from the fire, whereby the fire
is extinguished, when according to the Word, we cease to do evil, and learn to
doi well; the ground of Gods controversy is at an end. It was a dreadful
Prophecy, yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed. This Word was
believed, and as it was a loud call to Repentance, so that call was answered
and obeyed; it issued well, the Ninevites repent of their wickedness, God
repents of his Anger, and does not pour it upon them, Jon. 3. 10. And God saw
their Works, that they turned from their evil ways; and God repented of the
evil that he had said, that he would do unto them, and did it not.

4. When God lets Sinners alone in a wicked neglect of his Word, without
afflicting them, it is to be feared, he intends they shall die without Wisdom.
Gods forbearing to afflict; is sometimes an Argument of great displeasure, Isa.
1. 5. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will still revolt more and more.
And being stricken no more, they are the more hardened from his fear; till at
last as Fishes are taken in an evil Net; and as Birds are caught in the Snare;
so these Sinners are snared in an evil time; when it falls suddenly upon
them. Eccles. 9. 12.

5. Saints which are not exercised with Affliction, had need to be very
careful, that gentler methods which are used, be effectual to their Progress in
Grace and Holiness. It Is found harder to know how to abound, than how to want;
more difficult to avoid the Snares of Prosperity, than to overcome the
Temptations of Adversity. Hence that Caution, Deuteronomy. 8. 10, 11. When thou have
eaten and art full, beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, in not
keeping his Commandments, and his Judgments, and his Statutes which I command
thee this day. If you seldom feel the Rod; but only fair means are used; Oh
admire Divine goodness, and with great care take heed to his Word, being very
thankful and fruitful together. And if in the height of Prosperity, where
neither frown is seen in Gods face, nor blow felt from his hand, He is with Joy
remembered and served; this Obedience is with great evidence of Sincerity and
Uprightness.

6. Saints who after feel the Rod of Affliction should have a more than
ordinary regard to the Word of God. They should tremble at it, for God has a
special regard to them that tremble at his Word, Isa. 66. 2. And they should
rejoice with trembling; in it. Saints who are frequently chastised, are
entrusted with the more Talents, and should improve them accordingly. Another
day we shall be called to account, what Benefit we have received by
Afflictions; as well as how we have profited under Ordinances. Frequent
Troubles should make our Consciences more tender, Sin by the blows of the Rod
should be struck more dead; we should live more as Pilgrims on Earth, our Eye
should be more upon the Heavenly Inheritance; and the Apple of our Eye should
not be kept with greater chariness, than we keep the Word of God, Prove. 7. 2.
Keep my Commandments and live, and my Law as the Apple of thine Eye.

USE II. Of Counsel to All to incline their Ears and apply their Hearts to
learn the Word of God. That you may attain to this Learning (incomparably the
truest and best Learning in the World) is the design of Preaching; and you see
it is the design of Afflicting Providence. And Mercies are bestowed with the
same intent, Psalm. 105. 45. All the deliverances wrought for Israel, God
wrought them to this end, That they might observe his Statutes, and keep his
Laws. That Wisdom, which is to be found in the Word of God, is a Treasure more
valuable than all the Treasures on Earth; and this Treasure lies deep; but it is
highly worth searching for. And therefore Solomon signifies to us, that we
should seek for it, as for Silver, and search for it as for hid Treasures,
Prove. 2. 4. If thou seek her as Silver, and searchest for her as for hid
Treasures; then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord and find the
Knowledge of God. Nay this Word of God is not only your Treasure; but it is as
much as your Life is worth, to neglect this Word of God, Deuteronomy. 32. 46, 47. Set
your Hearts unto all the Words, which I testify among you this day, for it is
not a vain thing for you, for it is your Life.

Here I shall answer two Questions, and so conclude this Discourse.

The First is, Which Way this Learning in the Word of God may be attained?

The Second is, What are sufficient and comfortable Evidences; that the Word of
God is truly Learned?

The First Question is, Which Way this Learning in the Word of God may be
attained? Unto this I Answer,

1. Let every Rod you feel cause a stricter search into the Word. It Is part of
the Rods Language, Toll, lege; take the Word, and Read, and be better
acquainted with it. The Rod is used in Grammar Schools; that Authors there may
be more diligently Studied. God uses his Rod in his own School; that his Book
the Holy Bible may be the better understood and practiced. There is not any
Affliction, but it ought to be looked upon as an Admonition to take greater heed
to the Holy Scripture, which is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.

2. Be sensible, that true and saving Knowledge is from above, therefore ask it
from thence, Jam. 1. 5. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask it of God; who
gives to all men liberally without upbraiding; and it shall be given him. And
V. 17. Every good and perfect Gift is from above, and comes down from the
Father of Lights. And as God is the Father of Lights, so his Spirit is the
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. He enlightens the Eyes of the
Understanding, and puts saving Knowledge into the Heart. What an Instructor is
the Spirit of the Lord! He not only reveals Gods Counsel; but gives an Heart
to apprehend it, and to be answerably affected with it. He not only speaks the
Word, which it does so infinitely concern all to know; but he gives also the
Ear to hear, the Eye to see, and the Heart to understand.

3. Resolve when Instructed to Praise your Instructor; thus does the Psalmist
Purpose and Promise, Psalm. 119. 7. I will Praise thee, with uprightness of
Heart, when I shall have learned thy Righteous Judgments. How joyful was the
Hallelujah! when the Psalmist had said; He geveth his Word unto Jacob, his
Statutes and his Judgments to the Children of Israel, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. And
Psalm. 119. 164. Seven times a day do I Praise thee, because of thy Righteous
Judgments. And V. 62. He had said, upon the same account, he would arise at
midnight and give thanks unto God.

4. Look unto Jesus in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge,
Col. 2. 3. Christ is the Churches Lawgiver and Prophet. He declares the Father,
whom no man at any time has seen, and no man knows the Father, but the Son,
and he to whom the Son shall reveal him, Mat. 11. 17. He opens the Eyes and
Understanding to understand the Scripture, Luke 24. 45. The Gospel is as it
were a Sealed Book, till he opens it; a right understanding of the Things of
God, and which belong to your Peace, is both Christ's Purchase; and the Work and
Effect of his illuminating Spirit.

5. Pray much for Meekness and Humility; and let not any deceitful lust be
harbored in the Heart. A Promise of Guidance is made to the Meek and Lowly,
Psalm. 25. 8, 9. Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach Sinners
in the way, the Meek will he guide in Judgment, and the Meek will he teach his
Way. Make no Provision for any fleshly or wordly Lusts, for these Lusts of the
Heart influence the Head; and hinder the Light from shining there so clearly
and powerfully, both Mind and Conscience by fulfilling these Lusts will be
defiled. The Apostle plainly intimates, that the old man must be put off which
is corrupt according to deceitful Lusts; or else we can never be renewed in the
Spirit of our Mind, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23. In short, be willing to know the Truth,
that you may be sanctified by the Truth. Look into the perfect Law of Liberty;
and count you, walk most at Liberty; when you walk most accurately and exactly
according to this Law. Cry for Knowledge in Order to Affection and Practice;
that is the Way, to attain to great understanding in the Word of Righteousness.
Talents you shall still be entrusted with, when you are thus ready to Trade
with them.

The Second Question follows, What are sufficient and comfortable Evidences,
that the Word of God is truly Learned?

What has been spoken already may be in part an Answer to this Question. But
that this great Case may be more fully resolved; I shall add these Particulars.

1. You have truly Learned the Word of God, when you stand in awe of it. When
Conscience does urge, and the whole man does reverence the Words Authority. And
the Heart concludes, that God must be obeyed whatever come on it, and that
nothing can excuse disobedience to his Commands. This Holy awe of the Word must
break the force of the strongest Temptations from worldly Gain, and sinful
Pleasures; and it must Swallow up the fear of the greatest Men, who will
dislike you for the sake of Righteousness, Psalm. 119. 161. Princes have
persecuted me without a cause; but my Heart stands in awe of thy Word.
Princes commands and threats are not so much to be minded, as Gods commands,
and the threatenings wherewith they are enforced. When Princes have inflicted
Temporal Death; they are come to their Ne plus ultra, they can go no further;
Eternal Life and Death are not in their Power; but how is God to be sanctified
and dreaded, who can reward, or punish for ever in the World to come!

2. You have truly Learned the Word of God, when you prefer it before all
things, which are really of less value. Worldly Wisdom, Riches, Might, and
earthly Greatness, are very despicable, compared with that Knowledge of God,
which this Word is a means to convey to us, Jer. 9. 23, 24. Thus says the
Lord, let not the wise man Glory in his Wisdom, neither let the mighty man
Glory in his Might; let not the rich man Glory in his Riches. But let him that
glories, Glory in this, that he understands and knows Me. See how the
Policy of the greatest Potentates on Earth is disparaged in Comparison of
Scriptural Wisdom, and not without sufficient Reason. The Policy of Princes,
and themselves perish together. But Believers who are made wise by the Word of
God, do mind, and attain unto, and shall be unmoveably possess't of, an Eternal
Glory and Kingdom, 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7. Howbeit we speak Wisdom among them that are
perfect, yet not the Wisdom of this World, nor of the Princes of this World,
which come to naught; but we speak the Wisdom of God in a Mystery; even the
hidden Wisdom, which God ordained before the World unto our Glory. In my Text
the Psalmist having said, It Is good for me that I have been afflicted,
presently expresses his Estimation of the Word, above thousands of Gold and
Silver. If the Word has an higher Room in your Judgments and Affections after
Affliction, Affliction has certainly done you good, and you have learned the
Word to good purpose.

3. You have truly Learned the Word of God; if you Love and Delight therein,
and make it your continual Meditation, Psalm. 119. 15, 16. I will Meditate in
thy Precepts and have respect unto thy Ways, I will delight my self in thy
Statutes, I will not forget thy Word. Here are excellent Rules, and they that
walk by them are perfected more and more; for they become more gloriously like
to God himself; here are clean and safe Ways; Promises of the good things of
Time, so far as they are good for any of you; and of the infinitely better
things of Eternity. All this may be well matter of great delight. The more you
love the Word, the greater will be your Peace, and you will hold on in the best
ways without offense or stumbling, Psalm. 119. 165. Great Peace have they that
love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them.

4. You have truly learned the Word of God, when you keep it both in Heart and
Life. Not to keep it in the Life, is a scandalous contempt of the Word; not to
keep it in the Heart, though there be a specious form and show of Religion, is
but demure and abominable Hypocrisy. If the Word be in your Hearts, how will
it as nourishing Food well concocted there make you strong in Spirit! It will
make your Hearts both clean and comfortable, and as a powerful Antidote expel
Sins Poison, Psalm. 119. 11. Thy Word have I hid in my Heart, that I might not
Sin against Thee. Let not Sin, but the Word Reign in your Mortal Body, that
none of the Members of it may be defiled and debased in wicked Works and
Services. Prize all the Ordinances and Institutions of the Word of God; neglect
none; be negligent in none. The more these are prized and used, the greater
Reason you will see to persist in the use of them, for the greater spiritual
Benefit will sensibly be reaped. That Noble Pair, had learned the Word indeed,
of whom it was said, Luke 1. 6. And they were both righteous before God,
walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless.

5. You have truly learned the Word of God, when your care is to commend it and
to adorn it in all things. The more this Word is in your Mouths, the more
Edifying will your Discourse be. Speak much of this Word and for it, nay if you
speak much of it as it is; you will speak for it, for the Word will commend it
self. Mind those Injunctions, Ephesians. 4. 29. Let no corrupt Communication proceed
out of your Mouths, but that which is good to the use of Edifying, and which
may administer Grace to the hearers. And Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. These Words, which I
command thee this day, shall be in thy Heart; and thou shall talk of them, when
thou sit in thy House; and when thou walk by the way; when thou lie
down; and when thou risest up. How can it be said the Word has been entertained
in your Hearts; if you are not ready to commend it that it may have a Room in
the Hearts of others? And let not your Commendation of the Word be verbal only
but real. Let your Conversations ever become the Gospel, Live suirably to such
a pure, Holy and Heavenly Word, and walk worthy of God who by this Word has
called you to his Kingdom and Glor^, ^ These. 2. ^^.

6. You have truly learned the Word of God, when you do every things by its
Direction, not only your Duty toward God, but your Duty toward Man. In all
your ways, God is to be eyed and acknowledged, that by his Word your Paths may
be directed, Prove. 3. 6. Trade must be managed by the Word, and the rules of
Truth and Justice and Equity laid down there; this is the way to grow Rich with
a Blessing, and without the Addition of Sorrow. A Family must be ordered by
this Word; and all the Members of Families, and the Governors of them, must
learn their Relative Duties from the Word of God. Recreations must be regulated
hereby, else there may quickly be a forgetting of God, an excessive delight in
them; and too great an expense of precious time. Nothing can be well done, if
the Word be not regarded in the doing of it, and nothing can be ill done or
miscarry, under the Words Conduct.

7. You have truly learned the Word of God, if you never depart from it.
Persevering in Obedience will prove you (...) indeed Disciples, Joh. 8. 31.
Jesus said to those Jews, who believed in him; if ye continue in my Word, then
are ye my Disciples indeed. This shows the Lord himself has been your Teacher,
and is teaching you still and strengthening you together, Psalm. 119. 33. Teach
me O Lord the way of thy Statutes, and I shall keep it to the end. And V. 102.
he says, I have not departed from thy Judgments for thou have taught me. Stick
unto his Testimonies, and cleave unto the Lord with such a Resolution as
neither Mammon, Sin, nor Satan may ever shake. You can never change your Lord
or his Service, but you must change infinitely for the worse; therefore be
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in his work. Though the Mountains
depart, and the Hills be removed; yet do you abide with God, and stand fast in
the Faith unto the Death; that you may receive the Promised Crown of Life, and
wear it for evermore.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 49. line 16. for broken read trodden, p. 53. l. 9. f. in r. as, p. 56. l.
29. f. the r. yet, p. 64. l. 16. f. diligent r. vigilant, p. 76. l. 17. f.
undenied r. underived, p. 77. l. 12. f. Tabb r. Fable.

Books Printed for, and sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns
in Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel.
A Body of practical Divinity consisting of above 176 Sermons on the lesser
Catechism composed by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at Westminster, with a
Supplement of some Sermons on several Texts of Scripture, by Tho. Watson
formerly Minister of St. Stephens Walbrook, Printed from his own hand writing,
recommended by several Ministers to Masters of Families and others.

Synodicon in Gallia Reformata, or the Acts, Decrees, Decisions, Canons of the
Reformed Churches in France. Being 1. A most faithful and impartial History of
the rise, growth, perfection and decay of the Reformation in that Kingdom, with
its fatal Catastrophe upon the revocation of the Edict at Nants in the year
1685. 2. The Confession of Faith and Discipline of those Churches. 3. A
Collection of Speeches, Letters, Sacred Politics, Cases of Conscience, and
Controversies in Divinity determined and resolved by those Grave Assemblies. 4.
Many excellent expedients for preventing and healing Schisms in the Churches
and for re-uniting the dismembered Body of divided Protestants. 5. The Laws,
Government and Maintenance of the Colleges, Universities, and Ministers,
together, with their Exercise of Discipline upon delinquent Ministers and
Church Members. 6. A Record of very many illustrious Events of Divine
Providence relating to those Churches. The whole collected and composed out of
the Original Manuscript Acts of those renowned Synods, a work never before
extant in any Language, in two Vol. by John Quick, etc. Fol.

The Sure Mercies of David: Or, a Second Part of Heart-treasure. Wherein is
contained the sum and substance of Gospel-mercies purchased by Christ, and
Promised in the Covenant of Grace, together with the several ways how they are
made sure to all the Heirs of Promise, and how they are to be improved for the
Saints Fort and Defense, Settlement and Encouragement in shaking and
backsliding times. By O. Heywood.

Closet-prayer a Christian Duty: Or, a Treatise upon Mat. 6. 6. By O. Heywood.

Baptismal Bonds renewed. Being some Meditations upon Psalm. 50. 5. By O. H. M.
A.

Meetness for Heaven promoted in some brief Meditations upon Colos. 1. 12.
Discovering the nature and necessity of habitual and actual Meetness for Heaven
here, in all that hope for Heaven hereafter. By O. H.

An Epistolary Discourse on the great assistances to a Christians Faith, and
for a more Entire Rest and Assurance in the highest Trials and Adventures
thereof. With a Second Part, upon the Present Times, and these rare
Vicissitudes of Providence in the Public State of Britain in this Age. To
which an Appendix is added in the Close. By R. Fleming.

A Discourse of Earthquakes; as they are Supernatural and Premonitory Signs to
a Nation; with a respect to what has occurred in this Year 1692. And some
special Reflections thereon. As also on that Security and Assurance of Mind,
which is attainable in the Light and Power of Religion, under the greatest
Surprizals and Terrors of Sense. With some Enquiry upon the Grounds, both of
our Fears and Hopes, as to the public State of the Church of Christ in this
Day. By the Author of the Fulfilling of the Scriptures.

The Confirming Work of Religion: Or its Great Things made plain, by their
Primary Evidences and Demonstrations. Whereby the meanest in the Church, may
soon be made able to render a Rational account of their Faith. Written by R.
Fleming, Author of the Fulfilling of the Scriptures.

A Defense of Mr. M. H's. Brief Enquiry into the Nature of Schism, and the
Vindication of it. With Reflections upon a Pamphlet called the Review, etc. And
a Brief Historical Account of Nonconformity, from the Reformation to this
Present Time.

England's Alarm: Being an account of God's most Considerable Dispensations of
Mercy and Judgment toward these Kingdoms for Fourteen Years last past. And
also, of the several sorts of Sins and Sinners therein; Especially the
Murmurers against the Present Government. With an Earnest Call to speedy
Humiliation, Supplication and Reformation, as the Chief Means of Prospering
their Majesty's Counsels and Preparations. Dedicated to the King and Queen.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Shewell, Master of
Arts, and Minister of the Gospel in Coventry. Who went up well into the Pulpit,
Jan. 15. and having Prayed, and Named the Text, Romans 5. 12. was seized by an
Apoplexy, and dyed within a few Hours. By William Tongue, Minister of the
Gospel.

The Good of Early Obedience. By M. Mead.

A Practical Expos. on the 130. Psalm.

The Grace and Duty of being Spiritual Minded.

The Declaration of the Glorious Mistory of the Person of Christ. These three
by J. Owen, D. D.

Redemption of Time, the Duty and Wisdom of Christians in evil days. By S. Wade
Minister at Hamersmith.

The Vanity of Man, being a Discourse, fitted for Funeral occasions. By S. Shaw.

Several Discourses concerning the actual Providence of God in three Parts.

Above one hundred Sermons on the Canticles. These two by the Reverend John
Collings, D. D. of Norwich.

FINIS.

