THE YOUNG GALLANT'S Academy.

OR, Directions how he should behave himself in all Places and Company.

As, 1. In an Ordinary. 2. In a Playhouse. 3. In a Tavern. 4. As he passes
along the Street all hours of the Night. 5. And how to avoid Constables
Interrogatories.


To which is added, The Character of a Town-HUFF.

TOGETHER WITH The CHARACTER of a right Generous and well-bred GENTLEMAN.

By Sam. Overcome.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. for R. Mills, at the Pestle and Mortar without
Temple Bar. 167^*

TO The truly virtuous Lover and Incourager of Learning and Ingenuity George
Doddington Esquire.
FLattery and Ingratitude I have always esteemed so much unbecoming a Person
that has that Noble Faculty of the Soul Reason, that he that should be guilty
of either of them, is not fit for, or ought to be admitted into humane Society.
For what can we do with, or know we how to deal with these deformed Animals;
the one wheadles Gentlemen out of their Estates, with their Protestations and
fair pretenses; the other laughs at us when he has got his ends: and though
you have but immediately before relieved him with money out of your purse, the
same person shall be glad to see you in a Goal. But give me leave to testify
to the world, that you have neither been an Admirer or Cherisher o^ these foul
(but now too-much-adored) Monsters. And I my self have been so fa^ from doting
on them, that having served under the Colors of that excellent, but now
despised Lady, Good Nature, I am not in so good an Equipage as when I first
entered my self into her Service. But now lest I my self, whilst I am railing
upon this sort of Creatures, should be thought to be a Wolf in Sheeps
Clothing, and a Lion under a Lambs skin: Be not angry with me if I tell you,
the former Obligations and Favors you conferred upon me, imboldened me thus to
attempt: and I should be ungrateful indeed, should I not endeavor some small
Retaliations. I have therefore put into your hands a homely piece of Work,
neither so good as you deserve, nor so rich as I do wish it: I must entreat you
to blame the vanity of our Age and Times, which are so fantastical grown, that
they covet Stuffs rather slight to feed the eye with show, than substantial for
enduring: let the Fashion be Frencb, it is no matter what the Cloth be. I have
therefore not (with the Sturgeon) swam against the Stream, but followed the
humorous Tides of this Age, and like Democritus have fallen a laughing at all the
world, seeing it does nothing but mock it self. Sir, you have here the
behavior and Character of a Fop composed, to show the Apish Fashions, and
ridiculous Humors and Conversations of some of our Town-Gallants, of whose
Actions you are so far from being an Admirer and Imitator, that while they are
swallowing down the sweet morsels of Sin, and in the midst of Revelling,
courting their Mistresses (as their Gentile word is) and inventing New Oaths
for to be able to keep Company with only such as themselves; and whilst they
study the very height of Debauchery, and account him a boon Companion that is
most vicious, You are taken up in a far more Noble Exercise, and spend your
spare hours in reading History; and for the laying out a little money, receive a
larger interest than the greatest Usurers do for their money: by looking on
those Prospective-glasses, you behold Kingdoms and People afar off, come
acquainted with their Manners, their Policies, their Government, their Risings
and their Downfals: You are present at their Battles without danger to your
self, unless it is in grieving to see States so overthrown by the mutability of
Fortune: you see those Empires utterly brought to subversion, which had been
Terrors and Triumphers over all Nations upon Earth. Oh Histories! You Sovereign
Balms to the Bodies of the Dead, that preserve them more fresh than if they
were alive, keep the Fames of Princes from perishing, when Marble Monuments
cannot save their bones from being rotten; you faithful Intelligencers between
Kingdoms, you truest Counselors to Kings, even in greatest dangers, be not
angry with me if I am something tedious in setting forth the excellency of
your delight (History) Happy you are by Birth, happy by your bringing up; but
most happy, in that the Muses too have been your Darling. The Path which true
Nobleness had wont and ought to tread, lies directly before you; you have been
ever, and are now in the way, which imboldens me to presume, that as our
greatest Commanders will not disdain to instruct even a freshwatered Soldier
in the School. points of War; so out of your generous disposition, you will
vouchsafe to view the labor of so dull a Pen, and not censure me for
consecrating so idle a Pamphlet to you. And say not that the world will take
you to be of that number that desire to have your Name in print only to get a
vain Reputation, and that by the superfluities of so idle a brain as mine; No
Sir, it is a piece of Drollery, I confess, but not designed nor writ to droll
upon you, but only to let the world see that you are of so sedentary and
retired a Nature and Conversation, that it is requisite for your divertisement
to view the Fopperies of this Age. If you give entertainment to this in your
best affection, you will bind me (one day) to heighten your Name, when by some
more worthy. Column I shall Consecrate that and your self to an Everlasting and
Sacred Memory, most affectionately desirous to be

Yours, SAM. VINCENT.

TO THE READER.
TO come to the press, is more than to be pressed to death: for the pain of
those Tortures last but a few minutes; but he that lies upon the Rack in Print,
has his flesh torn off by the Teeth of Envy and Calumny, though he means no
Person any harm. I think therefore 'twere better to make ten Challenges at all
manner of Weapons, than to play a Scholars Prize upon a Booksellers Stall: for
the one araws but Blood, by the other a man is drawn and quartered. Take heed
of Critics, they bite like Fish at any thing, especially at Books; nay, the
Stationers themselves are turned Demi-Criticks. Go to one and offer a Copy; if
it be merry, the man likes no light stuff; if it be sad, it will not sell:
another meddles with nothing but what fits the times. I would have his Shop
filled with nothing but Gazets and Proclamations. Since therefore that neither
hot nor cold can please, neither strait nor crooked can serve as a measure to
some mouths; what a miserable and endless labor does he undertake, that in a
few scribled Sheets hopes to wrap up the Loves of all men? Better it were for
him in my Judgment to turn his Leaves into such Paper-Kites as Boys run after
whilst they fly in the Air, than to publish his Wits in Print, and yet be
counted but a Fool for his Labor. Yet notwithstanding with such a tickling
Itch is this Printed Ambition troubled, that some are never at better ease than
when they are scratching upon Paper. Of those sharp-toothed Dogs you shall find
me none. I hold no whip in my hand, but rather a soft Feather; and there drops
rather Water than Gall out of my Quill. I have only Drawn the Pictures of some
Ignorant Young Gallants, and Younger Brothers, alias Gulls: If you bid them
Welcome, I am glad; if not, I cannot be much sorry, because the Cook knew not
your Diet; so that his Error was Ignorance, and Ignorance is a venial Sin to be
Pardoned.

Nam veniam pro laud peto: laudatus abunde, Non fastiditus si tibi (Lector)
ero.
THE CONTENTS.
THe Introduction. Page 1. CHAP. I. The Old World and this New, weighed
together. The Tailors of those times and these compared. The Apparel of our
first Fathers. 13 CHAP. II. How a Gallant shall not only keep his Clothes
(which many of them can hardly do for Brokers) but also save the Charges of
taking Physic: With other Rules for the Morning. The praise of Sleep, and of
going Naked. Page 20 CHAP. III. How a young Gallant should accost to and warm
himself by the Fire: How attire himself. The Descriptition of a Man's Head. The
praise of long Hair. 32 CHAP. IV. Instructions how a young Gallant should
behave himself at an Ordinary. 42 CHAP. V. Instructions for a young Gallant how
to behave himself in the Playhouse. 55 CHAP. VI. Instructions how a young
Gallant should behave himself in a Tavern. 61 CHAP. VII. Instructions for a
young Gallant how to behave himself passing through the City at all hours of
the night, and how to pass by any Watch. 66. The Character of a Proud, Huffing,
Self-conceited, Foppish and Lascivious youn^ Gallant. Page 7^ The Character of
a True, Noble, Liberal, and Stayed Gentleman. 87
THE INTRODUCTION.
I Sing (like the Cuckoe in June) to be laughed at; if therefore I make a scurvy
Noise, and that my Tunes sound un-Musically (they being altogether lame in
respect of the bad Feet, and unhandsome in respect of the wormeaten Fashion:)
You that have Authority under the Broad Seal of Moldy Custom, to be called,
The Gentle Audience, set your hands to my Pardon; or else, because I scorn to
be upbraided that I profess to Instruct others, in an Art whereof I my self am
Ignorant; Do your worst, choose whether you will let my Notes have you by the
Ears or no: Hiss, or give Plandites, I care not a Nutshel which of either: You
can neither shake our Comic Theater with your stinking breath of Hisses, nor
raise it with the Thunderclaps of your Hands; up i^ goes in despetto del fato:
a Coat with four Elbows (for any one that will wear it) is put to making in
defiance of the Seven Wise Mistresses. For I have smelt out o^ the musty sheets
of an old Almonack, that (at one time or other) even he that talks all Adagie;
eve^ he that will not have a wrinkl^ in his new Suite, though his Min^ be
uglier than his Face, and hi^ Face so ill-favouredly made, that he looks at all
times as if a Tooth drawer were fumbling about hi^ Gums, with a thousand lame
Het^ roclites more that cozen the World with a Flaxen Perruke and a pair of
Pantaloons, will be glad to step in, and be driven (like a Flemish Hoy in soul
weather) to slip into our School, and take out a Lesson. Tush, Caelum petimus
Stultiti^; all that are chosen Constables for their Wit; go not to Heaven. A
Fig therefore for the newfound College of Critics, that do nothing but sing
forth the Gam^^^h. Air of Complemental Courtesy, and at the Rustical Behavior
of our Country- Muso, will skrew forth worse Faces, than those which God and the
Painter has bestowed upon You. I desie your perfumed Scor^^, and vow to poison
your Musk-Cats, if ever their eivet-Excrement do but once play with my Nose.
You ordinary Gulls, that through a poor and silly Ambition to be thought that
you inherit the Bevinues: of an extra ordinary Wit; will spend your sballow
Censure upon the most elaborate Writings so lavishly, that all about you take
you to be Heirs- apparent to Rich Myd-^ss, that had more Skill in Alchymy; than
Kelly with the Philosophers-Stone; (for all that he could, lay his Fingers on,
turned into beaten. Gold.) Dry Yobacco with my Leaves (you Good drybrain'd
Polypragmonists) till your Pipe-Offices smoke with your stinking bisses shot
out against me. I Conjure You (as you come of the right Goose-Caps) stain not
your House, but when at a New Play you take up your Seat in the Pit, or one of
the Boxes (because the Lords and you may seem Hayl Fellows wellmet:) There draw
forth this Book, Read aloud, Langh aloud, Play the Anticks, that all the whole
House may take notice of You. As for there Zoilus, Go hang thy self; and for
thee Momus, Chew nothing but Hemlock, and spit nothing but the Syrup of Aloes
upon my Papers, till thy very rotten Lungs come forth for Anger. I am
Snake-proof, and though with Hannibal you bring whole Hogsheads of
Vinegar-Raylings, it is impossible for you to quench; or come over my
Alpine-Resolution. I Will Sail boldly and desperately along the Shore of the Isle
of Gulls; and in defiance of those terrible Block-Houses, their Logger-beads,
will make a true Discovery of their wild, yet habitable Country.

Sound an Alarm therefore (Oh my Courageous Muse!) and like a Common Crier,
make Proclamation with thy Drum; the effect of Thine O Yes being, That if any
Man, Woman, or Child, be he Lord, be he Clown; be he Courtier, be he Carter; of
the Inns of Court, hating from the bottom of his heart all Good Manners, and
Generous Education, is really in love, or rather doats on that Excellent
Country-Lady, Innocent-Simplicity, being the First, Fairest, and Chiefest
Chambermaid that our Great Grandame Eve entertaind into Service: Or if any
Person aforesaid, longing to make a Voyage in the Ship of Fools, would venture
all the Wit that his Mother left him, to live in the Country of Gulls,
Cockneys, and Coxcombs; to the intent, that haunting the Two THEATERS, he may
only Learn PLAY-SPEECHES, which afterward may furnish the necessity of his
bare Knowledge, to maintain Table-Talk; or else frequenting Taverns, desires to
take the Bacchanalian Degrees, and to write himself into Art Bibendi Magister:
Let all such (and I hope the World has not left her old Fashions, but there
are ten thousand such) repair hither: never knock, but with your Feet spurn
open the Door, and enter into our School. You shall not need to buy Books; No,
scorn to distinguish a B from a Battle-door; only look that your Ears be long
enough to reach our Rudiments, and you are made for ever.

It is by Heart that I would have you to con my Lessons; and therefore be sure
to have most devouring Stomachs; nor be you terrisied with an Opinion, that our
Rules be hard and indigestable, and that you shall never be good Gradtiates in
those rare Sciences of Barbarism and Idiotism. Oh! Fie upon any Man that
carries that ungodly mind. Tush, tush, the greatest Fool that ever was, never
Played the Clown more naturally, than the arrantest Sot of you all shall, if he
will but boil my Instructions in his Brainpan.

And lest I my self, like some Pedantical Vicar, stammering out a most false
and cracked Latin Oraration to Mr. Major of the Town and his Brethren, should
cough and hem in my Deliveries; by which means, You, my Auditors, should be in
danger to depart more like Woodcooks, than when you came to me: Oh! Thou
Venerable Father of ancient and therefore hoary) Customs Sylvanus! I invoke thy
Assistance Thou that first taughtest Carters to wear Hob-nails, and Clowns to
play Christ-mass-Gambols, Oh do thou! Or, If thou art not at leisure, let thy
Mountebank, Goatfooted Fauni, inspire me with the knowledge of all those silly
and ridiculous Fashions, which the Old dunstical world wore, even out at
Elbows. Draw for me the Pictures of the most simple Fellows then living, that
by their Paterns I may pain't the like. Awake! Thou noblest Drunkard, Bacchus,
Thou must likewise stand to me (if at least thou can for reeling) teach me
how to take the Germans Op sijn Frize, the Danish Rowsa, the Switzers Stoop of
Rhenish, the Italians Parmasant, the Englishmans Healths and Frolicks. Hide not
a drop of thy moist Mystery from me, thou plumpest Swillbowl. Thirdly, (Because
I will have more than two Strings to my Bow) Come thou Clerk of Gluttonies
Kithin; Do thou also bid me Pro-face; and let me not arise from Table, till I
am perfect in all the general Rules of Epicures and Cormorants: fatten thou my
Brains, that I may feed others, and teach them both how to squat down to their
meat, and how to munch so like Loobies, that the wisest Solon in the world
shall not be able to take them for any others. If there be any strength in
thee, thou beggarly Monarch of Indians, and setter-up of rotten-lung'd Chimney.
Sweepers (Tobacco!) I beg it at thy smoaky hands; make me thy adopted Heir,
that inheriting the virtues of thy whiffs, I may distribute them amongst all
Nations: after thy Pipe shall ten thousand be taught to Dance, if thou will but
discover to me the sweetness of thy Snuffs, with the manner of spawling,
spitting and driveling^ in all places, and before all persons. Oh! what Songs
will I charm forth in praise of those valiantly-strong stinking-breaths, which
are easily purchased at thy hands, if I can but get thee to travel through my
Nose. All the foughs in the faire^ Ladies mouths that ever kissed Lord, shall not
fright me from thy Brown presence; for thou art humble, and from the Courts of
Princes have ^^chsafed to be acquainted and ^runk for Company with Watermen,
Carmen, and Colliers; whereis before, and so still, Knights and wise Gentlemen,
were, and are, thy Companions. Last of all, Thou La^^y of Clowns and Carters!
School^^stress of Fools and Wise-acres! Thou homely (but harmless) Ru^^icity!
Oh breath thy dull and ^^unstical Spirit into our Gander^ Quill. Crown me thy
Poet, not with a Garland of Bays (Oh! no, the number of those that steal
Lau^el, is too monstrous already.) But swaddle thou my brows with those
unhandsome Boughs, which (like Autumn's rotten-hair) hang dangling over thy
dusty Eyelids. Help me (thou Midwise of unmannerlyness) to be delivered this
Embryon which lies tumbli^^ in my Brain. Direct me in t^^ hard and dangerous
Voyage, th^^ being safely arrived on the desir^^ Shore, I may build up Altars
(...) thy unmatchable rudeness. (...) Herculean a labor is this that I
^^dertake, that I am enforced to (...) out for all your Succors; to t^^ intent
I may aptly furnish this Fe^^^ of Fools, unto which I solemn^^ invite all the
world: for at it sha^^ sit, not only those whom Fortu^^ favors, but even those
whose W^^^ are naturally their own. Yet because your artificial Fools bear
(...) way the Bell, all our best Wor^manship at this time shall be spe^^ to
fashion such a Creature.

CHAP. 1.
The Old World and this New, weighed together. The Tailors of those times and
these compared. The Apparel of our first Fathers.

GOod Clothes are the embroidered Trappings of Pride; and Good Cheer the very
Eringo^^^t of Gluttony. Did Man, think you, come wrangling into the World about
no better matters, than all his lifetime to make privy searches for Fashions,
or for Pies of Nigh^^ingals tongues in Heliogabalus his Kitchen? Oh! no: The
first Suit of Apparel that ever mortal Man put on, came neither from the
Mercers shops, nor the Merchan Warehouse. Adam's Bill would have been sooner
taken, than. Knights Bond now. Yet was great in no bodies Books for T^^ fety or
Velvet: the Silk-wor^ had something else to do in th^^ days, than to set up
Looms, and free of the Weavers. His Breech were not so much worth as Ki^^
Stephens, that cost but a poor N^ble: for Adams Holiday-Suit was ^^ better
Stuff than plain Fig Leaves and Eves best Gown of the sa^^ Piece; there went
but a pair shears betwixt them. An Ant^^ quary in this Town has yet so^^ of the
Powder of those Leaves di^^ed, to show. Tailors then wer^^ none of the Twelve
Companies Their Hall, that now is larger the some Dorps among the Nethe^^
lands, was then no bigger than a ordinary Trades-mans Shop: the durst not
strike down their Customers with their large Bills. Adam cared not an
Apple-paring for all their lowzy Hems. Fashions then was counted a Disease, and
Horses died of it; but now (thanks to folly) it is held the only rare Physic,
and the purest golden Asses live upon it.

As for the Diet of that Saturni^^ Age, it was like their Attire, homely: A
Sallad and a Mess of Leek-porridge was a Dinner for a for greater Man than ever
the Turk was: Potato-pies and Custards, stood like the sinful Suburbs of
Cookery, and had not a wall (so much as a handful high) built ^ound about them.
Oh, golden World! the suspicious Venetian carved not his Meat with a silver
Pitch-fork, neither did the sweettooth'd Englishman stuff a dozen of Plates at
one Meal. Piers Plowman laid the Cloth, and Simpllcity brought in the Voyder.
Ho^^ wonderfully is the world altered and no marvel: For it has lai^ sick
above five thousand years So that it is now no more like the Old Theater du
Monde, than the Bear-Garden St. James his Part What an excellent Workman there
fore were he, that could cast the Globe of it into a new Mould And not to make
it look like the ordinary Globe, with a round Fac^^ sleekt, and washed over
with the Whites of Eggs, but to have it ^^ Plano, as it was at first, with all
the ancient Circles, Lines, Parallels and Figures, representing indeed, a^^ the
Wrinkles, Cracks, Crevise and Flaws that stuck upon it a^^ the first Creation,
and made ^^ look most lovely. But now those Furrows are filled up with Cerus^^
and Vermilion; yet all will no^ do, it appears more ugly. Come, come, it would
be a bald World, but that it wears a Perruke: The Body of it is fowl (like a
Birdingpiece) by being too much heated: the breath of it stinks like the breath
of Chamber-maids, by feeding on so many Sweetmeats; and though to purge it
will be a sorer labor. than the cleansing of Augeas his Stable, yet Ille ego
qui quondam, I am he that will do (...).

Draw near therefore, all you that love to walk upon single and simple Souls,
and that wish to keep Company with none but Innocents, and the Sons of civil
Citirens; out with your Tables, and nail your Ears (as it were to the Pillory)
to the Music of our Instructions: nor let the Titles of Gullery and Bublery
fright you from our School; for mark what an excellent Ladder you are to climb
by. How many worthy and Men of famous Memory have flourished in London of that
ancient Family the Wise-acres, being now no better esteemed than Foo^ or
Younger Brothers? This gea^ must be looked into, lest in time (oh lamentable
time! when that hourglass is turned up) a Rich man's Son shall no sooner peep
out of the shell of his Minority, but he shall be straight-ways begge^^ for a
concealment, or set upon (a^^ it were by Free-booters) and ta'n^^ in his own
Purse-nets by Fence^^ and Coney-catchers: to drive which pestilent Infection
from hi^ heart, here is a Medicine more po^^tent and more precious than eve^^
was that mingle-mangle of Drug^ which Mithridates boiled together; fear not
then to taste it ^^ Caudle will not go down half ^^ sweetly as this will: You
need not call the honest name of it in Question; for Antiquity puts off his
Gap, and makes a bare Oration in praise of the virtues of it: the Receipt has
been subscribed unto by all those that have had to do with Simples, with this
Moth^^ten Motto, Probatum est. You therefore whose Bodies are either
overflowing with the corrupt humor of this Age, Phantastickness; or else
being burnt up with the inflammation of upstart Fashions, would fain be purged,
and to truly show that you truly loath this polluted and mangie-fisted world,
turn Pinionists, not caring either for Men or their Manners; do you pledge me;
spare not to take a deep draught of our ^^mely Counsel: the Cup is full, and so
large, that I boldly drink a ^^alth unto all Comers.

CHAP. II.
How a Gallant shall not only keep his Clothes (whi^^ many of them can hardl^
do for Brokers) but all save the Charges of taking Physic: With other Rule^^
for the Morning. The praise of Sleep, and of goin^ Naked.

YOu have heard all this while nothing but the Prologue and seen no more than a
Dum^^ Show: Our Vetu^ Comedia step^ out now.

The fittest stay upon which you (that study to be an Actor there are first to
represent your self, ^^ (in my Judgment) the softest and largest Down-bed; from
whence, if you will but take sound Counsel on your Pillow, you shall never
arise until you hear it ring noon at least. Sleep, in the Name of Morpheus,
your belly-full, or (rather) sleep till your. Belly grumbles and waxes empty.
Care not for those course-painted Cloth-lines made by the University of Salern,
that come over you with.

Sit brevis aut nullus tibi samnus Meridianus.

Short let thy Sleep at Noon be Or rather let it none be

Sweet candid Counsel! but there is Rats bane under it. Trust never a Bachelor
of Art of them all for he speaks your health fair, but only to steal away the
Maydenhead of it. Salern stands in the luxurious Country of Naples; and who
knows not but the Neapolita^ will, like the Jesuits, embrace you with one
hand, and rip your Gut^ with the other? protest love, you hate mortally? There
is not a ha^ in his Mustacho, but if he kiss you will stab you through the
Chec^ like a Poniard. The Slave, to b^ avenged on his Enemy, will dri^^ off a
pint of Poison himself, ^^ that he may be sure but to have the other pledge him
half so much And it may be, upon some secre^ grudge to work the general
destruction of all Men-kind. Physitian^ (I know) and none else, too^ up the
Bucklers in their defense railing bitterly upon that Venerable and Princely
Custom of ^on^lying abed. Yet how I remember me, I cannot blame them; ^^ they
which want sleep (which is Man natural rest) become either me Naturals, or
else fall into the Doctors hands, and so consequently into the Lords: Whereas
he that Snorts profoundly scorns to let Hippocrates himself stand giving his
Judgment on his Urinal, and thereby saves the charges of a Groats worth of
Physic; and happy is that man saves it: for Physic is Non minus venifica quam
benefica; it has an ounce of Gall in it, for every dram of Honey. Ten Tyburns
cannot turn Men over the Perch so fast as one of these Brewers of Purgations;
the very nerves of their Practice being nothing but Ars homici^^^orum; an Art
to make poor Souls kick up their heels. Insomuch that even their sick grunting
Patients stand in more danger of Mr. Doctor and his Drugs, than of all the
Canon ^^ots which the desperate Disease it self can discharge against them.
Send them packing therefore to wal^ like Italian, Mount^bancks; beat not your
Brains to understand their parcel Greek, parcel Latin Gib. brish: Let not all
their Sophistical buzzing in your Ears, nor then Satirical canvasing of
Feather. beds, and tossing Men out of the^ warm Blankets, awake you till the
Hour that is here prescribed. For do but consider what an excellent thing Sleep
is; it is so inestimable a Jewel, that if a Tyrant would give his Crown for an
hours slumber, it cannot be bought; of so beautiful a shape is it, that though
a Man lie with an Empress, his Heart cannot be at quiet till he leaves her
Embracements to be at rest with the other: Yea, so greatly are we indebted to
this Kinsman^^f Death, that we owe the better Tributary half of our, Life to
him^ and there is good Cause why we should do so; for Sleep is that Golden
Chain that ties Health and our Bodies together. Who complains of Wants, of
Wounds, of Cares, of Great Men's Oppressions, Captivity, whilst he sleeps?
Beggars in their Beds take as much pleasure as Kings; Can we therefore sur^et
on this delicate Ambrosia? Can we drink of that too much, whereof to taste a
little tumbles us into a Churchyard, and to use it but indifferently, throws
us into Bedlam? No, no, look upon Endymion the Moons Minion, who slept
threescore and fifteen years, and was not a hair the worse for it. Can lying
abed till Noon then (being not the threescore and fifteenth part of his nap) be
hurtful?

Besides, By the Opinion of all Philosophers and Physicians, it is not good to
trust the Air with our Bodies till the Sun with his flame-coloured wings has
fanned away the misty smoke of the Morn, and refined that thick Tobacco-breath
which the rheumatick Night throws abroad on purpose to put out the Eye of the
Element: which work Questionless cannot be perfectly finished, till the Suns
Car-horses stand prancing on the very top of highest Noon: so that then (and
not till then) is thy healthfullest hourto be stirring. Do you require Examples
to persuade you? At what time do Lords and L^dies rise, but at that time? Your
simpering Merchants Wives are the fairest liers in the world; and is not eleven
a Clock their common hour? they find (no doubt) unspeakable sweetness in such
lying, or else they would not day by day put it into practice. In a word,
Midday-slumbers are Golden; they make the body fat, the skin fair, the flesh
plump, delicate and tender; they set a crimson Color on the cheeks of young
Women, and make Courage to rise up in Men; they make us thristy, both in
sparing Victuals (for Break-fasts thereby are saved from the Hell-mouth of the
Belly) and in preserving Apparel; for whilst we warm us in our Beds, our
Clothes are not worn. The Casements of thine Eyes being then at this
commendable time of Day newly set open, choose rather to have thy windpipe cut
in pieces than so Salute any man: Bid not Good Morrow so much as to thy Father,
though he be an Emperor: an idle Ceremony it is, and can do him little good; to
thy self it may bring much harm. For if he be a wise man, that knows how to
hold his peace, of necessity he must be counted a fool that cannot keep his
tongue.

Among all the wild men that run up and down in this wide Forest of Fools (the
World) none are more superstitious than those notable Ebritians, the Jews; yet
a Jew never wears his Cap thredbare with putting it off; never bends in the
Hams with casting away a Leg; never cries God save you, though he see the Devil
at your Elbow. Play the Jews therefore in this, and save thy Lips that labor;
only to remember, that so soon as thy Eyelids be unglued, thy first exercise
must be (either sitting upright on thy Pillow, or lying at thy Bodies length)
to yawn and stretch, and gape wider than an Oyster-Weuch.

This Lesson being played, turn over a new leaf, and (unless that
Frizeland-Cur, cold Winter, offer to bite thee) walk up and down a while in thy
Chamber, either in thy thin shirt only, or strip thy self stark naked: Are we
not born so, and shall a foolish Custom make us to break the Laws of our
Creation? Our first Parents, so long as they went naked, were suffered to dwell
in Paradise; but after they got Coats to their backs, they were turned out of
Doors. Put on therefore no Apparel at all, or put it on carelessly; for look how
much more delicate Liberty is than Bondage, so much is the looseness in wearing
of our Attire, above the imprisonment of being nea^ly and Taylor-like dressed up.
To be ready in our Clothes, is to be ready for nothing else: A man looks as if
he hung in Chains, or like a Scar-crow: and as those excellent Birds (whom
Pliny could never have the wit to catch in all his Springes) commonly called
Woodcocks (whereof there is great store in England) having all their Feathers
plucked from their backs, and being turned out as naked as Plato's Cock was
before all Diogenes his Scholars; even so stands the case with man. Truth
(because the bald-Pate her Father Time has no Hair to cover his Head) goes
stark naked; but Falsehood has ever a Cloak for the Rain. You see likewise that
the Lion, being the King of Beasts; the Horse, being the lustiest Creature; the
Unicorn, whose Horn is worth half a City; all these go with no more clothes on
their backs than what Nature has bestowed upon them: but your Jackanapes
(being the scum and rascallity of all the hedge-creepers) they go in Jerkins:
Marry how? They are put into these rags only in mockery.

Oh! Beware therefore what you wear, and how you wear it; and let this heavenly
Reason move you never to be handsome: for when the Sun is arising out of his
Bed, does not the Element seem more glorious than (being only in gray) at Noon,
when he is in all his Bravery? it were madness to deny it: What man would not
willingly see a beautiful woman naked, or at least with nothing but a Lawn or
some loose thing over her? Shall we then abhor that in our selves, which we
admire and hold to be so excellent in others? Absit.

CHAP. III.
How a young Gallant should accost to and warm himself by the Fire: How attire
himself. The Descriptition of a Man's Head. The praise of long Hair.

BUt if (as it often happens, unless the Year catch the Sweating-Sickness) the
Morning like Charity waxing cold, thrust his frosty fingers into thy bosom,
pinching thee black and blew (with her nails made of Ice) like an invincible
Goblin, so that thy Teeth (as if thou were singing a Prick-song) stand coldly
quavering in thy Head, and leap up and down like the nimble Jacks of a pair of
Virginals; be then as swift as a Whirlwind, and as boystrous in tossing all thy
clothes in a rude heap together; with which bundle filling thine Arms, step
bravely forth, crying, Room, What a coyl keep you about the Fire? The more are
set round about it, the more is thy commendation, if thou either bluntly ridest
over their shoulders, or tumblest aside their Stools, to creep into the
Chimney-corner: there toast thy body till thy schorched shins be speckled all
over, being stained with more Colors than are to be seen on the right side of
the Rainbow.

Neither shall it be fit for the state of thy health to put on thy Apparel,
till by fitting in that hothouse of the Chimney, thou feel the fat Dew of
thy body (like bisting) run trickling down thy sides; for by that means thou
may lawfully boast, That thou live by the sweat of thy brows.

As for thy stockings and shoes, so wear them, that all men may point at thee,
and make thee famous by that glorious name of Malcontent.

Having thus apparelled thee from Top to Toe, according to that simple Fashion
which the greatest Coxcombs in Europe strive to imitate; it is now high time
for me to have a blow at thy head; which I will not cut off with sharp Documents,
but rather set it on faster, bestowing upon it such excellent carving, that if
all the Wisemen of Gotham should lay their Heads together, their Jobber-nowls
would not be able to compare with thine.

To maintain therefore that Sconce of thine strongly guarded and in good
reparation, let never any Comb fasten his. Teeth there: Let thy Hair grow
thick and bushy like a Forest, or some Wilderness, lest those six-footed
Creatures that breed in it, and are Tenants to that Crown-Land of thine, be
hunted to death by every base, barbarous Barber, and so that delicate and
tickling pleasure of scratching be utterly taken from thee; for thy Head is a
House built for Reason to dwell in; and thus is the Tenement framed. The two
Eyes are the Glass-windows, at which Light disperses it self into every Room;
having goodly Penthouses of Hair to overshade them. As for the Nose, though
some (injuriously and most improperly) make it serve for an Indian-Chimney, yet
surely it is rightly a Bridge, two Arches under which are neat Passages to
convey as well Perfumes to air and sweeten every Chamber, as to carry away all
noisome Filth that is swept out of unclean Corners. The Cherry-lips open like
the new-painted Gates of a Lord Majors House, to take in Provision. The tongue
is a Bell hanging just under the middle of the Roof; and lest it should be rung
out too deep (as sometimes it is when women have a Peal) whereas it was cast by
the first Founder only to tole softly; there are two Rows of Ivory Pegs (like
Pales) to keep it in. The Ears are two Musick-rooms, into which, as well good
sounds as bad descend down two narrow pair of Stairs, that for all the world
have crooked windings like those that did lead to the top of Pauls-Steeple,
when standing before that General Conflagration: And because when the Tunes are
once got in, they should not too quickly slip out, all the walls of both places
are plaistered with yellow Wax round about them. Now as the fairest Lodging,
though it be furnished with Walls, Chimneys, Chambers, and all other parts of
Architecture; yet if the Sieling be wanting, it stands subject to Rain, and so
consequently to Ruin: So would this goodly Palace which we have modelled out
unto you, be but a cold and bald habitation, were not the top of it rarely
covered. Nature therefore has played the Tyler, and given it a most curious
Covering, or (to speak more properly) she has thatched it all over, and that
thatching is Hiir: if then thou desire to reserve that Fee-simple of Wit (thy
Head) for Thee and the lawful Heirs of thy Body, let thy Hair receive his full
growth, that thou may 'st safely and wisely brag it is thine own Bush natural.
And withal consider, that as those snowy Fleeces which the naked Bryar steals
from the innocent nibbling sheep, to make him a warm Winter-livery, is to it an
excellent Ornament; so make thou account that to have Feathers sticking here
and there on thy Head will embellish and set thy Crown out rarely. None dare
upbraid thee, that like a Beggar thou have lain on the Straw, or like a
traveling Peddler on musty flocks: for those Feathers will rise up as.
Witnesses to choke him that says so, and to prove that thy Bed was of the
softest Down. When your Noblest Gallants consecrate their Hours to their
Mistresses, and to Revelling, they wear Feathers then chiefly in their Hats,
being one of the fairest Ensigns of their Bravery: But be thou a Reveller or
Mistress-server all the Year long, by wearing Feathers in thy Hair, whose
length before the rigorous edge of any Puritanical pair of scizzars should
shorten the breadth of a finger, let the three Huswively Spinsters of Destiny
rather curtal the thread of thy life. Oh no! Long Hair is the only Net that
Women spread abroad to entrap men in: And why should not men be as far above
Women in that Commodity, as they go beyond men in others? The Merry Greeks were
called (...), Longhaired. Loose not thou (being an honest Trojan) that Honor,
seeing it will more fairly become thee. Grass is the Hair of the earth, which
so long as it is suffered to grow, it carries a most excellent Color; but when
the Sunburned Clown makes his Mowes at it, and (like a Barber) shaves it off to
the stumps, it withers, and is good for nothing, but to be trust, up and thrown
among the Jades. How ugly is a blad-Pate? it looks like a Face wanting a Nose,
or like ground eaten bare with the Arrows of Archers, Whereas a Head all hid in
Hair gives even to the most deformed Face a sweet Complexion, and looks like a
Meadow newly married to the Spring: which beauty in Christians the Turks
envying, they no sooner lay hold on one, but the first Mark they set upon him
to make him know that he is a Slave, is to shave off all his Hair close to his
Skull. A Mahumetical cruelty therefore it is, to stuff Balls with that which
when it is once lost, all the hare-shooters in the world may sweat their Hearts
out, and yet hardly catch it again. Long Hair will make thee look dreadfully to
thine Enemies, and manly ^o thy Friends: It is in Peace an Ornament, in War a
strong Helmet; it blunts the edge of a Sword, and deads the leaden thump of a
Bullet. In Winter it is a warm Nightcap, in Summer a cooling Fan of Feathers.

CHAP. IV.
Instructions how a young Gallant should behave, himself at an Ordinary.

FIrst, Diligently having enquired out an Ordinary of the the largest
reckoning, whither mo^^ of your Gallants do resort; let (...) be your use to
repair thither about half an hour after Eleven, for then you shall find most of
your Fashion-Mongers planted in the Room waiting for Meat.

Being arrived in the Room, Salute not any but those of your own Acquaintance:
walk up and down as scornfully and as carelessly as a Gentleman Usher. Select
some friend, having first thrown off your Cloak, to walk up and down the Room
with you; let him be Suited, if you can, worse by far than your self; for by
this means he will publish you better than a Tennis-Court or a Play^ouse.
Discourse as much as you can, no matter to how little purpose: if you but make
a noise, and laugh in Fashion, and have a good ^^im Face to promise
quarrelling, you shall be much observed.

If you be a Soldier, and have had any Command, talk how often you have been
in such an Action^ as in all the Three Last Dutch-^ights; and that you fought
so stoutly, that you were fain to shift your Ship twice; and that when the
Captain of your Ship was killed (being then but Lieutenant) you fought three
hours with Trump, and forced him to take his old course when worsted, to swim
like a Water-rat; and that His His Grace the Duke of Monmou^^ having heard of
your Service in the Fleet (then cry, But no matter Sirs, a man ought not to
speak fort his own praise; upon which the Company will conclude you spea^
truth) he begged of the Prince that he might have you with him at the taking of
Maestricht, and that the next man that entered after his good Grace, was you
self; and though you say it and should not say it, you were he that
countermined all their Mines; and that for ought you know, had you not been
there, the busine^^ had never been effected. And if you perceive that the
untravelled Company take this down well, ply them with more such Stuff; as how
you, as simple a Fellow as you seem to be, have In^^^preted between the French
King and the Emperor; and that will be an ^^cellent way to publish your
Lan^uages, if you have them; if not, ^et some fragments of French, or shall
parcels of Italian to fling a^out the Table: but beware how ^ou speak any Latin
there; your Ordinaries most commonly have no more to do with Latin, than a
desperate Town or Garrison has.

If you be a Courtier, discourse of the obtaining Suits, of your Mistresses
favors: Make inquiry if any Gentleman at the Board have any Suit to get, which
he would use the good means of a Great Man's interest with the King; and withal
(if you have not so much Grace left in you as to ^lush) that you are (thanks to
your Stars) in mighty Credit, though in your own Conscience you know that you
dare not (but only upon the Privilege of handsome Clothes) presume to peep
within the Court-gates; yea, a^^ rather than your tongue should n^^ be heard in
the room, discourse ho^ often this Lady has sent h^^ Coach for you, and how
often yo^ have sweat in the Tennis-Court with that Great Lord or Duke.

If you be a Poet, and come into the Ordinary (though it can be no great Glory
to be an ordinary Poet) Order your self thus: Observe no man, though the Poet
Laureat should be there himself. Put not off your Hat to that Gentleman to day
at Dinner, to whom not two Nights ago you were beholden for a Supper; but after
a turn or two in the Room, take occasion (pulling out your Gloves) to have some
Epigram or Satyr fastened in one of them, that may (as it were against your
consent) offer it self to the Gentlemen: they will presently desire it; but
without mighty Conjuration from them do not read it: Marry, if you chance to
get into your hands any witty thing of another man's that is something better, I
would counsel you then, if demand be made who composed it; you may say a very
Learned Gentleman, and a worthy Friend; and this seeming to lay it on another
man, will be counted modesty in you, or a sign that you are not ambitious of
praise, or else that you dare not take it upon you for fear of the sharpness it
carries with it: besides it will add much to your Fame, to let your Tongue walk
faster than your Teeth, though you be never so hungry; and rather than you
should sit like a dumb Coxcomb, to repeat by heart either some Verses of your
own, or any other man's, stretching even very good Lines upon the rack of
Censure, though it be against Law, Honesty or Conscience, it may chance save
you the price of your Ordinary. Marry, I would further entreat our Poet to be
in League with the Mistress of the Ordinary; because from her, upon condition
that he will but Rhyme Knights and Gentlemen to her House, he may easily make up
his Mouth at her cost gratis.

Thus much for particular men: but in general, let all that are in
Ordinary-pay, march after the sound of these Directions. Before the meat come
smoking to the Board, our Gallant must draw out his Tobacco-Pox, the Ladle for
the cold Snuff into the Nostril, the Tongues and Stopper: all which Artillery,
may be of Gold or Silver (if he can reach to the price of it) it will be a
reasonable useful Pawn at all times, when the Current of his Money falls out to
run low.

When you are set down to Dinner, you must eat as impudently as can be. When
your Knight is upon the stewed Mutton, be you presently in the bosom of the
Goose; when your Justice of Peace is Inuckle-deep in the Goose, you may without
disparagement fall very manfully to your Woodeocks. You may rise in Dinnertime
to ask for a Close-stool, protesting to all the Gentlemen, that it costs you an
hundred pounds per Annum for Physic, besides the Annual Pension which your
wife allows her Doctor. And if you please, you may invite some special Friend
of yours from the Table, to hold Discourse with you as you fit in that
withdrawing Chamber; from whence being returned again to the Board, you shall
sharpen the wits of all the eating Gallants about you, and do them great
pleasure, to ask what Pamphlets or Poems a man might think fittest to wipe his
Tail with: And in propounding this Question, you may abuse the Works of any
man, deprave his Writings that you cannot equal, and purchase to your self in
time the name of a severe Critic.

After Dinner, every man as his business leads him, some to Dice, some to
Plays, some to take up Friends in the Court, some to take up money in the City.
And thus as the People is said to be a Beast of many heads (yet all those heads
like Hydra's) overgrowing as various in their horns, as wondrous in their
budding and branching; so in an Ordinary you shall find the variety of a whole
Kingdom in a few Apes of the Nation

You must not swear in your Dicing, for that argues a violent impatience to
depart from your money, and in time will betray a man's need; take heed of it.
No, if you be at Hazard or Put, you shall sit as patiently (though you lose
half a years exhibition) as a disarmed Gentleman does when he is in the
unmerciful hands of Sergeants. Yet I will allow you to swear privately, and
tear six or seven score pair of Cards, be the damnation of some dozen bail of
vice, and forswear Play a thousand times in an hour, but not swear.

At your Twelve Penny Ordinary you may give any young Knight (if he be but one
degree toward the Equinoctial of the salt^ellar) leave to pay for the wine;
and he shall not refuse it, though it ^e but a week before the receiving of his
Quarters Rent, which is a time albeit of good hope, yet of present necessity.

There is another Ordinary, to which your London-Vsurer, your stale Bachelor,
and your thrifty Attorney do resort; the price three pence: the Rooms as full
as a Goal, and indeed divided into several Wards, like the beds of an Hospital.
The Complement between these is not much, the^ words few; for the Belly has
(...) Ears: every man's eye here is upon the other man's Trencher, to not^
whether his fellow lurch him o^ no. If they chance to Discourse it is of nothing
but of Statutes Bonds, Recognizances, Fines, Recoveries, Rents, Subsidies,
Enclosures, Indictments, Outlaries Feoffments, Judgments, Commissions,
Banckrouts, Amercements and such like horrible matter. can find nothing in
this Ordinary worthy the sitting down for; therefore the Cloth shall be taken
away; and those that are thought good enough to be Guests here, shall be too
base to be waiters at our Grand Ordinary, at which your Gallant tastes these
Commodities; he shall fare well, enjoy good Company, receive all the News e're
the Post can deliver his Packet, Proclaim his good Clothes, know this man to
drink well, that to ^^ed stoutly; he shall, if he be minded to Travel, put out
money upon his Return, and have hands enough to receive it upon any terms of
repayment: and no Question, if he be poor, he shall now and then light upon
some Gull or other, whom he may bubble (after the Gentile Fashion) of money. By
this time the parings of Fruit and Cheese are in the Voyder, Cards and Dice lie
stinking in the fire; some are gone to one Theater, some to the other. Let us
take a pair of Oars for Dorset-stairs, and so in to the Theater after them as
fast as we can.

CHAP. V.
Instructions for a young Gallant how to behave himself in the Playhouse.

THe Theater is your Poets Royal Exchange, upon which their Muses (that are now
turned to Merchants) meeting, barter away that light Commodity of words, for a
fighter ware than words, Plandities, and the breath of the great Beast, which
(like the threatenings of two Cowards) vanish into Air.

The Playhouse is free for entertainment, allowing Room as well to the Farmers
Son as to a Templer; yet it is not fit that he whom the most Tailors bills make
room for when he comes should be basely like a Viol, cased up in a corner:
Therefore, I say, let our Gallant (having paid his half Crown, and given the
Doorkeeper his Ticket) presently advance himself into the middle of the Pit,
where having made his Honor to the rest of the Company, but especially to the
Vizard-Masks, let him pull out his Comb, and manage his flaxen Wig with all the
Grace he can. Having so done, the next step is to give a hum to the
China-Orange-wench, and give her her own rate for her Oranges (for it is below a
Gentleman to stand haggling like a Citizens wife) and then to present the
fairest to the next Vizard-mask. And that I may encourage our Gallant not like
the Tradesman to save a shilling, and so sit but in the Middle-Gallery, let
him but consider what large comings-in are pursed up sitting in the Pit.

1. First, A conspicuous Emi^ence is gotten, by which means the best and most
essential parts of a Gentleman, as his fine Clothes and Perruke, are perfectly
revealed.

2. By sitting in the Pit, if you be a Knight, you may happily get you a
Mistress; which if you would, I advise you never to be absent when Epsome Wells
is played: for, We see the Wells have Empress of Moracco in the Protegue.
stolen the Vizardmasks away.

But if you be but a mere Fleetstreet Gentleman, a Wife: but assure your self,
by your continual residence there, you are the first and principal man in
election to begin the number of We three.

It shall Crown you with rich Commendation, to laugh aloud in the midst of the
most serious and sudden Scene of the terriblest Tragedy, and to let the Clapper
(your Tongue) be tossed so high, that all the House may ring of it: for by
talking and laughing, you heap Pelion upon Ossa, Glory upon Glory: as first,
all the eyes in the Galleries will leave walking after the Players, and only
follow you: the most Pedantick Person in the House snatches up your name; an^
when he meets you in the Streets, he will say, He is such a Gallant; and the
people admire you.

Secondly, You publish your temperance to the world, in that you seem not to
resort thither to taste vain Pleasures with an hungry Appetite; but only as a
Gentleman to spend a foolish hour or two, because you can do nothing else.

Now Sir, if the Poet be a fellow that has Lampoon'd or libelled you, or has
had a flirt at your Mistress, you shall disgrace him worse than tossing him in
a Blanket, or giving him the Bastinado in a Tavern, if in the middle of the
Play you arise with a skrew'd and discontented face (as if you ^ad the griping
in the Guts) and ^e gone; and further to vex ^im, mew at passionate Speeches,
^lare at merry, find fault with the Music, whistle at the Songs, and above
all, curse the Sharers, that whereas the very same day you had bestowed five
pounds for an embroidered Belt, you encounter with the very same on the Stage,
when the Belt-maker swore the impression was new but that morning.

To conclude, hoard up the finest Play-scraps you can get, upon which your lean
Wit may most savourly feed for want of other stuff; for this is only Furniture
for a Courtier that is but a new Beginner, and is but in his A B C of
Complement. The next places that are filled after the Playhouses be emptied,
are Taverns. Into a Tavern let us then march, where the Brains of one Hogshead
must be beaten out to make up another.

CHAP. VI.
Instructions how a young Gallant should behave himself in a Tavern.

WHosoever desires to be accounted a well-wisher to the Public, whether he be
a Country-Gentleman that brings his wife up to learn the Fashions, see the
Tombs at Westminster, the Lions in the Tower, or take Physic; or else is some
young Farmer, who many times makes his wife (in the Country) believe he has
Suites in Law, because he will come up to his Letchery; be he of what stamp he
will that has money in his Purse, and a good Conscience to spend it, my counsel
is, that he take his continual Diet at a Tavern, which is the only Rendezvous
of boon Company, and the Drawers the most nimble, the most bold, and most
sudden Proclaimers of your largest Bounty.

Having put your self into an Equipage, your office is to enquire out those
Taverns which are best customed, whose Masters are oftnest drunk; and such as
stand farthest from the Counters; where landing your self and your followers,
your first Complement shall be, to grow most inwardly acquainted with the
Drawers, to learn their names, as Jack and Will, and Tom; to dive into their
Inclinations, as, whether this fellow uses the Fencing-School, this the
Dancing-School; whether that young Conjurer (in Hogsheads) at Midnight keeps a
Gelding now and then to visit his Cockatrice; or whether he loves Dogs, or be
ad^cted to any other eminent and Gentleman-like quality; and pro^est your self
to be extremely in love, and that you spend much ^ony in a year upon any of
those ^xercises, which you perceive is ^^llowed by them. The use which ^ou
should make of this familiari^y, is this; if you want money five (...) six days
together, you may still ^ay the Reckoning with this most Gentleman-like
Language, Boy ^^ch me money from the Bar. Be^^des, you shall be sure (if there
be ^ne Fawcet that can betray neat ^une to the Bar) to have that ar^igned
before you sooner than better and a worthier Person.

For your Drink, let not your Physician confine you to any one particular
Liquor: for as it is very equisite that a Gentleman should ^ot always be
plodding in one Art, but rather be a general Scholar (that is, to have a lick
at all sorts of Learning, and away) so it is not fitting a man should trouble
his head with sucking at one Grape.

Your Discourse at the Table must be such, as that which you utter at an
Ordinary; your Behavior the same, but somewhat more carelessly: for where your
Expense is great, let your modesty beless; and though you should he mad in a
Tavern, the largeness of the Items will bear with your incivility; you may
without prick to your Conscience set the want of your Wit against the
superfluity of their Reckonings. Again, inquire what Gallants sup in the next
Room; and if there be any of your Acquaintance, do not you (after the
City-fashion) send them in a Bottle of Wine, and your name sweetened in two
pitiful papers of Sugar, with some simple Apology crammed in the mouth of a
Drawer: No, no, that is below a Gentleman; nor when the terrible Reckoning (like
an Indictment) bids you hold up your hand, and that you must answer it at the
Bar, you must not abate one penny in any particular, but only cast your eye
upon the Totalis, and no further: for to traverse the Bill, would letray you to
be acquainted with the rates of the Market; nay more, it would make the Vintner
believe you were Familias, and kept a House, which I will assure you is ^ot now
in fashion.

At your departure forth of the House, to kiss mine Hostess over the Bar, or to
accept of the courtesy of the Cellar, or to bid any of the Vintners good
night, is as commendable as for a Barber after ming to lave your face with
Rosewatet, etc.

CHAP. VII.
Instructions for a young Gallant how to behave himself passing through the
City at all hours of the night, and how to pass by any Watch.

AFter the sound of Bottles is out of your Ears, and that the spirit of Wine
and Tobacco walks in your Brain, the Taverndoor being shut upon your back, pass
through the wide and high streets in the City; and if your means cannot reach
to the keeping of a Boy, hire one of the Drawers to be as a Lanthorn unto your
feet, and to light you home; and still as you approach near any Night-walker,
that is up as late as your self, curse and swear (like one that speaks
High Dutch) in a lofty voice, because your man has used you so like a Raskal
in not waiting upon you; and vow the next morning to pull his blew Livery over
his ears; though if your Chamber were well searched, you give only 6 d. a week
to some old woman to make your Bed, and that she is all the Servant that you
give wages to. If you smell a Watch (and that you may easily do, for commonly
they eat Onions to keep themselves in sleeping, which they account a Medicine
against the cold) and you come within danger of their brown Bills, let him that
is your Candlestick, let Ignis fatuus, I say, being within reach of the
Constablesstaff, ask aloud, Sir Giles, or Sir Abram, will you turn this way, or
down that Street? And if the Sentinel and his Court of Guard stand strictly
upon his Martial Law, and cry Stand, commanding you to give the Word, and to
show reason why your Ghost walks so late; do it in some jest: or if you read a
Mittimus in the Constables Book, counterfeit your self to be a Frenchman, a
Dutchman, or any other Nation whose Country is at peace with your own; and you
may pass: for being not able to understand you, they cannot by the Custom of
the City take your examination, and so by consequence they have nothing to say
to you.

All the way as you pass (especially being approacht near some of the Gates)
talk of none but Lords or such Ladies with whom you have played at Cribbidge and
Post and Pair, the very same day: and being arrived at your Lodgingdoor, which
I would counsel you to choose in some rich Citizens house, salute no man at
parting but by the name of Sir (as though you had supped with Knights) although
you had none in your company but Foot-boys.

Happily it will be blown abroad that you and your shole of Gallants swam
through such an Ocean of Wine, that you danced so much money out at heels, and
that in wild-fowl there flew away so much; and have your Bill of your Reckoning
lost on purpose, so that it may be published, will make you to be held in dear
estimation: only the danger is, if that your revelling gets your Creditors by
the ears, for then look to have a peal of Ordnance thundering at your
Chamber Door the next morning: but if either your Tailor, Mercer, Habberdasher,
Silk-man, Linnendraper, or Sempster, stand like a Guard of Switzers about your
Lodging, waiting your up-rising; or if they miss of that, your downlying in one
of the Counters, you have no means to avoid the galling of their small shot,
but by sending out a Light-Horse-man, to call your Apothecary to your aid, who
encountering this desperate band of your Creditors, only with two or three
Glasses in his hands, as though that day you purged, is able to drive them all
to their holes like so many Foxes: for the name of taking Physic is a
sufficient Quietus est to any endangered Gentleman.

I could now breath you in a Fencing-School, and out of that Cudgel you into a
Dancing-School; and to close up this Feast, I could make Cockneys whose Fathers
have left them well, acknowledge themselves infinitely beholding to me, to
teaching them by familiar demonstration how to spend their Patrimony, and to
get themselves names when their Fathers are dead: But lest too many Dishes
should cast you into a surfeit, I will now take away; yet so, that if I perceive
you to relish this well, the rest shall be in time prepared for you. Farewell.

THE CHARACTER OF A Proud, Huffing, Self-conceited, Foppish and Lascivious
YOUNG GALLANT.
TO take him ab origin, he was born and shaped for his Clothes; and had Adam
not fallen, he had lived to no purpose: he gratulates therefore the first sin,
and fig leaves that were an occasion of bravery. His first care is his Dress,
the next his Body; and in the uniting these two, lies his Soul and its
Faculties. If he be qualified in Gaming notably and extraordinarily, he is so
much the more gentile and complete, and he learns the best Oaths for the same
purpose; these are some part of his Discourse, and he is as curious in their
newness, as the Fashion. He knows no man, that is not generally known: his Wit,
like the Marigold, opens with the Sun; and therefore he arises not before ten
of the Clock. He put more confidence in his words than meaning, and more in his
pronunciation than his words. Occasion is his Cupid, and he has but one
receipt of making love. He follows nothing but Inconstancy, admires nothing
but Beauty, and honors nothing but Fortune. He is a great News-monger; and his
censure, like a shot, depends upon the Charging. You shall never see him
serious, but with his Tailor, when he is in conspiracy for the ^ext devise. He
is furnished with ^is Jests as some wanderer with ^ermons, some three for all
Con^regations; one especially against ^he Scholar, a man to him much
ri^iculous, whom he knows by no other definition, than silly fellow ^^ black.
He is a kind of a walk^^g Mercers-shop, and shows you ^^e stuff to day, and
another to ^orrow; an Ornament to the ^ooms he comes in, as the fair bed ^^d
hangings be, and is merely ra^able accordingly, fifty or one ^undred pounds, as
his Suite is. He is ignorant of nothing, no not ^f those things where ignorance
is ^he lesser shame. He gets the ^ames of good Wits, and utters them for his
Companions. He consesseth Vices that he is guilty of, if they be in fashion;
and dares not salute a man in old Clothes, or out of fashion. There is not a
public Assembly without him, and h^^ will take any pains for an acquaintance
there. He allows of no Judge but the eye. He is some what like the
Salamander, and lives in the flame of love; which pains he expresses; and
nothing grieves him so much, as the want of a Poet to make an issue in his
love: yet he sighs sweetly, and speaks lamentably; for his breath is perfumed,
and his words a^^ wind. He laughs at every person whose Perruke sits not well,
or tha^ has not a pair of Pantaloons. His very essence he places in his
outside; and his chiefest prayers and wishes are, that his revenues may hold
out so as to be able to keep his Miss, and keep himself in a good Equipage. You
shall never see him melancholy, but when he wants a new Suite, or fears a
Sergeant. Again, he is Mountains ^nky, that climbing a Tree, and ^pping from
bough to bough, ^ves you back his face; but com^g once to the top, he holds his
^ose up into the wind, and shows ^ou his Tail. All his gay-glitter ^ews on him
as if the Sun shone in puddle: for he is a small Wine at will not last; and
when he is ^lling, he goes of himself faster ^an misery can drive him. You ^ay
observe, if you do but ob^rve him well, that his whole life ^^ but a
counterfeit Patent, which evertheless makes many a Coun^^y-Justice of Peace
tremble. He theats young Gulls that are newly come to Town; and when the ^eeper
of the Ordinary blames him for it, he answers him in his own Profession, That
the Woodcock must be plucked ere he be dressed. He accounts bashfulness the
wicked'st thing in the world, and therefore studies Impudence: if all men were
of his mind, all honesty would be out of fashion. He much frequents the two
Theaters: picks up a Miss, and pinches her fingers, and cries, Damme, Madam, if
you were but sensible of the passion that I have for you, and the mortal wounds
that your beauty has given me, you would -- and it may be he never saw her
before in his life: and if he cannot prevail with he^ for -- and he finds her
honest, then he cries, Damye for a precise whore, What make you in the Pit
here? the Twelve-penny Gallery and Foot-boys are good enough for you: and so
leaves attacquing her. And if he lights of no other game, when the Play is
done, if you mark his rising, it is with a kind of walking Epilogue; mounts the
Stage from the Pit, and walks to and fro the Stage, and amongst the Scenes, to
see if his ^uite may pass for current. Scho^^r he pretends himself, and says he
has sweat for it; but the truth is, he knows Cornelius better far than Tacitus:
his ordinary and most usual Sports (though not all) are Cock-fights, but most
frequent Horse-races; from whence he comes home dry-foundered; and when his
Purse has cast her Calf, ^e goes down into the Country ^or a recruit; and if
he cannot ^ave as much as he demands, presently huffs the good-natured man his
Father, or the provident woman his Mother: but at last, having wheadled
somebody of a sum of money, up again he comes for London, the Playhouse, the
Ordinary, and the Tavern, where it is nothing with him, if any of the Drawers
give him but a cross word, nay, if they do not accent their Syllables aright
when they speak to him, he presently makes them measure their lenghts on the
ground, and cracks their crowns with a Quart-Bottle, a Candlestick, or any
thing that comes next his hands; and if they do but offer to vindicate
themselves, Damye, are you not satisfied? away he goes, and it may be upon
pretense of the Drawers abusing him, builds a Sconce on the House. The next
house he comes into, if it be to Dinner or any Treat, he is so proud, that if
he be not placed in the highest Seat, he eats nothing, he professes to keep
his Stomach for the Pheasant or the Quail; and when they come in, he can eat
nothing he has been so cloyed with them that year, although they be the first
he saw: he rises up in a huff from Table, and it may be tick his reckoning,
that he may keep half a Crown in his Pocket to sit ^n the Pit in the
Playhouse. He ^ow and then, it may be, will go ^o hear a Sermon, only to show
his gay Clothes and his flaxen Wig. In the speculation of his good parts, his
eyes, like a Drunkard's, ^ee all double; and his fancy, like ^n old man's
Spectacles, make a ^reat letter in a small print. He magines every place where
he ^omes his Theater, and not a look stirring but his Spectator; and conceives
men's thoughts to be very idle, that is, only busy about him. His walk is still
in the fashion of a March, and like his Opinion, unaccompanied with his eyes;
most fixed upon his own person, or on others with reflection to himself. If he
has done any thing that has passed with applause, he is always re-acting it
alone, and conceits the ecstasy his Hearers were in at every period. Another
part of his Discourse is Positions, and definitive Decrees, with thus it must
be, and thus it is; and he will not humble himself to prove it. Methinks Virgi^
well expresses him in those wellbehav'd Ghosts that Aeneas met with, that were
friends to tal^ with, and men to look on; but if he graspt them, but air: so he
^^ one that lies kindly to you, an^ for good fashion-sake; and it is
discourtesie in you to believe him (...) his words are but so many fine and
delicate Phrases set together which serve equally for all men and are equally
to no purpose: each fresh encounter with a man, puts him to the same pa^^
again; and he goes over to you, what he said to him was last wi^^ him: he
kisses your hand as h^ kissed his before, and is your humble ^^rvant to be
commanded; but ^ou shall entreat of him nothing; ^^s proffers are universal and
gene^al, with exceptions as against all ^^rticulars: he will do any thing ^or
you; but if you urge him to his, he cannot; or to that, he is ^^gaged; but he
will do any ^^ing (observe how complemental ^^d obliging he is.) Promises he
^ccounts but a kind of unmanner^^ words, and in the expectation ^^ your Manners
not to exact ^^em; if you do, he wonders at our ill-breeding, that you cannot
^^stinguish betwixt what is spoken ^^d what is meant. No man gives ^^tter
satisfaction at the first, and ^^mes off more with the Elogie of fine
Gentleman, until you know ^^m better, and then you know ^^m for nothing. Again,
he is one ^^at loves to gratify the old man; and thus he boasts himself the
Servant of many Mistresses, but a^^ are but his Lust, to which only ^^ is
faithful, and none besides, and spends his best Blood and Spirit^ in the
Service. His Soul is the bound to his Body; and those that assist him in this
nature, the neares^ to it. No man abuses more the name of Love, or those whom
he applies this name to: for his Love is like his Stomach, to feed on what he
loves, and in the end to surfeit and loath, till a fresh Appetite rekindle him;
and it kindles o^ any one sooner, than who deserv^ best of him. No man laughs
^^ his sin more than he, or is so extremely tickled with the remembrance of it;
and he is more violent to a modest ear, than to her ^^ deflowered. A bawdy Jest
enter deep into him, and whatsoeve^ you speak, he will draw to Bawdry; and his
Wit is seldom or ever so quick as here. There is nothing more hard to his
Perswa^ion, than a chaste man, no Eu^uch; and makes a scoffing and inheard-of
Wonder and Miracle, if you tell him but of a pure Virgin or a Maid. He has
many fine quips at the folly of plain-dealing; but his lash is greatest, and
most of all, at Religion; yet he uses this too, and virtue and good words, but
^s less dangerously a Devil than a Saint. He ascribes all honesty to an
unpractis'dness in the humors and conversations of his Fellowtown-Gallants;
and Conscience he adjudges and deems a thing fit only for Children. He scorns
all that are so silly to trust him; and only not scorns his Enemy, especially
if as bad as himself, he fears him as a man well armed and provided; and sets
boldly on good natures; as the most facile and easy to be vanquished. To
conclude, he is generally and universally o^ so bad a nature and disposition,
that no civilized person will either keep Company, or hold Correspondence with
him; and he dislikes them as bad, if not worse, than they him, and delights in
no Company but such as are like himself; which is evident by that common
Proverb, Birds of a Feather flock together: for his and his Companions design
is nothing but to cheat the world with a fair outshew, build Sconces in public
Houses, cheat young innocent Gentlemen of their Estates, and be revenged upon
those inanimalia commonly called Glass-windows, as they pass the streets all
hours of the night, and so to their Lodgings, or some Bawdy House, where they
get claps, die, and are buried no body knows how, or cares where.

THE CHARACTER OF A True, Noble, Liberal, AND STAYED GENTLEMAN.
THere is as great a distance between him and our huffing and self-conceited
Gallant, as there is between us and the Antipodes. The former's delights and
pleasures consist in fine Clothes, gentile Oaths, as he calls them; and except
you are as well versed in those as himself, he will neither keep Company, or
have any thing to do with you; unless he finds you of no great reach or
understanding, and thereby he is raised in his expectation to bubble you out of
a sum of money, of a Watch, or a Diamond-Ring; then he will be most complaisant
with you. And there is no man puts his brain to more use than he; for his whole
life is a daily Invention, and each meal a new Stratagem. But now our true and
noble-spirited Gentleman is one that has taken order with himself, and sets a
rule to all his pleasures and delights; not too precise or too lavish, but
keeps a just medium and decorum in every thing. He will keep company with none
but ingenious persons, and hates a Fop, and avoids him as much, as a Mariner
does Scylla or Charibdis; and has as great kindness for him as a Puritan has
for a Bishop or Surplice. His whole life is as it were distinct in Method, and
his Actions cast up before; not loosed into the Worlds vanities, but gathered
and contracted up in his station; not scattered into many pieces of businesses,
but that one course he takes goes through with: one that is firm and standing
in his designs and purposes, not heaved off with each wind and passion; that
squares* his Expense to his Coffers, and makes the total first, and then the
Items; one that thinks what he does, and does what he says, and foresees what
he may do before he purposes: one whose [If I can] is more than another
assurance, and his doubtful Tale before some men's Protestations; that is
confident of nothing in futurity, yet his Conjectures often true Prophesies; that
makes a pause still betwixt his ear and belief, and is not at all forward or
hasty to say after others: one whose Tongue is strung up like a Clock till the
time, and then strikes, and says much when he talks little; that can see the
truth betwixt two wranglers, and sees them agree in that they fall out upon;
that speaks no Rebellion in a bravery, or talks big from the spirit of Sack: a
man temperate and cool in his passions, not easily betrayed by his Choler; that
vies not Oath with Oath, nor heat with heat, but replies calmly to an angry
man, and is too hard for him too. Duellist he is none, nor like our Huff, that
is commonly most insulting and courageous if he has a Coward to deal with;
laboring to take off this suspicion from himself: For the Opinion of Valor is
a good Protection to those that dare not use it. No man is valianter than our
Huff in civil Company, and where he thinks no danger may come of it; and he is
the most ready to fall upon a Drawer or Tapster, and those that must not strike
again. Wonderful exceptious and choleric when he sees men are unwilling and
loath to give him occasion; and you cannot pacify him better, than by
quarrelling with him; the hotter you grow, the more temperate man he is; he
protests he always honored you; and the more you rail upon him, the more he
honors you; and you threaten him at last into a very quiet and modest man. The
sight of a Sword wounds him more sensibly than the stroke; for before that
come, he is dead already. Every man is his Master that dare beat him. For his
friend he cares not for, as a man that carries no such terror as his Enemy,
which for this cause is the more potent with him of the two; and men fall out
with him on purpose to get courtesies from him, and be bribed again to a
reconcilement. A man in whom no secret can be bound up: for the apprehension of
each danger frightens him, and makes him bewray the Room and it. He is a
Christian merely for fear of Hellfire; and if any Religion could fright him
more, he would be of that. Now it is quite contrary between this our Huff and
our discreet and Noble-spirited Gentleman: for he on the other side, though he
sometimes seems to be haughty and proud, yet in reality he is not: you may
forgive him his looks for his worths sake; for they are too proud to be base:
one whom no rate can buy off from the least piece of his freedom, and make him
digest an unworthy thought an hour. He cannot crouch to a Great man to possess
him, nor fall to the earth to rebound never so high again; he stands taller on
his own bottom, than others on the advantageground of Fortune, as having
solidly that Honor of which Title is but the pomp; he does homage to no man
for his great Style sake, but is strictly just in the exaction of respect
again; and will not bate you a Complement, though he does not value them: he is
more sensible of a neglect than an undoing, and scorns no man so much as his
surly threatner: a man though he has been abused, and taken an affront, yet is
quickly laid down with satisfaction, and remits an injury upon the
acknowledgement and confession of it; one that stands not upon trifling
punctilio's of honor, as taking the wall, the right hand; but laughs at the
ridiculousness of such persons that do stand upon it. Only to himself he is
irreconcilable, whom he never forgives a disgrace, but is still stabbing
himself with the thought of it; and no disease that he dies of sooner. He is
one that strives more to be quit with his Friend than his Enemy. Fortune may
kill him, but not deject him; not make him fall into an humbler key than
before, but he is now loftier than ever in his own defense; you shall hear him
talk still after thousands, and he becomes it better than those that have it:
he is one that is above the world and its drudgery; one that will do nothing
upon Command, though he would do it otherwise; and if ever he do evil, it is
when he is dared to it: one who is not deep in Drapers, Mercers, or Silkmens
Books, but pay, when he has his Commodities delivered: one whom ^o ill hunting
sends home discon^ented, and makes him swear ^t his Dogs and Family: one who
keeps his Servants long, and alters not his Lodgings every week; not hasty to
pursue every new Fashion, nor yet over-precise, but gravely handsome, and to his
place, which suites him better than his Tailor; active in the world without
disquiet, and careful without misery; yet neither ingulft in his pleasures, nor
a seeker of business, but has his hour for both. His pleasures and pastimes
are sometimes Reading History, sometimes Hunting, Hawking, Fowling and Fishing,
and sometimes to see a Play; but not to appoint Assignations, or seek for
Adventures; nor is his humor much allied to the Romance; that he can neither
act without the distressed Lady; nor is it to meet his Friends there, nor to
join himself in a Squadron for some notable and gallant exploit, as the other
Gallant (Huff) does, who after the Play is done, is next for a House of
Pleasure, and then the French House, where having repeated their former
Gallantry, and heightened their courage with Eloquence and Wine, they are fit
for any thing except Civility. In these brave humors has many a Watchman been
forced to measure his length upon the ground, the poor Constable been put
beside the gravity of his Interrogatories; -- many a timorous female has been
forced to fill the Air with shrieks and bewailings, whilst during this close
engagement the thundering Cannon of their Oaths have with horror filled the
Neighborhood. But the true-bred Gentleman sits the Play out patiently, without
flinging his eyes abroad to ken the Vizard-Masks, and so board them; where if
he observes any thing that is good or ingenious, he turns it into practice; and
after the Play is done, home he goes to his Lodging, and can there laugh at the
Fopperies of some Persons that were presented: he can pick good out of the
worst evil; and you shall never know him live above his Estate, which too too
many now adays do, who are of Horace' ^ Opinion, Fugere cras quaerere. He is a
man that seldom laughs violently, but his mirth is a cheerful look: he affects
nothing so wholly, that he must be a miserable man when he looses it: one that
loves his Credit, not this word Reputation; yet can save both without a Duel;
whose Entertainments to those of a higher rank are respectful, not only flash
and mere Complement. A man he is well poized in all humors, in whom Nature
showed most Geometry. At your first acquaintance with him, he is exceeding
kind, obliging, and friendly, and at your twentieth meeting after friendly
still: he relieves the poor at his door, and the sick with his estate: he can
listen to a foolish discourse with an applausive attention, and conceals his
laughter at Nonsense. Silly men much honor and esteem him, because by his
fair reasoning with them, as men of understanding, he puts them into an
erroneous Opinion of themselves, and makes them forwarder hereafter to their
own discovery. He is the Steers-man of his own Destiny, Truth is the Goddess,
and he takes pains to get her, not to look like her: he knows the condition of
the world, that he must act one thing like another, and then another; to these
he carries his desires and not his desires him; and sticks not fast by the way
(for that Contentment is Repentance) but knowing the Circle of all Courses, of
all intents, of all things, to have but one Center or Period, without all
distraction. Unto the Society of men he is a Sun, whose clearness directs their
steps in a regular Motion; when he is more particular, he is the poor, needy,
and wise man's Friend, the Example of the indifferent, the Medicine of the
vicious: his Bounty is limited by Reason, not Ostentation; and to make it last,
he deals it discreetly, as we sow the furrow, not by the sack, but by the
handful: his word and his meaning are quadrate, and never shake hands and part,
but always go together: he can survey good, and love it; and loves to do it
himself, for its own sake, not for thanks: Nobility lightens in his eyes, and
in his face and gesture is painted the God of Hospitality: his heart never
grows old, no more than his Memory: he passes his time so well, that a man
cannot say that any of it is lost by him: nor has he only years to approve he
has lived till he be old, but Virtues.

And thus I have given you the Character of the Fop, and a true well-bread
Gentleman; the Life and Conversation of the former, being by all persons that
have any Reason left to be shunned; the Actions, and Life of the later to be
embraced and cherished.

FINIS.

