The Saints Triumph OVER THE Last Enemy. IN A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of
that Zealous and Painful Minister of CHRIST, Mr. JAMES JANEWAY. Unto which is
added, His CHARACTER. His sore Conflict before he dyed: And afterward, His
Triumphant manner of departing from Earth, to the Heavenly Inheritance. By
Nathanael Vincent, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel, and at the Bible on London-Bridg, under the
Gate. 1674.

To the much respected Mrs. Hannah Janeway, the sorrowful Relict of Mr. James
Janeway.
Dear Sister,
THough it be a great affliction to lose so excellent an Husband as you
enjoyed, and at whose Funeral this ensuing Sermon was preached; yet that he was
so excellent may also be an argument of Consolation. The thoughts of his being
at rest in Heaven, and rewarded with that Crown which the Great Shepherd has
promised to those Pastors who are faithful, may help to quiet and satisfy your
spirit; especially considering, as Death was unconceivably gainful to him, so
the Husband that lives for ever, can easily make up the loss of that mortal one
who is taken from you.

Think of the Joys his Soul is filled with in Glory, when you find your sorrow
swelling, and your grief transgressing due bounds. And withal remember, that He
who has betrothed you unto himself for ever, is always near you, and has
engaged himself, never to fail you, nor forsake you. How unchangeable is his
love! How great is his faithfulness! How tender are his bowels! How certainly
does he sympathize with you in your sorrows! And how ready is he, to give that
grace which is suitable and sufficient!

You performed your duty abundantly to your dear Husband while he lived; and I
must needs say, that by your love to him, and care of him, you have made the
Church of Christ and Souls your Debtors. Pray do not fail in doing your duty
now; which is, patiently to submit unto the will of God. The Gospel will be
credited, and you will be no loser by such a submission.

The Lord increase grace in you exceedingly; and so shed abroad his love in
your heart by his Spirit, as that the days of your Widowhood, may be the most
comfortable you have ever lived. So prays,

Your truly loving Brother Nathanael Vincent.

To the Congregation over whom my Brother Janeway was Overseer.
My dearly Beloved,
It Is a very heavy stroke that has made you a Flock without a Shepherd. Oh what
a Friend did you lose when your Pastor was snatched from you. You were as dear
to him as his own Soul. How did he pray, and weep, and preach, and labor, and
all to this end, that you might be sincere converts, and work out your own
salvation. Very few could match my Brother Janeway in zeal, in compassion, in
holy activity, in affection, in sincerity. He sought not yours, but you; and
desired ten thousand times more to gain Souls than ought besides. He
endeavored to debase the world in your esteem, and 'twas low in his own. He
strived to raise your affections heavenward, and there was his heart and
treasure. Christ he loved, in Christ he believed; Christ he preached, Christ he
commended. And how did he rejoice, when any that before rejected the Lord
Jesus, were persuaded to give their consents to him!

How may his unregenerate Hearers be startled at the removal of such a
Minister! They deafned their ears, and hardened their hearts, notwithstanding
all his entreaties and importunity; they have resisted the Spirit speaking in
him; and may fear the Spirit is about to give over striving. O you secure
Souls! that live without God, without Christ, that are strangers to duty, and
haters of holiness. A Prophet has been among you, and you shall know it. You
that are back sliders from God; and your seeming forwardness in Religion is
vanished away; O bethink your selves! Let the death of Him that has spoken so
much in the Name of the Lord, be a louder warning than ever any he gave you in
the Pulpit. Call to mind the words he has preached, and beg that being backed
by this sad providence, they may be made effectual to your awakening, and
turning of you unto God.

You that are sincere, Weep over him, that so sincerely loved both Christ and
you. Lament your loss of him, but especially your own unprofitableness under
such a Ministry; and let it be your earnest desire to be made more fruitful.

I must here inform you of three words of advice which were given by your
Pastor before he died; and the words of dying persons should be remembered.

First, That you would walk according to the Gospel, ordering your conversation
so as that the Doctrine of God our Savior may be adorned. The eyes of God, and
Angels, and Men are upon you, you had need to walk with circumspection; pass
the time of your sojourning here in fear; deny ungodliness and worldly lusts;
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, as those that
indeed look for a blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the Lord Jesus.

Secondly, That you would continue united together. Scatter not presently, now
your shepherd is gone, but wait still at those gates of wisdom where you were
wont to attend.

Thirdly, That you would be very well advised in choosing a Successor. Let the
person he one that is an holy, able, and lively Minister; and who is not subtle
to draw people to a particular party, but serious in endeavoring to draw them
to Christ, and to persuade them unto holiness.

Dear Brethren, I am very much concerned for you; and as my grief is great,
because he who had the rule over you must now watch for your Souls no longer;
so my hearty desire is, that God would once again trust you with an able
Minister of the new Testament, and that he may come to you in the fullness of
the blessing of the Gospel of peace.

Your affectionate Friend and Servant for Jesus sake. Nathanael Vincent.

Books lately Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in
Cheapside near Mercers Chapel.
THE Life and Death of Mr. John Janeway.

Saints Encouragement to Diligence in Gods Service. Both writ by Mr. James
Janeway.

The Life and Death of Dr. Edmund Staunton; to which is added a Dialogue
between a Minister and Stranger; with a Discourse of Christian Conference.
Published by Richard Mayo.

Eighteen Sermons of Mr. William Whittaker late of Bermondsey Southwark; With
his Funeral-Sermon by Samuel Annesly, L. L. D.

Cases of Conscience, by John Norman late Minister of Bridgwater.

Four Sermons of Mr. William Hickock.

A Discourse concerning the Lords Supper, by Rich. Kidder.

The young man's Instructor, and old man's Remembrancer, By Tho. Doolittel.

There is printing Forty six Sermons on the whole Eighth Chapter of the Romans.

Eight Sermons on the whole fourth Psalm.

Nineteen Sermons on the whole 51 Psalm. Preached by Tho. Horton, D. D. late
Minister of St. Helens: Perfected for the Press by his own hand; left with his
Relict to be Printed.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Mr. James Janeway, March 20, 1673/4.
1 COR. 15. 55, former part. O death, where is thy sting?
I Am verily persuaded, that in this great Assembly there are not many but what
are real Mourners. Although the pompous Ceremonies of a Funeral are wanting;
yet I am confident few have been attended with more sad hearts to their graves,
than he that is now to be carried thither. The loss of a Saint is a great loss,
not only because such are so useful and profitable while they live, but their
removal also is no good Omen; their departing is like Lot's out of Sodom,
before its overthrow. Their housing in Heaven is like Noah's getting into the
Ark before the Old World was drowned. The Prophet tells us, That the righteous
are taken away from the evil to come, Isa. 57. 1.

But the loss of a Minister that has been zealous and industrious, and whose
great design was to turn many unto righteousness, is yet more to be laid to
heart. Is not Gods controversy great, when the Ambassadors of peace are called
home? May we not justly be afraid of losing the Treasure, when the Vessels that
contain it are broken so fast in pieces? When faithful Laborers are still
growing fewer, may we not suspect there are not many more among us to be
gathered? Surely then great lamentations, aching hearts, sad countenances, and
sadder spirits, very well become this days Solemnity.

What David of old said over his dead and dear Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1. 26, I cannot
abstain from using, I am distressed for thee my brother Janeway, I am
distressed for thee! very pleasant have thou been unto me, and so thou wast to
all that knew thee. Thy love to Souls was wonderful, and therefore every Soul
should be concerned at thy leaving the world, and that thy work is come to an
end. He is gone, alas! he is gone! he is gone! We shall never see his face, nor
hear his voice more. But as his life was exceeding, so also was his death
edifying. He had a sore conflict indeed, but afterward a glorious conquest;
and was a Triumphant Saint before his expiration. O death, where is thy sting?
O grave, where is thy victory?

In this Chapter the Apostle Paul looked by the eye of Faith to the end of the
world; nay he looked beyond it; his Faith was the substance of things hoped
for, and rendered things unseen evident. He saw already the Lord Jesus upon his
great white Throne, sitting to judge the world in righteousness: He saw the
bodies that were sown in corruption, raised in incorruption; that were sown in
dishonor, raised in glory; that were sown in weakness, raised in power: He saw
Believers rescued out of the prison of the grave, and placed at the right hand
of Christ, with Crowns on their heads, and palms in their hands, mortality
being totally swallowed up of life; And this makes him thus triumph, and say, O
death, where is thy sting?

I shall not trouble you with the various readings of this Text which I have
met with, nor spend time in showing the agreement between these words and those
of the Prophet Hosea, c. 13. 14, O death, I will be thy plague; from whom many
are of opinion they are borrowed; though Calvin thinks that the Apostle does
not professedly cite the Prophet, but only does accommodate a Sentence that is
very pious, and was very well known, to his present purpose. I shall adhere to
that reading which you have; and being thus read, the words are not only sound,
but very full of consolation.

Chrysostom here admires (...), the bravery (...). B. in 1 Ep. ad Cor.
of the Apostles spirit, who looked upon future things as past and done, (...),
and sings a song of Victory over that last Enemy, the thoughts of which
terrify and astonish the most among the children of men.

In the words you may observe,

1. The Person triumphing, the Apostle Paul, whose Faith was strong concerning
the Resurrection; and his assurance well-grounded of his interest in Christ,
who is the resurrection and the life. And the Apostle triumphs that other
Believers might grow fearless, being emboldened by his greatness of spirit.

2. What is triumphed over, and that is death. Death, which is the King of
terrors, which tames the proudest, which pulls down the most mighty, which is
an Universal Monarch; and none are able to withstand, but all are forced to pay
homage to it, by stooping and lying before it in the dust. This notwithstanding
is triumphed over.

3. The reason of this triumph, the sting of death is taken out, and
consequently, that which renders death so dreadful is removed.

The Text does afford us two Doctrines.

1. Death comes to a Believer without a sting. 2. The Believer may triumph over
Death.
Doct. 1. I begin with the first of these Doctrines, Death comes to a Believer
without a sting. It is appointed unto men once to dye, Heb. 9. 27. And this
Statute, as it changes not, so it reaches all; Holy men return to the dust as
well as others. But though they are not exempted from the stroke, yet they are
from the sting of death.

In the prosecuting of this Doctrine, I shall First, Speak concerning Death.
Secondly, Concerning the Sting of Death. Thirdly, Show how Believers come to be
delivered from this Sting. Lastly, Make Application.

In the first place I am to speak concerning Death: And,

1. I find Affliction in Scripture sometimes called by that name. Exodus 10. 27,
when Egypt was afflicted with the Locusts, Pharaoh cries out, Entreat the Lord
your God, that he may take away from me this death only. Afflictions have
stings too, which Christ only can take out. As Sin turns our blessings into
cursings, so it makes every bitter cup poison. But Believers are pardoned and
sanctified; and therefore though they are exercised with the Cross, yet the
Curse of the Cross is taken away.

2. Hell is likewise called Death. Rev. 21. 18, The lake which burns with fire
and brimstone is the second death. This death is the separation of the Soul
from God the chiefest good, and the enduring of those torments which the Lords
power and wrath justly inflicts upon all that live and dye in their iniquities.
Augustine has a notable passage, That death which men fear is the destruction
of the body; but the separation of the soul from God, Enarrat. in Ps. 48.
Mors est vera, quam non timent, is the true death, which they are not afraid
of. This second death, which is as it were, all gall, all sting, Believers
shall never feel.

3. Death is taken for the dissolving of that union which is between our bodies
and our spirits, when the dust returns to the earth as it was, and the spirit
unto God who gave it, Eccl. 12. 7. Of this death the Apostle is to be
understood in the Text.

Now in the death of Believers three things are remarkable,

1. Their Souls immediately are with Christ. The Apostle for encouragement-sake
seems to put this into death's definition, Phil. 1. 23, For I am in a strait
betwixt two, having a desire to be dissolved, or to depart and to be with
Christ, which is far better. The Saints as soon as absent from the body, are
present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 8, 9, We are confident, says the Apostle, and
willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord;
wherefore we labor that whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him.

That opinion of the Souls sleeping and dying with the Body, and resting
senseless till the resurrection, is absurd and impious. Christ says, Fear not
them which can kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul, Mat. 10. 28.
If the Sold did dye with the Body, man would have power over both, and might
cast the Soul as well as the Body into a dead sleep. But our Lord affirms, man
is not able to kill the Soul, which is an undeniable argument to prove its
immortality, and surviving after its separation; it goes immediately to Christ,
if it has been sanctified. Stephen commended his spirit into Christ's hands,
Act. 7. 59.

2. Believers bodies, after death has divided their Souls from them, are still
united unto Christ. Our very Bodies are called the Temples of the Holy Ghost,
and the Members of Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 15, 19. And the mystical Union between
Christ and his Members is lasting, nay everlasting. The dead Saints do sleep in
Jesus, they are in Jesus while asleep, 1 These. 4. 14. It Is comfortable
seriously to meditate upon that relation, and consequently that respect and
care that Christ has to, and of the carcasses of his deceased Servants; even
these are still his Members, and by virtue of that Union shall rise again at
the last day.

3. The death of Believers is compared to a sleep, for after a while they shall
be awaked. I grant, the ungodly shall wake too, but in order to punishment;
'twere better for them to sleep eternally. Believers Bodies and Souls that are
parted by death, shall one day be reunited: 'Twill surely be a joyful meeting
of those two dear Companions, that have been so long separated; especially they
being both changed so much from what they were, when before together; for the
Soul will in the most perfect manner partake of the Divine Nature; and the
Body, that is now a vile one, will be like to Christ's glorious body, Phil. 3.
ult. Not another Body, but the same for substance shall rise again; else
'twould not be a Resurrection, but a new Creation: (...), This mortal shall put
on immortality, and this corruptible shall put on incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. 53.

In the second place, I am to speak of the sting of death. Now if you ask what
that is, the Apostle explains his own meaning in the verse following the Text,
The sting of death is sin. As sin has caused death it self, so all the terror
and bitterness of it is the effect of sin. Sin is certainly committed upon a
very great mistake; only those keep their sins, who know not what they are. The
Apostle cautions against being hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb.
3. 13. None are obstinate in sin, but those that are deceived by it. Sin is
fancied to be full of pleasure, and it is represented as if 'twere all honey;
but it is a sting, the very sting of death.

It may be compared to a sting in these three respects:

1. Sin like a sting pierces; It pierced Christ, it pierces us. That which no
weapon can reach sin can wound, and that is the Soul. Diogenes Laertius tells
us, that when Anaxarchus was In vita Anaxar (...).
driven to Cyprus, and taken by Nicocreon the Tyrant there, and horribly beaten
as in a Mortar with a Pestle, he cried out, (...), Beat on, beat on the windbag
of Anaxarchus, for Anaxarchus himself thou can not hurt. But though weapons
cannot touch the Soul, sin strikes deepest there. Against this the Apostle
says, our fleshly lusts do war, and therefore beseeches us to abstain from
them, 1 Pet. 2. 11.

2. Sin like a sting pains. Cain was thus pained when he cried out, My
punishment is greater than I can bear. Pashur was thus pained, when he deserved
the name of Magor Missabib, Terror round about. Judas also was thus pained,
when in the height of despair and horror, he put a period to his burthensom
life with his own hands. Oh the horror and raging torment that sin causes in
the conscience! A wounded spirit who can bear? says Solomon, Prove. 18. 14;
intimating, there is no pain like the smart of those wounds.

3. Sin like a sting poisons. It Is compared to venom, and that of creatures
most venomous, Deuteronomy. 32. 33, Their wine is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel
venom of Asps. This was all the fruit, which those which the Lord had once
planted a noble Vine yielded. How harmless soever sin is thought, it is rank
poison. Job 20. 12, 14, Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though hide de
it under his tongue, though he spare it, and forsake it not; yet at length it
proves the gall of Asps within him.

You see in what respect sin is called a sting.

But here it may be demanded, Is all sin the sting of death? Miserable then
must the end of all needs be, for all have sinned, and come short of the glory
of God, Romans 3. 23. In many things all still offend, Jam. 3. 2. There is not a
just man upon earth, that does good and sins not, Eccl. 7. 20.

I answer in these particulars,

1. All by sin have deserved death, accompanied with its greatest horror. We
read Rev. 6. 8, of a pale horse, and the name of him that sat on him was death;
It Is represented as on horseback, to show the speed and haste it makes; but
behold a terrible second, it follows, Hell followed with him; and truly 'twere
just, that Death and Hell should be inseparable. The Grave in the Old Testament
is frequently called Hell, to signify that sin has indeed joined the Grave and
Hell together, and how righteous it is that one should always follow upon the
other.

2. In sin we are to take notice of two things, the strength of it, and the
dominion of it; and those that are under both these, death comes with a sting
to them; But whoever are redeemed and made free from sins strength and
dominion, are under grace, and death is unstung before it comes to them.

1. We are to take notice of the strength of sin. Now the Apostle informs us,
that the strength of sin is the Law, 1 Cor. 15. 56. Therefore sin is so
powerful to bind over to condemnation, because the transgression of a Law; and
therefore to such dreadful and eternal vengeance, because the Law transgressed
is the Law of so great a God. But Believers are not under the Law, Christ has
redeemed them from the curse of it. Their guilt is all removed as far as the
East is from the West, and that is far enough. Psalm. 103. 12, As far as the east
is from the west, so far has he removed our transgressions from us.

2. We are to take notice of the dominion of sin. Where sin is loved and
preferred before God, where it is served with both hands earnestly, where
provision is made for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof; we may conclude
that sin reigns and has dominion, and sins reigns unto death, that is, joins
first and second death together; for death is opposed unto eternal life, which
grace is said to reign unto, Romans 5. ult. As sin has reigned unto death even
so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ
our Lord. The sum is, that all sin, though it does deserve to be, yet is not
the sting of death; but sin unpardoned, sin reigning, (and truly it is
unpardoned if it is reigning) is the sting of death.

In the third place, I am to tell you how Believers come to be delivered from
this sting of death.

1. The Son of God was made flesh, he became a mortal man, that he might be
capable of suffering for Believers. As God, he could not suffer; and if he had
been merely man, his sufferings would have been insufficient. The Blood of
Christ is the Blood of God, else it could never have washed away sins. The
Righteousness of Christ is the Righteousness of him that is Jehovah, Jer. 23.
6, else the imputation thereof would not avail for our remission. Who can
venture his Soul in Christ's hand, and with satisfaction rely upon him, that
eyes not his Godhead? And how may we be encouraged to believe on him, since he
has taken our nature, and is become our Brother! Heb. 2. 11, He is not ashamed
to call them brethren.

2. Christ was made sin, that he might deliver Believers from the sting of
death. He had none of his own, but our sins were imputed to him. Isa. 53. 6,
All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way,
and the Lord has made the iniquity of us all to meet on him. And as there was
an imputation of our sins to Christ, so there is of his Righteousness to us, 2
Cor. 5. ult. as Christ suffered for the sake of our sins, which were laid upon
him; so for the sake of his righteousness, his obedience and sufferings, our
sins are remitted. This is the great truth preached up in the Gospel. How can
death be disarmed of its sting, or the conscience have any true peace, till the
truth be believed and improved? Though Papists and never so many others oppose
this truth, yet through grace we will hold it fast; Though Angels from heaven
should preach another doctrine, we would conclude a second Apostasy of Angels,
and say they were accursed.

3. Christ became obedient unto death, that he might unsting death. We shall
presently be convinced that death was very terrible which Christ did undergo,
if we consider with how many stings it came armed upon him. All the sins of all
those that ever were or shall be saved, did as it were spit their poison at
Christ together. If the first sin of the first Adam be so heavy that all the
shoulders of his whole progeny bow under it, and cannot bear it; Oh what a load
was all that guilt which lay upon the second Adam! Well, death thrust its sting
into Christ the Head, and there left it, there lost it; it has not now a sting
to hurt his Members.

What was Christ's aim when he died? He aimed at the satisfaction of divine
Justice; he designed to justify many, and to pacify their consciences, they
receiving the atonement, Romans 5. 9, 11. He died that he might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is, the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. The Devil has great
power to render death formidable, by his accusations, by his fiery darts, which
he is liberal of upon the least permission. But Christ died to destroy him in
this respect, to quench his darts, and stop his mouth. Further he designed the
purging away of iniquity, the cleansing of his Church. The dominion of sin is
at present pulled down, and at last the very being of it shall be abolished. By
all this you may perceive how death is unstung by the death of Christ.

4. Christ loosed the pains of death, for it was not possible he should be
holden of it, Act. 2. 24. By his power he overcame death, as by his sufferings
he had made sufficient satisfaction. Death could not have been unstung, if
Christ had not risen. Sin and Satan and Death might have triumphed, if our Lord
had been detained still a prisoner in the grave; our faith would have been
vain, we should have been yet in our sins; those that have fallen asleep in
Christ would all have perished, 1 Cor. 15. 17, 18. But Christ having taken his
life again which he laid down, death has no more dominion over him; it is a
conquered enemy.

5. Believers being by faith united to Christ, partake of the benefits which he
has procured; now remission of sin, and freedom from the bondage of corruption,
which is freedom indeed, are to be reckoned among these benefits. All that are
in Christ share in his victories; in their head who is a common person and
representative of them all; they have already been Conquerors; and at length
all their foes will be made their footstools; the last enemy that shall be
destroyed is death, but that shall certainly likewise be destroyed. The Apostle
speaks thus to the Saints, All are yours, and ye are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3. ult.
They that are interested in the Lord Jesus, all things are theirs, whether
Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death; Death is theirs,
theirs to serve them, theirs to profit them, theirs to be an outlet from sin
and sorrow, and an inlet unto happiness.

The Application now follows.

Use 1, of Information in these particulars:

1. Does death come to a Believer without a sting? Then it ceases to be so
great an enemy. It Is confessed, that death is a terrible enemy to the Ungodly;
it strips them naked of all their comforts, takes away their portion from them,
deprives them of their good things; and not only so, but drags them to the
judgment seat, where being condemned they are delivered immediately to the
tormentors, Luke 16. 25, Son remember thou in thy life time receivedst thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented. How great a kindness did death do to Lazarus, in sending him from
the rich man's gate to Abraham's bosom? Death does that in an instant for
Believers, which all ordinances, providence, the greatest industry, and
strongest cries could never effect; it makes them completely holy, and sends
them to that rest which remains to the people of God; Paul, Apollo, Cephas, are
friends, but death a greater friend than any.

2. Does death come to a Believer without a sting? Then it ought not so much to
be feared; and it may truly be said, that the Saints are more afraid than hurt
by it. As in regeneration there is a change wrought in reference to other
things; the world which before was idolized, being now contemned; sin that
before was loved, being now hated; so there should be in reference unto death,
this which before was feared should be desired, 2 Cor. 5. 2, In this we groan
earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven.
Death is the less to be feared, for guilt which causes fear will not be any
more contracted.

3. Does death come to a Believer without a sting? Behold the vast difference
between the end of the Believer and the Unbeliever. Indeed the breath goes away
from both alike; their Bodies are carried to the same grave, which is styled
the house of all the living. But if you could behold where their Souls go, then
you would perceive as vast a difference as there is between the highest Heaven
and the lowest Hell. The wicked man when he dies, leaves perhaps children
roaring, wife wringing of her hands, relations weeping bitterly. Oh but what
are these lamentations, compared with those despairing agonies and sorrows that
he himself is full of in outer darkness! Even impious Balaam was so
apprehensive of the different end of the holy and unholy; that his wish was,
Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his, Numb.
23. 10.

4. Does death come to a Believer without a sting? Then departed Saints should
not be mourned for without hope. Ambrose says, Non ammitti sed praemitti
videntur: They are not lost, but are sent before to those mansions, whither we
must quickly follow, if we patiently continue in well-doing.

Use. 2. Of Consolation to Believers; they must dye indeed but they shall not
feel the sting of death. The Lion in the fable was not feared when his Teeth
and Claws were gone: Death should not make us dismayed, when its sting is taken
out. I shall propound these four grounds of comfort in death unto Believers.

1. At death sin is quite mortified. The Law in the members is no longer in
force, that which the Apostle calls the body of sin and death, then dies and
shall never have a resurrection. Filia devorabit Matrem, Death the daughter
will devour Sin the mother. Saints then shall no longer cry out, O wretched who
shall deliver us, Romans 7. 4. Deliverance will be fully come. They shall no
longer complain of evil present, when they would do good; their ignorance,
their unbelief, their estrangement from God, and unsuitableness to him, will
all then be removed. Nazianzen speaks Orat. 32.
excellently to our present purpose; A Saint therefore is made to dye, that sin
might not be (...) an immortal evil.

2. At Death Believers take wings and fly out of a troublesome World; the World
shall no more ensuare them, cross them, persecute them. Oh hapyy exchange, to
leave Meshech, and the Tents of Kedar, and to go and dwell in the heavenly
Jerusalem! here they dwell among the sons of Belial, they see and hear that
which vexes their righteous souls from day to day; and in the very best, they
know, they see something that is offensive: But they will go to other kind of
company after death. Surely the spirits of just men made perfect, and an
innumerable company of Angels, will be far sweeter society, than any in this
world: All tears will be wiped away from Non homo, (...) miseria hominis
Christiani moritur.
their eyes, and every thing gone that may occasion sadness.

3. At Death Believers are set out of Satan's reach: He got into the first
Paradise and tempted Adam who before was innocent, and prevailed by his
temptation; but into Heaven he shall not enter. Concerning the Dragon and his
Angels it is said, their place is not found any more in Heaven, Rev. 12. 8. He
can shoot his darts any-where here in this World; even in the Sanctuary, even
at the Lords table, he will be pestering the Saints with his injections and
solicitations; but Heaven is too sacred a place for that wicked one to have
admission: It Is as impossible for the Devil to reach any with his darts that
are in glory, as it is for us with an arrow to hit the Sun in the firmament.

4. At Death Believers receive a Crown of Life. Rev. 3. 10, Be thou faithful
unto death, and I will give thee a crown of Life. They shall see God face to
face, and that sight will transform them into his likeness: they shall live
with God for ever, and that life must needs be holy; that life must needs be
joyful. Psalm. 16. ult. In thy presence is fullness of joy; at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore. Cyprian that Ser. 4. De mortalit. p. 2^^.
he might make death comfortable, says Ad immortalitatem morte transgredimur,
by death we pass to immortality, nec potest vita aeterna succedere, nisi hinc
contigerit exire: Neither can we, till out of this life, enter upon that life
that is eternal: then he goes on, Who would not haste unto that which is so
much better of the two?

Use 3. Of Exhortation, in two Words.

1. Let it be your great care that the sting of death may be taken out: Sin
will not always be made light of; perhaps when death is really within view,
Conscience that was stupid before may be horribly affrighted, when the strength
fails, and Physicians are discouraged by fatal Symptoms, when it is whispered in
the Room there is no hope of recovery; when Friends stand by and weep because
they look upon you as good as gone; Oh then though never so senseless and seared
before, fear may come upon you as desolation, and destruction as a whirlwind,
distress and anguish may take hold of you, Prove. 1. 27.

Or suppose you die hardened, immediately after death the sting of it will be
felt, and the unexpected smart and torment will be the more tormenting. Oh how
did the rich Glutton yell and roar, when he felt himself tormented in the
flames that before had lived in ease and pleasure! It concerns you therefore
highly, to have Death unstung; and that it may be unstung follow these
Directions.

1. Let your hearts be pricked for sin at present, Act. 2. 37. Be afflicted,
and mourn, and weep because you have sinned against God, against your own
Souls. Smite upon your thighs and say, What have I done? blame your ignorance
and madness in offending, Psalm. 73. 21, 22. Thus my heart was grieved, I was
pricked in my reins, so foolish was I and ignorant, I was as a beast before
thee. Thus to be troubled is the way to peace.

2. Believe that help indeed lies in the Lord Jesus, and that he is able to
save you from the sting of death. Believe, that he was delivered for our
offenses, and that he rose again for our justification, Romans 4. ult. and that
his life which he gave is sufficient to be a ransom for many.

3. Stick at no terms that you may partake of Christ Jesus. Be not offended at
any thing; quarrel not at the cross; be willing to deny your selves; submit
unto the strictest commands; let no iniquity have dominion over you; consent
that Christ should save you in his own way, and from sin it self as well as
wrath: And if thus Christ be accepted, he will prevent death's stinging you. He
has the Keys of Hell and of Death, Rev. 1. 18, I am he that lives and was
dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen, and have the keys of hell and
of death. He has power over both; and though he lets you fall into the grave,
he will keep hell locked against you.

2. The other word of Exhortation is this, Labor after assurance that death's
sting is really taken out. And you may be assured of this by two things, if you
are dead to sin, if Christ be your life.

1. If you are dead to sin. If the gain and pleasure of sin does not now take
with you; and you are deaf unto Arguments that heretofore were prevalent to
persuade you to evil. If you have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts, you may conclude you are Christ's, Gal. 5. 24. and then Death will not be
the forerunner of Condemnation. When Christ was Crucified they looked upon him
as a deceiver, and they slew him. Then our lusts may be said to be crucified,
when we look upon them as deceitful, and so indeed they are; and we cry out
earnestly to have them killed, and are glad when they are slain.

2. If Christ be your life. If you live by faith upon him, and derive life more
and more abundantly from him; If you live to him, and not henceforth unto your
selves, 2 Cor. 5. 15. then death will be no death to you. Hark to the Apostle,
Phil. 1. 21. To live to me is Christ, and to die is gain. Thus of the first
Doctrine, Death comes to a Believer without a sting.

Doct. 2. The second Doctrine is this, The Believer may triumph over Death.
Thus does the Apostle in the Text, he dares Death to do its worst, he was
assured of victory over it. The Reasons of the Doctrine are these.

1. Believers may triumph over Death, for Christ is risen; the Captain of their
Salvation has encountered this enemy and overcame him, and they have a share and
interest in his Conquest. Methinks these words seem to be spoken with joy and
an exulting spirit, Luke 24. 34. The Lord is risen indeed. Though he came not
down from the Cross, yet he came out of the grave. We see that Death is not an
invincible enemy, Christ has been too hard for it.

2. Believers may triumph over Death, for their Resurrection is certain; there
is so strong a connection between Christ's Resurrection and ours, that the
Apostle sticks not to say, If there be no Resurrection of the dead then is not
Christ risen, 1 Cor. 15. 13. The time will certainly come when all that are in
the grave shall hear Christ's voice, and shall come forth; they that have done
good to the resurrection of life; as they that have done evil to the
resurrection of damnation, Joh. 5. 28, 29. The Grave shall at last become sick
of Believers bodies, and cast them out; and being then made Spiritual bodies,
Death shall no more have dominion over them.

3. Believers may triumph over Death; for Christ died not only that he might
deliver from the sting of death, but also from that bondage which the fear of
death causes; Heb. 2. 15; And deliver them who through the fear of death were
all their lifetime subject to bondage. Our Lord consults the peace and joy, as
well as safety of his followers; and saves them not only from the evils feared,
but from the fear of evil; for fear has much torment in it.

4. Believers may triumph over Death; for death is exceeding gainful; they are
not losers even in reference to their bodies. The Corn gains by being sown in
the ground, and whereas 'twas but a single grain, rises again sixty, or an
hundred fold; so the bodies of Believers shall gain by the Grave, they shall
rise glorious. Chrysostom illustrates this by the similitude of a Founder, who
breaks a more vile vessel all to pieces, that melting it he may cast it into a
vessel of honor.

5. Believers may triumph over Death; for this is the last enemy; and if they
pass the pikes well here, and are not hurt by this, their warfare is
accomplished, and no other enemies shall meddle with them any more for ever.

Use 1. To the ungodly and hypocritical. All you that allow your selves in sin,
whether more openly or under a profession of Godliness; you have no reason to
triumph but to tremble at the thoughts of Death. Consider,

1. When you die, the day of Grace will end, not another accepted time, nor day
of Salvation is to be expected; you will no more be entreated to be reconciled,
nor called upon to turn and live.

2, When you die your joys will die. The triumphing of the wicked is short, and
the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment, Job 20. 5. That man that said, Soul
take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry, thou have goods laid up for many
years; when upon the sudden even that night, his Soul was required, Oh what
became of his carnal mirth and jollity!

3. When you die your hopes will die; the hope of the unjust and of the
hypocrite shall perish. Their hope shall be cut off, and their trust shall be a
spiders web, Job 8. 13, 14. It Is reckoned among some of the notable Sayings of
Aristotle, that being Diog. Lur. in vita Aristot.
asked what Hope was, he answered (...), the dream of one that is awake. All
the hopes of those that are not really new Creatures, concerning the Love of
God, and Life and Salvation, are but dreams; and when they awake in Hell they
will find they are mere dreams. Thus the hungry man dreameth and behold he
earth, but he awaketh and his soul is empty; the thirsty man dreameth and
behold he drinks, but he awaketh and behold he is faint, Isa. 29. 8.

4. When you that are ungodly die, your sorrows will be extreme, but they shall
never die. Our Lord says thrice together, That in hell the worm dies not, the
fire is not quenched, Mark. 9. 44, 46, 48.

Use 2. To the weak and doubting Saints, Labor to have your Spiritual state
cleared; It Is a wild thing to suffer matters that concern Eternity hang at
uncertainties. Oh watch more against every sin; for this feeds your doubts and
(...) unto Jesus and understand his Righteousness; (...) that Grace may be more
evident: Try your selves (...) seech the Lord to search you, and discover
sincerity to you; And when once you know that God is yours and you his; then
you will be above the fear of Death.

Use 3. To those few that upon good grounds are not afraid of dying.

1. Be thankful for victory. Thanks be unto God who gives us the victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 57.

2. Be steadfast and unmovable always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58.

Thus have I finished both the Doctrines, and both are verified in this eminent
servant of Christ, who is now to be interred. Death came without a sting to
him, which is the common happiness of all the Saints; he triumphed over death,
and that is peculiar.

What I have to say concerning my dear deceased Brother, I shall speak in this
order. I shall tell you wherein the Lord made him to excel in his lifetime.
And what his Carriage was at his Departure.

For the first there are these following Particulars very remarkable.

1. Great was the sweetness of his Natural temper and disposition. And this
excellency of Nature was very much hightned and ennobled by the grace of God.
He was far from moroseness and bitterness of spirit. Candor was to be discerned
in his very Countenance; and by conversing with him 'twas much more apparent.
And in his kindness, and affability, and proneness to oblige, he had a design
of good upon Souls, for he knew he could not more oblige any than to endeavor
their Eternal welfare.

2. He made it his business to be Religious; he practiced himself what he
preached to others, and was a follower of Christ as he exhorted others to
follow him; his works were good as well as his words, and Oh how often and
seriously did he lift up his Soul to God, desiring nothing more than to be a
man and Pastor after the heart of the Lord!

3. He was a serious mourner for the decays of Godliness in this backsliding
age. How would he mention the old Puritan strictness and circumspection, and
bewail the excesses and licentiousness of professors!

4. His heart was inflamed with love to Christ. And though his affections were
so strong and vehement, yet they were still aspiring higher. His expressions
sometimes showed unusual raptures and ecstasies of love. He would beg, that he
might equal Paul or John, nay the very Seraphims in loving, that he might be
sick and dye of love. Blessed Soul! thou have now thy fill, thou love thy
Lord now, and enjoyest this love to the uttermost of thy capacity!

5. His bowels of compassion yearned toward immortal souls. He knew the worth
of his own and the souls of others, and as he was acquainted with the value of
souls, so he was sensible of their danger. How earnestly would he warn them to
flee from future wrath? How eagerly and sweetly would he woo them to give their
consents to be espoused to Christ? How admirably would he expostulate with them
concerning their egregious folly in refusing? He pitied the souls of all, old,
young; nay he was deeply concerned for little Children, witness those books
which he styles tokens for them.

6. He labored abundantly spending himself in his Masters work. If he had
wrought less he might in probability have lived longer: but he chose rather
like the Candle to consume that he might give light to others. He preached, he
visited, he catechized, he was instant in season, out of season; and truly the
Lord honored him exceedingly in making him instrumental to convert the
profane, to strengthen the weak in Grace; to speak comfortably and healing
words to the distressed and wounded in their Spirits.

7. He was a man mighty in prayer, there was an elegant fluency in his
Expression both when he prayed and preached, but oh the Spiritual and Heavenly
matter was most to be admired! Augustine tell us of a certain person who prayed
as if he De Civ. Dei lib. 22. cap. 8
would expirare orando, breath out his very soul and life in prayer; and adds,
quas tuorum preces si non has exaudis? What Supplications will be prevalent if
not such as these? This may be applied to my Brother Janeway. He was a mighty
wrestler with God, and would not be put off without a blessing.

8. He was much for Unity and Love; though according as it was foretold, Love
is grown so cold in most, 'twas warm in him; he followed peace as well as
holiness, and was of a most yielding Spirit, ready as far as he might to comply
with any rather than a breach should be, or be continued.

9. He abounded in works of Charity; having seriously pondered that saying of
our Lord, It Is more blessed to give than to receive. As he was liberal in
importing the treasure of the Gospel, so of his own substance which God had
given him. 'Twas his constant course whatever he received to give two shillings
in the pound that is the tenth unto good uses. He endeavored to persuade
others to be Charitable, the Widows and the Fatherless had a great interest in
his Compassions, and may well bewail his departure, by whom now they can be no
more relieved.

10. Which crowned all his other excellencies, he was exceeding humble; he was
much in praising and admiring and adoring God, and had very low thoughts of
himself; and in honor preferred others before himself. He would say he was the
least of Ministers, less than the least of all Saints.

In these particulars you have something of his Character, but the half has not
been told you; yet enough has been said to make you sensible how heavy the
stroke was which took him away. The loss of him is not only his Relations loss,
but Redriffs loss, Londons loss, Englands loss, the Churches loss; for he was
of such a public Spirit that all are like to miss him.

In the next place I am to speak of his carriage at his death.

He had a great Conflict with Satan somewhile before his leaving the world; and
truly I do not wonder that the Devil should buffet him, who had with such
vigor and success endeavored to overthrow his Kingdom. To prepare him for the
encounter, the Lord at first did shine upon his soul, and gave him some
assurance that Heaven was his Inheritance: But afterward there intervened a
Cloud, and Satan's Chain was lengthned; that Lion roared upon him, and
endeavored to disturb his peace. The great thing he blamed himself for, was
his aptness to slubber over private duties, since he was so much engaged in
public work. The Accuser of the Brethren was Let Ministers take especial
notice of it.
very sierce in his accusations, and so far prevailed, that Mr. Janeway cried
out, I am at infinite uncertainties as to my future state. I thought I had been
sincere, but Satan tells me I have been an hypocrite: And then added, Whatever
you do, do not dally in Religion: it is only godliness in the power of it, that
can strengthen against the fear of death. Satan would not yet give over, but
having begun to batter his faith, gives a fresh assault; then with a mournful
voice he cried out, Eternity! Eternity! Eternity! Infinite! Infinite! Infinite!
Everlasting! Everlasting! Everlasting! A Relation that stood by, added, An
Eternity of Glory. To which he replied, Of Horror! of Horror! unspeakable
Horror!

This was his Conflict, and truly 'twas a sore one. But after this blackest
darkness, followed the break of day; Satan prevailed so far, that he might be
the more remarkably foiled: for the God of Peace did tread the evil one under
his feet. The Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, did visit him, and bore
witness with his spirit, that he was a Child of God; and helped him to discern
and look back upon the uprightness of his heart with satisfaction.

Not long before he died, he blessed God for the assurance of his love, and
said, He could now as easily dye as shut his eyes; and added, Here am I longing
to be silent in the dust, and enjoying Christ in glory. I long to be in the
arms of Jesus. It Is not worth the while to weep for me. Then remembering how
busy the Devil had been about him, he was exceeding thankful to God for his
goodness in rebuking him.

Afterward he brake forth, saying, though so weak, with a loud voice, Amen
Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Hallelujah! and desired others to join with him; which
they not presently doing, he added, James Janeway is the only Singer. He was
quickly seized upon with another rapture of joy, and thus expressed it,
Millions of praises to the most High Jehovah! Heaven and Earth praise him, ye
Mountains and Hills praise him, all his Host praise him, all ye Saints bless
him, who has visited us in our low estate, and redeemed us unto himself. All
must be ascribed to Free grace from the beginning to the end.

Then he begged of God, That he would bless his people, and take away
animosities and names of division from among them. And these were the last
words which he was heard to speak distinctly.

Thus triumphantly he went to Glory! thus an abundant entrance was administered
to him into the Everlasting Kingdom. But if his joy and praises were such
before he was got quite thither, when he was actually come within Heavens Gate,
and first saw the Lord face to face; Oh who can conceive his joy and wonder!

To draw to a Conclusion: His Spirit is now where Christ is, and is made
perfect; he is joining with the Church of the first born in the Heavenly
Jerusalem, in that Song, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power and
honor, and glory, and blessing, for thou have redeemed us unto God by thy
blood out of every tongue, and kindred, and people, and nation! His Body is now
to make its bed in the dust, and upon his Grave such a kind of Epitaph may be
inscribed.

Siste Viator, Passenger stay and understand.

Here lies a faithful Shepherd, unto whom the Flock was dearer than his own
Life.
He excelled in Wisdom, for he was wise to win Souls.
He lived not long, but lived well, and did much in a little time. His end was
Peace.
And though Satan did his worst, be foiled him; and died Triumphing.
O Death where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy victory?
FINIS.

