Mr. Nathanael Vincent's LETTER TO HIS CONGREGATION In and about LONDON.
Most dearly beloved in our Lord and Savior,
MY silent Sabbaths are a sore Trial to me, a Pulpit is more desirable to me
then an Emperors Throne, Oh! how do I long to be among you again, that I may
publish the glad tidings of Salvation, prevent the loss and ruin of Souls,
which are of greater value then the whole World; Satan is busy, his
Instruments are active, the Flock of Christ needs food; Oh! sad necessity that
I must be silent. But you will presently be apt to reply, From whence is this
necessity? I can assure you not from any promise I am under not to Preach at
all, nor for fear of punishments for Preaching: But hope of serviceableness
shortly makes me at present forbear, and my body by Imprisonments has been so
weakened that to put it upon that hard labor it was used to heretofore, would
in all likelihood destroy it, and put an end to my days and Preaching together.
Jerusalem in the depths of her distress remembered the joyful days that once she
had when she was Princess among the Provinces, when her mount Zion was the Joy
of the whole Earth, and she was exalted above the rest of the Nations in regard
of sacred and Civil Privileges: and alas being now deprived of these, her
sorrow was the more overwhelming. Oh! my dear Brethren, I remember the blessed
and peaceable Sabbaths. I enjoyed with you, Thousands of us were admitted
together to the Throne of Grace, that we might join our forces, our Graces
together, and prevail with the Father of Mercies who takes delight in the
sincere supplications of his People. I had liberty of prophesying to Thousands
and spread the Net of the Gospel wide, and Blessed, blessed be God, that so
many Souls were taken; I had liberty to cry that I might awaken the secure, to
fill my mouth with arguments to persuade Souls to believe and be converted. I
call to mind my well bestowed Sweat and Pains, for I never grudged to spend my
self and to be spent for you. Oh! The inlargements I have had in Prayer, the
assistances vouchsafed in Preaching; the warmth, the meltings, the ravishments,
the holy resolutions at the Lords Table. Lament, Lament, and again I say
Lament, Oh! my Soul, that now the Case is so sadly altered, there is a black
cloud that covers the Stars in Christ's right Hand. Solemn assemblies are
broken, and straving Souls, when in part ready to take their Food, have it
cruelly snatched away from them. I have been told that when a famous Church in
France was of late pulled down, where Protestants used to meet and worship;
That the pulling of it down was a most affecting spectacle, the Protestants
came and looked on, and Oh! what beating of Breast was there; what floods of
Tears were shed, what bitter reflections upon their unprofitableness under
those Ordinances which there had been publicly administered. Break, break, Oh!
my stupid Heart, to think how I am thrust out of the Pulpit, and deprived, of
those precious opportunities of service which once I had. And you, my dear
Brethren, Mourn together with me, that you improved Sermons no better, and that
tho so much Seed was sown, and that Seed was Watered so plentifully, yet so
little Fruit was brought forth.

Many billows have gone over us already, and perhaps more are coming: God
preserve the Vessel of his Church from drowning. Sometimes I have feared, and
the Lord grant I be not prophetical, since Family duties have been so much
neglected, that Family worship will be only allowed to Protestant Dissentors. I
have feared because Christians have been so proud, so worldly, so vain, so
censorious, so backbiting, when they have come together, that they shall be
more scattered then ever, Oh! that Tongue Sins may not cost professors so dear
as to make Ministers, nay God himself silent. Oh! let us all smite on our
Thighs, and say, what have we done, what have we spoken, what have we thought
that has been amiss? True Repentance which does include a Through and lasting
Reformation is the way to fix the Golden Candelstick again in its place and to
prevent a Nations ruin; and which is comfortable to consider the Repentance of
Tens may do more good, then harm can be done by the Sins of Thousands. Brethren
pray very hard for me, that I may be strengthened every way both in body and
Spirit, that Head and Heart may be bettered, and both sincerely engaged in the
service of Christ, and you; that the Waters which because of my Imprisonment I
have need to use longer this year then others, may be Healing, and that once
again as great a Door as ever, and much more effectual then ever,
notwithstanding our many Adversaries may, be opened to

Your most affectionate Pastor, and without Complement, your Servant for Jesus
sake, Nathanael Vincent.
June the 24 1683. being Sabbath, but a sad Sabbath, being absent from you my
dearly Beloved.
POSTCRIPT.
THis canting Letter is published, that the world may see their pernicious
principles and practices are still the same to deceive the multitude. That it
is his own Letter, neither he nor his Congregation can deny.

LONDON, Printed for J. Cox, at the Blew-Ball in Thames street over against
Baynards Castle. 1683.


