THE Best Gift, OR GOD'S CALL UPON YOUNG MEN for their HEARTS.

Delivered in a Sermon to YOUNG MEN.

By THOMAS VINCENT, Minister sometime of Maudlins Milkstreet, London.

LONDON, Printed for George Calvert and Samuel Sprint, and are to be sold at
the Golden Ball in Duck Lane. 1672.

THE BEST GIFT, etc.
Prove. 23. part of the 26th verse. My Son, Give me thine Heart.
SOlomon was not only a King, but a Prophet; not only a Prince, but a Preacher;
and in the name of God he calls upon all the children of men, especially
young men, by the name of his Son, for their Heart; that they would present the
Lord with the gift of the Heart: As in the later clause of the verse he
directs the eye of their mind unto the observation of Gods way, which he
calls his way; Let thine eyes observe my Ways; so in this first clause he
directs their hearts unto God in himself, whom he does represent; My Son,
give me thine heart.

Hence observe,

Doct. That all men, especially young men, ought to give their Heart unto God.

In handling of this point, I shall show, 1. What is meant by the Heart. 2.
What it is to give God the Heart. 3. Why all men, especially young men, ought
to give God their Hearts. 4, Make some application.

1. What is meant by the Heart? The Heart in Scripture is frequently taken for
the whole Soul, as including all its powers and faculties; thus Mat 15.8. This
people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips,
there was the worship of their outward man; but their heart is far from me; the
worship of the Soul and inward man was wanting. So Romans 2.28, 29. He is not a
Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is outward in
the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of
the heart in the spirit, etc. And we shall find in the Scripture, that every
faculty is sometimes called by the name of the Heart; The Understanding, Ephesians.
4.18. Being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in
them, because of the blindness of their hearts. The Conscience, 1 Job. 3.20.
For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our hearts, and knows all
things. The Memory, Luke 2.19. Mary kept al these things in her heart. But
chiefly, and most properly, the Heart is taken in Scripture for the Will and
Affections, which are seated in the Heart, as the Understanding, Memory, Fancy,
and Imagination are seated in the Head; and thus we may understand the
acceptance of the word Heart in this place; namely, for the Will and
Affections, yet not excluding the other faculties. 2. What is it to give God
the Heart? Persons give God their Hearts, when their Wills make choice of him
as their chief Good, and they place their liking affections chiefly upon him;
when their love is chiefly toward him, their desires chiefly after him, their
hopes and delights chiefly in him: Persons give God their Hearts, when the^
open the door of these secret chambers, and let God in, and lodge him the
dearest embracements of their affections; when they give him full possession of
their hearts, and set him up in the highest room; when they give God the chief
rule and command in their hearts, placing him upon the the throne; when they
engage their hearts to the Lord in a solemn covenant to be his, and only his.
3. Why all men, especially young men, ought to give their hearts unto God. R.
1. Because God has right to their hearts: The Devil and Sin have got the
possession, but they have no right to the heart, they are usurpers, and
therefore should be turned out; God only has right to the heart, and that to
the heart of young ones as well as others; young ones have not right to possess
their inheritance left to them by their Fathers, whilst they are under age,
until they arrive at one and twenty years; but God has right to possess the
hearts of young ones, in the years of their minority, He has a right to their
hearts so soon as they are born, so soon as they have them themselves; and that
because he has made them, and he has bought them; they belong to him by right
of Creation, and by right of Purchase: The Body was formed by God, but the Soul
is infused, and comes more immediately out of his hand; and it is but equal to
return that to God which he has made, to present God with the gift of that
which is his own, the work of his own hands; especially, when besides his
natural right to the heart, he has made a purchase of it, he has laid ^own a
great price for it, even the price of his Sons blood; as the blood of Christ
has purchased an everlasting inheritance for men, so it has purchased the
hearts of men for God, to be his everlasting habitation: See this Argument
urged by the Apostle upon the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20, Ye are not your
own, for ye are bought with a price; therefore glorify God in your body and in
your spirit which are Gods. God has a double right both to to the body, and to
the Spirit too; and as the heart is his by way of right, so all ought to make
it his by way of tender and gift. R. 2. All, especially young men, ought to
give God their hearts, because God does require them; some tacitly give away
their right, by their not demanding of it; and some things which are the right
of such a man, yet are not his without a lawful demand; but God has not only
right to the heart, but he requires it, he makes a demand of it; he
commands us to give it; See Matthew. 22.37, 38. Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and all thy soul, and all thy mind: this is the first
and great commandment. It is not the eye, or the ear, or the tongue, or the
knee, that God cares for, but the heart; the sincere, and supreme love of the
heart, is the chiefest and most comprehensive commandment. Some debts are
forfeited by Law, if, though they be demanded, they be not timely demanded; but
God does timely demand this debt of the Heart; He does not stay till men are
grown into elder years, but he demands their hearts when they are young; He
calls upon young men to give him their hearts, as in the Text My son, give me
thine heart. R. 3. All, especially young men, ought to give God their Hearts,
because God will accept of their Hearts. If a man will not accept of his right,
he loses his right; and there is no obligation upon a man to tender a gift
that is despised; but God will accept of the Heart, and nothing is more
acceptable than the Heart, nothing is acceptable like the Heart, and nothing is
acceptable without the Heart; all the good language of the lips, the devotion
of the knees, and all bodily exercises, is of no worth in Gods account, all is
flattery, all is mockery without the Heart: the Sacrifices under the Law,
although of Gods own appointment, yet comparatively with the Sacrifice of the
Heart, they were not esteemed, and without the sacrifice of the Heart, they
were despised; but the Heart was never despised, never refused, but readily
accepted, as the most delightful sacrifice. See Psalm. 51.16, 17. For thou
desire not sacrifice (that is, comparatively) else would I give it; thou
delightest not in burnt-offerings, the Sacrifices of God are as broken spirit;
a broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. God does not despise
the heart, yea, He desires, and delights in the Sacrifice of the Heart, when
it is offered up unto Him by the hands of Christ, our great High Priest in
Heaven: a heart broken and bleeding for sin, gasping and breathing after God,
is very pleasing and acceptable. And as God will accept the Hearts of any, so
especially the Hearts of young ones; the sooner any bring their Hearts unto
God, the better is he pleased; the Rose is sweetest in the bud, before it be
quite blown; and the love of Youths to God has a great fragrancy, and is very
sweet and delightful to Him. R. 4. All, especially young men, ought to give God
their Hearts, because he does best deserve them; not only as he has a right to
them, of which before, but also as he is the most deserving object; Nothing is
worthy of their Hearts beside Him, or in the least degree of comparison with
Him. 1. If Loveliness do deserve Love, God is altogether Lovely; this cannot be
said of any creature in the world, which may be apt to draw away the Heart; the
creatures indeed may have loveliness, but the loveliness of creatures is
inferior, Gods loveliness is supreme; the loveliness of creatures is
defective, Gods loveliness is perfect; the creatures may have some loveliness,
but God has all loveliness; the creatures loveliness is derivative, Gods
loveliness is from himself, and whatsoever loveliness the creatures have, they
derive it from Him; and therefore, even that loveliness is eminently in Him;
and moreover, such loveliness as is infinitely beyond that. What is the Beam in
comparison of the Sun? What is the Stream in comparison with the Fountain? What
is the drop in comparison with the Ocean? And what is creatures loveliness, in
comparison with the Creator's loveliness? Indeed God's loveliness is not
visible, like some creatures-loveliness, because God is a Spirit, and his
loveliness spiritual; but Gods loveliness is not the less because it is not
corporal and visible, but the more, because not so low and inferior, and
subject to alternations, as bodily beauty is as the beauty of the mind adorned
with wisdom and grace, is far beyond the beauty of the (...) of the rarest
symmetry, and mixture of colors; so the beauty of God which is spiritual, does
infinitely excel all created beauty, whether of body, or of mind. Gods
loveliness cannot be discerned with the eye of the body, but it may be viewed
with the eye of the mind, with the eye of faith, through the illuminations of
the spirit; indeed the beauty of his face cannot be seen by any in the body,
the vision of this is fit only for Angels, and is reserved for the Saints in
Heaven; yet in his back parts there is infinitely more loveliness to be seen,
than in the face of any creatures whatsoever; if there could be a composition
of all created loveliness in one person, it would fall infinitely short of the
loveliness of God, in any one of his excellencies and perfections. Hence was
that desire of David, Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that
will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of
my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple. And
Psalm. 63.1, 2. O God, thou art my God; early will I seek thee, my soul
thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, as in a dry and thirsty land,
where no water is; to see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in
the Sanctuary. 2. If sutableness do deserve love, there is infinitely more of
this in God unto the Heart, than in any thing else that any may set their
hearts upon; Indeed sensitive objects are more suitable unto the brutish part,
I mean the senses, in which many bruits do excel men; but God is most suitable
to the most excellent and noble part of man, which is the soul; He is a suitable
good, and the only suitable good for the Heart, because he is the only chief
good; nothing beneath, nothing besides the chief good, can give true
satisfaction to the Soul; none but God can fill up the large and immense
desires of the Heart: the house may be filled with goods, the bags may be
filled with silver and gold, the cabinets may be filled with jewels; but none
of these things can fill the Heart; the eye may be tired with seeing, and the
ear wearied with hearing, and all the senses glutted and cloyed with their
proper objects; but none of these objects are suitable to the Soul; and
therefore cannot fill, and satisfy its desires. Earthly riches are uncertain
and thorny; worldly honors are vain and windy; sensual pleasures are thin and
empty; and all are of short continuance, and very transitory; and what then can
they all do to give satisfaction unto a rational Soul, which is a spiritual
substance? to an immortal soul, which must abide when the body is dropped off
into the dust, and all these things are vanished out of sight, and which must
live so long as the eternal God shall live. God only is the suitable good for
the Soul, the creatures are not so far beneath the Soul, as God is above it;
the creatures have not so much emptiness, as God has fullness; the creatures
have not such insufficiency, as God has All Sufficiency; he that is
Self-sufficient, must needs be All-sufficient; an Ocean surely is sufficient to
fill a Bucket or a Nut shell: though ten thousand worlds are not sufficient to
fill one Soul; yet one God that is All sufficient can fill ten thousand worlds
of souls. It is a great expression, Ephesians. 3.20, 21. Now to him that is able to
do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power
that works in us; to him be glory, etc. He can do above, abundantly above,
exceeding abunantly above; in the original the words are (...), above
abundantly, He can do infinitely beyond, not only our Prayers, and what we can
ask; but also our conceptions, and what we can think; We may ask for great
things, mountains of Gold, seats amongst the Stars, the most delicious things
for the sense; but God can do more than this for us; and if he does not give
such things, because they are not so good, he gives that which is better; a
little true Grace is beyond all; and God can do beyond what we can ask in
spiritual riches; the riches of glory are exceedingly abundantly beyond the
riches of grace; we may conceive and think more than we can have confidence, or
find words to ask; but God can do for us beyond our either desires or thoughts;
yea, there is more in himself than we can imagine: God is a fountain of
goodness, which is always running, overflowing, and ever-flowing; He is a
treasury of all good things, which can never be exhausted and emptied. Surely
then God is the most suitable good for the Heart, and most deserves the Heart.
3. If Love do deserve the Heart, and call for return of Love, surely God has
infinitely more of this, than any else; none can match him in loveliness, and
none can match him in Love: See Job. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, etc. God so loved the world; How did he love the world?
There is no comparison to set it forth by, nothing great enough to express it,
it is too big to be put into the scales with any creature-love, except you
would weigh vast mountains in one balance, and a light feather in the other;
yea, I may safely say, that the smallest dust on the ground, or the least more
that flies in the air, may better be compared with the whole globe of the
Earth for weight, than the love of any creature can be compared with the love
of God to Mankind; and therefore if you ask how God loved Mankind, the answer
must not be by a comparison, for it passes comparison, and it passes
comprehension: but it is set forth by the expression of it, in giving his only
begotten Son for men, that believing in him, they might not perish, but have
everlasting life; here is love, not in word so much as in deed; love in a
love-token, in a gift, and such a gift as is unvaluable; a gift so necessary,
as without which, eternal ruin could not be avoided; so beneficial, that by
it; and with it, eternal life and happiness is obtained. Gods love is so great,
in giving his Son, that when the Apostle John does speak of it, he tells us
not only that God has Love, but that God is Love, 1 Ioh. 4.8, 9, 10. God is
love; In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because God sent his
only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is
love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son to be a
propitiation for our sins. Creatures have love, it is a quality in them, and
has degrees; the highest capacity which we have for love is but as it is a
quality, and even in that which we are capable of, we are deficient, whilst in
this world; but Love in God is not a quality, for a quality is an accident, and
there are no accidents in God; and therefore it is his essence, He is Love;
there is a (...), a depth in the expression, which we cannot fathom. If the
Apostle cries out, Romans 11.33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out! We may also cry out in an ecstasy of admiration, O the depth of
the riches of the goodness and love of God! how unsearchable are his mercies,
and the ways of his grace past finding out! Apprehend we may something of Gods
love, but comprehend it we cannot. Who ever did, or could look into the depth
of Gods heart? The heart of man is deep, but the heart of God is far deeper;
and indeed, in comparison with God, the streams of our Love are but small
brooks, and shallow rivulets, unto the dep current, and bottomless ocean of
Love in the heart of God to sinners, through Jesus Christ. Gods Love is First,
Free, Tender, Unchangeable, from everlasting to everlasting: But I must not
lanch too deep into this subject of Gods Love, which in many discourses of
those that have the most raised apprehensions, and sweetest tastes of it, cannot
be set forth with any sutableness unto its greatness. Now such love of God
surely does deserve the Heart, and the return of the choicest and chiefest
affections which the children of men can possibly present him withal. Love
does usually draw forth particular, and endeared Love, more than Loveliness;
but when such infinite Loveliness, Sutableness, and withal such infinite
incomparable Love, do meet in one God, surely we must say that he is the most
deserving object for the Love.
R. 5. Lastly, All, especially young men, ought to give God their Hearts,
because he will best use their Hearts; their Hearts will be abused by any thing
they give them unto, except it be God alone. If they give their Hearts to the
world, it will debase and degrade them; but if they give their Hearts unto God,
He will advance and ennoble them; if the creatures have their hearts, they will
impoverish them, but if God have their Hearts, He will enrich them; if Sin get
their Hearts, it will deform them, but if God get their Hearts, He will
beautify them; if Lust be received into their Hearts, it will defile them, but
if God be received into their Hearts, He will cleanse them. If God have not the
Heart, the Devil, and the World, and Lust will possess it, and be sure they
will abuse it. Better it is a thousand fold to entertain God into the Heart,
than any other inhabitant, He having promised to dwell where he is entertained,
2 Cor. 6.16. For ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will
dwell in you, and walk in you: and be sure He will use the Hearts well where he
dwells. The Devil and Lust make the Heart a Dungeon, but Gods presence makes
the Heart a Palace; God has two Palaces, the one is the highest Heavens, the
other is the lowest Hearts; and where God dwells, he will bring his own
Furniture; He will throw out of doors the rotten furniture of Sin, which he
finds, and bring in the furniture of Grace, he will, as it were, hang the
Heart with the rich Tapistry, and curious Embroidery of the Spirit, that He may
take delight in his Habitation, adorned with his own Ornaments. And He will
bring in his own Provisions too, and feast them with his Love, and the most
kind expressions thereof, which shall yield such peace and satisfaction, such
comfort and sweetness, and sometimes such ravishing joys, as have not entered
into the hearts of the carnal and worldly to conceive. Moreover, He will watch
over the Heart, and defend it from many mischiefs and dangers, from many snares
and temptations, from many sins, and those ruins which sin does lead the
ungodly unto. To conclude, By the Grace which He gives the Heart here, He will
qualify and prepare it for glory hereafter; and at length, when the Soul now
given to him, shall be separated from the Body, it shall not want an
habitation, for He will receive it into the dearest closets, and eternal
embracements of his Love. Surely then God will best use the Heart, and
therefore all should give their Hearts unto Him.

The Application.
Use 1. BY way of Information.

HEnce learn, that none have the dispose of their own Hearts, none have liberty
to ^ive their Hearts as they please; to choose, or love, or desire, or delight
in what, and in whom ^hey please. It is the speech of the ungodly, Psalm.^ 2.4.
Our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? and it is a more ungodly speech to
say, Our Hearts are our own, who is Lord over us? There is nothing which any
can call their own, properly and ^trictly, except it be sin; whatever any are,
or ^ave, they owe it unto God, from whom they ^ave received it; but above all,
God claims his ^^ght to the Heart, and He is most jealous of the Heart, and
none may give away their Hearts from him.

2. Learn here, God has disposed of our Hearts better than we could or would
dispose of them our selves: if God had not directed our Hearts to himself, and
commanded us to give them to him, we should foolishly dispose of them unto
inferior things, which are wholly unworthy of them, and which would woefully
abuse them; as all such do dispose their Hearts who give no heed unto this
command.

3. Learn here, that God has made that to be our duty to give our Hearts to
him, which is our great privilege, that we may give our hearts to him; this
commandment surely is not grievous, but most reasonable and sweet; God is not
beholding to us for our Hearts, but we are beholding unto him that he will
accept of them.

4. Learn here the difference between the wicked and the righteous; the
difference does not lie in their riches; for when many of the righteous be poor
in this world, multitudes of wicked men do abound in wealth; it does not lie in
worldly grandeur and dignity, usually the wicked are advanced to the highest
seat of honor, and are esteemed when the righteous are low, and under
disgrace: It does not lie in their food and apparel; Div^^ is arrayed in
purple, and fine linen, and fares deliciously every day, when Lazarus lies
at his gate, hungry, and in rags. It does not lie in any beauty and strength of
body, in any natural parts or acquired abilities of mind; some that have very
foul insides, are outwardly fair and beautiful; and many are ignorant of the
mysteries of salvation who are great Scholars in other things, and of high
esteem for worldly wisdom and prudence; when the righteous, many of them, have
a contemptible outside, and are of very mean natural, and acquired abilities.
But the difference between the wicked and the righteous, and that wherein the
righteous do excel all the wicked in the world, is in the disposing of their
hearts; the wicked give their hearts to the creature, some to the dung of
earthly pelf, others to the filth of sensual delight, others to the wind of
worldly esteem; some give their hearts to their Friends, others to their Lands,
others to their Hawks and Hounds; and all the wicked are of such a low and
inferior spirit, that they let their Hearts sink beneath themselves, unto
something that debases them; but the righteous they lift up their hearts to him
that is above them; whereby they are advanced, they dispose their hearts unto
God, who is the chief good; when the stream of the wicked man's affections
runs downwards, theirs runs upward; and surely of all others they have
the greatest wisdom, and true height and nobleness of spirit, whose hearts are
raised so high, as to be joined unto the Lord.

Use. 2. For reproof of such as give away their Hearts from God; And are there
not too many such in this place? God has your ears sometimes, and your lips,
and your knees sometimes, and your bodies, it may be, are often presented
before him in the outside of Religious duties; but has God your hearts? Have
you presented God with this gift? with this sacrifice? without which, all other
sacrifices of your lips, and outward devotion, are but a vain oblation; yea,
despised, and an abomination unto him? Young men, you are disposed of by your
Friends, some to this Calling, and some to that; but Friends have not the
dispose of your Hearts, you have disposed of them your selves; and have not too
many of you disposed away your hearts from God unto the creature? Has not
vanity and the world, and some foolish, filthy, and deceitful Lust the chief
room and possession of your hearts? God has called for your Hearts, but you
have not hearkened; God has knocked at the door, but you have not opened; He
has in his Word, and by his Spirit, woed for your chiefest affections, but you
have hitherto given him a denial and repulse; when you have listened to the
Devil, and readily opened your Hearts to the world, and given forth of your
dearest loves and delights to the creatures; you have been deaf unto God, and
your Hearts shup up against him, and foolishly withheld your affections from
him. Consider your great sin herein 1. You that give away your hearts from God,
are guilty of Heart-Idolatry; that which you chiefly love, and desire, and
delight your selves in, is your God: If it be meats and drinks for your belly,
your belly is your God, Philip. 3.19. Whose God is their belly: If it be Gold
and Silver, and the riches of the World, Riches are your God: And therefore
Covetousness is called Idolatry, Col. 3.5. Covetousness which is Idolatry.
Whatever it be that you supremely love, that is your God, and the Idol of your
hearts, if it be any thing beneath, and beside the true God. And can any of
these Gods hear your Prayers? Can they save you in your troubles, if you call
upon them? Can they deliver you from wrath to come? Can they abide with you, to
be your eternal portion? 2. You that give away your Hearts from God, are guilty
of Spiritual Adultery; your Maker is, or should be your Husband, and you go a
whoring from him, when you give your Hearts chiefly to any person or thing
besides him; you commit Spiritual Adultery with any creature which you receive
into the embracements of your dearest affections; and therefore such whose
hearts are chiefly addicted to the world, and to its friendship, are called
Adulterers and Adulteresses, Iam. 4.4. Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, Know ye
not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? 3. You that give away
your hearts from God, are guilty of great injustice; your Hearts do of right
belong to God, as has been proved; He has made them, and he has bought them;
and you may as justly give away money which belongs to another, or goods
which belong to another, or house and lands which belong ao another, as give
away your Hearts to any other, which do of right belong unto God. 4. You that
give away your Hearts from God, are guilty of great folly; you are hereby not
only unjust toward God, but you are injurious toward your selves; God has
not need of your Hearts, but you have need to give them to him; your loss is
great, by withholding your Hearts from God, you lose the heart of God which
you should have in exchange; you lose the favor of God, which is infinitely
beyond the favor of men; you lose the peace of conscience, which is the Souls
feast; you lose the joys of the Holy Ghost, which are unspeakably sweet and
glorious: you love all that communion with God, and communications of the
richest spiritual supplies which you might have from God, if you gave your
Hearts unto him; hereby you lose your souls, which is the greatest loss; you
lose your salvation, and the eternal crown and glory which you are capable of.
And what do you gain by giving away your Hearts from God? you look indeed for
great satisfaction and delight, and a happiness which the things you chiefly
desire and love should yield unto you; but be sure you will come off with
disappointment, none of these things can give that which they have not;
something indeed you will gain by giving your Hearts to the creatures; namely,
deep wounds of conscience, heart-piercing sorrows, smarting scourges sometimes
of afflictions; or if your life be more pleasant, and conscience for a while
asleep, at your latter end you are like to be utterly consumed with terrors;
or if you be not awakened then, be sure you will be awakened in the flames of
Hell. Fire and brimstone, and a horrible tempest of Gods wrath, and most
dreadful indignation, shall be the eternal portion which you will gain by your
preferring the creature above God in your affections. And what can be more
foolish, more injurious to your selves than this sin?


Use 3. For exhortation of all men, especially of you that are young men, to
give your Hearts unto God. This is the first day of the new year, and some of
you do bring New Years gifts to one another, be persuaded to present God with
the New Years gift of your Hearts; the Devil, that old Serpent, and the World,
that old Cheat, have had your Hearts all the old Year; and some deceitful Lusts
have hitherto gained and possessed your Affections; be persuaded to call off,
and pluck your hearts now at length out of the hands of these enemies, which
seek after your destruction, and to offer them up unto God for a New Years gift
this New Years day, and as a new and living sacrifice which will be very
acceptable unto God, who is the God of your Salvation. Some of you have nothing
of your own, which you can give unto men, without wronging your Masters, or
your Parents; but all of you have hearts of your own, which you may give to
God, and which you cannot keep from him, without wronging him, and wronging
your selves too.

Young men, it may be you have given your Hearts to Delight and Pleasure, the
Goddess which most in the world do adore: But sit down and consider, whether
sensual pleasure, does deserve your Hearts; you have tasted a little of its
sweetness, and hope for a great deal more; yea, so much as shall give
satisfaction and contentment; but you will find emptiness and vanity in the
enjoyment, bitterness and misery to be the consequent of that pleasure which
your Hearts do so much love and desire. Solomon, who had as great a confluence
of creature-delights, as any man living, and upon trial, had found all to be
vanity and vexation of spirit in the issue, does from his own experience, warn
young men against indulging the flesh, and giving their hearts unto any
sensual-delights: Indeed he seems in his first words to give allowance to
young men to take their pleasures, and to walk in this way of their hearts; but
his speech is ironical; for withal he tacitly intimates unto them how dearly
they should pay for their pleasures, when God should bring them unto Judgment,
Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the
sight of thine eyes; but know that for all these things God will bring thee
unto judgment. As if he should have said, Young ones, be as merry and frolic
as you list; take your fill of sensual Pleasures if you think good: Smell at
every flower; suck at every breast; taste and feed on every dainty dish; drink,
and drink deep of every sweet cup: Bathe your selves in the streams of all
creature-delights; run into every pleasant embracement; melt away in soft
pleasures; indulge your sensual appetite to the height; gratify every lust to
the full; withhold from your selves nothing which is pleasing to your flesh; do
whatever seems good in your own eyes; be cheerful, and rejoice all your
youthful days; seek, gather, and enjoy with all freedom whatever is delightful
to your hearts, or pleasant to your eyes: This do, if you think good, and that
it is your interest: BUT KNOW, that for all these things God will bring you
unto judgment: Believe, remember, and seriously consider, that there is a day
of reckoning not far off, a day of judgment coming, when you will be called to
an account; and when all your delights and pleasures will vanish like the
cloud, and be fled for ever out of your sight; then your most sweet delights
will be turned into Gall and Wormwood; then horrible pain and everlasting
torment will take the room of your momentany pleasures; and as you like the
one, so indulge your selves in the other. Or it may be, it is the honor and
esteem of men which too many of you that are young are most enamoured with, and
have addicted your hearts unto; Some of you, though you have not the golden
chain about your neck, have gotten the chain of Pride and ambition about your
Heart, whereby it is captivated and led away from God unto any kind of
Practices, which may likely get you a name, and lift you up in others esteem:
And is it not to be feared, that some of you make use of Religion as a
footstool to raise you a little higher, or as a stirrup to advance you into the
seat of some kind of repute, and as a cloak to cover ambitions designs? And is
any kind of honor, either amongst the ungodly, or the religious, worthy of
your hearts? Does it deserve the highest room in your affections? Is it fit
that Pride should sit in the throne which does belong to God? Your affections
are hungry, will they be satisfied with wind? If they be filled sometime, will
they, can they herewith be satisfied? Do you not lose honor, by loving it and
desiring it inordinately? and that higher honor than the honor which you may
desire, but never attain unto? I mean, do you not lose the honor and esteem of
God, which is infinitely beyond all the highest honor and esteem of men? Honor
est in honorante, Honor is not in him that is honored, but in him that
honors; and is that so amiable which is not in your selves, but in another
breast? or if you do desire honor, is worldly honor the most desirable, which
is of all things the most uncertain, and most inconstant? Is any honor so sure
and so great; as the honor which the Great Jehovah has for all that truly
love and fear him? And what sweetness can you really find in others good esteem
of you, when you have so much reason to dis-esteem your selves? Must not their
esteem of you be for low and inferior things, which are not praiseworthy? or
else must not their esteem be built upon a mistake? and can you take any great
comfort in others mistake? Can this be a happiness and chief good for a
rational Soul? Suppose that your ambition were gratified, and you advanced not
only in esteem, but also in a high place of dignity; are not all high places
very slippery? And by how much your place is the higher, would not your fall be
the lower? If you were Kings or Emperors, Death would quickly turn off your
Crowns, and pluck your robes off your backs, and your Scepters out of your
right hands. And what honor do the worms give to the bodies of Great ones,
when they are brought down to the dust? What honor will God give to the Souls
of wicked Great ones when they are out of the body? What honor will the Lord
Jesus give to such at the last day, when he appears with his glorious train
of Angels, to Judge the world in righteousness? Will not all the honor of
wicked men be then turned into shame, disgrace, everlasting contempt, and
confusion of face? And is it good then to set your heart upon Honor instead of
God? Or, it may be, young ones, your hearts are not upon the wing to carry you
either to the mountains of pleasures, or the mountains of honor; but they are
grovelling upon the earth; you are got under it, and are digging for Mines and
Treasures there: I mean, that possibly your Hearts are most addicted to the
gain of earthly riches; and are they more worthy of your Hearts than God? Can
they yield more satisfaction unto you, or abide more surely by you, than those
pleasures or honors of the world, which I have been endeavoring to disgrace?
If you had Gold like the dust, and Silver like the sand, and Jewels like the
stones of the field; if you had as much wealth as your hearts could wish, could
you find the contentment your hearts do desire in any of these things? Besides,
if riches in great abundance could give contentment, (which they cannot) are
you certain to get such abundance? Has the world Treasures enough to enrich
all that so dearly love and desire it? Are not the times hard? Is not trading
low? Is it not with great difficulty that any do get an estate? Do not such as
will be rich run themselves into temptations and snares which entangle them,
and enslave themselves to many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which at length undo
them, and drown them in perdition and destruction? 1 Timothy 6.9. Read, and
consider what the Wise man speaks, Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thine eyes upon
that which is not? for riches cerainly make themselves wings, they flee away
like an Eagle toward Heaven? Will you set your hearts upon that which is not,
that is, which is not what it seems to be; or which is of so short
continuance, as if it had no being; Riches certainly make themselves wings,
like Eagles, and are flying away from you; and will you make your selves wings
like Eagles, and fly after them? Are you like to overtake them when they are
upon the wing to be gone? and when they are gone upon the wing, will they
return again? or if they should abide so long as you abide? will not death make
wings for you e're long, upon which, willing or unwilling, you must flee away,
and leave all your riches behind you? Think how death will strip you of all
your wealth, and bereave you of all your riches? Naked you came into the world,
and naked you must return; and think how grievous it will be for you to part
with those things unto which you have given your heart? Will it not be a
tearing to your hearts to be disjoined from that unto which they are now so
glewed? And when withal you think that you must not only leave all that you so
much love, but also that you must go to a place of most exquisite and eternal
torments in Hell, which you so much fear? Let me then persuade all of you,
especially you that are young men, to call off your hearts from all these
things, which the Devil makes use of as baits to catch hearts withal, as
snares to entangle and captivate affections; look to the hook through the bait;
look to the prison, whither the Devil, in such chains which he has laid upon
your affections, is leading you; withdraw your hearts from the world, and every
thing therein, and now present it unto the Lord: The Lord has sent me this day
to woe your Hearts, O, that I could win your Hearts for him You are young men,
and most of you (if not all) single men; Suppose that the most lovely young
woman that ever your eyes beheld, of such stature, feature, and exact mixture
of colors, as you never before saw one so beautiful; Suppose her birth and
dowry to be far above you; Suppose her humble, like the ground, and of the
sweetest disposition, that she had none like her; and this person should make
tender of particular and most ardent Love unto any of you, and be willing to
give her self, and all that she has unto you; only did expect a return of Love
on your part; I suppose there is not any of you who would refuse and withold
your Love. But what is any creature in comparison with God? not so much as the
dust upon the balance: his excellencies are infinitely beyond compare and
comprehension too. I have set forth the Loveliness of the Lord, as infinitely
exceeding all creature - loveliness: I have set forth his Sutableness unto your
Souls; and withal his infinite Love, and by me he makes tender of himself,
and his Love unto you, unto the meanest and most unworthy amongst you, but he
looks for a return of Love on your part; By me he calls for your Heart:
think what an indignity it will be to the Lord, what a folly and injury to your
selves, should you refuse and withhold your hearts from him. God does by me
call for your hearts, they are his due; if any else can claim such right to
them, let them have them: if any else do so much desire or deserve them, let
them have them; if any else will so well use them, let them have them; if any
else can so advance, beautify, enrich, satisfy and fill them with such peace
and joy, let them have them; No, no there is no person can do it; nothing can
do it in this world; and will you still withold you Hearts from God? Why are
you so backward to bestow your affections upon God? Why so loath to give your
hearts to him that has given you your hearts; given you all that you are, all
that you have, that has given his Son for you, and proffereth to give his Son
to you; and with him pardon and peace, and many special favors here, and the
Kingdom of Heaven hereafter? What do you say, young men? Shall God have your
Hearts or no? God does not only call for them, and will accept of them, but he
is loath to be denied; He does by me entreat and beseech you, that he might have
them. In his entreaties of you, that you would be reconciled to him, he does
entreat you to give him your Hearts. God is reconciled to you, when he gives
to you his Son; and you are reconciled unto him, when you give him your hearts;
then your enmity against him is laid aside; and see Gods entreaties by
Ministers for this thing, 2 Cor. 5.20. Now we are ambassadors for Christ, as
if God did beseech you by us, we pray you, in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled
unto God. Hear O Heavens! Wonder, O Angels! Admire, O Saints! Be astonished, O
Sinners! Be confounded, O Devils! that God should not only be willing, to
accept of Hearts, but desire them! not only call for them, but entreat for
them! that God should entreat! entreat his creatures! entreat sinners,
traitors, rebels! persons so mean, so vile! when he has no need of them, that
he should entreat for Hearts, as if he were beholding to them to give them! O
wonderful! wonderful condescension! although you have stopped your ear so long,
and refused your Hearts so often, yet the Lord does still entreat, and he would
fain prevail with you for this gift, so beneficial, not to him to receive it,
but unto you to give it. Upon my knees, (if that would do) I would beseech you
in the name of my Lord, that you would give your Hearts unto God: Methinks you
should not shut your ears to such kind invitations; or when your ears are open,
methinks you should not shut your hearts against the Lord, that stands at
those doors and knocks, and entreats you to let him in, and give him room
there. Methinks that Grief should now arise against those base, filthy lusts,
which are got into the room of God, and Desire should step forth, and invite
the Lord in, to take possession of that place which is due. Methinks your
hearts now should begin to open unto God, and the everlasting gates of them
should be lifted up, that this King of Glory might be entertained, and exalted,
and enthroned within you. Methinks Hatred should now arise in your hearts
against Sin, and a contempt of the World, with all the vanities thereof; and a
fire of Love should now methinks begin to enkindle within you. Look, young men,
look upwards, Do you see nothing? Take up the Glass of the Word, and through
this perspective cannot you see the Lord of Heaven, full of mavelous, and
most ravishing beauty in his face; full of most free, tender, incomparable, and
incomprehensible love in his heart? If you can see but little, beg the eye of
Faith, and light of the Spirit, and then you will see wonders, wonders of
beauty, and wonders of love: And do not your hearts yet begin to move toward
God? What do you say, young men? How many of your Hearts may I gain for God
this day? Methinks every one of you should be ready to say, Here Is my Heart for
the Lord; and here is my heart for the Lord; and here is my heart for the Lord.
Will you now all of you engage your Hearts in Covenant to the Lord? will you
now withdraw your hearts from the World, and all its Lusts which has usurped
them; and making choice of God for your chief good, Devote your Hearts, with
your whole man to him, to be His, and His for ever. Consent heartily unto this,
young men, and the thing is done; your Hearts are God's, and God is yours, and
yours for ever.

And if you would give your Hearts unto God;

1. You must give them presently, delays are dangerous; if you refuse now, you
may never be asked for them any more; this may be God's last Call, it may be
now you have some movings and strivings of the Spirit for your Hearts; if you
do not now hearken and yield, God may withhold his Spirit for the future, and
never strive with you more. 2. You must give them freely, Don't think God is
beholding to you to give them; but that you are beholding to him that He will
accept of them. 3. You must give them fully; Don't reserve any room in them for
Sin, and harbor any base Lust in any corner of your hearts. 4. You must give
them resolutely; with full purpose never to retract this gift; Gods gifts of
his Grace to men are without repentance; and so must be your gift of your
Hearts unto God: And if the Lord does get your Hearts this day, I know he will
get all; the Heart being the commanding part; Put your selves under God's
command; hereby you will be in safeguard from the worst of evils; I mean, the
Reign of Sin, and Tyranny of the Devil here, and the Damnation of Hell in the
other World; hereby your hearts will be near to Gods Heart whilst you live, and
they shall be brought nearer to him when you die; when absent from the body,
they shall be present with the Lord in glory, and abide with him to eternity.
FINIS.

