The Perfect Man described in his Life and End.

IN A Funeral Discourse Upon Psalm XXXVII. 37.

Occasioned by the DEATH Of that Pattern of Uprightness Mr. EDWARD LAWRENCE.

By Nathanael Vincent, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

Whereunto are added some Passages out of Two Letters, written by Two Excellent
Ministers concerning Mr. Lawrence; who were well acquainted with him, and with
the Worth of him.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange, in Cornhill. 1696.

Mr. VINCENT's Funeral Discourse Occasioned by the DEATH of Mr. EDWARD LAWRENCE.

TO THAT CONGREGATION Who had Mr. EDWARD LAWRENCE For their PASTOR.
My much respected Friends!
WHen I preached this Sermon, which now I present especially to you; I was so
far from having the least thought of Printing it, that I had not written so
much as one word of it; and when your Desires were expressed that it might be
Published, I discovered a great averseness, because I knew how much averse my
deceased and most true Friend was from a Discourse relating to Himself; and
much more would he have been against the Printing any thing concerning Him. But
your reitereated Desires prevailed, being seconded by that Argument, that Mr.
Lawrence himself went contrary to the declared Will of an Eminent Christian, in
Preaching a Funeral Sermon, and giving him his deserved Commendations: Adding,
that because that Excellent Saint was against his Preaching, therefore he was
the more forward to do it. So that I have only made bold to mete the same
Measure to my Friend who is dead and gone, which He did mete to his Friend that
died before him.

This Sermon for the Substance of it was taken from my Mouth in Shorthand, and
brought to me written out in Long. And since you have importuned the making of
it public, I desire you may give it a serious perusal.

A perfect Man is the most glorious and lovely of all visible Creatures. How
much of the Image of the invisible God does shine forth in him! The Grace of
God in Truth wherever *it is wrought, what a blessed Change does it make! Out of
the rubbish and ruins of corrupt Nature, there is built an Holy Temple for the
living God! And in this Temple how is He honored and served! The perfect Man
has an high Aim, and a commendable Emulation; he desires to do the will of God
on earth, as it is done in heaven. And Heaven is esteemed a blessed place,
because there he shall be able fully to do what he does desire.

I have heard your deceased Pastor express his longings to be in an holy and
happy Eternity. Tho he had many other Loads, Sin was his heaviest Burden; and
perfect Holiness was looked upon as a great part of his expected Blessedness.
He was a powerful and a profitable Preacher; and this must be added, that he
preached continually. His serious Looks, his edifying Communication, which
administered Grace to the Hearers; his holy, just, and unblameable and shining
Conversation, were greatly instructive; and by these he was ever speaking to
all that observed him, that it was much for their Interest to be like him. And
now being dead, he yet speaks to you, that the Counsels he gave you, which are
the Counsels of God, should not dye with him, nor be buried in Oblivion. The
Flock of such a Pastor should be Eminent for Contempt of the World, serious
Holiness, and Heavenly-Mindedness, else they will be far from resembling their
Faithful Shephard.

I cannot wish you better, than that the Lord would direct you to settle under
a Minister most like him who is taken from you; and who will naturally care for
your Spiritual Estate. I wish his Family may be cared for by that God, whom he
served in Truth and Sincerity, whose mercy is from everlasting to everlasting
upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto childrens children, to such
as keep his covenant, and remember his commandments to do them.

Earth is emptying apace of them who are ripe for Heaven; I wish the Death of
those that are gone, may make both Ministers and Saints that remain and
survive, to be more lively and diligent in their Lord's Work! The Time of
Labor is short; but to Eternity it will be found, that labor is not in vain
in the Lord.

My Friends, I commend you and yours to the Great Shepherd of Souls, and to the
Word of his Grace; and wish your Perfection and Peace, living, dying, and for
ever.

Your Servant for Jesus sake, NATHANAEL VINCENT.

PSALM XXXVII. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of
that man is peace.
ALTHOUGH Liberty to Preach the Gospel is justly esteemed the privilege and
pleasure of my Life; and tho a Regal Throne, or a Triple Crown, is to me
contemptible in comparison of a Pulpit; yet I must needs confess that I come
with a sad heart to preach the Word this day; and the reason of my Sorrow is,
the loss of that Excellent Man and Minister of Christ, who dwelt in this place,
who is now effectually silenced by Death, and must be heard to Preach no more
for ever. This burning and shining Light, a great many Years ago, was put under
a Bushel, which was worthy to have been set in a Golden Candlestick; but now
alas! in a sense it is quite extinguished: He is gone into darkness and the
shadow of Death, where there is no order, and where the light is as darkness.

He had in his lifetime declared his Will against a Funeral Sermon; for he was
far from affecting those Praises and Commendations which are usually given in
Funeral Discourses; but I must say, that the less he desired, the more he
deserved to be praised and commended; having such a large share of Humility,
joined with his other great Ministerial Accomplishments. When the news of his
Death came first to my ears, I said what I thought, and had good ground to be
persuaded of: Now there is a Man gone out of the World, that was one of the
best Men in it. Good Men may truly be called Pillars of the Earth; and when a
very strong Pillar is thrown down, there should be great Lamentation; and the
Earth may tremble at the fall of it. But tho he is gone down to the Dust, where
his Face is bound in secret, and must be seen no more, till this World be no
more; yet methinks I have a view of him plainly in the Text I have chosen; here
we have his Character both Living and Dying: Mark the perfect man, and behold
the upright: for the end of that man is peace.

In which words, I shall offer these particulars to your Observation.

First, Here is a remarkable Man, and he is the perfect Man.

Secondly, Wherein the perfection of this Man lies; it lies in his being
upright.

Thirdly, What the perfect and upright Man is worthy of; he is worthy to be
marked, he is worthy to be beheld.

Fourthly, What of this perfect and upright Man our eye in a special manner
should be upon, and that is his end.

Fifthly, His end is remarkable as well as himself, for his end is peace. An
upright Life, and a peaceful Death, how truly desirable are they! and the
former is the way to the latter; whereas there is no peace, says the Lord, to
the wicked while he lives; and when he dies and his Soul is required at his
hands, he will perceive how foolish he was, in crying peace and safety to
himself.

These Particulars I shall insist on, and then conclude with the Application.

In the first place I am to speak of the remarkable Man in the Text, and he is
the perfect Man. It is a wonder, considering the general Corruption and
Depravation of Humane Nature, and how full of Snares and Temptations this World
is, that there should be ever a perfect Man upon Earth! But see what the
powerful Grace of God can do. It can renew and alter Nature it self, and change
it from contrary to contrary, from wickedness and deceitfulness, to holiness of
truth.

That the perfect Man may be the better understood, you must know that there is
a threefold Perfection spoken of in Scripture.

Legal. Celestial. Evangelical.
1. There is a Legal Perfection: This was in Adam before the Fall; he was made
perfect and upright; but being made mutable, he quickly sought out many
inventions, Eccles. 7. 29. and made himself quite and clean another Creature
from what he was at first created. When other things were made, God's bare word
of command that they should be, gave them a Being; but when Man was to be
formed, it was not done without some kind of Solemnity and Consultation, Genesis
1. 26. And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. And how
did Man shine with this Image upon him, when he came first out of his Maker's
hands! If all things were very good in their kind, how perfect was Man's
Goodness in his kind! not the least moral Evil was to be found in him. What a
clear light was there in his mind! How exactly conformed was his Will to the
Divine Will! How regular were his Affections! Not the least Evil was in him,
either in Action, Thought, or Inclination.

He had a Power to keep the whole Law of God in every Part and Point of it, and
a Will most free and forward in it. He could, and for a while did come up to
the terms of the first Covenant, Do this and live. And thus perfect he did
remain, till through the Temptations of the evil One, he let go his primitive
Righteousness and Integrity.

2. There is a Celestial Perfection, and that is the Perfection of glorified
Saints in Heaven; we cannot aspire unto, or desire any thing for our selves,
higher than, or so high as this. This the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10.
For we know in part, and we prophecy in part; but when that which is perfect is
come, then that which is in part shall he done away. This Perfection is
preached of, and heard of at present; and they who attain to the greatest
measure of Grace and Holiness, can best give a guess at it: Our Brother, who is
lately taken away from us, now understands and experiences to his Joy what
Heavens perfection is. We read, Heb. 12. 23. of the general Assembly and Church
of the firstborn which are written in Heaven, and the spirits of just Men made
perfect. How clear is that light, in which God, who is light, is seen! How
perfect is that Purity which is consequent upon this Vision of him! how have
they all been transformed into the Image of him whom they do behold, fully
resembling him in Righteousness and true Holiness! 1 John 3. 2. We know that
when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.

The separated Spirits of Saints, having left their Earthly House and
Tabernacle, have put off their sinful Infirmities; nothing that makes them in
the least unlike to God, or that he dislikes, remains in them. The great
Physician began the Cure of those blessed Souls in this World, and now in the
other World it is perfected; that Scripture is applicable to every one of them,
Cant. 4. 7. Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee.

And as the Spirits of just Men in Heaven are perfect; so their vile bodies
will be changed and made like unto Christ's glorious body. Heb. 3. 21. this
corruptible will put on incorruption, this mortal immortality. Adam's Body
before the Fall was of an admirable Make and Constitution, not the least
peccant Humor in it. And if he had stood, the Tree of Life, the Sacrament of
the first Covenant, was to assure him of Immortality; yet that Body was much
inferior to a Spiritual Body at the Resurrection. Oh how illustriously perfect
as to their whole Man, will all Saints be, when Christ their life shall appear,
and they appear with him in glory! Col. 3 4. The perfection of Heaven, which
Christ is the Purchaser of, will be found by many degrees to be beyond that
Perfection which was in the first Paradise.

3. There is an Evangelical Perfection: and the Man spoken of in the Text, is
in this Sense perfect. Legal Rigor is abated in the Gospel; the Gospel does
not curse every one that continues not in all things required in the Law. Legal
exactness is not expected from Believers; God does not mark iniquities, nor
enter into judgment with them. A sincere Saint is evangelically a perfect Man;
tho in strictness of Law, there is some Imperfection in his Holiness. The
Apostle, without Selfcontradiction, affirms himself to be perfect and not
perfect, almost in the same breath Phil. 3. 12. Not as tho I had already
attained, or were already perfect; and yet he says ver. 15. Let us therefore as
many as be perfect be thus indeed. He had a perfection of sincerity; but unto a
sinless perfection he had not attained.

The Evangelically perfect Man, I am now to describe.

The perfect Man is renewed in all his Parts and Powers. The whole Man is
corrupted by Nature, and the whole Man is renewed by Grace. This the Apostle
expresses by Sanctification throughout, in body, soul, and spirit, 1 These. 5.
23. Tho in degree, Sanctification be put in part; yet every part is truly and
really sanctified. When the Lord makes a perfect Man, he works a change in the
whole Man. Nothing in the Soul but has some gracious Alteration wrought in it.
No one Power or Faculty is let alone to be altogether as it was. The Mind is
enlightened, the Conscience awakened, the Will and Affections have a new bias;
and the Memory retains things necessary and worthy to be remembered; and the
heart being purified, the members are yielded as Instruments of Righteousness
unto Holiness. The new Creature lacks not any parts, and degrees of Grace are
still to be added: In this Sense all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. and
yet the inward man is further to be renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4. 16.

2. The perfect Man is made pertaker of every Grace. Moral Philosophers have
observed a Concatenation of all moral Virtues, that they are inseparable; where
one is indeed, there are all of them. There cannot be truly any Virtue in any
man, where any one Vice is allowed to be predominant. It Is a great truth
concerning the Graces of the Spirit, that they are all linked together. There
is no Grace insincerity in that man, who ordinarily and presumptuously does
what he knows to be evil in God's sight, and willingly suffers, tho it be but
one Iniquity to have the dominion over him.

The Spirit of God works like himself; and all Grace he works, where he works
any. The Stone or Kernel of the Fruit tree, has vertually the whole Tree in it;
and if it be sown in the Ground, a Tree with Leaves and Fruit at length grows
up from it. We read of the seed of God, 1 John 3. 9. and this Seed vertually
has all Grace in it: And this Seed does remain; and Grace of every sort, as
there is occasion, in some degree or other, is produced into act and exercise.

In the perfect man's breast plate, or if you will in his breast, there is
Faith, and Love, and Righteousness: It is Hope that is his Helmet. It is
Humility that is both his Clothing and Ornament; and Zeal is not so much one
single Grace, as an high degree of all. The Spirit of the Lord dwells in the
perfect man; and where the Spirit is and abides, all his Graces are with him.
This is plainly intimated, John 1. 16. Of his fullness we all have received and
grace for grace. There are several Interpretations of these Words, but the
truest is this: Of Christ's fullness all sincere believers have received (...),
Grace answerable to every grace that is in Christ himself; as the Child
receives Limb for Limb from the Parent. How truly Rich and Happy is he who has
no Grace wanting! and what a satisfaction is it to perceive plainly in himself,
that every Grace is growing!

3. The perfect man prises all the promises of the New Covenant, and esteems
himself highly favored in being Heir unto them all. Hypocritical Professors,
and Wicked Men, may put a value upon some promises; as when the Lord promises
to bless in the City, and in the Field, to bless in the fruit of the Body, and
of the Cattle, and of the Ground; to bless in the Basket, and in the Store,
Deuteronomy. 28. 3, 4, 5. when he promises length of days, and long life, and that
peace shall be added, Prove. 3. 2. Nay one that is ungodly, designing to die the
death of the Righteous, may put a value upon the promises of deliverance from
the wrath to come, and from eternal condemnation.

But the perfect man, though he sets an estimate upon any Blessing which God
has promised, and values Temporal Mercies, and Salvation from the Vengeance of
eternal Fire: Yet there are also other kind of promises he gladly embraces, as
the promise of an heart to know the Lord. Jer. 24. 7. I will give them an heart
to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and I will be
their God, for they shall return to me with their whole heart. That promise
also of an heart circumcised to love God, is much valued and rested on by the
perfect man. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the
heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul, that thou may live. So is that promise, Ezekiel. 36. 25. Then will I
sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness
and from all your idols I will cleanse you. There is good reason that the
promises of sanctification should be looked upon as exceeding great and
precious; for by these the perfect man is made a partaker of the divine nature,
and escapes the corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1. 4.

4. The perfect man has a respect unto all God's commandments; he does not
choose some, and pass by others; but readily receives every precept. Psalm. 119.
6. Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect unto all thy commandments.
He looks upon every Law with an eye to the Authority of the Lawgiver, who has a
right to rule him, and has power to save and destroy, John 4. 12. He looks upon
the Law delivered on Mount Sinai, as in force upon Mount Zion; and that by
faith the law is established, Romans 3. 31. The Apostle's manner of Expression
carries in it a strong motive to Obedience, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 2. For ye know what
commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. Commands are given by his
Authority, who is Lord of all; and Obedience is urged for his sake, who himself
has obeyed and suffered for us; and who is so ready to strengthen us to obey,
and to make what we do acceptable.

The perfect man has his eye upon God and Christ, and cannot find in his Heart
to cast any Command of theirs behind his Back; that is his perpetual wish,
that is his daily groan; Oh, that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes!
Oh, let me not wander from thy Commandments! Psalm. 119. 5, 10. Whereas the
unsound Professor is not reconciled to every Command, nor indeed to any. Though
his Obedience seem exact in many respects, yet offending in one point or other,
he is guilty of violating the whole law, James 2. 10. His partial Obedience to
the Commands, shows he is not sincere in keeping any one of them. If any were
kept upon a right ground, then every one of the Precepts would be kept upon the
same ground.

5. The perfect man keeps judgment and does righteousness at all times, Psalm.
106. 3. He sticks to the Lord's testimonies, and cleaves to the Lord himself
with an unshaken purpose of heart, even in times of great Apostasy and falling
away: He will not leave the Ship of the Church, and put to shore when a storm
of Persecution arises; it is better to be in the Vessel where Christ is, though
the Tempest be never so fierce and sore, than trust to a sinful compliance with
the men of the World. The perfect man's goodness is not like the morning Cloud,
and the early Dew that goes away; but his Righteousness is like a River.

Labitur and labetur in omne volubilis aevum. It holds on its course, and keeps
running continually. He shows himself a Disciple indeed by still following his
Master, and abiding in his word. John 8. 31. If ye continue in my word, then
are ye my Disciples indeed.

6. The perfect man wishes and longs for a sinless perfection. He really and
earnestly desires to be as good as the Law would have him to be, every whit as
Righteous as the Commandment requires; and when through Infirmity he breaks the
Law, he is troubled. When the Apostle says, This we wish were your perfection,
2 Cor. 13. 9. Certainly his Charity began at home, and he wished his own
perfection also. These longings after unspotted Purity, and to do the will of
God on earth as it is done heaven, God observes, and is well pleased with. David
did not build the Temple yet the Lord tells him he did well, in that it was in
his heart to do it, 2 Chronicles. 6. 8. What was in heart to do, God reckons as
done, and well done. Abraham did not actually Sacrifice his Son Isaac, yet it is
said again and again that he offered him up, Heb. 11. 17. The Will for the Deed
is accepted. The perfect man's Will, to be every way perfect, is very well
taken. The more there is of a willing Mind, the more there is of a perfect
Heart, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.

In the second place I am to show wherein the perfection of the perfect man
lies; it lies in his being upright. I have described him in part already; but I
shall farther give you the perfect man's Character, by setting him forth in his
uprightness. This uprightness does not only include Integrity, in opposition to
Partiality, but it includes Truth and Power, in opposition to Show and Form;
for Form wants the principal Dimension of Uprightness, which is Depth and
Substance.

I shall tell you in several particulars how the Scripture represents the
upright man. Let Conscience diligently mark the representation, that you may
discern whether you are upright or otherwise.

1. The upright man acknowledges his sin without allowed guile. He has no
secret regard to any iniquity, so as to connive at it himself, so as to refuse
to acknowledge it to God. He freely and ingenuously confesses to the Lord the
worst he knows of himself; and while he thus declares his Sin and dislikes it,
and himself for it, God covers it, and no longer imputes it to him, Psalm. 32.
1. 2. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered;
blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose spirit
there is no guile. Holy Job was censured by his Friends, as unsound in his
Religion; but by many Arguments he vindicates his uprightness, Job 31. And
among the rest by this, ver. 33. That he had not covered his transgression like
Adam, by hiding his iniquity in his bosom.

To excuse Sin is inexcusable; to defend Sin, How offensive is it unto God! The
upright man, in his Repentance, exposes his Sin with its many Aggravations,
till it appears as it is, out of measure sinful; and concludes it, beyond
measure, hateful. He is ready to speak all he knows amiss in himself; and that
which he sees not, he desires may be detected, that he may be cleansed from it:
Search me, O God, says upright David, and see if there be any evil way in me,
Psalm. 139. 23, 24. He was sensible of the wickedness of his Heart, and begs
that God would create in him a clean one; and because of the deceitfulness of
his Heart, he prays that a right spirit might be renewed within him, Psalm. 51.
10.

2. The upright man keeps himself from that sin which in a special manner may
be called his iniquity. He is so well acquainted with himself, as well to know,
and much to observe what Sin or Sins do most easily beset him; and he sets the
strongest guard against those Corruptions which he takes notice that naturally
he is most strongly addicted to. Psalm. 18. 23. I was also upright before him,
and I kept my self from my iniquity. The upright man, who is naturally inclined
to Covetousness, watches and prays against the love of worldly wealth, as that
which is the root of all evil. If his Constitution inclines him to impure
Lusts, he endeavors to prevent, or to quench these hellish sparks at first
kindling, and to possess his heart, as well as vessel, in sanctification and
honor. If he be of an hasty Temper, what pains does he take to keep Passion
under, and to be adorned with the meekness and gentleness of Christ! He is an
upright man, who because God has been so often displeased by it, can banish and
hate that which was once a darling sin.

3. The upright man is a lover of the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, Cant. 1.
4. Draw me, we will run after thee; we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we
will remember thy love more than wine; the upright love thee. The upright man
is what he is by the Grace of Christ; that Grace made his Heart a good and
honest one, which naturally was no better than the Hearts of others; and even
now he cannot stand in Law, because of his many Faults and Failings; were it
not for Jesus the Mediator, his very uprightness could never be accepted. He
has his all from Christ, he does all by his strength; and what he does is
through him acceptable to God: Well may his love to the Lord be strong, to whom
his Obligations are vastly great.

His love to Christ is not in Word and Tongue only, but in Deed and in Truth.
Love to Christ constrains him to live to him that died for him, 2 Cor. 5. 14,
15. and rather than be separated from Christ and from his love, he resolves by
the glorious Spirit's aid, to part with the most desirable outward Comforts,
and with Life it self. It was (...), an incorrupt and fervent love to the Lord
Jesus, which made the Apostle full of earnest expectation and hope, that in
nothing he should be ashamed; and very willing that Christ should be magnified
in his body, whether it were by life or death, Phil. 1. 20.

4. The upright man walks before God in truth. He sets himself before God, unto
whose pure and piercing eye the inmost secrets of his Heart are open and naked;
and he is sensible the Lord can take no pleasure in him without sincerity. 1 Chronicles. 29. 17. I know, O my God, that thou triest the heart, and have pleasure
in uprightness. The upright man sets God before himself also. Psalm. 16. 8. I
have set the Lord always before me; because he is at my right hand, I shall not
be moved. The Psalmist studied to approve himself to God, who always observed
him; and he stays himself on God's everlasting arm and strength, that he might
be upheld against all Temptation and Opposition, and be kept immovable in
Well-doing.

Upright Hezekiah walked before God in truth and with a perfect heart, and did
that which was good in his sight, Isa. 38. 3. His heart was in what he did, and
he had the Heart-searcher's Approbation, and his Conscience giving a Testimony
for him; he has confidence toward God. An upright man may be influenced by the
fear of punishment. They were the Friends of Christ, to whom he speaks thus, Be
not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they
can do; but I will forewarn you whom you shall fear; fear him which after he
has killed, has power to cast into hell. Yea, I say unto you, fear him. The
Psalmist also thus expresses himself, My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and
I am afraid of thy judgments.

But though fear has an influence, it is not the only inducement to walk with
God. He that is upright knows that love is the great thing which God commands;
and love hinders any other command from being accounted grievous. A man has a
great evidence of uprightness, when love is predominant in him, when he is
biased by love to God, to do these things that are pleasing in his eyes; and
he is overcome with a sense of God's loving kindness to him, and is truly his
servant, Psalm. 26. 3. Thy loving kindness is before my eyes, and I have walked
in thy truth.

5. The upright man holds fast his integrity. When Mammon and Satan combine to
rob him of this Jewel, yet neither fair means nor foul can make him part with
it. The reproaches of Job's Friends did enter, and go deep into him; but a
reproaching Conscience would have been a thousand times worse: Therefore though
he ceased to be Job the wealthy, Job the greatest of all the men in the Fast;
yet he remained Job the upright still, Job 27. 5, 6. Till I die I will not
remove my integrity, neither the thing it self, nor the evidence of it from me.
My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go; my heart shall not
reproach me so long as I live.

The Providence of God may sometimes be dark and cloudy, and his Hand very
heavy upon his upright ones; so that themselves and others may be amazed at
those Trials which their Faith and Patience may be put upon: Yet true Gold will
endure the hottest Furnace, and lose nothing of its Weight and Worth. However
the Lord deals with them, the upright have reason to conclude the immutability
of his love, and that his faithfulness never fails. Job 17. 8, 9. Upright men
shall be astonished at this, and the innocent shall stir up himself against the
hypocrite. The righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that has clean
hands shall be stronger and stronger.

And if it be asked how the upright man comes to be thus tenacious of his
sincerity? I answer, It Is not only because of the delight and sweetness he
finds in reflecting upon it; but also, and that chiefly, because God's right
hand upholds him, God fixes his heart, renews a stable and a constant spirit in
him; it is God who keeps holy Inclinations and religious Purposes alive, and
firm, and strong in him. This is acknowledged by David, Psalm. 41. 12. As for
me, thou upheldest me in my integrity, and set me before thy face for ever.

In the third place it follows, What the perfect and upright man is worthy of.

He is worthy to be marked.
He is worthy to be beheld.
First, He is worthy to be marked. Mark the perfect man, says the Text: And
marked he should be; and that both

For conviction, and also
For imitation.
1. The perfect and upright man is to be marked for conviction. As the Saints
shall judge the World at last, so they are a conviction to the World at
present. The wicked think it strange that believers run not out with them to
the same excess of riot; and their Tongues speak evil of them, 1 Pet. 4. 4. But
their Consciences at the same time may fly in their own Faces, and tell them
plainly that those whom they speak ill of, are much wiser and better than
themselves. An exemplary Conversation is a very convincing thing, it stops the
mouths of ignorant and evil Speakers. 1 Pet. 2. 15. For so is the will of God,
that with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. It
fills the faces of such with shame; they being convinced that accusations are
false, when consciences and conversations are good, 1 Pet. 3. 16. Having a good
conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you as of evil doers, they may be
ashamed who falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.

If the World did but mark the perfect man, it might prevent that woe from
falling upon them which is denounced against them, because of offenses which
they are apt to take at Religion, as if it self were but an imaginary thing,
and all that profess it were Dissemblers. And if loose and carnal Professors
would but mark them whose exact and circumspect walking does show them to be
sincere, and Saints indeed; it might startle their Consciences and make them
very unquiet, because they are so very unlike those, who in their manner of
living, do show forth the power of godliness; their Consciences might call them
vain men, their faith a dead faith, their profession an empty and vain show;
Jam. 2. 20. But will thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?

2. The perfect man is to be marked for imitation. That excellent Company of
Faithful ones, mentioned Heb. 11. are called (...), a cloud of Witnesses, Heb.
12. 1. here seems to be an allusion to the cloud in the Wilderness which
directed the Children of Israel to the land of Canaan. Perfect men are Clouds,
their dark side, their faults and failings, if we observe any in them, it must
be our care to eschew them. But their bright side may be of great use for our
direction and encouragement. When we observe how holy, heavenly, full of love
to God and goodness, and diligent in the Lord's work others have been; we
should show the same grace and diligence, to the full assurance of hope, to the
end. We should by no means be slothful, but followers of them, who through
faith and patience inherit the promises. Heb 6. 11. 12.

Our Lord himself indeed is incomparably the best Pattern; Sin never found any
place in him. 1 Pet. 2. 22. Who did no sin, neither was guile sound in his
mouth. Never in the least faulty, either in word or deed: Yet perfect and
upright men are fair Copies for others to write after. Phil. 3. 17, 20.
Brethren, be ye followers together of me, and mark them which walk so as ye
have us for an example; for our conversation is in heaven. And Chap 4. 9. He
says not only those things which ye have heard, but what ye have seen in me,
do, and the God of peace shall be with you. All would be better, if the best
were but more imitated.

Secondly, As the perfect and upright man is to be marked; so he is worthy to
be beheld; the Text says, Behold the upright. The Psalmist beheld the
transgressors, and was grieved: Upright men may be beheld with joy and
pleasure; though grief may well be raised, when by death they are snatched
away. Now that the Upright man may be beheld to good purpose.

1. Behold him in his usefulness: Though the perverse and prejudiced World does
think the Upright man not fit to live in it; yet indeed the world is not worthy
of him; and is very much beholding to him. When the world which lives in
wickedness, and grows more and more wicked, is hastening its own Judgment and
Condemnation, for the sake of the Upright ones that are therein, it is spared.
Though there was such an abominable Crew of Wicked men in Sodom, which were
sinners before the Lord exceedingly; yet Sodom had stood undestroyed by Fire
and Brimstone, if ten righteous persons had been found therein, Genesis 18. 32.
when Abraham said, Oh let not my Lord be angry, and I will speak but this once;
peradventure ten righteous ones shall be found there; and he said, I will not
destroy it for ten sake.

Nay, One Moses stood in the Breach, when the Sins of Israel had opened a wide
Gap for the Wrath of God to break in upon them, Psalm 106. 23. Therefore he
said, he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the
breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them. However Infidels
and ungodl ones may prate maliciously, the Puritans of a Nation are very much
the security of it. Job 22. 30. He shall deliver the Island of the innocent; or
it may be translated, The Innocent shall deliver the Island; and it is
delivered by the pureness of thy hands.

2. Behold the Grace of God in the upright Man, which makes him thus useful.
Both the esse and the operati of the new Creature is from Divine Grace; by
Grace the upright man is what he is, and by the same Grace he does what he
does. Who ever labored so abundantly as the Apostle Paul? Whose Labors were
more succeeded to the Glory of God, to the Church's, and the World's benefit,
than his were? Yet he ascribes nothing to himself, but gives unto Grace all the
Glory. 1 Cor. 15. 10. I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but
the grace of God which was with me. When you behold the upright man, you must
see God in him, and with him of a truth. Men are not to glory, or to be gloried
in; but he that glories, let him glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 31.

3. Behold the upright man, so as to desire and hope that the same Grace which
made him upright, may make you so. Upright ones were not such by their first
Birth, but by their second. The Apostle readily makes this acknowledgment, Ephesians.
2. 3. Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past in the lusts of
our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by
nature the children of wrath, even as others. Therefore concerning sincere
Saints, it must be said, That they are born not of blood, nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, John 1. 13. And that God who of
his own will begat them with the word of truth, can easily also regenerate you
by the the same means, and by his own powerful Grace, make more vessels of
honor (all upright ones are such) out of the Mass of corrupted Nature.

In the fourth place I am to show, What of this perfect and upright Man our eye
in a special manner should be upon, and that is his end. To look to the end of
Persons and Things, and likewise those things that are endless, is a great
piece of Wisdom. By the upright man's End we are to understand his Dissolution
and Death, whereby he ceases to be any longer in this World. Not that Death
does make an end of him; the Soul is redeemed from the power of the grave, for
God does receives it, Psalm 49. 15. and the Body shall not always be the Graves
prisoner; but the Union between these two constituent parts by Death is
dissolved. Now there are several things of the perfect and upright man which
Death does put an end unto.

1. Death puts an end to the upright man's Labor. Labor in the Lord, and for
the Lord, is the upright man's business in this World. He has no time to waste,
neither is he allowed to be idle. Working hard and living, must run parallel:
Nay, with allusion to what Caesar once said, we may affirm, Necesse est
laborare, non est necesse vivere. Laboring is more necessary than living.
While the upright man lives, he must be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding
in the doing of good. But when Death comes, it signifies to him that his Work
is at an end. Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from
henceforth, yea, says the spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and
their works do follow them.

2. Death puts an end to the upright man's Sorrows; here in this World, he is
in his Minority, and is under the Discipline of the Rod; after Death he will
not need it. His gracious Father in great faithfulness, consults the upright
man's necessity; and if need be, he is in heaviness through manifold
temptations, 1 Pet. 1. 6. and yet still there is a mixture of mercy with the
greatest severity; the Son of God is with the sincere Saint in every Furnace,
and his Presence makes the Furnace both tolerable and purifying: Under the
heaviest Burdens; everlasting Arms shall sustain him, and well may he be
comforted with the thoughts of everlasting Love. But the end of his days puts a
full period to his Troubles and Sorrows; his Heart shall ache, his Tongue
complain, his Eyes shall weep no more; Rev. 7. 17. The Lamb which is in the
midst of the Throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains
of waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

3. Death puts an end to the upright man's Conflicts. His Life is a warfare, he
fights every step of his way to Heaven; his Enemies are much stronger than he;
called Principalities and Powers whom he wrrstles with; but he is furnished
with the whole Armor of God, and his strength lies in Christ the Captain of
his Salvation* (...): Christ has encountered these Enemies in his own Person,
tried their force, and triumphed over them; and as he has his Followers at
command, so he can command Salvation for them. Satan is a troublesome and
unwearied Adversary; and when the upright man is just going; this Enemy may
give him a blow at parting. He usually endeavors to make a Saint's Deathbed
uneasy and uncomfortable; and sometimes he strives to lift up the perfect man
with Spiritual Pride; As the famous Knox of Scotland was tempted to an high
Opinion of himself when he was near expiring, because he had been so faithful
in his ministry; but he ascribed all that he was and did unto the Grace of God;
and Satan was quite soiled. But when Death comes, it removes the upright man
out of Satan's reach. He is made more than a conqueror through Christ who has
loved him; having overcome, he sits down in that throne with his blessed Lord
himself, where he shall never be molested more with any of the Enemies of his
Salvation.

4. Death puts end to the upright man's natural Life. Tho his Life on Earth is
far from being a noxious and hurtful Vapor; yet it is a vapor which appears
for a little time, and then vanishes away, Jam. 4. 14. The Bodies of the Just
must be brought down into the Grave, as well as the Bodies of others; that
mankind, and best of men may have a sensible Document how hateful Sin is to
God; upon all that have sinned death passes, Romans 5. 12. Tho the Bodies of the
Saints are Members of Christ, and Instruments of Righteousness to Holiness, and
the Temples of the Holy Ghost himself, yet these Temples must be demolished and
cast to the ground, and for a while turned under it; and after they have been
so long imprisoned in the Grave, how glorious will be the strength and love of
Christ their Lord and Head, in rescuing his Members all of them from under
Death's Dominion, and in totally abolishing Death it self! and how will the
power of the Spirit be manifested in rearing up his Temples out of the Dust,
and in making them so transcendently glorious, and likewise so firm and
durable, that they shall stand and abide unto eternity! Romans 8. 11. If the
spirit of him that raised up Christ from the dead dwell in you; he that raised
up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his spirit
that dwells in you.

5. Death puts an end to all that Corruption which remains in the upright Man.
Sin was the Parent of Death, and at Death sin it self is totally destroyed. The
mortal and corruptible Body of the Saint shall at length put on Incorruption
and Immortality; but the body of Sin is annihilated, and shall be no more; he
shall never complain of any evil present with him, nor be troubled with any the
least lustings of the flesh against the Spirit. How contrary and offensive to
the new Nature, were the remainders of the old Man which is corrupt according
to deceitful lusts! But at Death the upright man when he puts off his earthly
Tabernacle, does quite put off the old Man; not the least Member of that Body
can remain unmortified; and in what glorious perfection does he put on the Lord
Jesus Christ! He is perfecting Holiness while he lives, 2 Cor. 7. 1. which
intimates that at Death his Work and Labor to cleanse himself will be at an
end, and Holiness will be perfected. And how beautiful and glorious will his
separate Soul be in its perfected and unspotted Purity!

In the fifth place, The end of the perfect and upright man is remarkable as
well as himself, for his end is Peace. The Scripture is true concerning him,
Eccl. 7. 1. The day of his death is better than the day of his birth. He was
born into a wicked and a wretched World, but Death sends him to an everlasting
Habitation of Bliss, and Life, and Glory. His dying day may well be the
joyfullest day that ever he lived, because the last moment of his time is his
entrance into a blessed Eternity. He is indeed a Son of Peace, and Death should
not disturb it.

1. The perfect and upright man dies in peace with God. He is reconciled to God
by the death of his Son: How sure is Salvation upon such a Reconciliation! The
Enmity between God and him, being slain by the Cross of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 16. the
Value and Virtue of Christ's Crucifixion must needs make Peace that is lasting.
The middle Wall of Partition that is thrown down, shall never be reared up
again. The upright man's Sins are all removed from him, as far as the East is
from the West, Psalm 103. 12. and he may as well imagine the two Poles that are
so far distant should meet together, as fear that any of his Sins which are not
imputed to him, should again be laid unto his charge. Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies: who is he
that condemns? it is Christ that died. Neither at Death nor Judgment shall
any of their Sins be found against them that are upright. A Covenant of Peace
is made with them more firm than the strongest Hills and Mountains. Isaiah 54.
10. The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall
not depart from thee, nor the covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord
that has mercy upon thee.

2 The perfect and upright man dies in peace with others. If all things are to
be done with charity, 1 Cor. 16. 14 then dying must be in Charity likewise. How
can he dye in the love of God, whose heart is full of malice and hatred to his
Brother? I remember what that blessed Martyr, Bradford, said at his Death, I
ask all the World forgiveness, and I forgive all the World; there was a great
deal of Judgment and Grace in this Expression. The World had dealt very hardly
with him, and was so furious as to burn him with Fire, yet he forgave the
Injury. Thus the Protomartyr Stephen of old, from his heart forgave his
Persecutors; and his last Prayer was for them, that God would not lay their Sin
and blood-guiltiness to their charge, Acts 7. 60. When the heart is emptied of
Wrath and Bitterness, and desire of Revenge, whatever Injuries have been
received; when peace has been pursued, and there has been an universal Love to
all Saints; and in Obedience to Christ's Command it has been extended even to
despightful Enemies; here is a comfortable evidence of Peace with God, and of
an interest in his Love. Forgive, says Christ, and you your selves shall be
forgiven.

3. The perfect and upright Man when he comes to dye, has reason and good
ground to have peace within himself. I dare not affirm, That every good Man
concludes his Days with this Peace. The Letters of Mr. Paul Bains discover a
great measure of Grace and Holiness, and an excellent Spirit in him; yet he
professes himself a great Stranger to the Sweetness of Religion, and the Joys
of the Holy Ghost; that disconsolate humor of Melancholy possibly might be
one reason of it. Nay, when he came to dye, his Deathbed was uncomfortable,
and sadness remained upon his Spirit till he entered into the Joy of his Lord.

Yet I am sure there is sufficient ground for peace within the perfect Man. For
Christ died that Death might be unstung; and that Believers might not be
terrified at it, but triumph over it. Through Death he destroyed the Devil, as
he had the Power of Death, that is, to make Death terrible, and consequently
deliver them, who through the fear of death were all their lifetime subject to
bondage, Heb. 2. 14, 15. What a most desirable way of dying is this, when
Conscience has great Peace, being purged and healed by the Blood of Christ!
When the God of Love and Peace, speaks Peace to the departing Soul by his
comforting Spirit! And a Saint can say with righteous Simeon of old, Luke 1.
29, 30. Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for my eyes have
seen thy salvation!

4. When the perfect and upright man dies, what a glorious and perfect Peace
does he enter into in the other World. In those blessed Regions unto which he
goes, there is Light without Darkness, there is Love without the least Discord,
there is Joy without any Sorrow, and secure Possession without any Disturbance,
or fear of Deprivation. The gulf that is fixed, Luke 16. 26. as it for ever
banishes Hope out of Hell, so it leaves not the least room for Fear in Heaven.
It is much to be lamented, that Saints at this day discover no more of love,
and of a peaceable Temper, but when they are all come to the same Heaven, God
who is Light and Love will be all in all, 1 Cor. 15. 28. and they all will be
perfectly One in Him!

I come now to the Application.

And here I shall speak,

First, Concerning the perfect and upright Man, who is lately taken from us.

Secondly, A few words to you that survive him.

First, Concerning the Person deceased. And truly I speak not only my
Affection, but my Conscience, when I say, I do believe there was not a Man upon
Earth that better deserved to be called a perfect Man, than our Mr. Edward
Lawrence. A Man more free from all the tricks of fleshly Wisdom, more free from
petty Revenges, and petty Designs against any Party; I confess I knew not any.
Upright he was toward God, downright in his Dealings with Men. An even and
well-spun Thread of Truth, and Honesty, and Faithfulness ran through the whole
Course of his Conversation in the World.

Several things more particularly worthy of our notice, I shall mention
concerning him.

1. He had attained to a great strength and perfection of Faith. As he saw the
invisible God, and his Faith was the substance of things hoped for, and he
mainly minded the invisible World; so he could trust in God, for the things of
this World, when Sense being judge, there was no probability of supply. He
(...) had a numerous Family when he left his Living on the Black
Bartholomew-day; and being asked how he hoped to be provided for? He answered,
That the Sixth of Matthew should maintain him By Faith he rested on that
promise, that all other things shall be added to them who first seek the
Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness. He said, His Heavenly Father knew he
needed these things; and he made no question but what he needed, would be given
him. There is, I am persuaded, an extraordinary Relish in the Meat and Drink,
when Faith spreads the Table, and fills the Cup every day, and Sense cannot
perceive a Day beforehand how this should be done.

2. How perfect a Work had Patience in him! He was conformed to his Head
Christ, in being a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief. He was exercised
with Affliction in his own Person, and with Domestic Troubles which went very
near him; yet he justified God in all; he believed that Good would come out of
the Evils he felt; no Burden tired his Patience, for he knew how happy they
are that endure. In all Chastizements he perceived the Faithfulness and Love of
his Chastizer, and this made all strokes tolerable. His sick Fits, his Pains,
his wearisome and wakeful Nights, (...), never made him, that ever I could
hear, or hear of, to break forth into Murmurings or Complaints unbecoming him;
whatever he wanted, he still possessed his Soul in Patience.

3. He was a Man of a most Public Spirit, and of a Catholic Charity. He was
troubled to see the Members of the Body of Christ divided; so little consulting
the honor of their Head, or their own Interest. He was stiffly for no Party,
very moderate toward all. True Goodness he liked and loved wherever he saw
it, and tho he had suffered very much from some bot Men of the Church of
England, yet he was not bitter in his Speeches against them; wherever he
perceived usefulness, an unblameable Conversation, and a design for God carried
on, he did readily acknowledge it, and rejoiced in it.

He was not in the Quarrels of this present Age; he loved and followed after
Peace as well as Holiness, and shared in the Blessedness which is promised to
the Peacemakers. He was troubled to see roots of Bitterness bringing forth
such bitter Fruits almost every where, and in every Party. And with such
meekness of Wisdom, with such calmness and sedateness of Spirit, he carried it
toward Men of all Persuasions; and his Words and Ways were so inoffensive,
that I never heard any one speak ill of Mr. Edward Lawrence, but all that knew
him were ready to acknowledge that he was a Man of eminent Godliness, of a most
peaceable Temper, and of a very great Integrity.

And as he loved all Saints as such, by what Name soever distinguished, so he
vexed his righteous Soul from day to day, because of the Ungodliness,
Infidelity, and Debaucheries of this wicked Age. In his last Sermon which was
upon that Text, Isaiah 29. 6. When thy judgments are in the earth, the
inhabitants of the world-will learn righteousness, with very great Zeal and
warmth, he pressed upon his Hearers the learning, the loving, the practice of
Righteousness for the Nations sake, and for their own Souls sake, that it might
be well with the one, and with the other.

4. He was a man of great Ministerial Accomplishments. His worth was like the
deep Rivers which run more silently, whereas the shallow Brooks do make the
greater Noise. He was very able in Controversial Divinity; his Judgment was
sound, his Arguments strong, his Head and Notions very clear; and having a
clear Apprehension of Truths himself, he could make them very plain to others
understandings; and in his arguings he was very free from Passion; and when he
saw he was likely only to stir up the Passion of others, instead of rectifying
their Judgments, he would be silent.

In his Preaching he was very solid and substantial; he had a great firmness in
Memory which continued to the last. He prayed and preached with such a Spirit,
as did evidence much of the presence of God with him. How did he speak to God?
as one that saw him just before him! And when he spoke to man, he spoke as the
Oracle of God with greatest seriousness, and as about things of the highest and
everlasting Concernment. How firmly was he himself persuaded of those Truths he
propounded to others? He taught the Commands of Christ, and himself obeyed
them, and was great useful in his Kingdom.

In the second place I shall speak a few Words to you that survive him.

And that both to his Relations.

And to Others.

To his Relations I shall say these three things,

1. Take notice of his great Affection to you, and how this Affection was
spiritualized; he loved you, but especially your Souls, the most precious part
of you; he was full of care that it might be well with you for ever, and was
faithful in reproving, as the World can witness, when he saw occasion; he used
various Ways and Methods that his great end, your Happiness, might be attained.

2. Be sure to follow his very good Example. What kind of Children should the
Children of such a Father be! there would be a kind of monstrousness in being
very grossly unlike to him! As to his youngest Son, who is a Minister of the
Gospel, I heartily wish, tho it be an hard thing which I wish, that a double
portion of his Fathers Spirit may be vouchsafed to him!

3. Be encouraged by this, That your deceased Father has treasured up a stock
of Prayers for you; and you may expect a gracious return. If you give your
selves to Prayers, God may answer his Supplications after his death in
bestowing Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal Benefits upon you.

To others that hear me this day; I shall only give two words of Counsel.

Think much of your later end.

Let it be your great care that your end may be peace.

1. Be all of you wise to consider your later end. Death did set out against
you as soon as you were born, and it makes still nearer and nearer approaches
to you every day, and hour, and moment of your lives. Every step you take is a
step toward the Grave. Every moment of your time which passes away brings you
nearer to Eternity. God wishes you wise to consider your later end; he will be
much pleased to see you very earnest with him to make you so; he is ready to
teach you so to number your days, that you may apply your hearts unto wisdom,
Psalm. 90. 12. The serious thoughts of death will quicken you in your Duties,
and break the force of Temptations: Think of the time when you must leave the
World, that eagerness after the World may be abated. To how good purpose will
you live, if with the Apostle you dye daily! 1 Cor. 15. 31.

2. Let it be your care that your end may be peace. Believe in Jesus the great
Peacemaker between God and Man, that you may joy in him, because by him you
have received the atonement, Romans 5. 11. Let your Faith be accompanied with
Obedience and Love to the Laws of God. Psalm. 119. 165. Great peace have they
that love thy law, and nothing shall offend them. Value the inestimable Jewel
of a good Conscience, and take heed of every thing that may defile and wound
it. When the Apostle had the sentence of death in himself; the testimony of his
Conscience, that by the grace of God he had had his Conversation in the World
in simplicity and godly sincerity, did fill him with Peace and Joy, 2 Cor. 1.
9, 12. Never be weary of well-doing, that your Lord when he comes may find you
so doing. It Is labor best bestowed when you are diligent, that you may be
found of him in peace without spot and blameless.

Several Passages concerning Mr. Lawrence, out of Two Letters, which were sent
by Two Ministers, Eminent for Learning and Godliness, and both of them
intimately acquainted with Him.
The First LETTER concerning Mr. Edward Lawrence.
MR. Lawrence was admitted into Magdalene College in Cambridge, in the Year
1645, and was Studious, a Promoter of serious Godliness among the young
Scholars; and was so noted also for his Parts and Learning, that we would have
made him a Fellow. But when he had taken his Degree of Batchellor of Arts,
(some Years after, he took the Degree of Master of Arts) he, being some ways
engaged, went into the Country, and began to preach (having been of a good Age
when admitted, about 18 as I remember), and with much Acceptance. He took up
with Baschurch, a Vicaridge of about 60 l. a Year; where (though if he had
sought great things he might have been removed to a greater Place, considering
the Love and Esteem he had) he continued till Bartholomew 1662, and then left
his Station and Subsistence, though he had a Wife and seven or eight Children,
and no Estate; and often used to say, He lived upon the sixth of Matthew. About
the Year 79, the Quakers rising thereabout, he Disputed with one of their Chief
Ringleaders, and shamefully baffled him in the Judgment of the Multitudes of
the Hearers, and as appears by the Relation of it put out by the Quaker. He was
dangerously ill, and upon his recovery put out his useful Book, Of Christ's
Power over bodily Diseases; which, though very good, I then told him was below
most of his Sermons he usually preached, of which I had heard many.

How he was driven from Whitchurch, Mr. H. who was then in those parts will, I
suppose, punctually inform you; and for these last four or five and twenty
Years, his Brethren in the City can give a good account of Him.

The Second LETTER.
AFter Mr. Lawrence his remove by the Bartholomew Act from Baschurch, where he
had been many Years a Faithful Minister of the Gospel of Christ, he sojourned*
while with his Wife and Children, at a Neighboring Gentleman's House within
the Parish, who had a great Respect for him, and was very Kind to him; and he
accounted it a great Mercy that though the Law had silenced him, that he must
not preach to his beloved Flock, yet he had his Abode amongst them, and might
be many ways useful to them. But when the Five Mile Act, so called, was to be
put in Execution in March 66. he went to Tilstock, a Village in Whitchurch
Parish, in the same County, to sojourn there, and there the Power of the Lord
was with him greatly and made him Instrumental of much Good, both to the Town
and in the Neighborhood; the remembrance whereof is still sweet to many who
are yet living. As he had opportunity he preached to them, both in Season and
out of Season; and which was more, his Prudent, Pious Conversation was a
continual Sermon. He had many Children and all with him, and no visible Income
wherewithal to buy them Bread, yet the Lord was graciously pleased to make
Provision both for him and them, so that they did not want: The sixth of
Matthew, as he was used to say, did maintain him. During his Abode there he
buried a dearly beloved Daughter, named Sarah, which was a great Grief to him,
for she was grown up, and began to be useful; but it Comforted him that she
finished Well; and God gave him two Sons instead of her, which repaired the
loss. Another remove he had to Whitchurch Town, and while he was there in May
1670, when the severe Act against Conventicles commenced in the same Month;
upon a Sabbath Day in the Afternoon he preached in a private House only to four
and the Family, where they were disturbed by the Minister himself, Dr. M. F. in
his own Person, with others attending him; and the Week following Convicted and
Fined; the Minister 10 l. because Poor; the Master of the House 20 l. and two
other of the Town 5 l. a piece; and one Woman 5 s. Upon each of which Distress
was made shortly after with the greatest Rigor. They judging themselves
wronged, made their Appeal according to Law, and in March following had a Trial
at Salop, before Judge Twisden. The Pretense against them was, That a Daughter
of the Family (who was sixteen Years of Age but a few Days before) coming home
from Chester from an Uncle the had there, was one present, and being none of
the Family of her Father made a fifth. The Case was argued by Council, and the
Prosecutors made no other account but that the Jury would give their Verdict
for the Justices, who were the Defendants, and lay treble Damages upon the
Plantiffs, which were intended to be made very great to their utter undoing.
But it pleased God, in whose Hands are the Hearts of all Men, without any
Motion or Procurement of theirs to incline one of the Jurors to differ in the
Verdict from the rest, saying, He would rather dye than say the Girl was none
of her Father's Family. This occasioned their stay together all Night; and in
the Morning being accused of some words spoken by him in their heat of Arguing,
to one of his Fellow-Jurors, he was severely Rebuked and Fined 10 l. and the
Cause referred to two Lawyers, who never made any Decision of it, so that each
side sat down with his own Loss; and not long after such of their Goods, as
were taken from them they had again, but much demnified. 'Twas observed, That
one of the Prosecuting Justices dying during the Prosecution, his
Houshold-Goods were Proclaimed in the Town to be Sold, and were Sold before
Chapmen could be found that would buy the Distrained Goods. The Informer that
told he saw the Persons going into the House, did afterward beg his Bread from
Door to Door. This Event occasioned the remove of this Excellent Person out of
his own Native Country, where he dwelt among his own People, to seek a
Habitation elsewhere among Strangers; and to London he went, where God gave him
Favor in the sight of many who sat down under his Ministry, and with whom he
ended his Days.

FINIS.
Lately Printed,
THe Cure of Distractions in attending upon God. In several Sermons from 1 Cor.
7. 35. That we may attend upon the Lord without distraction.

The Love of the World cured. In several Sermons preached upon 1 John 2. 15.
Love not the world, etc.

Both by Nathanael Vincent.


