A RELATION OF THE COASTS OF AFRICA CALLED GUINEE; WITH A Description of the
Countries, Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants; of the productions of the
Earth, and the Merchandise and Commodities it affords; with some Historical
Observations upon the Coasts.

Being Collected in a VOYAGE By the Sieur Villault, Escuyer, Sieur de
Bellefond, in the years 1666, and 1667.

Written in French, and faithfully Englished.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Mitre in Fleet Street near
Temple-Barr, 1670.

THE TABLE OF CHAPTERS.
A Relation of their Voyage from Amsterdam. page 1 The Description of Cap-Verd.
p. 16 The Coast of Malegeta, with the Kingdom of Sierra-Leone. p. 29 The
Description of Sierra-Leone, or the Mountain of Lions. p. 37 Cap de Monte, and
its Description. p. 54 Cap Miserado. p. 66 Rio de Junco. p. 73 Petit Dieppe. p.
76 Rio-Sextos. p. 77 The Coast of Graives called Malaguette. p. 87 The Coast of
Elephants Teeth. p. 98 Cost d' Or, or the Gold Coast, with a Relation of our
Occurrences there. p. 114 The Description of the Golden Coast. p. 131 Of the
Stature and Proportion of the People of this Country, of their Wit,
Inclination, Industry, and Habits. p. 133 Of their Women, their Genius, Humor,
and Habits. p. 140 Of their Marriages, and the Education of their Children. p.
145 Of their Houses, Heusholdstuff, Drink, Meat, Palm wine, and how it is
made. p. 154 Of their Markets, their manner of Buying and Selling, with a
Description of their Measures and Weights. p. 162 Their Religion. Of their
Sundays, Feasts, Devotions, Gods or Fetiches, of their Sacrifices, Priests,
and Habits. p. 166 Of their Superstition, their Swearing upon their Fetiches,
their manner of pacifying them, when they think they are angry, and the Burial
of the Dead. p. 182 Of their Old Men, their Slaves, their Lame, their Servants,
the Diseases they are usually subject to, with their Cures, and the way to
prevent them. p. 195 Of their Dances, and Feasts, both private and solemn. p.
207 Of their Exercises, their workmen, their Trades, their Merchandises, their
Fishing, and the Duty they pay to the King. p. 214 Of the Kings of those
Countries, their Courts, Authority, and manner of living with their Courtiers,
of their Wives and Children, of the Succession of their Kingdoms, their
Revenues, Feasts, Deaths, Burials, and Elections of another King. p. 223 Of
their Nobles, the manner of their making War, the grounds upon which they do
usually make it, their Arms, of their Cessations and Peace. p. 238 Of their
Civil and their Criminal Justice, and of the successions of particular men. p.
249 Of their Beasts, their Birds, and their Fish. p. 255 Their Fruits, Herbs,
Bread, Millet* Mays, their manner of sowing and making of Salt. p. 260 Of their
Gold, where it is found, and how, with the variety of works they make of it. p.
264 Of the Return of our Vessel for Europe. p. 272 The Description of the Isle
of Saint Thomas which lies under the Line. p. 274
A VOYAGE TO The Coasts of Africa called GUINEE.
With a Description of the several Countries, Fashions, and Manners of the
People, the Fruit and Commodities of those parts, with the Trade and Commerce
they afford.
THe Coasts of Africa, commonly called Guinee, comprehening a Tract of ground
of seven hundred Leagues, from Cap-verd in the fourteenth degree of Northern
latitude, and nintieth degree of longitude East: to Cape Gonsalvo in the first
degree of Southern latitude and 29 and a half of Eastern longitude, are at
present so little frequented by the French (and all from an opinion they have
taken up of the Malignity of the air) that it cannot (without great sense and
reluctance) be considered how long, and how unhappily they have been deserted
by them, and left as a prey to all other Nations, without reserving so much as
the least share in the most advantageous Commerce they afford.

I must confess (having the heart and passions of a Frenchman) I could not
observe without great regret, the cunning, and artifice, wherewith the English,
the Hollander, and the Dane had possessed us of the pernitiousness of the air,
and the unwholsomness of the place, and that with so much subtilty, they had
almost persuaded us out of the whole country, and to have given up those few
places which are still in our power: a practice of that Moment, and importance
to them all, that from their traffic upon these coasts alone (would they be
ingenious and confess) they must acknowledge they derive their most considerable
profit and advantage.

And indeed what Frenchman is their in the world so stupid and impenitrable,
that can behold several Bays along these coasts, (by the inhabitants called
Bays de France) and several Towns (as Petit Diep and others) declaring at this
day the Genealogy of their founders, so entirely abandoned by his countrymen,
that there is nothing remaining there now but their name, and an indeliable
desire in the natives, that they would conquer them again; what Frenchman I say
can consider this without remorse, or remember it without being affected.

True it is, in the time of the civil wars wherewith it pleased God to afflict
the Kingdom of France in the reign of Henry le grand, our expulsion in those
parts was completed, for having no leisure to reinforce such garrisons as we
had there from the time of Lewis the Eleventh, we were forced out of them all
and constrained to yield possession to the Portugais, who at that time like an
inundation overwhelmed all we had formerly gained upon the Golden Coast, and
for better security of their conquests, built a Castle called St. George de la
Mine, of which I shall give a more ample description hereafter.

Yet, as an argument that our interest was considerable there once, and that
our magnificence was suitable to our interest: it is worthy observation, that
at this very day the Dutch make use of a fair Church built formerly by the
French, still adorned with our Monuments and Arms, and the principal Battery
they have toward the sea, is still by the Natives themselves called la
battery de France.

Upon these Coasts we had once the possession of Akara, Carmentin, Cape-corse
and Takorai, at which last the Sweeds raised a new Fort since that, and upon
the ruins of ours, but their late wars in Germany, (like our wars in France)
having caused it to be neglected, and been an occasion of interrupting its
supplies, it is demollish'd as well as ours, and has nothing left now but
rubbish, to show that ever it was there.

Besides this, we have suffered the Hollander to incroach upon us in our days,
and to possess themselves of our Plantation at Commendo, a Town some two
leagues distance from the Chasteau de la Mine, but they were glad to attend the
death of two Frenchmen who had lived there along time, built a fair house (of
which there is nothing now standing but the walls) and comported themselves
with that candor and integrity to the Natives, that they gained the affections
of them all, and have left such a perfume and reputation of the French behind
them, the Moors do glory in being called by that name, and will still beat
their drums after the mode of France.

Three Months in the year, the air of this Country is dangerous, and no more,
yet so little then, that with the least providence and moderation one may
preserve himself as well as in France, and perhaps better, because we have
several diseases which are familiar in Europe, that are utterly unknown in this
Country.

But the truth is, this is but pretense, and the collusion of the Dutch to put
that into our heads, that seeing our commerce declining in those parts, they
might not only eradicate all our thoughts of recovering it again, but all our
regret and concernment for the loss of it, and they themselves go quietly away
with the commerce of so many Kingdoms, which is so prodigiously rich, I shall
only touch upon it in transitu, and not tell what I saw my self least it should
seem to be incredible.

Only this I shall be bold to offer to the consideration of the world, whether
it is probable the Hollanders (who are a people so ardently devoted to their
interest and advantage, that there is scarce any body but knows it) would upon
occasion of surprising the Fort at Cormentin upon the Golden Coast which was
formerly theirs, have ventured upon the last war with England, had not their
profits upon those coasts been more then ordinarily considerable.

And indeed so sweet was their trade there, and of that consequence and
importance they would never have endured either English or Dane amongst them,
had not the Natives compelled them.

The instance I shall give in the ill usage we received from the Here
Walkenbourg their General at the Mine, at a time too when we were in so strict
alliance with them, that we had espoused their quarrel, and made their Enemies
our own, will I doubt not be sufficient to demonstrate, that there is nothing
so Barbarous, or inhospitable, they will not act for their profit, and to
exclude the world from the notion of a Trade that would alone maintain the
Grandeur of their State, were they absolute Masters of these coasts without any
competitors.

That the Genius and Humor of the Mores is more susceptible of the French,
then any other Nation, is manifest by the designs all Foreigners have laid to
keep us from thence: they know very well should our commerce be readmitted,
theirs would be lost irrecoverably, and we should ingross the vast quantities
of Ivory and Gold-sand, which comes yearly from thence: besides the benefit of
the Nigroes which are transported for Slaves into America; and contribute
exceedingly to the profit of those plantations.

Nor ought any difficulty in the Voyage, be able to discourage us, seeing when
once arrived at the Canaries, the wind serves always very well, no tempests, no
storms, and ankorage is every where so good, that an ankor of nine or ten
inches, will hold a Vessel of 400 Tun.

Monsieur Daliez Seigneur Martel being employed into these parts by the
West-Indy Company at Paris, and setting out from Amsterdam in a new Ship of
four hundred Tun, (called the Europe) took me along with him in the quality of
his controuler for that Voyage.

On St. Mathews Eve, in the year one thousand six hundred sixty six, I departed
from Paris in order to my employment, and arrived at Brussels the Saturday
after, the next night passing to Antwerp, and from thence to Roterdam, I came
safely to Amsterdam on the 13th of September where having spent some weeks with
the rest of our Officers in fraiting our Ship, I departed with the Here
Vantesck, the Here Willembourg (our Captain,) the Here Vanderberg, and
Mounsieur Mathews (our Secretary) for the Texel.

The next morning we went aboard, and on the 13 of November with a fair wind we
set sail, steering our course south south west; we gave the Fort of the Texel
three guns, and then put out the colors of Ostend to prevent being stopped,
there having been an express prohibition for any Hollander to serve any
forreigner in those parts upon pain of death, let the pretense be what it would.

Having dismissed our Pilot which conducted us to sea; by degrees, and the
opportunity of a mist we past thorough the Channel, and (escaping the English
of whom we had great apprehension) we came up at length to certain Islands
about some 20 leagues distance from the River of Lisbon.

In this place it seems it is a custom amongst the Hollanders (and punctually
observed) to baptize such of their seamen and passengers as have never past the
Tropique or Line before, and if the Vessel have never made that Voyage before
(as ours had never done) by the same custom the Captain is to obliged to give
the Seamen some certain bottles of Brandy to be merry, and drink his health
with all, otherwise he forfeits.

The weather being fair, and we very much beholding to the benignity of the
sun, all things were prepared, the Bell rung, and the Seamen immediately upon
the Deck, and having slackned our Sails, they began the ceremony of Baptism as
follows.

Those of the Seamen who had made this Voyage before, s^ised upon the other,
and tying their hands behind them, they took them one by one, and having
fastened a Rope under their armpits, they pulled them up to the yard of the main
mast, from thence soucing them into the water, and then drawing them out again
three or four times, sometimes they ducked them for the King of France, and
sometimes for the States General, and at last for the Officers of the Ship, and
their wives if they had any, after which they gave them a glass of Sack, or a
dish of Brandy, and all were good friends.

The boys in the Ship were stripped to their shirts, and put under a basket, and
had seven or eight buckets of water poured over their heads.

Nor were the Officers exempt, for after their presents of drink to the Seamen,
they were contented to stand still till they threw some little water upon their
heads out of a glass or pot, which concluded the ceremony.

This Christning being over, we set sail again, and by the error of our Pilots,
we past by the Maderas, where we intended to have put in.

At length we discovered a high foreland, and advanced within 4 leagues of it
to discover what it was, after five hours coasting we found by our sounding
(the water being forty fathom) and the redness of the sand, that it was not the
Isle of Palma (as we imagined) but that we were got as far as the Gulf de
saint Croix near the Cape Geer upon the coasts of Moroque.

Having past the Canaries and the Cape de Bajador, we past the Tropic of
Cancer on the 10 of December, and on the 12 having past the Cape Blanc, we came
into 18 degrees of latitude, and by the benefit of a south east wind we run
along by the shore till we came to the 16 degrees, at which time we began to
descry the coasts of Africa and to observe them sandy and low.

The 14 at sunrising we found our selves at the mouth of the river of Senegal,
about 15 degrees, where the wind falling, we endured a calm, so as that day nor
the night following, we made no progress at all.

On the 15th we discovered Cap-Verd, which at a distance resembled two Breasts,
but in respect it was environed with Rocks, and not approachable without
danger, we steered to the North-West, and on the 16, we doubled the Cap in our
passage to Rio-Fresco, a Town upon the coasts of Africa, about 6 leagues from
the Cap; a place where they usually take in fresh water, and sometimes trade,
but with little security, the Fort and Island of Goure (which belongs to the
Hollander) being too near.

CAP-VERD.
SO called from a perpetual verdure which embellishes it, is one of the
pleasantest and most agreeable places in the world. It is a Promontory which
throws it self a long way from East to West into the Sea; the North part of it
is Mountanous, and covered always with green Trees, its point toward the East,
is about a Mile over: it is a Rock very steep and sharp toward the Sea, which
with great gentleness bathes and washes the feet of it, after it has been
broken, and discust by several smaller, and concealed rocks that incompass it,
and seem to be placed there by nature, on no other purpose but to oppose
themselves (in the behalf of so delicate a place) against the fury of so
impetuous an Element. The 2 points advancing like mountains, and making as it
were a verdant terras or rampart walk betwixt them, yields a most incomparable
perspective thorough the trees on the East Side, and is no less beautiful on
the South, though the country lies low, by reason of the Trees which one would
think were planted by a line, if he considers with what exactness and
regularity they grow.

But the same wind which (being gentle) had indulged our curiosity, and given
us a grateful and complete prospect of this Cape, removed us almost insensibly,
and brought us to Goure.

Goure is a little Island about a League in circumference, and three Leagues
distant from Cap-Verd, it is separated from the Terrasirma by a little arm of
the Sea, about half a League over. At present it belongs to the Hollander, who
on a mountain on the west side has built a Fort, on the East it is low, has a
good Port on the South, and good Ankorage.

We saluted the Fort with five pieces of Canon, and received as many from them;
we gave them 3. more by way of thanks, and that they might not seem to be
behind us in civility, they returned us one more, and set up the Dutch Standard.

A while after the Governor sent out his Boat to inquire what we were, and what
news; he that commanded it spoke very good French, and it fell to my share to
entertain him a good while. Our discourse was about Cap-Verd, and Le-Segnal,
which he cried up to me as the most pleasant part of the world, and the best
for trade, and told me, that at long run the French would carry it from every
body.

For Cap-Verd, that they whch loved hunting, might abundantly divert themselves
there, that there was plenty of game, as Partridge, Hares, Hearts, Roe-Bucks,
and several other Animals very good meat, though utterly unknown in Europe.
That the Moors were not to be feared, and that there was excellent fishing.

After Dinner he returned to the Fort, desiring us to go on to Gambay where the
English had a small Fort with eight pieces of Canon planted, and the Government
worth 2000 l. per ann.

Rio-Fresca, is a Town in Africa, near which, we came to Anchor in the Bay de
France, which is firm and gravelly at the bottom, and is six Fathoms deep at
low water.

After Dinner our Secretary was sent on Shore to carry the Alcair, or Governor,
his Presents, (which were Knives, and Brandy) and to take a view of what
Commodities they had there and to procure fresh meat.

At his return, he told us the Alcair had received him very civilly in his own
house, which is built in the midst of several others, that he made him sit down
by him upon a very neat Mat, and regaled him with such Wine and Fruits as the
Country did afford.

That as to Commodities, the coast was at present unfurnished, but if we would
have patience for a fortnight, he would give notice to the Merchants of the
Country, who would doubtless supply us, especially several Portugals which they
then had amongst them: and as to fresh Victuals he would furnish us next day.

Whilst our Notary was a shore, there came a Canoe aboard us from the Alcair,
but so manned, as surprised me very much: they were exceedingly black, their
Mine not much better than our Beggars in France, and naked as they were born,
except a little linen before.

They demanded what we were; we told them French: they asked if we were come to
stay, or had put in only for Provisions; we replied for Provisions, but we
would return to continue; to which they answered Bon, Bon: the French are more
worth than all the rest of the World.

There came several other Canoes to us with great quantity of fish, which they
bartered for knives and strong waters, which they fancy exceedingly.

That night we stood to our arms, apprehending some attempt from Goure to
surprise us. The next morning, the Alcair himself, called Abdonsech, came
aboard us in our Shallop, accompanied with his Officers, and the principal of
the Town. He was a person of about 35. or 40. years of age, well proportioned,
and understood his interest well enough. He was in a long white Robe made of
Cotton, which came no lower than his knees, the sleeves long and wide like a
Surplice, only gathered close at the hands, about his neck great quantity of
locks of Red Wool, with a Callecon of the same; he had a Cap upon his head not
much unlike the Capuches worn in Hungaria. The Officers had all of them old
Mantles of stripped Cotton about them, partly white, and part blew, not unlike
our Gypsies.

We made them sit and dine with us, after which they desired the Officers of
the Vessel that they would return thither and continue, which we promising,
they entered into a Contract of alliance, which was signed and sealed on both
sides.

We asked them where their King was; they replied three days journey up into
the Country: That he was called Damel Biram, and his kingdom Caillor, that he
loved the French best, as being more frank, and liberal, and less addicted to
their interest and profit.

It Is a wonder to see these people, they can neither write nor read, and yet
all of them spoke Portugais; but the Alcair, French, English, and Dutch, as
perfectly as those that were born there: about Noon he took his leave of us,
and we filled him a great Gourd with strong water, which he had brought full of
Palm Wine, which is the best in their Country; I went on shore with him, and
interrogating him about those following things for several hours, he informed
me, that

Rio-Fresca is a Town of about 200 houses, that it has a convenient Harbor on
the West Side of it, and capable of a shallop: That the houses are but small,
and according to my computation, like our thatched houses in Normandy, built
only with mud and sticks laid a cross. That there were not above 300 men in
the Town, besides women and children.

The East Side is covered with a Wood, through which I past four or five hundred
paces, and discovered large fields beyond it, which my eye could not compass.
This Wood consists of Palm Trees, and other very lofty Trees, which in Europe
are unknown.

The air (though the place be fourteen degrees on this side the Line) is as
good and as warm, as any on these coasts; for which reason both women and men,
go naked, only a little linen before, to cover their pudibunda, which the men
do not scruple to laave off when they go to Sea.

Their Religion is so various, and intermixed, that besides the Portugal
Catholics, which are there in great numbers, they have other circumcized
Catholics, that come near to the Jews, as also Mahumetans and Idolaters. These
latter have little baggs of leather which they wear constantly about their
necks, and call them Fetiches, which is as much as to say their Gods, (as I
shall demonstrate more at large in my Chapter of the Superstition of th^^ which
inhabit the Golden Coast) in which likewise they have so great confidence, they
believe that unless it be the Whites, there is no body can do them any harm.

They eat very little flesh, though they have Oxen, Cows, Sheep, Goats, Kids,
Hens, Pigeons, a kind of Phesants, and small Birds in abundance; Their chief
diet is Fish, as the Guilthead, the Shadfish, the Pilcher, which they take day
and night in great numbers, besides many other unknown among us. Their fishing
is in little Canoes, cut out of the Trunk of a Tree, and made hollow, with a
stick, (instead of a Mast) set up in the middle when the wind is down, but
otherwise when it is high, they stand right up, and row with a kind of oars,
some four or five foot long, and as broad at the end as a good large plate.

The men of this place are very personable and well, not many of them Camous,
and from hence it is they have the best slaves in Africa. The women and
daughters are for the most part very common, courting and soliciting of
Strangers by that time they are fourteen years old, and that in the midst of
the streets, so great a kindness and inclination they have for them.

The men have as many wives as they can keep, will prostitute them for a small
matter, and sometimes offer them for nothing. They have their hair tied up upon
their heads (which are always uncovered) to which they fasten certain little
pieces of wood, and think them great preservatives against the heat of the Sun.
All of them both men and women speak a kind of corrupt Portugais.

The commodities this Country affords, are Skins, Gums, Feathers, Ivory,
Indigo, Civet, and great quantity of a kind of Cotton cloth, stripped with white
and with blew, which is immediately put off again at the Golden Coast.

Though they are naturally great liars, and not to be believed, yet it is
certain the Alcair gave advertisement to the Inhabitants up the country as he
promised us, but we thought it not fit to trust him according to the advice of
another Vessel of Amsterdam, which made advantage thereby.

We bought that day some Hens, Pullets, and Kids, and delayed our time so long
on shore, our camerades were forced to give us a signal, by discharging a great
Gun, that we should come back, as apprehending some mischief might befall us
from the Hollander.

That night we set sail for the Sierra-Leoane, or Mountain of Lions, neither
thinking it convenient to make up the other Rivers, or to pass directly to
Gambay. And on the six and twentieth of December we came to an anchor within
three leagues.

The Coasts of MALEGETA, with the Kingdom of Sierra-Leone.
THe next day by the benefit of the Tide, we came to an anchor in the River of
Sierra-Leone; aboot noon the Mores came aboard us to conduct us into the Bay de
France, which is the 4th from Cap-Ledo at the mouth of the River.

At six fathom deep, low water, we came to an anchor within musket shot of the
fountain, where we took in fresh water, and having landed, we went that night
to supper upon the banks of it, where we killed a Goat which came thither to
drink, and found the water more pleasant and delicious (in respect of our
thirst) then the best of our Wines.

We put out the colors of Ostend, and not of France, because there was an
Englishman living in one of those Isles a long time, where he had a fair house
and four pieces of Canon, and was besides well beloved and protected by the
Kings of that Country.

The next day we sent two of our Officers up the River, about ten leagues, to
wait upon the King of Boure, with our usual presents, and to desire permission
to trade, and to furnish our selves with fresh water, and wood; and in the mean
time our people fell to work to cut down wood, and carry water, the Notary, my
self, and one of my servants, going along with them as a guard. During our
absence there came aboard our ship five or six Canoes, in one of which there
was one John Thomas (Captain of one of the Isles in that River) who brought
some quantity of Ivory along with him. The Captain (who was the only Officer
aboard) received him very civilly, saluted him at his entrance with a volley of
great shot, and regaled him as much as was possible, but he bought none of his
Ivory being too dear, which gave so much dissatisfaction to Mounsieur Thomas;
he went away in a huff about five a clock, and landed with 15 or 16 Mores in
his company, near the bank of the Fountain I have spoke of before. The Clerk
and my self were returning in our great shallop laden with balast, and advanced
as much as the tide (which was then coming in) would give us leave, in so much
that our shallop was afloat: which being observed by the Captain and his Mores,
they put themselves into their Canoes again, and made with all speed to our
men, who were cutting down wood upon the banks of the Bay. At the same time
they gave us a signal from the Ship by furling our colors, which made us
double our speed, in apprehension there might have been some mutiny or sedition
aboard; but when we arrived, we found it was only to give notice of the design
of the Mores, who were seen making to our men with their weapons in their
hands, but the man I left behind me, having his musket with him, stopped their
proceedings, and the rest defended themselves so well with their Axes, that
there was none wounded or killed of the whole company, only one ancient man
received a scratch in one of his arms. We sailed immediately toward them, but
as soon as we came within musket shot, and they perceived our Guns in our
hands, they run strait into the woods, where they lay close all day long, but
at night we could hear them making great noise about the fountain aforesaid.

The next day being the 29 December, the Clerk, the Pilots Mate, several
servants, and about 20 of our Seamen, went a shore in our shallop for fresh
water and wood. At their landing the Mores abandoned the fountain, and betook
themselves to the Woods, where they made a great noise likewise, but without
any attempt, for our men having run toward them, and fired 5 or 6 muskets at
a venture into the woods, they took their heels, and from that time we heard no
more of Mounsieur Thomas, nor any of his crew.

After dinner our Ambassadors returned from the King of Boure's Court, having
stayed there with his most August Majesty but one night: but they brought most
of the Canoes thereabout along with them, laden with Ivory, which was bought
off indifferent cheap.

The next day the King of Boure's Brother came aboard us, and brought with him
a Portugais (which we had seen before, and is employed in the affairs of that
Prince) we know it was some person of quality as soon as we discerned his
Canoe, which we distinguished by the sound of his Trumpets, and immediately
sent out our boat to receive him, into which he entered with his Trumpet and
Drum, and at his coming aboard our Ship, was saluted with a volley from the
great Guns.

The Brother of the King of Sierra-Leone is a person of about fifty or
threescore years of age, and begins now to grow gray: his stature is but
indifferent, but grave, and intelligent enough in his affairs. His habit was
not much unlike that of the Alcair of Rio-Fresca, unless it be that the
Alcair's habit was of white cloth, and this of cloth stripped with black and
blew, he had a gray hat upon his head, a stick like a musket rest in his hand,
his Attendants had all of them Robes of Cotton cloth, only the Portugal was
dressed ala Portugaise.

Whilst we were treating him, we gave him an account of the story of John
Thomas, to which he answered that he was a mutineer and a rebel, and that in
case we should catch him, we should not only have his pardon, but thanks.

After he had dined, he pulled out about twenty little stones, out of a little
purse, which he threw upon the Table, demanding so many Bars (as they call
them) in discharge of their Kings duties, as well for the business they had
negotiated with him, as for their fresh water and wood. Though these people can
neither read nor write, yet they make use of this way of gathering their
Rights, and the frequency of their Commerce with the Portugals, has brought
them to talk altogether by Bars, which is the word they do most ordinarily
use.

According to their demand, the 20 Bars were paid him, that is to say, in
Iron 12 Bars a little Barrel of Strong Water at 4 Bars, a Kettle at 2
Bars, a Hat at 2 Bars, and so on: He was himself upon his own score
presented with 2 Bottles of Brandy, and his Retinue with Knives: at the close
of the evening he returned, well stuffed and well satisfied, as the greatest part
of his Attendants were also; at his departure he had several Guns given him,
and was dismissed with all possible civility. He is in great respect among the
people, his Trumpet and Drum are always carried along with him, even when he
goes about his most natural affairs. During these three days, we had several
Portugals came aboard us with their Commodities, of whom I endeavored what I
could to inform my self of the manners of that Country.

The Description of Sierra-Leone, or the Mountain of the Lions.
THe Country of Sierra-Leone, is called Boulombel by the Mores, which in their
language is as much as the large Country. In respect of the extraordinary
height of the Mountains toward the South, which are much higher then either
the Pyrenaean or Alps, and the multitude of Lions which are constantly to be
seen there, it was called Sierra Leone by the Portugals, which in our Language
amounts to no more then the Mountain of Lions: Their Country begins a great
way up in the land Eastward, and ends Northwest with the Cap-Ledo, which throws
it self into the Sea: from the point of that Cape, as on passes up the River,
there are several Bays, the fourth of which is the Bay de France, either
because the French were formerly possessed of this Coast, or that they burned a
Town there heretofore, and this is the only Bay in that River where they can
take in fresh water.

I had one day the curiosity to trace one of the three Fountains which are
there, and having followed it a league to the foot of the Mountains, observing
the tracks and Print of the wild beasts, which are very strange, and dreadful,
I returned as I went, and have been since informed by one of the Portugals,
that it rises in the midst of the woods, which are above 15 leagues over, and
that if I had pursued my design, and traced it to its spring, I must never have
expected to come back, as well for the vast number of Lions, as for the Tygars,
Elephants, and Crocodiles which are there, and would probably have devoured me.

Those Mountains are covered with Trees very full of Gum, always green, and
for the most part not unlike our Laurel.

The Northen parts of this Sierra-Leone lie very low; and are in the possession
of the King of Boulom, as the Southern parts are of the King of Boure.

The Kingdom of Boulom is not overwell known, either to the French or
Hollander, their affections being principally inclined to the English and
Portugals, of which last, there are several that inhabit there.

The River which bears the name of Sierra-Leone likewise, runs a great way
Eastward up into the Country, is about 3 leagues over at the mouth; and one
about 14 or 15 leagues higher. The Harbor is not above two fathoms deep,
insomuch that in entering into it, we were fain to come as near the Mountains as
we could, where we found 10, 12, and 16 fathoms water. It has several little
Islands in its channel, the most of them inhabited, and covered with green
Trees, especially Palm trees, of which they make great quantities of Wine; It
is very full of Fish, and breeds Crocodiles near the head of its Fountain.

The borders of these Islands are set with certain Trees whose branches do
never extend themselves further out one then another, but the shutes or siences
growing downwards, as soon as they touch the water or the earth, they take new
root, and by that means make a Hedge sometimes of 10 or 12 yards broad.

The Inhabitants of this Country are very well made, I observed very few of
them Camous'd, the men much more civil than at Cap-Verd, they are always
clothed, and for the most part more modest.

In the Town of Boure there cannot be above 300 houses, according to the
estimation of some of our men who were there, and told me among other things,
that the Palace of their King is built likewise in the middle of the Town, and
would not make a good residence for a Justice of Peace.

Their Women are generally common, every man has as many of them as he
pleases, and prostitutes them to Strangers, as he thinks good, except only the
first, which are kept with great jealousy, and circumspection all along these
Coasts, so as properly the other are nothing but Concubines.

According to the computation of every body I spoke with, there may be in Boure
about 4 or 500 men, besides women and children: Their King is a Roman Catholic
his name Philippes, and has a Capuchin and a Jesuit in his Court.

In an Island called Saint Andrew, I entered into one of their houses, and found
it built of sticks and dirt, on one side a little window covered with leaves, a
hole for the door, and a small fire in the middle; they lie upon matts, made of
great rushes, which they place in a corner, and have their Arms by their sides,
which for the most part are swords, daggers, darts, bows and arrows, the head
of which they impoison with fruit of a certain tree, whose poison is so
inconceiveably subtle and quick, it runs immediately into the blood, and affects
it so suddenly, it is no easy matter either to prevent or cure it: Which fruit
is long like a raddish, and green. Some of them have their Guns, which they all
of them are fond of, and do use with great dexterity.

Their Religion also is various, the great Commerce the Portugals have in this
place, and the great numbers that inhabit there already have converted many of
them, the rest being Mahumetans, and Idolators. They pay a reverence
extraordinary to certain extravigant figures, which they call Fetiches, worship
them as Gods, pray to them punctually Morning and Night, and when at any time
they have any thing better then ordinary, either Meat, or fish, or their
Palm-Wine, they throw it all down upon the ground in honor to their Gods.

As I went a shore one day in the Canoe of a certain More, I heard him
muttering to himself, and having distinguished these words Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, I asked him what he was doing, he told me he was giving thanks to his
Fetiche, for having preserved him at Sea, and that the rest of the Mores, as
they had occasion, did always the same: They all of them carry their Fetiches
in little baggs, either upon their hearts, or their shoulders, tendering them
meat Night and Morning constantly, they trim them up with Rasade; or little
grains of glass of all colors, which they take to be the greatest Ornament in
the world.

This Country produces great quantity of Rice, of Millet, and Mays, which is a
kind of Turkish Corn, they make their bread off, and is not very ill: Some of
them having washed their Rice in Sea water, will eat it raw, and without any
ill effect.

Their common diet is fish, and great store of fruits, as Berrys, Figgs, Pears,
Prunes, Oranges, Citrons, and a kind of Chestnut, not altogether so good as in
Europe, but it has the virtue to quench the thirst though one be never so dry.

These Mountains produce great quantities of Goats, Hoggs, Lions, Tygres,
Elephants, wild Bores, Hearts, and Roebucks, which last are so numerous, they
bring them on Ship board, and truck them for little or nothing: But the
Serpents (if we may believe either the Mores or the Portugals) do increase so
unmeasurably, that some of them will swallow a Man at a gulpe. The Mores are
perpetually at wars with them, and do use a certain herb (which is admirably
good against poison) against the bites of all the Beasts they encounter.

The Apes run up and down every where in great Troops, destroying their plants
where ever they come, upon which score the Mores are their implacable enemies
(as well as the Elephants) hunting and persuing them perpetually, and sometimes
eating them when they have done. I have tasted of their flesh, which is not
bad, and in my judgment comes very near our Beef.

All of them speak Portugais, and are very apprehensive of being drunk, for
which reason (especially amonst us) they drank but little strong water.

The Merchandise this Country affords is Rice, excellent Ivory, Civet, and
some Amber Greece. Of all the Coasts, this is one of the best for matter of
trade, seldom yiedling less profit then Cent pour Cent: But the Portugals gain
is much greater, they buying their Ivory up higher in the Country, and
afterward selling it again at the Sea side to other Merchants; Four or five
men might live in one of the little Isles in this River, and be very well
sustained by the labor of two or three Slaves.

The English have a Warehouse in one of those Islands, and the Factor thereof
writ to us several times to desire he might come to us and trade, we told him
he might do it with safety, and on the last of December, upon our parole, when
we had finished our bargains for Ivory with the Portugals, and Natives, the
said Englishman called Abraham, came aboard us in his shallop (rowed by three
Slaves) accompanied by a certain Hollander, and two others which belonged to
him; he was well received, but after Supper, contrary to the advice of all the
rest, the Captain made him a prisoner, and the three Mores which were with him,
to their no small astonishment, and on the first of January 1667. the great
shallop was manned out with 30. men, the Captain, the Chyrurgion, and my self,
with one piece of ordnance, to besiege and plunder his house.

It is built of Brick, and free stone, defended with four pieces of Canon,
carrying a four pound bullet, and encompassed with a fair wood of Palm Trees,
which supplied him with Wine. On one side there are fifteen or twenty Cabines
for the Natives, and on the other, a spring of very good water. This Island is
the best and most beautiful upon the River: As we were about to land, we
discovered some 200 Mores, got together about the house, with their firelocks,
and a greater number up the woods at farther distance: which obliged us to make
a show of passing on higher, as being the weaker, and by consequence in more
need of the advantage of the wind. They imagined we had been going to Boure,
and immediately dispatched a Canoe to give Boulom the alarm, and to advise him
to come to them; we persued this Canoe with all possible diligence, but could
not persuade them to come in till we fired 3 or 4 times into their boat; They
were two young Slaves, belonging to a Portugal, that was with the English Man,
but we could not make them confess any thing, by all the interrogations we
could use: Those of the English party observing what was past, fired at us with
their Canon, and 3 of their bullets fell within ten paces of our boat. We put
our selves out of the reach of their Guns for the present, and came to an
anchor, attending the coming in of the tide to accommodate our return: The
weather being calm, about half an hour after, there appeared two Mores
belonging to one of the neighboring Islands, in a Canoe, which made directly
up to us, and came within pistol shot, but would by no means be persuaded on
board; whereupon we shot off 2 or 3 Guns (not with intention of doing them
harm) but to instruct them of the truth: They no sooner heard the noise of our
Guns, but they run away immediately, plying their cars as fast as they could,
and stooping (upon sight of our fire) so low, they seemed to us no higher then
Cats: In the mean time the Canon of the English were not idle, playing still
upon us, though they saw we were out of their reach, which they did not so much
to do any execution, as to let the Natives see they had undertaken their
defense, and desired their friendship: However the tide coming in, we passed
by several little Islands, and made our retreat.

We found several Mores, and Portugals aboard our Vessel, and amongst the rest,
the King of Bouloms Son called Bombo, who was a person of about 30 or 40 years
old, well proportioned, and (bating his complexion) a very handsome man, his
air was courteous, and majestic, he was an intimate friend of Abraham's, but
knew nothing till supper, of his imprisonment: He no sooner understood it, but
he interceded for his ransom, and went immediately with the Portugal (that
manages the affairs of the King of Boure) to procure it: On Monday at noon they
came aboard again with a 100 Elephants teeth, weighing 900 pound weight, and
two live Civet Cats, upon the delivery of which he was dismissed, and went home
after dinner, we giving him a little barrel of Strong Water, a roll of
Tobacco, a Cheese, and a Salvo of 3 Guns, when he went off.

Some sew Portugals stayed behind till they made up their Markets, and having
dispatched them the fisth, they returned out of hand.

That day we intended to have been gone, but happening upon a calm, and to have
a tide against us too, we were forced to attend a little longer then we
designed. About noon there came a Canoe aboard us, with two Mores, which
pretended to belong to Boulom, who brought us fruit, but having no Ivory, we
looked upon them but as spies, and sent them back again about five.

That night we set sail, and having past Cap-Ledo, we steered a South
South-East course, to avoid the the Banks of Saint Anne, and the next morning
discry'd a little Vessel of Holland, coasting upon the shore as we did to make
the Cap de Monte, which is about 60 leagues distant from the Sierra-Leone.

On Friday the 7th of January, we past by the mouth of the River of
Madre-Bomba, where the English have a house also, and not inferior to that at
Sierra-Leone.

In the afternoon we came within sight of the Rio de Gallines, so called by the
Portugals, from the multitude of Hens there, and the cheapness of them, the
people giving one, two, and sometimes three for a knife of a penny. The
Hollanders had a house there formerly: The Natives gave us a sign to approach
and put in, but the neighborhood of the English would not suffer us to hear on
that ear, but we continued our coast to the East till Saturday morning, at
which time by the assistance of a clear day, we discovered the Cap de Monte, at
about ten leagues distance.

CAP DE MONTE, and its Description.
THe wind being but little, we came not to an anchor till night, and then about
half a league from the shore, at twelve fathom low water, and upon a sand.

The Cap de Monte is so called from a point of ground which gives it that
figure, and rising just by the Sea, forms its self into a round Mountain, all
the rest of that coast lying very low.

We could not descry either house or cabane all along, yet on the 19th we went
on shore, and found 4 or 5 houses at some distance, where the Blacks made their
Salt.

They appeared very joyful at our arrival; they told us their King lived three
days journey up into the Country, that they would give notice to their
neighbors of our coming that night, and that if we thought good to return the
next morning, we might find such store of Ivory as could be suddenly got. That
if we intended to keep our promise when we came on board, we should give them
two great Guns as a signal, and they would make fires to confirm us on their
side, which was agreed and performed accordingly.

The tenth, and the eleventh days, were spent entirely in bartring, I being on
board the 12th, I went on shore, though with some difficulty, the Sea breaking
off. so abruptly, our shallop was left some 20 paces upon ground, and the
Seamen forced to go out of the boat, and land the Officers upon their backs;
where we found the Mores had made a large Arbor, covered over with leaves, and
branches of trees, to keep our commodities dry, and shelter us from the
violence of the Sun.

Whilst we were Negotiating our affairs, we heard a great noise on a sudden,
and saw the Mores in a great hurry, running Pell-mell from their houses, and
merchandise both: we apprehended we might be surprised, and took up our arms
immediately, but being got out into the air, we understood it was only their
King was coming to us; whereupon some of our men went to meet him, and saluted
him with a volley of five or six of our firelocks.

Before him marched his Drum, and his Trumpet, 8 or 10 of his kindred and
friends, and the rest were his Officers: his Wives, and his Daughters, marched
on his side, behind him his Slaves followed, and a certain number of women
carrying his dinner in bowls of Wood, and of Tyn, which they held up as high as
they could possibly: By him he had four Slaves marching, two of them covering
him with two large Bucklers, and the other carrying his bow and arrows, and
javelin: As he approached, the Mores divided themselves, the Men on one side,
the Women on the other, singing, and dancing, and leaping up and down, and
testifying their joy in a thousand different postures. The King took a dart,
and pretended to throw it at them, upon which they threw themselves immediately
upon the ground, and at the same time they which came along with his Majesty
took their turn, both to dance and to sing. Presently the King took an arrow,
which he shot up into the air, and presently all run to the place where it
fell, and happy was he that could take it up first, and bring it to him; after
this he made a show of shooting directly amongst them, and they throwing
themselves down again, with great acclamation, continued this pastime for a
quarter of an hour: In this triumpth and grandour, he was conducted to us; we
received him as honorably as we could, saluting him with volleys of small shot.

He was a grave and venerable old man of about threescore years of age, or
upwards, they called him Falam Boure, he was very sensible and majestic: his
habit was the same with the rest of the Gentlemen, saving that his was quite
blew, and the Robes of the Gentlemen, Officers, and Nobility of that Country,
are always stripped (like the Captains of Rio-Fresca) with white and blew: We
paid him what respect we could, and after we had made him such presents as
were usual, he retired into another Arbor the Mores had made for him, and left
us very graciously to our Negotiations.

I vvaited upon him to his Arbor, where he entertained me in Portugais, and
told me, that it was four years since he had seen any Whites, and with tears
(as it were) of joy assured me, that the French should be always vvelcome to
him; that indeed they were a little quick and capricious, but otherwise honest
men: that he and his Country (which he thought was not contemptible) I would be
eternally at their service.

And in truth were all the rest of Africa like this part of it, it was
indubitably to be preferred to any part of Europe. No sooner is your foot upon
the ground, but you are presented with a fair plain, planted on this side and
that, with curious groves perpetually green, and in their leaves not unlike to
our Laurel. The prospect is bounded to the South with the Mountain of the Cape;
and on the North by a large grove, which gives a shade to a little Island in a
little River, which casts it self hard by into the Sea, though it be navigable
for a Canoe only, or perhaps with some difficulty for a shallop: Eastward there
is no stop nor termination of the eye, it may delight and lose it self, in vast
meadows and playnes, beautified and perfumed with excellent verdures, and
watered with several pretty Rivers, which open and expan'd themselves to the
Mores, and seem to invite them to a communication with those that live higher
up in the Country.

In this place their Rice, their Millet, and their Mais (of which their bread
is made) is more plentiful, and grows in greater quantity, than in any other
part of Guinee whatsoever.

They have Citrons, Oranges, Amants, Berrys, Melons, Gourds, and a sort of
plums not much unlike our Brugnons, but not so well tasted.

They have great variety of fowl, as Hens, and Pigeons, and Ducks, and
Mallard, and Teal, which must be very plentiful, by the price they are sold for.

Goats and Hoggs are very common, and Apes too, but ugly ones. They have great
store of Fish, both Seafish and in their Rivers, which I have said they value
much above flesh, they have Tortoises likewise are excellent meat, but their
shells not worth a farthing.

They are very neat in their feeding, they roast their meat upon wooden spits,
turning them with great care, and observing very curiously least one side be
more roasted then the other.

Whilst he was at dinner in his own appartment, I took the confidence to begin
a health to on of his Sons Wifes, in their Palme-Wine, and she answered me in
French, Monsierje vous remercie, and told me afterward in Portugais, that her
Husbands Father had lived always amongst the French, when they were in those
parts, and that she could distinguish easily by our air, that my self and
Lacquey were the only Frenchmen in our whole company.

The inhabitants are generally handsome, good natured, tractible, and speak a
kind of corrupt Portugais. They go all naked both women and men, only a little
cloth before them, but the women wear theirs from their stomach, to their
mid-legg: they are more chaste then the rest, and their Husbands commonly more
jealous.

For their Religion, do what I could, I could not inform my self, only one of
them told me the Whites prayed to God, and the Blacks to the Devil: Yet I could
perceive many of them were Circumcised, and all of them had their Fetiches.

At our landing, there was not above five or six houses to be seen, and those
belonging to such as made Salt there, and carried it afterward into the
Country: But within two days time, the plain (which was about a league in
circumference) was covered over with houses, which the Mores from all parts had
built, in order to their traffic with us.

In the Kings houses, or the houses of their Nobility, they have a distinct
appartment where their beds are made, either upon plancks, or mat; about a
yeard from the ground, about which they hang a cloth (in stead of curtains and
vallence) and so sleep all night upon them. For their repose in the day time,
they have a sort of delicate neat mats, exquisitely made (of which the
Hollander buys great store for their Chambers) where laying themselves down
with their heads in their Wives lapps, they spend much of their time in combing
and ordring their Husbands hair.

For four days together we had a very good Trade. The commodities we bought
were Mats, Rice, and Ivory, which in those parts is plentiful and excellently
good.

And in this place certainly (if any where) a man may live happily, all things
contributing to make his life pleasant; the beauty and bounty of the Country,
the humor and disposition of the people, the abundance of all necessaries,
the considerableness of the gain, and the aptness and convenience for building
in all places wherever you come.

On the thirteenth we went a shore again, but seeing they had no Ivory left,
(though the King promised in three days time we should have ten times as much
as we had bought aleady,) we set sail that night for Cap-Miserado.

CAP-MISERADO.
THe next day being the 14th of January, steering or course East-South-East and
by South, we discovered the Cap-Miserado, but the weather being duskish, and a
thick fog interrupting our prospect, we were glad to cast anchor at three
leagues distance from the shore (imagining notwithstanding we had been nearer
then we were) and afterward we shot off 2 Guns to give the Mores notice of our
arrival.

The fifteenth we discovered our mistake, yet by reason of calm, we were
forced to continue at anchor till noon, at which time we perceived a Canoe
making toward us with 2 Mores in it, which coming up, demanded who we were,
and of what Country, we told them of Holland; and they desired us to come
nearer land, but would by no means be persuaded on board us, till they saw us
take the advantage of the wind, weigh anchor, and sail toward the shore.

They entered then, and told us it was a full year since they had seen any
Whites: that the next day they would bring good store of Ivory to the Sea side
for us, and that they might perform what they had promised, after we had made
them some small presents, they took their leaves. We came up within half a
league of the land, to the mouth of a little river they call Duro, at the foot
of the Cape, where we found six fathom deep at low water.

This Cape is called Miserado by the Portugais, either because it is
encompassed by rocks that lie under water, and would inevitably destroy any
Vessel, which should come nearer then half a league, or because the French
which were formerly massacred there, cried out Misericorde, Misericorde:
Besides the Natives of this place being very cruel, they have denominated the
river, and called it Duro, as being hard and fatal to the Whites. Upon which
score we fortifyed our shollop with a great Gun, to fright them and keep them
in order.

They set up a little house against we came in order to our negotiations, but
not another to be seen within less then half a league, and those too in the
woods.

The River Duro casts it self into the Sea on that side toward the Cape, but
is so small and inconsiderable, it carrys nothing but Canoes.

At our coming on shore, we found the Captain (who governs those parts) with
several of his Officers sitting under a tree, we presented them with two
Bottles of Brandy, which they drank freely, and then conducted us to the house
they had prepared, and stayed with us till night came on, and we returned to
our Ship.

The Captain was a very lusty man of a severe aspect, in a Robe like that of
the Alcair de Rio-Fresca, saving that his was red, with a bonnet of the same
color, he was attended by 50 or 60 Negroes, with great darts, bows, arrows,
and swords, and with some few women, which they sent back again to the Woods,
not above fifty paces from our lodge, from whence we never durst trust our
selves above ten.

They asked us whether we came as enemies or friends, observing it seems the
Canon in our shallop; We told them that we could not but take notice, that they
came with their arms, contrary to the custom of all other places we had traded
in, and that we did, was but to secure our selves, and our Merchandises, which
we should bring on shore by degrees, and according as we sold what we had
brought.

Some of the Captains Women, lugging their children along with them, came to
see us at our lodge, and we were forced to present them, though the Captain was
so refractory, what Ivory soever he exposed to truck, or to sale, he asked with
that unreasonable confidence, there was no reason to give it: They all of them
spoke Portugais, and were all of them clothed.

Whilst we were at dinner, the Captain demanded some one of us to stay with
him, and I (very courageously) proffered to be the man, which he took so
kindly, he took me by the hand, and put it into the hand of one of his
daughters, with this complement, that he gave her me for my Wife, after which
we grew very intimate and great; He took me and showed me to the rest of the
Mores, who called me their kinsman and friend, promised me S^aves, carried me
along with them, and setting me in the midst of them, they made me drink of
their Palm-wine.

One of the Officers that dined with us, I observed to throw Wine upon the
ground, before he drank; I asked him the reason, and he told me, that if his
dead Father should be dry, he would come thither to drink.

We had a sight too of some of their Priests, but their habits being the same,
with what we saw afterward upon the Golden Coast, I shall pass them by in this
place, with this animadversion only, that they carry themselves toward them
with great deference and respect, believing every word they spoke an Oracle.
The Captain showed me one of them, and told me, if I had lost any thing, he
could tell me where it was, and cried him up as he had been a Prophet: But
above all things, their greatest superstition is of their Fetiches.

Their Traffic is principally Ivory, (which indeed is excellent) and Rice in
great abundance.

The English have a ware house beyond the Cape, and are in great favor with
the Mores, who used us ill in no respect, but as they thought us enemies to
them.

When we returned to our Vessel, we promised to be with them again the next
morning, but observing they had brought us good quantity of Ivory at first,
which was not afterward to be seen, we had a suspicion might be a design of
the English to amuse us with their Trade, whilst they could get more men
together out of the Country; Upon which grounds, that very night (though one
of our Officers left a golden ring with the Captain, as a gage for his word) we
weighed anchor and away for Rio-Sextos.

Being on the other side of Cap-Miserado, we discovered fires, which the Mores
had made along the shores, which is the ordinary sign they use, to signify to
such Ships as pass by, that they have Merchandise for them, upon which account
we resolved to cast anchor.

RIO DE JVNCO.
ABout 9 or 10 a clock we came to an anchor, directly over against the fires
upon the shore, we shot of 2 great Guns, to invite them aboard, but seeing none
of them come, we manned out our shallop after dinner, and sailed toward them
with some few Merchandises, but we could not reach the shore, within fifty
paces, without inevitable danger of bulging.

Seeing some Mores upon the banks, we made signs to them to come to us, and
they came swimming half way, and went back again, nor could all our alurements
win them aboard, till at last two of them ventured in a Canoe, and were kindly
received, which they on the shore observing, three of them threw themselves
immediately into the Sea and swam to us; we presented them with a bottle of
Srong-waters, which they carried on shore to their infinite satisfaction: we
showed them our Kettles, and what other Commodities we had, at the sight of
which, they made a thousand expressions of joy, and could have done no more, if
Paradise it self had been shown them: they asked us if we had any large white
Rasade. Those which were upon land, held up great, and great quantity of
Elephants teeth, to hasten us them, but having used our utmost endeavor to no
purpose, and finding it impossible to come at them, without manifest danger, we
sent back the 2 Mores (which came to us) to them: Who by their aspect and Mine,
seemed to be persons of more then ordinary quality.

Rio de Junco is a River which lies five degrees and fifty minutes of Northern
latitude, and of Eastern longitude, 9 degrees, 10 minutes. The mouth of it is
known by three great trees which stand very high, and three great Mountains
over against them, but at some distance into the land; the mouth of it is near
five hundred paces over, but shallow, the banks so well decorated with trees,
and flowers, that considered with the smoothness and serenity of the stream,
they make a most admirable landship.

Orange Trees, Citrons, and Palme-trees, are planted all along, and in
exquisite order, and (as the Mores which came aboard intimated to us) they have
abundance of all things, especially Poultry and Palme-Wine. We went aboard, and
perceiving no body came at us, we set sail that night, and came the next
moring before Petit Dieppe.

PETIT DIEPPE.
PEtit Dieppe is a Town not far from a River, which casts it self into the Sea,
and in its passage, twisting about a spot of ground, forms it self into no
contemptible Island: it was formerly in the possession of the French, but
deserted long since; at the disemboguement of this River, there are many Rocks,
which make the entrance more then ordinary difficult: We discovered a little
Vessel upon this Coast, and gave chase to it, but without any success.

The 22d we came to Rio-Sextos, whose description follows,

RIO-SEXTOS.
RIo-Sextos is a River, which comes a great way down the land, North and
North-West, and is about half a league over at the mouth of it. On both sides
it is set very pleasantly with Trees, very large, and very tall; about three
leagues up the River, the English had formerly a house, but there is nothing of
it left but the Walls. This River will carry a Yacht or a large Bark a
douzaine leagues and more up in the Country.

It was called Rio-Sextos by the Portugais, from a certain kind of Pepper which
grows by it, and is called Sextos by them, the same I suppose with what we call
Malaguette which I shall speak of more particularly in the next Chapter: We
were told by their fisherboats, that about a fortnight before there passed two
Flemish Vessels that way to the Mine, that we might find good quantities of
Ivory, but that their Canoes being so small, it would be necessary for us to
carry our Merchanhise on shore: whereupon we anchored about half a league from
land, in about 16 fathom water.

Some of our Officers went a shore in our shallop, and carried some Commodities
along with them, to begin the Commerce; they carried them three leagues up the
River, and their King (who lived yet higher into the Country) came down to see
them, and according to Custom had his usual presents.

They came back very late, and the Notary at his return gave me this account of
him, that he was a very lusty man, with a stern and supercilious aspect; that
he professed great frienship for the English: That he brought down great store
of Ivory with him, but having furnished the two Flemish Vessels so lately, he
held it so dear, there was no dealing with him for it. That they seemed worse
natured then the Mores at Miserado; But that the River was very fine, and is
full of little stones upon the shore like our Flints, only these are harder,
and give more fire upon any collision.

Whilst they were amongst them, there came about 10 or 12 of their Canoes
aboard us with a kind of Sea-Pike (an excellent good fish) and several other
sorts, of which we bought some.

The people are generally well proportioned, and bearing every one of them the
name of some Saint or other, I had a great curiosity to know how that custom
came upon them. I took one of them aside, and having cajoled him with a glass
of Wine, and strong-water (which they love better then their Wives) I asked him
the reason, and he told me, that when any Vessels passed that way, and did the
Natives any kindness, it was usual to beg their Names at their departure,
which they gave afterward to their children, in memory of the courtesy they
had received from them: Which convinced me, being imbellished with so noble a
virtue as gratitude, they could not be so bad as they had been represented to
me, and the rather, because the King of them having upon the death of an
English Merchant seized upon all his Ivory and goods, did upon the arrival of
the first English Ship, voluntarily, and without any solicitation, deliver all
to the Captain: An invincible argument of their piety and says. I gave him
that gave me this account, two little knives for his pains, and he was so
surprised at the present, he desired my name, and I having told him, he obliged
himself, if his Wife (which was big at that time) was brought to bed of a boy,
he should carry my name, and if ever I returned that way, he would bring him to
see me.

All along this Coast, their manner of salutation is the same, they take our
sore finger and thumb, into their hands, and putting them into a certain
posture, they pull them hard, and make them snap, crying out Aquio when they
have done, which is as much as your Servant with us.

This Country is very fertile, well furnished with Fowl, and Rice, and Millet,
of which they make all the bread, which they carry with them in their Canoes
when they go out a fishing, which (as I observed) they are very neat and axact
in keeping clean.

He that would stay upon the place, might make very good advantage either by
Rice, or Pepper, or Ivory, which is excellently good; their kindness has been
always more conspicious to the French, then either to the Hollander or
Portugal, neither of which they would ever suffer to cohabit with them.

On the 32th. by break of day, we discovered a little Fleet of Canoes of about
40, which were going a fishing, and within a quarter of an hour they dispersed
themselves every way: Of the whole Armada, there was but one came to us, with
some few Elephants teeth, which he held so dear he had his labor for his
pains, and carried them off as he brought them; whereupon we also weighed
anchor for Rio-Sanguin, which is the first place upon the Coast of Malaguette,
and about twelve leagues from Rio-Sextos; for four hours together we steered
Southward to avoid the Rocks which ly in great numbers betwixt Rio-Sanguin, and
Rio-Sextos, after which we steered East and by North, and came safe to
Rio-Sanguin.

That the French had the preoccupancy of these Coasts, in respect of all other
Nations of Europe, I think is clear from the Names of several Bays, and a
hundred other monuments of their glory: But at present we have nothing left
there, nor indeed any body, but the English, who by means of seven or eight
houses, do carry away as it were the whole pofits of the place.

The Portugais succeeded the French, but being overpowered by the English, and
the Dutch, and beaten off from the Coasts, in the year 1604. they retreated
farther into the Country, and marrying with the Natives, have begot that
generation of people, they call Muletto's, or Olive-couler'd, and have by that
means acquired such an interest amongst them, as have been the cause we have
made no farther discoveries there, and that they do to this day go away with
the whole Island Trade; he that should endeavor to share with them being
certain to be destroyed by their great influence and authority with the Nigros:
So that they have engrossed that whole commerce to them selves, passing up and
down every where as they please, and running up the Niger, as far as Benin,
which is more then 800 leagues.

They it is that have been the loss of Cantozi to the Danes, which is a little
Island upon the Niger, two hundred leagues above the mouth of the Gambie.

Their authority over the Mores upon the Coasts is so great, they manage them
as thy think good, and we can never read that they have at any time rebelled*
against them, as they have frequently done against the rest of the Europeans;
Nay* so absolute is their Empire, they are many times served at the table by
the Sons of that King, which is so superlative a command, there can be nothing
beyond it; Yet if any other European does but quarrel or affront any of their
Grandees, there is nothing but they will attempt which may contribute to their
revenge. One of them who came to traffic with us at Sierra-Leone, told me, he
did use every year to go to Senegal, which is two hundred leagues from
Sierra-Leone, and that where he had not the convenience of a river, both
himself and his Commodities were carried up into the Country on the backs of
the Mores.

They have all of them little Chapels built near their houses, in which they
use all possible means for the conversion of those people, and when they have
had any success, and made a prosilite, they hang Chappelets about his neck, and
have a particular care of them ever after.

THE COAST OF GRAIVES CALLED MALAGUETTE
UPon the three and twentieth of January, the same day we set sail from
Rio-Sextos, we came to an anchor before Rio-Sanguin, where the Coast of
Malaguette, or Manigette begins, and extends it self sixty leagues to the Cape
de Palms, about three degrees and forty minutes of Northern latitude,
comprehending all these places, Ri^-Sanguin, Cestre-Crou, Brova, Bassou, Zino,
Crou, Crousestre, Wapo, Batou, Grand-Sester, Petit-Sester, and Goiane, all
which places we visited in ninteen days, which we dedicated to our traffic in
those parts.

Rio-Sanguin runs into the Sea South South-East, and will carry a Petach about
twelve leagues, and no more; upon its bank it has a Town of about a hundred
houses, and large Trees on both sides of it, but is not five hundred paces
broad at the widest part of it.

That night there came a Canoe aboard us with three Mores, one of them was the
Kings Brother, who having been three years in Holland, spoke very good Dutch;
he sent back his Company, and his Canoe, and supped and lodged with us that
night. At supper he told us, that above a Month before, there was a Flemish
Ship put in at Rio-Sanguin for fresh water and wood, but that discovering an
English Vessel making toward them, he weighed anchor (...) being a good
sayler, got off, and that the Vessel that chaced them returned, and steered his
old course for Rio-Sextos. He described the bulk of it so well, we concluded it
was the Ship we had seeing crusing up the Coast of Petit Dieppe. He told us
moreover, that a while since the English had a house at Rio-Sanguin, but for
four years last past, they had none; and that a little Vessel going by lately,
had surprised about a douzen Mores near Crousester, and carried them away.

As we were hoisting sail on the five and twentieth, the King of Rio-Sanguin
came aboard us, attended with two other Canoes, and about ten or twelve Mores.

He was an ancient man, very grave, and venerable, his hair very white, yet his
person large and lusty; his habit blew, like their habits at Cap de Monte. That
which was most remarkable was, he drank neither Wine nor Strong-water, nor
Palme-Wine, nothing but pure water; he and his Brother both stayed with us till
night, and having received some presents they departed.

We had passed the place abovesaid, as far as from Rio-Sanguin to Wapo, where
being at anchor, the third of February, about Sunrising we discryed a Vessel
at Sea, making towords us with all the sail she could make: We thought at
first it had been the English Piqueroon we had been told of, for which reason
we stood all that night to our arms, but the next day the hopes we had of
over-powring and taking her, vanished with the Vessel, which we could never
see more.

Till Saturday the fifth we spent our time wholly in traffic, on which day
having come to an anchor at Batou, we discovered another Vessel coming toward
us also with full sails: The number of Mores who were then aboard us, hindered
us from discovering them perfectly, but coming nearer, we could discry the
Vessel to be as bigg as ours, whereupon we dismissed our Merchants, weighed
anchor, and stood toward them directly, resolved not only to defend our
selves, but to venture upon them. When we were come within a league of him, he
hung out his Dutch colors, and clapped his Cornette upon his Sprit-sayle, and we
hung out our French. When we came nearer, we knew the Ship to be a Frigate of
Amsterdam, of about 400 Tunn, and 36 pieces of Ordnance, set out by a private
person, and by the authority, and consent of the East-Indy Company, sent to
Ardres. The Captain called Wilere, having boasted when we were in the Texel,
that if he found us upon these Coasts, he would either sink or take us; we took
down our French colors, and put up a red flagg, endeavoring, and tacking
three hours together, to get the wind of him, he had all his sails out, and
his caps up, and yet sailed worse than we. About Sunsetting he furled his
sails, and having lost the wind, and we within 20 paces of him, he made signs
with his hat to know if we were not the Europe: he told us his name; and
calling for a glass of Wine, began a good soup to our healths, and we did him
reason in our turn. After which he took his leave, continued his course to the
Mine, and we came that night to an anchor before Grand Sestre, called formerly
by the French Paris; where the rest of our time we spent in our Negotiations
and Trade.

This Coast is called the Coast of Malaguette, in respect of the Pepper (which
I have mentioned before) at Rio-Sextos, which amongst the French is called
Malaguette, or Maniguette, which commodity is more profitable than can be
imagined, especially if Pepper be dear, and the Indy Fleet comes not unluckily
in, but if that falls out, it sells not altogether so well: This is the
principal Commodity of this Coast, and is sharper and hotter than the ordinary
Pepper, and particularly than the white.

All the Towns along these Coasts are built upon the backs of some little
River, or other which gives them their Names: The chief are Rio-Sanguin, the
Grand Sestre, which runs a good way up into the Country, and is deep enough to
carry a Petach: which the Inhabitants of Dieppe called Paris, in comparison of
the abundance of Pepper at both places.

All these Coasts are bordered with great Trees, the land very low, and fatt,
and watered with so great a number of Brooks, and Rivelets, that they render
the air so very unhealthful, there are but few of the Whites can stay long
there without being sick.

We understood nothing of their language, so they were put to explain
themselves by signs, they have no ill Physiognomy, their proportion is good,
they go always naked with their head, and have only a little piece of linen
before, for the shelter of their whole body: And though the air be so ill, and
unwholesome, yet they are so hardy and strong, I saw one of them that had a
Rupture hung down to the middle of his leg, and a lusty cut over the Pate,
that had laid his skull as naked as his back, and yet he came aboard us every
day, smoking and drinking Strong Water, with the best of them, as if he ailed
nothing at all.

They work excellent well in Iron: at Grand Sester they mended our shears for
us, with which we cut out our bars of Iron, and gave them such a temper as
made them incomparably better than they were at first.

Besides this Pepper, this Coast affords Rice and Millet (of which they make
their bread, and brought us good store of it) excellent Peace, (very tender and
good, boiled) Beans, Citrons, Oranges, Bullys, and a kind of admirable Nutt,
the shell something thicker than ours, but without any skin over the kernel,
but all round like your Almonds or Pistaccios of Spain.

They have likewise store of Oxen, Cows, Goats, Hoggs, Pullen, and other Fowl,
which may be collected from the price that they bear.

Their Palme-Wine is very good, and especially the Plums, which are so
pleasant, I have seen them on Shipboard refuse all that could be offered, to
be crawnching of them; and this is all I can say of the Coast of Malaguette,
for as to their Religion and manners, understanding but little, I shall say
nothing at all, only I imagine they have as many Wives as they can keep, for
the More at Rio-Sanguin, told us his Brother had fifty, and himself fifteen.

The Inhabitants of Dieppe have traded long upon these Coasts, and were grown
so cunning at their Trade, they had found the way of mingling this Pepper with
that of the Indies, before it was grown so common, and the Portugais had
discovered the Island of St. Thomas, and from thence diffused themselves all
over Guinee, by which it appears we Traded there formerly, and every thing
contributes to confirm it, for besides the Grand Sester, which retains still
the name of Paris, that little language they speak intelligibly is French: They
call not Pepper Sextos with the Portugals, nor Grain with the Hollander, but
Malaguette with us and if a Vessel at any time comes in, when their salutations
are over, they cry out as loud as they can, Malaguette tout plein, tout plein,
tant a terre de Malaguette, which is French they learned from us, and nothing
else.

If they meet any of their friends from a different place, they take one
another by the upper part of the arm, and stretching them out, they cry Toma,
then they come to the elboe, and grasping it hard they cry Toma again; and at
last catching one another by the fingers, as I have observed at Rio-Sextos,
they make them snapp as they did there, crying out Enfa Nemate, Enfa Nemate.
Which the More that speak Dutch, interpreted to us, and told us it was no more
then, My dear friend how is it, all that I have is at your service, even to my
life it self. From which very complement we may conclude the language is more
elegant then we imagine, to one that understands it.

THE COAST OF ELEPHANTS TEETH.
ON Friday morning the 11th of February, we weighed anchor before Goyane, and
steered a South-East course, to double the Cape de Palms, and avoid the Rocks
which incompass it, which we continued for a while, and came at last to an
anchor before Grova, which is the first place upon the Teeth-Coast.

This Cape is denominated from the Palme-trees, which do shadow it on all
sides near the Sea, it rises in several hills, covered all over with these kind
of Trees, and lies in four degrees and ten minutes of Northern latitude, and
twelve and a half of longitude Eastward.

The Coast also takes its name from the vast quantity of Elephants teeth sold
there, which is so great, that though all the Ships that are bound for Ardres
or the Mine, do pass that way, yet they seldom or never have any Merchandise
left, which they bring thither to exchange.

It extends it self four and twenty leagues, from the Cape de Palms to to the
River d' Asene, where the Golden Coast begins, and contains these places upon
the Sea: Crova, Tabo, Petit-tabo, Grand-drouin, Tao, Rio S. Andre, Giron,
Petit-drouin, Bortrou, Cap la hou, Jacques la hou, Vallochk, and Gomma, where
the ordinary trade is, where we spent seventeen days, without any considerable
accident, unless it be that which happened at Cap la hou.

On Saturday the 26th. being at anchor there, the Seamen discovered a Ship
making toward us with full sail; we imagined at first it might be the English
Privatier the More had given us notice of at Rio-Sanguin; we weighed anchor
immediately, and made as fast toward him, having put out our French colors,
which he saluted with a volley of Canon, and hung out the colors of Holland,
which we gratified with another. He sent forth his shallop forthwith to
discover us, and although he which commanded understood very well the greatest
part of our Equipage were Flemings, he could not be persuaded aboard us, but
returned; a while after, the shallop came to us again, bringing their
Lieutenant along, who came aboard, was civilly recieved, and staid with us two
hours; and in the mean time, this little Vessel of Brittainie (though commanded
by a Zelander, and was not above 100 Tunn) made like a Pinnace with 8 guns, and
40 men) sailed round about our Vessel, the Captain making his Drums and his
Trumpets sound all the while, with a thousand other ostentations of joy. He
told us for news, that at his departure from Flushing, he came out with 26
other Privatiers in his company, but that they were dispersed in a Storm, and
he heard nothing of them since: that as he was entering into Sierra Leone, he
found the little Vessel we saw as we came out, who complained, that the English
man which we had imprisoned and ransomed again, had siezed his long boat or
shallop, with nine of his men, whilst they were fishing, and that the same
Portugals we had traded withal, had assisted them; whereupon he thought
himself obliged to vindicate himself, and did it so effectually, that he beat
the house down with his great Guns, killed several of the Mores which defended
it, and rescued his nine men, paying three thousand weight of Ivory for their
Ransom, which had not been done, had not the Mores, upon the approach of these
two Ships, carried them all into the Woods; we gave him a Collation, and then
he took his leave. About midnight, the Captain himself came aboard us to drink
and be merry with our Officers, but he told us no more then his Lieutenant,
only this, that the Mores who were by us when we weighed anchor to meet him,
had come to him, and told him, in these words, If you be English, you must run
for it, but if Dutch, you are safe enough. After which they all clapped
themselves down close in their Canoes, to attend what would follow, and in case
we had fought, and one of us been sunk, to have had the benefit of the pillage:
At his departure we gave him three Guns for a farewell, which he repayed
exactly when he got aboard; we gave him a Cheese, two Barrels of Powder, and
four Bullets, he told us he was bound for the Mine, from thence to Ardres, to
Capolopo and Gonsalves, and that if he met with no prize there, he would go
unto the Isles; but we heard afterward at the Isle of S. Thomas, that he
passed by there with 400 Negroes, which he had taken about the Cap de Lopes,
out of 2 Vessels, which had put in there for fresh first water; the first
yielded without any resistance, the other having lost his maine mast, he sunk
to the bottom.

The same day the Mores perceiving we were friends, came aboard us again, to
finish their Markets, which being done, the next we set sail for the Golden
Coast.

This Country produces a great quantity of Rice, Pease, Beans, Berrys,
Citrons, Oranges, Cochonuts, etc. Besides which the Natives brought us
Suger-Canes aboard, of a very considerable bigness. It Is one of the best
Countries in Guinee, the Hills and the Valleys are admirable, the great Rocks
of Mountains, which are red, with the constant verdure of the Trees wherewith
they are covered, by the variation of Colors make delicious prospect: But even
of these places the Grand Drouin, and the Rio S. Andre are the best.

The Grand Drouin is situate in the midst of a little River, which winds about
a little Island betwixt 2 Mountains; it is encompassed with excellent Meadows,
and is washed so gently by the water, you would think it was afraid to come
near it.

Rio S. Andre of all Africa ts the properest place for building, the River of
the same name, runs up far into the Country, and not far from the place where
it falls into the Sea, it divides its self into two branches, one running
North-West, and the other East: It is bordered on both sides with very fair
Trees, environed with fine Meadows and Fields, and is deep enough to carry a
Yacht an indifferent way up. The Rock at the Sea side, at the mouth of the
River, is three hundred paces in circumference the top, which being flat,
commands all the Country about it without any contest. It Is very steep toward
the Sea, and on the East Side, and indeed inaccessible, unless by the River on
the West, which makes it so near being an Island, that the cutting but of 15
paces of earth, would make it one entirely; On all other sides it is
encompassed with Rocks under water, upon which even a shallop would be lost: The
fresh water which comes out of a Fountain at the foot of a large Mountain,
which covers this Rock on the North-side, may be defended from thence with the
shot of a Faucon; and the Towns of Petit-Drouin, Tao, and Groua, are at no
greater distance then the Grand-Drouin, which is only one league and no more:
From the top of this Rock Giron may be discerned on the East, built upon the
side of a delicate large Meadow, and Tabo on the West at the end of a fair
Campagnia, planted up and down with curious Woods, which run up a good way into
the Country, and terminate at the foot of several great Mountains, which are
visible from thence.

Saturday the 9th of February we came to an anchor, and took in fresh water all
the rest of the day, as well as on the Sunday and Monday following, which gave
me opportunity of considering these following observations: The water we took
in at this place served us almost till we came at the Isle of S. Thomas: The
Fountain is very pure, but being shadowed by a large Tree, at the fall of the
leave, when they fall into the Fountain, they render it something black for a
time.

Upon these Coasts they have great quantities of Bullocks, Goats, Kids, Hoggs,
and Dear, which are so cheep, one may buy a good Beef of them for a douzain of
knives of about twenty pence, and a good Roe Buck for the same price.

The People are well made, strong, lusty, their limbs large and fat, but their
looks austere and dreadful, and it is reported they do eat the Whites: I never
heard of any house built by the Europeans in these parts where they land but
very rarely, and have as little to do with them as they can.

It Is not above thirteen or fourteen years ago, since fourteen Hollanders were
killed, and eaten at Rio S. Andre, as they were taking in fresh water, without
any occasion of quarrel; for which reason, we went always well armed, and were
always upon our guard.

The common people wear only a linen cloth before but the Grandees and Nobles
of the Country are conspicuous by a kind of Mantle they wrap about them, and a
Poniard by their sides. They are great lovers of great heads of hair, which
they breid for one another very handsomely, and then bind them up upon their
heads, but the Women's hair they usually cut.

The women of Giron, and Petit-Drouin, had the curiosity to come and look upon
us as we were taking in water, and to bring their daughters along with them,
the liniaments and features of their faces were so just and regular, that (bate
them the unhappiness of their complexion) they were absolute beauties: Amongst
fifty of them which I saw, there was not any fat or tall, whereas on the
contrary, not one of a hundred amongst the men but are both: The women have
only a cloth before, and the least covered I observed any where upon those
Coasts; if there be any thing besides their color amiss in their faces, it is,
that they threaten revenge and mischief a little too much. When they come
aboard any Ship, the Captain of it must come to them, and it is their custom
whilst they have one foot upon their Canoe, and the other upon the Ship,
holding by one hand upon the Rope, they dip the other in the Sea, and throw
their handful upon his head, which is intended as a great instance of kindness
and amity, and in this they are so pertinatiously superstitious, that without
it they will never be forced nor persuaded to enter any Ship: and when they
would affirm any thing with more vehemence than ordinary, they use the same
ceremony: They are so diffident and distrustful, they will never begot with
all the art can be used, either under deck, or into any of the Cabains, which
the Mores of all other parts, would do very freely.

They have a great fancy for bracelets of Iron, with rings and bells upon them,
with which kind of Gallantry, most of their arms, and legs, are plentifully
furnished; they have great store of Mulettoes among them.

We could not understand their language, nor they speak one word of Portugais:
When they came first aboard us, they cried Qua, Qua, Qua, which we found
afterward to be as much as, you are welcome, or good morrow; for which reason
the Hollanders have given the name of Quaqua to a good part of this Coast: they
made great use of that word, especially if their Gutts had been filled.

The Commodities which this Country yields, are Elephants teeth, so large
sometimes, that they weigh 200 weight a piece, and then they are worth 10000
livers: If we may credit those that live on the Gold Coast, which are their
Neighbors, they have so great number of Elephants, that they are forced for
their security against them, to make their houses under ground: They kill as
many of them as they can: but that which accommodates them with so many teeth,
is, that the Elephants do shed them every three year, as the Staggs do their
Horns.

This Country affords likewise good store of Cotton, of which they make a
pretty sort of stuff, stripped with white, and blew, about three quarters broad,
and three or four else long, which is much valued amongst them, and sold
afterward at a good rate upon the Gold Coast, to cover their Pesantry there.

They have Gold amongst them likewise undoubtedly, for without any Commerce or
communication with their Neighbors, they bind up their hair for the most part
with hair laces of Gold very curiously made; I made a sign to one of them, to
know which way they came by it, and he showed me the great Mountains up the
Country afar off, and signed to me from thence. for which reason, he that
should make further discovery of these parts, would questionless encounter many
rarities, and without any great difficulties, in regard the Country consists
for the most part of Plains. The Inhabitants here are more afraid off fire
arms, then of all the inventions in Guinee.

The 26 of February we weighed anchor, and continuing our course all Sunday,
about evening we made the Golden Coast, and stood to it directly.

COST D' OR, OR THE GOLD COAST. With a Relation of our occurrences there.
Monday the last of February, we came to an anchor, at sixteen fathom low
water, at Asbini, the first place upon the Gold Coast: The Country thereabouts
is very low: the Town is seate'd upon the mouth of a River of that name, which
runs up North-West amongst the Hills, and South into the Sea, we stayed there 3
days bartring for Gold-Sand.

The 4th of March we past before Albiani, Tabo, and other Towns, upon that
Coast: The Country there is but low likewise, very full of Trees, but no River
at all: Those Canoes which came aboard us having assured us, they had no Gold,
we gave them the go by, and past on.

We thought to have doubled the Cape of Apollonia that night, but two of their
Canoes coming up to us, and promising fair, we believed them and cast anchor.

The next day some of their Canoes brought some Gold, which we bought of them,
though it was not much: This Cape throws it self a far into the Sea, and
raising it self by degrees into Hills, and then into a Mountain, makes no
unpleasant prospect. But it is of no good access, the Sea beating so violently
upon it, there is great danger in approaching: We weighed anchor again that
night, but the weather being calm, we could not reach Axime before Sunday in
the afternoon, at which time we came to an anchor.

Axime is a Fort belonging to the Hollanders, some twelve leagues distant from
the Cape Apollonia, situate upon the side of a River, which runs up Northward
also into the Country, and abounds with Gold-Sand, which is esteemed the best
of all that Coast. Its banks are higher than either Asbini, or Cape Apollonia:
Before this place we stayed all Sunday and Monday, but perceiving the Dutch
obstructed the Mores coming aboard us, we weighed anchor on Tuesday, and
doubled the Cape de Tres-Puntas, so called from three Mountains which appear so
at a distance, and by the convenience of their position, do make two little,
but convenient Bays.

In the afternoon we appeared before Botrou, which is another little Fort
belonging to the Hollander, situate beyond the Cape upon an eminence, at whose
foot runs a brook that is not unpleasant: We stayed here as long as we had any
Trade, and departed the 11th. being Friday.

We weighed anchor at that time, and came to anchor again betwixt Saconde and
Takorai, about six leagues distant from Botrou, they are seated amongst the
Mountains, which lean as it were upon the banks of the River they lie so near
it; at which place, we received Letters from the Governor of Frederisbourg,
not far from Cape Corse, offering us his road (if we pleased) in consideration
of the alliance betwixt France and Denmark, desiring us also to secure some of
his Merchandise for him.

We remained there Friday and Saturday, and it was no small trouble to me to
see an ancient Fort which had been formerly ours, in its ruins and rubbish; it
was at Takorai, upon a Mountain which commanded the whole Country, the sides
of it spoke it but barren, being quite naked of either Trees or Grass, and the
stone of a reddish complexion.

On Sunday the 23th. we weighed anchor, and in two hours appeared in the road
de Comendo, whose Inhabitants are greater lovers of the French, than of any
other Europeans: The Town (that may consist of about a hundred houses) is built
on the Seaside, and watered by a Rivulet, which falling into the Sea likewise
on the South, forms a pretty Channel and Harbor for Canoes, and Shallops: The
East Side lies low, but the West rises into a hill, which being flat a top, is
very convenient to build upon. The house appertaining formerly to the French,
stands upon the North-end of the Town, which runs up into the Country, and
raises it self into little hills by degrees, at whose feet there are very fair
Fields, and Meadows, planted up and down with variety of fruit.

The Mores which came aboard us, were in great anxiety and disorder to resolve
which way they should signify their joy. Their King held his Court some four
leagues from us in the Town de Grand Comendo, he sent us fresh meat, and other
presents, invited us a shore to his Court, proffered us all the commodities af
the Town, and sent us word, that he had refused a banner which Walkembourg (who
was General for the Hollander at the Mine) had sent him, and returned him this
answer; That the Country had been always in the possession of the French, and
that they only should be welcome thither.

We returned him many thanks, sent him our presents, and stayed where we were
to the 16. of March, and then set sail for Frederisbourgh, and came before the
Castle of Mine before night: we found three Vessels in that road, but not
considerable. This Castle I shall say nothing of being so famous both for its
situation, the commiodity of its Harbor and Fort, and the great Trade which is
drove there.

Two hours after we past before Cape Corse, where the English have a very
strong Fort, which made resistance to all the Dutch Fleet, under the command of
du Ruiter. The Harbor is very safe, and the Castle fortifyed with three
Batteries, one above the other: The Town consists of more than 200 houses, in
the middle of which there is daily kept so considerable a Market, that it is
eminent for its plenty all over those Coasts.

At length about 3 hours after we came before Frederisbourg, and saluting the
Governor with 5 Guns, he returned our civility with 3, which we again requited
with one.

The Castle of that name was built by the Danes, in assistance to the Mores,
after they were beaten from Cape Corse by the Dutch, which was taken from them
again by the English, with the assistance of the Dane, and as a mark of their
interest, he retains a great house at the end of the Town, with a Danish
Officer and Garrison, and the colors of Denmark set out upon the top on it.

Frederisbourgh is seated upon a high Mountain, which runs up into a point: The
whole circuit of it amounts not to 300 paces, and commands all about it, even
Cape Corse it self, which is not above Musket shot from it: The form of the
Plott upon which it is built is round, but the Fort triangular, fortifyed with
three Bastions, one of them plays Southward upon the Road, the other Westward
upon Cape Corse, and the third toward the Fort de Nassau or de Moure to the
East. The foot of this Mountain (which is not above 100 paces high) and cannot
be ascended but by going about) is compassed by houses which the Mores have
built that inhabit there.

We were no sooner at anchor, but we dispatched one immediately with our
complement to the General, called Henry Dalbreckhe, a Hamburger borne; he was
but a little man of his person, but fierce, and brisk, and yet courteous
withal, wit enough; and very civil.

He sent his Secretary aboard us, by name of Dasse of Amsterdam, who had been
there six years; he came in a Canoe; conducted by 8 Slaves, which sang and
ranted all along as they rowed, which it seems is the custom when they bring
any Whites with them, and before they put them aboard, they row three times
about the Vessel, with as much force and expedition as they can row. As he
entered, we gave him 3 Guns, and spent the rest of that day and night in his
entertainment: This night we had the greatest storm we had seen all our
voyage, in so much, we were obliged to cast out our greatest anchor, but it
ceast at last, and the next day having laid by such commodities as the General
had desired, he took his leave and returned.

On Saturday morning our Notary going ashore with the Merchandise he desired,
they shot from Cape Corse at our shallop, and the bullet fell within six or
seven foot of them: The Governor of Frederisbourg immediately fired a great
Gun upon the Castle, and the bullet fell at the foot of the second Battery, to
which they replied, but without balls, seeing the General took us into his
protection, and after that used no act of hostility more. The reason was,
because, though there be war declared betwixt England and Denmark, upon the
Hollanders account, yet the Generals of these two Forts have made an amicable
agreement, to commit nothing of hostility betwixt themselves, and it is so
punctually observed, the Soldiers of both Garrisons meet daily, eating and
drinking together at their pleasures.

The two and twentieth I went on shore my self, and was received with all
civillity, and very good cheer by the General, he enquired of me what news, I
answered him in Latin, which he spoke very well, but no French at all: I
understood from him, that the Kings of that Country had been at wars four
years, which was a great impediment to their Trade; that we should find three
English Vessels in Ardres road, and that he was obliged to send provisions to
Christiansbourgh, where the war was yet so hot, all that Country lay
unmanured: in short, I was so much engaged to him, that upon several occasions
which I had to converse with him, he used all means to satisfy my curiosity,
and to instruct me in the manners of the Country.

All the rest of that month, and the four first days of April, we spent in
traffic, and on the fifth we discerned a Petach passing toward the Mine,
with a great shallop full of Soldiers which the Dutch General sent to
Cormentin, a Fort which belongs to them: we were utterly ignorant of the
design, but were told afterward by the Mores, that the Governor of that Fort
being gone to Anembou with several of his Soldiers to drink and be merry
(there being the best Palm-wine in Africa) had been seized upon, and all his
company with him, by the King of that Country, in whose dominions Cormentin
stood, and that two of them endeavoring to defend themselves, were killed: the
ground of this Insurrection was this; The King of Fantin having engaged himself
to the English at Cape-Corse, to put them again into possession of that Fort,
had given them his Son in hostage, and desiring to have him restored, and the
English refusing till his Articles were performed, he had seized upon the
Governor, and 4 other Hollanders, with design to exchange them for his Son.

Thursday the 7th of April, we had news that the Controuler general of Holland
was killed at Axime, and the Mores of those parts had unanimously declared for
the English.

That day we arrested two Mores in our ship, and kept them prisoners, to secure
a debt due to us from two Merchants on shore; they continued two days with us,
but the Denmark General interposing, we gave them their liberty, and were paid
by the Merchants within eight days afterward.

On Good Friday the 8th of April, we weighed anchor in order to our passage to
Eniacham, a Town about four leagues distance from Frederisbourg, who gave us
his guns when we went off, and we returned ours in requital. We sailed by
Moure, where the Fort of Nassau is, which belongs to the Hollanders, and is
some two leagues and a half from the Castle of the Mine. This fort is situate
upon a Rock, flanked with four Bastions, the Sea washes the foot of it, and the
Town of Moure (which consists of about two hundred houses) encompasseth it
about on all sides but toward the Sea: it holds of the King of Acanispetit, as
well as the Town of Icome, which is not above a quarter of a league from it, on
the Seaside too.

In the afternoon we came to an anchor before Eniacham, where the English have
a little Fort upon a little Eminence, about six hundred paces within land: near
which the King of Sabou has a Town, of whom Eniacham holds likewise. We saluted
the Fort with 3 Guns, which they returned immediately.

On Easter day the tenth of April, the Mores brought us good store of their
Palme-Wine, and assured us their Merchants would come down the next day, and
bring us gold enough: On Monday they sent us a Fricassee of Pullets; (which
they dress as well as in France, as I shall mention hereafter) and acquainted
us, that the King of Fantins Soldiers had entered Sabou in the night, killed
four men, and taken several Prisoners. Upon which the Town of Sabou had sent
away their Wives and Children, and put themselves in arms: We smelt their
design, and resolved to return that night to Frederisbourg, having nothing to
do at Cormentin, because of the Hollanders, nor at Akara, by reason of the wars
that King had with Tacara.

From Eniacham we could see Cormentin, but not distinguish the Fortifications
by reason of the distance: It is situate upon a Hill, and belongs to the
Hollanders, who have a house at Fantin also, and another at Nemabon, a Town in
the same Kingdom.

On Tuesday in the afternoon we set sail for Frederisbourg, by the benefit of
a North wind from the Hills, which blows constantly on this Coast from midnight
till noon, and about nine a clock we came to an anchor again: We stayed there
till we had put off all our commodities, and then away for the Isle of Saint
Thomas, having been two months upon the Golden Coast: and forty days in
Frederisbourg road, where I went on shore again, to inform my self more
particularly of the Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants of the Golden Coast:
I had the good fortune to see the most of their curiosities, and to satisfy
and inform my self of the rest from the General, the Minister, and the Mores of
Frederisbourg, who all of them spoke Portugais.

The Description of the GOLDEN COAST.
THE Golden Coast lies betwixt four degrees and a half, and six and a half of
Northern latitude, and betwixt 17 and 20 of longitude East: it has taken its
name from the vast quantity of Gold is brought yearly from thence, as well from
their Mines, as the Sand in their Rivers, and contains (besides the places
above mentioned) Rotou, Ronate, and Akara, which lie more to the East; its
extent is a hundred and thirty leagues. The bank of Asbini, which is but low in
Axime, rises near Achema to a Mountain, and then humbling it self to Cape
Corse, it raises it self again, and continues so the rest of the Coast; the
circumference comprehending the inland Country and all, contains about four
hundred leagues, divided into the Kingdoms of Asbini, Axime, Comendo, Fetu,
Acanis-Petit, Sabou, Fantin, Akara, and the Seignories of Abrambou and Takara,
all which depend upon the King of Acanis le grand, who is called Akim, (whose
Imperial Town is situate 90 leagues Northward of the Mine) and may be called an
Emperor.

Of the Stature and Proportion of the People of this Country, of their Wit,
I^clination, Industry, and Habits.
THe Inhabitants of the Golden Coast are handsome, and well-proportioned, they
have nothing disagreeable in their Countenance, but the blackness of their
Complexion; some of them have flattish noses, and all of them little ears;
their eyes are quick and sparkling, but above all, their teeth as white as
Ivory, of which they have a particular care, and for their conservation, are
perpetually champing a certain wood which grows in the kingdom of Acanis,
which has a peculiar quality of making them white, of preserving their gums,
and preventing any blackness or rottenness in them. Though their beards appear
not so soon as ours, yet they affect them exceedingly, and their Grandees and
Officers wear them very long upon their chins, and some of them like the
Capuchins with us. Their skin is black indeed, but smooth and delicate, without
any hair, but as they grow old, their blackness lessens, and their hair which
is short, black, and frizell'd, grows grizled by degrees.

Their Stomachs are generally so hot, they do not only digest all kind of meats
that are roasted or boiled, but raw likewise; and some there are among them
which prefer that to the other.

They are great lovers of cleanliness, and wash themselves daily to prevent
Vermin, rubbing afterward with oil of Palms. They are not at all ashamed of
their nudity, but they have so great an abhorrency and detestation of belching,
or any such thing, that they will sooner die than do it; and if it happens at
any time they be in the company of any Europeans that are guilty of it, they
run out of the room immediately, making the horriblest faces imaginable.

They have a great deal of wit, are solid in their judgments, cunning, and so
dexterous and quick, one need never show them the same thing twice: they are
liars to the highest degree, their memory transcendent, and though they can
neither write nor read, yet they manage their Trade with the greatest
exactness: they never dispute the commands which are laid upon them: you shall
have a Merchant negotiating and managing 4 Marks of gold for 20 several
persons, every particular man desiring five or six several Commodities, which
he performs without hasitation or mistake.

Their address appears abundantly by their dexterity in their Commerce, they
are all of them given to pilfering, covetous to that point, especially to the
Whites, that they think they do a mighty act, if they present them with a
little fruit: they are drunken, luxurious, and much subject to the Lues
Venerea, which is no scandal amongst them: they are but ill paymasters, and
satisfy their debts with great difficulty and unwillingness: they are great
enemies to cold weather, and endure it with much impatience: so proud, that
their Merchants, (who are all of them Nobles, Captains, or other great
Officers) march up and down the Streets with their eyes fixed upon the ground,
not vouchsafing so much as a glance upon the common people: behind them they
have constantly a Slave with a chair in his hand, that they may sit down when
they please, it being thought dishonorable to be too long upon their legs;
they never answer any ordinary person, but with great superciliousness, and
never speak to them but with great Majesty: to other people they are civil
enough, and pay very much respect to the Whites, especially if they be
Officers, to whom they never speak but with their hat in their hand. The surest
way of gaining their affection, is to be civil to them which they value more
than any other thing one can do.

Though the manner of their habits be much different from ours yet they are as
curious and as proud in them, as the best of us. When their Officers or
Merchants walking the Streets, or are in transaction with any Stranger, they
take a piece of Silk, Taffaty, or fine Indian Damask, about two or three Else
long, which they tie about their waste, and afterward bringing it betwixt
their thighs, they let the two ends hang down before and behind almost to the
ground. Sometimes they wrap other Stuffs about them, from their breast to their
mid-legg, or else throw it over their shoulders like a Mantle.

They order their hair in several ways; but rich, and poor, and all, are very
curious in adjusting it handsomely, and inventing new modes and gallantries to
adorn it, it being the only business almost which gives their women employment.
Most of them dave hats, some of Straw, some of the Bark of trees, some of
Goats-skin, but their Slaves are distinguished by going bare-headed: they trim
themselves up with diverse Necklaces of Rasade, and Bracelets, which they
beautify with little works of Gold, in honor to their God, after they have
muttered out some of their Prayers over it: they have Rings or Jewels upon the
small of their Legs, or else a string of Coraile, of the bark of the Tree,
under which they pay worship to their Fetiches.

Though they love exceedingly to be spruce yet, they are good house-wives of
their cloths, never put on their finery but upon some such extraordinary
occasion as I have mentioned, and then whip and off with them again as soon as
they come home, folding them up carefully, and putting them into chests, which
they buy of the Europeans for that purpose, where they lie snugg till some new
opportunity brings them abroad again: Nevertheless from the King to the Cobbler
they affect change of apparel, to make themselves more considerable, and that
more or less according to their riches or gains. And yet for all this in the
main they are frugal enough, will buy nothing that is superfluous, but what
they do buy, let it be stuff, or any thing else, they will be sure it be
lasting and good, or they will be sure to have none of it, for all slight
things they laugh at and despise.

Of the Women, their genious, humor, and habits.
THE Women upon these Coasts are generally well shaped also, but some of them
are little, and some great and corpulent: the young Women do place their
principal care upon the whitening their teeth, and adorning their hair.

They have wit enough, good mine, honest, and obliging, but much more courteous
then the men; they are very grave, addicted to frugality in their houses, but
to pomp and ostention abroad: But their lasciviousness is above all, which
they suck as it were with their milk, playing hoytytoyty amongst the young
fellows stark naked. There are but few of them barren before, but when married
they are seldom over fertile, which may be attributed to their temper and
complexion, for there is seldom any of them have above four or five.

The Virgins, (to please, and to enamour the young men, as soon as they are up
every morning) take water and wash, and then comb their hair (which they have
in twice the plenty the men have) with great curiosity, plating and disposing
it in a hundred several modes and gallantries, gumming it with oil of Palms,
instead of mouth glue, tying it with ribands if they have any, if not, adorning
it with little pieces of gold, or a certain red cockle shell, which is very
common amongst them. Some of them paint their foreheads with red and white, and
sometimes their eyebrows, and cheeks: they cut and carve their skins about
their ears, and temples, which rising up in little blisters, they paint them
over with diverse colors, and fancy it a great addition to their beauty: they
have all of them Pendants at their ears, they all of them love the Ribbands,
and above all Ribbands, the red; they wear necklaces of Corail, or of Rasade,
and bracelets not only upon their wrists and their arms, but upon their legs,
and their ankles; the maidens for the most part have their bracelets made of
the bark of that tree which is dedicated to their Fetiches, which are their
Gods as I shall show hereafter. When they go abroad, if they be the Wives of
Merchants, Officers, or Captains, in that Country, they have a piece of Silk,
Taffaty, or other Stuff, either red, or blew, or violet-colour'd (which are the
colors they are most pleased with) which they take and wrap about them, from
the breast to the mid-legg, stuffing it out behind with a great Rouler. They
have always a great bunch of keys at their girdle, though they have many times
never a Chest in the world: they wear bracelets of Ivory, and Gold, and Rings
in that abundance, one can see no fingers that they have sometimes; and in this
posture they are fit to be seen: the common sort dress them selves as fine as
they can too, but when they come in again, they are mighty careful to sold them
up handsomely, putting on a kind of coarse linen with which they make shift to
cover themselves from the Navel, to the midst of their Thigh. They love variety
of habits too as well as the men, but the Virgins especially, who make it their
whole business from morning to night to spruce up themselves, and make
themselves acceptable, above all to the Whites, whom they seem to caress much
more than those of their own Complexion.

Their Ladies of pleasure, are not distinguishable in any thing, they are
welcome wherever they go, and handsomely received by every body; but they are
more mercenary and covetous than in any other part of the world.

Of their Marriages, and the Education of their Children.
I Happened to be present at a Marriage whilst I was at Frederisbourg, which
was consummated in no unpleasant manner. The Father of a young man finding him
at age to get his living himself, looks out immediately for a Wife for him, and
having pitched upon one he thinks will be proper, he goes to his Son, tells him
what he has done, advises him to see her, if they like one another, his Father
desires her of hers, if they agree, they go all of them together with one of
the Priests who gives them Fetiches, and in the presence of the whole Assembly,
the Bride takes a solemn Oath upon the Fetiche to be true and faithful to her
good man; her Groom promising on the other side as much to her very civilly,
but no Oath of fidelity in the case. The Parents present one another
reciprocally, and give in the bride and the Bridegroom what they are able to
spare, they spend the rest of the day in feasting and jollity, and there is an
end of the Marriage.

However this Lady has this advantage over her Spouse, by being his first love,
that he can never take another, but by her permission, which yet her Ladyship
is seldom so morose as to deny. But it was my fortune to see a young Merchant
of the Mine who had worse luck, his name was Anthony, he came several times
aboard our ship, and never with less than 10 or 12 Marks of Gold; amongst other
discourse, I asked him one day how many Wives he had, he told me but one, and
the reason was, she was so cross grained a Jade, she would let him have no
more; and then told me very seriously, that amongst them that custom was
inviolable.

Nevertheless, all women knowing very well, that variety of Wives and Children
is the greatest honor and reputation to their husbands, and what they
themselves will boast of to Strangers: when they see their husbands grow
wealthy, and in a capacity of maintaining them, they themselves will press them
to take more, which to speak truly, are no other then Concubines, they being
not at all concerned for their liberty or incontinence: the first has this
privilege also, that she lies 3 nights successively with the good man, whilst
the younger brood must be contented with one, and that according to the
priority of their Marriage. In short, they live very lovingly together, and
have seldom any jealousies or animosity amongst them. A good Merchant, or
Officer, will have twenty or thirty, according to his abilities. The King of
Fetu's Son-in-Law had forty, by whom he had a douzain of daughters, fourteen to
the douzain of the other Sex, and kept constantly a hundred Slaves to attend
them.

In those parts, who will may come into the Chamber of any Woman when she lies
in: as soon as the Child is safe in the world, they bring the good Woman a
bottle of drink made of Rice, and Mays, and Water and Wine, and Malaguette,
(not unlike our Pepper Posset) which having taken off kindly, they cover her
well, and then leave her three or four hours to her devotions, which being
over, she rises immediately, washes her Child, falls to her business, and
there is an end of that labor; but (to be sober) I could not but admire very
much the force of their temper, when I saw the very same thing done by a Slaves
Wife at Frederisbourg.

As soon as they have washed their Child, the Father and Mother give it
commonly a name, and for the most part, of some European or other they have
been beholding to, that done, they wrap it in a kind of blanket, and then lay
it in a skin upon the Rushes, where it lies quietly till it be three weeks or a
month old, after which time the Mother carries it at her back upon a piece of
wood with the legs under her armpits, tying its two hands about her neck,
where it hangs all day, and never comes off, but when she goes to bed; and this
is the reason why the Children of their Nobles, or better sort, have seldom
camous noses, because their Wives do not labor, nor carry their Infants about
them, as the others do, whose Children sleeping many times whilst the Mother is
walking or at work, knock their noses against their Shoulders, and so in time
they become flat: if they cry out for the teat, they throw their breasts over
their shoulders, and let them suck. Every morning they wash and rub them with
Oil of Palms.

By that time they be 7 or 8 months old, they lay them along upon the ground,
drawing them forward upon all four, like Kitlings, which possibly may be the
reason the Children go much sooner in these Countries than in Europe.

Whilst they be thus tender and young, the Parents put little works of gold
about their necks, wrapped up in the rind of the tree where they worship their
Fetiches, for fear the Devil should run away with them, and when they come to
be about 4 year old, they bind little branches of it (which they buy of their
Priests) about their arms, and their legs, wreathing and bending them into a
round figure, which they look upon as a great Antidote against any sickness or
disaster whatsoever. In this manner they continue their care of them till they
be 7 or 8 years old, but after that they feed upon the same as the Father and
Mother does, heaping up many time such nasty things as they find in the
Streets, which they eat afterward very heartily, when they are hungry: the boys
and the gyrls, being higledy-pigledy together, and all naked, it takes off much
of their modesty, and is a cause they are never ashamed of any thing; to which
may be added their want of correction, their Parents being so far from whipping
them, they never so much as rebuke them in the least.

From the seventh or eighth year of their age they learn to swim, which they do
with so much success and perfection, that when they are grown up, if their
Canoe oversets at any time at Sea, they are not affrighted, but swim back again
very quietly from whence they came, they will dive excellently well too, and
fetch up goods or any other thing that is accidentally cast away, upon which
score one may see the shore so full sometimes of little Blacks, one would think
them so many young Devils.

At 12 year old they fall under the jurisdiction of the Father, who shows them
which way to get their livelihood: if he be a fisherman he carries them to Sea,
shows them how to make a Canoe, and which way to take fish; if a Merchant he
teaches them the mystery of Trading, brings them acquainted with Foreigners,
and instructs them in this manner till they be 18 or 20, and can begin to do
something for themselves, then he gives them Slaves to do their work, and all
the care that is behind, is to help them to Wives, which from that time forward
they are always contriving.

The Gyrls are employed in keeping clean the houses, in picking their Rice,
beating their Mays, making their bread, managing their Kitchen, and buying or
selling at the Markets what is to be bought or sold, sometimes they make
baskets of rushes, sometimes matts (in which they are transcendantly excellent)
sometimes weave, but above all their care is greatest of their Father and
Mother, to see that they have their meat and drink in good hours, and that
nothing of their goods be imbezled; in short there is nothing of good
housewivry or frugality, that is wanting amongst them, and when they are once
married, they may teach that lesson to most of the Women of Europe.

Of their Houses, Household Stuff, Drink, Meat, Palme-Wine, and how it is made.
THe great Commerce they have had with the Europeans having learned them the
art of building, the Officers and great Merchants of this Country have
followed their directions and built themselves houses, with high and lofty
roofes, several appartments, with one chamber opening into another, and usually
at the door of their chamber 2 Slaves constantly attending with darts in their
hands in the nature of guards, which are releived at certain hours.

All their houses are made of earth, but the common people have their walls so
low, they seldom exceed the height of a man. Their beam and rafters, and the
whole frame of the house resting only upon them: the houses of the Grandees as
well as the commons are all thatched, and have all of them but one little
square hole, which serves for a door, to which they fasten a piece of board,
without either lock or hinges, like the poor Peasants in the Country to their
Garden-doors, and are contented to fasten them only with a rope, either without
or within. Their windows are small, the earth they make their floors with, very
close and compact, they have at least two chambers to a house, and this
character must be given them, that they are very curious in keeping them neat,
and paint them very frequently both without and within.

Amongst the common sort, there is nothing of houshould-stuff, or what is used
commonly about the house, to be seen, all is locked up in their Coffers, which
they buy of the Whites; except they be Merchants or great men, and then their
Tables and Chairs appear sometimes, but never no Beds, for they lie always
upon Skins spread upon the ground, or else upon Mattresses made of Rushes,
covering themselves with the Skins of Oxen, or some other Beast, without any
Boulster, except they be of the Nobles, and then they have Pillows under their
heads, and a good fire in the middle of their Room, but not the least hole for
a Chimney.

Every woman has her appartment, or little house, joining to her Husbands,
consisting of one or two Chambers, where she manages her own affairs by her
self, seldom eating or drinking together. Some of them go a Gossipping to
their Neighbors, and carry such as they have along with them. The good man
takes the same course, and he visits his Merchant, not so much as concerning
himself how squares go at home, the women being always very punctual to
accommodate them with every thing necessary, and to bring up their Children
carefully; yet sometimes on their Festivals, or upon some great occasion, their
Stomachs come down, and they feed very lovingly together.

As the women have the charge of the house and the money, so they make it their
whole business that neither of them miscarry in their hands. The men employ
themselves constantly abroad, either in matters of Trade, or in making of
Palm-wine, or fishing, as every man's genius inclines him: when they have got
any money, they give it still to their wives, who order it so well, they never
make the least unnecessary disbursement; they go every night themselves into
the granaries, delivering out such a proportion of corn as they judge will be
necessary for the whole family the next day.

By break of day the young girls are up and at work, beating their Rice, and
their Mays (which is called Turkey wheat amongst us) in a wooden Mortar, and
when it is bruised, they grind it (as the Painters do their colors.) betwixt
two stones, and so reduce it to powder, then kneading it with water and salt,
they divide it into a kind of penny loaves, and put it into a great earthen pot
that stands upon the fire, with a little earthen lid, they throw embers upon
it, and it is done; if it be well baked, it is very good, and without any ill
relish at all.

Their food generally is fish, though they have great store of flesh also,
which they boil or roast as they think good, but their fish is most commonly
baked, being seasoned first with water, and pepper, and salt: the great
Merchants who have Slaves to wait on them at the Table, do eat a l' Europeenne,
and have their Ragousts as well made as in France, which they learned of us,
and the Cook at the Fort of Denmark; yet there are some Mores will make a
Pottage, or a Ragoust with the best Cuisinier in Paris.

They eat great store of fruit, of Peace, Beans, and such like: they make
usually but two meals a day, that is, at Sunrising, and Sunsetting, where
they feed like Cormorants, and when they have eat never so much, are hungry
still, which I impute to nothing but an excessive heat within them, which gives
them a Canine, and perpetually insatiable appetite, insomuch that I have
observed them when they have been at dinner a Shipboard, one Black has eat as
much as six of us could do.

Their Mornings draught is either of water, or a kind of small beer, which they
call Poitou, and is made of Mays, but it is night before they drink any Wine,
and the reason is because the Peasant never brings it to the Market till after
dinner.

The Palm-Wine comes out of a Tree, not unlike our Date-trees; the Mores make a
hole at the top of the tree, to which they fasten a pott, like one of the Monks
pitchers, and the next day, or the day after, they find it full of a kind of
juice like Milk, sweet and very pleasant, but with a quality to inebriate The
Mores have got a trick of late to sophisticate it, and put water amongst it for
their gain, but it is no hard matter to discover it. This Wine cannot be kept
till next day, but will grow sower in a nights time, upon which grounds, the
Merchants, and other good fellows do meet, and drink smartly many times, but
with this ceremony always, that they leave a little in the bottom, which they
throw upon the ground in honor of their Fetiches.

Those who have no provision, nor means to make any, are forced to buy what
they want (at a little Market hard by) with what they have got by fishing, by
making Palme-Wine, by building or repairing of houses, carrying home what the
Merchants have bought on Shipboard, and such other servile employments as our
Mechanics in France live by: to which Market the Whites go also sometimes when
their Stomach hangs after fish.

Of their Markets, their manner of buying and selling, with a description of
their Measures and Weights.
THe best Market in all Africa is held every day at Cape-Corse, but we being at
wars with England, I could have no sight of that, and therefore must be
contented with the Market at Frederisbourg, which is not indeed so bigg, but
there is the same thing observed in a place designed for the same use, and that
is, that it be ordinarily in the midst of the Town.

By break of day the Peasants come in with their Sugarcanes, bound up like
Fagots, their fruits of all sorts, Plums, Potatoes, Turnips, Carrets, Citrons,
Oranges, Rice, Mays, Malaguette, Bread, Pullets, Fish, Eggs, and whatever is
necessary for the life of man; after Dinner their Palme-wine comes in, and what
Fish is taken since the morning.

They have never no confusion in their Markets, each Commodity has a peculiar
place assigned for it by the Merchant, which is observed with great order;
their Tobacco is sold in the leaf, which being dried by the fire, they light it
and smoke, their industry as yet not having been great enough to make it up
into Rowls.

There is no such thing amongst them as trusting or credit, no Money no
Merchandise there, every one brings his Gold in his hand. If the Commodity be
of small price, they take their Gold and poise it upon the end of their finger,
adding or substracting as they think fit; but if considerable, and of great
value, they out with their Scales and weigh it.

Their Scales are made of two flat pieces of Copper something broader than our
Crown pieces, which they hang by a thread at the end of a short stick, and
ballancing so exactly, there can be nothing more true. Having no Needle, they
make a noose of thread with their thumb and fasten to the middle, in which,
instead of weights, they hang a certain red grain they call Tacous, each of
which grains weighs about two-Penny weight, with which Pian Piano, they will
weigh a Mark of Gold, yet there are some great Merchants which have Scales like
ours, which they have bought lately of us.

All that comes to this Market, (which is kept every day in the week ( Sunday
excepted) is Tribute free, and pays no duty to the King.

There are others that resemble our Fairs, and fall out not above twice in the
year, to which all the whole Country repairs, for there is never in any of
those Kingdoms two Fairs kept in one day, left one should be a hindrance and
disadvantage to the other. By the report I have had, it is to these places they
bring the best and finest of their things, and whatever they buy of us, as
likewise to the ordinary Markets which are kept farther up into the Country,
but to those Markets which are kept nearer the Sea, there is nothing comes but
what is necessary to humane life, which the Peasants bring (like so many Mules)
upon their backs, and that but from 5 or 6 places: yet so strict are they in
their Religion, and do so much postpone the considerations of their advantage
and gain, that if any of these Fairs does happen to fall out upon a Sunday, it
is ipso facto put off till the next day.

THEIR RELIGION. Of their Sundays, Feasts, Devotions, Gods or Fetiches, of
their Sacrifices, Priests, and Habits.
THough amongst these poor people, there is not the least tincture of the true
Religion to be seen, yet they observe a Sabbath (which is our Tuesday) very
strictly: Every man rests that day from his labor, the Peasants bring nothing
to the Markets, and no man is permitted to traffic, unless it be those upon
the Sea side, who have liberty to go aboard, any Vessel in the Road, and to
truck and make bargains as they please. The rest employ their times wholly at
their devotions, and do observe it with much more punctuality then we do our
Sundays with us.

They meet altogether in a place, in the middle of which there is a great Tree,
called the Tree of their Fetiche, of the bark off which they make the fillets,
with which they bind their little pieces of Gold to their arms, and their
legs. At the foot of this Tree a Table is spread, (the feet dressed with several
Crowns and Garlands made of the boughs of trees) upon which they set Rice,
Millet, Mays, Fruit, Meat, and Fish, with Wine, and Oil of palms, to eat and
drink to their Fetiches, they dance, and sing, and jump up and down all day
about this Tree, making a most obstreperous noise with Copper Basins, and other
instruments for the purpose.

They wash their faces that morning with particular care, and more exactly then
all the week after. The first bit of what ever they eat, they throw down upon
the ground in honor of their Gods, and at night the Captain or the Governor
distributes Palme-Wine to all the Inhabitants, the Peasants being obliged to
bring it to him that evening.

Ask them about any thing of their faith, and they will look down upon the
ground, but never give you an answer; only one of them told us that we had a
very good God, that gave us so many fine things: They all of them believe an
other life, but where, whether above or below, they cannot tell. For which
reason, lest their Father or Mother should be hungry and starve, they put meat
and Palme-Wine very often into their graves, to the end that if they be thirsty
or hungry, they may repair thither, and be relieved.

When they hear it thunder, rain hard, or the wind blow very strong, there is
not one of them to be seen in the streets, all hide themselves in their houses,
and cry, the Gods of the Whites are angry. I asked one of them of what color
his God was, and he told me black: The Devil is so dreadful to them, they
tremble at his very naming, they say he beats them, and makes them do ill
things for their Fetiches, for whom they have an incredible superstition,
though they be all of them inanimate, and some of them so nastily villainous,
one would not touch them with a pair of tongs.

They every body carry some of them about with them, some are made of the end
of horns, filled up with ordure, others of little figures, as the heads of some
creature or other, and a hundred such like impertinences, which their Priests
sell them at their own price, and pretend they found them under the tree of the
Fetiche.

They tie this tree about (which is the place where they sacrifice) with little
roaps of straw, and after their Ceremonies are over, they take those ropes, and
stringing their gold work upon them, they fasten them to their arms and legs,
and then think themselves safe against any mischief whatever.

For the preservation of their houses, they have a sort of Fetiches which are
planted at their doors, and they are no better than our poles, or hooks, we
pull down the boughs withal when we gather our fruit: Of these Fetiches their
Priests set a great number about a stone, which (by their tradition) is as old
as the world, and when they have been there a certain time, the Priests sell
them to the people.

If at any time any trouble befall them, they repair immediately to their
Priest, for a new Fetiche (the old one is to be trusted no longer) who most
graciously supplies them for their money, and into the bargain, he gives them a
piece of Suet, or Tallow, with two or three Parrets feathers set right up, or
else a certain herb; the King of Fetu's Son-in-Law had the head of an Ape for
his Fetiche.

They do all of them abstein from something or other, in honor of their
Fetiche, with this opinion, that if ever they eat or drink of that, after they
promised abstinence (which is usually at their Marriage) they shall dye upon
the spot; for which reason, one eats no Beef, another no Goat, another no Hens,
this man drinks no Wine, and the other no Strong Water, which they observe so
exactly, they will sooner dye than be persuaded or forced to the contrary.

These Fetiches I have spoken of hitherto, are but private Fetiches, and belong
but to particular men: but they have another sort of Fetiches which are
tutelary to the whole Country, as for example, sometimes such a Mountain,
sometimes such a kind of Tree, sometimes such a Stone, sometimes such a sort of
Fish, or such a Species of Birds, which they look upon and worship as so many
Gods. If a Negroe by accident kills any of those Birds, he is punished
sufficiently, and if a White, he runs a great hazard of his life. I saw one of
these Birds at Frederisbourg, a little thing about the bigness of a Wrenn, with
a Beak like a Linnet, marked with black and white, and the Feathers a kind of
light brown: if any of these at any time are seen flying about in the Gardens
of a More, it is looked upon as a good Omen, and he throws it meat immediately.

The Consecrated Trees are ordinarily those about which their Sacrifices are
performed; they believe whoever cuts such a one down, destroys (without more
ado) all the fruit in the Country: and therefore if there be any such
Malefactors, they are punished with death, as it happened to the Hollanders at
Moure in the year 1598, before they had built the Fort of Nassau, where 8 or 10
of them were killed the 8th. of May, for having cut down a Tree dedicated to
their Fetiches.

The highest Mountains, and such as are most subject to Thunder and Lightning,
they imagine are the Residences of their Gods, and therefore they pay great
honor and respect to them: at the bottom of them they will lay Rice, Millet,
Mays, Bread, Wine, Oil, and other things, that they may eat and drink if they
be hungry or dry.

Their Stones (which they fancy to be Fetiches) are like our great Landmarks
in the Country, (or such as are laid to distinguish and determine the bounds
or limits of a Country Parish) and they believe them as old as the world:
about these it is their Priests do set their Cruches which they sell afterward
to the people for conservation of their houses, as I mentioned before.

Besides these Fetiches aforesaid, if five or six Neighbors build near one
another, in any place divided from the rest of the Town, they will have a
Fetiche to themselves, and will sacrifice and pray to him for their
preservation.

Thursday the fourteenth of April being at Frederisbourg, whilst they were at
Prayers above, I went down, and at the entrance of a house which stood alone by
it self, I observed a man and a woman, bleeding of a Hen (which they had
pricked on purpose) upon certain leaves which they had placed upon the ground,
and after it had done bleeding, they cut it into mamocks, threw them down upon
the leaves, and then turning their faces upon one another, and kissing their
hands, they cried, Me Cusa, Me Cusa, Me Cusa, which is as much as to say, Make
me good. I let them alone till their ceremony was done, and then asked them
what they were about, they told me, that the Fetiche of that quarter had beaten
them, and they by way of atonement, had given him a Hen for his dinner: As I
was looking down upon their leaves, (or an herb rather which grows upon the
Seaside) they desired me not to touch them, and told me whoever eat of that
Pullet, in half an hours time, would be as dead as a herring; but I was so
stout-heared, I took it up, had it broyl'd upon the coals, by my Lacquey,
eating some part of it in their presence, and throwing the rest to the piggs:
the poor people were amazed, and stood gaping to see me fall down dead, or sink
over head and ears into the earth immediately. I asked them to see their
Fetiche, they carried me into a little Court, to a kind of a Tyle wrapped about
with straw, and told me that was the Fetiche which had beaten them. Well said
I, I Will be revenged, and throwing it on the ground, I break it into a hundred
pieces, and planted a Cross in the Room on it. I taught them to sign themselves
also, broak all their Cruches about the door, and having given them each a
little cross for their pockets, and bid them when ever the Fetiche came to
plague them again, that they should sign themselves with the sign of the
Cross, take that out and kiss it, and they should hear no more of their Fetiche
ever after; they heard me very patiently, and made such relations at home, that
a whole Church of them came to me next day, desiring to swop a Fetiche for a
Crucifix: We came immediately to a bargain, and when I began to examine my
Fetiche, I found it nothing but a piece of putrified earth, nointed over with
suet, and grease, and oil of Palms, with five or six Parrot-feathers bolt
upright in the middle, to which morning and night they paid their constant
devotions.

I persuaded them afterward to show me to their Fetiche General, which they
did: I found it in a plain where they made all their Sacrifices; it was nothing
but a stone covered with earth, which I routed immediately, and brake five
hundred of their poles which they had planted about it; from thence I went to
their Priest, to see what Fetiches he had to sell, he told me I had one, which
was one of the poles I had brought along in my hand, and would have had me
paid him for it: I took him by the elbow, and carried him to the Master
Fetiche, and when he saw he was demolished, Lord! what a pickle he was in, he
roared and cried out to his Neighbors, and all of them looked upon it as a
miracle that I was not as dead as a door-nail in the twinkling of an eye. I
told him, Sir, for your payment I have set up this Cross, and whosoever touches
it (unless upon the knee) is a dead man in a minute; at which words, they ran
home as fast as they could, yelling and crying out to one another, whilst I
returned to the Castle.

They have so great an opinion, and veneration for their Priests, the whole
world is not able to disabuse them: if they have one bit better than other,
it is kept for them; they are the only people amongst the Mores, that are
suffered not to work, are nourished at others cost, and charess'd all ways they
can think of, to the end they may afford them their prayers. They sell Fetiches
(as I have said before) to the common people, persuading them, they found them
hanging upon the Fetiches Tree, which they believe so obstinately, their own
eyes are not sufficient to convince them; for if at any time they see the
contrary, they will sooner believe it an illusion, than imagine their Priests
would deceive them: so blind are these poor people, being led by those who are
blinder than themselves.

The Habit of their Priests resembles a Coat of Arms, and is made of some
course linen, or serge, about which they have a scarf, set with little bones
of broyl'd Pullets, like the Cockle-shells worn by the Pilgrims of St. Michael;
the rest of their bodies is quite naked, they have garters about their legs,
made of the Fibers of their Fetiche Tree: all people, even to the Kings
themselves, are ambitious of their friendship, that they may entreat their
Fetiches to be favorable to them, either in their Trade, or any thing else.

For my part, I believe they are made all of them by the Priest, and that they
talk and converse with the Devil, who communicates with them, and teaches them
which way to cheat the people so easily; and that which makes me say it, is
this, they always mutter out some words to their Fetiches, before they
(...)them.

Of their Superstition, their Swearing upon their Fetiches, their manner of
pacifying them, when they think they are angry, and the Burials of the Dead.
THeir Superstition toward their Fetiches, is so positive, and dogmatical,
nothing in this world is able to convince them. Their chief end in carrying
them about them, is to keep them from any ill might befall them, and when any
does, they believe the fault is in themselves, and that they have not performed
their duties toward them.

They dread Swearing by their Fetiches above all things, believing it
impossible to live an hour after, if they swear false; for which reason when
the good woman goes to the Market, or abroad at any time, the good man takes
his Fetiche, and putting it into a cup of drink made with Palm-wine, he gives
it her, and makes her swear to be faithful to him in his absence, and swears
her again (whether she has or not) when she returns.

When we were before Asbini, there was one called Attire, who complained that
he was robbed of a Mark of Gold in our Ship: Monsieur Wantesk took a crust of
bread, and bid him swear by his Fetiche, and then (eating that) wish the Devil
might carry him away in an hours time, if it were not true; but his Conscience
being too tender, he refused it, and made himself so ridiculous amongst his
Brethren, he never durst appear in our ship afterward.

The eight and twentieth of April, being with the Danish General about Supper
time, the King of Fetu's Son-in-law (called Janque Senece) arriv d, the General
suspected he had nimm'd away a Ring from him, but his Excellence protested the
contrary, offering to swear, and to swallow his Fetiche upon the premises. I
had a great mind (upon the tidings) to be present at the Ceremony; I went in,
and found a Faggot of Thorns in a Basket which a Slave carried under his arm,
covered over with a Skin, I made bold to uncover it, and in the middle of the
Faggot, I saw a piece of Suet and Wax, with Parrots Feathers, little burnt
bones of Pullets, Plumes of the Bird which was Fetichissimo of that Country,
and several other nastie things with them. One of their Priests was present,
who told him he had made it as strong as was possible, and that if he lied, he
could not outlive it a quarter of an hour; for all that, he took a piece of
bread, and a glass of Wine, and was falling to work, but the General stopped him,
and would not suffer him to drink it. I put my hand to this Fetiche, the Priest
saw me, started, and bid me have a care, If I took it up, I was a dead man. I
lifted it out of the basket for all that, he stepped back, and cried out to me,
if you turn, or move it, the fire will fall down from Heaven, and consume you:
I took it and twirl d it three times on the right hand, and as many on the
left: and then threw it dash against the ground, leaping upon it, and breaking
it into a thousand pieces. They said I would dye in the morning, and were very
much amazed to find me alive afterward. But they recollected, and told me, I
was not dead, because I did not believe: I answered, They were fools, not to be
as great Infidels as I? They replied, It was impossible, their Fetiches would
not suffer them: Quoth I, Who is this Fetiche? They told me, It was a great
black Dog, that appeared very frequently at the foot of a great Tree. I asked
them, If they had seen him? they told me, No, but their Priests and he were
very great, conferred notes often, and they gave them a relation of their
discourse.

Besides the ways of appeasing their Fetiches, which I have mentioned before,
they have other whimseys as memorable: If they have not so good fortune a
fishing, as they use to have, they imagine their Fetiche is offended, and has
driven them away. If their Trade be but dull, they are of the same opinion,
believe them to be the cause, and fall to their devotions immediately.

If a poor fisherman goes out, takes little, and returns after all his patience
and pains, not much richer than he went, he concludes his Fetiche is
disgruntled, repairs presently to his Priest, presents him with a token of his
Love, and with tears in his eyes, begs of him, that he would set them to rights
again; after which he marches with his Wife and Children (as neat, and as trim,
as hands can make them) to the Sea side, with great branches of their Fetiche
Tree about their necks, which after certain ceremonies they throw into the Sea,
with Rice, Millet, and Mays, crying out a thousand times, Me cusa, Me cusa.

If the King observes that Gold comes not down so plentifully as formerly, or
that his traffic and duties decrease, to work he goes instantly with his
Fetiche, he prays, he sacrifices, he treats, spreading of meat, and drink,
about the Mountains and Trees that are consecrated to him, which the Minister
of Frederisbourg told me he had many times seen.

Having seized upon two Mores on Holy-Thursday, to secure some debts we had
owing us upon the shore. On Friday morning we observed one of them to wash his
face more than ordinary, to mutter out some words to himself, and to take
water, and throw it behind him: we asked him for what reason he did so, and he
told us, it was to implore the Fetiche for rain, that Gold might be washed down
from the Mountains, and the Merchants enabled by that to set them at liberty.

After they have sown their Corn (of the manner of which I shall give a
relation by and by) that night they burn all the thorns they can find in the
field, and then skipping, and dancing, and singing, whatever they have more
than ordinarily precious, they throw it (with Palme-Wine) into the fire,
conceiving thereby to render their Fetiche more favorable in their Harvest: By
which we may see the deplorable blindness of those poor Creatures, and be
excited to give God thanks, who has illuminated us with the rays of the Gospel.

The General of Frederisbourg, having notice that there was one of them dead in
the Castle, gave me advertisement immediately that I might be present at the
Funeral Ceremonies, a thing which the Mores will never permit, but by
constraint.

When any one dies amongst them, they put the body into a Coffin made of
Osiers, the bark of Trees, or of Rushes, which indeed is no more than a
panier, the women, the relations, friends and neighbors that are there, run up
and down the house, crying, and lamenting, and interrogating the dead person
why he would leave them.

If it be a woman that dies, her daughter or some other woman, (for the men are
never called to their funerals) goes from house to house complaining and making
her moan, and with the gold she finds about her, or in the house, buys an Ox or
a Sheep, which she gives to the Priest, to pray to the Fetiche of the dead
person, to conduct her into a place of repose: the Priest orders this Ox, or
Mutton, to be killed, and then sprinkling the blood about in honor to her
Fetiche, he begs of it, that it would not interrupt her in her passage to the
other world, and that it would pardon whatever she had done amiss. Those who
are present being put by him into a ring, in a corner of the Chamber, he places
himself in the midst, and dressed very sprucely with Rasade, Corail, or plates of
Gold, sets a great quantity of Pease, Beans, Rice, Mays, and Oil of Palms
about them, and then sprinkles them with the blood of a Pullet, which is
killed, and afterward makes a kind of a necklace of certain herbs, which he
hangs about his neck, whilst the good women cut the Pullet into morsells, and
present them before the Fetiche. After this the Priest having muttered out some
prayers to himself, he takes water, or Palme-Wine in his mouth, and spirts it
upon the most ancient of the Fetiches, from which he takes a proportion of suet
and grease, and mingling it with the leaves of his collar, and other things, he
stamps and bruises them altogether with his feet, till they be brought to a
consistence, then making them up into a great mass, he separates again into
several little pieces, which being wrapped up in the rind of a consecrated tree,
he distributes to the whole company, reserving a part to be buried with the
corpse, to make her journey more prosperous into the other world, and these
Fetiches are looked upon as the most propitious of all.

This Ceremony being over, the body is exposed about half a day, with the head
bound about, and the arms extended, after which the women carry it to the place
of its Sepulture (it being their Province to bury the dead) the men never
stirring in that case, unless the burial be to be in some other Village, which
is frequent by reason of a custom they have of burying every body in the Town
they were born, and then they attend the Corpse with their weapons in their
hands; but this person I saw being buried hard by, I had the opportunity of
being a Spectator of the whole Ceremony.

The Corpse being brought to the place of its Burial, the men which inhabited
there, dug a hole of about four or five foot deep, and put it in, but so, as
the Earth came not near it, then turning about the Grave, they bid him adieu,
with great noise and ejulation; that Wife which he had most kindness for, threw
his Fetiches into the hole, and at last laid a good part of his housholdstuff
(as his Kettles and Clothes) by his side, and his Arms a top on him: if he
loved any thing more than ordinary, as Palm-wine, or any thing else, they
placed it by him, with Rice, Millet, Mays, and whatever they thought necessary
for the life of man, that he might want nothing whither he was a going. Over
his Grave they set up a little Shedd, to keep it from the weather, which
continues there till it be rotten, without being touched by any one. He which
makes the Grave, and buries the dead body, has the liberty to take his choice
of such things which they put into the Grave with the Corpse, and it is looked
upon as a due, if he be not paid otherwise for his pains.

If a woman dies in Travail, and the Child dies also, they are buried together,
and the Infant in the arms of the Mother.

These Ceremonies being finished, they return weeping and lamenting to their
houses, where both men and women do wash themselves forthwith, after which they
eat the Beef or the Mutton which was bought, passing the rest of the day in
feasting, and jollity, only every year they carry meat and drink, and set it at
his grave, lest he should be hungry or thirsty in the other world.

Of their old Men, their Slaves, their Lame, their Servants, the Diseases they
are usually subject to, with their Cures, and the way to prevent them.
THough there is but little love lost amongst them, and the men, and the women
(unless it be their first wives) quit one another as they please, yet they are
troubled and concerned when it happens. So great an aversion have these people
against idleness, that amongst them the aged men and women are not allowed it,
but are constrained to get their livelihood by such employments as their age
and infirmities will bear, some of them being set on work either to blow the
bellows in some forge, to supervise the business of the house, or some such
trifling affair, which requires not much pains: the lame, and such as by any
other means are rendered incapable of working, are forced to the wars, or if
unable for that, they are sent to sell and barter for their Commodities at the
Market, or else assist at the making of their oil of Palm, make Mattresses, or
what else their strength will admit.

They have not many Slaves upon this Coast, it not being permitted to any but
Nobles, to Trade in that nature by which means they are not allowed to
entertain any but for their necessary service in their families or fields.

These Slaves are commonly such poor miserable Creatures, as having not
wherewithal to maintain or keep themselves alive, are glad to sell themselves
to the rich Merchants of that Country (that are all Noblemen) who to know
them from others, do give them always a particular mark of their own, if they
endeavor to escape, for the first time they cut off one ear, and for the
second the other, if they attempt it a third time, and be taken, they either
sell them away, or cut off their heads, as they please. The children of these
poor people are Slaves as well as the Parents, and obliged to do whatever they
are commanded, as watring their fish, spinning Rasade, etc.

The King has several sorts of Slaves, some like these I have mentioned; others
which are forfeited to him for want of paying their Fines, or other penalties
imposed for some fault they have committed: and both of them sent commonly to
be sold at the place set apart for the Trucking of Slaves.

The Kings Slaves are distinguishable from other men, only by this that they
have no hats, but go always naked with their heads. The Inhabitants will not
be called Mores (which is an appellation they say belongs more properly to
their Slaves) but Pretos, which is as much as Negroes. They generally use their
Slaves very well, seldom or never giving them any correction.

Though they have not so many diseases amongst them, as we, yet they are not
without their share, and those as troublesome as ours: the most frequent are
the Neapolitan disease, pains in the head, burning Fevers, (which for the most
part are occasioned by their women) the Chollick, and worms which grow betwixt
the flesh and the skin, to which strangers also being subject, I shall speak a
word or two anon.

For the Neapolitan disease (which is not infamous amongst them) they use only
Salseparilla, which they boil in a Skillet to such a height, and then straining
it, they use it as a diet-drink, and (as they say themselves) with very great
success.

Their pains in their head they cure by fomentations made of certain herbs
which they lay upon the Patients face, and it takes the pain away immediately.
Sometimes they raise little blisters upon it, which then applying to them a
certain kind of Earth, they have amongst them, it asswages and cures them also.

The Chollick, and Wind in the Stomach, is not over frequent amongst the
Natives, but all Strangers are much subject to them, till they be accustomed to
the air of that Country.

To prevent and fortify ones self against them, it is good to bind about the
Stomach very hard, to keep ones self warm in the night with a Waste-coat, or
some other thing, and if notwithstanding all this, it be not prevented, it is
not amiss to take 4 or 5 drops of balm of Sulphur in a little Strong-water,
cover ones self well, and sweat, the next day let blood, then purge two days
after, and it is odds but he will be well. It Is very dangerous sleeping upon the
ground, in three days many times they are dead of an incurable cold.

Sometimes they bath them with Mallows, Marsh Mallows, Pellitory of the Wall,
Powder of Cassia, each half an ounce, then they boil it upon the fire to a
certain degree, and put ten or twelve drops of Oil of Anniseeds amongst it,
which makes it sovereign; but the best way of all is to keep the Stomach warm,
and have a great care of sleeping upon the ground.

As to the worms which grow betwixt the skin and the flesh, Foreigners are as
much subject to them, as they: they breed over all the body, but principally in
the thighs, legs, and most fleshy parts. Sometimes they have them two years
together, and never perceive it till about a fortnight before they come out. By
the report of those who have had them, there is no torment like them, and it
exceeds the most violent pain in the teeth.

There has been great inquisition into the cause of it, some attribute it to
their Palm-wine, others to the Fish which is eaten upon that Coast, others to
their Water, every one arguing according to his fancy, but all of them wide of
the Mark; for those Mores who live but forty leagues up higher into the
Country, know nothing of it at all, nor are in any danger of the Evening dew.

The most probable cause is the dew which falls in the Evening upon the Coast,
occasioned by the Breezes from the Sea, which being very cold, the Mores do
constantly make fires at their feet when they go to sleep, and indeed nothing
is of more importance to ones health, than to keep off the chilness of that
Air, and to preserve ones self as warm as one can. The ill water they drink,
together with the nastiness of their diet, may add something, but it is the
nipping Winds and Rains which fall upon the Coast, and makes those parts so
subject to worms: in June, July, and August, (which are the most rainy months
amongst them) experience tells us, those worms are most apt to engender. In
short, every drop of their Rain is bigger than a large Pea: if in a shower of
that nature, one be wet never so little, and lets his clothes dry upon his
back, besides that in three days his clothes shall be rotten, if he has no
worms, he shall be sure of a distemper that will be very dangerous.

We may affirm therefore it is the rain, as well as the dew, which produces
these worms, how, or which way, I leave to the Philosopher, and Physician to
resolve; but this I am sure, having many times put out a bit of flesh in the
rain, or in the evening dew, I found as soon as the beams of the Sun glanced
but upon it, it turned all into Worms, which experiment I made very often, and
am convinced by it, that they come but those two ways, either by the rain or
the dew. Of those Worms which grow in the body, there are two sorts, one
lesser, the other greater, and some of them as slender as a hair; the least are
half a foot long, the larger a foot, and some there are of an ell, but very
rarely.

When you are once plagued with them, there is nothing to be done till they are
out, which is evident by the tumors they raise in the flesh, and the swelling
of the part where they lie. There is nothing like keeping ones bed, and opening
the corner of the skin gently with a knife to give them free passage, if they
perceive them advancing, they may hasten their journey, and pull them out by
little and little, if they find any stop or reluctance in the Worm, they must
let them alone (lest they break them) and tie a hair or piece of silk about
them, to keep them from going back: sometimes several of them will come out at
one hole, but they must have patience, for their motion is but slow: above all
things they must have a care of breaking them, for they are of so venomous a
quality, there is no way to preserve the person against its virulence, but by
cutting off the part. When they are out, they usually rub the place with butter
and salt, and wash it with Seawater, which in that case is sovereign.

Their best way to secure themselves against them, is to put file-dust into
their breeches and shoes to keep their feet dry, and if at any time they be
wet, to change their clothes and their drawers immediately, by no means to
sleep upon the ground, to have a care of the Seraine or evenings dew, to bind
themselves up close, and keep their stomachs warm, to abstein from Women, to
use confection of Hyacinth, Alkermes, or Clarie, to keep ones self clean, avoid
the rain, which the Mores are as feared of as the Plague, shutting up
themselves as soon as it begins but to mizzle; if one be wett, to dry his
cloths, and by these observations they may be probably prevented. I saw a
person of quality who had been there 17 years, who told me he had never been
troubled with them but the first year, and that was for want of these cautions.
But to continue these stories of death and diseases, is but to make the Reader
chagrin and melancholy; it is time now I should to something of more pleasure
and divertisement.

Of their Dances, and Feasts, both private and solemn.
THe Inhabitants of the Coasts of Africa, are great lovers of Music, and
songs, but especially of dancing, in which they spend two or three hours every
evening before they go to bed: to this purpose the men and women both, dress
themselves as fine as they can, putting on their bracelets of Gold and Ivory,
and trimming up their hair; the men carry little fanns in their hands, made of
the tayls of Elephants, or Horses, (like the boasom of feathers wherewith
pictures are dusted, saving that these are gilt at both ends) and meet all at a
place about Sunset; Being come together, those who make the Music, draw into
a corner by themselves, their Instruments are a kind of Drum, or Tabor, made of
the trunck of a Tree, hollowed: A Cane with several holes in it, like a flute,
a Tambour de Basque, and an instrument something near our Guitars, with six
strings; all which playing together, make no contemptible harmony. As soon as
they strike up, the men and women divide immediately, and putting themselves
(two and two) directly against one another, they begin their dance, marching up
to one another, and then recoyling in good measure, clacking their fingers, as
they pass nodding their heads, whispering certain words into one another ears,
tossing about their fanns, with a thousand postures and gesticulations, and in
this manner spending the evenings till they go to bed: this dance is not much
unlike one of our Filoux in France; some of their women and maids will take a
hoop and throw it upon the ground, then skip, and dance about it, and at last
take it up with their toes. In short, dancing is in so great request amongst
them, they have Schools on purpose to teach them.

Besides Sundays, they have particular Festivals, and particular dances
belonging to them; for the days which are observed by their Kings, I shall
speak of in a Chapter by themselves.

On the 26 of April being at Frederisbourg, I saw one of these Feasts, which
are commonly instituted in memory of some advantage befaln the State: This that
I was at, was celebrated by the King of Fetu's Son-in-Law, who had gained a
great battle against the King of Acanis, and the Lord of Abrambou, on the same
day the year before, in which engagement as the General of Frederisbourg told
me, there were slain on both sides above 5000 men. The Festival began at
Cape-Corse, where the Son-in-Law lived, who made a great Feast, distributed
largely to all that were there, who troubled themselves that day with naught
but their sports, and at night came to finish their ceremony at the Castle of
Frederisbourg; we were just setting down to the Table, when on a sudden we
heard a great noise of showts and acclamations, and immediately their Drums and
their Trumpets strike up. Their Trumpets are of Elephants teeth made hollow: we
perceived presently it was the Kings Son-in-Law, with his Drum before him, 15
or 20 Trumpets, about 12 of his Wives, and about 60 Slaves after him, two of
which attended him with great Bucklers, carried on purpose to cover him, and
two others with his, Darts, his Bow, and his Arrows. The Women were dressed in
Damask and Taffaties, which they wrapped about them from their breasts to their
mid-legg, wearing several Fetiches upon their heads, several little plates of
gold in bracelets, about their wrists and ankles, or else of Rasade or Ivory,
their hair very well dressed, according to the mode of that Country: the Kings
Son in-Law had a piece of blew Taffaty about his wast, whose two ends were
drawn betwixt his legs, and trail'd almost upon the ground. Before him he had
a little faulchion carried, he had a Cap trimmed with pieces of the skulls of
such persons as he had killed, and covered all over with plumes of feathers: on
his arms and his legs, he had several little pieces of gold excellently well
wrought, and two little fanns in his hands made of horse-hair; When they were
received into the Court, after a hundred shouts and acclamations, the men put
themselves on one side, the women on the other, and the Slaves, Trumpets, and
Drums behind him, who sounded as they passed, and made all the noise and
clamor was possible; having separated themselves, they began their
approaching, and retiring with great exactness, turning themselves this way and
that way about half a quarter of an hour: after this he gave his 2 fanns to one
of his Slaves, and taking his Dart in his hand, he pretended to dart it at the
women, who were doing the same thing on their side; but the Slaves got about
him, and covered him quite with their bucklers: this having lasted a pretty
while, on a sudden he claps his hand upon his sword, and run a tilt at the
women, who did the same to him with sticks they had in their hands for that
purpose, and then mingling themselves pell-mell with the Slaves (who had swords
also in their hands, and made as if they struck them as hard as they could)
they gave a great yell, divided again, and so made an end of their Ceremony.

The General treated them very kindly with Strong waters and other things, and
whispered to me, that their manner of fighting was at that rate; in short, this
Son-in-Law of his Majesty was not quit of this sopperie at less charge than 500
Marks of Gold, from thence he went to the Governor of the Mores in
Frederisbourg, to pass that night with him, and as we heard, he stayed very
graciously with him till the next day at noon.

Of their Exercises, their Workmen, their Trades, their Merchandises, their
Fishing, which way it is used and the Duty they pay to their King.
AS they have several Trades and employments amongst them, so are they very
constantly employed, especially if there be no Ships upon their Coasts to
divert them. They have Goldsmiths which work very curiously, they have
Carpenters that make their Canoes, they have people that Fish, they have others
that cut down their wood, the women in the mean time keeping their Markets, and
selling their Commodities to Merchants which come higher out of the Country.

Those who come aboard to negotiate with us are commonly Officers, or Captains
of some Town, who are all of them Merchants: their manner of coming aboard us,
is in a little Canoe, very neatly made, rowed by two Mores, the Merchant in the
middle upon a little chair, with his sword lying by him.

Being of several places, they have a different way of Trading, those who live
farther up the Country, and are neither acquainted with the language, nor
manner of Commerce, which is practiced by the Whites, are constrained to make
use of a sort of Brokers to negotiate for them, and do usually give them good
recompense for their pains; this is an advantage accrews particularly to such
as live near the Seaside, and (so generally are they devoted to their profit)
the greatest Merchants amongst them will not refuse the employment, if there be
the least prospect and expectation of gain.

Most commonly, it is those who live upon the Coasts, or within 10 leagues
distance of the Sea, that buy up the Commodities which are brought in by such
Ships as come into their Roads, and sell them afterward when the Ships are
gone, to the Inlanders, seldom for less profit than six per Cent.

Having been deceived sometimes formerly, they are now grown so subtle and
wary, there is no cheating them any more; it is our business now rather to be
upon our guards, lest they be too cunning for us. They have so great judgment
and insight into Merchandise, they will distinguish whether a piece of Say be
dyed at Leyden or Harlem.

When their bargains are made, and their business done, they fall a begging and
bawling for some present or other (which they call Dache) and will never be
satisfied without it. The Hollanders brought up this Custom at first, to
cajole, and work them off from the Portugais: But what they did voluntarily
then, is become now such a Custom, that some of the Mores are so confident, as
to demand what present they shall have, before they will admit any proposition
of Traffic.

They have one pretty odd kind of superstition amongst them, if a Merchant
sneezes as he comes out of his house, and turns his head by accident, toward
the right hand, (which they call Eninfan) they believe they shall run a great
hazard of losing their goods that day. If he turns it to the left (which they
call Abnicon) though they were sure to gain the profits of a Kingdom, they
would not stir out that day from their houses.

When they return from our Ship they have always store of boys, and young
fellows attending upon the shore, to carry the Commodities they have bought to
their houses, for which the Merchant gives them some little pieces of gold as a
reward. Those who live higher up the Country have all their Commodities
brought down upon the backs of their Slaves, making no use of horse, or any
other Creature in that business, which is no small inconvenience to a Merchant
that comes a hundred leagues to us cross the Country, and forces them to
travel with their Arms.

Fishing being their principal employment, every morning there are twenty or
thirty Canoes to be seen sailing out of their harbors, and dividing themselves
instantly into all quarters when they come out to Sea. In each of them they
have commonly two men, one to fish, and the other to manage the Canoe, and by
them they have their swords and their Victuals. Their Canoes are very neat and
beautiful, painted and adorned with all possible care; they fasten Fetiches to
them, to preserve them from storms and disasters, and when they have done
fishing, they draw them up under a place on purpose to keep them dry. They are
so light, two men will carry one of them as they please.

In this manner they go a fishing every morning, yet not so much by design, as
by natural impulse, the wind from the hills forcing them as it were to Sea, and
altering at night, and blowing hard upon the shore, they are brought home again
by the same necessity and violence: and this they do constantly every day but
Sunday, never failing when the weather will endure it.

The most general way of fishing, is with little hooks, of which they fasten
twenty (sometimes) to one line; others make use of lines with a kind of
slipping nooses, but this is as rarely at Sea, as it is ordinary in their
Rivers, and Lakes within Land. They are much delighted with fishing in the
night, which they do by the light of Torches greased over with Oil of Palm, or
Rosen, hooking the fish up as they come near them. Others go up to the bellies
into the Sea, with a lighted Torch in one hand, and a Net in the other, which
they throw over them with great dexterity: and from hence we may collect how
industrious they are, neglecting no time, nor labor to get themselves a
livelihood. At their return, they are attended by several boys, who are
always waiting in the harbor to help them home with their fish, and to make
up their Lines and their Nets for them, for which pains, they usually gratify
them with some little present of fish.

But the Fisherman and Merchant are no sooner returned, but the Receiver of the
Office (in which the Duties and Customs are paid; for the King in whose
Dominion that Port is) stands ready always to receive them, and to carry with
him a full third of whatever they bring on shore) to bring the Merchant to a
higher composition, for there being no fixed prices set, it is the Merchants
business to get off as cheap, and the Receivers to hoist him as high as he can:
besides these duties, the foreign Merchants which are not of that Kingdom, are
oblig d sometimes to give a Mark of gold more for a free passage through the
territories of the neighboring Princes.

But those who live upon the Seaside, are exempted from any tribute in this
nature, provided the worth of their Merchandise exceeds not two ounces of gold
at one time, if it does, they pay as other people.

The duty upon their fish is paid punctually to the Receiver every day, who as
punctually sends it every day to the King; not one Fisherman daring under a
great penalty, to sell one morsel till it be paid, this tribute being designed
to the sustenance of his Royal Family; for which reason, whatever fish is
taken, is brought immediately to the Office, where the Receiver has a great
measure about the bigness of a Peck, which he fills and delivers frankly to the
Fisherman; that done, he measures the rest, and reserves a fifth part for the
King, which is sent away presently by the Slaves for the use of the house.
These Receivers are for the most part, the Sons, Brothers, or near Relations of
their Kings.

Of the Kings of those Countries, their Courts, Authority, and manner of living
with their Courtiers, of their Wives and Children, of the Succession of their
Kingdoms, their Revenues, Feasts, Deaths, Burials, and Elections of another
King.
THe Kings being the chief heads of so many people, I ought in justice to have
given them the precedence, and have spoken of them in the first Chapter; but
having never seen them my self, and what I write is but from the report of such
as have lived there six or seven year, I have thought it best to put this, and
the three subsequent Chapters by themselves, having been an eyewitness of what
I have writ before, and what I shall write hereafter of the Fruits and
Productions of that Country: But these Chapters I took out of the Memoires of
the General, and Minister of Frederisbourg, who are in the Kingdom of Fetu:
and as their manners and customs all along those Coasts are every where the
same, speaking of one, I shall give sufficient prospect, and information of
them all.

The King of Fetu as they represented him to me, is no unhandsome man, he is a
great lover of the Whites, and has expressed it upon several occasions; he is
about five and forty, or fifty years old, Majestic, requires honor and
respect, rich, and very liberal, he has come many times to visit the Governor
of Frederisbourg, and made him several presents: Liberality is very ordinary in
these parts, and used, to inveigle the people, and oblige them to parties: He
keeps a great Court, passing away the time in drinking and laughing in a great
Hall in the middle of his Palace; about Sunset he sets himself down at the
Gate, dressed very sine, with his bracelets and necklaces of Gold, and clad in
the richest habits can be bought for money; in this manner, if he be at peace,
he passes away his time with his Ladies, whose principal business is to wash
and keep him neat against night, at which time he has dancing constantly and
balls.

His subjects have all of them a great veneration for him, and are in much aw
and apprehension of his displeasure, by reason that whoever amongst them has
but once disobeyed their King, he is ipso facto by the Laws of that Kingdom;
made incapable of any public office. His authority is so absolute, he does
what he pleases, and no body dares to control him.

He has always a great number of Slaves and Soldiers guarding his Palace,
which is very large, and neat, and incomparably much handsomer than a house he
has near the Seaside: it consists of above two hundred chambers, and is built
in the midst of a Town, with large Courts round about it; when he goes abroad,
he is always attended and carried upon the shoulders of his Slaves, all people
endeavoring to please him wherever he comes.

To gain the affections of his Courtiers, and the Grandees of his Country,
above all things it is necessary he be Noble, for they hate avarice, and look
upon it as ignominious in a great person, on whom all people do depend, to be
too parsimoniously intent upon hoording up Gold; Yet this liberality that is
looked for, consists only in treatings and banquets, which he makes very often
for them, and if the Whites at any time make him a present, he distributes it
amongst them, if it be of Strong Water, he drinks it merrily amongst them,
preferring their company, in that case, to his Wives and Children, to whom
notwithstanding he allows a proportion.

He has as many Wives as he pleases, who are all disposed into several
appartements, with whom he dines or sups sometimes as he thinks good, but very
seldom, when they go abroad, they are carried likewise on the shoulders of
their Slaves: they are abundantly proud, and employ their whole time in
diverting and indulging the King; some of them are admitted into his company
after dinner in the great Hall, and are very happy if they may but wash and
dress him in the morning, they having servants enough to dispatch what else is
to be done in the house: when they have spruc'd him up, they fall to work upon
themselves, combing, and curling their hair in several postures: their clothes
are very rich always, and laden sometimes with such abundance of Gold, it is
a wonder which way they can bear them.

Whilst their Father lives, their Children are brought up at the charge of the
public when they go abroad out of the Palace, they are carried by their Slaves
likewise, and have always their Trumpets, and one Drum: by which formalities
they are distinguished from other people, and as they pass, recei^e great
honor and respect.

The succession of the Kingdom goes not to the Children, is it does in Europe,
but devolves upon him that is next of Kin to his Majesty, that the Crown may be
sure never to go out of the Royal Family: for this reason the Kings Children
make hay whilst the Sun shines, and lay up what they can whilst their Father is
alive: they work and take pains too as well as the rest, having no other
advantage but exemption from tribute, living always with their Father: whilst
he lives himself, they have opportunity of getting and laying up against an
evil day. If they marry, the Father gives them only the quality of Nobles, not
but he would willingly do more, but dares not: the greatest privilege they
have, is to keep Slaves, but the King disposes of all as he pleases. The
principal Offices of the Kingdom are reserved for them, as well as the chief
Commands in the Armies in times of war: In time of peace they are sent
frequently as hostages to other Princes, to secure their Leagues, and to inform
themselves of their manner of Government: If they be brave men, and generous,
they are respected when their Father is marched off, but if covetous and base,
on the contrary they are abandoned by their Relations, and contemptible to
every body else; they will oftentimes complain that their Father durst not do
any thing indirectly to enrich them, that they are poor, and indigent, and yet
have vast treasures concealed.

The Revenue of the King consists in Fruit, Fish, Wine, Oil of Palm, Millet,
Rice, Mays, Flesh, and whatever else is necessary to the life of man; all which
are brought in daily to his Palace, that he may have no cares upon him, nor no
room left for any thing but diversion.

The Revenue of the Estate arises from the Customs and Fines which are adjudg'd
to him in Civil and Criminal cases, which the Receivers deliver every 3 months
to his Treasurer, who makes the whole disbursement, both for matters of State,
for the expense of his Court, for the payment of the Soldiers in time of war,
for his privy purse, buys all the Cloths for the King, his Wives, and his
Children, upon which score, he never stirs from him, accompanies him where ever
he goes, and has an appartment in his Palace; this Office of Treasurer, is the
best Office in the Kingdom, and the Treasurer is in more repute amongst all
people, then any child of the Kings.

Besides Sundays (which the King passes ordinarily after his devotions are
ended amongst his Wives and his Children) he observes several Festival days, in
which he buys up all the Palm-wine, and Fowl, the Peasants bring that day, and
regales the Treasurer, his Courtiers, and Nobles of the Country, in the
company of his Wives and his Children.

The first and chief Feast which he observes, is on the day of his Coronation
annually, which they call the Feast of Fetiches: on that day he invites not
only all his Nobles, but his neighboring Princes, and whatever Whites are upon
his Coasts, who send him presents at that time, and are present themselves if
they have any designs upon his friendship: if they come upon the invitation, he
receives them very well, feasting them for three days together, and
entertaining with Balls and Dances, and whatever may contribute to their
recreations; to which they do wholly devote themselves; after they have past
their devotions, (which are finished to their Fetiches usually in a morning)
and after they have left them meat and drink at the foot of some Mountain or
Tree, to refresh themselves if they happen to be hungry.

The other Feasts which they observe, are ordinarily in memory of some eminent
accident for the honor, or advantage of the State, as upon some memorable
victory, or so, in which cases the Europeans are commonly invited, and must
come too, if they mean to keep up a good correspondence with them. These
Festivals consist in Collations, Banquets, Dances, and Songs, by all which the
liberality of that Prince is very conspicuous, but especially by his Feasts.
When their King dies, they express their sorrow by their complaints, their
doleful Songs, and horrible outcries; after the aforementioned Ceremonies are
over, he is exposed for some days, and in the mean time, his meat and drink
served up to him, as duly as he were alive.

When his body begins to smell, 2 or 4 of his Slaves take him, and carry him
into the Woods, where they bury him as they please, no person yet having ever
known where their King was buried: if any of their Wives follow him, the Slaves
kill them, and bury them together, throwing in their Fetiches after them, and
then his Arms, Sword, Darts, Bows and Arrows, Cloths, Housholdstuff, and
whatever he delighted in when he was alive: by his side they place good store
of Palm-Wine, Rice, and such other necessary sustenance, and when they have
done, they present themselves very demurely before the Palace to be killed,
believing they shall be cocksure of the best places about their King in the
other world.

Whilst the Slaves are employed in the interrement of the King, the Inhabitants
of the Town, run up and down like mad, cutting the throats of man, woman,
child, and slaves, to make his equipage as they call it, and attend his Majesty
into the other world, insomuch, that if he be a great Prince, they kill 4 or 5
hundred persons sometimes at the day of his funeral. If he loved any place
better than ordinary, they set up a Tomb for him there, where his Successor
commands all things necessary to be placed once every year, left he should want
any thing in the world where he is gone.

When their Funerals are over, the next Kinsman is advanced to the Throne, and
then conducted with great acclamation to his Palace (which is locked up and a
Guard set upon it from the death of the former) their next business is to give
him possession of all the Treasure his Predecessor had scraped up, whose
children cannot pretend to any part of it, or of any thing else, unless it be
something their Father was possessed of before his advancement to the Crown.
But this is true, the new King gives something considerable always to the
Children, and takes care of his Wives, who are matches for the best Noblemen
in the Country. Yet their condition sometimes is so miserable, that if they
have not been good husbands, and laid up something for themselves, they become
so abject and contemptible, they are forced to make themselves Slaves for
subsistence, and to live in perpetual infamy, to avoid dying with hunger.

This done, the new King makes a Banquet for all comers, and a Feast, which
continues 4 or 5 days, during which time he treats all people, the Whites, the
Kings his Neighbors, and his Nobles, who all of them send him their presents.
He takes new Fetiches that day, and prays to them afterward, renewing this
Feast every year, as I have said before.

Sometimes he changes his Officers, and puts in his relations, and friends, but
it is but seldom, for if they be old that were in before, he lets them dye in
their places, not out of any affection to them, but to oblige and captivate the
people by such examples of bounty, to whom he gives great largesses that day
likewise, and then calling his Wives and his Children to Court, they begin to
take State upon them, to leave off beating the Hoof, and to be carried in great
Pomp upon the shoulders of their Slaves.

Of their Nobles, the manner of their making of War, the grounds upon which
they do usually make it, their Arms: of their Cessations and Peace.
SO much are the Mores in love with the title of Nobles, they will not baulk
any thing can possibly advance them to it, of which there are several sorts
amongst them notwithstanding: This honor is acquired two ways, either by some
great and honorable Exploit for the benefit of the State, or else by his money:
for if a common More finds himself rich enough; he must be ennobled
immediately, though it drains him never so dry.

The day he is ennobled, he invites all his friends, and all the Nobility of
the Country that are then in the Town. In the presence of the King and his
Lieutenant, his Slaves take him up upon their backs, carrying him a pick-pack
round about the City; the good women dancing, and singing, and jumping before
him all day till Supper comes up and stops their recreations. This Feast holds
three days, at the end of which he gives an Ox to the poor, and a proportion
of Palm-wine. He takes new Fetiches too that day, and observes it annually with
his kindred and friends. It Is reported also, that the Nobility have a certain
day in which they all meet and feast every year amongst themselves.

The Privileges which they enjoy above other people, are these, they can Trade
in every place as they please, they can sell and buy slaves, they may have
their drums and their trumpets, and make them play as they think good; but
those who are advanced for any noble atchievment, have this pre-eminence, that
they have always the principal charges and commands in the Army.

These Kings being perpetually emulous, and jealous of one another to the
highest degree, do commonly declare war upon the slightest occasion; so that
upon the least apprehension of injury, the King calls his Courtiers together,
tells them his disgust, requires their assistance, and they in hopes of booty
and plunder conclude upon a war. An Herald is immediately dispatched to the
Enemy, and a time and place appointed for the battle; his Subjects are
advertised of the quarrel by his Guards, and a place set for the Randezvouz;
there is an universal appearance of joy, every one prepares against that day,
as cheerfully, as it were to be his wedding; they paint and adorn themselves
with variety of colors, and from that instant conceive a mortal and implacable
hatred against their Enemies: if the injury be great, and the war likely to be
long, they take their Wives and Children with them into the field, burning
their houses, lest it should be their misfortune to be beaten, and they become
a prey to the Foe: if the quarrel be but small, they send them to the next Town
where there is peace, to attend their success.

They meet precisely at the day and place, the Captains with Casques upon their
heads, some of them made of the Skulls of such people as they have killed in
the preceedent wars, others of the Skins of Lions or Crocodiles, with plumes of
feathers upon them if they have any: on their left arm they carry a large
Buckler made of the Skin of a Tygre or Ox, with a Dart in their right hand;
they have no defensive arms, nor any thing at all upon their bodies, but a
piece of linen before, that they may be the more active and agile when they
come to be engaged; before them they have their swords carried, behind and of
each side, their Slaves with their Bows and Arrows. The common Soldiers are
armed with a kind of Battle-axe and Swords, and having of late by their
Commerce with the Eu opeans some of them got Muskets, they are looked upon as
^rave fellows, and placed in the Front.

Being come near one another, they give a great shout, and fall on, they threw
their Darts immediately, shoot Arrows without number, covering themselves with
their Bucklers against the blows of their Enemies; when they once come to the
Sword, they are Devils and not men, the very Women and Children kill and slay,
and adding their cries to the noise of the Trumpets and Drums (which are
playing incessantly) they increase the fury in their Parents, and excite them
to more inhumanity. The slaughter continues till one side be defeated, but when
they see the victory clear, they give quarter then, and fall a taking of
Prisoners, which are made Slaves out of hand, and can never be ransomed upon
any terms whatsoever.

When the battle is over, some of them (as an expression of their hatred to
their Enemies, and devotion to their Prince) will eat the bodies of those they
have killed, but all of them cut off their under Jaws, and hang them afterward
before their doors as a mark of honor, which is the 11 step as it were of
recommending them to the Nobility.

As their wars are commenced upon frivolous occasions, so they are like a wisp
of straw, no sooner kindled, but extinguished. Sometimes they last longer
indeed than others, but seldom any considerable time. If after a lusty
engagement, they be any better inclined, they agree upon a place, where they
meet exactly, bring their Fetiches along with them, upon which they swear
solemnly on both sides, to do no hurt for the future, to retain no malice, nor
to remember their past hostility, and for their further security, hostages
are delivered, which are commonly the Sons of the Kings, or (if they have none)
the principal Persons of the Country. The rest of the day is spent by both
parties, in mirth, singing, dancing, and making good cheer, after which,
Trading revives betwixt them, and they live as lovingly, as if they had never
had wars.

Whilst we were in that Country, there was a very fierce War brake out upon
this occasion: Abrambou is a Seigneury which has six Towns under it,
independent of any of their Kings, and holding of no body but the Emperor of
Achim or Acanis Grand. The Predecessor of him that possessed it then, who was
dead about 4 years before, would needs put a duty upon the Merchants of Acanis
the less, and all such as past through his Dominions, nor was there any of the
Neighboring Kings durst expostulate the business, so great was his courage and
power.

After his death, the Merchants of Acanis demanded restitution of such goods as
had been taken away by violence before, and were in possession of the present
Prince, but they were refused, whereupon those of Acanis declared war against
him: the King of Fetu's Son being by accident at Acanis, engaged generously
with the Town, and was slain in the first battle. His Father having no more
Sons, and resenting the loss of him, the more because he was so extraordinarily
hopeful, joined himself with the Town of Acanis, against the Lord of Abrambou,
and engaged all his allies in the quarrel also, in so-much as the war continued
above four years, had destroyed more then 60000 men, and put a stop to all
Commerce and Trade; The Generals of the English, Danes, and Hollanders, used
all possible means to accommodate the difference, but in vain; and in memory of
a Battle gained by the King of Fetu in this war, was the great Feast at
Frederisbourg I have spoken of before. There was a quarrel also betwixt the
Kings of Fantin, and Sabou, about a Noble man of Fantin who had been in love
with a Lady of Sabou, and stolen her away: the difference not being to be
composed in an amicable way, both Kings having taken cognizance of it, they
were so highly incensed, they sell to war immediately, endeavoring to have
surprised one another as I have mentioned before, for they do not always come
to a pich'd field, but sometimes endeavor to destroy one another by surprises
and in-Roads, by burning, pillaging of their Towns, and taking all prisoners
they meet.

The Danish General told me, that sometimes a Gentleman (if he were wealthy and
rich) would be able to make war against his King, so strangely are the Mores
addi^t^^l to gain, and indeed it is no wonder having so little affection or
kindness for one another, they will scarce give a wounded man a drop of water
to save his life, but will see one another die like dogs without any relief,
and for the most part the first that forsake them are their Wives and their
Children.

At Frederisbourg we saw a poor creature abandoned by all people, and the Mores
admiring how we durst come near him: but his infirmity being only an oppression
in his Stomach, our Chyrurgeon cured him with ease; we saw him afterward merry
and drinking with his Camerades, who used him then with a thousand caresses,
though but eight days before his Wife and children had deserted him, as not
knowing his malady.

Of their Civil and their Criminal Justice, and of the Successions of
particular men.
AMongst these brutish and barbarous Nations, Justice has its place, and all
crimes are punishable, though not capitally, but upon great offenses. To begin
with their criminal Justice, he which is accused of adultery, or felony, is
immediately cited by the Judge, who having heard what he could say, and found
his defense to be impertinent, sets a fine upon him out of hand, which he is
obliged to pay down into the hands of the Receiver of the Customs. If he be not
able to pay it, he is sold as a Slave, and can never redeem himself afterward.
If the criminal be escaped, his Kindred are to pay it, unless they will choose
to leave the Kingdom rather, and that without hopes of ever coming into it
again. If the accusation be for adultery, (that is to say with the first wife
of another Man) the Husband has power to divorce himself from her, but he
cannot make her a Slave.

If it be matter of homicide, fratricide, or disobedience to his Majesty's
Orders, they are carried before the King as crimes extraordinary: and if the
thing be not very soul indeed, he condemns them only in a sum of Money, one
half to be paid to his Courtiers who are present at the Trial (which is always
in public) and the other to be paid into the Kings Treasury. If the Offender
be judged to dye, he is led out of the Town blindfolded, and at the place of
execution, run through with a Javelin, his head cut off and hung upon a Tree,
and the rest of his body cut in mammocks and thrown into the air.

If one be accused in any Civil, or Criminal case, and he desires to purge
himself by oath, in drinking, or eating his Fetiche, he is permitted, and if he
be found dead the next morning, the informer goes to pot in his place, and pays
a good round sum as a penalty to the King: But if there be several witnesses
which depose against the Criminal, in that case he is not allowed to swear.

They hate adultery mortally, if committed with the first Wives, for which
reason, they punish that as severely as any other Crime, and so it happens
sometimes, that out of the malice they do naturally (...) to one another, the
Father accuses the Son, and the Son the Father: If an Offender escapes, and is
taken again, he has a large fine set upon his head, and is made a Slave into
the Bargain, without all hopes of redemption.

In their civil affairs, whether for debt or any thing else, they are cited
before the Judge of that place; which I saw my self in the person of one called
Pitre at Frederisbourg; being come before the Judge, the Plaintiff spoke first,
the Defendant answered, and after they had pleaded what they could on both
sides, the Judge pronounced sentence immediately, which is so peremptory and
Authentic, there lies no appeal against it in any other place, but it is
executed forthwith.

Sometimes the business is so difficult, the Judge will not undertake to
determine it, but transferrs it to the King, in which cases their anger and
indignation is many times so increast, that of civil Offenders, they become
criminals, and challenging one another, they come into the field with three or
four seconds on a side, and a resolution to decide it by the Sword: If one be
killed upon the place, the other is obliged to run out of the Kingdom: If he be
taken, he is brought before the King, who sets a good lusty Fine upon him, upon
the payment of which he is discharged: This act of grace has such an influence,
and authority upon the people, no body dares asperse him in the least with what
is past, no not so much as the Widow nor Children of him that is slain, to
whom, by the Justice of the Country, a moiety of the Fine does naturally
belong: if he has not wherewithal to pay his Fine, he is made a Slave, and
delivered up to them to be sold into foreign Countries, after which he is never
to appear in his own again.

There was one Jean Class Governor of Acanis, who came aboard us every day,
he told us, that having fought a duel upon occasion of a civil affair, and
killed his adversary, he had a Fine set upon him of an hundred and seventy
Marks of Gold, and paid it every penny to the King.

The Judges are ordinarily the Captains of the Towns, that the King may have no
more Officers to pay than are necessary, and that more advantage might accrue
to his Treasury, by the Feasts and Presents they are obliged to make him.

For their inheritances (which amongst us make the greatest part of our suits)
they have no controversy at all, the next kinsman inheriting always amongst
them, to the exclusion of Wife and Children, who have nothing left them, and
are sometimes constrained to serve for their living, though their Husband and
Father died never so rich; for which reason, the good man uses them to work
betimes, that when he comes to dye, it may be no news to them, but that
subsisting by their labor, they need not be forced to turn Slaves for a
livelihood.

Of their Beasts, their Birds, and their Fish.
IN these Countries there are but few Elephants to be seen, but great store of
Lions, Tygres, Leopards, Panthers, and other beasts of prey: they afford
likewise multitudes of Oxen, Cows, Hogs, Goats, Sheep, Stags, Roe-bucks,
Wild-boars, Deer, and ^ares, and other beasts which are very good meat, besides
Civet-Cats, and Apes of several kinds

They have Dragons also, and a sort of great Lizards which are good to eat;
they have Serpents of unmeasurable bigness, as also Crocodils, and Cameleons;
these last are about the bigness of our green Lizards in France, and do not
change their color, as is imagined, but having their skins firm and scaly like
glass, they represent variety of colors according to the different reflections
upon them, which is the ground of that error.

Their wild Fowl, and Birds of prey, are Eagles, of which they have several
kinds, but one especially, and which is to be found only in the Kingdom of
Acara; it has the feathers of a Peacock, the legs of a Stork, the Beak of a
Heron, and a Crown of feathers upon the head. The Commissioner at Acara sent a
live one to Frederisbourg, and another dead, which was very good meat, but the
live one was sent to the King of Denmark; From hence it is our gray Parrots,
with red tayls and wings are brought, which are observed to speak sooner than
from any other place: their Paraquittes are very beautiful to the eye, they
have their bodies and their heads green, and as small as Linnets, their beak
and feet like Parrots, edged with a kind of redish Orange color, like our
goldfinch, their music is not very pleasant, but some say they learn to speak
well enough: they have a thousand sorts of little birds of all colors, black,
red, yellow, green, and mixed, which they take commonly with nets.

Their Fowl for the Table are Hens, Pigeons, Pintades Geese, Duck and Mallard,
Phesants and Partridge, but smaller than ours, Peacocks, Feldisars, Cranes,
Ringdoves, Turtles, and Beet in great multitudes; in short, they may be said to
abound with all sorts of Birds which are visible amongst us, unless it be
Larks, of which sort I could never see any.

Having spoken before of their Fish, and manner of fishing, I shall say nothing
of their Fish again, but of such as are to be seen upon the Coast, having
indeed nothing to say of such as are to be found in their Rivers and Lakes,
which are farther up in the Country.

Their Seafish are the Gold-fish, Bonnittes, Jacos, as big as our Calves,
Sea-Pikes, fresh-Cod, Tunny-fish, and Thornback; Small fish they have in
abundance, especially Pilchards, which are fat, and excellently good: they have
a sort of flying fish, the which are very good meat, and as white as snow:
their biggest Oysters (of which they have great quantities all along these
coasts) are no bigger than our smallest, but very good meat, as their Cockles
are likewise.

It is very dangerous washing ones self upon these Coasts, especially near the
Island of St. Thomas, in respect of a ravenous sort of fish called Requiens,
which abound there.

From Cape-Verd to the Island of Saint Thomas, there is a fish which fastens it
self always to the Keel of the Ship, and will not be got off: the Hollanders
call it the Ordure-fish, because it lives only of the ordure which is thrown
out of the Ship: it is of the shape of a Groudin, but shorter, and without
scales, it has the skin of an Eel, is flead and excoriated like that, and has
much of its fat, and taste also: it sticks so fast to a Ship by the help of a
thing it has upon its head, about three fingers broad, and eight fingers long,
that there is not a man living can put it off.

Their Fruits, Herbs, Bread, Millet, Mays, their manner of sowing and making of
Salt.
THeir Fruits upon these Coasts are Plums, Pears, Oranges, Citrons,
Cuckoe-nuts, and Figgs, but of the last no great plenty.

The General of Frederisbourg has made a Garden about Musquetshot from the
Castle, where he has Cabbage, and Roman Lettice, which grow very well, they
have excellent Mellons, and the ground covered all over with a kind of
Purslane; Besides which, they have in many places another herb they call Tetie,
in its stalk and leaf not unlike our Rape, it is pleasant to eat, and very good
for the Stomach.

They have Potatoes good store, which the Hollander has brought over, and calls
them Field Artichoaks, because they have the taste of our Ignames, which is a
thick root very white within, which they cut in trenches, as they do Turnips in
Limousin: and this is the bread and sole nourishment of the poor, and Peasants
of that Country: their Beans, and their Peace are of several colors, red
black, violet color, and gray, and a sort of Lentils in great abundance, which
are easily baked, and very good meat.

They make their bread of three several sorts of seed; some of them of Rice,
which is very white; but heavy upon the Stomach; others of their Millet, which
is something browner than ours, but has not so good a taste when it is made of
that alone; the other of Mays, or Turkey Corn, which is well, and very common,
but much better if mingled with the flower of Millet, which makes it more
pleasant.

When the Month of April approaches, they go to the Receiver of the Kings
duties for permission to sow, (all the fields belonging wholly to the King)
having obtained leave, they go up and down rooting up the bushes from one side
to the other, and then digging it once or twice, they let it lie for a day or
two, and then sow it with Rice, Millet, or Mays, for the King or the Governor,
and when they have done for them, they begin for themselves.

When they have done sowing, they bring all the bushes they have stubb'd up,
into a corner of the field, and then burn them, singing, and dancing, and
throwing about their Palm-wine, in honor of their Fetiches, to the end they
may send them a happy Harvest: It appears in eight days afterward, and they
reap it in three Months; those who have not sown, buy their provision for the
whole year at that time; those who have, and are obliged to go to the Receiver,
carry him such a proportion of gold as they think reasonable, which the
Receiver carries afterward to the King, and is very well treated for his pains.

Their Mays or Turkey Corn, agrees best with the Hills, their Millet and Rice
with the Valleys; they plant their Mays, as we do our Peace, but their Millet
and Mays is sown as we do our Corn.

I did not observe many Flowers upon the Coasts, only one whose leaves and
stalk were as large as our Mustard-tree: the flower is of an admirable flame
color, but no scent at all, they are most common about the Isle of Saint
Thomas.

Their Salt is whiter and better than ours, they make it in great quantity in
January, February, and March, which they carry up afterward higher into the
Country, and make good advantage by it, but it has this defect, it will not
endure their violent heats, but becomes bitter and acide.

Of their Gold, where it is found, and how, with the variety of works they make
of it.
THe Gold which is transported in so great quantities from these Coasts, that
it gives them the Epithet of Golden, is taken in several places.

The Gold of Axime is reckoned the best, and is oftentimes found in pieces of
two and twenty, or three and twenty Carrets.

The Gold of Acara or Tasore, is something less: that of Acanis and Achema is
next, and the worst of all is the Gold of Fetu.

The manner of taking it, is known only by the report of the Negroes, and (if
they speak truth) is several ways.

Those of Axime and Achema find it in the sands of their Rivers, in powder: and
it is to be supposed would they dig at the feet of the Mountains where these
Rivers arise, it is probable they would meet with greater proportions, seeing by
their own confessions, after a lusty shower their plenty is increast, upon
which score they have this superstition amongst them, that when they want Gold,
they pray to their Fetiches to send them good store of rain, and they are sure
to be supplied, as I hinted before.

The Gold of Acara comes from the Mountain of Taffou, some thirty leagues
distance, from the Town, which is three days journey up in the Country: One
of the Captains of the Blacks had a great desire to have carried me to the
place, and would have lest the Kings Brother and Son in hostage: but the water
sailing as we were ready to go, we could not proceed in our design. He told us
that the Mine belonged to the King, that there was no more to be done but to
dig about the Mountain, and they would have gold enough; that those who found
it were to have one Moiety, and the King the other, that he had an ingot of
gold before his gate, which by the universal confession of all the Negroes, was
bigger than the Fetiche of the whole Country, and taken out of this Mountain.

An Officer at Frederisbourg, who has been several times at Fetu and Acanis,
assured me, that those two Kings had each of them before the gates of their
Palaces, a golden Fetiche of a vast bigness, not so big indeed as that of the
King of Fetu, but yet full as big as a Peck.

The gold of Acanis and Fetu, is found in the earth by digging, sometimes more,
and sometimes less; he which discovers a Mine has one half, and the King the
other: it is never above twenty or one and twenty Carrets; it is melted down at
neither place, but brought to us aboard as it is taken out of the ground.

The Danish General has an ingot of gold, taken out of the Mountain of Tafou,
which weighs seventeen Marks, and about the seventh part of an Ounce. It was a
present sent him by the King of Acara, when his Army was beaten by the Seigneur
of Acara, and he protected him in his Fort.

When the French and the Portugais frequented these Coasts, the Natives knew
not the value of their gold, but since other Nations have been admitted, (and
the Hollanders especially) they have learned, by their earnest desire to have
it, that it is of more price, and do now hold it so dear, and stand so high in
their demands, it is almost insupportable.

Besides that, they have found out new ways of increasing their quantities by
adulterating it, and mingling it with little pieces of Copper, which they call
Quaquara, or otherwise with Brass: the chief place for this Artifice is
Commendo, where I may say boldly, there are the best cheats in the world.

Yet these practices are only amongst the lesser sort of Merchants of whom
great care is to be taken, for they are so ingenious in this kind, there is not
a cheat or forgery that can fall under the invention of mankind, which they do
not use for the circumvention of strangers.

They pretend very much to imitate the Europeans in their working of their
Gold, and to speak truth they are so happy as to surpass all the workmen I ever
saw; their files are much ^iner than ours, and will make their work as fine as
our Filigranne.

The King of Fetu has a Casque, and a suit of Arms of beaten Gold, admirably
well done. Amongst other things, they make great quantities of Bracelets of
polished Gold, and of those Fetiches which they wear upon their heads, as thin
as paper: But above all things they transcend in their hatbands, which they
make of threads as fine as any hair. Their Kings have their Vessels in Gold
still, their working Goldsmiths making every thing they fancy, and every thing
that comes into their heads.

The Wives and Daughters of their Kings, Merchants, and Nobility of that
Country, are so well laden with Rings, Bracelets, and Fetiches of Gold,
especially when they go to their Balls, that they have sometimes in such
trifles, to the weight of 20, or 25 Marks of Gold, and the men to thirty or
forty.

It is so incredibly plentiful in those parts, that a King upon an ordinary
Festival will distribute two hundred Marks of Gold amongst his Courtiers, and
sometimes more; for which reason, the Negroes delight to have liberal Kings,
that their largesses may be more frequent, and the Gold (not being locked up in
their private Coffers) may expend and circulate through the whole Kingdom.

Nor is the dearness of their provisions, a small argument of the plenty
aforesaid; a Fricassee of Pullets bought of the Mores will cost two Crowns at
least, a Pot of their Palm-wine, as it comes entirely from the tree, a Crown,
and is no more than three of our Chopines at Paris. It Is true amongst
themselves things are not altogether so dear, but having taken up an opinion
that the Whites make treble advantage of whatever they buy of them, they sell
every thing they can possibly at that rate to them: their fish is somewhat
cheaper indeed, and for ten pence one may have as much as will suffice ten men.

Notwithstanding all the pains I did take, I could never inform my self further
concerning their Gold, or their manner of taking it out of the Mines: talk to a
thousand persons of it, and they will all tell you several stories, not that
they are ignorant themselves, but their diffidence of the Whites is so
invincibly great, they will never be persuaded to impart it to them.

Of the return of our Vessel for Europe.
THe immense profits that are made upon these Coasts being obvious to all
people, it would be superfluous to speak any more of them: by the universal
consent of the whole world, it is agreed, that these Voyages are more certain,
and advantageous than any other, which appears by the extraordinary attempts
have been made by all Nations of Europe, to make themselves absolute Masters
there, and evinceth the truth of what I have said, to any one that imagines the
contrary, so that it remains now, that I speak only one word of our return.

Having finished our trading designs, we weighed Anchor from before
Frederisbourg, the twentieth of April, and sailed directly for the Port of
Saint Thomas, (which is an Island belonging to the Portugais, situated
directly under the Line) to supply our selves with victuals for so long a
Voyage. The first two days we steered our course East and by South, the two
next East South-East, and the two next full East; after which, we discovered
the Island of Saint Thomas, and came to an Anchor before the Castle on the
sixth of May, seven days after our departure from Frederisbourg, having made
in all twenty six leagues and upwards.

The Description of the Isle of St. Thomas which lies under the Line.
ON the 8th. of May we made a visit to the Governor of the Castle, who
received us with great civility, but would not be persuaded to permit us to go
into the Town; he gave Orders to his Lieutenant to treat us with all respect,
which he was not able to perform himself, by reason of an indisposition that
was upon him at that time.

He is a little man, well proportioned, about 40 or 50 years of age, his name
is Acosta, a fierce quick man, but very civil. That night a Captain of the Fort
came aboard us, to whom we gave an account of what provisions we wanted, and
the Governor ordered us to be supplied the last day in Rogation week.

Every day whilst we lay there at Anchor, our men went to a little River which
runs hard by into the Sea, to provide our selves with fresh water, which is
indeed the best in all Africa, for we kept it a year afterward, and it was as
good and as sweet as at the first day. During all the time we were there, not
one person of our Crew was permitted to go on shore, but my self, who had that
privilege by being a Frenchman.

I lay on shore three nights, but desiring the Governors leave that our Notary
might do the same for the benefit of his health, he told me for my self all
places were free, I might go whether, and buy what I pleased, but for the
Notary he could not permit it, he being a Flemming; that if our whole Equipage
had been French, they should all have had the same liberty, but that the
Portugais had too rational a jealousy of the Dutch to allow them a freedom
that had not been practiced since the Island came into their hands; that the
Town was then a rebuilding, and that there still remained the footsteps of the
mischiefs and desolations the Hollanders had made there, especially amongst
their Churches, which were very beautiful.

The Island of Saint Thomas is about sixty leagues in circumference, it has a
Bishopric in it, and a Cathedral (which they were then in repairing) not
inferior in bigness to Saint Meredick in Paris, but much more beautiful, and
neat, the Music and Chapter were maintained at the King of Portugals charge:
Besides that they had Negroes to their Priests, I was much pleased to hear the
little Morish Boys, which serve there in the Quire, and sing without Notes or
Books, as exactly as our Choristers in France, which I observed in their
Procession, the first day of their Rogations: all the Mores in that Island are
Christians: the Town consists of about five hundred houses, the most part of
Wood, since the Hollanders took it, and burned it.

The general opinion is, that this Island is not healthful, but they have all
things necessary for the life of man, in that plenty and abundance, that it is a
Miracle to me considering the heat of the Climat, and the unwholesomness of the
air. The Sugar which comes from hence, is cried up above all the Sugar in the
world.

They have a fair C^tadel built upon the Seaside, on the East Side of the Town
(with its gate toward the North) about the distance of Musket shot; the
figure is square, fortified with four good Bastions, lined with Freestone,
planted with sixty pieces of brass Canon, carrying from eight to eight and
forty pound bullet. But so many Authors having writ of it at large, it would
but importune the Reader to enlarge any farther.

Upon Ascension day we weighed Anchor, and set sail for Europe, having saluted
the Castle with 5 Guns, and received their complement in three, steering
South-west, though the wind stood South-East, and is so constantly upon those
Coasts, the next day we discovered Anabou, another Island in the possession of
the Portugais; at which place we began to alter our course Westward, as we did
many times afterward, according to the discretion of our Pilots.

We past on the backside of Scotland, coasting upon the Isles de Terro, which
are under the Dominion of the King of Denmark, and upon the Coasts of Norway,
where meeting with some Dutch Ships, we received the first news of the Treaty
at Breda, which was the most remarkable thing in our passage; for our Pilots
having been mistaken, and run to the windward, more than two hundred leagues
too much, I can say but little of our return.

In short, on the 29th of August we found our selves at the mouth of the Texel,
where for want of a fair wind our Ship was forced to ride at Anchor till the
first of September, at which time we entered, and on the fourth following came
to an Anchor before Amsterdam, where all the Officers, (except the Captain and
the Secretary) were arrived the last of August, by the convenience of a Shallop
with Oars, which do usually come out to all such Ships as are to go into the
Texel, for that purpose.

And thus was our Voyage concluded, having spent in our journey, our stay, and
return, about nine Months and a half, without any disaster, or the loss of any
more than one man, who dyed as we were passing the Line, of a Dissentery he had
got at the Island of Saint Thomas, by eating too great a quantity of their
Sugar, and sweet meats; all the rest both Officers and Soulders were
continually in health, lively, brisk, and well disposed, without the least
malady or sickness in the world. For which, God be praised.

FINIS.

