The Principles OF THE Doctrine of Christ.

OR A Catechism, In which is contained the Sum of the Christian Religion; or
what is necessary to be believed and done in order to Salvation. The Answers
being but Seventeen in number; and in very plain words, easy to be understood.

Unto which is added, A Catechism for Conscience; Wherein, The Consciences of
the Ignorant, the grossly Profane, the Young, the merely Mortal, and the
Hypocrites, are examined, in order to their Instruction and Awakening; and the
Consciences of the sincere Christians are tried in order to their Peace and
Comfort.

By Nathanael Vincent, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

Jer. 3. 15. I will give you Pastors according to my Heart, who shall feed you
with knowledge and with understanding. 2 Cor. 4. 2. By manifestation of the
truth, commending ourselves to every Man's Conscience in the sight of God.
London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers Chapel. 1691.

THE Epistle Dedicatory* To that Church of Christ who have given up themselves
unto my Pastoral Care, Light and Grace, and Peace be multiplied!
Beloved in our Lord and Savior!
IT is not a Complement I pass upon you, when I tell you, that your Souls are
very dear to me, even as my own; and your Salvation as my own, desired. I am
persuaded I was put into the Ministry specially for your sakes; and that our
Lord gave me the Talents I have; that I might improve them to your Spiritual
advantage. When first I came among you, most of you were young; and I my self
was young also; but many years are past and gone since we were first related
the one to the other; our Age begins to decline; Old Age and Death are
approaching; and who knows but Death may overtake Old Age, and come to many of
us before it! You know how I have labored in the public Exercise of my
Ministry; I have not grudged to spend my self, and to be spent for you. Those
Souls who have reaped profit by my Labors; what thanks do I owe them, and to
God for them! How have they obliged Me, by having the truest regard unto
Themselves! I have been with you in the Calm and in the Storm, and blessed be
God that neither you nor I have been Shipwrackt! I have gone through Honor and
Dishonor, through evil Report and good Report: And evil report being
sanctified to the humbling of me; has done me a greater kindness than the
Reporters thought of.

At this day through the Providence of God over ruling and acting powerfully
and graciously even to amazement; both you and I, and many more, enjoy a
public liberty; which under Restraint and Persecution, we earnestly prayed,
but could hardly hope for. This liberty is a special favor from Heaven; is
envied us by Hell; and I make no question, but the Instruments of the Evil One
will be very active to deprive us of it. Let us but improve it by recourse to
the Son of God to make us more free indeed, i. e. more free from Sin, and more
enlarged in the Lords Service; and I believe we shall find that Scripture
fulfilled, Rev. 3. 8. Behold I have set before thee an open door, and no man
can shut it.

I am now come to the finishing part and work of my life, and are not many of
you also? And should it not be our care to finish well? When the Painter has
almost done a curious piece, how exact is he in every touch of his pencil? his
last hand expresses his greatest Skill. If the Lord adds more years unto my
days, I wish they may be the holiest and most useful; and then they will be the
happiest I have lived. The nearer we approach unto Death, and the day of
Reckoning, how exactly should we walk! how clean should be our Hearts! how
heavenly our Minds and Conversations! and how doubly refined should all our
Services be!

You that are Husbands, you that are Wives, the nearer Eternal Life approaches,
live together more as the Heirs of such a Life; be more fervent in Prayer,
rejoice in Hope, and press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling
of God.

You that are Parents and Masters, Oh set fairer copies for your Children and
Servants to write after! Be more Exemplary for Faith, for Love, for Meekness,
for Truth and Righteousness, for Humility, and Contempt of the World; declare
plainly that you seek a better Country, i. e. an Heavenly; and that here on
Earth is neither your Heart nor Treasure. Children and Servants Souls are
precious, and a great part of your care; give them not occasion to Eternity to
curse your unfaithfulness to them, and carelessness of them. Your instructing of
them being seconded by such an Example as may demonstrate to them that you your
selves are indeed taught of God; will be most likely to take impression, and to
have the desired effect upon them.

And you of the younger sort that are Children and Servants, be sure to value
Saving Knowledge and Grace at an high rate, and seek after both betimes. When
the Youth of a Land are universally degenerate and corrupt, and affect
ignorance, and are filled with prejudices against the power of Godliness; it is
a great sign of God his being about to depart from that Land, and that the
Gospel is ready to be removed. What a sad prospect is there at this day; when
the young Generation is seriously considered. Horrible Pride, outrageous Lust,
Riotous and Intemperate Eating and Drinking every where almost prevail, what
will become of poor Posterity!

You young Ones whom I here address unto, be entreated to do a kindness to your
selves and to the Land of your Nativity. The Righteousness of Ten, would have
done more toward the preservation of filthy Sodom; than the wickedness of a
multitude would have done toward the destruction of it. If some Tens of you
did but prize the Gospel, entertain it in your Heads and Hearts, and adorn it
in your Practice, and were instant in Prayer for its continuance among us; you
might do more to the fixing of the Golden Candlestick in its place, than the
Blind Zeal of the Papists, and the ignorance and disobedience of many carnal
Protestants; can do toward the taking away the Candlestick and its light from
us. If a considerable Company of young ones in every Age, would set their
Hearts to study the Word of God, and become true Believers, sincere Lovers and
diligent Doers of his Word: The Sun of Righteousness might through a miracle of
mercy, as it were stand still in England, and not haste to go down for many
Generations.

This little Catechism which I now send forth may be of use to Instructers, and
to them that are to be instructed in Families; and as it is very short, so I
have endeavored to make it very plain to the meanest Capacities. The
Scriptures are added at length to show how every thing therein is proved. That
what is learned may come with the greater Authority and Efficacy.

The Assemblies Catechism is indeed above my commendation, and will commend it
self to them that are considerate, whoever go about to disparage it. But This
which I have Composed being much more brief, and having words somewhat easier
to be understood. I hope may not be unuseful.

I have added a Catechism for Conscience; and have applied my self to the
Consciences of several sorts of Persons: And though in a special manner I
design your Edification; yet if these few Sheets shall, through the blessing of
that God who is and works all in all, be made profitable to a great many more;
the greater will be the satisfaction and rejoicing of

Your Affectionate Pastor and Servant for Jesus Sake, Nathanael Vincent.

THE PRINCIPLES OF THE DOCTRINE OF CHRIST.

OR, A Catechism;

In which is contained the Sum of the Christian Religion; or what is necessary
to be believed and done in order to Salvation. The Answers being but Seventeen
in number; and in very plain words, easy to be understood.

By Nathanael Vincent, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers Chapel. 1691.

Unto which is Added A Catechism for Conscience: Wherein
The Consciences of the Ignorant, the grossly Profane, the Young, the merely
Moral, and the Hypocrites, are Examined, in order to their Instruction and
Awakening; and the Consciences of the Sincere Christians are tried in order to
their Peace and Comfort.

THE PRINCIPLES OF THE Doctrine of CHRIST. IN A very Short And Plain Catechism.
By Nathaniel Vincent, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.
Qu. 1. WHat do you believe concerning God?

Ans. God is eternal, every where present, a Spirit most wise, powerful,
righteous and merciful, the whole Worlds Creator and Governor.

God is Eternal, Psalm. 90 2. From everlasting to everlasting thou art God.

God is every where present, Jer. 23. 24. Can any hide himself in secret places
that I shall not see him? says the Lord. Do not I fill Heaven and Earth? says
the Lord. God is a Spirit without bodily parts, like Man; Joh. 4. 24. God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth,
Romans 1. 22. 23. They became fools, and changed the glory of the incorruptible
God, into an Image made like to corruptible Man.

God is most Wise, Romans 16. 27. To God only wise be glory through Jesus Christ
for ever, Amen.

God is most Powerful, Psalm. 62. 11. God has spoken once, twice have I heard
this, that power belongs unto God.

God is Righteous, Psalm. 119. 137. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are
thy Judgments.

God is Merciful, Psalm. 103, 8, 11. The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to
anger, and plenteous in mercy. As the Heaven is high above the Earth; so great
is his Mercy toward them that fear him.

God is the whole Worlds Creator, Rev. 4. 11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive glory, and honor, and power; for Thou have created all things, and for
thy pleasure they are and were created.

God is the Worlds Governor, Psalm. 103. 19. His Kingdom rules over all.

Q. 2. Are there more Gods tha^ One?

A. God is but One, yet he is distinguished into Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
who have the same Eternal Power, and Godhead, and concur in the work of Man's
Salvation.

God is but One, yet he is distinguished into Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 1
John 5. 7. There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost, and these three are One. Baptism, that is in the Name of
the true God; is in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Mat. 28. 19.

The Son has the same Godhead and Power with the Father. Romans 9. 5. Of whom as
concerning the Flesh Christ came who is over all God blessed for ever.

The Holy Ghost is likewise God. Acts 5. 3, 4. Why has Satan filled thy Heart
to Lie unto the Holy Ghost? Thou have not Lied unto Man, but unto God.

The Father concurs in the work of Man's Salvation. John 3. 16. For God so loved
the World that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish but have everlasting life.

The Son concurs in the Saving of Man. Luke 2. 11. Unto you is born this day in
the City of David a Savior who is Christ the Lord.

The Holy Ghost concurs in this work of Saving. John 3. 5. Except a man be born
of Water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

Q. 3. In what Estate did God at first Create Man?

A. God created Man after his own Image; having true Knowledge, and Holiness,
and Dominion over the Creatures; and entered into a Covenant of Life with him
upon condition of perfect obedience.

God created Man after his own Image. Genesis 1. 27. So God created man in his own
Image; in the Image of God created he him; male and female created he them.

The Image of God did lie in Knowledge. Col. 3. 10. And have put on that new
man which is renewed in knowledge after the Image of Him that created him.

The Image of God does lie in Holiness. Ephesians. 4. 24. And that ye put on that new
man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

The Image of God lies also in Dominion over the Creatures. Psalm. 8. 5, 6. Thou
made him a little lower than the Angels, and Crownedst him with Glory and
Honor, and made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands.

God entered into a Covenant of life with Man upon condition of perfect
obedience. Romans 10. 5. The Man that does those things shall live by them.

Q. 4. Did Man continue in this blessed state in which he was created?

A. The first Man Adam sinned in eating the forbidden Fruit; and all his
Posterity sinned in him; are Born the Children of wrath; derive from Him a
corrupted Nature; being backward to good, and prone to evil.

The first Man was Adam. 1 Cor. 15. 45. The first Man Adam was made a living
Soul.

Adam sinned in eating the forbidden Fruit. Genesis 3. 6. The Woman took of the
fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also to her Husband with her, and he did
eat.

All his Posterity (being represented by him) sinned in him. Romans 5. 19. By one
Man's disobedience many were made sinners; his Posterity though never so many.

All are Born the Children of wrath, considered as Adam's Children. Ephesians. 2. 3.
And were by nature the Children of wrath even as others. Romans 5. 18. By the
offense of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation.

All derive from Adam a corrupted nature. Ephesians. 4. 22. The old Man or Adam is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts.

All naturally are backward to good, prone to evil. Romans 8. 7. The carnal man
is enmity against God, and is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can
it be. Genesis 6. 5. God saw that the wickedness of Man was great in the Earth,
and that every imagination of the thoughts of his Heart was only evil,
continually.

Q 5. What is Sin?

A. Sin is a transgression of the Law of God, and the desert and wages of it is
Death and Hell.

Sin is a transgression of the Law of God. 1 John 3. 4. Whosoever commits
sin; transgresses also the Law; for sin is a transgression of the Law.

The desert and wages of Sin is Death. Romans 5. 12. Death passed upon all men,
for that all have sinned.

The desert and wages of Sin is Hell. Psalm. 9. 17. The wicked shall be turned
into Hell; and all the Nations that forget God.

Q. 6. Who is the Savior from Sin and Hell?

A. Jesus Christ the Son of God took Man's Nature; and died upon the Cross, that
he might put away Sin; and deliver Man from Wrath, by the Sacrifice of himself;
and he arose from the dead; and sat down at the Right Hand of God.

Jesus Christ the Son of God took Man's Nature. John 1. 14. The Word was made
Flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only
begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth.

Christ died upon the Cross. Luke 23. 33. And they Crucified Him and the
Malefactors, one on the right Hand, and the other on the left.

Christ by his Death puts away Sin. Heb. 9. 26. But now once in the end of the
World has he appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself.

Christ delivers from Hell and Wrath. Romans 5. 9. Being now justified by his
Blood we shall be saved from wrath through Him.

Christ arose from the Dead. Luke 24. 34. The Lord is risen indeed. Acts 13.
37. Rising the third day, he saw no corruption.

Christ Ascended into Heaven, and sat at God's Right Hand. Heb. 1. 3. When he
had by himself purged our sins sat down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on
High.

Q. 7. What are the Offices of Christ Jesus?

A. Christ has a threefold Office. He is a Prophet to teach; a Priest by his
satisfaction and intercession to reconcile; and a King to govern and defend his
Church and People.

Christ is a Prophet to teach. Acts 7. 37. A Prophet shall the Lord your God
raise up unto you of your Brethren, Him shall you hear. Luke 24. 45. Then
opened He their understandings that they might understand the Scriptures.

Christ is a Priest to reconcile. Heb. 2. 17. It behoved him in all things to
be made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful
High Priest to make reconciliation for the sins of the People.

Christ reconciles by his Death (which was satisfactory to God, who had been by
sin offended) and by his Intercession. Romans 8. 34. Who is he that condemns?
it is Christ that died; yea rather is risen again; who also makes intercession
for us.

Christ is a King to govern his Church and People. Col. 1. 13. Who has
delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the
Kingdom of his dear Son.

Christ defends his Church against all Enemies. Romans 8. 37 Nay in all these
things we are more than Conquerors through Him that loved us.

Q. 8. How is Christ made known?

A. Christ is made known by the Word in the Holy Scripture which is given by
Inspiration of God: The Old Testament gave a discovery of Him; but in the New
Testament he is more fully revealed.

Christ is made known by the Word in the Holy Scripture. Col. 1. 27. To whom
God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this Mystery among the
Gentiles; which is Christ in you the hope of glory.

The Holy Scripture is given by Inspiration of God. 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture
is given by Inspiration of God.

The Old Testament gave a discovery of Christ. John 5. 46. If ye had believed
Moses you would have believed Me, says Christ, for He wrote of Me. Acts 26.
22, 23. Saying none other things than what Moses and all the Prophets did say
should come; that Christ should suffer; and that he should be the first that
should rise from the dead; and show light to the People and to the Gentiles.

In the New Testament Christ is more fully revealed, 2 Cor. 3. 18. We all with
open face beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same Image.

Q. 9. How are we made partakers of Christ, and interested in Him?

A. We are drawn to Christ by the Spirit, working Faith in us; whereby we
receive Christ, and rest upon him alone for Salvation; unto which Faith
Repentance is joined, whereby we sorrow for sin, and turn from it to God with
the whole Heart.

We are drawn to Christ by the Spirit working Faith in us. 2 Cor. 4. 13. We
having the same Spirit of Faith. Phil. 1. 30 Unto you it is given in the behalf
of Christ to believe on him.

By Faith we receive Christ. John 1. 12. To as many as received him he gave
power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his Name.

By Faith we rest upon Christ alone for Salvation. Phil. 3. 8, 9. I count all
things but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in Him, not having my own
Righteousness which is by the Law. Acts 4. 12. Neither is there Salvation in
any other.

Unto Faith Repentance is joined. Acts 20. 21. Testifying both to the Jews and
to the Greeks, Repentance toward God; and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

Repentance is a sorrowing for Sin. Jam. 4. 9. Be afflicted, and mourn, and
weep; let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness.

Repentance is a turning from Sin to God with the whole Heart. Isa. 55. 7. Let
the wicked man forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let
him return to the Lord; and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon. Joel 2. 12. Therefore now also, says the Lord, turn ye
even unto me with all your heart.

Q. 10. What is that Covenant which God has made with them that repent and
believe?

A. God has made a New Covenant with penitent Believers, wherein he has
promised to be their God, to justify them from, and pardon all their Sins: to
renew and write his Laws in their Hearts; and to give them Grace till they come
to Glory.

God has made a New Covenant, commonly called the Covenant of Grace. Heb. 8.
8. Behold the days come, says the Lord, when I will make a New Covenant with
the House of Israel and of Judah.

They that repent and believe are in Covenant: An Heart to repent and believe
is from God. Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I
put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I
will give you an heart of flesh.

The Lord in the Covenant promises to be his peoples God. 2 Cor. 6. 16. I will
dwell in them and walk in them, and I will be their God and they shall be my
people.

God promises to justify them from, and pardon all their Sins. Heb. 8. 12. I
will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities I will
remember no more.

God promises to renew, and to write his Laws in their Hearts. Heb. 10. 16.
This is the Covenant I will make with them after those days, says the Lord, I
will put my laws in their hearts, and in their minds will I write them.

God will give his people Grace sufficient till they come to Glory. 2 Cor. 12.
My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in ^e^kness. 2 Timothy 4. 18. The Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve
me to his heavenly Kingdom; to whom be glory for ever and ever.

Rehearse the Laws of God, Exodus 20. which by Faith are Established, and are our
Rule to walk by.

God spoke all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God which have brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage.

Com. I. Thou shall have none other Gods before me.

Com. II. Thou shall not make unto thee any Graven Image, or any Likeness of
any thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or that is in the
Water under the Earth; thou shall not Bow down thy self to them, nor Serve
them; for I the Lord thy God am a Jealous God; visiting the Iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of them that
hate me; and showing mercy unto Thousands of them that love me, and keep my
Commandments.

Com. III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the
Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

Com. IV. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, Six days shall thou labor,
and do all thy work, but the Seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in
it thou shall not do any work; thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy
Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, nor thy Stranger that is within thy Gates;
for in Six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them
is; and rested the Seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and
hallowed it.

Com. V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long upon the
Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Com. VI. Thou shall not Kill.

Com. VII. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

Com. VIII. Thou shall not Steal.

Com. IX. Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor.

Com. X. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors Wife, nor his Manservant, nor his Maidservant, nor his Ox, nor his
Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbors.

Q. 11. What is the Sum of the Law contained in the Ten Commandments?

A. The Sum of the Law, is Love to God; which will cause us to Worship him in
Spirit, to Sanctify his Name, and Day: and Love to our Neighbors as to our
Selves; which will hinder us from doing any thing contrary to the Dignity,
Life, Chastity, Estate, or good Name of our Neighbor, and all motions of the
Heart to work ill to him.

The Sum of the Law is Love to God. Mat. 22. 37, 38. Jesus said unto him, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind; this is the first and great Commandment. So great that it
comprehends all others.

And Love to our Neighbor. ver. 39. The second is like unto it, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self. Romans 13. 10. Love works no ill to his
neighbor, and therefore love is the fulfilling of the law.

Q. 12. How is grace to be obtained whereby we may keep Gods Commands?

A. Grace to keep the commands of God is obtained by Prayer, wherein it is our
Duty to offer up our desires to God in Christ's Name, by the Spirits
assistance; confessing Sin; and giving thanks for Mercies.

Grace which strengthens us to keep Gods Commandments is obtained by Prayer.
Psalm. 119. 10. With my whole heart have I sought thee; Oh let me not wander
from thy Commandments! Psalm. 138. In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me,
and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul.

Prayer is our Duty. Luke 18. 1. Men ought always to pray and not to faint:
always, i. e. at their set times, and all fit seasons.

In Prayer we offer up our desires to God. Psalm. 38. 9. Lord all my desire is
before thee; and my groaning is not hid from thee.

Prayer must be in Christ's Name. Joh. 16. 23. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name he will give it you.

Prayer must be by the Spirits assistance. Romans 8. 26, 27. Likewise the Spirit
also helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we
ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings which
cannot be uttered And be which searches the hearts knows what is the mind of
the Spirit; because he makes intercession for the Saints according to the will
of God.

Prayer should be with confession of Sin. Psalm. 51. 3. I acknowledge my
iniquity, and my sin is ever before me.

There ought to be a giving thanks for Mercies. Col. 4. 2. Continue in prayer,
and watch in the same with thanksgiving.

Q. 13. What is the Rule for our direction in Prayer?

A. The whole Word of God is of use to direct us in our Supplications, but
especially the Lords Prayer which he taught his Disciples.

The whole Word of God directs us in Prayer, for it reveals his Will; according
to which our Prayers ought to be made. 1 John 5. 14. And this is the confidence
we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his Will he hears us.

The Lords Prayer which he taught his Disciples is our special direction how to
pray. Mat. 6. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. After this manner therefore pray ye. Our
Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be
done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive
us out Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not
into Temptation; but deliver us from Evil; for thine is the Kingdom, and the
Power, and the Glory, for ever, Amen.

Q. 14. How has God confirmed his New Covenant.

A. God has confirmed his New Covenant by the Sacraments, which are the Signs
and Seals of it; and these Sacraments under the New Testament are Two; Baptism
and the Lords Supper.

Sacraments are Signs and Seals of the New Covenant. What the Apostle speaks of
the Sacrament of Circumcision in the Old Testament, is true of the Sacraments
under the New. Rom 4. 11. He received the sign of Circumcision a seal of the
righteousness of Faith; and where the righteousness of Faith is signified and
sealed, the other Benefits of the New Covenant are signified and sealed also.

Baptism is appointed and required, Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and disciple
all nations, baptizing them.

The Lords Supper is Instituted. 1 Cor. 11. 23. I have received of the Lord;
that which also I delivered unto you. ver. 24. Do this in remembrance of me.

Q. 15. What is Baptism?

A. Baptism is a washing with Water in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, whereby is signified and sealed our being Born again; the purging away
of sin by the Blood and Spirit of Christ, and our partaking of a new Nature.
And all that are Baptized, whether Believers or their Seed; are engaged to be
the Lords.

Baptism is a washing with Water in the Name of the Father, Son, and Spirit.
Mat. 28. 19. Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost.

Baptism signifies and seals our being born again, Tit. 3. 5. According to his
mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost.

In the regenerate sin is purged away by the Blood and Spirit of Christ, 1 John
1. 7. The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin, Gal. 5. 16.
This I say then, walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh.

They that are born again have a new nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. That you might be
partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the
world through lust.

All that are baptized, whether Believers or their seed, are engaged to be the
Lords. Romans 6. 3, 4. So many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his death; and being dead to sin, should walk in newness of life.
Children are engaged as well as the Parents, Act. 2. 39. The Promise is unto
you and to your Children, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else were your Children unclean, but
now they are holy; separated to him and to his service.

Q. 16. What is the Lords Supper?

A. The Lords Supper is an Ordinance, wherein after self-examination, which is
required; there is a giving and receiving of the Bread and Wine according to
Christ's appointment: And worthy Receivers discern his Body; partake of his
benefits; and show forth his death till he come to Judgment.

Self-examination is required before this Ordinance of the Supper, 1 Cor. 11.
v. 28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and
drink of that Cup.

In this Supper there is a giving and receiving of Bread and Wine according to
Christ's appointment, Mat. 26. 26, 27. Jesus took Bread and blessed it, and
brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body.
And he took the Cup, and gave thanks and gave it unto them, saying, Drink ye
all of it.

Worthy Receivers discern his Body; looking beyond the Bread and Wine, to his
Body and Blood thereby signified and given to them, 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25. This is
my Body which is broken for you: This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood.

Worthy Receivers partake of his benefits, Joh. 1. 16. And of his fullness have
all we received and grace for grace.

In the Supper we show forth Christ's death till he come to Judgment, 1 Cor. 11.
26. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show forth the
Lords death till he come.

Q. 17. When Christ comes to Judgment, who must appear before Him?

A. At the last day the dead will be raised; and all must appear at the
Judgment seat of Christ. Believers who have done good shall be rewarded with
eternal life: The wicked who lived and died in their sins, shall be punished
with the vengeance of eternal fire.

At the last day the dead shall be raised, Acts 26. 8. Why should it seem a
thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead?

All must appear at the Judgment seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 10. For we must all
appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the
things done in his body according to that he has done, whether it be good or
evil.

Believers that have done good shall be rewarded with eternal life, Rom 6. 22.
But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your
fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.

The wicked shall be punished with the vengeance of eternal fire. Mat. 25. 41.
Then shall he say to them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

2 Cor. 5. 11. Knowing the truth and terror of the Lord; we persuade Men.

2 Pet. 3. 7, 11. Seeing the Heaven and the Earth are kept in store, reserved
unto fire against the day of Judgment, and perdition of ungodly men; what
manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness?

The CREED. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth;
and in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, who was Conceived by the Holy Ghost,
Born of the Virgin Mary, Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and
Buried; he Descended into Hell. Continued in the State of the Dead The third
day he Rose again from the Dead; he Ascended into Heaven, and Sits at the
Right Hand of God the Father Almighty, from thence He shall come to Judge the
quick and the dead. I Believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church, the
Communion of Saints, the Forgiveness of Sins; the Resurrection of the Body; and
the Life Everlasting. Amen.
London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers Chapel. 1691.

A Catechism FOR CONSCIENCE The design of which is to try, awaken and instruct
the Consciences of Men, and to make them faithful to God and to Themselves.
The Conscience of a grossly Ignorant Sinner is thus to be Questioned.
Quest. 1. WHat are thy thoughts of God?

Answ. I seldom hear, and hardly ever think of him.

Q. 2. Why is not God in all thy thoughts? Why do thou live without him in
the World?

A. I have no knowledge of Him, and I do not care to entertain thoughts
concerning Him.

Q. 3. Is not this thy bare ingratitude and folly, that God who gave thee thy
Being, and gives thee every good thing thou have; should never be thought on?
But tell me, Have thou no apprehensions of God at all?

A. I sometimes conceive Him to be a good old Man, that sits and reigns above
in Heaven.

Q. 4. Foolish and darkened Heart! Why have thou not taken notice that God is a
Spirit, who really has no bodily parts? Why do thou not consider, That they
exceedingly dishonor Him, who change the glory of the incorruptible God into
an Image made like to corruptible Man? Romans 1. 23. But do thou not believe
that God always observes thee?

A. I regard not God, and I hope he does not much regard me, nor what I say or
do.

Q. 5. Brutish Heart when will thou be wise? He that planted the Ear, shall he
not hear? and He that formed the Eye, shall not He see? But while thus ignorant
and regardless of God; in what condition do thou think thou art?

A. I cannot certainly say, but I hope and believe well: And truly I see no
hurt or danger near me.

Q. 6. How see no danger! Do thou not know thou art a Sinner?

A. I know not very well what sin is; but I am no more a sinner; nor worse than
others of my Neighbors.

Q. 7. Art thou willing to understand thy sin, and how exceeding miserable thy
sin makes thee?

A. I am at peace, pray do not you disquiet me; I have heard of some that have
run stark mad, and have made away themselves, when they have heard preaching of
sin and damnation.

Q. 8. Why have thou not considered that passage of the Prophet Isa. 57. 21.
There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked? Is it wisdom in thee to say
peace and safety when God speaks quite the contrary, and says, Woe to the
wicked! it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given
him? Isa. 3. 11.

A. He that made me I hope will save me.

Q. 9. Do thou think he will save thee in thy ignorance and wickedness,
whilst thou do not desire to be delivered from either? How plainly does the
Prophet speak, Isa. 27. 11. It is a people of no understanding, therefore He
that made them will not save them, and he that formed them, will show them no
favor?

A. I am not Book-learned; and I hope my ignorance will excuse me.

Q. 10. Art thou not willingly ignorant? And will not the condemnation of them
be sore, who love darkness rather than light because their deeds are evil? Joh.
3. 19. Are not they threatened with distress and anguish, and destruction as a
Whirlwind? And told that God will laugh at them in their calamity; who hate
knowledge, and do not choose the fear of the Lord? Prove. 1. 29.

A. Pray trouble not your self about me; every one shall answer for himself,
and as the saying is, Every Tub shall stand upon its own bottom.

Q. 11. If a Man were blind, and ready to fall into a deep Ditch full of Water,
should he be angry at one that has Eyes, and would stop him, and prevent his
drowning? And do thou well to be displeased with me, who seeing thee in Hells
Road, and not perceiving thy self whither thou art going; endeavor to stop
thee, and hinder thy falling into that place of Torment?

A. I do not love to hear of Hell Fire.

Q. 12. What will it be then to feel it? and to be for ever tortured in the
Flames that are unquenchable?

A. I find some fears raised in me, and begin to doubt all is not well with me.

Q. 13. Do thou believe the Bible to be the Word of God, and certainly true?

A. Yes; what Christian Man denies that?

Q. 14. Why then art thou so unacquainted with the Holy Scriptures, which when
searched and rightly believed make the Believers wise unto Salvation?

A. I have had other things to do, a Trade to mind, a Family to provide for;
and the time I have to spare, I spend in merry Company, in Sports and Pleasures.

Q. 15. But is it not unreasonable and Heathen-like only to take thought, what
thou shall eat and drink, and wherewithal thou shall be clothed? and never to
inquire what thou must do to be saved?

A. I begin to blame my self for my past negligence and carelessness about my
Souls health; and that I am still so ignorant, who have lived so long where
there has been so much good preaching.

Q. 16. How do thou spend thy time and days?

A. I mind the World, and the profits and pleasures of it all the day long.
When first I wake in the morning, the World presently comes into my thoughts,
and I continue thinking of it, and contriving how to get more of it, and how to
keep what I have gotten: Thus my mind is employed, till I go to Bed at night.
The World is that which is suitable to me, the thing which I most desire and
delight in.

Q. 17. How Earthly minded art thou! Does not the Apostle affirm, that they are
Enemies to the Cross of Christ, and that their end will be destruction who mind
earthly things? Phil. 3 18, 19. But tell me, Do thou never pray in secret, or
in thy Family?

A. I have long thought, that to say, Lord have mercy upon us! Christ have
mercy upon us, when we are sick, or come to die, had been sufficient.

Q. 18. Do thou think that cries forced merely by fear of calamity will be
regarded? Does not the Lord speak plainly concerning such, who are burdened
only with affliction, but not with sin; who are in fear of death, but not
desirous to be turned unto God; They shall call upon me, but I will not answer;
they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me? Prove. 1. 28.

A. Still my fears increase upon me.

Q. 19. How is the Lords day spent?

A. I sit up late on the Saturday night; lie long a-bed on the Sunday morning:
Many times I go not to Church at all; if I do go, I come away as I went; not at
all wiser or better. And I have wished Sundays were over, that I might return to
my worldly business again. I have heard of a Book called the Book of Sports; I
thought it was a very good time when they were allowed of; and that those
Sports would make Sundays pleasant days indeed.

Q. 20. What a contempt of God, and of his Service and Grace do these words of
thine discover, and what a wretched carelessness of thy own precious Soul? How
unfit art thou to keep an Eternal Sabbath in Heaven, who now does grudge unto
God one day in seven?

A. I see it had been better to have lived otherwise than I have done.

Q. 21. As thou have omitted thy duty, so have thou not allowed thy self in
committing iniquity?

A. Alas! with shame I must confess, that my Ignorance has not been alone; but
I have fallen into Drunkenness, and Whoredom sometimes: I have been guilty of
Swearing and Lying to serve a turn, and for my own advantage: And so I could
but do it cleverly, I have not stuck at doing unjustly in wronging of my
Neighbor.

Q. 22. How shall the pardon of such sins as these be obtained?

A. I hope by now saying my Prayers, and going constantly to Church, and
leaving my sins to make amends to God Almighty for them.

Q. 23. Have thou never heard of Jesus Christ?

A. Yes, Jesus Christ is our only Savior.

Q. 24. Why then do thou speak of thy praying, and duties and performances as
if by these thou could save thy self?

A. Certainly sin is to be forsaken, and duties are to be done.

Q. 25. But how shall good duties, which when best done, have much of sin in
them, make satisfaction for the iniquities thou have been guilty of? Does not
the Scripture say, The Blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin? 1 John 1. 7.
And being justified by his Blood we shall be saved from wrath through Him? Romans
5. 9.

A. I thought not on Christ's Blood; neither know I how it comes to be of more
worth than my own good prayers and doings.

Q. 26. Is not Christ God as well as Man? And does not (think thou) his
Godhead put a greater worth and value upon his Sufferings and Blood; which was
shed upon the Cross for sin; than is to be found in a sinners prayers and
duties?

A. I do not very well apprehend this matter.

Q. 27. Is it not because thou do not apprehend how great an evil sin is? Did
not the sin of Man strike so high as at God himself? and to satisfy for it;
was it not necessary that the Son of God should humble himself, and become Man,
and be obedient to the death of the Cross, that he might make satisfaction and
an atonement for this great evil?

A. I thought good duties and works had been of more worth than you make them.

Q. 28. Can either thou or thy duties be accepted any other way but in Christ
the Beloved?

A. I see then I must do good duties without resting on them as if hereby I
could deserve pardon: And that forgiveness of sin is to be had by the Blood of
Jesus, who alone made satisfaction for iniquity.

Q. 29. Art thou willing now to attain to the saving knowledge of the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent.

A. My Ignorance I perceive is dangerous, I wish I were directed how to obtain
sound and true knowledge.

Q. 30. Will thou allow time to get knowledge? Will thou pray for wisdom? VVilt
thou attend upon the Word preached? VVilt thou study Catechisms, and other
good Books? And above all Books will thou search the Bible that thou may be
instructed?

A. Such counsel is very profitable, and ought to be followed.

Q. 31. VVilt thou leave the Company of ignorant Fools, since a companion of
Fools shall be destroyed? And will thou associate with them that are wise and
godly, that thou may become truly wise thy self?

A. I hope to receive much benefit by religious Company.

Q. 32. VVilt thou now keep holy the Sabbath day, and come to the House of God
with a design and desire that the Spirit may be given thee; who can enlighten
thy darkness, and turn and change thy very heart?

A. O that God would forgive my iniquities, and give to me his Holy Spirit to
be my Guide.

Q. 33. Art thou willing presently to part with thy fleshly and worldly Lusts;
with thy most pleasing and gainful sins which hitherto have blinded thy mind
and defiled thy Soul?

A. I now fully resolve upon all this which you have spoken to me about.

Q. 34. Do thou not resolve in thy own strength? Alas how weak art thou in
thy self? and if left to thy self, how soon will all thy good purposes vanish?

A. The Lord strengthen me! and give me an heart to know him, so as to love and
fear him, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind to the
end of my days.

The Conscience of the gross, notorious, profane Sinner is thus to be dealt
with that it may be startled.
Q. 1. Whither, Oh whither art thou going? Why do thou make such speed in a
pernicious way? Does Eternal Damnation and Misery deserve all this pains and
labor?

A. Talk not to me of damnation, I have no fear of any such thing; I live a
gallant Life at present, and trouble not my head about uncertainties hereafter.

Q. 2. Had thou never any checks of Conscience in thy vile and vicious
courses?

A. Conscience has sometimes much disquieted me; and was ready to spoil all the
pleasure I took in sin; but now that troublesome Devil is laid, and I can sin
without remorse, with freedom and delight. I can be very merry among my boon
Companions and Ladies of pleasure. My Sports and Pastimes make my days and
nights too, pass swiftly away, and I am become a Stranger unto melancholy.

Q 3.

How can thou thus make a mock of sin? why do thou thus resemble the
madman that casts firebrands, and arrows, and death; and yet say, Am I
not in sport? Those Ladies of pleasure thou art so much taken with; Do they not
increase transgressors among men? Is it not a sign of being abhorred of the
Lord, to fall into their hands? Are not their hands as bands? and their hearts
as netts and snares? will not the end be bitter as Wormwood? and are not their
houses the very Suburbs of Hell? And as for thy boon Companions, are they not
incarnate Devils? do they not entice thee to sin, and endeavor to harden thee
in it? and continually further thee in the way to death and damnation?

A. My heart is proof, and I can laugh at such talk as this; speak of these
things to silly Women, or to Children to fright them; or to Men that are
childish. I can enjoy my pleasures without the least check or fear; and this
does mightily increase them, and makes them to be pleasures indeed.

Q 4.

Does not this senslesness of heart argue thy condition more desperate, who
under such loads of guilt and wrath yet feel and fear nothing? The Man
that is sick of a Fever, and has lost the use of his understanding; and says
he is perfectly well; and wonders they will not let him rise and go about his
affairs and business: does not this argue the disease more violent and
dangerous, and likely to prove more deadly?

A. You talk like a damned Fanatic; 'twill never be a good and a merry World,
till such sour, and serious fellows as you be, are out of it.

Q. 5. Is not this the raving of a man in a spiritual sense frantic, and
besides himself?

A. Pray cease to cant and prate in my company; and preach to them that are
willing to go to Conventicles, and to be your Auditors; a Romance, a
Stage Play, a witty Song sung with an excellent voice, and good music; such
things as these take with me exceedingly.

Q. 6. This profane language, which argues an heart most corrupt and wicked;
does not God hear it? Does not the Psalmist say what no reasonable man can
deny; There is not a word in my tongue, but Lo, O Lord, thou know it
altogether? Psalm. 139. 4.

A. I will not believe every thing which rigid Dissenters speak of God
Almighty; I believe him to be better than they would make him. I have pleased
my flesh, and go on in those courses which you make faces at, and declaim
against; yet I prosper, and rather thrive in the World, than go down the Wind:
I hope God is not altogether such an One as you do represent him.

Q. 7. But does he not give a true representation of himself in his own Word?
When God exercised patience, and did not presently punish the wicked man; did
he not hereupon imagine the Lord was altogether such an one as himself? and
because he loved his sin, that God did not so much hate it? And does it not
follow, Consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there
be none to deliver? Psalm. 50. 21, 22. And may you not read in another place; A
brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this; when the wicked
spring as the grass, and all the workers of iniquity flourish; it is that they
shall be destroyed for ever, Psalm. 92. 6, 7.

A. You can talk to me of nothing but Destruction, and that for ever.

Q. 8. Do I talk of Destruction to thee, to any other end, but to prevent thy
being destroyed? But pray let me ask thee; Do thou not believe that thou must
die?

A. Yes, and I am for a merry Life, because I know not how short it may be.

Q. 9 But what is like to become of thy Soul after Death?

A. I never spoke with any that came from the other World you talk of; to
inform me where the Souls of men do go.

Q. 10. Do thou not believe the word of the God of Truth, and what he says
concerning the worth of thy Soul which thou so little mindest; the
irreparableness of its loss: and what he tells thee concerning Hells Terror
and Heavens Glory?

A. I am certain of what is perceivable by my Senses; therefore I pursue the
good which my Senses are taken with; and fly from the evil which distastes and
dislikes them. But as for things invisible, as matters of Faith are, I regard
them not.

Q. 11. To mind only the things of sense, is it not to play the bruit? Do
thou not think, thou art capable of an higher happiness, and of greater misery
than the beasts?

A. I must confess that if Souls at last should prove immortal, and be found so
precious; and the things revealed in the Scriptures, should be indeed
realities; I, and such as I, should be but in an ill case.

Q. 12. If there were but a probability of the Scriptures being the word of
God, and consequently the word of truth; would it not be agreeable to prudence
and right reason to be less concerned about things temporal, and more about
things that are Eternal? But how much more, when there is so great a certainty?

A. That certainty is not apparent unto me.

Q. 13. Was not the Gospel confirmed by the Miracles which Christ wrought, and
which he enabled his Apostles to work also? And our Lord pretending to work
Miracles, and that openly; if he had not indeed wrought them: would his
Doctrine have been at all received? Would not he and his Doctrine have been
derided? especially since it is so contrary to corrupt nature, imposes such
strict commands; and requires self-denial, and taking up the Cross also?

A. I must confess, that the Gospel being so displeasing to men's fleshly and
sensual inclinations would hardly have been embraced, unless Christ who
pretended to a power to do them; had really done wonders to confirm the truth
of it.

Q. 14. Besides, Does not the Gospel show it self to be of God, by its
effectual working at this day? Does it not search the Heart, and make the
secrets of it manifest? Does it not mortify the strongest lusts? does it not
open the eyes of blind minds? does it not change hearts that are hard as an
Adamant; and as foul as Hell: into hearts clean and tender? finally, does it
not raise them that are dead in sin, and make them alive to God and to
Righteousness?

A. I never felt this power of the Gospel which you speak of.

Q. 15. But have not many others? A medicine that has cured multitudes; do
thou not believe it a good one, though thy self did never try it? And let me
further ask thee, whether thou art now willing to feel this efficicacy of the
Gospel?

A. It must be a powerful word indeed, if it work upon such an heart as mine,
and turn such a Sinner, such a Sot, such a Devil incarnate, into a Saint.

Q. 16. Is there any thing too hard for the Lord who is Almighty? What gross
sinners has his word been a means to convince and bring to Repentance?

A. Now my sinful delights and gains are represented to me, as alluring and
desirable, and I cannot find in my heart to part with them.

Q. 17. The Rich man that lived in pleasure, and fared sumptuously every day,
and was clothed in Purple, which was the royal attire; when he came to be
tormented in Hell Flames, did he then admire his former sensual happiness? Nay
did he not desire that his surviving Brethren might be warned not to take up
with, and be deceived still with such a poor felicity?

A. If I should change my course of life, I should be derided and scorned, and
trampled on like dirt. What Songs would my drunken Companions make of me?

Q. 18. Why should a man in his Wits be concerned to behold the mad Men in
Bedlam laugh at him for his sober carriage? And is it not better to break
company with the wicked; though they deride thee, than to go along with them to
that place of woe; where their laughter will be at an end, and end in eternal
sorrow and mourning?

A. If I would be Religious I know not how to be so.

Q. 19. Art thou willing to be instructed? Will thou cry to God for knowledge?
Will thou search into his Word where it is to be found? Will thou say to thy
debauched Companions, whether they laugh or chaff at thee, Depart from me ye
evildoers, for I will keep the commands of God?

A. All this you speak seems most truly for my good.

Q. 20. Will thou count that the time past of thy Life does more than suffice
to have walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of Wine, Revellings,
Banquettings, and other abominable wickedness? And will thou live the rest of
thy time in the flesh to the will of God?

A. If I think seriously of Eternity, I shall waste no more of my precious
time, of which perhaps there may be but very little remaining.

Q. 21. How have thou been used to spend the Sabbath?

A. Alas! that was a day always devoted to sins service in a special manner.
Upon other days I minded the work and business of my Calling; but the Sabbath
was wholly wasted in the works of wickedness. I fear I have been guilty of more
sin that day, than upon all the six days of the Week besides.

Q 22.

Is not thy sin exceedingly aggravated because then served most when God should
have been served and worshipped? Should it not trouble thee that none of thy
time has yet been improved as it ought to have been? but especially should it
not afflict thee, that Hallowed Time has been lavisht away most profanely?

A. This my way has been my folly and madness. It were just with God speedily
to put an end to my days, to grant me no more Sabbaths, nor indeed any longer
space for repentance.

Q. 23. Art thou now willing to sanctify the Lords day? to attend upon those
Ministers, that preach as being in good earnest, that speak most to the
Consciences of their Hearers, and are desirous and wise to win Souls?

A. These above all I have hated; but all the while I did so, I now perceive I
had no true love unto my self.

Q. 24. Do thou consent to submit unto the easy yoke of Christ's commands as
well as desire pardon and reconciliation by his Blood? And do thou look upon
it as unreasonable to hope to be saved by Christ, if thou art resolved that Sin
and the Devil shall still rule thee?

A. The wages of Sin is Death; why should I serve such a Lord any longer? Oh
that I may become a Servant indeed to the best Lord of All.

Q. 25. Art thou willing to be a true Convert unto God? To have thy Eyes turned
to look to him? Thy Feet turned to walk in all his ways? And thy Heart turned
to love and fear, and cleave unto Him?

A. Lord turn thou me, and then I, even I, as bad as I have been shall indeed
be turned!

The Conscience of the Young Man who is vain in his Youth; is to be dealt with
after this manner.
Q. 1. O young Man, thou rejoicest in thy youth, and seem void of care and
fear; What is the ground of this thy joy?

A. I walk after the sight of my Eyes, and in the way to which my heart is
inclined, and the fulfilling of my youthful Lusts is very pleasant.

Q. 2. But is not thy Creator to be remembered in the days of thy youth? And is
not his service infinitely better than to have thy Lusts thy Lords?

A. I reckon it time enough to think of God when I am old.

Q. 3. How do thou know thou shall live to be old?

A. I find Nature in me vigorous and strong. And now what is gratifying to my
Senses puts me into a transport of joy. Mirth and Music delight my Ear; Meats
and Drinks do please my apperite: Brave Apparel is my Pride: Sports and
Recreations are my principal business, and Amorous Thoughts and Desires are
constant Guests which my heart entertains with wonderful complacency. My mind
aspires to worldly greatness; and I hope to be somebody before I die.

Q. 4. Why do thou not consider, that the hour of Death may be near,
notwithstanding the strength of Nature? and that many as young and lusty as thy
self, and who as confidently reckoned upon longer life, have been, by the small
Pox, or Fever, or some other malady, or by unexpected accident suddenly sent
unto their graves?

A. Pray don't talk of Death; it is a melancholic subject which I don't care to
hear or think of.

Q. 5. But will the putting of Death out of thy mind, be any defense against
its stroke, or keep Death off from thee?

A. To think much of Death, would make life miserable; it would be a torturing
of ones self, and a dying every day.

Q. 6. But if thou live so, as that to die will be gain to thee; will the
thoughts of Death be unpleasant then?

A. I have no inclination at all to change my course of life.

Q. 7. Why should thou resolve to live a fool? deceived and enslaved by thy
lusts and pleasures? and to venture dying miserably?

A. Pray let me alone, I am not sensible of any bondage I am under; I live a
merry life; and an ounce of mirth is better than a pound of sorrow.

Q. 8. If an ounce of carnal mirth, which may so quickly end, and end in
endless sorrow, be of so much account with thee; what is a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of joy and glory?

A. That joy is unsuitable to me. That Man methinks spoke very good sense, who
said, Soul take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry, thou have Goods laid up
for many years.

Q. 9. Does not God call that Man a Fool? And did not Death which came to him
many years sooner than he expected; prove him to be both Fool, and Wretched?
And did not Hell make him sensible of his folly when it was too late?

A. I dislike the thoughts of death, but much more of what is to follow after.

Q. 10. Is it not a Lesson, that the Wise man would teach the Young man,
Eccles. 11. 9. But know that for all these things God will bring thee to
Judgment?

A. I dread that day, and cannot endure to think of the account I am then to
give to Him that is to be my Judge.

Q. 11. Not thinking of Judgment, does it not make thee secure and careless in
making ready for it? And hereupon will not thy account be with the greater
grief and horror?

A. I am sorry I have entered upon this discourse; if once these things come to
have a deep and abiding impression upon my heart, I must bid farewell to all my
joy; and sorrow must fill up the remainder of my days.

Q. 12. Why do thou suffer thy self to be deceived and abused? Is not a
greater joy to be preferred before a less? A true and lasting joy, before that
which is but a shadow, a dream, and vanishes in a moment?

A. I cannot conceive that Religion should ever prove such a pleasant thing to
me.

Q. 13. Why then does the Scripture speak of strong consolation? Of a peace
that passes all understanding? Of a joy unexpressible and full of glory?

A. These strong comforts and joys seem to me to be but strong phancies and
mere imaginations.

Q. 14. Have thou not reason to say so of thy sinful Comforts? But pray
consider. Is it not God, the great Creator of all things which has put into the
creatures, that power they have to delight thy senses? And cannot He himself
infinitely more delight thy Soul?

A. Spiritual pleasures are things I do not understand; I have had a deal of
satisfaction in the delights that are fleshly.

Q. 15. Do thou think the Holy Angels have no pleasure because they have no
flesh? How full of Torment are the Devils though they have no bodily senses to
be tormented? And have not the elect Angels though they have no bodies, a far
higher delight in God, than a body is capable of?

A. I confess I have not minded my Soul which is a Spirit; but have pleased my
senses and my fancy; as if there were no higher happiness.

Q. 16. While thou have thus pleased thy brutish part, (for Beasts have senses
which they please) have thou not showed thy self rather a Brute, than either
Saint or Man?

A. You intimate that to be a Saint is to act with the greatest reason. But I
would fain enjoy my sensual pleasures a little longer; and afterward I am for
repenting and turning Saint indeed.

Q. 17. God who commands thy turning to him; and turning Saint; does he not
command thee to do it presently? Does not the Holy Ghost say, To day if ye will
hear his voice harden not your hearts. Heb. 3. 7, 8. If thou were in pain,
would not thou be for present ease? If thou were in great danger, would not
thou be for present security? If sick of a death threatening malady, would
thou not desire to be presently healed? Why, oh why should thou not be
willing to part with sin immediately, which is the worst disease? and which, if
not presently cured, perhaps may never be cured, but issue in eternal death?

A. Methinks I see that evil in sin I never saw; and the bewitching pleasure of
it, is not so taking a thing as it was formerly.

Q. 18. Art thou willing to be directed to a Savior who can deliver thee from
Sin and Wrath?

A. I may die while I am young; and when I come to die I shall prize a Savior;
certainly I ought now to value him, I am willing to be directed to him.

Q. 19. That thou may come to Christ, will thou flee youthful lusts? and
pray that thy heart may be cleansed from them? and that thou may possess thy
vessel in sanctification and honor? counting it an honor to thy body to have
the members of it Instruments of Righteousness unto Holiness?

A. I perceive my Lusts are hurtful, and it is a foolish thing to serve them to
my own ruin.

Q. 20. When Sinners thy companions entice thee, will thou refuse to consent?
and rather reprove them though they call thee fool and fanatic, than have any
longer fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness?

A. It Is better to leave them, and be laughed at; than in hell to weep and
despair with them to Eternity.

Q. 21. Thy wanton and defiling and ensnaring books, such as Plays and
Romances, will thou cast away? and give thy self to search the Scripture;
Catechisms, and other good books which may help thee in the understanding, and
practice of the Word of God?

A. I hope I shall become a student in the Holy Bible; labor to be well
grounded in the doctrine of the Catechism; and add practice to knowledge.

Q. 22. Art thou sensible that the pleasures of sin are but for a season? And
are the vanities of the world fallen in thy esteem?

A. I hope I shall be no longer a lover of pleasure more than a lover of God,
nor prefer sports and pastimes before Prayer, his word and service.

Q. 23. Do thou perceive that thy happiness lies in God? in being favored by
him? in being like unto him in holiness, and in enjoying him both here and for
ever?

A. My naughty heart is unsuited to God, and looks upon happiness in him with a
strange eye, but I desire my heart may be circumcised to love him; and that I
may choose God himself above all.

Q. 24. Do thou consent to receive Christ who is made known and offered to
thee in the Gospel? to justify thee by his blood; to sanctify thee by his
Spirit; and to rule thee by his word and commandments?

A. I desire my heart may be opened to receive the Lord Jesus.

Q. 25. Do thou rely on Christ alone to make thy peace with God? as believing
this truth, there is but One God and One Mediator between God and Men, the Man
Christ Jesus?

A. I am persuaded that Christ alone is the Savior of his Church and People,
and that there is not Salvation in any other.

Q. 26. Do thou see thy inability to come to Christ except the Father who
has sent him, draw thee?

A. The Lord make me willing in the day of his power! and draw me to his Son.
Turn m^ to himself! that I may never return to my youthful vanity and folly, or
any wickedness more!

The merely Moral Man's Conscience is thus to be Examined.
Q. 1. What are thy Apprehensions of thy Spiritual state?

A. I thank God I am not as other Men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers.
None can say black is my Eye, I have the the good word and report of my
Neighbors, I do as I would be done unto, I wrong, I defraud no Man.

Q. 2. How do thou perform thy duty toward God?

A. I pray, and hear Sermons, and come to the Communion Table, and pay to the
Church as well as to the Poor, and therefore question not but all is, and will
be well with me.

Q. 3. Do thou not believe that thou art descended from old Adam?

A. I have heard something of Adam, I think he was the first Man, but I do not
well understand the meaning and intent of your question.

Q. 4. Do thou not know that Adam was created innocent and upright, but
quickly fell from his integrity, by believing Satan, and eating the forbidden
Fruit?

A. That was done several thousand years ago; and I am not to concern my self
about it.

Q. 5. Think thou not that thou did sin in Adam?

A. I cannot conceive how I should sin in Him so long a time before I was born.

Q. 6. Does not the Apostle expressly say that by one Man's disobedience many
were made sinners? This he speaks of Adam, and does he not affirm that death
passed upon all men, because in Him all sinned? Romans 5. 12, 19.

A. I do not understand how this can be?

Q. 7. Do thou not perceive in thy self the effects of Adam's sin? And that
thou have derived from Him, a corrupt and depraved Heart and Nature?

A. I thank God, my heart is very true and good; I believe that few, if any,
have a better.

Q. 8. How long has thy Heart been thus true and good?

A. Ever since I can remember.

Q. 9. What think thou of that black character which the Heart-searching
God, gives of the heart of man; that it is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17. 9.

A. I never perceived any such wickedness in mine.

Q. 10. Is it not because thy Heart deceives thee, and hides its wickedness
from thy Eyes? But for thy conviction, let me ask thee. What kind of thoughts
does thy heart entertain?

A. Thoughts are free, and I let them take their course, it would be an endless
piece of business to observe my thoughts.

Q. 11. Does not the Scripture say that sinful thoughts as well as ways must be
forsaken, if we will obtain mercy? Isa. 55. 7. And does not the Apostle give
advice to a man to pray that the thought of his heart may be forgiven? Acts 8.
22. Do not these places plainly signify that thoughts may be sins, and need
pardon?

A. I never understood so much before.

Q. 12. When thou are praying or hearing where are thy thoughts?

A. I am very reverent and devout in my gestures and behavior, but as for my
thoughts; I can give no account, for I very little, if at all mind them.

Q. 13. Does not God himself say, that they worship him in vain; who draw nigh
to him with their Bodies; and honor him with their Lips, but their Hearts are
removed far from him?

A. My heart I must confess does rove and wander while I am in the service of
God: I have many thoughts and contrivances about the World, while I am in the
Church worshipping.

Q. 14. When thou art about thy worldly business that brings in gain into thy
purse, are not thy thoughts intent and fixed?

A. I don't love to play the fool, and do those things that bring in my
livelihood, and the maintenance of my family, as if I did them not.

Q 15.

Does not this show the corruption of thy nature, and the estrangement of thy
heart from God? that thou can trifle with Him and in his Service? and about
the concernments of thy Soul? and yet be so very serious about earthly matters?

A. I must confess in this respect my heart is not so good as it ought to be;
and as I did before imagine.

Q. 16. Did thou ever see thy need of Christ? of his Righteousness to cover
thy sins and to render thy duties acceptable?

A. I have long time thought that my own righteousness and honest dealing did
commend me to God Almighty; and that I am too good to be damned. I have not
perceived any great need of Christ, and know but little of him.

Q. 17.

Art thou willing to be convinced of thy pride and ignorance which thy words
plainly discover, that ignorance and vain confidence may not be thy ruin?

A. Here is a charge that is severe; such as I thought I never should have had
from any man: and I am ready to resolve to talk no more; but still to place my
confidence where I have done. And yet withal I have no mind to perish;
therefore I am not against conviction upon good and sufficient grounds.

Q. 18. Thou trustest in thy Righteousness, but does thine exceed that of the
Scribes and Pharisees? And if it does not, how can thou hope, against Christ's
plain words, to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? Mat. 5. 20.

A. I know not what the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees was.

Q. 19. Thou art free from actual murder; but is there not malice, envy, or
revenge working in thy heart without control? Thou never were guilty of actual
fornication; but do thou not lust in thy heart after Women? suffering evil
concupiscence to burn within, not caring to quench that impure flame? Thou
stealest not any part of thy neighbors Estate, but have thou not often covered
what is His? The Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees was external only,
not in heart, sinful workings within, they made no matter of; yet they rested
on this Righteousness, thought themselves whole, and slighted Christ the great
Physician of Souls. And is not thy Righteousness, which thou gloriest in; just
the same?

A. Christ says, If thou will enter into Life, keep the Commandments; and he
names those of the second Table.

Q. 20. But does he not tell that young man who had kept these commandments
from his youth without any gross violation of them, that yet he lacked one
thing, love to Christ above his Possessions? And art not thou thy self so far
from loving Christ and believing in him that thou have not cared to know him?

A. I have heard some talk of Christ that he is our Redeemer.

Q. 21. May he not well be called a Redeemer, who redeemed believers from the
curse of the Law, from the wrath to come; and from all their Iniquities? Who
gave his Life a ransom, and shed his blood to be the price of his Churches
Redemption?

A. I see you would persuade me that I do stand in need of Christ the Redeemer;
as well as others? and that I am lost without him.

Q. 22. Did not Christ come to seek and to save that which was lost? Is it not
better to see thy self lost, and come to Him while he calls thee; than to think
thou art safe enough, till Hell too late convince thee that it is quite contrary?

A. My Life has been led without blame; I differ much from others who have run
into all excess of riot.

Q. 23. Was not the Apostle Paul blameless touching the righteousness of the
Law before his Conversion? And yet was he not convinced of sin and saw himself
lost? And who ever expressed an higher esteem of Christ than He?

A. Certainly the Apostle saw that in sin which yet I do not see.

Q. 24. Will thou study the purity and spirituality of the Law of God? Will thou take notice how it requires thee to love the Lord with all thy heart, to
worship him in Spirit and in Truth? and forbids all sinful motions, thoughts,
passions and desires? If the Law did thus come to thee, would not sin presently
revive? would not thy iniquities appear innumerable? would thou not conclude
thy self dead and condemned, till justified by Faith in Jesus?

A. I begin to have other thoughts of Christ than ever yet I entertained.

Q. 25. Will thou now bewail thy misplaced confidence? will thou pray for
Faith; and hear for Faith in Christ? will thou be incessant in thy
Supplications, that it may be given thee to believe? will thou come by the help
of his Grace and Spirit unto God as thy Chiefest Good, and come to him through
Jesus the Mediator, being sensible that He is the only Way unto the Father?

A. I desire to believe, Lord help my unbelief!

Q. 26. Will thou in all thy duties look unto Jesus for assistance to perform
them, and for acceptance through Christ after they are performed?

A. I see this is necessary.

Q. 27. Will thou rely on Christ and his Righteousness, i. e. his Obedience and
Sufferings for pardon of all past iniquities, especially thy minding the world,
and mocking of God in thy Devotions hitherto? And will thou earnestly desire
that thy Faith may not be counterfeit, but of the right kind; purifying thy
heart, overcoming the world, and working by love?

A. Such a Faith I now perceive is more precious, and will make me more truly
rich than the greatest abundance of Gold that perishes.

Q. 28. VVilt thou take due notice of the reason why thou mavest safely trust
in the Lord Jesus to save thee? Does not his Godhead argue him able to save?
And did he not become Man that he might be in a capacity to suffer for men's
sin? Was he not made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and
faithful High Priest to make reconciliation for the sins of the people? Heb. 2.
17.

A. On Him alone I resolve to rest; on whom whosoever believes, he shall not be
confounded.

The Hypocrites Conscience is thus to be searched.
Q. 1. Art thou willing to be tried? and since there is no grace but has its
counterfeit; have thou no fear of being deceived, and mistaking shows for
substance?

A. You make me half angry by asking such a question. None that know me; doubt
of my uprightness.

Q. 2. Of what Church art thou?

A. I am of the purest Church and way I know, I have separated my self from all
that are not of my persuasion, and I do not care to have communion with them.

Q. 3. Is not the Communion of Saints, an Article of the Creed? Is not the love
of every particular Member of Christ to be extended to the whole Body? Were not
the Ephesians commended for their Faith in the Lord Jesus and Love to all the
Saints? Ephesians. 1. 16. And if Believers of different persuasions, that are
sincere, are received by Christ; ought they not to receive one another?

A. I hate mixtures in Religion.

Q. 4.

But should thou not Love Grace wherever thou see it? And should thou
not take heed lest thy spirituality be mixed with uncharitableness?

A. I am a Member of a true and rightly constituted Church of Christ. I can
hardly look upon Assemblies that are of another constitution, as true Churches;
their Ministry, or the Ordinances administered to them to be valuable.

Q. 5. Is not this the right Antichristian Spirit? Do not the Papists Damn all
Christians in the World, that are not of their way? Instead of coming out
farther from Babylon, art thou not Baptized into the Spirit of Babylon e're art
aware?

A. I am sure we ought to dislike corruptions wherever we see them.

Q. 6. And is it not as certain that true goodness wherever it is seen; is to
be approved? Now do thou not perceive that many who differ from thee in thy
Church Way; are sound in the Faith, and of Exemplary Holiness in their Lives?

A. I cannot deny, but upon Discourse with them, and observation of them, (for
I am a strict observer of other men's steps) I have found them so.

Q. 7. Is not this an Argument that plainly proves, Christ is in other Churches
also, and works effectually among them, and in them by his Spirit? But thou who
talkest so much of a pure Church, how is thy Family ordered?

A. I am not under so low a dispensation, as to use forms of Catechizing in my
Family; neither do I look upon Family worship to be of such absolute necessity.

Q. 8. A strict Church and a loose Family, are they things at all suitable?
Will thou talk against Forms of Catechizing; when the Apostle commands Forms of
sound words to be held fast? And as for Family worship; Is it not plain from
that Petition in the Lords Prayer. Give us this Day our Daily Bread! That they
who daily Eat together; ought daily to Pray together? And that not only for the
Bread they Eat, but also for the Hallowing of Gods Name, the coming of his
Kingdom, the forgiveness of Sins, and Grace to strengthen them against
Temptation to Evil?

A. I am not utterly against Family worship, but sometimes perform it.

Q. 9. What hinders thy constant performance? Is it not (if thou will confess
the truth) an estrangement of thy Heart from God? An eagerness after the World?
And an over-industriousness in thy earthly business?

A. You little know whom you speak to. I have a great Name and am highly
esteemed for godliness, by them that are acquainted with me.

Q. 10. Had not the Church of Sardis a Name that they lived, and yet were
really dead in sin many of them? In others of them, the good things that
remained were they not ready to die? And was not the Church of Laodicea
confident she was rich, and increased in good things, and had need of nothing,
when indeed she was wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked?

A. These instances shake not my confidence.

Q. 11. What is the ground of this thy confidence?

A. Being so very pure and strict in our Church way, I hope we may have some
grains of allowance, to be more remiss in other respects. But this is a secret
not to be communicated to every one.

Q. 12. Is not this to resemble many ignorant carnal Protestants, who because
they are pretty exact in keeping some of the commands, think they may make bold
to live in the transgression of others? But does not the Apostle say, that if a
man keep the whole Law, and yet allow himself in offending in one point he is
guilty of all? Because he keeps no Commandment sincerely, and out of love and
reverence to God the Lawgiver? Jam. 2. 10.

A. Another ground of my Confidence, is the falls of Saints that are upon
Scripture record; therefore I conclude that to be intemperate with Lot and
Noah; and to be unclean with David; may very well consist with truth of grace.

Q. 13. Wherefore are their Falls recorded? Is it that such sins may be
allowed of? No no. Is it not to keep Saints humble, and that they may depend
upon a strength beyond their own, that they may be able to stand? Is it not to
make them sensible how bad the best men are when God does leave them a little
to themselves?

A. I cannot in this contradict you.

Q. 14. Were not these Falls of Saints recorded also, to open a door of hope
to fallen Saints, that they might rise again and cry for pardon, and for hearts
more clean and right, and that they might be more strongly upheld for the
future, and be established by Gods free Spirit? Now if thou securely allowest
thy self in those sins, which the Saints loathed themselves for, and with shame
and sorrow did forsake, is not this a plain demonstration of thy Hypocrisy?

A. I have sometimes been encouraged to overreach, and defraud others that are
not of our Way, because Israel was allowed to spoil the Egyptians of their
Jewels and Treasure.

Q. 15. Had not the most High God the Possessor of Heaven and Earth a greater
right to the Egyptians Gold and Jewels than they had themselves? and might not
He dispose of their Treasure as well as punish themselves, as he pleased? and
did he not thus dispose of it by a special command at that time? But where is
there such a particular command given to thee? How plain is the Precept; that
which is altogether just shall thou follow? Does not the Apostle say, Let no
man go beyond or defraud his Brother in any matter, because the Lord is the
Avenger of all evil? 1 These. 4. 6. Has not our Lord plainly signified, thou
should no more wrong another, than thou would be willing another should
wrong thee? Mat. 7. 12. Has he not showed thee O Man what is good? And what
does the Lord thy God require of thee but to do justly as well as to love
mercy? And if these duties are neglected, where is thy walking humbly with God?

A. I confess what you say; comes with that evidence and conviction, that the
foundation of my confidence begins to look like a Sandy Foundation: Yet I find
great stupidness in my Spirit. I can think of the sins I have allowed my self
in; without remorse and trouble.

Q. 16. Is there a greater and more inexcusable contemner of God than a
Hypocrite, who so often draws near to God, and gives him so many good words;
and yet in heart despises his presence; his power; his goodness; and his anger
also?

A. Woe is me! I wish I be not quite left unto my self! I fear God may have
pronounced concerning me; Thou art filthy, be filthy still; thou art unjust be
unjust still.

Q. 17. Art thou willing now at length to be thoroughly awaked out of thy
sinful and carnal security?

A. I am surprised (as it is said Hypocrites shall be) with an unusual
fearfulness. I desire to be delivered from the Spirit of slumber; and Oh that
my Eyes may be indeed enlightened, that I may not fall asleep again, and sleep
the sleep of death!

Q. 18. Is the applause of men a poor thing with thee? Do thou value the
favor and approbation of God, and Fellowship with him? And do thou begin to
abhor to seem religious only for carnal interest? and to make a profession
subservient to thy secular advantage?

A. Lord make me an Israelite indeed in whom there is no guile!

Q. 19. Do thou consent to be sanctified throughout, in Body, Soul and
Spirit, and to be established unblameable in holiness to the end?

A. Names and Shows will signify nothing at the day of Judgment; I consent
therefore to be a Saint indeed.

Q. 20. Will thou make restitutio^ of what has been gotten dishonestly either
to the persons wronged, (by thy own self, or by the hand of another, if
prudence so require) or if the persons wronged cannot be found, will thou make
restitution to the Poor?

A. I am glad I have wherewithal, and am in a capacity to do thus. I am willing
to give again what I have robbed, and to walk in the Statutes of Life.

Q. 21. Do thou know that though satisfaction is made to thy Neighbor, by
restitution for the wrong thou have done him; yet as that wrong is an offense
against God; satisfaction can be made alone by the Blood of Jesus the Mediator?

A. I dare rely on nothing but the Blood of Christ, that through him I may
receive the atonement, though my Faith alas is weak, and not without many
doubts and fears.

Q. 22. As presumptuous confidence has been thy sin hitherto; so do thou not
think that despair and despondency will be thy sin also if thou give way to
it? Though many Woes are thundered out against Hypocrites; yet if they are
willing to be made sincere; is the Door of Hope shut against them?

A. I am ready to run from one extreme to another, and to conclude, because I
find there has been no grace in me; that there is no hope remaining.

Q. 23. Does not the Scripture say, It Is good that a man should hope? Is not
despair then evil?

A. Lord pity, pardon, and hold me up from sinking.

Q.

Will thou now be low in thy own thoughts, as thou have but too much reason?
will thou be no longer censorious, but charitable; in honor preferring others
before thy self? will thou be exactly true in thy words; and righteous in all
thy future dealings? will thou be very pure in Body and Spirit, and keep a
Conscience void of offense toward God and toward Man?

A. I have talked much of Grace, buh have little understood it. Oh that tet*
Grace of God which brings Salvation may teach me to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world; that it may be well with me in the world to come for ever!

The Conscience of the Sincere but Doubting Christian is thus to be tried, in
order to his Comfort, and that he may Communicate at the Lords Table.
Q. 1. Why are thy looks so dejected and sad?

A. Alas my heart is full of doubts and fears; and fears of Hell and Wrath must
needs have much of torment.

Q. 2. What is the ground and reason of these fears?

A. My iniquities are increased over my head, and as an heavy burden are too
heavy for me.

Q. 3. Does not Christ call the laboring and heavy laden to come to him for
rest? Mat. 11. 28. and since his call is general to all the heavy laden Souls,
why should thou except and exclude thy self, as if the invitation were not
made to thee?

A. There are many things which are ready to kill my hop^s of ever being
pardoned and saved.

Q. 4. What are those things that have thus bowed thee down, and brought thee
to the brink of desperation?

A. None come to Christ, but those that are Elected, and given to Him of the
Father; and I fear I am not of that number.

Q. 5. Is that the first thing to be inquired into, whether thou art Elected or
no? Art thou not first to make thy calling sure, and by that to come to the
knowledge of thy Election? and if thou art effectually called from sin to
holiness; may thou not warrantably conclude thou have been predestined
unto life?

A. I am much troubled about Gods decree concerning me.

Q. 6. If thou make choice of God, and had rather have him to be thy
portion and inheritance, than to have the largest portion of the things of this
life; may thou not from hence certainly infer that he has chosen thee in
Christ before the foundation of the world was laid?

A. But is there not one sin that God will never pardon? And I am afraid
oftentimes that I have committed that unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost.

Q 7.

Is not the Blood of Christ which does away the guilt and filth of sin precious
in thy Eyes? and do thou not highly value the privilege of being justified
and washed by this Blood? and if so, is it not plain that thou does not trample
under-foot the Son of God, nor count his Blood an unholy and common thing?

A. The Blood of Christ is truly precious to me, and the benefits thereby
purchased, if I might partake of them.

Q. 8. Do thou count the Miracles that Christ wrought for the confirmation of
the Gospel by the power of the Holy Ghost, to have been wrought by the power of
the Devil?

A. No, no; I am satisfied that Satan could not do such wonders, as to give
sight to the Blind and born Blind, and to raise the dead.

Q. 9. How can thou think then that thou art guilty of Blasphemy against the
Spirit? But to put all out of doubt, do thou not desire the sanctifying grace
of the Spirit? and if so; is not this a plain evidence thou have not committed
the unpardonable sin against the Spirit?

A. I would fain have this well proved; that a desire after grace is an
evidence I never was guilty of the unpardonable sin.

Q. 10. Is not this proved from Christ's own words, Blessed are they that hunger
and thirst after righteousness? Mat. 5. 6. If He that hungers and thirsts after
righteousness, i. e. desires to be truly holy, and still to be more and more
holy; be indeed a blessed man; and shall be filled; have what he desires: How
can he have been guilty of a sin unpardonable, and that unremoveably fixes a
curse upon him?

A. But if I have not committed the sin that never is forgiven; alas how many
other sins have I been guilty of; which I fear will be my Eternal ruin!

Q. 11. Is not being burdened with sin now; the way to be eased of the load;
and to prevent thy sinking under it into Hell?

A. I fear my fears; and that sin is not my burden; only the punishment
threatened, the vengeance of Eternal Fire does affright me.

Q. 12. Is there not a difference made between thee, who fear that God who
can kill the Body, and destroy the Soul in Hell; and those stupid sinners; who
live without God in this World, as if there were no Heaven or Hell in the next?

A. I grant there is some difference made; for my Conscience that now is
awakened and troubled, was once very fast asleep and senseless.

Q. 13. Art thou still a worker of iniquity?

A. No, I dare not sin presumptuously: I dare not allow my self in the practice
of any known wickedness; but still in many things I am continually offending.

Q. 14. Do thou think that none have true grace unless they are perfectly
free from all sin? Does not Solomon say, There is not a just man upon Earth,
that does good and sins not? Eccles. 7. 20. Does not the Apostle acknowledge
that sin dwelt in him? and that when he would have done good evil was present
with him? Romans 7.

A. You little think how great the sins are which I have been guilty of, though
now I cease the practice of them. I am exceedingly amazed at their nature,
number, and aggravations.

Q. 15. Does not the Lord promise he will abundantly pardon the wicked man that
forsakes his evil way? Isa. 55. 7. Is thy sin too great for the righteousness
of Christ to cover; who in point of sufficiency, is the propitiation for the
sins of the whole world? Where sin has abounded, does not the grace of God much
more abound?

A. Still the greatness of sin terrifies me. Oh wretch that I am! what have I
been and done!

Q. 16. How great a sinner was David? with what horrid aggravations did he sin?
being such an experienced Saint, so wonderfully delivered and advanced; and so
great a Prophet besides? and yet does he despair of mercy? Does he say, Because
my sin is great, I fear it will not be forgiven? Nay, does he not use the
greatness of his sin, as an argument to prevail for pardon; because Divine
mercy, and the Name of God, would be the more magnified in justifying one so
guilty? Did he not pray and prevail too, when he prayed, for thy names sake
pardon my iniquity, for it is great? Psalm. 25. 11.

A. God pardons not the sins of any whether great or small, that repent not,
and I fear I never have sorrowed after a godly sort.

Q. 17. When thou confessest sin to God; do thou hide any because of the love
thou bear to it? Art thou not grieved and displeased with thy self because
thou have sinned? and art thou not willing to forsake all the sins thou do
know and acknowledge? if so; is not the promise very express, That thou shall
have mercy, Prove. 28. 13.

A. You cannot imagine what vile thoughts, and lusts, and passions, there are
in my Heart, which I cannot get rid of.

Q. 18. Are not these thoughts and lusts very unwelcome Guests? would not
have them mortified, and brought into captivity and obedience to Christ? and
don't you desire a clean Heart may be created, and a right Spirit renewed in
you?

A. I think it is merely fear of Hell that is the principle from which such
desires flow: If there were no Hell; it is likely my longing after purity would
be at an end.

Q. 19. Why should thou make a supposition, that there were no Hell? Art thou
not to look upon things as they are? and are they not indeed, as in Scripture
they are represented? If there were no future rewards and punishments, who
knows what the best would be, and do; the main foundation and reason of
religion and goodness being gone? Does not the Apostle himself say, What
advantageth it me if the dead rise not? let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
die? 2 Cor. 15. 32.

A. Well, but still I fear I am sincere in nothing which I do; because I seem
to be acted merely by the fear of punishment.

Q. 20. Do not all Hypocrites and wicked men that are under awakening
convictions, and fear Hell most; fear the loss of their sinful pleasures and
gains more? Do they not therefore endeavor to smother these convictions, that
they may serve their fleshly and worldly lusts without disturbance? But art not
thou of another mind? fearing lest thy Conscience should fall asleep again; and
desiring it may be more thoroughly awakened?

A. I would fain have my Conscience made truly tender.

Q. 21. And would thou not have thy heart thoroughly renewed?

A But my Will I think is influenced merely by a dread of Eternal Damnation and
Misery.

Q. 22. Is not Eternal Condemnation a thing that ought to be dreaded? Why is
Hell made naked before us in the Word, but that we may fear the falling into
it? And while these fears are very high; is it any wonder that the actings of
love are not so evident? When a Child fears his Fathers anger; though he has a
true love to his Father; yet is his love so plainly apparent in the very height
of his fear?

A. Oh! how shall I be able to dwell with devouring Fire? and to inhabit
Everlasting Burnings?

Q. 23. Does the Scripture any where say, that an Hypocrite by the fear of Hell
may be carried so far as to be willing to be truly and thoroughly sanctified?
to be willing to be made right as to the principle, manner and end of his
obedience; and yet remain a Hypocrite still?

A. I do not remember that ever any Hypocrite consented to be a Saint indeed
for fear of punishment; and yet still was branded for an Hypocrite.

Q. 24. Do we not read that the will to be sincere is wrought of God? Phil. 2.
13. and that it is a Day of power, when he thus makes a willing people? Psalm.
110. 3. why then should thou make light of this willingness in thee to part
with all sin both in heart and life; and to become an Israelite indeed in whom
there is no guile?

A. Christ saves Believers only; he that believes not shall be damned; I am
afraid I have no saving Faith, and that Christ never has indeed been received
by me.

Q. 25. Art thou willing to receive Christ undivided? Christ a Prophet,
effectually to instruct thee? Christ a Priest, to make reconciliation by his
death for all thy iniquities; and interceeding for thee to procure the
acceptance of thy duties? Christ a King, to subdue thy lusts and Satan, and to
rule thee according to the holy Laws in the Bible, which are the Laws of his
Kingdom?

A. I must needs say I have no exception against any of Christ's Offices, and I
should be glad if He would do all this for me, that you have mentioned.

Q. 26. And as thou art willing to receive Christ undivided; so art thou not
willing to give thy self and heart undivided to him? that he may have the
pre-eminence above all things in thy affection and esteem?

A. My whole Heart and self I would gladly give to the Lord Jesus, might such
an one as I; so guilty, so defiled; be accepted.

Q. 27. Was not the returning Prodigal, though vile and unworthy, received by
his Father with open Arms and a joyful Heart? was he not entertained with
amazing mercy and kindness? Luke 15. And was not this Parable spoken on purpose
to assure returning Sinners of a gracious reception, though they have run far
away from God?

A. I find some hope reviving at what you say, and some glimmering light of
joy; but still I tremble. I have heard of the Cross of Christ, and Self-denial
even to the death. And if it should once come to such a trial, I am confident I
should prove a most cowardly Apostate.

Q. 28. Is not sin the Natural Man's greatest darling? If therefore thou give
up thy lusts at present to be slain; have thou any reason to question thy
willingness (if called to it) to lay down thy life for Christ's sake? Besides;
in extraordinary trials; is there not extraordinary strength and comfort
vouchsafed? Is Martyrdom to be undergone in Natures powers? or does not the
Spirit of Glory and of God rest upon Sufferers, to carry them through the fiery
trial? 1 Pet. 4. 14. And why should thou distrust the Lord who is faithful,
and will not suffer thee to be tempted above what thou art able? 1 Cor. 10. 13.

A. Though I cannot answer and argue for my unbelief, yet alas my Spirit is
down; and I find it hard for any thing to fasten upon me for my comfort.

Q. 29. When wast thou at the Lords Table?

A. I dread the thoughts of approaching to it, since the unworthy receivers do
eat and drink judgment to themselves.

Q. 30. Is it any wonder thou art comfortless who live in the neglect of a
duty so expressly commanded? and that command given by thy dying Lord, Do this
in remembrance of me?

A. But surely it is better not to Eat and Drink; than to Eat and Drink
unworthily.

Q. 31. Have thou a right understanding of this Gospel-worthiness? How greatly
art thou mistaken if thou think it a meritorious worthiness? Is not
worthiness as much as meetness and fitness? Is not He the worthy person who is
truly sensible of his unworthiness, and desires to be found, and to be
accepted in Christ? Is not He the worthy Communicant who feels his Spiritual
diseases, wants and weakness, and desires that Christ in this Ordinance, would
heal, supply, and strengthen him?

A. I dare not come to the Table, before I have an assurance of the love of
God, and know I shall be welcome.

Q. 32. Is not this to say, I will not use the means, till I have attained the
end? Is not this Ordinance appointed that weak grace may be strengthened, and
by being strengthened may be made evident? Do thou not remember that the
Disciples the first Communicants of all, doubted of their sincerity? And when
Christ told them one of their number should betray him, did they not one of
them after another say, Lord is it I?

A. But the Scripture says, He that doubts is damned if he eat.

Q. 33. Does not the Apostle speak of doubting concerning the lawfulness of the
meat to be eaten, not concerning the Spiritual estate of the eater? The
Disciples doubted whether they were true Ones, or Traitors, and yet was this a
bar to Communion?

A. If I should come, I fear I should receive no benefit, but come away from
the Table with greater Terror and Trouble.

Q. 34. Do thou not perceive the hand of Satan in all this, who is the great
Enemy of thy Soul, and the peace of it? Art thou willing that Grace should be
in thee in truth; be in thee and abound? Art thou willing that World, and Flesh
should be Crucified, and all the Affections and Lusts of it? Art thou willing
to join thy self to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, that may never be
forgotten? If so; why do thou keep off from the Table, who would be so
welcome there? why do thou suffer the New Creature in thee to be weak and
languishing, for want of this Food to sustain and strengthen it? keeping thy
self a stranger unto peace and comfort?

A. I am jealous and afraid of comfort, lest it should make me careless and
presumptuous.

Q. 35. Did the manifestation of the Fathers kindness to the returning
Prodigal, make him forward to be gone again into the far Country? Or did it
not rather make him love his Father and Home, the better ever after? When thou
have tasted that the Lord is good, will not this make thee cleave to him with
further purpose? When thou have experienced the joys of the Holy Ghost, will
not sinful and earthly pleasures be contemned? Will it not be enough to
silence Satan in all his Temptations, when from thy own experience thou can
say, that Godliness is a greater gain and pleasure, than ever sin did yield to
thee?

A. The Lord increase my Faith! Encourage my drooping Spirit! Fit me for my
Duty! Incline me to it! And graciously meet me in the doing of it! I wish
instead of doubts and fears there may be hope and diligence; that I may wait
upon the Lord in all his ways, and find my strength renewed, since the
Scripture says, Blessed are all they that wait for Him.

These Books written by the same Author, are sold by Tho. Parkhurst at the
Bible and Three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel.
WOrthy Walking: Pressed upon all that have heard the Call of the Gospel: From
Ephesians. 4. 1. I therefore the prisoner of the Lord beseech you, that ye walk
worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called.

The Spirit of Prayer: Or, a Discourse, wherein the Nature of Prayer is opened,
the Kinds of Prayer are handled, and the right manner of Praying discovered:
Several Cases about this Duty are Resolved: From Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always
with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, etc. Unto which is added, a
Direction for the Attaining the Gift of Prayer: That Family Duty may not be
omitted, nor Secret Duty discouraged through Inability of Utterance and
Expressi^n.

A Heaven or Hell upon Earth: Or, a Discourse concerning Conscience; on Acts
24. 16. Herein do I exercise my self to have a Conscience, etc.

(...). The True Touchstone; which shows both Grace and Nature: Or, a Discourse
concerning Self-Examination, by which both Saints and Sinners may come to know
themselves. Whereunto are added sundry Meditations relating to the Lords Supper.

(...). The more Excellent Way to Edify the Church of Christ: Or, a Discourse
concerning Love: The Design of which is to Revive that Grace (now under such
decays) among Protestants of ALL Persuasions.

The Conversion of the Soul: Or, a Discourse Explaining the Nature of that
Conversion which is sincere; and Directing and Persuading all to cease their
loving Sin and Death, and to Turn to God and Live.

A Warning given to Sinners to prepare for Judgment, to flee from Wrath to
come, and turn from All Sin; but especially the Sin which does most easily
beset them.

The Little Child's Catechism: In which the Principles of the Christian
Religion are in plain words and short answers laid down, and suited to the
Memories and Understandings of Little Children. Whereunto are added several
short Histories, which may both please and profit them, as also Directions how
to pra^*

All Eight ^^^^ten by Nath. Vincent, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

FINIS.

