SURE and HONEST MEANS FOR THE CONVERSION OF ALL HERETICS: AND Wholesome
Advice and Expedients for the REFORMATION of the CHURCH.

Writ by one of the Communion of the Church of Rome, and Translated from the
French Printed at Cologn, 1682. With a Preface, by a Divine of the Church of
England.

LICENSED

GVIL. NEEDHAM.
November. 3. 1687.


LONDON: Printed* and to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. M DC
LXXX VIII.

THE PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH READER.
AFTER so many excellent Discourses as have of late been published by the
Divines of the Church of England upon almost all the Points in Controversy
between Us and our Brethren of the Church of Rome; The design of this
undertaking.
it might well be thought a very needless thing to call in this foreign
Auxiliary, were it not hoped that those Reasons which usually are not so well
received when coming from such as they esteem their Enemies, might possibly be
allowed the favor of an Examination, being offered by one of their own
Communion.

It may besides be perhaps no unseasonable design, especially at this time, to
satisfy the World, that those things which we chiefly complain of in their
Church, are after all no other, than what diverse of those who have lived and
died in it, have both confessed to be amiss, and earnestly wished they might
see reformed.

It is not unknown to any at this day, The necessity of a Reformation
acknowledged by many of the Church of Rome.
what the Complaints have been of many the most considerable Persons of the
Church of Rome in the very beginning of our Reformation. How much they desired
that something might be done to rectify what they could not deny to be amiss
both in the Head and in the Members. Let the frequent Demands of the Emperor
and other Catholic Princes; let the Acknowledgment of the Pope Himself, and
the Proposals of the College of Cardinals expressly set apart for this
Consultation; let the Remonstrances that were made, and the Endeavors that
were used, both by the French Legates, and the Spanish Bishops, even in the
Council of Trent it self, suffice to show, both that something was amiss, and
that the Protestants tho they might perhaps be censured by them for not
proceeding so regularly as they thought they should, yet could not be denied to
have had just grounds in the bottom for their Complaints.

Testified in writing by some of their most eminent Authors.
And what was then more generally owned as to these things, whilst as yet it was
hoped that some redress might be had of them; many of the best Men of that
Church, and who have made the most diligent and impartial Enquiries into the
differences between us, have not ceased, tho in a more private manner to
confess since, and publish to the World their just Resentments of it.

See the Preface to the Discourse of the Holy Eucharist, in the two great
Points of the Real Presence, and Adoration of the Host.

The present! Treatise an Instance of it.

That the Author of this Book was indeed of the Roman Religion.

The occasion of his first searching into the Truth of his Religion.


It were infinite to insist upon all those that have done this: Something of
that kind has been already offered to the World, and more perhaps may hereafter
be done more fully to confirm it. In the mean time the Author here before us,
and who lived and died in the Roman Communion, sufficiently declares, that he
was so far from esteeming that Church, which now pretends to so much Authority
over all others, to be absolutely exempt from all possibility of erring, that
on the contrary, he judged it to be actually involved in very great Errors.

It cannot reasonably be doubted by those who know any thing at all of this
Book, but that he who wrote it was truly a Member of the Church of Rome,
however dissatisfied with it in many of its pretenses.

His Preface will give a satisfactory account, how by the general decay of
Piety that he met with in a place, which he expected should above all others
have deserved the Name of the Holy City, he came first to search more fully
into his Religion: and how the more he read the Holy Scriptures, and compared
the Pretenses of his Church with what he found in them; the more he still
perceived it to have deviated from the Primitive Rule, and to have usurped upon
the Consciences and Credulity of its Members.

But tho by this means therefore he saw that in many of our Disputes we had
Reason in our Arguments against them; That he continued in many things to the
last in opposition to the Protestants. Instances of it.

That the Chapter of R. is the visible Chapter of Christ.

Moyons surs, etc. part 2. page 92, 93. Edit. de Cologne 1681.


yet in so many other Points he still defends their Errors, as plainly show how
far he was, at the time that he wrote this Book, from being a Deserter of his
first Faith.

Hence it is that we sometimes find him arguing thus against our Religion. That
there being no visible Church of our Persuasion at the beginning of the
Reformation, and yet it being confessed by us, that there ought always to have
been a visible Church of Christ in the World, we must confess that then ours is
not the visible Church of Christ: and there being no other that can with so
good reason pretend to it as the Roman, we ought to acknowledge that to be it.

Concerning the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, he seems to the last to have
stuck to that Interpretation of Christ's words, 2. Corporal Presence.
upon which the Church of Rome so much insists against us. That this Sacrament
being the last Will and Testament of our Blessed Lord, Ibid. page 103.
we ought to interpret it as all other things of that kind, according to the
Letter: And cannot without Impiety believe, that our Lord Jesus Christ in the
Institution of it should have made use of Words, either obscure or ambiguous.
Besides, that it was never his custom to establish Articles of Faith upon
Metaphorical Expressions. In a word; tho for Peace sake indeed he seems to
desire that no ones Conscience should be tied up to any determinate manner of
Christ's Presence in this blessed Eucharist, yet he plainly enough declares
that as for himself he thought him to be really, nay corporally present there:
Ibid. p. 105, 107.
And that the Calvinists were guilty of Novelty and Error in this matter,
seeing (as he adds) all the Christians of Asia and Africa believe the Real
Presence, P. 109.
and there are none but themselves that do deny it.

From this Error, he elsewhere argues in behalf of the Communion in one kind:
3. Communion in one kind.
In which tho he confesses his Church to have departed from the Primitive
Institution and therefore wishes is might be redressed; yet upon this Principle
of the Real Presence he endeavors to show that it is not so capital a Matter
as we pretend, Ibid. p. 99, 100, 109, 110.
nor ought we from hence to conclude, that their Church which he calls the
Catholic Church, is not the true Church.

4. Invocation of Saints.
I shall add but one Point more, and wherein he plainly shows himself to have
been far from our Persuasion, and that is, the Invocation of Saints. Which,
says he, we call a Religious Worship, Ibid. p. 112.
and little better than Idolatry. But he denies it to be a Religious Worship,
for any one to pray to a Saint to pray to God for him, or any more than to
entreat any good Man living to do the same. All the difference he thinks is,
that we are not so secure that the Saint hears our Prayers, as we are that our
f^llow Christian does. That for that Passage which from St. Paul we alledg
against them in the matter, Page 113.
Romans x. 14. How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? it does
them no more harm than it does the Calvinists themselves, who pray to their
Ministers to pray to God for them, although they do not believe in him, nor put
their Confidence in him as God. That besides all this, their Church does not
teach that it is necessary to pray to them, and that it is therefore a manifest
Injustice to accuse them as Idolatrous on any such account. Page 114.
And that after all, we cannot deny but that the Invocation of Saints was very
early in the Church.

I suppose this may be sufficient to satisfy any reasonable Man, His Book
reprinted by the A. B. of Toulouse.

See, le Jansonist convainca de vain sophistiquerie, page 91.


that t^is Author was indeed what he declares himself to be, a true Member of
the Church of Rome. But if yet any further doubt should still remain, this I
hope at least will fully cle^r it, that the Archbishop of Toulouse has lately
thought fit to cause this very Bo^k to be reprinted, with a public Permission
so to do.

And now after what has been said concerning this worthy Author, He is
therefore to be excused if he sometimes speak against us.
and who has hitherto m^t with a general acceptance from all those that prefer
the Interest of Truth and the Peace of the Church, before their own secular
Ends and Advantages; I hope it will not displease the Church of England-Reader,
if he meet with some things in the following Treatise that may seem to reflect
a little hardly upon his Country and Communion. For besides that they are not
many, he may please to remember that it was written by one, who, tho by God's
Mercy he saw enough to detest some of the Extravagances of his Church, yet in
the rest continued still firm to the Communion of it: And the Translator
thought that he ought not to give those of the other side cause to complain of
him, by representing only what made against them, and omiting that wherein he
sometimes reflects upon us too.

As for the design it self, The design of his undertaking the Conversion of all
Heretics.
The Conversion of all Heretics, and the Reformation of what is truly amiss in
the Church: How practicable it is I shall not undertake to determine. This must
be confessed, that it is certainly most worthy of a Christian's Thoughts and
Endeavors. And tho it is much to be feared, that through the Prejudices and
Interests of Men we never shall see such a perfect Union among Christians as
were to be wished; The method he has taken the most likely to do this.
yet I cannot doubt but that our Author has truly pointed out to us the
chiefest Obstacle of our common Peace; and which, were it once removed, we
might by God's Grace soon proceed on all hands to a better understanding than
we are ever like to arrive at without it.

Whilst Men not only continue insensible of their Errors, but are carried away
with an Opinion, that they cannot possible fall into any: Whilst instead of
examining imparpartially where the Truth lies, they magisterially assume to
themselves an Authority to denounce Anathema's against their Brethren who would
convince them of their Deviations; it is in vain to hope that either Truth
should prevail, or Peace and Unity be established among us. But would they once
be persuaded to remove this Obstacle out of the way; would they know themselves
to be but Men, and as such, exposed to the same Frailties and Infirmities that
other Christians are; would they seriously implore the Blessing of Heaven upon
their Endeavors, and laying aside their vain Traditions, join impartially with
us in the search of Truth, out of the alone certain and infallible Rule of it,
the Word of God; why should we despair but that the Light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ might yet so shine upon us, 2 Cor. iv. 4^ Luke i. 79.
as to guide our Feet into the way of Peace.

Now this is that which our Author here endeavors to draw all Men to. The sum
of his Project.
He proposes that we should first do Justice to one another, as to all those
Points that we have falsely laid to each others Charge. That then we should
reform on both sides whatever we could discover to need a Reformation. To this
end he freely gives us up the Council of Trent; and indeed in effect, all the
other Councils that have been held before it; the Infallibility of the Church,
but especially the Authority of the Pope, whom he proves, in what we here
publish, to be an Usurper, and wishes all Men to separate from him as such. He
desires that the Cardinals might be reduced to their first Condition; that the
number of Bishops might be increased, and their Diocesses no larger than what
they could easily supervise. That the Monasteries might be retrenched, and the
almost infinite number of the Clergy reduced to a juster proportion. That for
all this, a free Council might be assembled, in which the Laity as well as
Clergy might be present, as being the more likely of the two to bring things to
an Accommodation. That for those Points wherein we could not after all agree,
some way should be found out to tolerate one another. As for instance, that in
the matter of the Eucharist, neither should those of the Church of Rome require
us to receive their Doctrine, or to join in their Worship; nor we them to
renounce either: But that continuing on both sides as we are, we should
nevertheless communicate together in the same posture of kneeling, as is now
done in the Church of England. Finally, that for all this it were to be wished
some great Prince would begin to set this matter on foot, for that without such
a Concurrence, it will be impossible it should ever be thoroughly effected.

This is, as far as I can gather, the design of this Author; and which I have
the rather put together here, because it is not so fully expressed in what is
now published, being only the first part of his Work, tho all that he lived to
bring to perfection: For the rest, which we find in the French Edition, it is
rather a Collection of Materials for a second part, than any complete Copy of
what he had finished of it.

I shall not here enter into any debate, either to vindicate or to censure this
Project. No likelihood that the Papists will ever consent to it.
It will be time enough for us to deliberate on these things, when those of the
Church of Rome will be content in good earnest to quit their pretenses to that
Infallibility and Authority they have so long usurped to themselves, and over
all others, and join in such a Christian Design as is here proposed with us.
And however we have been told that the present Pope was once inclined to submit
the Council of Trent to a new revision, yet if we may be allowed to judge by his
other Actions, he does not seem to be at all disposed to give up the least part
of his own pretenses to the Churches Peace.

What use we are to make of it.
And therefore, instead of pursuing such vain, however pleasing, Speculations;
let us make this present use of our Author's Arguments, to confirm our selves
yet more in opposition to those Pretenses, which we see here even One of their
own Communion to have proved, not only false but insupportable. Let us beseech
God, if it be his Will, to bring all others that are yet enslaved by them, to
the like knowledge of the Truth. And that in the mean time, he would vouchsafe
unto us the Grace of his blessed Spirit, that we may faithfully persevere in
our Holy Profession to our Lives end: That no Terrors, no Interests, no
Craftiness of cunning Men, who lie in wait to deceive, may be able to make us
fall from our own Stedfastness: Ephesians. iv. 14.
But that contending earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered to the
Saints, Jude 3.
we may grow in Grace, 2 Pet. iii. 18.
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: To him be Glory both
now and for ever. Amen.

The Authors PREFACE.
THE Authority of the Pope has taken such root by the ignorance of the Holy
Scripture, by the multitude of Ecclesiastics, and by all the Temporal
Benefices, whereof the Pope is looked upon as the Source, that a kind of
Miracle seems necessary to destroy it, and to Reestablish the Church in that
liberty which the Son of God has purchased for it by his Blood. Besides,
Impiety, Irreligion, Ambition and Dissoluteness have so seized upon the minds
of the greatest part of Mankind, that a man cannot hope to be so much as heard
when he speaks of Reforming the Church. A^tho I am very well satisfied of that,
yet I think my self indispensibly obliged to represent the abuses of this Power
and Authority which has no just foundation; at least in this respect I shall
in some measure justify my self toward God in doing my Duty, I shall justify
my self to my own self, whom my Conscience has long accused of a large and
Criminal silence. I shall also justify the Catholics against the Heretics,
who will know by this, that we are not so blind as they imagine. And this will
also serve to fortify the Catholics against all the Temptations they may have
of abandoning the Church, by freeing themselves from the Papacy; so that
Renouncing the latter, they may always stand firm to the former, and also
prepare themselves to fight courageously against Antichrist, who in all
appearance is near at hand.

I have a great while hoped that there would have been found among the great
and learned men that we have among us, some one or other that would have
undertook to open men's eyes, and would have saved me a labor therein. I could
consult no body without manifest danger both to themselves and me, since it is
a work that may equally displease both weak Catholics and Heretics, being
obliged in regard of the first to disentangle and separate truth from falsehood,
and a falsehood more beloved by many Catholics than the most Important truths.
And in regard of the Heretics, I know it is the way to undermine the
foundation of their false Religions, tho without dispute, and indirectly, in
abolishing the Papacy. In respect both of the one and of the other, the effects
of this mischievous Authority are terrible; since it fills the Catholics with
ignorance, and gross and low Ideas of the Christian Religion; and mars the
beauty of that as well as of the Church. The Heretics are thereby scandalized,
and harden themselves more and more in their obstinacy, persuading themselves
that every thing in our Religion is false, seeing clearly that some part of it
is so.

It is not to be doubted but that many Catholics of our time do see this evil,
since in the preceding Ages many have perceived it, and that the evil is come
to so high a degree, that it is almost impossible not to take notice of it. And
truly there have been some who could not forbear saying somewhat of it; but
this has been but very slightly and superficially. It seems as tho they were
ashamed of Jesus Christ and his Gospel, as the Scripture speaks.

In truth, it is a deplorable thing that amongst the multitude of learned men
professing the Christian Religion, and that employ themselves in writing, there
cannot be found so much as one man of understanding touched with the miseries
of the Church, and of such courage as to represent it to those who may and
ought to remedy it, the Sacriledg daily committed in the Church under the very
name of the Church, and under the pretense of Religion. Either the greatness of
the evil must discourage them, and bereave them of all hopes, and not being
able to cure the Ulcer, they had rather let it wholly alone; Omittere potius
praevalida and Adulta vitia, quam hoc assequi ne palam fieret qualibus
flagitiis Impares simus, Tac. Annal. Lib. 3. or else it must be, that their own
interest is concerned in the continuance of this evil, or that they have no
regard for the desolations of the Church; or lastly, they are afraid of shaking
the Catholic* Religion in respect of weak Brethren, and for fear of giving
occasion to the Heretics, thereby to insult over it. If they had these last
thoughts, it was for want of examining the thing; for it is certain that the
Papacy has neither by nature nor Divine institution any connection with the
Christian Religion, but on the contrary its Principles are opposite, and tend
to its destruction. It is also certain that those who have separated themselves
from the Church, see very clearly the inconsistency of the Papacy with the
Gospel, since there was nothing else that heretofore obliged the Greeks, and
since the Protestants, to forsake the Church; so that no man can believe but
that they see the thing very well, since it is the only place wherein they
daily attack us with a mighty advantage; and tho it were not true that they
knew it perfectly, we are however indispensibly obliged to oppose Errors (
Mendacia nec tegunt nec vulnerant) and not to palliate them; and certainly not
sincerely to acknowledge palpable gross abuses, is to betray Religion and the
Church; for that makes men call in question the best established Truths,
according to that saying, He that denies all things, grants all things: Qui en
todo niga loda. And I have always observed, that a frank and generous
acknowledgment when a man is in an error, produces a very good effect upon all
judicious and reasonable persons, and disposes the Protestants with much more
readiness to embrace the Catholic Verities.

Furthermore, I dare be bold to affirm, That one of the principal causes of the
irreligion and impiety which reigns in the World, proceeds in great measure
from the little Reason and Wisdom wherewith this Primacy and Papal Almighty
power is exercised, which converting all Religion to its Temporal Profit, makes
the very Divinity of the Christian Religion to be called in question. For as
the World goes, men will have all or nothing; So that having at first received
the Article of the Papacy, as an Article of Faith, whilst they see the Popes,
under color of this Article, robbing and plundering the Church, they will
perceive the Imposture, and believe at length, that the other Articles of
Religion are no more Divine than that of the Papacy. So that if it pleased God,
that this Tyranny were abolished in the Church, this villainous Mask taken off
from Religion, it would be incomparably more loved and respected, and the
Impiety, Ambition, and Dissoluteness, wherewith the Papacy has infected all
things, would be banished from the Church, and we should see all the
Schismatics and Heretics range themselves under the Standard of the Church;
and even the Pagans, and the other Infidels, whose Princes are afraid of the
Pride of Rome, that would make them her Subjects and Tributaries, and dispose
of them and their States at her pleasure. By this means all hopes would be
taken away from the Heretics of ever seeing the Catholic Religion ruined by
it: for I know their Ministers have from hence all their hopes, and would be
sorry to see the Papacy abolished without the Catholic Religion. Wherefore it
is absolutely necessary to fortify the Catholics against this danger, and to
teach them how to distinguish between the Wisdom of God, which they ought
always to stand firm to, and the folly of men, which they ought always to
abhor; and that this last, whatever mixture it may seem to have with Truth, by
the art of men, may never make them contemn the other; and that the Truth may
never make them receive the Inventions of humane Wisdom, sharpened by Ambition
and Avarice, how specious soever they may appear. I shall not be at all
surprised, if some men think I say too much, and that there be many who will
call me Extravagant; for I know how gross and carnal Ideas they who read not
the Scripture have of Religion, having been one of that number, who, as well as
others, believed that the Church could not subsist without the Pope, and that
there ought to be a Universal and Visible Head of the whole Church: But I shall
have reason to think it very strange, if people have not other Sentiments,
after the reading of this work. All those who will penetrate, and enter a
little with me into the knowledge of the Disorders which that Authority causes
among Christians, will find, that I have too much reason, and that I speak with
a great deal of Moderation, if they have any zeal and love for the Church.

For my part, I have been in three different tempers, in regard of the Papacy.
When I first knew what it was, I did nothing but sigh, like another Heraclitus,
and afflict my self with grief for the Disorders that shook my Faith: After
this, I fell into another frame, wherein, like Democritus, I did nothing but
laugh at the folly and vanity of men, who under pretense of Religion, suffered
themselves to be so imposed upon. Since that, as my Understanding increased, I
again fell into the Condition of Heraclitus, being more persuaded than I was of
the Truths of Religion, and bearing a greater part in the calamities of the
Church, and in the salvation of my neighbor, than before I did; and this it
was that moved me to put these my thoughts in writing. So go the thoughts of
men, succeeding one another, pro or con, according as they are more enlightened.

Here I think it proper to represent by what Degrees I came to know the
Imposture.

It is now more than 30. years since I was first at Rome. There I began to
perceive that there was nothing at all in what people had made me believe of
the Pope and Cardinals. I did never believe that every thing that was told me
of them was true; for people would have persuaded me, that the Pope received
news every 24. hours from Paradise, and that he sent whomsoever he pleased to
Heaven or Hell. But what I believed of him, was his great Sanctity,
Infallibility, and Impeccability in every thing he said (as indeed it seems
necessary it should be so, if it be true, that Christ has given him the Employ
that he pretends to), a vast and almost infinite Knowledge, a perfect
abstraction from all frail and earthly things, with a continual application for
the salvation of all mankind: And I believed as much in proportion of the
Cardinals. I found that to be very true which Tacitus says, Major e longinquo
Reverentia: You must not come near a thing to have a value for it. I had the
leisure to consider the Maxims and Conduct of these people, which I soon found
to be contrary to all the Ideas I had formed to my self of them, and I wanted
but very little of running stark mad. I was as full of indignation against
those who gave me these impressions, as against those who scandalized me: I saw
nothing throughout, but an horrible Licentiousness both in the Court and in the
Town, without any appearance of the true Worship of God, as I had observed in
many honest people of France. I heard of nothing any where, but Horrors and
Abominations of all kinds; comparing this with the Sentiments that had been
instilled into me in France, I often cried out, O quantum est in Rebus Inane! O
how the World is abused! The mind of man is but vanity; and I wished with all
my heart, that our poor Frenchmen had but seen it, that so they might be
undeceived. The greatest part of the men here, pass half the day in the
Churches to hear the Music, and the other half among the Curtesans; and that
was it which they at first commended to me, the fine Churches, and the fine
Curtesans. This Nation as well as the Spaniards has found the secret of
Associating their Devotion with a habit of the most enormous vices. In one hand
they shall hold a long Bead-roll, and stick a Dagger into a man's body with the
other, or else commit the most horrible Impurities; nor is there any justice
for this, nor for Sodomy, which is more common there than simple Fornication in
our Country; nor for poisoning. And from all these things the Cardinals, and
Court of Rome, are no more free than others; For the Popes, their Age
ordinarily frees them from these things. I reasoned oftentimes thus with my
self; Is it possible that this here should be the man whom they call His
Holiness, who gives Pardons and Indulgences to others, and who Canonizes
Saints? Is it possible that these should be the men, and this the Court that
gives Laws for Religion to the whole Earth?

I confess, that my Respect for Religion sensibly diminished every day; that I
was tempted to believe that the Christian Religion was made only for them, and
that I doubted of its Divinity, seeing and hearing nothing but inconceivable
Dissoluteness every where, even in the very Cloisters; an Ambition, and an
excessive Vanity in all the Prelates, who were promoted for no other merit than
that of a Machiavillian Policy, wherein the Disciples outdo their Master. I
knew not where I was: Sometimes I cast my eye upon a person of Reputation and
of Merit, as people told me, and I believed so, seeing his Air and his
Behavior: In a matter of 8 days I should hear the secret History of him, which
was a horrible one. The Heroes of this Court are, as Tacitus says of Mucian,
people compounded of great Virtues, and great Vices; Mucianus Luxuria,
Arrogantia, Comitate, Industria, bonis malisque artibus mixtus. These are brave
worldly men; but for Religion, most certainly they have none at all. I am of
the Opinion, That staying in this place is very dangerous for an honest man;
and people do complain, both in Germany and in England, that their young people
that travel, come back from thence lost in Debauchery and Impiety. That which
preserved me from the Contagion of this place, was, that I went with an honest
and a simple mind, however, not very ignorant; for I had finished my studies.
This it was that disgusted me at all the disorders and licentiousness I saw
there, and gave me a horror for all their pleasures. Perhaps I should have done
like other people, if I had not been so stiff and resolute.

To free my self from the perplexity I was in about Religion, through the
disorder and irregularity of this Court, that is esteemed the Center of
Religion, from whence, according to this supposition, there ought to shine
forth nothing but Sanctity, Purity, Humility, Charity, and Zeal for the
salvation of men, Contempt of the Grandeurs and Riches of the World, with a
continual application to the instruction of the people; and where I saw
nevertheless nothing in the stead of these Virtues but Licentiousness, Ambition
and Superstition, with a horrible Ignorance in the people. I then formed a
Design to instruct my self, and to know a little better the Principles of the
Christian Religion: And I desired for that end a French Abbot, with whom I
lodged, to lend me a Latin New Testament, which he had, and which he read but
seldom. I read it with attention, twice over, from one end to the other, which
set my mind in better condition than it was before. The more I read, the more I
was inwardly comforted; but I was the more enraged against what I saw, without
being able to find the least solution to the impossibility that there appeared
to me to be, in the Popes being the Universal Vicar of Jesus Christ upon Earth,
and Head of the Church Catholic. I there quickly found the principal Articles
of Religion established in many places, and often in express terms one only
Head of the Church, Jesus Christ, of whom the Church is the Body, and Believers
the Members; one only Spouse of the Church, one only Bishop of Bishops; but not
one word, neither far nor near, of the Pope and Cardinals, nor any thing that
had any relation to them. Besides, all places there were full of Examples and
Exhortations to Humility, to Piety, to Chastity, and to Charity. The Master and
Disciples there spoke continually of renouncing the World, its Grandeurs,
Vanities, Pleasures, Riches, and above all, against the Spirit of Domination.
But in the Popes, and in their Court, I found Maxims that were quite contrary.
I sometimes entertained the Abbot, who was an honest man, and very sociable,
with the trouble that this Authority of the Popes gave me. He laughed at it,
and gave me pleasing Answers, owning one part of what I objected, and for the
rest, he gave me Reasons, which to me were not very sufficient. One day when I
pressed him a little more than ordinary, not knowing what to answer me, he told
me, That if I would read Bellarmin, I should there find many Reasons that would
resolve my Doubts. So that I hired one, which I read over and over upon this
Subject, without finding any thing that gave me the least satisfaction. There
were passages of Scripture wrested with great violence, which touched not the
question, or else were contrary to it; and the forced sense that he gave them
was always directly contrary to the Genius of the Gospel, and opposite to other
passages of Scripture, whereof I had made a great Collection, and agreed not at
all with the Maxims, and with the Example of Jesus Christ, and of his Apostles.
It is true, there were some Humane Reasons, which at first might seem
plausible; but besides that they had not that weight which those had which the
Scripture furnished with against him; they tended to establish a Worldly and
Temporal Dominion in the Church, and renewed the Error of those Jews who
believed that the Reign of the Messiah ought to be accompanied with worldly
Pomp and Splendour, and to be exercised with great Authority and with fleshly
Arms; for this was the Sum of what he endeavored to prove, That Monarchical
Government is the most advantageous in the World, and by consequence, that the
Church ought to be governed by the Sovereign Orders of only one man, who is the
Pope, who has the power to exterminate Kings, and all those who will not
submit themselves to him. This confirmed me in the Opinion I had before, seeing
that so subtle a Wit as Bellarmin, a man so well versed in Antiquity, and that
had so much interest in the thing* could find out nothing at all to maintain
this Opinion.

At length, I went into Germany, where, after Eight or Nine Months traveling,
I came to Cologne, where I had a great desire to inform my self farther, and to
know if the Papacy had a great while ruled in the Church, and how long since?
Whether or no the Ancient Doctors of the Church had heard it spoken of, and
what they thought of it? I applied my self then to examine some of the Fathers
upon this Article; and that I might the sooner have done, I consulted them upon
those places of Scripture which the Popes make use of, to see if the Fathers
understood them as they do. I found in examining them, that they explained them
in a manner quite contrary to the Pope's Pretensions. This made me certainly
conclude, that the Papacy must have been set up in the Church by some violent
stroke, or else by small beginnings, and by degrees, as it ordinarily falls out
in Usurpations, which are made either altogether by a greater force, or else by
little and little; and that this Usurpation had been seconded and favored by
people, who saw there was not like to be any great resistance, and they made
their advantage of it through men's ignorance.

After that, another thing that gave me a great deal of trouble, was, how to
separate the Article of the Papacy from the Verities of the Catholic Faith, so
that the Infallibility of the Church, as I understood it, might not be
prejudiced. Thinking on this then, often in my unquiet mind, I resolved farther
to consult the Scripture, and the Fathers, upon the passages ordinarily
alleged to prove the Infallibility of the Church; and I found that they did
not understand them as I did: But because I knew what made the Cardinals, and
other people, employ the utmost of their ingenuity in Defense of the Popes
Authority, and that I saw not well what Advantage they could draw from the
Infallibility of the Church, which they maintained with so much ardor, that
doubled my attention, to sound the depth of the matter; and I found, that by
the help of this Infallibility, they would conceal every thing, so as to save
the Popes Authority, and all the Temporal Advantages which flow from it; and I
made no further doubt of it, when I saw they applied it particularly to the
Clergy, excluding all the people, and many men to the Pope alone, excluding all
other Bishops.

Since these Discoveries, I have always held it as a Maxim, wherein I have
never been deceived, which is, That when any practice or Custom in the Church
brings profit or honor to the Ecclesiastics, I presently suspect and examine
it.

At length having a long time reflected upon all the abuses of this Papal
Authority, and having observed the Deplorable condition to which it has
reduced the Christian Religion as well without as within the Church, and seeing
it was that which having driven the Greeks and Protestants out of the Church,
is still the cause why they return not again unto its Communion, and that it
even draws strange Persecutions upon the Church from these scattered sheep, by
reason of the attempts of the Court of Rome, and its favorers; I at last
resolved to publish this little Treatise to disabuse mankind in respect of the
unjust and criminal Devotion which they have for the Papacy, and also to purge
the Church of it as well as of all other vices and misfortunes it has there
caused; being persuaded that an Infallible fruit of this Reformation would be
the Conversion of the Greeks, Protestants, Pagans, Jews and Mahometans; not to
mention the Honor it would do to all the Catholic Princes, whose Majesty and
Greatness are vilified by this shameful subjection to, and dependence on the
Popes, which make them to be despised by other Princes who have freed
themselves from their Tyranny. A Senator of Sweden told me one day a very good
saying of Tacitus to this purpose, Viri muliebria patiuntur. Men act the parts
of women; which is as much as to say, they are the Catamites of the Popes.

However, since it is in their power to treat those as Heretics and Enemies of
the Church who oppose their Ambition and Interest, I prepare my self against
it, and that does not at all discourage me. It is more Honorable to be hated
by such people than loved. Illi maledicent, at tu Domine Benedices. I know the
Reader will in this Work of mine presently look after the Caracters of either
Jansenist, Calvinist, or Lutheran; or lastly, of a man who could not be
promoted to Benefices, and many times he will think he has found me. As for
Benefices I might perhaps have had one if I had had a mind to it; but by the
Grace of God, I will have none, nor have I need of any, nor was I ever designed
for it. The Jansenists are as yet too much Papists to speak ill of the Papacy.
As for the Calvinists and Lutherans, I wish they could be brought to own the
opinions which I do, and which I have no mind to betray in this my Book. It is
true, they have both written often against this power, but not with design that
the Catholic Religion should be the better for it, to which this Work wholly
tends. Whatever men will judge, I think I ought not to renounce any truth
because the Heretics know it; nor to put my eyes out rather than see the
Injustice of the Papacy, because the Heretics see it. If I had not here drawn
the Picture of the Jesuits Religion, it may be those they call the Jansenists
would have suspected them to have been the authors of it as the present times
go; and for the Calvinists, I am sure, that in many places they will say that I
do but gild over the Pill, that they may the more easily swallow down the
poison, as some people have said of the Book of Mr. de Condom; they may judge of
it what they please, I have followed the sentiments which the reading of the
Holy Scripture has inspired me with, and in which I am confirmed the more by
reading the Fathers, and the Ecclesiastical History, and by making reflection
upon all that I have seen in foreign Countries, and upon what I see every day
here.

If the Romanists hear this Work spoken of, they will say, without doubt, as
heretofore at the Council of Trent, when Mr. de Faber made Remonstrances on the
Kings behalf concerning the disorders of the Church, Gallus Cantat, they cried.
I have no better answer than what he made them, Vtinam ad Galli cantum, Petrus
resipisceret; let them come and renounce the Dominion and Tyranny they exercise
over the Church, and over the World, and let our Bishops for time to come,
behave themselves like worthy Successors of this Apostle.

This Work shall be divided into Three Parts, which will contain so many
Chapters. In the first I shall prove that the Papacy has no foundation in the
Word of God; and shall show the vanity and folly of those arguments which they
pretend to draw from the Gospel. In the second I shall make it appear that the
Primitive Church never knew it, and that in the darkest Ages there were ever
some who opposed it, and I shall confute many human reasons, which for want of
the Scripture, and of the Fathers, are made use of for its defense. And in the
third and last, I shall examine all the pretended advantages which this
Authority procures to the Church, or to States, and I shall show that it is so
far from bringing any real good to the Church, or to Catholic States, that it
is the cause of the Desolations of the Church, and of the greatest part of the
Disorders among all Christians, of Ignorance, Heresies, Schisms and Irreligion
that reign. No man ought to be surprised that I conceal who I am in so perverse
an age as we live in, where Truth and Honesty as well as those who profess it,
are exposed to cruel Persecutions, and wherein I shall have as many mortal
enemies as there are worldly Catholics and Papists, and people in possession
of Benefices, without mentioning the Monks.

I have no reason to flatter my self with any great success this Book may have
by reason of the extreme disorder and irreligion of the Age; and I do it more
to discharge my self of the load lying upon me, and for the consolation of my
own mind, than for any other thing, as heretofore Petrarch said upon a like
occasion, Haec scribo, non tam ut saeculo meo prosim, cujus tam desperata
miseria est, quam ut me conceptis onerem and Animum scriptis soler. I write
these things not so much to profit the age I live in, whose misery is so
desperate, as to unburthen my self of my own thoughts, and to refresh my spirit
with writing I have written for my self. Haec mihi cecini and Musis, and si
nemo Alius Audierit. I have sung these things to my self and the Muses, tho no
body else should hear them.

Sure and Honest Means TO CONVERT ALL HERETICS.
CHAP. I.
That the Papacy has no Divine Title. The vanity and nullity of those which it
draws from the Gospel.

WHosoever shall read the New Testament, will there find that Jesus Christ
alone is established as Head of the Church, and that it is not said of any
other, that she should be his Body, or Believers his Members, that belonging to
none but Jesus Christ, who is also the only Spouse of the Church, which would
be adulterous should she submit to another; and this other could not be but an
evil person, and a reprobate, since that in taking the quality of Spouse of the
Church, he must renounce that of Son of the Church, and so could not have God
for his Father, according to the Maxim, That he who has not the Church for his
Mother, has not God for his Father. Now no one person can be the Head, the
Spouse and Son of the Church at the same time. Nevertheless it is certain that
the Popes do assume these Titles to themselves by a vanity which exceeds all
folly, and without being able to produce any reason for it, Divine or Humane.
But let us see what they say to maintain their pretensions.

They say that among the Jews one man only, viz. Aaron, had the conduct of
Divine Service, and was Head of the Levites, and that by consequence there
ought to be in the Christian Church an Authority like unto this, Established
over the whole Church; and that the Bishops of Rome perform the Functions of
this charge. Whereupon there are many things to be said: First of all, it was
not difficult for Aaron to acquit himself of this in so little a State as
Judea, and in one only City of this State, which was Jerusalem, and in one only
T^mple of that City; for it was not allowed to perform Divine Service, nor to
Sacrifice elsewhere; whereas Christianity is at this time spread over the whole
world, and therefore one single person only cannot perform these Functions
every where. It is as if a man should say, that because France is well governed
by one King, he might as well govern all the States of the habitable Earth; and
yet it would be much more easy for him to do it, than for one Bishop to govern
the whole Church, because (as it is well known) the Ecclesiastical Ministry
cannot inflict Corporal punishments upon Delinquents as the Civil Government
may and does. Besides, Aaron was no way the Figure of the Bishops of Rome; for
then the Type would have been more excellent than the Original; but he was the
Figure of our Great and Sovereign High Priest Jesus Christ. Furthermore, Aaron
was not the Monarch of the Levites, but as the Doge is at Venice; for according
to all the Talmudists, he was subject to the Jurisdiction of the Great
Sanhedrim, and to their Censure; whereas the Popes pretend to be not only the
Monarchs of the whole Earth, but particularly of all the Clergy. And besides
all this, there was an express institution of God for this charge, and for the
person of Aaron, and of his Successors. Whereas there is nothing like it for
the Papacy, nor for the persons of those who exercise it. We see in the Old
Testament the Institution of Aaron's Charge with many Ceremonies for his
Installment, and for his anointing; many Ordinances for the Exercise of this
Charge, and for the Succession; many Chapters which speak of the Subordination
of Priests and Levites. But on the contrary we find not one word in the Gospel
of this pretended charge of Universal Head of the Church, of Vicar General of
Jesus Christ, and Successor of St. Peter, nor any thing that has any relation
to it; and yet it ought to have been there clear and evident, since that this
Ministry was to be of an extent a thousand times greater, and the thing in it
self is prodigious, and appears quite contrary to the nature of the Messiah his
Kingdom, and to the Gospel. We see several Orders of Ministers of the Gospel,
there often spoken of; but not one word that can any ways relate to the Pope;
when surely that was the place to have spoken of it, especially if it be
necessary to Salvation to be subject to him, as they would have it, and if he
has the power as they would persuade us, as well over the Temporality as the
Spirituality of the whole world; St. Paul who without question was of as great
ability as the Pope, was not of these peoples humor, who pretend to govern the
whole Church; since he who had not the thousandth part of Christians to take
care of, as the Pope would have according to their supposition, declares that
no Mortal man was sufficient to perform every thing that was necessary to be
done in it, and that he was himself overwhelmed with the care he took for all
the Churches. Nor had St. Peter the courage of our good Popes, who believe
themselves capable of governing the whole Church, (and they might do it without
difficulty after the method they take) since he agreed with St. Paul, that St.
Paul should go toward the Gentiles, and he toward the Jews, and so they parted
the Ministry between them. At least the Popes, after Aarons example, ought to
meddle only in Ecclesiastical, and not in Secular affairs, as they do,
pretending to Lord it over the whole world; for we see that Aaron applied
himself only to the Functions of his Charge, and that in things Temporal and
Civil he was subject to Moses, and left the Absolute direction of them to him.

Instead of imitating Aaron, the Head of the Levites, in his Modesty, the Popes
pretend to be Lords not only of the Temporality, but of the Spirituality, of
all the States of the world, and will in this be Vicars of Jesus Christ, tho he
declared that his Kingdom was not of this world, tho he taught his Disciples,
that he among them who would be the first, should be the last, though he fled
away when they would have made him a King, tho he paid Tribute to the Princes
of the world, when he was himself Lord both of Heaven and Earth; tho he
expressly forbad his Disciples to bear rule over any one whatsoever.

The Popes notwithstanding this, will govern, and pretend that our Savior did
amiss when he spoke thus, and that they know better than he how to improve the
rights of his Prerogative. For my part, I believe that such a King as Jesus
Christ who holds the Earth in his hand, according to the Prophet's expression,
who upholds all things by the power of his word, as St. Paul says, who knows
the hearts of all men, and governs the motions of all the creatures; who is
Almighty, who knows and sees every thing, without whom no man can have neither
life, motion, nor being; such a King, I say, has no need of a Vicar General
for the Spiritual. Government of the Church, because he is present in all
places, no more than an Husband needs a Vicar for his Wife, or a living Father
for his Children; and that he himself assures us that where two or three are
gathered together in his name, there will he be in the midst of them. If he
has a Vicar General, he can be no other than the Holy Ghost. We also see that
when he was upon the point of leaving his poor Disciples who were afflicted by
reason of his approaching departure from them, he tells them not, I will leave
you the Pope to guide and govern you, which had been but a poor consolation:
But, I will send you the Comforter, who shall lead you in all truth.

And if we consider in what the administration of this Spiritual Kingdom does
consist, we shall clearly see that no one mortal man can be the Vicar General
of it: Can one only man preach the Gospel, and administer the Sacraments all
the world over? They tell you, that he will make it be done by others, (would
to God the Popes would do so) but these Delegated Preachers would be thus the
Popes Vicars, who pretends to be the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and sometimes of
St. Peter; which cannot be according to all the Canonists, who maintain that
one Vicar cannot make another; besides, that the Ecclesiastical Ministry,
properly speaking, cannot be subdelegated to Vicars; for whosoever discharges
it, ought always to perform it in Preaching, or Ex^rcising the other Episcopal
Functions in the name of Jesus Christ, and not in the name of any creature; and
a man must be a fool or a seducer to do otherwise. A mere man, as the Pope is,
can he fill the souls of men with peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, which is the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ? Can he def^nd the Church against all its enemies,
visible and invisible? Can he give the Crown of Righteousness to those who
shall be victorious and faithful to God to the death? Can he raise them up
again? These are Acts of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ over his Church. What
relation has the Dominion of the Pope to that of Jesus Christ? What
resemblance between light and darkness? between Jesus Christ and Belial?

Thus it is evident that it is without any foundation that the Bishops of Rome
boast of being Vicars of Jesus Christ; they are no more so, then the meanest
Priest of the Church; and it was with reason that the Council of Basil Aeneas
Silv. in Gest. Conc. Basil.
maintained to them, that they were not Vicars of Jesus Christ, but of the
Church, as every Curate is in his Parish, Pontifex Vicarius Ecclesiae, non
Christi. Nevertheless they maintain that St. Peter had this Employ of Universal
Vicar, that he was Head of the Apostles, and of the whole Church, Bishop of
Bishops, Sovereign both of Spirituality and Temporality, Monarch of the Church,
and of the World. In a word, that he had all the Prerogatives that the Popes at
this present time enjoy, in quality of Successors of St. Peter. And that, as I
have said, without being able to produce so much as one word, of the Creation
and Institution of this Charge so important to the Church, if you will believe
them, nor of the Rights of this Charge, nor of the Succession, nor of the
manner of the Election, nor how so mavelous a Charge ought to be Exercised,
nor of the respect and obedience due to this Vicar, nor of the use of his
Office. They affirm boldly that St. Peter was at Rome, that he was Bishop
there, That he founded that Church, That he died there, and left a Successor,
who was called Clement or Linus, or Anacletus; of which things, tho they make
the Salvation of all men to depend upon them, they are not able to prove one
tittle. And they do affirm that this Successor entered into the full possession
of all the Privileges of St. Peter, to which all the Bishops of that City have
ever since equally succeeded, both good and bad, unto the present Pope Innocent
the Eleventh.

It must be readily acknowledged, that these Gentlemen must have very
penetrating understandings to make these discoveries from the Gospel; for it is
certain that they are wholly imperceptible there; I have sometimes read it
without ever finding any thing that was at all like it, and I think I saw
clearly that St. Peter never knew he had this Authority, but that on the
contrary he believed that no Christian whatever, much less a Bishop, ought to
have it in the Church; nor did the other A^ostles know it any more than he, for
somewhat of it would then appear; and they who protest they have made known to
us the whole will of God, would have been extremely to blame not only to have
declared nothing of it to us, but also to have always spoken and acted with
their Sovereign Head and Master, as with an Equal. And St. Paul would have lost
all manner of respect for him when he so warmly reproved him. It seems probable
also that our Savior was obliged to have given them notice of it; for
naturally they could not know it; and the Modesty, Charity, and Humility of St.
Peter might have hindered him from declaring and exercising this Empire over
them; yet it is certain that there is nothing like this to be found.
Nevertheless this does not hinder but that the Pope and Cardinals whose eyes
their own interest opens, as it blinds other peoples, have in their own
opinions found very strong proofs of it in the New Testament: They say for
example, that our Savior changed only St. Peter's name; the reason as you see
is without reply; for it follows very necessarily from thence, that St. Peter
was the Head and King of the Church. But unluckily he also changed the names of
the Children of Zebedee. They say also that he is sometimes named the first;
but if he be not so always, this will signify nothing to them; but tho he had
been always so, this would not prove that he had authority over the others as
the Pope has over the other Bishops. Amongst the Presidents, the first has no
power over the others; nor amongst the Electors of the Empire; the Elector of
Mentz, who has the first place, has no authority over the other Electors; and
so in all Societies the Primacy carries no dominion along with it: But besides,
if that reason should take place, the Holy Virgin, who is sometimes named the
last in Scripture, would be greatly degraded from the place that belongs to
her. If St. Peter were always named the first, that might have been given to
his Age, as the Fathers say; and in truth we ought to attribute it to this,
that our Savior spoke so often to him, as well as to the fervency of his zeal,
which as we ought to admire and commend, so also may we say that it was owing
to the eagerness of his temper, which being not always well regulated, made him
commit greater faults than any others of the Apostl^s (except the perfidious
Judas) which made him be called Satan by his good Master, which none of the
other were. We ought also to attribute to this temper the blow he gave Malchus
with the Sword, as well as that warmth that made him promise wonders of
Fidelity to his Master, and induced him to accompany him to the Emperors Court,
where he denied his Savior. So that it is with very little reason that they
make an argument of this to prove his Royalty in the Church. In Spain, where
the most Honorable walk the last, they will not fail to alledg places where
St. Peter is named last, as in the passage where it is said, I am the Disciples
of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Caephas, who is Peter. For I remember that
at Paris, where they understand Divinity a little better than in Spain, a good
Bishop and an Abbot did maintain to me, that the passage where it is said that
James, Peter and John are esteemed Pillars of the Church, I having alleged
against them another where he is named the first, they maintained to me I say,
that this passage confirmed that which they alleged and proved very well the
Primacy of St. Peter. For said the Bishop, when three persons of worth are
walking together, they always put the most Honorable in the middle. This is
according to the common saying, That a Lawyer well paid shall always find the
cause of his Client, good: His Benefices made him see clear in this passage.

There are three other passages which the greatest part of our Doctors produce
against our Adversaries with a little more color, which are, Thou art Peter,
etc. I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. Feed my sheep.
Which passages we shall examine one after another, to see if St. Peter had any
privilege above the other Apostles; they say, that in the first of these
passages Jesus Christ does establish the Church, found it, and built it upon
St. Peter. I do not deny but that St. Peter was one of the Pillars of the
Church, because he is so called as well as James and John. Nor can it be
denied, but that he was and is one of the foundations of the Church, since that
he is not excepted out of the number of the Twelve, who in Scripture are called
the Foundations of the New Jerusalem. But I maintain that the Church is no more
founded upon him, than upon St. Paul, and the other Apostles. I would fain have
these Gentlemen tell me, upon whom the Church was founded before St. Peter? and
why the Church changed its foundation, and upon whom Peter himself was founded?
It was without doubt upon Jesus Christ, upon the Rock which is the Christ. And
it is without all question that St. Peter and we ought to have no other
foundation than that which St. Paul had, who says, That no man can lay any
other foundation than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Also we see in
this passage, that it is upon the Rock, upon the Rock of Ages, that our Savior
builds his Church, and not upon St. Peter. The Holy Ghost would have changed
neither name nor person, if he would have had us to have believed this of St.
Peter. He would not have said, Super hanc Petram, sed super te Petrum. Upon
this Rock, but upon thee Peter.

To the end that no difficulty may remain, we must observe what goes before,
and what follows after. Jesus Christ had demanded of all the Apostles together,
whom they thought he was? Peter either as the eldest or most zealous answers
for all, and says to him, Thou art the Christ the Son of the living God.
Whereupon Jesus Christ says to him, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I
build my Church, etc. It is evident that as our Savior's discourse was
directed to all, and that Peter answered for all; the following part of our
Saviors Discourse was directed also to them all, and related no more to Peter
than to any other particular Apostle. And men must have lost their
understandings to think, that Jesus Christ in this place founded his Church
upon Peter, whom in the same Chapter he calls Satan. What Foundation would the
Church have had, and what would have become of her when he denied his Savior?

It must then necessarily be acknowledged, that it is not the visible Church
that is here spoken of, which they pretend St. Peter to be the Head of: But the
Invisible, the Society of the Faithful, and the Elect. For the Gates of Hell
would have prevailed against the Church, not only when St. Peter denied his
Master, since that the foundation being run to decay, that which is built upon
it falls to ruin: But since that time have they not very often prevailed
against this Church which they would have the Bishops of Rome the pretended
Successors of St. Peter to be the Heads of? For Example, when according to the
Fathers the whole World was Arian ^otus Orbis se Arianum esse miratus est.
Hieron.
, the Bishops of Rome and all their Flock; and so many other times as the Popes
have been Magicians, Sodomites, Atheists, Heretics, etc. And what would have
become of the Church in the time of that great Schism that succeeded Gregory
the Ninth, which lasted fifty years, when the French would not have an Italian
Pope, nor the Italians a French one; and many Princes would have neither one
nor other; to whom at length Charles the Sixth joined himself for three years,
and the Kingdom of France was very well contented without a Pope; and many
other Princes for a longer season. And what shall we say of that great Schism
which the Popes made and caused with the Greek Church, by cutting them off, out
of Devilish pride, from the Communion of the Church, because they would not
submit to their yoke, but demanded the observation of the Canons? What shall we
say also of that great Apostasy that happened about 130 or 140 years since, or
thereabout, when so many States separated themselves from the Church, by reason
of the Impiety and Tyranny of the Popes? Does not all this prove that Hell has
prevailed against this exterior and visible Church, which the Popes govern, and
whereof St. Peter according to them was the Head? It is then the Invisible
Church which is here spoken of the Society of the Faithful, the Heavenly
Jerusalem, whereof Jesus Christ is the principal Cornerstone, upon which St.
Peter himself says believers are built as living stones. He says not it is on
himself that they are built, but on the contrary, he pretends himself as well
as others, to be one of these living stones which are built upon the
Cornerstone, which is Christ. It is then upon the Rock confessed by Simon
Peter, or upon his Confession that the Church is founded; on that which he
declared that Jesus Christ was the true Messiah, the Son of the Living God. And
the Fathers understood it no otherwise. I do not pretend here to relate all
that they have said upon this subject, but only some clear passages: Origin in
Mar. chap. 16. Tract. 1.
Origin upon St. Matthew tells us, That if we say as Peter did, Thou art the
Christ, etc. we are also what St. Peter was; and that it shall be also said
unto us what follows, Thou art Peter. For whosoever is the Disciple of Christ,
the same is also Peter. And Cypri. de simplicitate Praelat.
St. Cyprian shows very well, that he did not believe that St. Peter was
privileged beyond the other Apostles, when he says, that the other Apostles
were as considerable as Saint Peter, and that they were all equal in authority
and power, but that our Lord to show the Unity there ought to be in his Church,
speaks but to one, and that the first place was given to Peter. And in another
place, Our Lord, says he, gave to all his Apostles the same power after his
Resurrection, and said to them, As the Father has sent me, so send I you.
Ambr. in Epist. ad Ephesians. cap. 2.
And Saint Ambrose, Our Lord said to Peter, Upon this Rock, etc. that is to
say, upon this Confession of the Catholic Church, I ordain that Believers
shall have life. And in another place, Ambr. in Psalm. 32.
What was said to Peter, was said to the other Apostles. And St. Hierom Hieron.
in Psalm. 40.
The Church is the House built upon the firm Rock which is Christ. Idem in Mat.
8.
And in another place, She was founded upon a Rock, that is to say, Christ; for
this is the only foundation which the Apostle as a good Architect has laid,
viz. our Lord Jesus Christ. August. in Johan. Tract. 124.
St. Augustine, Our Lord said, Upon this Rock, etc. because that Peter had
said, Thou art the Christ, etc. Upon this Rock then which thou have confessed,
will I build my Church. The Rock was Christ, upon whose f^undation Peter
himself was builded; for no man can lay any other foundation than that which
has been laid, viz. Jesus Christ. Ideo ait Dominus super hanc Petram, etc.
Quia dixerat Petrus tu es Christus, etc. Super hanc ergo Petram quam confessus
es aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Petra erat Christus super quod fundamentum ipse
aedi^icatus est Petrus; nam nemo potest ponere aliud fundamentum quam id quod
positum est, a Christo.

The same August. de Verbo Dom. Sermon. 60.
Author speaks in another place thus: Quid est super hanc Petram? super id quod
dictum est, Tu es Christus, super Petram quam confessus es, super hanc Petram
quam agnovisti dicens, Tu es Christus, super me aedificabo te, non me super te.
Nam volentes homines, super homines aedificare dicebant; Ego quidem sum Pauli,
ego autem Apollo, ego autem Cephae, ipse est Petrus; sed alii qui nolebant
aedificare super Petrum, sed super Petram, dicebant; Ego sum Christi, etc. What
is this saying, Upon this Rock? That is, upon this Faith, upon what was said,
That thou art the Christ, upon this Rock which thou have acknowledged, saying,
Thou art the Christ: Upon me will I build thee, and not thee upon me; for they
who would build upon men, said, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of
Cephas, who is Peter; but those who would not build upon Peter, but upon the
Rock, said, I am the Disciple of Christ. This Holy Doctor has a thousand such
like sayings which I cannot relate to avoid being tedious. Chrysostom. in Matthew.
16.
Chrysostom says also, Upon this Rock, etc. That is to say, upon this Faith
and Confession. Super hanc Petram, hoc est super hanc fidem and confessionem.
And Chrysostom. in Sermon de Pentecost.
in another place, Super hanc Petram, non dixit super Petrum, non enim super
hominem, sed super fidem aedificavit Ecclesiam suam: Quae autem erat fides? Tu
es Christus filius Dei viventis. Upon this Rock, he did not say upon Peter; for
he has not built his Church upon a man, but upon Faith. What then was this
Faith? Thou art the Christ the Son of the Living God. Gregor. Nyss. lib. de
vita Mosi^.
Gregory Nyssen, Non Petrus and Johannes, and Jacobus tantum, sunt Ecclesiae
columnae, sed omnes qui Ecclesiam sustentant. Peter, James and John are not the
only Pillars of the Church, but all they who support the Church. Methinks there
needs no more to persuade every honest minded man, that the Fathers did not
believe that Jesus Christ founded his Church upon St. Peter in particular, much
less upon the Popes. I could easily produce a thousand other Eviden^es from the
ancient Fathers, and even from many Doctors that lived within the last four or
five hundred years; tho the truth has been almost wholly stifled, and that by
men perfectly sold to the Court of Rome, as well as to Iniquity. But I must not
tire out my Reader. Sal. 13. Tom. 1. lib. com. in Epist. Pauli.
The Jesuit Salermont alone, is worth a thousand of them, for he does own that
the Popes Authority has no foundation in the Scripture, and he places it
among Traditions not written. I demand only the liberty of confuting the abuse
of two other places of Scripture, whereof we have spoken: One would think they
were already sufficiently confuted by the passages which I have alleged; which
prove that the Fathers did not believe that St. Peter had any Prerogative above
the other Apostles; and here a Reflection may be made, which I think necessary
to prevent the Cheat which may be put upon us in this matter, by producing some
passages of the Fathers falsified or maimed, or else some Testimonies of the
Doctors of the later times, who have been for the most part vile slaves to the
Popes and the Court of Rome.

It must be considered that when upon such a subject as this, a man shall
pretend to alledg any thing of Antiquity, which seems to favor the opinion of
St. Peter's Primacy, that cannot counter-ballance what I have produced in short
against that Primacy, not only because I can produce an hundred places against
one which they shall alledg; but principally for this reason, that it is never
allowable for any man to oppose the Institutions of God, nor to misunderstand,
deny, change, or diminish them. So that if St. Peter had had the Authority over
the Apostles, and over the whole Church, which they pretend, and which the
Popes at this time do exercise over Bishops, Kings, and the whole Church, the
Fathers never could deny it without a crime; nor could they ever equal him to
the other Apostles without being guilty of Heresy, and heinous offense against
God. Whereas we may very lawfully speak advantageously of the Ordinances and
Institutions of God, of Holy things, and every thing that conduces to the true
Worship of God, and consequently of the Holy Apostles also, who were the
admirable Organs of his Grace for the conversion of the World. We may, I say,
speak of them with praise and with wonder, with respect and veneration, and
even attribute to them sometimes names and degrees of excellency, which do not
belong to them without any prejudice to Piety, provided they are not attributes
nor honors which are appropriated only to the Divine Being, for then it would
be Idolatry, as it is to attribute that to the Pope which belongs only to Jesus
Christ. For example, in reference to the great men of this world, it is very
allowable to speak to the advantage of a Minister of State, to whom a great
King shall communicate a part of his Authority for his service: It is very fit
to commend him, and to extol him even above his merit, by reason of the good
qualities which appear in him, or the favors which he receives from the King;
provided that the respect and obedience due to the King be inviolably kept; but
it would be a crime to lessen or contemn him, especially when the prosperity,
tranquillity and safety of the State depends upon him. So I maintain, that tho
the Fathers had said a t^ousand times of St. Peter, That the Church was founded
upon him, and that he was the Head of it; If they have said sometimes that he
was not so, and that he had nothing more excellent than the other Apostles,
this last ought to prevail, because that the first was an expression of favor,
and without danger, since they assert ev^ry where, that Jesus Christ is the
only Head of the Church, and that it was hard to conceive that ever men should
arrive to such excess of extravagancy as to think that one simple man could be
the Head of the Universal Church. Whereas if St. Peter had been instituted by
God in that quality, to deny it, would look like resisting God, destroying the
Church, which would be established upon him, and dethroning Jesus Christ, by
dethroning his Vicar. It must then be agreed to, whatever the Doctors of the
Age say, that the Church is built upon Jesus Christ, and not upon a man; and we
may say with David, That the stone which the builders refused, is in spite of
them become the Cornerstone of the Church.

But let us come to the second passage: Tibi dabo claves, etc. I will give thee
the Keys, etc. First of all you must know the occasion whereon this was said to
him: Jesus Christ had asked this question of his Disciples, Whom think you that
I am, etc. Peter with his wonted fervor spoke and answered for all, Thou art
the Christ, etc. And our Lord upon this promises to all his Apostles, and to
the whole Church under the name of Peter, the Power of the Keys, which is
indisputable, because in the 18 Chap. of St. Matthew, he tells them all in
general, and without distinction the same thing, Verily I say unto you, That
whatsoever you shall bind upon Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever
you loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. The other Apostles then, have
this power as well as St. Peter; and we see it also in St. John the 20. and the
22. where Jesus Christ says to all his Apostles, Receive ye the Holy Ghost;
whosesoever sins ye forgive, they are forgiven; and whosesoever ye retain, they
are retained.

Let us see whether the Fathers be not against us. We have already heard St.
Cyprian, Cypr. de Unitate Ecclesiae.
who says, Christus Apostolis post Resurrectionem parem potestatem tribuit.
Jesus Christ after his Resurrection gave an equal power to his Apostles.
Origin. in Math. Tract. 1.
Origin demands, An vero soli Petro dantur a Christo claves Regni Caelorum, nec
alius beatorum quisquam eas accepturus est? Quod si dictum hoc, tibi dabo
claves, etc. Caeteris quoque commune est, cur non simul and omnia and quae
prius dicta sunt, and quae sequuntur velut ad Petrum dicta sunt omnium
communia? Were the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven given only to Peter, and shall
no other blessed person have them? Certainly if what was said, I will give thee
the Keys, be common to all the Apostles, why shall not all that goes before,
and that follows after, tho said only to Peter, be common to all?

St. Hilary St Hilary lib. 6. de Trinitate, in the Council of Ephesus -- there
is an Epistle of the Council of Alexandria, where are these words, Petrus and
Johannes and aequales sunt ad alterutrum dignitatis.
Vos O sancti and beati viri ob fidei vestri meritum, claves Regni Coelorum and
ligandi and solvendi jus in terra adepti. He spoke to the Apostles, O holy and
blessed men, who by the merits of your faith have obtained the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and the power of binding and loosing upon Earth. Hieron
contra Jovian. lib. 1. cap. 14.
St. Hierom, At dicis super Petrum fundatur Ecclesia, licet id ipsum, in alio
loco super omnes Apostolos fiat, and cuncti claves Regni Caelorum accipiunt,
and ex aequo super eos, Ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur; tamen propterea inter
duodecim unus eligitur, ut capite constituto schismatis tollatur occasio. Sed
cur non Johannes electus est virgo? Aetati delatum est. Quia Petrus senior
erat, ne adhuc adolescens ac poene puer provectae aetatis hominibus
anteferretur, and ne causam praebere videretur invidiae. But you say the Church
is founded upon Peter, tho in other places the same thing is done upon all the
Apostles, and they all receive equally the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and
the strength of the Church is equally founded upon one as well as another;
nevertheless he chose one out of the Twelve, to the end that by establishing a
Head he might take away the occasion of Schism. But why was not John chosen?
Jesus Christ had regard to the age of Peter, who was the eldest, and would not
prefer a young man, one that was almost a child, before those who were more
advanced in years, that he might not seem to give an occasion for envy amongst
them. Hieron. in Mat. 16.
The same Hierom tells us, that the Ministers under the Gospel have also the
power of binding, and of loosing, of pardoning sins, or retaining them; that is
to say, of judging when God does pardon us or not. Id juris and officii habent
Sacerdotes Evangelici quod olim sub lege habebent Legales in curandis Leprosis.
Hi ergo peccata dimittunt vel retinent, dum dimissa a Deo, vel retenta judicant
vel ostendunt. St. Augustine August. in Joh. Trac. 118.
, Sicut in Apostolis cum esset etiam numerus duodenarius, and omnes essent
interrogati, solus Petrus respondit, Tu es Christus, etc. Et ei dicitur, Tibi
dabo claves, tanquam ligandi and solvendi solus acceperit potestatem, cum and
illud unus pro omnibus dixerit, and hoc cum omnibus dixerit, and hoc cum
omnibus tanquam personam gerens ipsius unitatis acceperit. Ideo unus pro
omnibus quia unitas est in omnibus. Amongst the Apostles who were Twelve in
number, tho they were all asked, Peter only answered, Thou art the Christ: and
Jesus Christ said to him, I will give thee the Keys, as tho he alone had
received the power of binding, and of loosing. Tho the truth is, that he said
that for all; and that he received also this power for all; because that he
represented the person of them all, and the union that there ought to be
amongst them. One spoke for all, because the unity was in all. The same Father
also says in another place, Manifesta est Sententia Domini nostri Apostolos
mittentis, and ipsis solis potestatem a patre sibi datam promittentis, Id. in
Epist. Joh. Tract. 10.
quibus nos successimus eadem potestate Ecclesiam regentes: That is to say, We
see clearly the intention of our Lord when he sent out his Apostles, and
promised them the same power which his Father had given him; and we have
succeeded them, governing the Church with the same power.

August. in Joan. Tra. 124.
And so in other places, Quando Petro dictum est, Tibi dabo claves, etc. Typum
Ecclesiae gerebat, unus pro omnibus respondit. When it was said to Peter, I
will give thee the Keys, etc. he represented the Church, one single person
answered for all. And in another place, Idem in Joan. Tract. the 10.

Theoph. in Mat. chap. 16.


Ecclesiae dictum est: Tibi dabo claves, etc. It was said to the Church, I will
give thee the Keys, etc. Theophylactalso, Habent potestatem remittendi and
ligandi quicunque sicut Petrus Episcopatus gratiam assecuti sunt, quamvis autem
Petro soli dictum sit, Dabo tibi; omnibus tamen Apostolis concessae sunt. That
is to say, All they have the power of remitting and unloosing, who as St. Peter
have obtained the Honor of being Bishops; for tho it were said to Peter alone,
I will give, etc. yet the Keys were given to all the Apostles. And Leo the
first, Leo in Anniver. die assumptionis suae ad Pontif. Sermon 3.
Transivit etiam in alios Apostolos vis potestatis istius, and ad omnes
Ecclesiae Principes Decreti hujus constitutio commeavit, sed non frustra uni
commendavit, quod omnibus intimetur. Petro idem ideo hoc singulariter creditur,
quia cunctis Ecclesiae rectoribus Petri forma proponitur; manet ergo Petri
privilegium, ubicunque fertur ex ipsius aequitate Judicium. That is to say,
That the power of the Keys was given also to all the Apostles; and not only to
them, but to all Bishops; and that it was not without design that our Lord
committed to one what he intimated to all: For thereby the example of Peter is
proposed to all them who have a share in the Government of the Church.
Wherever then any one judges as Peter did, there is the privilege of Peter
also to be found. And it is to be observed that Leo said this in a time when
the Bishop of Constantinople would have had the Primacy.

I think these Evidences are sufficient to show the injustice of the Popes, who
attribute to St. Peter alone those things which he had in common with all the
other Apostles, and all good Pastors, and that to usurp an authority which
neither St. Peter nor any other Creature ever could have; and though it were
possible that St. Peter or any other might have had it, the Popes have less
right to pretend to it than any other Priest, because that they are but
Temporal Princes; For under the Gospel men derogate both from Episcopacy and
Priesthood, when they become Temporal Princes; and it is certain that according
to the Scripture and the Holy Canons, these two things are inconsistent. They
ought to consider which they will stand to: I am persuaded they would not
contradict themselves in the matter, but would always hold to the Temporal,
which they call the solid thing, as Cardinal Palavicini Palavicini lib 4. c. 6.
very well observes, that they desire the Popedom only for the vast quantities
of Money which they get by it, with the means of Obliging and doing Courtesies;
Due beni per cui soli appar Desiderable il Pontificato, il Principiato dell Oro
e del Obligo. And in the Age we live in, they would be in danger of not making
so much of their Episcopacy as Boniface the third did by Phocas; and if they
should let their Beast but once get loose, they would find it a hard matter to
get up again.

But besides, I think I ought here to put you in mind of one thing, which is,
that the power of binding and loosing is not what the Popes and many evil
minded Priests would make us believe; for I do maintain, not only that the Pope
cannot free a man from the guilt of his Crimes, and from the punishment due to
them, no more than the meanest Priest, as Marsilius Patav. p. 2, c. 15.
Marsilius of Padua heretofore said; but also, that neither one nor other of
them has any power of pardoning Sins, but as far as it does appear to them
that God does pardon them, and that properly it belongs not to them but to God.
I shall be asked how the Priest or the Pope knows when God pardons any man's
Sins: And I ask them, by what Authority they can dispense with the punishments
a man has deserved for having offended God, without there be some appearance
of Contrition in this Man? I know very well there are many who affirm that the
Pope can do it, and others who pretend that attrition is sufficient; but it
will be no hard matter for me to prove that these Opinions are both foolish and
Impious: It is God only that can truly pardon Sins, and he never does it but to
the Contrite Heart, that is to say, to those who have a real sorrow within
themselves for having offended so good and so merciful a God; and who make a
firm Resolution to forsake their Sins, and to punish themselves by Repentance,
and by the Mortification of their Flesh, and of their Passions, and who will as
much as in them lies in reference to men, repair their crimes by making
Satisfaction to all those they have wronged: and Lastly, who have made a Vow to
endeavor all their Lifetime to root up all their evil habits. When these
Dispositions do not appear in a Penitent, the Pastor cannot pardon his Sins;
and when they do appear, he cannot refuse to give him Absolution. The Holy
Scripture mentions no other power of binding and loosing Sinners, but does
detest the use which the Popes make of it, who Excommunicated whomsoever they
please, even Kings themselves, and whole Nations for no other reason that their
Fantasy, Hierom in Math. cap. 16.
St. Hierom made light enough of these Excommunications, when he said, Apud
Deum non Sententia Sacerdotum, sed reorum vita quaeritur. Idem in Esaiam cap.
14.
And in an other place, Solvunt Apostoli Sermon Dei, testimoniis Scripturarum
and Exhortatione virtutum. That is to say, that God enquires not after the
Priests Opinion, but what sort of life a Sinner has led. It is the word of
God, the Evidences of Holy Scripture, and Exhortations to virtue, by which the
Apostles do Absolve, St. Amb. cap. 4. lib. 2. de Cain and Abel.
St. Ambrose also, Verbum Dei, says he, dimittit peccata, sacerdos est Judex,
sacerdos officium suum exhibet, nullius autem potestatis jura exercet; It is
the word of God, says he, that pardons Sins, the Priest is the Judge who does
his Duty (in judging according to this Word) but exercises no Authority. And
St. Augustine. August. in Johan. tract. 124.
Claves sunt discernendi scientia and potentia qua dignos recipere and indignos
excludere debet Sacerdos a Regno Dei. The Keys, says he, signify no other
thing than the Knowledge and Skill of discerning those who are Worthy, and
those who are Unworthy, that the Priest may Exclude them from the Kingdom of
God.

It is now time to examine the third passage which they allege for the Primacy
of St. Peter, which you find in the 21 of St. John. Peter, love thou me? Feed
my Sheep? From whence they draw this Consequence, that St. Peter was the Head
of the Universal Church; It is certain that he was one of the most excellent
Pastors of the Church; but notwithstanding that, he was not a Pastor to any of
the Apostles, nor to any other Christians, but as the other Apostles were; For
our Lord says to them all in common: As my Father has sent me, so send I you;
and in another place, Go then and teach all Nations, etc. Which is the same
thing as if he had said to them all, Feed my Sheep. What is to Feed, but to
Teach, Instruct, and Edify as well by Speaking as Writing, by Preaching, and
Explaining to men the word of God and its Truth, accompanying that with a life
conformable to that Holiness the Gospel requires; Which is called pascere
Exemplo and verbo? But they ask why our Lord repeated three times, Peter love
thou me, Feed my Sheep? Aug. in Johan. tract. 123. cap. 210.
St. Augustine answers that Redditur Negationi Trime Trina Confessio, etc. St.
Cyril understands it also in the same sense, Jure nunc ab eo Trina dilectionis
Confessio petitur, ut trina negatio aequali Confessionis numero Compensetur:
Ita quod verbis commissum fuit verbis curatur, St. Cyril. in Joh. lib. 12. cap.
64.
etc. Dixit autem pasce Agnos meos Apostolatus ipsi Renovans dignitatem ne
propter Negationem quae Humana infirmitate accidit, labefacta videretur, etc.
That is to say, Our Savior had reason to demand a threefold Confession of his
love toward him, to Recompense in some measure Peter's thrice denying him, etc.
And he says unto him, Feed my Sheep, to renew unto him the Dignity of his
Apostle-ship, from which he might seem to have fallen by denying his Master.
Cypr. de unitate Ecclesiae.
St. Cyprian, Pastores sunt omnes, says he, Sed grex unus ostenditur qui ab
Apostolis omnibus unanimi Confessione pascatur. Episcopatus unus est cujus a
singulis in solidum pars tenetur. They were all Pastors, but he showed them but
one Flock, which all the Apostles were to feed with an Unanimous consent. St.
Augustine, St. Aug. de Pastor.
In Petro unitatem Commendavit; multi erant Apostoli and uni dicitur pasce oves
meas, etc. Sed omnes boni pastores in uno sunt, unum sunt Illi pascunt,
Christus pascit, etc. He recommended the unity in the person of Peter; there
were many Apostles; he said nevertheless but to one of them, Feed my Sheep,
etc. But all good Pastors are in one, and are but one. They feed, Christ
feeds, etc. The same Father says in another place; Idem in sermon de Petro
and Paulo.
In uno Petro figurabatur unitas omnium Pastorum sed Bonorum. In Peter only was
represented the unity of all Pastors; but that is to say, of all good Pastors.
Chrysostom, Chysost. lib. 2. de sacerdote.
tum ostensu^us es eximiam tuam Dilectionem in Christum, cum paveris ejus
gregem, cum scriptum sit si diligis me, pasce Oves meas. Then said he to St.
Basil, thou will show thy love toward Jesus Christ, if thou feedest his Flock
as it is written, Love thou me? feed my Sheep. St. Peter himself explains to
us these words, and shows that he was himself far from pretending to the
quality of Universal Pastor, Excluding the other Apostles; because he does
acknowledge that even the Priests are Pastors as well as himself, and that the
Flock of Christ is committed to their charge as well as to his; which they
ought to feed not out of a ^hameful desire of gain; but by a disinterested
Charity, not in lording it over the Heritage, or over the Cl^rgy of the Lord;
St. Peter the 1. c. 5. v. 1.2.3.
But by giving themselves a good example to their Flock: How many r^proofs are
^ere in a f^w words against the Pope and evil Priests?

These are the places of Scripture which they cite with the greatest color for
the papacy of St. Peter, which as they explain them, are I think sufficiently
confuted. One may say of them, as heretofore the Council of Basil said to the
Creatures of Pope Eugenius, who also corrupted the Sense of these Passages.
Sunt Interpretationes Paparum fimbrias suas extendentium. Conc. Basil apud
Aene. S^. in gestis Council.
These are Interpretations of Popes, that stretch out the Skirts of their
Garments. To these which I have already given, I shall yet add some reasons
drawn from the Gospel it self, against this pretended Primacy and Rule of St.
Peter. I shall not repeat that we see nothing in the Gospel but Precepts of
Humility, of Charity, of renouncing the World, its Grandures, Pleasures and
Riches, But I shall say that we read in the Acts of the Apostles, Acts cap. 8.
v. 14.
that St. Peter was sent to Samaria by the other Apostles. A Prince is not
usually treated thus by his Subjects: Acts 11. v. 1.
We see also that in another place, having been accused by the others for
misbehaving himself, he justifies himself; This looks not like a Sovereign.
Would the Pope endure this from the Bishops, or from any other? We see not that
he gave Laws to others, that he established any thing by his own private
Authority, without the other Bishops. 1 Corin. chap. 11. v. 5.
St. Paul says expressly, that he was not inferior to the greatest of the
Apostles: In St. Math. 28. v. 20.
Matthew and St. John, it is manifest, that Jesus Christ gave to all his
Apostles the same power. John 20. v. 22.23.
And in the Epistle to the Galatians, that Peter, James and John gave their
hands to each other, as a mark of the Society that was between them. Would the
Pope give his in this manner to the other Bishops? We see that at the Council
of Jerusalem, it was not St. Peter, but St. James, who presided and concluded.
We read in the Epistle to the Galatians, Gal. 2. v. 9, Gal. 2. v. 7.
that St. Paul and he agreed together, that St. Paul should go and Preach to
the Gentiles, and St. Peter to the Jews.

If St. Peter had known that he had been the Head of the Church, he would not
in all likelihood have suffered, that his Ministry should have been thus
limited, or that the Ministry or Power of St. Paul should have been of an
extent an hundred times greater than his, especially if he had been of the
humor of our good Popes. If any Bishop should pretend to govern the Church of
France or Spain without them, it is to be believed, that it would not be very
pleasing to them; and from hence by the way, one may judge that Saint Peter had
nothing to do at Rome, nor was he ever there, as they imagine. There is yet
somewhat of greater weight then all this; That is, that St. Paul tells us he
withstood St. Peter to his face, because he deserved reproof. This looks as if
St. Paul had had some Authority over St. Peter: We hear not that he reproached
him for his Arrogance, nor that he Excommunicated him. It must be acknowledged
that here is a great difference between the proceedings of the Pope, and those
of St. Peter: For it is certain that if a Bishop should at this day dare to
displease the Majesty of the Pope, he should be soon swallowed up and destroyed
by his glory. I believe that Origin might have an eye to St. Paul's thus
correcting St. Peter, when he said that St. Paul was the greatest of all the
Apostles; Origin in Numeros, Hom. 3.
Paulus Apostolorum maximus; or else he might also have regard to the great
extent of St. Paul's Ministry, or to what he himself says, that he took more
pains than all the other Apostles. And all the Fathe^s looked upon him, as he
who among all the Apostles wrote the most profoundly, and with the greatest
light. This is what St. Augustine says of him. St. Chrysostom looks upon him as
the first of all the Saints; and if there had been any Pre-eminence among the
Apostles, he should have been preferred before any other. We may say then, that
the Popes in that Authority which they usu^p, have nothing common with St.
Peter, nor can they be compared together, but in one thing, which is, that as
St. Peter being come into Pilates-Hall, denied Christ three times, the Popes
since they have taken upon themselves the Authority of Pilate, and of worldly
Princes, have denied him not three times, but once for all. Vna sol volta in
Corte di Pilato entro est Petro e tra rinego Christo.

Thus we see that in the Holy Scripture there is not one word that can in the
least authorize the Popes Supremacy. And we may compare those who establish it
there, to poor Heralds, who to get a little money, do very frequently make
people meanly descended, to derive from the Ancient Greek and Roman Emperors,
because the Cullyes have gotten an Estate, and are become rich, tho most
usually it is only by Rogueries and Robberies. And it is not difficult thus to
deceive people, who always admire those that are rich and able to do them a
kindness. They never enquire how they came by it as the Spaniard says,
Alcansados los honores quedam Borrados los passos, pordende se subio a ellos.
Since then that the new Testament does not acknowledge this Authority of the
Popes, but absolutely condemn it; it has no lawful Institution for a Doctrine
of that Importance as the Primacy of the Pope is, whereon they make the whole
Government of the Church, Religion it self, and the Salvation of all Christians
to depend, being not to be found in Scripture, cannot be but false. For though
it be true that there are some Customs and Ceremonies in the Church which are
not to be found in Scripture, and which the Protestants are greatly in the
wrong, obstinately to reject, because that Tradition, and the use or practice
of the Church, have so long since given them sufficient Authority, as they
themselves acknowledge; yet that cannot be said of this Article, which according
to the Popes, and the greatest part of the Doctors, is Capital; and so Capital
they would willingly persuade us, that without it the rest signifies nothing.
It was very impiously said of Cardinal Palavicim in his Third Book of his
History of the Council of Trent, Chap. the 15. That the Christian Religion has
no more sure and immediate certainty than the Popes Authority. Quella
Religione, i cui Articoli Vnitamente considerati non hanno Altera Certezza
prossima and immediata che l' Autorita del Pontifice. We see clearly, that if
this Authority were laid aside, they would renounce the profession of
Christianity, as piety has been already renounced by them.

CHAP. II.
That the Primitive Church knew not the Papacy. The Vanity of some Humane
Reasons, by which for want of the Scriptures and the Fathers they would
establish it.

LET us now see if the Primitive Church did acknowledge a power in the Church
like to that of the Popes. Although that which has been already alleged from the
Holy Fathers proves sufficiently, that they knew not the Papacy, let us however
examine the thing a little more particularly. We are told then that St. Peter
was Head of the Church, that he was at Rome, that he was a Bishop there, that
he died there, that he resigned that Charge of Head of the Church, and of
Bishop, but not that of an Apostle to a Successor; which Successor he either
chose, or the Church of Rome did it after his death, by the power which he had
given her; which things are all of them very difficult to prove, and certainly
very false; for a thing of this consequence ought not to be founded upon
conjectures of mere probabilities, but we ought to have as certain and as exact
a knowledge of it as of any other Article of our Religion. And yet we see that
they who have spoken of St. Peter's coming to Rome, and of his Death there,
have said it upon such miserable grounds, and say so many contradictory things
as well of it as of his pretended Successor, that there is nothing more
uncertain in all Antiquity. But besides this, none of them ever believed, no
nor so much as suspected that St. Pet^r was Head of the Universal Church. And
the contradiction and little certainty that is in these Authors, shows
sufficiently that in the Primitive times it was not believed that this was
necessary to be known; nor did they in the least suspect that ever any body
would endeavor to lay upon it the foundation of that horrible Autho^ity which
the Popes do Exercise.

To give you some Instances of their Contradictions, I need only to show you
that some say it was Linus who succeeded Peter; others Clement; and lastly,
others say it was Anacletus; some will have it that St. Peter founded this
Church, and was the first that Preached at Rome. Others maintain, namely
Dorotheus, that it was Barnabas. Dorot. Tyrensis in Synopsi.
Barnabas primus Romae praedicavit.

And St. Paul shows us clearly that it was he himself who founded that Church;
for he complains that coming to Rome, he found that the Jews there, who had
embraced Christianity, were but very little instructed in the Doctrine of the
Christian Religion. Who can believe that if St. Peter had been there, and had
founded this Church, he would not have instructed them better? And what is yet
more, St. Paul says expressly in another pla^e, that he would not go and preach,
wh^re others had preached before him; because he would not build upon the
Foundation of others. As for the manner of his Death, some say he was Crucified
with St. Paul; Others, that he was beheaded, and Linus the pretended successor
of St. Peter, who writes the History of St. Paul's Death, says not one word of
St. Peter's. St. Hierom in Matthew. cap. 23. lib. 4.

Lyran in 1 Petri.


Hierom though a Roman, and Nicolas de Lyra assures us, that he was Crucified
at Jerusalem: And St. Hierom says in another place also, that his Sepulcher is
in Jerusalem. Thus we see what reason they have to build an Article of Faith
so monstrous, as the Popes Supremacy is, upon an imaginary Conjecture, that
has no Foundation that St. Peter was at Rome. But how comes it then to pass,
may some say, that many of the Fathers both believed, and said, that St. Peter
was at Rome? It was, because they did not examine the thing, believing it
useless; and they did not forsee the dreadful Consequences that the Bishops of
Rome would draw from it: They grounded it upon that place of St. Peter's
Epistle, where it is said, the Church which is at Babylon, saluteth you;
Interpreting Rome by Babylon, without any reason; because there were two other
Babylons, the one in Mesopotamia where Bagdet is; and the other in Egypt near
Memphis, where it is certain there were many Jews who were under St. Peter's
Ministry. As for the pretended combat between St. Peter and Simon Magus, the
Learned acknowledge that it was but a fiction.

But put the case St. Peter had been at Rome, what advantage can the Bishops of
Rome make of it? That he had left at Rome his Charge of Universal Vicar of
Jesus Christ? But on what do they found this pretense? If he had done it, it
would plainly have been united to his Apostleship, rather than to the quality
of a Bishop; and so by consequence could not have been communicated to any
other than an Apostle, and so St. James, or St. John, who continued alive long
time after him, should have inherited it, and not Linus nor any other; and they
would have transported it to Jerusalem, or to Ephesus, which were their
Churches, if the Town of Rome had not had some particular privileges (which no
man knows) that affixed this Dignity to that City, in which case one of these
two Apostles ought to have come and resided there. However it is likely that
St. James or St. John, who without all controversy lived a great while after
him, should rather have succeeded him in this admirable Charge than a simple
Priest or Bishop, as Linus. If the City of Rome pretends to derive this
Prerogative from St. Peter's having been there, and Preached the Gospel, (which
cannot be proved) the Church of Antioch ought to be preferred before it, for it
is certain both by the Scriptures and by the Fathers, that he was there, and
Preached there before it was possible for him to do it at Rome. And upon this
it was that they built that Revelation of the Sea of Peter's being removed from
Antioch to Rome, which you find in the Decrees of Gratian, in the Epistle of
Pope Marcellus Cause. 84. q. 5. Can. rogamus.
; which Imposture they contrived, because they could find nothing in the
Scripture that could favor their pretenses. Besides, if St. Peter had had a
Successor in this pretended Charge, how comes it to pass that the Primitive
Church that compiled the Canon of Books, which ought to regulate the Faith of
the Church, has not comprehended therein the Works of Linus, or of Clement,
who wrote enough, and yet has inserted those of St. James, and of St. John,
who ought to be much inferior in Infallibility, and in Sanctity to the
Vicar General of Jesus Christ upon Earth, and who ought to have been his
Subjects, and to have taken the Oath of Fidelity to him as they do at this day
to his Holiness? But a man may well wonder that Clement, who according to some
Writers was his Successor, and who, be he what he will, must have lived very
near that time, knew nothing of it. It Is seen by his first Epistle to St. James
Clem Epis. 1. Fratri Domini Episcopo Episcoporum, etc.
where he terms him Bishop of Bishops; and in another place he brings in St.
Peter, saying, Jacobus Episcopus acc^rcitum me inde huc Caesaream mittit. That
is to say, That the Bishop James sent him into Caesarea. It is yet a little
surprising that the Fath^rs of the Primitive Church who composed the Canon of
our Faith, that is the Creed Lib. 1. Recognitionum ubi Petrus.
; should forget to place after the Catholic Church the Bishop of Rome, who is
the Head of it, and without whom as they say it is like a Body without a soul,
or a Vessel exposed to the tempest without a Pilot. That Article does it self
sufficiently exclude all dependence upon any particular See. And the other, I
believe the Communion of Saints, does also establish Jesus Christ the only Head
of the Church, and condemns its being subject to an humane Head. And St.
Dionysius the Areopagite, or some other of those times who in his name composed
a Treatise of the Hierarchy, and says not one word of a Bishop of Bishops, and
Head of the Church, shows that in those times people did not believe that the
Hierarchy could not subsist without him. Saint Gregory also Bishop of Rome was
wholly ignorant of these pretended Privileges of his Bishopric; for he
acknowledges in his Register to Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria, that the Bishops
of Alexandria and of Antioch, are Successors of St. Peter, and that they sit in
the Chair of Peter as well as the Bishops of Rome. Nor was Irenaeus any more
persuaded that the Bishops of Rome alone had this advantage, when having
reproved Victor Bishop of Rome, who by a ridiculous rashness had Excommunicated
for a matter of small importance all the Churches of Asia, (which was
concerning the difference of the day whereon Easter was to be kept) he says to
him Iren. apud Eusebium, lib. 5. cap. 26, and 27.
, Presbyteri Ecclesiae cui nunc praesides, Anicetum dicimus, Ejum, Hyginum,
Telesphorum and Christum; neque ipsi sic observarunt, neque posteris suis sic
praeceperunt.

Observe by the way the modesty of the Bishops of those times, they affected no
other quality than that of Priest, as we also see in the Gospel that Bishops
are there sometimes called Priests: It was not in contempt that St. Ireneus
called them so, but because that in those blessed times the Bishops were
humble, and were ambitious of no other Title. But nowadays a Priest is
called, My Lord Abbot, an Abbot takes the Arms of a Bishop, a Bishop of a
Cardinal, a Cardinal equals himself to Princes, and will even take the place of
them. And the Bishops of Rome (who in those times were humble, and desired no
other Crown than that of Martyrdom) now raise themselves above Sovereigns,
Kings and Emperors, wear a Triple Crown which these Villains called Il Regno,
for a mark of their Royalty, tread even Emp^rors under their feet, make them
kiss their Slippers, and treat them like fools.

Cardinal Cusan confirms to us what St. Gregory said before Cusan lib. 1. cap.
14.
, In Cathedra Petri, says he, Patriarchae leguntur sedisse, Romanus,
Alexandrinus, and Antiochenus, and cum illis omnes subjecti Episcopi; that is
to say, We read that the three first Patriarchs who sat in the Chair of Peter,
were he of Rome, he of Alexandria, and he of Antioch, and with them all the
Bishops who were under them. Let a man read the Writings of Gregory, of
Gelasius, and of Leo, who were all Popes, and he shall see that they all
acknowledge that all good Bishops are Successors of St. Peter; and although they
sometimes failed not to demonstrate suffiently their Ambition, and the desire
they had to make the other Bishops their subjects, yet it was not in quality of
Heads of the Church, much less by virtue of any Text of Scripture. And we find
not that for the first six Centuries any man dared to bring so much as one
passage of Scripture to establish the Primacy of the Bishopric of Rome, Amb.
de Incarnatione c. 14.
St. Ambrose is not at all favorable to them, when he says, Primatus Petri,
Confessionis erat, non Honoris, fidei non ordinis: That the Primacy of Peter
was a Primacy of Confession, and not of Honour^; of Faith, and not of place.

St. Cyprian whom we have already mentioned, says farthermore, in another
place, Cyprian in Conc. Carth. sive de Sent. Episcoporum.
Neque enim quisquam nostrum se Episcopum Episcoporum constituit ut Tyrannico
t^rrore ad Obsequendi necessitatem collegas suos adigat, cum habeat omnis
Episcopus pro licentia libertatis and Potestatis suae Arbitrium proprium,
tanquam judicari ab alio non possit, cum nec ipse possit Alterum judicare sed
expectamus Vniversi Judicium D^mini nostri Jesu Christi qui unus and solus
habet potestatem and praeponendi nos in Ecclesiae suae Gubernatione and de Ac^u
nostro judicandi. There is n^ne among us who pretends to be a Bishop of
Bishops, that by a Tyrannical power he may oblige any of his Colleagues to the
necessity of being subject to him; since that every Bishop being his own
Master, and independent on any other, cannot be judged by another, nor can he
judge another, but we ought all to expect the judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who only has the power of establishing us over his Church, and of judging of
our behavior in it. Cyprian lib. 3. Epist. 21.
The same St. Cyprian calls Stephen Bishop of Rome his Colleague: Stephanum
Collegam nostrum, ut and Cornelium nostrum co-Episcopum. And Cornelius our
Fellow-Bishop. He speaks of two Bishops of Rome. And in another place he shows
that he thought he had as great a share in the Government of the whole Church
as the Bishop of Rome. Id. Ep. 30.
Omnes enim, says he, de^et pro corpore totius Ecclesiae, cujus per varias
quasque Provincias membra digesta sunt, excubare. And in another place, Idem de
Aleatoribus.
Divina and Paterna Pietas in nobis Apostolatus ducatum contulit and Vicariam
Domini sedem coelesti dignatione ornavit. That is to say, The Goodness of God
has conferred upon us the conduct of the Apostleship; and has adorned by his
Heavenly Grace the deputed See of the Lord which we hold. And furthermore, Idem
ad Puppienum. Ep. 66.
Christus dicit ad Apostolos ac per hos ad omnes praepositos qui Apostolis
Vicaria Ordinatione succedunt; Qui vos audit me audit. Jesus Christ says to
all the Apostles, and in the persons of them to all Bishops who succeed the
Apostles, being their Substitutes by Ordination, Whosoever hears you, hears
me. He shows in these places, that he pretended that his Church was an
Apostolic See, and that he was the Vicar of Jesus Christ as well as the other
Bishops Idem in Epist. 55.
. In his 55 Epistle he says that a man must be a fool or a mad man to believe
that the Authority of the Bishops of Africa was less than that of the Bishop of
Rome, to whom abundance of profligate wretches did resort that so they might
avoid the giving an account of their actions to the Bishops of Africa, and the
being punished for their crimes.

After his death a Council assembled at Carthage, did ordain In Conc. Africano,
Art. 6.
, Vt prima sedis Episcopus non appelletur princeps Sacerdotum aut primus
Sacerdos sed tantum primae sedis Episcopus: That the Bishop of the first See
ought not to be called Prince or chief of the Priests, or any thing of this
kind, but only the Bishop of the first See. And the Council of Nice marking out
the bounds of the extent of each Patriarchal See, says thus Council. ^icen. Can.
6.
, There is an ancient custom whereby the Bishop of Alexandria does govern all
the Diocesses of Egypt, of Lybia, and of Pentapolis, as also it is a long time
since that the Bishop of Rome has presided over those which he now governs,
and so likewise the Bishop of Antioch. Upon which Cardinal Cusan makes this
reflection: Cusan de Concord. Catho^ica, lib. 2. c. 12.
We see, says he, h^w much the Bishop ^f Rome ha^h gotten against the Holy
Constitutions by the long use of a submission, which has been given him, and
which was not due to him. Council. Antioch. c. 13. Council. Calcedon, Act. 16.
Council. Constant. c. 1.
This Decree of the Council of Nice was since confirmed by the Councils of
Antioch, of Calcedon, and of Constantinople. Theodoret produces a Letter of
the Council of Constantinople, which sufficiently shows the place which the
Bishops of Rome held at that time: it begins thus Theodor. lib. 5. c. 9.
, To our most Reverend and dear Brethren and Colleagues, Damasus, Ambrose,
Brillo, Valerian, and all the other Holy Bishops assembled together in the
Great City. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 7. cap 30.
Eusebius also relates to us another Letter which the Council of Antioch
assembled against the Heresy of Paulus of Samosatenus writes to the Bishop of
Rome, which begins thus: To Dionysius, to Maximus, and to all those who are
Ministers with us: Com-Ministris nostris, throughout the whole world, Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, and all the Church under Heaven. Would a man now in good
earnest in this corrupt age write thus to our Holy Father the Pope? Theod l. 2.
cap. 16.
Theodoret relates to us in his Ecclesiastical History, that the Emperor
Constantius was very urgent with the Bishop of Rome, Liberius, to embrace the
Communion of the other Churches, which shows that he also knew not that Rome
was the Mother of the other Churches. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, Cod.
Theod. l. 16. tit. 1. cap. 2.
and Theodosius, in the year 380, proposed Rome and Alexandria, for Models of
the Orthodox Faith. Ordaining that all the world should follow the Faith of
Damasus Bishop of Rome, and of Peter Bishop of Alexandria. And after the first
Council of Constantinople, as tho they would have the Center of Christian
Communion in the East only, they order without mentioning Rome, that all
Churches should be conferred upon those who joined in Communion with Nectarius
Bishop of Laodicea, and Diodorus Bishop of Tarsus, in the Diocese of the East,
with Amphilochus Bishop of Iconium, etc. If the Bishops of Asia, of Cilicia,
and of Mesopotamia, had believed that the Communion of the Bishop of Rome had
been necessary for their Churches, they would never all have been excluded from
its Communion, during 140 years, as they were, after that Victor Bishop of Rome
had Excommunicated them for a Trifle; for if they had pleased they might have
been reconciled to the Church of Rome by submitting to the Laws of that Bishop.
Greg Nazianz Ep. 22.
St. Gregory of Nazianzen writing to the Clergy of the Church of Caesarea in
Cappadocia, speaks to them thus: It is just that care should be taken of the
whole Church, as of the Body of Jesus Christ, chiefly of yours which has been
from the beginning the Mother of almost all the Churches, which is so at this
time, and is so esteemed, and to which the whole body of the Church relates as
a Circle does to the Center, round which it is formed, etc. This holy man
thought not the Church of Rome was the Center of all the Churches. Council.
Milevitan, cap. 22.
In the Milevitan Council where St. Augustine was present, it was Ordained,
That those of Africa who should Appeal to Rome should be Excommunicated: These
are the words: We have adjudged that all Priests, Deacons, and other Inferior
Ecclesiastics who shall complain of their Bishops Administration, shall apply
themselves to the Neighboring Bishops, who by the consent of their own Bishops
shall decide the Controversy between them: And if they will Appeal from their
Opinions, let them not do it, but to the Councils of Africa. And if any man
makes his Appeal to any place beyond the Seas (here Rome must be understood)
let him be looked upon as an Excommunicated person by all Africa Council.
Africanum. cap. 105.
. And since that time the same thing was Ordained in the Council of Africa, and
this they give for their reason: That no Council has taken away this Authority
from the African Councils, and that the Decrees of the Council of Nice have
committed as well Priests, as the Bishops to the direction of their
Metropolitans: Most prudently and justly providing, that affairs should be
determined upon the place where they had their first beginnings; and that no
Province would ever want the assistance of the Holy Ghost to discern equity;
that any injured person might procure a Council of his own Province, yea and
appeal from that to a General one, and a man must be a fool to think that God
would not rather inspire with the love and knowledge of Justice, a great number
of Prelates assembled in Council, than a single person be he who he will. What
stupidity and dullness is it that hinders Christians in these times from
carrying it in the same manner toward Rome? Council. Constant. c. 2. Can. 6.
And the Council of Constantinople after having limited the bounds of each
Patriarchal See, says that the Affairs of every Diocese ought to be Regulated
by the Synods of the Diocese, and that in Confirmation of the Fourth Canon of
the Council of Nice. Council. Nicen, can. 4.
And in the sixth Canon it does Enact. That if any man has been vexed by the
Bishop, let him complain of this Bishop to all the other Bishops of the
Province; and if these Bishops cannot determine the affair, he ought to apply
himself to a greater Synod of Bishops of that Diocese; whereby we see that the
Bishop of Rome had in those days no Authority over other Bishops, but that
every thing was then Regulated by Councils and by Synods. If an Archbishop, or
a Metropolitan were accused, the Affair was determined by an Assembly of the
Synod of the Diocese; and if any man appealed from thence, it was not to the
Bishop of Rome, but to a Synod composed of many Diocesses, which may be seen in
the case of Bagadius Bishop of Bostra Metropolitan of Arabia, who having been
Deposed by some Bishops of his Province, appealed from them, not to Rome, but
to Constantinople, where quickly afterward was assembled a Synod of many of
the Eastern Diocesses, at which Nectarius of Constantinople, Flavian of
Antioch, and Theophilus of Alexandria, all three Patriarchs assisted; and the
case was determined in the year 394, and Bagadius Reestablished in his place.
Hierom in Epist. ad Evagrius.
It was the opinion of St. Hierom, tho a Roman, and very zealous for his own
Patriarch, That if there be any question concerning Authority, that of the
whole world is greater than that of one single City. For what end shall a man
alledg the Customs of one only Town? Wheresoever there is a Bishop there is
always the same Dignity. Neither Riches nor Poverty making them Superiors or
Inferiors. They are all Successors of the Apostles. St. Chrysostom. Hom. 43. in
Matthew.
St. Chrysostom was also of this opinion when he spoke thus: If any Bishop
affects Supremacy on Earth, he shall find confusion in Heaven. And whosoever
shall be ambitious of raising himself above others, shall not be reckoned among
the servants of Jesus Christ. Thus are all the Popes Inclusively Excommunicated
by St. Chrysostom, since Boniface the Third; and not only by him, but by the
Milevitan Council, by the Council of Sardis, the third Council of Carthage, and
another Council held at Carthage at the Instance of Gregory the First, under
the Emperor Maurice; all these Councils do Excommunicate and declare him a
forerunner of Antichrist, who shall call himself Universal Bishop. Greg lib. 6.
Ep. ad Maurit. Imperat.
St. Gr^gory does himself abominate the Pride and Impiety of our Popes of these
last Ages, when he says, That whosoever shall make himself be called Universal
Bishop, shall be the forerunner of Antichrist, because he will by his Insolence
raise himself above others. Idem lib. 6. Ep. 24. ad Anastasium Antiochen.
And in another place speaking to Anastasius Bishop of Anti^ch, he says, That
without m^ntioning the dishon^ur that the pride of such a man would do you, If
a Bishop should m^ke himself be called Universal Head of the Church, the whole
Church must run to ruin if this Universal Head should fall. For my p^rt I pr^y
God keep me from hearkening to any such fol^ies, and from b^ing capable of so
great ^ ^anity, etc.

I should never have done, if I should pretend here to relate all the Evidences
of Antiquity, which are contrary to the pretenses of the Bishops of Rome for
some Ages past. St. Aug. in li cont. Donat. post Collat. c. 33.
St. Austin tells us a story which I cannot let pass, which shows things pretty
clearly: He says that Don^^us had accused Cecili^n, Archbishop of Carthage, of
a great Crime, and that the Emperor Constantine chose the Bishop of Rome, and
several other bishops for Judges of the Affair. Donatus was condemned by them,
and made his Appeal to the Emperor, who referred the Judgment of his Appeal to
Arles. At this Judgment the Bishop of Arles presided, and the Affair was by him
determined in favor of Cecilian, and the Judgment given at Rome confirmed. It
would be a fine thing now to see the Emperor in an Affair pur^ly
Ecclesiastical, as that was, establish the Pope as his Commissary, with other
Bishops, and an Appeal made from their sentence before the Emperor, and he
should send the cause before another Bishop, to judge definitively of it. I
know not after this what Eviden^es I further need to prove the Usurpations
which the Popes have made since those times. Christians ought to die in
confusion, who want Proofs for a thing as clear as the day, considering the
enormity and exorbitance of the power which these people take upon them. Leo in
Epist. 89. ad Episc. Viennensis Provinciae^ contra Hilarium.
In St. Hilaries days they endeavored to bring under the Bishops of France, in
such sort, that St. Hilary opposed their Ambition, which made Leo have the
Impudence to write of it to the Bishops of the Province of Vienne. However,
that did not hinder him from continually attacking him, and his successors, who
found opposition enough from time to time, they always gaining the Victory: And
we have a Letter which the Churches of France and Germany wrote together in the
time of King Clouis, to Anastasius the second Bishop of Rome, where we see that
they were not satisfied with the Ambition of that Bishop. Epistola Episcoporum
Germaniae and Galliae, contra Anastas. secundum, sub Clodoveo Magno, apud
Aventinum in Collectaneis.
It is not, say they, without reason, that the Bishops, it being grounded upon
many Authorities, affirm that the Authority of Councils is above that of a
Pope. St. Paul the Apostle, who tells us, that we should be his followers,
resisted Peter, the first of the Apostles, to his face, because he d^served
reproof. For our parts, we understand not this new compassion which the Italian
Physicians have for our M^ladies of France. They would cure our Bishops, and
are themselves sick of a continued Fever: They are themselves blind, and yet
they off^r us light: They forsake their own Flock, suffering it to wander, and
pretend to lead our Pastors in the right way. They would make us believe, that
the Cure for Spiritual Diseases, that is to say, Absolution, is to be found at
Rome, etc. But if the Ark of the Covenant should fall in France, it must be our
Bishops, and not theirs, that must take it up again. But if they be so rash, as
to pretend to touch the Ark of our Church, they only draw evil upon themselves,
as well as Uzzah the Levite. Let them fairly unde^stand this Syl^ogism; If
th^r^ be but one ^nly power in all Bishops, it is also in one person alone: Now
there is one and the same power in all Bishops; therefore it resides also in
one single person.

But let us here observe by the by, how much the Germans and French are
degenerated from that Piety and Love for the Liberty which Jesus Christ has
acquired for his Church.

It is certain, that Bishops were always equal in the first Ages of the Church:
It was some time after the Death of St. Cyprian, before they thought of
establishing in every Province one Bishop above the rest: They thought it would
be advantageous for removing the disorder that sprung up sometimes among them
for concurrence and presidency. He resided in the Capital City, and was called
the Metropolitan. At first he had no Authority over the others, but only the
place; but afterward they conferred upon them the power of consecrating
Bishops of the Province, because they dwelt in the Capital Ciiy, where every
body came about their Affairs. And it is from thence that Bishops became
subject to their Metropolitans, and have been distinguished from them by the
Ordination which they receive from them. These Metropolitans were called in the
West Archbishops; After this there was given them the power of calling
Provincial Synods, who for that Reason were assembled always in the Capital
City. That was brought in at first only as a Custom, and because it looked as
though the state of the Civil Government did require it. But at length this
Custom was confirmed by the Decrees of the Council of Nice, and became a Law.
After that, for the maintenance of Unity among the Churches of diverse
Provinces, it was further thought requisite to establish Exarchs, or Primates
over these Archbishops, according to the Idea of the Civil Government. These
Primates were the Bishops of the chief City of some great Province, or of a
Diocese that comprehended many Provinces. At first they acknowledged no
Superior, but by little and little, they of Constantinople, of Antioch, of
Alexandria, and lastly, he of Rome, did first attempt their Rights; and after
came the Council of Calcedon, who established over these Metropolitans four
Patriarchs, of Rome, of Alexandria, of Antioch, and of Constantinople, to whom
afterward he of Jerusalem was also added, for the Honor of that City; but he
lasted not long. The two principal were he of Rome, and he of Constantinople,
because those were two Seats of the Empire, and at last they took upon them the
Quality of Ecumenical Bishops against all Reason, Divine, or Humane, and
against the Decrees of many Councils. Since those times every thing has gone
worse and worse.

It is no hard matter to prove, that the Presidence of the Bishop of Rome was
purely in consideration of the Dignity of that City: Council Constant. Can. 2.
The Second Canon of the Council of Constantinople shows it sufficiently; where
it is said, That the Bishops who are established over a Diocese, shall not go
beyond the bounds which have been set them; but that the Bishop of
Constantinople shall have the Honor of the Primacy, after the Bishop of Rome,
and not before him, because that City is not so ancient as that of Rome. After
the same manner the 9 th Canon of the Council of Antioch ordains, That the
Bishops of great Cities shall have the pre-eminence, because all men of
business repair to the Capital City. Conc. Antio. Can. 9.
(...), etc.

Council. Calcedon, Act 16.
And the Council of Calcedon, in its 16 th Act, gives no other Reason for the
City of Rome's having the first place. The Fathers, says this Council, have
also given these Privileges to the Sea of Old Rome, by reason of the Empire of
that City, etc. And for this very reason they have given the same privileges
to the most Holy See of New Rome, judging very rati^nally, that a City honored
by the Sena^e and the Empire, ought to enjoy the same privileges as the
Ancient Rome, and have the same pre-eminence in Eccl^siastical Affairs, and be
the second after her. Conc. Turin, c. ^.
And the Council of Turin, in its first Chapter, has these words, That Bishop
who can prove that his City is the Capital of the wh^le Province, let him have
the honor of the Primacy, and the Faculty of conferring Orders upon others.
And we must not judge of this matter by what we now see: For Example, That
Paris and London, which are the Capital Cities of two great States, have not
the Primacy over the other Bishops of these Kingdoms: for besides that they
here received the Christian Faith later than the others did; the Court of Rome,
and its Favorers, have managed this very politickly, not suffering that any
great City should have this Honor, lest the Bishop of it should become their
Rival, and should cast off their yoke; as we see, they had all the difficulty
in the World, to subdue the great City of Milan: Sigon. lib. 9. de Regno
Italiae. Petrus Damianus, in Epist. ad Hildebrandum.
For in the year 1059. Nicholas the Second, having sent thither Peter Damien,
Bishop of Ostia, to make them lay aside the Ambr^sian Service, and take up the
Roman; both the Clergy and People answered vigorously, That they had never been
subject to the Roman Laws, and that the Bishop of Rome had nothing to do to
meddle with what concerned them: That it would be a thing unworthy of their
Church, which had been always free, to become subject, by their own cowardice,
to another Church; and that if they did it, it would bring an eternal shame
upon them. It is true, the Cardinal did corrupt the Archbishop, who received
the Roman Service; but the Clergy and the People soon shook off the Yoke, till
Gregory the Seventh's time, who by cunning practices, and by cruelty, oppressed
them. Vasaeus in Chronico Hisp Anno Christi 717, Rodericus Arch. Tolet. lib. 6.
cap. 25, and 26.
In the same manner, at Toledo, the Popes were forced to shed a great deal of
blood, before they could compel that Town to receive the Roman Service; and at
last, to appease the People, they were forced to allow, that they should retain
the Gallican Service in Six Parishes of the City of Toledo. Ravenna also
resisted for some time courageously, because they had tasted somewhat of their
Spiritual, as well as of their Temporal Dominion. We see it by the 54 th
Epistle of Adrian, Ad Carolum Magnum de Leone Episcopo Ravennate qui non vult
Obedire Adriano. His Predecessor Sergius had done the same thing, and so did
John, his Successor, and many others. See Cardinal D' Ailly, in his book of the
Reformation. Guicciardin also confirms it: The Church of Ravenna, says he,
disputed with Rome for the Primacy, because the Seat of Religion has been
accustomed to follow the Power of the Empire and its Arms; which, by the way,
also proves the Usurpations of the Bishops of Rome. Durand also tells us, That
Charlemayne was entreated by the Pope Adrian, to abolish the Ambrosian Service
throughout all Germany and France, and that he found great resistance, as
against an unheard of Tyranny. The Emperor, says he, did compel all the
Ecclesiastics, both by Threats and Punishments, to burn the Books of the
Ambrosian Service. He could not force the Men of Milan to it, who yet kept it
near 300. years. And we see in the 6 th Chapter of the Capitularies of
Charlemayne, that this Emperor made this Ordinance in the Year 806, that the
Service should be sung in Churches, according to the Use and Custom of the
Roman Church. These Villains, who owe so much to this Emperor, make but very
little acknowledgment, and have showed but small consideration to his
descendants.

I do not think it necessary to prove, that the Bishops of Rome presided in the
Councils, no more than other Bishops; that it was the Emperors who called the
Councils, that were to approve, and make them to be observed. There is no man
but knows that our Kings have assembled many, and have presided in them, even
when the Bishop of Rome has had a Deputy, or Legate present. We have a
remarkable Example in the History of the Gallican Councils, which it were to be
wished, that our great King would follow; Historia Council. Gallic. Council.
Leptinense ad Annum 748, in Praefat.
that is, of the Council of Leptine, assembled in the Name of Carloman, Duke
and Prince of the Francks, under Chilperie the third. First of all, you there
see that it was Carloman who presided, though the Bishop of Rome had his Deputy
there present. See how he there speaks: In the Name of Our Lord Jesus Christ, I
Carloman, Duke and Prince of the Francks, in the Year from the Incarnation 742,
the Second of the Calends of May, have assembled a Council, by the advice of
the Servants of God, and the Lords of our Court, that is to say, Boniface, and
Burchard, Bishops, with their Clergy, to advise concerning means whereby the
Law of God, and the Ecclesiastical Religion, which is fallen to decay in these
latter Ages, may be re-established, and how Christian People may attain to the
Salvation of their Souls, and not be destroyed by the deceits of false Teachers.

This is a true Idea of the present State of the Church; but with this
difference, that the disorder is now much greater; and would it would please
God to touch the heart of some great Prince in our days, to do as Carloman did.
Under the same King Chilperie, Pepin, who was yet only Duke of the Francks,
called also another Council at Soissons, where he also presided: The Preface
begins thus, I Pepin: And at the end it is said, Whosoever shall contradict
these Decrees, Established by 23. Bishops, and other Servants of God, by and
with the consent of Prince Pepin, and of the Lords of France, shall be judged
either by the Prince, or by the Bishops: And the Council is signed, Pepin. The
Bishop of Rome is no more mentioned in all this, than the Mufti, though they
were already arrived to a great height, because it was near two hundred years
since they had been declared Heads of the Church by the Emperor Phocas. The
first who took upon him this Quality, was one B^niface the third, who for
having protected Phocas, who had killed the Emperor Maurice, to settle himself
in his place, was by him, in recompense, honored with the Title of Universal
Bishop. Many Authors do relate the History of it, but one only shall suffice,
who is Beda, Beda in Tractatu de sex aetatibus mundi.
who reports, Phocam Imperatorem rogante Bonifacio secundo, Gregorii M^gni
Successore statuisse sedem Romanae, and Apostolicae Ecclesiae Caput esse Omnium
Ecclesiarum, quia Constantinopolitana Primam se Omnium Eccl^si^rum scribebat.
And since that time they are become the Vicars General of Jesus Christ upon
Earth, because they are the worthy Successors of Simon Magus, who as St.
Epiphanius reports, Epiphanius haeres 20.
pretended to be the Vicar of Christ. And the Divine Power, for the Government
of the Church. Being thus far advanced, no man need wonder that they govern the
Church so well: for as Tacitus observes Tacitus.
Ne^^ ^nquam Imperium flagitio quaesitum bonis Artibus Exercuit. Since this
Consecration of Phocas, they have always had the Wind in their Stern, and
Fortune has by little and little greatly advanced them: They were never at a
loss to find people who would assist them to get a share in the Plunder. Prima
Principatus initia, Ardua ubi sis ingressus, adesse Studia and Ministros. And I
may say that which the same Tacitus says in an other place, with respect to the
Ancient Grandeur of Rome, That Fortune prepared them in many places of the
World means and occasions of establishing their Empire: Tacitus.
Struebat jam Fortuna in diversa part Terrarum, initia caususque Imperio,
(Papatui.) It is now not very long since that the Emperors did elect and depose
the Popes: They made use of them in their Affairs; in Embassies; they punished
them when they had committed any Crime, and sometimes even with Death.
Theodorie, King of Italy, for Example, sent John, Bishop of Rome, in an Embassy
to the Emperor Justinian; and having afterward re-called him, he put him to
death in Prison. Platina, Sigebert.
Belisarius, Lieutenant of the Emperor Justinian, in the year 538, drove away
Silverius, Bishop of Rome, and put Vigil in his place, whom he afterward drew
through the Town with a Rope about his Neck, as Platina Platina.
relates. In the year 654, the Emperor Constantine bound the Pope Martin in
Chains, and sent him away in Exile to Chersona, where he died. In the year 963,
the Emperor Otbo deposed Pope John the 12 th. In the the year 1007, Henry the
Second deposed Three Popes, Benet the Ninth, Sylvester the Third, and Gregory
the Sixth. We see by the Authentic of Justinian, that the Popes paid to the
Emperors, as to their Sovereigns, Twenty Pounds of Gold for their Investiture
Authent. Justinian, 123. cap. 3.
And Pope Adrian himself, and also Leo the Eighth, do confess, that the Emperor
Charlemayne had the Authority of Electing Popes Distinct. 63. Can. in Sinodo.
.

Why is it not so now? It is because the Popes have by a thousand Cheats ruined
the Roman Emperors, and are become more mighty then they, as well by the
desolation of the Empire, which they have rent in pieces, as by the Conquests
which they have made in Italy, and by the Usurpations which they yet make upon
what remains to the Emperor, in debauching part of his Subjects, who swear
Fidelity and Obedience to them, even against the Emperor himself, and by
holding in Captivity their Consciences, by means of the Monks, to make them do
what they please in favor of the Pope; not to mention how they drain his
Country, as well as others, trafficking with Princes and their Subjects, in
almost the same manner as is usual with some people of the Ind^es, to whom they
give Pins, and pieces of Glass for their Pearls and Gold. After this manner
they draw to them all our Substance; and we are, at least, as simple as these
poor people.

Some body in Tacitus complains, That the Money went out of Rome for Diamonds;
and that ^trangers and Enemies made advantage by it: Tacitus.
Pecuniae nostrae lapidum causa ad Exteras and Hostiles Gentes transeunt. We
have now so much more reason to make this Complaint, as Diamonds are better
worth than Bulls and Dispensations of our Most Holy Father the Pope.

Bonif^ce the Third, as I have already said, having been made Universal Head of
the Church by Phocas, this power increased prodigiously in a little time:
Sigebert in Chronico.
This good Pope presently called together some Ecclesiastics of his Faction,
in a Synod, who confirmed to him the Title of Head of the Church. After him,
his Successors, taking advantage of the weakness of the Greek Emperors, and of
the distractions of Italy, they established and augmented their Authority more
and more; and the Exarchat of Ravenna, having been ruined by the Lombards, the
Spiritual Power of that City fell as a prey into the hands of the Bishops of
Rome, who, seeing none in Italy but the Lombards, who could disturb him, played
a cunning trick to draw to them out of France, Pepin, Son of Charles Martel; it
was by sending him Letters brought from Heaven to the Holy Father, which
promised Pepin an assured Victory over the Lombards. Pepin gave credit to this
Letter, came and defeated the Lombards; pursuant to which, His Holiness, Pope
Zachary, the worthy Successor of Boniface the Third, very honestly dispensed
with Pepin's Oath of Allegiance, which he owed to King Chilperic, and crowned
him King of France; and at the same time dispensed with all the French for
their Obedience due to their lawful Prince. Pepin then in acknowledgment of
this, gave them the Exarchat of Ravenna, with many Cities and Privileges,
reserving to himself only the Sovereignty, and the Right of Electing Popes,
which, as History testifies, his Successors enjoyed long after him.

Nor had any of their Bishops any need of Bulls, or to pay Tribute to the
Popes, being elected by the Clergy and the People, invested by the Prince, who
alone assembled Capitula Caroli Magni Ludovi. Lotharii, etc.
Councils, and made Regulations in Ecclesiastical things. And when the Popes
encroached farther than they had to do, we see that the Churches of Germany,
and of France, had yet courage enough to oppose their Enterprises. And we find
that in the year 991. the Counc^^ assembled at Reimes under Hugh Capet, deposed
one Arnoulph, Archbishop of Rheimes, in spite of the Pope; and when he
complained of it, they asked him for what ^eason they should prefer his
Apostleship before others? Council. Rhem. anno 991. c. 26. and cap. 28.
Vt sciamus and intelligamus cur inter caeteros Apostolatum vestrum praeferre
debeamus. And in the 28 th Chapter of the same Council, What would Laws
signify, if all were to be governed by one Man's Humor?

In the greatest prosperity of Rome, when it was the Seat of the Empire, and
Bishops were men of Merit, the Gelasiuses, the Gregory's, and the Leoes, the
Afr^cans would not give them the Privilege of Appeals; how much less ought we
to do it now? Compare our times with theirs. It is true, that notwithstanding
the Protestations which were every where made against the Ambition of the
Bishops of Rome, yet they still gained ground; and at length, having gotten,
either by some trick, or by open violence, not only the Exarchat of Ravenna,
but Benevento, and Ferrara, and what they call the Patrimony of St. Peter,
having made themselves absolute Masters of the Town of Rome, they were no
longer afraid to declare open War against the Emperors. And this it was which
made Guicciardin say in two places, Jam ita se gerunt ut Authoritatis
ponti^iciae videatur Leges dare potius quam accipere Terrorem armo^um
Coelestium in res caducas vertunt. Tandem non erga Deum and Homines Charitas,
sed Exercitus, sed bella in Christianos horum Curae and Ludicra; jam per multos
annos beliorum Authors, incendiorum Faces, etc. Now they behave themselves as
though it were a part of the Popes Authority to give Laws, not to receive them.
They turn the Terror of Heavenly Weapons on Worldly Affairs; now not love to
God and Man, but Armies and Wars against Christians, are their care and sport.
For many years they have been Authors of Wars, etc.

Aventin. in Boi. Hist.
Aventin gives us an account of a Letter which the Emp^ror Barberossa wrote in
the year 1150. to the Princes of Germany, which says expressly, That the Popes
being increased in Wealth and Dignity, by means of him and his Predecessors,
apply themselves with all diligence to dethrone Kings and Princes, and cannot
suffer an Equal: That they were busied both Night and Day, not so much to
destroy him, as the Sacred Empire. After they had oppressed the Head of it,
they affect not only Domination, but Divinity it self, and will not be feared
and adored less than God: And that the Christian Religion has no greater
Enemies than they.

But he who of all the Popes gave the most mortal blow to the Church, and to
the Authority of Christian Princes, was Gregory the Seventh, and that by three
Devilish means: First of all by Deposing the Emperor Henry the Fourth, which
caused the ruin of the Western Empire; for since that time it has been torn
into many little States, and weak Principalities, which the Popes have played
with at their pleasure, as well in Germ^ny, as in Italy. Only our Country of
France has maintained it self against all their endeavors, without being
divided, and has still kept some small Remains of Liberty, which they daily
attempt to rob us of. The second device was to engage Princes, and great men,
and those who were very rich, in the Croisadoes and Expeditions of the Holy
Land, and to make them take the Cross; which besides the vast Treasures which
the Popes got by it, augmented greatly their Authority; for from hence they
invented Indulgences, from whence the Court of Rome has drawn unspeakable
Advantages as well in Riches, as in Authority. The third was by introducing
neatly under the pretense of ignorance, and the weakness of Princes, the use of
Cardinals of diverse Nations, in the Election of the Pope; for by this these
Nations are for the Spiritual ^art become subject to the Sea of Rome, the
Clergy and people of R^me, as well as the Emperors, have lost the Right of
Electing the Bishop. All these States have thought that the Bishop of Rome was
greater than another Bishop, and that they had great Interest in his Election;
and the Popes have gotten many Creatures in all these States. It is true, that
at this time they are almost all Italians, because they have of late so well
bridled all these Countries by the Infinite number of their Monks, and by many
other Inventions that they now fear not their casting off the yoke.

After that Henry the Fourth had been Deposed, and the Right of Investing
Bishops taken from him, the Successors of this Gregory pretended that the
Ecclesiastics were exempt from all Jurisdiction and power of ^ecular Princes,
even in Civil Affairs. And besides that, that the Bishop of Rome could D^pose
Kings, if they did not submit to all his Orders; and to fortify this, came
forth the Decretals of many Popes, of which these people at last made so good
use to compose their Bull de Caena Domini, and the Directory of the Inquisitors.

But, say they, all this does not hinder the Bishop of Rome from being Head of
the Church, for we see that the Laws and Rules, and Roman Discipline, have been
followed by the other Churches. It is true, that in the West, as there was no
other Patriarchal See, and as in most places thee Christian Faith had been
received by means of the Roman Church, the wo^ld had a great respect for it;
and be^ides, it was by reason of the Dignity of this City. As in France we
always consult the Sorbonne at Paris concerning matters of Religion; not that
for this reason the other Universities or Churches depend upon it. But it is
false, that all Christians, or the greatest part of them have received the
Rules and Discipline of Rome. The Greek Churches never owned them, nor any of
those who are in Asia, or in Africa, as the Armenian, the Ethiopian and others.
And what we have already alleged from many of the Fathers and Councils, from
the Gallican Church* from the Churches of Ravenna, Milan and Toledo, who with
so much difficulty received the Roman Office, even in the Eleventh Century,
shows sufficiently that they had no dependence on the Bishop of Rome. I could
bring a thousand other proofs did I not fear being too tedious to the Reader.
Avent. Anno 723.
Aventin relates that Gregory the Second sent one Winefred toward the
Countries lying upon the Rhine to reform the Churches there, and to set them on
the Roman bottom; but that they vigorously opposed him and many Bishops, called
him the Author of Lies, and corrupter of the Christian Faith. 1 Tom.
Conciliorum.
In the first Tome of the Councils we have a Letter of Damasus Bishop of Rome,
to Hierome a Priest, where we find these words, which do sufficiently confute
the pretenses of our people: I entreat, Brother, thy charity to send us the
Greek Psalter, with the Notes by which they sing them. These are the words,
Peto charitatem tuam ut Graecorum Psallentiam ad nos dirigere tua Fraternitas
delectetur. For, adds he, we are so simple that upon Festival days we do
nothing but read a Chapter in the Epistles, or in the Gospel, and we have no
custom of singing Psalms, nor is the Grace and Glory of Hymns to be found in
our mouths. Observe these words, Charitas tua, and Fraternitas tua, from a
Bishop of Rome to a Priest, and how far they were from endeavoring to make
other Churches subject to their Laws, since that on the contrary they did
correct their own faults by the good example of others. At the end of St.
Gregory's Works.
We find also at the end of St. Gregory's Works, that about the year 593, he
sent a Monk called Austin into England, who passing through France, was
surprised to see there another manner of Divine Service than he had seen in
Italy, with Ceremonies quite different; that when he wrote to Gregory, he asked
him how it came to pass that since there was but one Faith, the customs of
Churches were so different, and that the custom and manner of Masses was not
the same at Rome as in France? To which St. Gregory answered, You know,
Brother, what is the custom of the Roman Church, wherein you have been
educated. But my opinion is, that if you find any thing, be it in the Roman
Church, or the Gallican, or in any other which may be more agreeable to God,
you should pr^f^r it; for we ought not to love the things for the places, but
the places for the good things we find in them.

See Apostolic.
There are some people also who would make an advantage of this that the Church
of Rome is by the Fathers called the Apostolic See. In truth as the Pharisees
sat in the seat of Moses, as our Savior says, so do the Bishops of Rome also
^it upon the Seat of the Apostles. But it is certain, that the other Bishops
who teach the Doctrine of the Apostles, and imitate their example, are more
Apostolic than they. You must know that all the Churches founded by the
Apostles were honored with this Title, and particularly famous and
Metropolitan Cities, which were looked upon as the Mothers of other Churches,
tho sometimes they had embraced Christianity after others that were less
considerable, because there Resided the Civil, which drew after it the
Eccl^siastical Jurisdiction. And because there were many in the East where
Christians were far more numerous than on this side, none of those Churches
ever raised it self above the others; but in the West there being but one,
which was the Roman, and no other having been since erected, tho the Germans,
Spaniards, French, and other Nations have embraced the Christian Religion since
those times, yet Rome alone has had this Glorious Title, and the others have
had great respect for it, without any manner of d^pendance on it however at the
beginning, as has already been showed. But that hinders not but that other
Orthodox Church^s may also have it; consult Tertullian, Tertul. de praescripti;
cap. 20.
he says that all Churches that follow the Faith of the Apostles, are
Apostolic. And Pope Pelagius confirms the same thing, Pelag. ad Valor. in
Collect. Romans part 1. p. 227.
Whenever, says he, there arises any question in peoples minds concerning an
Universal Synod, let those who love their own Salvation, consult the Apostolic
Sees, that they may learn the reason of what they understand not. St. Aug.
Epist. 162.
And St. Austin speaking of Cecilian Bishop of Carthage, condemned by the
Donaetists, before whom he refused to answer, says that he might reserve the
whole cognizance of the thing to the judgment of his other fellow Bishops,
chiefly those of Apostolic Sees. We have seen already that the Council of
Rheimes assembled under Hugh Capet, says that the Apostleship of the Bishop of
Rome is not to be pr^ferred before that of other Bishops, and so his See is no
more Apostolic. Apollin. lib. 7. Epist. 4. Sidon. Apollin. lib. 6.
Apol^inaris gives this account of the Apostleship to Fontelus Bishop of
Vaison; and says also, that the Bishop Tricassin lived forty years in an
Apostolic See. Greg. Hist. l 4. cap. 26.
Gr^gory of Tours calls the Church of Bourdeaux an Apostolic See. The
Council of Antioch assembled against Paulus Samosatensis calls the Church of
Antioch the Church Catholic. We have, say they, been obliged to give unto the
Catholic Church another Bishop in the room of this Heretic. Eusebius. Hist. lib.
7. cap. 30.
Nevertheless this Catholic Church was not subject to the Bishop of Rome no
more than Cecilian Bishop of Carthage, of whom the Emperor Constantine also
said, that he presided over the Church Catholic Eusebius. Hist. lib. 10. cap. 7.
.

Bishop of Bishops.
As for the quality of Bishop of Bishops, which the Popes take upon themselves,
and which the Fathers have sometimes given to the Bishops of Rome, it is like
that of King of Kings, in regard of those who had Kings under them. The
Metropolitans who were the first Bishops were thus called. Chrysostom is
called Father of the Fathers, and Teacher of the whole World by the Emperors
Theodosius. Niceph. lib. 4. cap. 43. Sydon. Apollin. lib. 6. Epist. 2.
Sovereign Pontife.
And Sydonius calls Lupus Tricassin Bishop of Trequier, Father of Fathers, and
Bishop of Bishops. He also calls one Graecus Massiliensis Bishop of Marseilles
by the same name, and gives also the Title of Sovereign Pontife, even to those
sort of Bishops, and to Aegrotius Bishop of Sens, and to Fontelus Bishop of
Vaison. Sydon. Apol. lib. 7. Epist. 2, and 4.
He says in another place, that Evatrix King of the Goths having subdued all
Aquitain, killed all the Sovereign Pontifes that were there, and that there
were no other Bishops establi^hed in their stead. Idem lib. 5. Epist. 6.
The same Author calls also Mamereus Bishop of Vienne Sovereign Pontife. Lib.
4. Ep. 11. and lib. 6. Epist. 4.
And there also speaking of Lupus Bishop of Trequier, he says, he is the first
Bishop of the Habitable Earth. This same Sydonius having been chosen by the
Clergy of Bourges, to Elect, and in the presence of the Archbishop of Sens to
establish a Bishop at Bourges; says, You have gi^en me this Commission to Elect
a Bishop in the presence of our most Holy Father the Pope, a man m^st worthy of
the Sovereign Priesthood. Praesente sacro sancto Papa Pontificatu summo
Dignissimo. So he calls Aegrotius Bishop of Sens, and not the Pope of Rome.
Ignatius ad Smirnens.
We see also that St. Ignatius acknowledges no Dignity above that of a Bishop.
Honor the Bishop as being the chief Priest, wh^ bears the Image of God. Leo
Epist. 87. ad Afric.
And Pope L^o acknowledges that above a Bishop there is no other degree. The
Poet Fortunatus gives St. Germain Bishop of Paris, the Title of High Priest
Fortun. lib. 11. Ep. 13.
.

Pontifici summo nos commendare Precamur,
Regibus and Dominis forte salutis opus.
As for the word Pope which these people have affected to distinguish
themselves by from other Bishops; it is like the word Legate or Nuncio, which
they give to their Ambassadors and Envoys instead of using the ordinary Terms;
these are singular marks of vanity and pride, which however have their effect
on silly people, who imagine by these words that the Pope is a man of a quite
different kind from others. You must know that this word in its Original
signifies no other thing than a Priest or Bishop; and that it was common
heretofore to all people of this Character, and even now at this day they are
so called in Greece, and also in Germany, and the Motto of the Duke of
Brunswick, who styled himself Gottes, friend; and Paepsten fiend, signifies no
less that he was an enemy to Priests than to Popes. We see in the Life of St.
Cyprian, written by Pontianus a Deacon, that he is there called Pope. Epist.
Cler. Romans ad Cypr. de Lapsu. 15.
And in the Epistle of the Roman Clergy to St. Cyprian, there are these words,
Cypriano Papae, to Pope Cyprian; and at length, We desire thee most H^ly and
most Glorious Pope. And in the Epistle of Calerin, which is the 89 th. in
Cyprian, The most Holy Pope Cyprian. And Ischyras writing to Athanasius, says
thus, Beato Papae Athanasios: To the blessed Pope Athanasius, Greeting. I need
not bring any more proofs, since Baronius himself does acknowledge and attest
that this name Baron. Martyr. Januarii.
had been common to all Bishops until the year 1070, that Gregory the Seventh,
that Able Pope whom we have already mentioned, forbad it to be given to any
other Bishop than he of Rome.

As for the Cardinals who are in no other See than that of Rome, they in my
opinion give so little advantage to it above the Sees of other Bishops,
speaking like a Christian, that they do abase and make it infinitely less than
others. For what are these people? They are worldly men, Epicures, people of
pride, vanity and prodigious expense; there are but few of them who devour less
than Three hundred thousand Livres These are French Livres that are worth 20
English pence a pie^e, 25000 l.
a year after an Infamous manner; and it was not without reason that the
Emperor Sigismond represented to the Council of Constance, that they were good
for nothing in the Church, and their Dignity ought to be suppressed. And of
latter days even in the Council of Trent there were men bold enough to propose
the abolishment of this Dignity, or else to reduce them to their first
Functions of Curates. As also the Gallican Church demanded in its Remonstrances
to the Council of Constance, Domini Cardinales: My Lords, the Cardinals, say
they, are Curates of the Parish Churches of Rome, and in this respect are they
called Cardinals; that is to say, the chief of Principals Cardinals in other
places besides Rome.
. And according to this Institution their chief duty is and ought to be to hear
Conf^ssions, Preach and Baptize. Besides there were many other Churches who as
well as Rome had such like Priests as the Cardinals. We see it by a Brief of
the Gallican Church under Charles the Fifth Apostoli dati. Cardinalibus per
Nationem Gallicanam, sub Carolo Quinto.
, It is not only Rome, says this Brief, which has Cardinals, but there are
many other Churches who have them, as that of Ravenna, and who call them
Cardinals who have the chief Employments in the Church. And so it was in many
other Churches, Kingdoms and Provinces. And the Cardinals were in those times
under the Bishops, as may be seen by the The Chro. of the Abbey of St. Jean de
Vignes at Soissons.
Chronicle of the Abbey of St. Jean de Vignes at Soissons, where Theobald Bishop
of Soissons is brought in speaking of the Curate of St. John de Vignes, and
says, Presbiter vero Cardinalis, ipsius ejusdem loci, mihi de more and
Archidiacono de Cura Parochianorum reddat rationem. That is to say, That the
Cardinal-Priest of this Parish ought according to the custom to give an account
of his Parishioners to me, and to the Archdeacon. The same Author called Le
Gris, a Canon Regular of St. Augustine, says, That there were Twelve Curates at
Soissons, who time out of mind had been called Cardinals; and it was the same
thing in many other places of France. And we read in Pasquier that in a Council
held at Metz under Charlemagne, it was ordained, Pasquiet, lib. 4. cap. 3.
Vt Titulos Cardinales in Vrbibus vel Suburbiis constitutos honestissime and
Canonice retractatione ordinent and disponant Art. 54.
. That the Bishops should ordain and dispose the Title of Cardinals Honestly,
and Canonically, in Cities and Suburbs.

If this name and dignity be to be esteemed so highly in the Church, it would
be very easy to make as many as one would in France without the Bishop of Rome
his consent, since that ev^ry Bishop has the power of making them, and without
being Reordained there is no Priest who does now officiate, who may not be a
Cardinal when you please. Thus this signifies nothing, no more than the other
things which have been already confuted, to prove that the Popes Authority is
Divine, since the S^ripture and the whole Primitive Church are against it.

But I must here also answer one Humane Reason which they make use of to throw
dust in our eyes; A humane Reason for the Papacy.
they take it from an Author whom they esteem as much as St. Paul, nay more,
for they pretend that without him we should fail in many Articles of our Faith;
this is Aristotle. I scarce believe so much can be said of St. Paul, who wrote
the clearest of all the Apostles. Senza Aristotele noi mancarono di molti
Articoli di Fide, Palavic. lib. 8. cap. 19.
says Cardinal Palavicini. Bellarmine also, another Cardinal and a Jesuit, does
object to us that Aristotle demonstrated Monarchy to be the most excellent of
all Governments, and by consequence God would have his Church so governed, and
that this Monarchy belongs to the Pope. It is certain that the Spiritual
Government of the Church is Monarchical. It is Jesus Christ who governs it, a
Monarch all-wise, and Almighty; but the external Government of the visible and
Universal Church cannot be so; and their principle it self is contested by the
greatest part of Politicians. Aristotle himself, their Apostle, says in some
places, that a mixed or compounded Government, be it Aristocratical, or
Democratical, is better: Aristot. lib. 2. Pol. cap. 4.
Quae ex Pluribus constat Respublica melior est. And tho a Kingdom may be very
well governed by one single person; yet it does not follow that this one person
can as well govern all the States and Kingdoms of the World. And he says in
another place. Idem lib. 5. Pol. cap. 11*
Huc enim sunt omnia reducenda ut ii ^ui in Imperio sunt, non Tyrannum sed
patrem Familias agere videantur, and rem non quasi Dominus sed quasi Procurator
and Praefectus administrare, nec quod nimium est sectari. Do the Popes govern
after this manner? Reason and Experience both convince us of the contrary. We
see by History, that the Empires of the World, when they were of too great an
extent, could not subsist, and have been torn in pieces; and we have the
example of some wise Emperors who made Decrees to hinder the enlargement of
their Empire, as Augustus made one, Tacitus.
De Coercendo intra limits Imperio. It is a Proverb, That he who takes too
much into his arms, cannot hug it close. And this is so much the truer in
Ecclesiastical Government, which cannot inflict Corporal punishments upon
Delinquents; for St. Paul says expressly, that the Arms of the Evangelick
Ministry are not according to the Flesh. And the Fathers as well as the
Councils do teach us, that the Arms of a Bishop ought to be Prayers and Tears.
The example which they bring of one single Bishop, who by Divine Institution
governs a Diocese, or of a Curate who governs one Church only, can signify to
them nothing at all; because first of all there is a Divine Institution for
that, but none for this. Besides, a man may easily manage a Boat upon a little
River, who knows not how alone to manage a great Vessel upon the Ocean, much
less a Fleet of Ships. And the Example of a Bishop or Curate makes against
them, for they are not Sovereigns, the one presides only among the other
Priests, and the other in a Parish.

I foresee that it will be said, that though this Authority of the Pope was not
Instituted by Jesus Christ, that the Church for the first five Centuries knew
it not, that it has been since opposed from time to time by many people,
perhaps of a turbulent or discontented mind; yet it must be believed that the
Church which did establish it since, did it for good Reasons; that Jesus Christ
and his Apostles have not so precisely Regulated every thing that concerns the
Discipline of the Church, but that she may according to her own Prudence alter
some things according to the times and places; or as others say, that every
time has its customs; or as Cardinal Palavicini, Palav. lib. 23. cap. 10.
Altri tempi, Altri costumi: That the Church was at that time in its Infancy,
and that the mature age to which it is now arrived, is not to be governed as
its tender Infancy. I acknowledge that the Church may sometimes vary in its
Discipline, and in its policy without any great crime; but this must be always
by a principle of charity; and according to the Fathers, Quod propter
charitatem fit, non debet contra Charitatem militare. That which is done by a
Principle of Charity, ought not to militate against Charity. It must tend to
Edification; the Church ought to do nothing against the Commandments of God.
Now I have shown that the Papacy is against the Maxims of the Gospel, and is
altogether contrary to the Genius of Christianity, and more contrary than light
is to darkness.

The Church has not established the Papacy.

The Papacy never did any good in the world.


Furthermore, it is not true that the Church has established the Papacy, only
some few Councils held in Italy about two or three hundred years since, or
thereabouts; as that at Florence, Lateran, Bolonia and Trent. But we speak not
of these dark Ages; for those with whom I dispute, believe that the Church has
established this power in the Sixth or Seventh Century.

Cusan de concor. Cathol. lib. 2. cap. 14.
In this respect the Cardinal Cusan mistakes himself, when he says, P^patus est
de jure Positivo; The Papacy is of Positive Right: For the Church has not
established it in any Council, unless you call that Rabble of Ecclesiastics
and Seculars the Church, who assembled themselves together at the desire of
Boniface the Third, to confirm upon him the Title of Universal Bishop, which he
got by the Parricide Phocas, for the assistance he had given him. He himself
acknowledges, that this Authority came to them, Cusan lib. 2. c. 13. and 34.
ex usu and Consuetudine Subjectionalis Obedientiae. And he maintains with good
reason in another place, Si per possibile Treverinus Archiepiscopus per
Ecclesiam Congregatam pro Praeside and Capite Eligeretur, Ille proprie plus
Successor esset Beati Petri in Principatu quam Romanus Episcopus: That if it
were possible that the Arch Bishop of Treves could be chosen Head of the Church
by a General Council, he would be a more lawful Successor of St. Peter than the
Bishop of Rome; which shows, that in his time no Council had declared the
Bishop of Rome as such. Besides, these words, if it were possible, show, that
he belioved not that the Church could dispose of such a thing. Gerson de
potestate Ecclesiastic.
Gerson was also of this Opinion; for he acknowledges very ingeniously, that
the Papal Authority cannot be conferred by the Church: Papalis Authoritas si
non a Deo esset immediate instituta, a tota Ecclesia institui non poterat: If
the Papal Authority were not from God immediately, it could not be instituted
by the whole Church.

And though it were true, that the Church had established it, as Pope Innocent
the Third pretends, when he says, Ecclesia non nupsit vacua, sed Dotem mihi
tribuit absque pretio preti^sam, spiritualium plenitudinem and latitudinem
temporalium; illius me constituit vicarium qui habet in vestimento suo
scriptum, Rex Regum and Dominus Dominantium: The Church has not married me
without a Fortune; but has given me the invaluable dowry of God, the fullness
of Spirituals, and the latitude of Temporals; has made me the Vicar of him who
has written on his garment, King of Kings and Lord of Lords.

Although that, I say, were true, it would not be less necessary to abolish
this power, which is the cause of so many disorders, because the Church in
those days might have created it for the good of the Church, as she then
thought: And having found out that it is to her ruin, she ought to destroy it;
for the Chair of Peter is for the Church, and not the Church for the Chair of
Peter: Petri Cathedra propter Ecclesiam, non Ecclesia propter Petri Cathedram.
Quod propter Charitatem fit, non debet contra Charitatem Militare. And since
that our Faith, according to Thomas Aquinas, ought to be founded upon the Word
of God only, and not upon the Eshablishments of the Church, as he says, Tho.
Aquin. summa, part. 1. quaest. 1. Art. 8, and 10.
Fides nostra innititur Revelationibus Prophetis and Apostolis Factis; Ecclesia
non statuit nisi de non necessariis ad Salutem; According to this Truth, we are
not obliged to believe the Extravagant of Pope Boniface, who says, That it is
necessary to Salvation to submit to the Pope. And if the Church, according to
these People, dared to change the Aristocratical Government, instituted by
Jesus Christ, under which the Kingdom of God spread it self so far, Piety
flourished, Idolatry was confounded; shall it not be allowable for the Church,
and for Princes, who are its natural Protectors, to redeem it out of that
Slavery into which the Enemy of Mankind has reduced it, to its first Purity
and Simplicity? Methinks if Men had any sense of Religion, they ought to sigh
continually, for the deplorable condition of the Church, and of the Greeks and
Protestants, whom we have cast headlong into the Evil they now labor under.

Some people will have it, That because the Greek Patriarchs among themselves
hold that Place which the Council of Nice, and the Emperor Constantine gave to
all Patriarchs, he of Rome, who had the first Place, ought still to keep it;
and as in Place he was the first Bishop, and the only Patriarch in the West, he
ought still to enjoy these Prerogatives. But first of all, none of the Greek
Patriarchs, unless it were that John of Constantinople against whom St. Gregory
wrote so vehemently, ever pretended to bear Rule over the other Bishops, nor
over the Church, much less over Christian Princes, as the Popes do; and the
Patriarch of Rome for above Three Hundred Years after his Institution, never
attempted it.

Secondly, The Place which the Bishop of Rome held, was Propter Principalitatem
Vrbis, in regard of the Dignity of the City, which now has no weight at all,
Rome being no longer the Seat of the Empire, but the Sink and Common-shore of
all filthy Iniquity, a Den of Thieves, and a Nest of Satan, Nido di Satanazzo,
and the very Habitation of Sloth, Laziness and Beggary. Paris, or London, do at
this time deserve this Honor a thousand times better. Besides, it was in a
time when there were but very few Christians in the West; These great States
were not yet converted to the Faith: France, Germany, Poland, part of Spain,
and all the Northern Countries, knew not what Christianity was; so that one
Patriarch might more easily have the inspection of this small number of
Christians who resorted also to Rome for their civil Affairs, as to the capital
City, where the Emperor resided. How are they now able to govern all the
Churches, they who cannot govern that at Rome, and, which is worse, that
trouble not their Heads about it? Add to this a fourth Reason, which is, That
in those days they were not Temporal Princes, as they are become since; and had
not innumerable Legions of Monks and Beneficiaries at their command, as now
they have, which renders this Power the most formidable of any upon Earth among
the Catholics.

If because Rome had heretofore the first Place for the Spirituality before
other Cities, she should pretend still to have it, it will thence follow, that
she has it for the Temporality over these same Cities, since the Spiritual
Authority of this City, as I have already proved, was founded upon the Temporal
and Civil, which she enjoyed as the Seat of the Empire; and so in pretending to
the Regency of Religion in France, Flanders, and other Catholic Countries,
they pretend also to have a Right of treating these States as they please; and
they have effectually made them their Subjects and Tributaries, even to the
disposing (...) the Crowns of Kings, as their fancy leads them.

There are others who believe they have hit on the right, when they say, that
the Pope is Primus inter Pares, and that so he is the first of all Bishops. But
I ask by what Authority? It is true, he was so among the Patriarchs, whilst
that Rome, as I have said already, was the Seat of the Empire; but now I
maintain, that he is Vltimus inter Pares, and unworthy of the Name of either
Priest or Bishop, being the Tyrant of the Church, and of Christian Princes, and
a Temporal Prince himself. Were he not a Temporal Prince, all he could lawfully
pretend to, would be to be the first Bishop of Italy.

I know it will be said, That I ask too much to obtain any thing; and I know
that it will be neither better nor worse; but I will discharge my mind, and
tell the Truth. God Almighty may raise up Princes when he pleases, who may
restore that happy Equality among the Bishops, under which the Church was
heretofore so flourishing, and Christianity made so great Progress; which would
also re-establish Peace among all Christians, much better than the Equality of
Turkish Politics, of which they say, Ittichat Khoga Kopatmas: Equality
produces no Wars: They mean, the Equality of Poverty; that is to say, that
great men are not to be suffered in a Nation; and that being all miserable,
they would make no commotions: Whereas the Equality which I speak of, would
produce not only a firm and lasting Peace, but also the abundance of all
Spiritual and Temporal Goods.

There are also some People who pretended, that if we acknowledge a necessity of
having Archbishops and Primates, who take their Places above Bishops
instituted by Jesus Christ, tho the Dignity of Archbishops or Primates is not
so; in like manner, for Orders sake we may have a Pope. That might pass, if the
Popes did not pretend to be of another Order; if they exercised no Authority
over their fellow-brethren; if they were not Temporal and Mighty Princes; if
the Clergy did not absolutely depend upon them; if they had nothing but a
Pre-eminence of Place over the other Bishops in Assemblies and in Councils; if
there were One of them in every Christian State, who should solicit the Prince
for the assembling of Provincial Synods every year, to whom he should be
subject, as the other Bishops, and should entertain Communion with the other
Patriarchs, or Catholic Popes, and with whom he should keep Correspondence,
that they might altogether, by the Consent of their Respective Princes, cause
General Councils to be assembled, when they should be necessary, which should
be held sometimes in one State, and sometimes in another, and wherein should
preside men of the greatest Understanding, and the greatest Merit, without
exception of Persons; or else every Patriarch in his turn.

Thus was the Church anciently governed without Tyranny; by this means did
Religion spread it self abroad with great success in all Countries, and not by
a pretended Bishop, who is a Worldly Prince, and has ruined the Church. We
see, that heretofore, among the Pagans, Kings have been Sacrificers and
Ministers of Religion. Amongst the Jews also, at the beginning, we find, that
the Heads of Families, who were Sovereigns, did take upon them the offering of
Sacrifices, and performed Divine Service; but before these latter times, which
is the Sink of all Ages, it was never seen, that Priests played the Princes, and
that People who ought to employ themselves only in Prayers, and Sacrifices, and
whom Jesus Christ, and all the most pure Canons of the Church, do forbid to
meddle in Secular Affairs, should compare themselves with, and raise themselves
above Kings.

Is it not a comely sight to behold a Temporal Prince wearing Three Crowns one
above the other, sitting in a throne covered with Gold and precious Stones,
having the Arms both of Sea and Land, many Attendants following him, who are
equal to other Princes: Such a Prince as this, I say, to be the Vicar of Jesus
Christ! He is then a Carnal Messiah, and such a one as the Jews do at this day
look for: He is then a King of Concupiscence and of Iniquity. If it be so, the
Jews had reason to accuse him for endeavoring to supplant Caesar; the Romans
would have been in the right to put him to Death; and so he would not have been
the Redeemer of Mankind.

This Pretension of the Popes, as we see, is a horrible Blasphemy, and which
yields the Cause over to the Jews against us, and tends to justify every thing
they did against our Lord Jesus, and utterly to overturn Christianity. The
pretense also which they have, that Ecclesiastics ought not to be subject to
their Natural Prince, and are freed from Obedience to him by Jesus Christ; This
is to renew against our great Savior the impious Accusation which the Jews
brought against him, That he would have made himself a King, and persuaded
others to Rebellion.

There are others who pretend that the evil is not so great that there is a
Pope, as that General Councils are no more assembled; and so they say, that we
should rather speak of assembling a Council, than talk of exterminating the
Papacy; because they think that a Council would limit the Pope, and hold the
Reins shorter over him: But this Papacy subsisting, how shall a General Council
be called, but that they will have a hand in it? And if they have, what will this
Council tend to? The End of it will be like that of Trent, sad and miserable.
And put the case there might be found a Prince zealous, strong, and prudent
enough to cause a General Council to be assembled by an agreement of other
Christian Princes, in spite of the Pope; what would this Council do against
the Pope, who would have all the Bishops for him, both by the Oath which they
have taken to him, and by Twenty Millions of Revenue which he has, and which
he would employ to corrupt all the World? What would you do with the Monks, who
would be all for him, it being their Interest to maintain the Authority and
Infallibility of the Pope, because the Privileges which he has given to many
of them, which are as ancient as their first Institution, are not confirmed by
any Lawful Council, and so are null? And how long should the good condition of
this Prince's Affairs last, or his good Correspondence with other Princes, to
make the Laws of this Council be obeyed; and that the Pope, who will be all, or
nothing, shall not hinder the Execution of his Decrees, and continue his
Tyranny? And how will you in the mean time keep the Papacy with its hands tied,
and what will this signify? It is certainly better to cast off the Yoke all at
once, than to let it continue without being sure that it shall do no more
mischief. Tutius est perire non posse quam juxta periculum non periisse, says a
certain Author.

We have the sad Example of the Councils of Trent and Constance; from that of
Trent we could not hope for any great matters; but even that of Constance,
which seemed well inclined to a Reformation, as well as that of Basil, found
such horrible resistance in the Court of Rome, and among the Ecclesiastics,
that it never could re-establish the ancient Discipline. And that shows us,
that we must wholly eradicate this Papacy, and that it is not enough to
assemble a free Ecumenical Council, but that it must be some powerful,
zealous, and resolute Prince, who fears nothing but God, and not the Court of
Rome, who must begin, continue, and vigorously end the thing, without
hearkening to pretended moderate Councils, which tend only to the Churches
ruin. The Proverb here signifies nothing, That it is better to preserve the
Commonwealth as it is, than to have none at all: For I maintain that here is no
Commonwealth, but a perfect Anarchy; and that the Church, instead of being
governed, is devoured by a Faction of Villains, who eat the people of God like
bread.

But say they, you speak of abolishing the Primacy in the Church; and
nevertheless there is no Society, no Families, no College but has it: Without
it these Societies cannot subsist. It is not so much the Primacy which I
condemn, as the Tyranny which has been joined to it. The Primacy of Place
might yet be suffered, although Jesus Christ has not instituted it in the
Church; but that of Pope, is a Primacy of Jurisdiction, to which the Universal
Church, and the whole World is subject, as they pretend. I condemn the Primacy
of a Bishop who is a Worldly Prince, who has more than Twenty Millions of
Rev^nue; this Primacy, which is the Cause of all the Disorders of the Church;
Whereas the end and ordinary use of Lawful Primacies, is to maintain good Order
in all Societies. And I wish nothing more, than to see re-established in the
Church that Primacy which Jesus Christ has there instituted; ( viz.) that of
Councils, and that they should be often assembled, as they were in the
Primitive Church; for it is the want of these Councils which has undone the
Church. We see in the Preface of the Eleventh Council of Toledo, that the
Fathers say, That having wanted the Light of Councils for the space of Ten
Years, the whole World went astray, and the Church fell into disorder and
confusion. How much more reason have we now to complain of that, we who for
above these Hundred Years have seen none, and which is more, can never hope to
see a Lawful one, whilst the Papacy shall subsist? Substracta Luce Conciliorum
integro decennie, Matrem Omnium Errorum ignorantiam, otiosas Mentes occupasse,
adeo ut Babylonicae Confusionis olla succensa purpuratae Meretricis incrementa
Sacerdotes sequerentur, quia Ecclesiastici Convenius non aderat Disciplina, nec
erat qui Errantium Corrigeret parts, cum Sermo Divinus haberetur Extorris.

Is not this the cause of so many Superstitions, of so many Heresies, Schisms,
and Licentiousness, which we see in the Clergy? Is it not a ridiculous thing,
that no more Councils shall be called, whilst we see the Monks, both Capucins,
Carthusians and Jesuits often assemble their Congregations for the augmentation
of their Societies? It is no wonder if the Church daily runs to ruin, whilst
these Societies fortify themselves. Is it not clear as the day, that if
Provincial Synods were called every year, National every three or four years,
as heretofore they were under our great Kings; and Ecumenical Councils, at
least, once in Ten years, that Remedies would be found out for the Calamities
of the Church? Might not a Patriarch in every State, aided by the Secular
Power, excute the Decrees of the Church with more facility, less jealousy, and
more security for Religion and for the State, than a foreign Ambitious, and
potent Prince, who resolves to take no care for Religion, but to model every
thing to his own Interest? If this Patriarch should neglect his Duty, or carry
it like a Master, should not the Prince chastise him, nor depose him?
Experience shows us, that the Church never flourished but when she was
Aristocratically governed, and when there was no other Primacy in the Universal
Church than that of Councils, and all Primates and Patriarchs were subject to
them: But since the Patriarch of Rome has had the sole disposing of Religion
in the West, we have seen nothing but Confusion, Anarchy, Schism, Heresies,
Impiety, Atheism, Cruelty and Barbarity. Ipsa Ecclesia Vnus est Princeps, and
Vnitati fidelium, non singulis haec Jurisdictio a Domino conceditur, etc. Quia
Vnitas Ecclesiae multo major est atque perfectior, quam Vnitas Vnius Regis aut
Imperatoris terreni.

Thus did the Holy Council of Basil answer the false Reasons of Pope Eugenius
his Orators, who pretended, That the Unity of the Church was preserved much
better by a Pope than by the Council.

There are others who would have the Pope's Authority confined within the
bounds which the Councils of Constance and of Basil had marked out for it; but
they never understood the Moral Impossibility that there is, not only of making
the Popes consent to it; but suppose they were constrained to consent to these
Rules for a season, to make them observe them always, or for any long time. And
Experience confirms what I say, with reference even to these Councils which
have put no stop at all to their career; for they live in contempt as well of
these as of all other Lawful Councils. Have not they called others in Italy,
who have destroyed whatever these had established, even to treat with the Name
of Heresy this Holy Doctrine of the Superiority of the Council? Have not the
Popes been sufficiently Sacrilegious to raze out of the Roman Edition of
General Councils, the Council of Basil from among the Ecumenical Councils? It
is then impossible, that with the Impiety and Ambition wherewith the Court of
Rome is wholly made up, and with the enormous power which the Popes at this
time have, which equals that of the greatest Kings, that they should be reduced
to submit themselves to the Council of Constance. And even that would signify
nothing; for this Council gives them too much Authority; It gives them the
power which belongs to the Emperors, of assembling General Councils, of
presiding in them, and concluding, and of executing the Canons of Councils, in
regard of particular Churches, and even of making Decrees, during the Intervals
of Synods, and of being judged only by a General Council.

They ought then to be deprived of this temporal power, the Cardinals to be
abolished, and the Monks to be Enfranchised, and Released from the rash Vows
they have made to the Popes; the disposing of the Palls of Archbishops ought to
be taken from him, and the faculty of Investing Bishops, and of dispencing with
them for holding so many Benefices; with all the other Simonical Traffic which
will still renders him the Tyrant of the Church, the Master of all States, and
the Devil the possessor of many souls. It is much more easy to restore all at
once the ancient Discipline. I promote a Paradox, but my reason is, that there
will never be a good change, but it must happen after some strangely
surprising, or if I may so say, some violent manner, such violence as forces
its way into the Kingdom of Heaven. Whilst we stand upon treating, the Popes
shall maintain themselves always with the times, either by Intriegues, or by
some Devilish inventions, the most zealous shall grow cold upon the business,
Ministers shall be corrupted either by money, or by Cardinals Caps, the Prince
shall have other affairs found him to look after, or shall be killed by the
hand of some Monk or other: All the Jesuits and the Monks shall be
everlastingly for the Papacy, whatever show they at this time make. Gerson
somewhere says that there will never be a Reformation if some zealous and
resolute Pope does not procure it by assembling a General Council. For my part,
I say, that if God does not inspire some great Prince to do it, I say that a
Reformation will come as soon by means of the Devil as the Pope. First of all,
the Court of Rome professes an abhorrence of calling General Councils.
Concilio semper aborrito da Pontefici, says Palavicini: Besides that, they have
established this fundamental Maxim, That the Pope cannot divest himself of the
least tittle of his Authority, no not for the salvation of the whole world; for
the Pope, say they, is not the Master but only the Guardian of this Authority.
Nay, they go so far as to maintain that the Church would commit Simony should
she desire to divest the Pope of this Authority, or of his profits, for the
Salvation of Souls. Primato Apostolico, di cui non era Signiore, ma custode,
says Cardinal Palavicini, that he is not the Lord or Patron, but only the
Guardian of the Apostolic Primacy. And in another place he says these words:
Non Essendo egli arbitro e padrone della sua Maggoranza constituta da Christo,
e pero non potendo farle alcun prejudicio. Palav. lib. 3. cap. 12.
He can do no wrong to his Authority constituted by Jesus Christ, because he is
not the Patron and disposer of it. And again, Far una specie di Simonia
vendendo al Papa la recuperatione dell' anime a prezzo d' entrate e di
giuridizzioni ritolte della chieza. It would be a kind of Simony to sell the
Redemption of Souls to the Pope at the price either of Estates, or
Jurisdictions taken from the Church. If a Pope would really Reform the Church,
the Court of Rome would murder him. But as Peter of Blois says, this is the
Chair of Pestilence, wherein people of the greatest merit are presently
corrupted. They no sooner ascend this proud Throne, but straightways they
forget they are men, and are by a just judgment of God struck with stupidity.
We have the example of one Aeneas Silvius, who in the Council of Basil was so
zealous for the truth, and maintained so well the Interest of the Church
against the Popes Tyranny; and nevertheless so soon as he was Elected Pope, he
maintained that the Council was inferior to the Pope, and Excommunicated those
who believed the contrary. This Angel was no sooner raised to this mighty
grandeur, but like Lucifer he became a Devil. Aristotle says in one place, that
it sometimes falls out that a man loses the habit of virtue by one only act of
enormous wickedness; that there are men qui uno actu feritatis humanitatem
exuunt, who lay aside all humanity all at once by one act of barbarousness and
inhumanity. This befalls the Popes so soon as they are elected; they were
sometime honest men before, but the Miter being fixed upon their head, they
make themselves he adored by this Surname of Most Holy, Collo pronome di
sanctissimo, says Cardinal Palavicini; they are no more men, but the voice of
God and not of men, as was said of Herod. Sixtus Quintus, who had been a Keeper
of Swine, when he became Pope, Excommunicated King Henry the Fourth (of
France.) This it was that made Marcellinus the Second say, that he believed not
that a Pope could be saved; and Pius Quintus, that when he was a Monk he had
pretty good hopes of his Salvation; that being a Cardinal he began much to fear
it; but when he was Pope he absolutely despaired of it. St. Hierom speaks of a
certain young Consul at Rome who said, Facite me Vrbis Romanae Episcopum and
ero protinus Christianus, Make me Bishop of Rome, and I will be a Christian
presently. We may say the contrary of those who for this long time have been
made Bishops of Rome, That as soon as they have been so, they have ceased being
Christians. The reason of that is not only this Tyranny which they exercise in
the Church, and over the world in contempt of Jesus Christ, and of his Gospel,
but also this Temporal greatness to which they are raised all at once, which
turns their brain. We scarce see a man of a thousand Livres a year, whose
reason is not blinded by his Estate, and he shall be puffed up with pride, even
tho he were born to it; and we see but few rich men who are not insupportable
either for their vanity, or for their vices; but few Princes who have any
Religion, and in whom power has not corrupted and defaced all the Idea's of
Virtue and of Vice. How then shall a poor fellow behave himself, who is raised
all at a clap to so high a Dignity that Emperors kiss his Slippers; and who so
soon as he is chosen, is adored like God, even upon the Altars? This it is that
brings down the curse of God upon all the Popes; and to speak of a good Pope,
is like talking of a good Devil. Observe this present Pope, who is a man the
best inclined that we have had a long time; to what excess of pride is he
arrived against our [ French] King, whom he has threatened to Excommunicate;
tho St. Augustine, whose Disciple they say he is, teaches, that no Prince nor
his people are ever to be Excommunicated. Aug. apud Gloss. Ordin.
Multitudo non est Excommunicanda, nec Princeps populi, says he, Vbi parabola
zizaniorum evolvitur.

But how, say they, will you be a Catholic without a Pope? Let there be one in
Gods name, but let him be of the order of Simon P^ter, and not of Simon Magus,
a Pope who makes no Traffic of the Graces of the Holy Ghost, and of Holy
things, and who is not a Prince of this world; let him be a Pope who raises
not himself above other Popes, that is to say, other Bishops, to give them
Laws; let him be subject to his Prince; let him be subject as well to National
as General Councils, and not turn all Religion to his particular profit; but to
wish always to have such Popes as for these seven or eight hundred years have
wasted the Church, a man must have no true Idea of Christianity; nay, he must
have even lost the Idea of good and evil.

I knew a Prince in Germany, who was one of the most Catholic Princes in the
world, who had abjured Heresy, and was really converted, having not done it
for any carnal advantage, like many base people, who we see infect instead of
edifying the Church. This most Catholic Prince abhorred the Papacy, and could
not endure the Books of our Writers, when there was any thing in them
favorable to the Popes Authority. Those who were a little acquainted with the
late Duke of Hanouer, know whether I speak truth or no. We know that Charles
the Sixth, by the advice of the Divines of the Faculty at Paris, made no
difficulty of withdrawing himself and all his Subjects from the Communion of
the Pope, which lasted during the Pontificat of John the 23 d. of Benedict the
13 th. and Gregory the 12 th. and even to give encouragement to all other
Princes to do as he had done; and he had much less cause to do it than we have
at this time. You see his reasons in the Letters of the University of Paris in
Theodore a Nyem, which were, that they would not consent that the disorders of
the Church should be regulated by a free Council, and that they would not
submit themselves to the Decisions of the Church. Are not we now again just in
the same condition since the Councils of Constance and of Basil? For those
which have been Assembled since, deserve not the name of Councils, because
there was no liberty in them, and every thing was there done by the
Inspiration, not of God, but the Popes. France did but half free it self from
this yoke, for quickly after we suffered our selves to be drawn in, and have
been like to have been undone many a time since by it,

Nor do I make any great account of the Conduct of the Venetians, which is so
highly commended, who after having known the nature of the Papacy, and the
Genius of this power, have but half freed themselves from this slavery, nay
less than half. They have behaved themselves in this according to their
ordinary custom, following moderate Councils, where excess was not to be
feared, and where it could not be committed: Consilia media and quod inter
ancipitia deterrimum est, nec ausi sunt satis, nec providerunt. For they have
still this Viper in their bosom, which they stupifie as much as they can; but
he may some time or other revive and devour them. They have every day a
thousand difficulties with these cunning Romans, who will be always spying out
occasions to destroy them, and to reduce them absolutely under their yoke. They
should renounce perfectly and for ^ver all dependence upon this See, and thus
shall they be better able to regulate their Clergy, which is as licentious as
that of Rome, which they dare not reform, because it would be to be feared that
to maintain themselves in this Roman Libertinism they should give assistance to
the Pope to oppress the Republic, that they might always enjoy the full
liberty of the children of the Sea of Rome: Vulgo dissoluta gratior est quam
Temperata vita and vivere ut quisque velit permisit, quoniam sic magna erit
tali Reipublicoe faventium Magnitudo. Arist. lib. 6. cap. 4.
Et hoc Humanitas vocabatur ac ne pars servitutis esset, etc.

Will any man still say, Ought we not to be of the Roman Church? People are not
contented with being in the Catholic and Apostolic Church, if they are not in
the Roman; they seem desirous of having a share in the Abominations of this
City, and of this Court; but the Romans are not at all desirous to be of the
Gallican Church. I would fain know for what reason we should be rather of the
Roman Church than the Romans of the Gallican Church. Rome is not as heretofore,
it was the Seat of the Empire, and tho it were, we hold no longer of the
Empire, and it is a contradiction for a man to be in the Catholic Church, in
the Gallican, and in the Roman Churches both together; for the first is the
General, and the other two are particulars. You may always have Communion with
all the Romans who live in the fear of God, with the Pope of Rome himself if he
be a Christian; but not to depend upon him, nor upon Rome. You shall be as the
Christians of the Primitive Church were for more than six hundred years. You
shall pay no more Annates, you shall buy no more Bulls, nor Dispensations. You
shall be much more Catholic than before, for then you may hold Communion with
the Greeks and Protestants, by drawing them home to the Faith of the Church,
whereas the Sea of Rome is at this time a wall of Separation between them and
us.

CHAP. III.
That the pretended Authority of the Papacy has never done any good to the
Church. A Confutation of whatever is said to the advantage of this Power to
prove it necessary to the world, by showing at the same time that it has been
the cause of all the Evils of the Church.

THEY maintain that the Papacy has heretofore done, and still does a great
deal of good to the Church, and to the world; this I can confute all at once,
by a thing which the world knows, which is, that we have in no place so many
true Christians as in those Catholic Countries where this power is least
known, as in France, Flanders, and Germany. But let us see particularly what
good the Papacy does. It is a common saying that there is nothing so bad but
that you may make some use of it, either in its nature, or in conjunction with
other things. Let us then examine the usefulness of the Papacy, omitting
nothing that can be said to its advantage: It is, says Cardinal Perron, The
Center and the root of Chri^tian Unity. These are fine words, I confess, but we
shall find but very little sense in them if we a little consider them; for I
ask him, In what this Unity does consist, and how the Pope is the center and
the root of it? The Popes make no Unity, there is no Unity among them. The
Popes are wicked men.
If this Unity be in the pure service of God, methinks that God should be the
center of it, and not the Pope, and that it is also God who is the root of it;
that is, the influencing principle over the will and strength of men to serve
him and to do well. If this Unity be for doing what is evil, it is then but a
conspiracy; and I do confess that in regard of wicked Clergymen, who are the
members of the Pope, he is the source of all their Impiety, Ambition, and
Dissoluteness, and he is the center of the Unity of these people, who belong
all to him; and as for themselves, he is the center of their worship, and would
be so to all other men. Palavici. in his History of the Council of Trent.
Palavicini says that the union and submission of all Catholics to the Pope,
makes a band, a life perfectly Politic, Vna, conjunctione di vita perf^tta
mente Politica. He says, not a Christian, but a Politic life, and according to
him it is the same thing. Palav. lib. 3. cap. 20.
And in another place he says, the Church is the most happy Body Politic in
the world: Corpo Politico il piu felice che sia in terra. This Unity, as I said
before, consists only in their obedience to the Pope, Ibidem.
whom they all honor for their profit; looking upon him as the source of
Riches, of Honors, and of all the pleasures which they have according to the
flesh, Secondo la carne. This Unity is in the conformity of judgment, which
they all make of the riches of the Churches Patrimony, which is, that they are
good. It is certain, that it is not in their opinions; for what Clergyman is
there who cares for the Popes judgment, when it is contrary to his own? What
Unity is there between the Jesuits and the Pope now reigning? What Unity is
there among many Sects of the Monks who make war upon one another, and mortally
hate each other? What Unity is there of Morals among one or other, the Jesuits
and the good Catholics whom they treat as Heretics, Apostates, Antichrists,
and Devils? What Unity was there between the Jansenists and Pope Alexander the
Seventh? We see that for twenty years last past the Popes are between these two
Sects as between the Anvil and the Hammer, not knowing how to govern
themselves, because on one side the Jesuits dispose of all the powers of
Europe; and on the other, their Morals destroy Christianity and Humanity it
self; in this they are opposed by the Jansenists, who are followed by all sorts
of people that are not lost in Ignorance or Irreligion. How can they ever agree
in their opinions? because the decisions of one Pope do often times overthrow
those of another, and sometimes they are themselves Heretics, as some people
do accuse the present Pope of being a Jansenist, which is according to them
worse than Heretic? What Unity of Religion is there between the Spanish, the
Italian, and French Nations? whereof the two first have scarce any knowl^dg of
God, but are almost all Idolaters; and the last is very different from them.
Lastly, to judge of this Unity, we need only to read the Books of the several
Doctors, and we shall find them of very different opinions even in regard of
the Pope himself. The Divines of Italy make him a God on Earth; those of France
and Germany believe nothing on it. The Universities of Rome and Bolonia
determine that he is above the Councils; those of France and of Louvain prove
very well the contrary. Gerson.
The Italian Councils of Florence, the Lateran, and of Trent, will have him
above a General Council; those of Constance and of Basil maintain that it is a
detestable Heresy to believe so. If there be a Unity, how comes it to pass
that it is said, and that with reason too, that the Pope has a different soul
in every State where he governs? If there were a Unity, there would be but one
Soul; they must have greater abilities than either St. Peter or St. Paul, who
could not unite men's minds in the Churches of Corinth, of Philippi, and of
Galatia, where we learn by the Gospel that many Errors were taught in these
Apostles times. The Cardinal Palavicini says also, Lib. 8. c. 17.
that Il Principiato Apostolico maintienne in unita, in regola and in decoro
tutta la Chieza, the Apostolic Primacy maintains in Unity, in Order, and in
Beauty, the whole Church. To know the truth of what this Cardinal says, we need
only to consider what edification the Popes have given to the Church since
Boniface the Third, Patriarch of the Popes, and first Head of the Church.
Complaint^ against the Pope.
Was not the action whereby he got to be Universal Bishop, a good example to
the Church? and that of Pope Zachary in regard of Chilperic? Is there any thing
in the world that favors perfidiousness and injustice more than these
Examples? See the Histories of Platina, of Genebrard, of Sigebert, and many
others; and you shall find that there are no crimes, excesses, nor abominations
which the Popes have not committed to bring about their Affairs for many Ages.
Is it not a matter of great consolation for honest men to see in this Seat,
Children, Magicians, Atheists, Adulterers, and Sodomites, as History affirms,
and not ten or twelve only in all, but fifty one after another? Baronius
himself does not deny it, if the Church had had such Heads as these, she would
have been long since abolished upon Earth. But to make short work on it, Was it
not they who ruined the Church and Religion among the Greeks, by giving them
over as a prey to the Turks, because they would not submit to the Popish yoke,
but demanded the observation of the Holy Canons? Were not they the cause of the
loss of Hungary by their perfidiousness, having advised the King of Hungary to
violate the Treaty made with the Turks? for which the Hungarians were by a just
judgment of God cut all to pieces in the Battle of Varnes, as a Poet of those
times relates, who brings in the King of Hungary speaking thus: Me, nisi
Pontifices jussissent rumpere foedus,
Non ferret Scythicum Pannonis ora jugum.
Discite Mortales non temerare Fidem.


Can it be denied but that it was they who by their detestable Simony, and by
their pride, have destroyed Religion in all those Countries which are called
Protestants? See but the Complaints which all great men for many Ages have made
against this See, and those who have been in possession of it, and you may judge
of the solidity of what Cardinal Palavicini says, that they maintain the
Church in Unity, in Order, and in Honor. I will relate some Examples of it.
John of Salisbury Bishop of Chartres, speaks thus, Joannes Sarisbur* in
Polycratico.
The Scribes and Pharisees are sat in the Church of Rome, imposing weighty
burdens upon the people. The Sovereign Pontife is an insupportable grievance
to all honest men. His Legates commit so many Enormities, that it looks as tho
the Devil were let loose; whosoever does not acquiesce in their Doctrine, is by
them treated as a Heretic. And the Council of Rheimes Assembled under Hugh
Capet, and Robert his Son, cries out thus, Shall it be said that an infinite
number of Bishops and Priests who are Illustrious for their merit, and for
their knowledge, shall submit themselves to such Monsters? What means this,
most, Reverend Fathers, What think you that this man is, whom we see sitting
upon a lofty Throne, shining all with Gold, and clothed with Purple? We have
spoken of the Letter of the Emperor Barbarossa to the Princes of the Empire,
Aventinus in Oratione Archymistae ad Proceres Imperii.
which Aventine makes mention of; the same Author also produces the Speech of
an Archbishop who presided in the States of the Empire held at Ratisbon; there
are these words: The Pope teaches us one thing, which is this, That there is
this difference between Christian Princes and those who are not such, that the
first bear rule over their Subjects, and on the contrary the Subjects (viz. the
Popes) ought to rule over their Princes. Our Lord himself took upon him the
form of a Servant to serve his Disciples, and to kiss their feet; but these
Ministers of Babylon will reign themselves alone, and cannot suffer an equal;
they will never be at r^st till they have laid all at their feet, till they sit
in the Temple of God, and even raise themselves above God. He despises the
H^ly Assemblies and C^uncils of his Brethren, and of his Masters. He is afraid
of being compel^ed to give an account of what he has committed against the
Laws. He speak^ of great things as tho he were God. His mind runs upon new
d^signs of establishing an Empire for himself. He changes the Laws of God, and
makes others of his own head. He defiles all things, he robb^th, he deceives
and murders. Honor. Augustodun. in Dial^^o de P^aede^^ and Libero A^bi^^io.
Honorius Bishop of Autun speaks of him after the same manner: Turn, says he,
toward these Citizens of Babylon, and behold what they are, etc They contrive
at all times to do evil, etc. and instruct others to do the same; They sell
Holy things, and buy off Crimes, that they may not go alone into Hell; They
defile the Priesthood by their Impurity: they seduce the People by their
Hypocrisy; they reject all the Scriptures whereby we obtain Salvation.
Consider also the Monks; they deceive men by their Habits, despising God, and
provoking his Wrath by their Hypocrisy. Behold also the Convents of Nuns; they
learn Immodesty from their Childhood, etc.

Petrus Blesensis in Epist. ad quendam Officialem.
And Peter of Blois, Take away, Lord, the Idol from thine House, and bruise the
H^rns of this man of sin; They pervert every thing at Rome, and give all sorts
of liberty to the Monks, who give themselves over to all the Excesses of
Sensuality, for which they have Absolution for a yearly Pension which they pay.
Thus does the Prince of Sodom gov^rn himself as well as his Disciples, who are
sat in the Seat of Pestilence, etc. Bernard de Cons. ad Eugen. l. 3. c. 5.
And St. Bernard, who cries out, speaking of Popish Tyranny, O mis^rable
Spouse, says he, who art committed to such k^epers! They are not thine
Husband's Friends, but Rivals: We see all H^nours heaped up upon them, and they
are laden with the Riches of the Lord, and yet they do him no H^nour. From
hence come all these Ornaments of the Whore, these Actors H^bits, this Royal
Equipage, etc. The Plague of the Church is within its Bowels, and incurable.
Bernard super Psalm 9. v. 6. Ser. 6,
A shameful Traffic has been also made of Ecclesiastical Offices and
Dignities; nor does any body value them but for their profit. It is not the
Salvation of Souls that they look after, but how to enrich themselves: It Is for
that they are shaved, frequent the Churches, and say Masses. And in another
place; It looks, Lord Jesus, as tho all the Christians had conspired against
thee; and they themselves are the first to persecute thee, that seem to have
the Primacy in the Church. And the like in many other places.

B^rnard Epist. 91.
He observes in his 91 st Epistle, that the Popes did already spoil every thing
that was done in the Councils, which made him say, That he passionately wished
to see a Council where Traditions were not defended with so much Obstinacy, nor
obs^rved with Superstition; because the Popes brought in great Abuses under the
Pretext of Tradition. Ad illud Concilium toto d^sid^rio feror, in quo
Traditiones non obstinatius defensentur aut superstiti^sius obs^rventur.
Recedant a m^ cui dicunt, nolumus esse meliores quam Patres nostri. These were
not Ecumenical Councils, but such as Leo the Tenth assembled, from which the
Apellatio Universitat. Patisiens. contra Leonem.
Sorbon appealed, by reason of the Abuses which were there established, and
wrote to him, That his Council was not assembled in the Spirit of God, in the
Name of the Lord. See what our Probus says, who was Bishop of Toul, under
Honorius the Fourth: He cries out, Alas! how long shall these Vultures of
Romulus abuse our Patience, or rather, Dullness? Petrarque in lib. Epist. sine
Titulo.
And the Great Petrarque, Who, I pray, is there that ought not to detest this
Babylon, which is the miserable Habitation of all sorts of Vice and Wickedness,
etc? I know it by Experience, that in it there is no Piety, nor Charity, nor
Faith, nor Fear of God; nothing Holy, nothing Just, etc.

Isid. Pel. lib. 1. Epist. 323.
It is now above a thousand years since, that Isidore Pelusiota commended a
Priest for having refused to be made a Bishop, by reason of the great
difference between the Bishops of his own time, and those of former Ages;
because, says he, the Dignity of sweetness of Humor, and of Civility, was
changed into Tyranny; For in former times they suffered Death for the Salvation
of all; now they cause the Death of their Flocks, not by cutting their Throats
(which would be a less heinous Crime), but by giving Scandal to the destruction
of Souls; They then gave their Goods to the Poor, but now they turn to their
own profit the very Portion of the Poor: They then mortified their Bodies by
fasting, now they soften them by Luxury; Then they honored Virtue, now they
persecute the Lovers of Piety: They then spoke greatly in commendation of
Chastity, but now -- I will not say any thing of the odious, etc. He here holds
his peace, and gives you the liberty to think what he cannot with modesty
express.

Alv. Pelag. de Planctu Ecclesiae lib. 2. cap. 15.
Alvarez Pelagius, a Portugal Bishop, after having made an honorable mention
of the first Bishops of Rome, complains thus of their Successors: It is now a
long time since their Successors have raised themselves in Authority, but they
are very different in H^liness, getting themselves in to be Bishops of Rome (
would to God that this intrusion were made without a Devilish Agreement
beforehand), enriching and raising their Neighbors, living themselves
deliciously, conferring Dignities upon their Friends, building of Towers and
Palaces in Babylon ( that is to say, Rome, according to St. Hierom), kindling
of Wars, keeping up of Parties in Italy, tho there be but one Church,
embezelling the Goods of the Church, putting unworthy Men into Offices,
vaunting themselves in their Chariots, Elephants, Horses, Costly Apparel, and
their great Train of Guards and Worldly Power; invading many times the Power of
Temporal Princes, taking no care for the Salvation of Souls, and what not?
wholly minding the desires of the Flesh.

That the Papacy is an Obstacle unto Piety.
Besides these Subjects of Complaint, which are of great importance, there is
yet another, which cries more loud to God for Vengeance, which is, That the
Papacy is an Obstacle unto the Piety of those Christians who are subject to its
Yoke. We are not of our own Nature virtuous; but on the contrary, we are born
in sin, and without the particular Grace of God there is in us always a strong
Disposition to do evil. If then men are not furnished with means to resist
these ill Inclinations, it is evident, that they will let themselves be carried
away by them: But if instead of furnishing them with these means, they have
greater occasion given them to do evil, there is no doubt but we shall be so
far from inspiring them with the love of Virtue, that we shall engage them in
sin. Now the Papacy, according to the state wherein it now is, and for many
Ages has been, has such ill qualities, that it takes away from Christians the
Occasions of doing good, and offers them others of doing evil. It is one of
the Properties of our Mind to be led very much by Example, especially by those
who make a figure in the World, and have Authority over others. Thus the
behavior of the Monks, and of the Priests, savouring scarce of any thing but
Covetousness and Ambition, the Natural Dispositions which we have to these
Vices are by this means strengthened. I acknowledge, that Preachers do instruct
the people, That to make themselves acceptable unto God, and to have a share in
the Kingdom of Heaven, they must refrain from these evil Passions; and they
build this Obligation upon the Precepts of the Gospel: but men acting
exceedingly more by the hope and fear of present good or evil, than of that
which is future, the efficacy of all the loveliness of a God, who gave this
Precept, of the hope of Paradise, and fear of Hell, becomes extremely weakened
in them, by the ill Example of those who by their Habit and Condition, seem,
and ought to make profession of a Life more pure and disengaged from the
Interests of this World. For although they embrace not formally this Opinion, That
there is neither God, nor Heaven, nor Hell; and that on the contrary, they hold
these Doctrines to be very true; yet nevertheless this ill Example makes them
act as if they did wholly reject them; this damnable Example having so mortal a
poison in it, that it makes them believe, that their Teachers, being able men,
would themselves live conformable to these Instructions, if they thought them
Divine; and they themselves leading not this life, it is probable that they do
not believe what they preach and teach. The Scripture also in many places
highly enveigheth against Pastors of an ill Life, the disorder of their manners
being a stumbling block to those whom they have the care of. But tho the
Irregularities of Pastors did not make so ill an impression upon the minds of
the people, whilst persons who desire to be saved, and are humbled when they
perceive within themselves a repugnancy to follow those ways which the Gospel
has marked out, hear speak of able men, and of almost whole Orders, whom, for
instance, the Gospel enjoins to be charitable, know that no more is employed
that way than what remains to him who spares no cost to appear Great, and to
keep up his Port, according to the Custom of the World, and other such like
Interpretations of all the Precepts of Jesus Christ, do not they find
themselves inclined to embrace these Explications, thereby satisfying their
desires, and thinking to quiet their Consciences? Those who favor the Papacy
shall tell you, That the Pope is so far from ordering such pernicious Maxims to
be taught, that he does abhor them, and wish with all his heart, that they
would teach and promote contrary ones.

Besides, that many Popes have themselves entertained ill Opinions, I will
grant it for the present; but the Pope, who pretends to be the only Head of
the Church, and that it belongs to him alone to judge absolutely of
E^clesiastical things and persons, not reproving them; nay, oftentimes shutting
the mouths of those who would oppose them, who sow, and spread abroad such
dangerous Maxims, does uphold these pernicious Opin^ons; which we have the
greater reason to believe, because he withdraws the Monks, and many of the
Clergy, from the Jurisdiction of the Bishops. If it be said, That he cannot
silence them, by reason of their too great Authority; it is then manifest, that
the Papacy, such as it is, does suffer the ill Example, and these pernicious
Opinions, and is not able to hinder them, unless it be in matters of very small
importance. And thus far it is an Obstacle unto Piety, since no body can apply
a Remedy, whilst the Pope shall be acknowledged the Head and Master of the
Church.

The Second Argument, which shows, That the Papacy is an Obstacle unto true
Virtue, is, that it makes use of such practices as promote a false, and only
seeming, instead of true Piety. Some Catholics do teach, That Contrition is
necessary to make Confession valid. But this Doctrine is not much followed;
That which has the Vogue, and reigns most in the World, is, that Attrition is
sufficient, which is only a simple Sorrow for having sinned, and that too
occasioned but by the fear of Hell. The people who are instructed in this
Opinion, believe readily, that it is an easy matter to be justified before
God; and so think, that after having sinned a great while, they shall at their
Death receive Absolution of their sins, by saying a Peccavi: For what man is
there who is not afraid of being Damned? The great multitude of Plenary
Indulgences, and others, which are as common as Water, does also marvellously
contribute to the casting men into Impenitence, and to make them at the same
time believe, that their Consciences are in safety, under pretense of observing
those Exercises which pass for Pious, tho they are not so.

I could produce many other Reasons, to demonstrate the Truth of what I say;
but let these suffice.

The Pope, pretending to be the only Sovereign Judge of Religion, not silencing
these false and pernicious Teachers; nay, not being able to do it, if he would;
Is not then the Papacy an Obstacle unto true Piety, since it introduces a false
one in its place? There are good people among the Catholics, I confess; but
the Papacy contributes nothing to that. On the contrary, those who believe, and
live well, it is God, and not the Pope, who is the Author of their Piety, as
well as of their Profession, which is rather destroyed than maintained by the
usual Pride and Impiety of the Popes; from whence it comes, that no man now a
days believes but what he will; so that the whole World is full of Deists,
Socinians, Libertines, and impious persons.

Of the Popes maintaining the Exterior Unity.
But they say, That at least, the Papacy does maintain the External Unity, and
that is a great Advantage. Yet I deny that; For what does it contribute to this
outward Unity? But besides that, it serves only to cheat the World, whilst
there is no inward Unity. If they mean the Unity in Ceremonies, First of all,
this would be no great matter; for Ceremonies make not the Essence of Religion,
but are only the outside of it; and besides, they are very different,
according to the several Countries; and the Popes are not the Authors of them:
If they were, it were enough to condemn them. Besides all this, there are fewer
Sects and Factions, less Divisions, and by consequence, more Unity among the
Greeks, who have many Patriarchs, than among us. I acknowledge indeed, that it
is rather Ignorance that unites them, than Reason or Piety.

Expense for the Conversion of the Greeks.
B^t they tell us, that the Popes spare nothing for the Conversion of the
Greeks and Protestants; they bestow on them both Money and Benefices. To that
may be added, That they have not spared even the Blood of Heretics for their
Conversion, as History informs us. But if it be their Conversion which they do
heartily desire, why do not they renounce the Authority which they have usurped
in the Church and in the World? Why do not they re-establish things in a
Christian manner, in the same State they were in, in the days of the Apostles,
and of the Primitive Church? Why do not they condemn the Blasphemies which are
spoken in favor of their Government, and destroy the Maxims by which they have
managed themselves so long? They answer, That then their lives would be in
danger, and that the Court of Rome would destroy them, as they did Adrian the
Sixth, who thought to have reformed the Church; of whom Palav. l. 2. cap. 3.
and 7.
Cardinal Palavicini gives this Account, That he was Ottimo Ecclesiastico,
Pontefice Mediocre, a Good Priest, but an Indifferent Pope.

But if the Popes cannot find a Remedy for the Disorders which are so
prevalent, because, as they say, their Authority is not sufficient, what are
they then good for, and why shall we any longer suffer this Tyranny in the
Church? If they can find a Remedy, and will not, they are then not only
unprofitable, but detestable Creatures. It is certainly one or other, or both
together; for we see, that every thing is overturned in the Church. And what?
If they are the Vicars of Jesus Christ, and Successors of St. Peter, ought they
not to think themselves happy, to die for the Glory of God, and Good of the
Church? Is it better to be the Object of Men's Worship, to provoke the Jealousy
of God, and to do so much mischief in the Church? Where is the Zeal of Moses,
or of St. Paul, who would have died for their Brethren, and have been even
accursed; and of the first Bishops of Rome, who suffered Martyrdom so
Courageously? They love rather to give them Money, and Benefices, because that
thus they put out all to great Usury; they sow that they may reap; they give
what is none of their own, or else what signifies nothing to them. If it be
true, that they are careful of the Salvation of these People, why are they not
so of their own? Why do they not labor for the Salvation of Catholics? That
would cost them no Money: There needs nothing but to allow the Reading of the
Holy Scripture every where, and recommend it, as God has recommended it to us;
to suffer Divine Service to be read in a Language which every body understands;
For it cannot be denied, but that the want of these things does produce among
us great Ignorance, with which Piety is never to be found: But to give Money to
convert People, it is the mark of a very profane Spirit, and a very dishonest
method, and an Example for Mahometans and Heretics to make use of, even
toward Christians. And to give Benefices, it is yet worse; for by this the
Clergy is filled up more and more with Hypocrites, and People of no Religion,
who spend the Goods of the Poor upon Debauchery and Luxury, and most commonly
are of no use at all to the Church.

They say, That they make Religion to be respected: But how? Is it by their own
Piety, or Sanctity, or that of their Court, or by their Humility? No truly,
these Virtues are wholly there Of the Popes making Religion to be respected,
and accommodating the differences of Princes.
unknown, and the contrary Vices have ruled the Roast long since; but their fine
Court, and the Greatness and Magnificence of the Cardinals, are the things we
hear of. But are these the things that ought to make men love Religion? Is it
Gold and Silver, costly Furniture, Riches, Carnal Pleasures, which the Prelates
glut themselves withal? Is it their Cavalcades to Montecavallo, their Horse and
Foot-Guards, their Armies and their Fleets, which make Religion to be
respected? If it be so, both Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, deserved to be
despised, in comparison of their Vicars; and the Christian Religion also was
very contemptible in their days. Is it to Excommunicate all the World when they
please, without Authority, without Cause, and against the Nature of the Gospel,
which is Charity it self? But wise men are so far from respecting them for
this, that they look upon them as Fools. Is it to hold a Chapel, or
Consistory, where they treat only of profane things, and of promoting of
Cardinals? What does this signify, or what Relation has it to the Glory of
God, or the Salvation of Men? And what is there in all this, which the
Patriarch of Venice, or the Archbishop of Lions, might not do as well as the
Pope, if he had a mind to it? We must not dissemble. All the Respect which men
have for the Papacy, at least, they who hope for no advantage by it, comes only
from the Respect, or from the Fear which they see Princes have of it. And this
respect of Princes, if it be voluntary, proceeds from great Ignorance of
Religion, in which they have been brought up for that purpose, or from the ill
Council of some Ambitious Clergyman, who compasses his Designs at the Prince's
Expense. If this Respect be forced, as ordinarily it is, it is then out of the
fear which men have of the Popes Power; whereby he rules the vast Numbers of
the Ecclesiastics, and especially the Monks, who govern the meaner People;
who, as Palavicini says, are the disposers of the Religion of Countries.

It is said, That they have the Power of making the Laws of God to be observed.
If so, they ought themselves to give an Example; they ought to apply to
themselves what our Savior said to St. Peter, not to draw his Sword. It is a
thing both ridiculous and horrible, that these People should have Armies, and
make War. They do it in Germany, after the Bishop of Rome his Example; But
where is it that they make the Laws of God to be observed? Is there any place
where they are violated more than where they have most Authority? Is Rome at
this day better than Sodom? Do not they on the contrary, favor, as much as in
them lies, the very Crime, by the Example of their Court, by their Expenses, by
their pretending to exempt all Clergymen from the Jurisdiction of the Civil
Magistrate; that so they may commit all sorts of Crimes, and go unpunished? But
they say furthermore, That they make Kings stand in Awe, and hinder them from
professing, Heresy. On the contrary, it is they who made them become
Heretics, as in England, Sweden, and Denmark, and who by their Tyranny, hinder
them from returning into the bosom of the Church.

It is also pretended, That they are very useful for the composing of
Differences between Princes, being looked upon as common Fathers to them all.
On the contrary, their Artifices and Ambition, are so well known, that th^re is
no Prince whom they are more distrustful of. They never carried on their own
Interest better, than during the Wars of Italy, Germany, France and Spain,
which either they always began, or kept on foot. They are also constant Enemies
to Great Princes. What is alleged might take place, if the Popes were not
th^mselves become Temporal Princes, at the Expense of the Empero^^, and other
Princes, whom they have robbed. And it is k^own, that they have Pretensions
over all Christian Kingdoms; That there is no Court more refined in Policy than
theirs, or that makes less Conscience of taking to themselves what belongs to
another. In truth, they think it not taken wrongfully, because they pretend
that it is their Right; that the Pope is Sennor del Mondo; and they call him,
Nostor Sennor^, Our Lord, as well as Jesus Christ.

There is no State in Europe which they have not endeavored many times to
destroy, and which they have not greatly endamaged. M. Paris in Hist. Angliae.
Matthew Paris relates to us that King John of England, because he would not
receive an Archbishop of Canterbury whom Po^e Inn^cent the Third had Elected
against the Canons, he was first Excommucated by Innocent, who accordingly gave
away his Kingdom to Philip the August King of France; and that poor King John
was compelled to implore the Popes mercy, who received him very bountifully, on
condition that from thenceforth his Kingdom should depend upon the Holy See,
should be Tributary to it, and pay 20000 Marks of Gold every year. And that
this King having recovered his courage, resolved to Abjure Christianity as an
evil Religion, thereby designing to cast off the Popish yoke. Because he made
himself the Popes Vassal, he was called the Apostolic King. I wonder why the
Kings of France and Spain will not add to the Titles of Most Christian and Most
Catholic that of Apostolic Kings at the same price as this King John of
England did. It Is not his Holiness's fault, they may have it when they please.

They answer, The Popes have on at this time a disguise, waiting for an
advantage. We ought to be always (...).
that it is true that they have heretofore caused disorders, but that it will
never fall out so again, that it was some hot headed men; that amongst the
Apostles themselves there was found a Judas. But I maintain that all these
disasters proceeded not only from the pettish humor of any one Pope, but were
the natural effects of the Principles of the Papacy. And tho we do not see it
visibly break forth every day by some bloody example, yet we ought not to
believe that the habit or the will is ever the less, but that there is some
external extraordinary reason which suspends the Action, and which does
sometimes make them act directly contrary to their own inclination. Do not we
see that the Inquisition it self at Rome, that Impious Tribunal which has the
power of authorizing the greatest crimes, and of Canonizing for the Popes
Interest, even Parricides, and the Assassins of our Kings; as amongst others by
a Decree of the ninth of November 1609, it did condemn the Decree of the
Parliament of Paris given out against John Chatel, who had attempted to Murder
Henry the Fourth. This Tribunal, I say, has not long since condemned the
Jesuits Morals, tho they were perfectly conformable to the Principles of the
Inquisition; and we see that the Jesuits of France are at this time in the
Kings Interest against the Pope, which is absolutely contrary to their Maxims,
and to all their former conduct; which shows, that it is not true, that because
an ill person does a good action he is no more to be feared: Tho a man be
extremely wicked, it does not follow from thence that every thing he does shall
be so. We must not think that the habit is lost, because we do not always see
its acts: Philosophers tell us that it is often so. It is a sort of a Truce and
not a Peace. Gellius.
Non pax sed induciae, bellum enim manet, pugna cessa^. A Cobbler, Horace.
says Horace, is still a Cobbler, tho his Stall be shut. [Et Alfenus vafer omni
abjecto instrumento Artis, clausaque taberna, suitor erat. Thus the Pope remains
still Pope, tho he sometimes do a good Action. Valeri ^ Max.
Valerius Maximus says in a certain place that there are people, Quorum animus
peregrinatur in nequitia, non habitat, whose minds light upon iniquity, but
like a Traveller in an Inn they fix not; so may it be said of the Popes,
Quorundam paparum animus peregrinatur in bonitate, non habitat; that they
sometimes touch upon a good action, but cannot hold to it. The Viper is a very
dangerous creature, tho she does not always bite, when it lies in her power.
But it is never good to trust her. Nemo juxtae viperam securos somnos capit,
quae si non percutit certe sollicitat. St. Hier.
Says St. Hierom somewhere. The Papacy is just the same, it is the Chair of
Pestilence, Cathedra Pestilentiae, where the best men are corrupted. It is what
he very well understood, who said that the greatest harm he could wish a man
was, that he were Pope. Petreius Chartr.
And the Holy Carthusian Father that praises God that none of his Order had
ever yet been Pope. How can any man maintain that Princes need not stand in
fear of the Pope, when three Popes of this present age have condemned the
opinion, that the Pope cannot depose Kings, as wicked and contrary to the
Faith? Accipe nunc Danaum insidias and crimine ab uno disce omnes. Attempts of
the Popes of this present Age upon Kings.
These were Paul the Fifth, Innocent the Tenth, and Alexander the Seventh, of
whom it may be said, that they were Ottimi Pontefici, Ecclesiastici mediocri,
that they were true Popes, but very indifferent Clergymen, who will be both
Judge and party in their own cause, and pretend that their evidence must be
taken, even when it tends to their own profit, and to the spoiling of those who
believe them. I could yet produce a later example, which is that of the present
Pope, who with unsufferable rashness lately threatened to Excommunicate the
Greatest King upon Earth, because he would Reign alone in his own State, and
take away from some people who ought to employ themselves only in serving God,
the disposal of some Benefices which belong properly to the Sovereign of a
State, who we see makes a more judicious choice of men fit to serve in these
Employs, because he does not sell them, nor give them to his Relations, as they
did, who had but very little regard to the merit of those upon whom they
conferred these things. Besides, of right, the Popes have nothing to do in the
Dominions of other Princes; and there have been sufficient proofs given by this
Great Prince of his zeal for Justice, and for Religion. But these men love to
make people feel their yoke, and it may be well said of them, what Mithridates
said of the ancient Romans, that it was not their love to Justice that made
them fight against Princes, but the desire of their Authority, and of their
Greatness, Tit. Live.
Non delicta Regum illos, sed vires ac Majestatem insequi. It is well known how
ill they have treated Spain not long since, upon the account of the President
of Castile, who had reason in what he did, and how at this time they handle the
Venetians. Don't we know how Alexander the Seventh, and his Nephews, behaved
themselves at Rome toward our King, in the person of his Ambassador the Duke
of Crequi? We may remember how that under Henry the Fourth they wanted but very
little to have utterly ruined France, and to have made the French all subject
to the Spaniards; and if the Parliament at Paris had not been better Christians
than the Pope, what would have become of the Posterity of Henry the Fourth? For
Sixtus Quintus, whose first Employ was to be a Keeper of Swine, having gotten
to be Pope, grew so insolent as to Excommunicate King Henry the Fourth, and to
declare him incapable to succeed to the Crown; but the Parliament nulled his
Holiness his Bull, which broke the design for that time. Mezeray in the Life of
King Henry the Third, page 367.
Mezeray mentions the Bull, which deserves reading. There are these words, That
the Authority given to Saint Peter, and to his Suce^ssors, by the infinite
power of the Eternal God is greatly above all powers of Earthly Kings, that it
belongs to them to make Laws be observed, and to chastise those who oppose
them, to overturn their Seats, and to tumble them down to the ground as the
Ministers of Satan. He adds afterward, That by the Indispenceable Duty of his
Office, he is constrained to draw the Sword of Vengeance against Henry the late
King of Navarre, and against Henry Prince of Conde, the spurious and detestable
offspring of the Illustrious House of Bourbon. Wherefore being in this l^fty
See, and in the full power which the King of Kings, and the Lord of Monarchs
has given him, he does declare them Heretics, etc.

Thus also did Pope Julius the Second Out the Grandfather of King Henry the
Fourth of his Kingdom of Navarre, and made it fall to the Spaniards. O
miserable and detestable Creatures, thus to abuse the simplicity and credulity
of men, as to dare by a Diabolical pride to attribute to themselves an
Authority which belongs only to God, and which Jesus Christ himself never
exercised whilst he was upon Earth.

It is said in the Gospel, that Michael the Archangel disputing with the Devil,
would not bring any railing accus^tion against him, but was content to say to
him only, The Lord rebuke thee; because he looked upon God as him to whom
judgment and vengeance belonged. And yet we see that the Sons of Adam are bold
and desperate enough, not only to condemn, but to destroy Dignities, which they
ought to Reverence, and to ruin them, together with whole States, as their
fancy leads them; and that men give themselves over to these Impieties, which
is unconceivable; There must be in it an Enchantment not to be comprehended. By
this you may see what judgment we ought to make of the Harangue which Cardinal
Perron made in behalf of the French Clergy, in the Assembly of the States at
Paris, Anno 1616, he maintained that the Pope could Excommunicate and D^pose
Kings, and make them be Assassinated, and that not to believe it, was as much
as to say, that the Popes who had long enjoyed these Rights were Antichrist.
And that for his part, and for his Brethren, they would voluntarily suffer
Martyrdom in defense of this Holy Doctrine. He desired to have his name
inserted in the Martyrology of Garnet, and of Ra^illiac, and to go to the same
Paradise. Ite truces animae and letho Tartara vestro pol^uite, and totas erel^i
consumite poenas. This stroke of Cardinal Perron, confirms absolutely what
Sancy says of him, that he did not believe in God; and that judgment ought we
to make of him.

(...) it. By all these Examples then we see that Princes, especially Kings of
France, ought never to trust any Pope whatsoever; and that the Popes can never
be the Mediators of those Differences which are between them and other Princes.

The use the Popes make of their Tributes.
The Advocates for the Papacy do alledg also, that it is a great advantage that
the Popes draw Revenues out of Catholic Countries, because they make a good
use of them, and with this Money they assist the Catholic Princes against the
Turk, and employ it to many other good uses. For Example, They say, that the
present Pope has this Year given a great deal of Corn to the poor People at
Rome, and Portions to marry off several poor young Maids. But what does this
signify, to prove that the Popes are universal Vicars of Jesus Christ upon
Earth, and Heads of the Catholic Church? I do not say, that to be Pope, a Man
must lay aside all Humanity, and become a Devil; that Opinion suits only with
those who believe the Pope to be Antichrist. Cicero l. 2. de Officiis.
Cicero tells us, that even those who live only by their Crimes, cannot live
without some exercise of Justice. It is a wonderful thing that the greatest
part of the World, with the great Veneration which they have for the very Name
of Popes, should be so ridiculously favorable to them, as to admire them for
very common Actions, when they ought always to surpass the most perfect
Christians in Charity, in greatness of Mind, and in contempt of the great
things of this World, if it be true that they are the Vicars of Jesus Christ,
and Successors of St. Peter; but to see how these People are extolled for the
little Good they sometimes do, you would think they had a Dispensation from
doing any good Actions. It is like those who commend the great Virtue of a
Woman that does not prostitute her self to all the World, you would say that
she might be dishonest for all that, and that for this there is no such great
Commendation due to her: just so do People magnify the Pope, because they say
he will give five hundred thousand Livers a Year to defend Poland against the
Turks. But first of all, there is his own Interest in the case; for the Popes
look upon themselves as chief Kings of Poland, as well as of other Catholic
Kingdoms, and they think they lose so much Land and so many Subjects as the
Turks gain from the Catholics; but what is such a Sum as this to a Priest
whose Revenue amounts to twenty Millions; how does he employ the rest of the
Churches Blood? I dare be bold to say he does every Year plunder Poland of more
than this Sum. But now in a time that People begin a little to know the Papacy,
we must not wonder they endeavor by some good AAions to keep it from Contempt.
As for the Corn which they give at Rome to the Poor, what a great matter that
is? It is but just, that since the Papacy has made them idle and lazy, it
should maintain them. Was there ever yet a Tyrant who did not do some good? I
do not inveigh against the Person of the present Pope, who, of all the Popes
that have been in Possession of this See since Boniface the Third, is certainly
one of the least wicked. It is the Papacy only which I oppose, that extravagant
Authority which they make Men to adore, that never yet did any thing but
Mischief; and I make a distinction quite contrary to that which ignorant People
make of it, who say, that the Popes as Men, may be wicked, but not as Popes;
for I maintain that as Popes, since Boniface the Third, they have never done
any thing but ill; but as Men, they may sometimes do Actions that are morally
good. If the Popes did their Duty as true Bishops, if they preached the word of
God, if they instructed their Diocese in the knowledge of God, if they applied
themselves to their Prayers, without being ambitious, without desiring Command
and Authority, and playing the Princes at Rome, without abusing the World with
their Dispensations, Induglences, false Relics* Agnus Dei's, and other
Fooleries; without drawing of Annates, giving of Bulls, and comparing
themselves to Kings and Princes: If, I say, they behaved themselves like the
first Bishops of Rome, I should honor and admire them, as a Soldier said
heretofore to Nero, I loved thee Tacitus.
dum amari meruisti; sed postquam Parricida, Histrio, incendiarius extitisti,
etc. whilst thou did deserve it, but since thou were a Parricide, a
Stage Player, and destroyer of thy Country, I have abhorred thee.

Missions.
They say furthermore, that were it not for the Pope, there would be no
Missions to the Indies, and that those People would never be converted. On the
contrary, by the Ambition, Pride, and carnal Pleasures which they keep up in
the Church, Zeal and Charity are almost wholly extinguished. But what do the
Popes do for these Missions? If they contribute any thing toward them, it must
be, as in all other things, for their own Interest. But there were Missions to
the Indies before ever the Bishops of Rome undertook to govern the Church:
those who are now sent thither go only for Gain and Traffic; and by the
Relations we have of them, they are the strangest Conversions in the World;
they take no care at all to instruct these poor People, nor to teach them any
thing, they baptize them only, without explaining to them the Virtue of that
Sacrament, or what it signifies; nay without turning them from their former
Idolatry. They are contented instead of instructing them, to tell them that in
worshipping their Idols, and doing all as they did before, it is sufficient if
they direct the Intention to Jesus Christ, or to the Saints, and so they are no
less Idolaters than they were before. These now are their Conversions.

Bishops in partibus Infidelium.
But, say they, does not the Pope create a great many Bishops in partibus
Infidelium, in the Countries of Infidels. That may be done without the Pope;
Metropolitans and Primates did heretofore create them, and Bishops may do so
still. This tends to nothing but to flatter the Vanity of the Popes, who, not
being able to establish themselves effectually in those Countries, will however
satisfy their Fancies, by this imaginary Empire which they attribute to
themselves in disposing of fantastic Bishoprics in those Countries. This is
all but Farce. My Lord the new Bishop makes wry Faces, as if he were going to
his pretended Diocese, where the People shall be Greeks, Pagans, or Mahometans,
he prepares his Equipage to be gone, and whilst he is just ready to depart, his
Holiness has a tender Affection for his dear Son, commends his Zeal and his
Piety, to go to hazard himself among the Infidels, dispences with him as to his
Journey, and for a recompense of his Devotion, he gives him good Pensions and
Benefices, wherewith the good Prelate lives jollily at Rome in Pleasures and in
Honors. They have by this Principle of Vanity created four Patriarchs at Rome
to make themselves amends because they could not make the four Greek Patriarchs
submit to them.

Pagans and Mahometans also have a Head of Religion.
There are some People also who pretend, that the necessity of a visible Head
of the Christian Church is proved by this, that the Mahometans have one, and
the Pagans also had one: And they say, that the Mahometans, who have a Musti,
and had heretofore their Caliphes, the Pagans their Pontifex Maximus, as the
ancient Romans had, will have less Aversion for Christianity when they see in
it a Head of Religion like their own. But there is a great deal of difference;
for these never did usurp the Temporal Power of Princes like the Popes; they
never exacted Oaths of Allegiance from their Clergy, nor pretended to a share
of the Princes Authority, as the Popes do in Catholic Countries. The Ambition
of the Popes will ever keep them back more than this Conformity will induce
them to embrace Christianity. But Men must not form to themselves such carnal
Ideas of the Religion of Jesus Christ, who is all Spirit, Truth, and Holiness;
it is a sort of Idolatry to believe that Jesus Christ has such Vicars. It is
to be wholly ignorant of God, and to make Jesus Christ the Minister of Sin.

It may be yet said, that the Popes keep Princes and great Men in the Catholic
Religion by the convenience of Dispensations, which they many times gives them
very opportunely, and such as they could not find in other Religions;
Palavicin* lib. 19. c. 6. lib. 2^. c. 8.
as Cardinal Palavicini maintains, that if the Pope did not give these
Dispensations to those who possess and change many Benefices, they who enjoyed
them would offend God, and be uneasy in their Consciences, and that it is
because that God should not be offended that the Popes have found out the
Secret of Dispensations. But these Dispensations are either against the Law of
God, or they are not: If they are, then Princes are so much the more to be
blamed to address themselves to the Pope; for this is manifestly to mock both
God and Men. I know very well, as I have already observed, that there are some
good People who maintain, that the Popes can make that a Sin which is not a
Sin, and that not a Sin which is a Sin; but I do not think that any Prince was
ever so simple as to believe so; thus the Action of a Prince who has recourse
to the Popes for Dispensations authorizeth this abominable Impiety, and by his
Example, makes it pass for an Article of Faith, making himself the shameful
Instrument to establish the most pernicious and the most infamous of all
Impostures. If the thing be not contrary to the Law of God, there is no need of
a Dispensation for any whatsoever. And furthermore, be they necessary or
unnecessary, the meanest Bishop has as much right to grant them as the Pope,
nay more, since that, as I have already said, the Popes being Temporal Princes
can not be in the Christian Religion either Bishops or Priests; they have
forfeited this Character, and have no calling under God, since God has not
instituted this monstrous Authority. Besides, these Dispensations are only for
the Popes advantage; for by them he raises and maintains himself in Credit,
not only other above Bishops his fellow Brethren, but even above God himself,
abrogating his Laws, and fastening Princes with his whole Families indispensably
more and more to their Service, it being their Interest to maintain this
pretended Authority of the Pope, without which, their Actions would appear
shameful and scandalous; and as many times it is for their Marriages which they
are dispensed with, their Children would be illegimate, which would confound
the order of the Succession. Thus does every thing turn to the Popes advantage,
who are always of his opinion, who said in Epictetus Epictetus, cap. 38.
(...) (...), that where Profit is there is Piety. Tacitus.
Omnia retinendae Dominationis causa honesta. They do not only give
Dispensations to Princes which are many times very unjust, but they also give
them to every Body for Money, which makes Heretics abhor the Catholic
Religion, who in this have much more respect for the Law of God, never
practicing any thing like this, and if there be amongst them a Licentious
Person, who has some great Affair to compass, he must become a Catholic; then
making his Addresses with a good grace to the Pope, his business is done: this
is not Simony, because that which he obtains is in premio del denaro donato a
Dio, a Reward for the Money which he has given to God, as Palavicini, lib. 1.
cap. 2.
Cardinal Palavicini says, Idem.
He also makes them give Money as a Punishment for their Sins as the same Jesuit
says in another place. How could Men arrive to such Excesses of Impiety, as to
suffer such things as these? A Pagan heretofore said, that Maxima Salust.
fortuna minima licentia est, that they ought to give themselves the least
liberty who are Masters of the greatest Fortunes. Our Popes on the contrary,
believe that they may do any thing, because that every thing is subject to
them, which boldness the long continuance of their Empire has caused Tacitus.
Vetustate Imperii coalita audacia, and as they found that the People easily
swallowed down their Impostures, they by degrees invented more enormous ones.
When People have once passed some certain Bounds, they have afterward no shame
left them, neque metus ultra, Tacitus.
neque pudor est. But it is a strange thing that no body opposes such horrible
things, that they are suffered to be done in the Church, and in the Name of God
too, which the whole World ought to acknowledge to be Holiness it self: Every
body has seen it, does yet see it, says nothing of it, but by silence
approves, nay applaudes it. I believe for my part, that People please
themselves with fancying that God is like the Popes, and that they may come off
easily with him in their Affairs. That which is as bad too as all the rest is,
that proportionably other Ecclesiastics, at least many of them, do attribute
to themselves some part of this Authority of the Popes, of dispencing against
the Law of God, and that after the Popes Example, who have infected all the
others. Horace.
Sicut Grex totus in agris, unius scabie cadit. This it is which has produced
those fine Morals which reign so much in the World, and have done so much
Mischief. They will rather dispense with some great Crime against the Law of
God and Nature, than with an indifferent thing, against which either they or
their Predecessors have made some rash Decree; for by either of them, they
raise their Almighty Power above Heaven it self. In the first they raise
themselves above God, by dispencing with the Obedience to his Law, and by the
other, they make that a Sin which is not so in its own nature, which belongs
only to God; and so they put themselves in his place. What Reason is there (for
Example) in what Pope Innocent the Third established, Innocent extra. de
Bigamis tit. 22. c. quia circa.
that a Priest may be dispensed with for keeping many Concubines, but not for
being twice married? upon which the Glossary makes this just Observation,
Notandum mirabile quod plus valet hic luxuria quam Castitas. What reason is
there that at Rome the best Benefices are disposed of in favor of wicked
Wretches, Atheists, Poisoners, and Sodomites, Fellows that are known to be
such, and not to one only, but a great number of them; and that in France such
Benefices as those cannot be possessed by a Prince and natural Son of a great
King? I am not ignorant that there are some Canons which are against it; but
why shall People observe so scrupulously a Canon of a Council upon a thing
almost indifferent, whilst that the Popes do every day violate many Canons of
the most Sacred Councils, in things that are Essential, and even in this very
Point; for there is no body who knows Italy or Spain, but must acknowledge that
there are a great many, who, not only possess Benefices, but Priests and
Bishops who are Bastards, born even of double Adultery, begotten by Priests
upon married Women. I do affirm, that I have my self known more than four of
them; and even in France, our own Country, which is a very religious place, in
comparison of Italy or Spain, who is there but knows that there are People of
this sort in Possession of Benefices? Horrible Maxims of Italian Divines
concerning* Sodomy in a Priest.
The Roman Divines maintain, that a Priest is not irregular for Adultery and
Sodomy, yet it would be irregular to let a Prince enjoy Benefices, because his
Father did not beget him by his lawful Wife. Navar. quest. 2. de defensione
proximi.
See in Navarre the great Canonist, he shall tell you that Sodomy causes no
irregularity in a Priest, but that Marriage does, because Pope Innocent the
Third has so established. After he has spoken of those cases which causes
Irregularity, he asks the Question, whether Sodomy be one or no. Dubitarunt an
voluerimus etiam nefandum Sodomiae crimen comprehendere; sequitur respondendum
esse, non comprehendi, primo quia irregularitas nisi ob casus jure expressos
non incurritur, secundo quia verba illa sunt Innocentii. Facit etiam quod nos
intelleximus quod in Italia ubi, ut fertur, plus hoc malo laboratur, quam
oporteret, nullae de eo Dispensationes quaeruntur. He concludes that Sodomy
makes not a Priest irregular. Tolet. cap. 61. lib 1. de institutione Presbyt.
And the Cardinal Tolet does maintain it to be the common Doctrine of the
Divines at Rome, that all Orders, even Priesthood it self, may be conferred
upon Children, and those who have not yet the use of Reason. Omnes Ordines,
says he, etiam and Presbyteratum conferri posse Infantibus, and nondum usum
Rationis habentibus, est communis Doctrina Theologorum. We see clearly by this,
that when in France these People refuse to grant Benefices without Cure of
Souls, upon the account of pretended Irregularities, that it is more out of
Pride than Religion, and that they take pleasure, as I have already said, to
make People feel their Yoke, this they call super Aspidem and Basiliscum
ambulare, to tread upon Serpents and Dragons.

Those who maintain the Popes Authority do moreover affirm, that we are obliged
to the Popes for the Holy Tribunal of the Inquisition, without which the true
Religion would have supplanted by Heresy, in Italy, Spain, and Portugal, Palav.
lib. 14. cap. 19.
Cardinal Palavicini does assure us so. Il Tribunal dell' Inquisitione, dal
quale, l' Italia riconosce la conservata integrita della sua fide. It is to the
Holy Tribunal of the Inquisition that Italy owes the preservation of the
Integrity of the Faith. Wherein truly they do a great deal of Honor to God and
to the Christian Religion, to imagine that God has no other means to preserve
his Church, and that he needs such cursed Instruments as those to maintain it.
The Inquisition.
That you may make the better judgment of it, it will not be amiss for me to
speak briefly a word or two concerning the manner how this Tribunal proceeds
against Heriticks, upon what they call the Directory of the Inquisitors, made
in the Year 1585. you must know that this Directory was made for the Execution
of the Bull de Coena Domini which is to be seen Lib. 1.
in summa Francisci Tolet. de instructione Sacerdotum, where there are eighteen
sorts of Excommunications; the first against Heretics, Favorers of Heretics,
those who read or keep their Books without the permission of the Holy See. And
under this pretense these Fellows have caused two of our Kings to be murdered.
It was this rare Excommunication that ruined Religion in England, and it is a
wonder that it does not destroy it every where else. Idem.
In his 20 th Book you find that all those are excommunicated, who say and
confess that the Council is above the Pope, and who appeal from his Decrees to
the Council, so that a Man cannot be a true Christian, without being
excommunicated by the Pope. We must no longer believe the Gospel, but become
the Popes Creatures to avoid these terrible Excommunications. In the 21 st
Chapter of Cardinal Tolet his Collection, there is a Bull which does
excommunicate all Princes who lay new Taxes upon their People without the
Pope's permission. This was not much amiss indeed, for by it you see that all
Sovereign Princes are made Slaves to the holy See. A Man must have lost his
Senses not to see that it is the Spirit of the Devil which possesses this
Gene^ation of Vipers. Idem.
In his 27 th, 28 th, and 29 th Chapters, all Chancellours, Presidents,
Councillors, and Sovereign Courts of Justice, are excommunicated if they
hinder the Clergy in any manner whatsoever to exercise their Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction against all Persons, according to the Decrees of the Council of
Trent, whereby they will destroy all Political Authority, and make the Clergy
Masters of it; for you must know that the Council of Trent, whose Decrees were
all made at Rome before ever matters were proposed at Trent, established
Ecclesiastical Immunities, according to the Decretals of Boniface the Eight:
This it was that made many worthy Prelates in France formerly press so hard to
have this Council received there; and that wicked Wretch Miron Archbishop of
Angiers, write so insolently against the Parliament, for which he very well
deserved to be hanged. At length having thundered out a great many other
Excommunications, they declare, that whosoever shall remain a whole Year in
these sorts of Excommunications, shall for their Contumacy be declared
Heretics. Chap. Cum Contumacia de Hereticis in 6. and it is a favor too that
they do not turn them into Hobgoblins. There is nothing in all this but what is
sottish, horrible, and diabolical, yet there are People who at this day dare
not publicly detest it. Nay, there are several in France, who shall maintain
it at their utmost peril, and even die for it, as almost all the Monks and many
others who for the sake of Jesus Christ himself would not lose this Point.
Hitherto this Tribunal of the Inquisition has been abhorred in France, but no
thanks to the Monks, but the Parliaments; they say, Ecclesia mavult suffundere
sanguinem quam effundere. And during the Minority of Lewis the thirteenth all
the Chairs of the Doctors and Preachers rung with this impious and abominable
Doctrine, that the Pope was the Monarch of the Church could excommunicate,
depose and put Kings to death. And to the end that these Holy Laws should be
put in Execution, these infamous Creatures have wrote a Book, which they call
the Directory of the Inquisitors in the the Year 1585. wherein they establish,
that they are all impious Persons, and Enemies to the Church, who do not allow
of the Extravagants of Boniface, and all the Decretals of the Popes who
declare, that the Church has the Power of both Swords to destroy all those who
will not submit to it. In the third part of this Directory, Commentary the
thirteenth; there are three methods of proceeding against Heretics, viz. by
Accusation, by Delation, and by Inquisition. In Matters of Faith, Accusation is
not allowed of, because they say that it is very dangerous, and full of
Contention; the Crime of Heresy must be proved Judicially, and Canonically,
which cannot be done without some difficulty; so that the Treasurer of the
Inquisition becomes the Accuser, for this reason, quia non est obnoxious poenae
talionis, because he is not obnoxious to the Punishment of Retaliation, neque
aliis poenis quas falsi Accusatores pati solent, nor to any other Punishments
which false Witnesses are wont to suffer. So that there is no other way but by
Delation and Inquisition; and let a Man but apply himself to the Syndic of the
Inquisition, or to the Inquisitor to accuse any body and there is an end of him.
In this third part of the Directory, Commentary the 28 th, toward the latter
end there are these words; In crimine Haereseos propter ejus Enormitatem omnia
testimonia recipiuntur, omniumque voces and interpretationes audiuntur, etiam
and inimicorum hominum, perjurorum, lenonum, meretricum, and infamium: In case
of Heresy, by reason of the Enormity of the Crime, all Evidences are allowed
of, and the Word and Accusation of all sorts of People are to be heard, even of
Enemies, those that are perjured, Pimps, Whores, and those of the worst
Reputation. And that which is as good as this, is, that two Witnesses of this
sort are sufficient, even against a King, and without being obliged to let him
know who the Witnesses are. See Commentary the 23, 48, 120, 124. there are
these words; Quod si reus instaret postularetque ut sibi concederetur defensio
secundum Juris Ordinem, and per consequens ut Testium nomina simul cum dictis
eorundem sibi ederentur, audiendus non esset; and si fortassis ob id gravari se
diceret, and appellaret, talis appellatio non esset admittenda; sed ea non
obstante imo vero ea rejecta tanquam frivola and injusta ad ulteriora Judicii
acta est intrepide procedendum; That if any guilty Person does insist upon, and
require liberty to make a Defenee, according to the ordinary course of Law, and
by consequence, that the Names of the Witnesses, together with their
Depositions, should be delivered him, he is not to be heard; And if, for th^s
reason, he shall say that he is hardly dealt with, and shall appeal, such his
Appeal is in no wise to be allowed, but that notwithstanding, nay, it being
wholly rejected as frivolous and unjust, he is vigorously to be proceeded
against, even to the utmost Acts of Judgment. And the good natured Inquisitors
give this Consolation to People that are condemned; Nec quisquam dicat se
injuste hac ratione condemnari, nec conqueratur do judicibus Ecclesiasticis,
vel de judicio Ecclesiae ita statuentis: Nor let any Man say that he is
condemned unjustly upon this account, nor complain of the Ecclesiastical
Judges, or of the Church so ordaining: (These Hangmen will make the Church
accessory to their Barbarities.) Sed si injuste condemnatus sit, gaudeat potius
quod pro veritate mortem patiatur; but if he be unjustly condemned, let him
rejoice rather that he suffers Death for the Truth. What could the Devil do
worse if he were incarnate? Yet this is the Churches Head, the Vicar of Jesus
Christ, the Holy See, the Apostolic See, it is his Holiness who has made and
decreed these things. They do yet worse than this to Kings and Princes, for
they make use of secret means, for fear they should get notice of them, and by
their Power prevent their wicked Designs. They employ ignorant Creatures that
are laden with Iniquity, such as Ravilliac, who was a Murderer by Profession,
and a Sorcerer too, as was commonly said, they give these People Absolution
from all their Crimes, and promise them Paradise if they perish in the
Execution, or, if they are taken, after it. They have for such purposes as
these in Italy, those whom they call Crocesegnati, and in Spain los Familiares.
Suarez. in def. fid. Cath. c. 4. l. 6. n. 17.
See in the Book of Francis Suarez the Spaniard, called Defensio fidei
Catholicae. By the way, we are very much obliged to this Loyal Loyolist, for
calling these Maxims the Catholic Faith. If what he said were true, it would
be no great advantage to be a Catholic. It would be perfect Manicheisme, a Man
must believe two contrary Principles, good and bad, God and the Devil, at the
same time. There is a certain Author, called Guliel. Nubrigensis, who relates
the Story of a Monk, who dethroned his natural Prince and sat himself in his
place, he had engraved upon his Seal, Ferus ut Leo, mitis ut Agnus. This Monk
was Villain enough, thus to usurp the Authority of his Prince; but he was a
thousand times better than any of these Thieves at Rome. For my part, I will
all my Lifetime hold Communion with the Catholic Gallican Church; but for the
Bull de Coena Domini, the Inquisition, the Superiority of the Pope above the
Council, and the Morals now in fashion, I declare I do detest it as a thing
dangerous to Salvation, to hold Communion with them who believe and maintain
these things, and that I believe them as far from being saved as the Mahometans.

Who can believe that Jesus Christ, who gave himself for the Salvation of us
all, and who is all Charity it self, can approve of it, that People should be
put to death for Religion; or, that he does not detest the Barbarities which
these Monsters exercise under the Name of Vicars of Jesus Christ? How contrary
are these Practices to those of Jesus Christ and of his Apostles? See after
what manner our merciful Savior spoke to his Apostles, who would have forsaken
him, What, and will you also leave me? upon which St. Chrysostom makes this
Reflection, * (...)^ He asks them, saying, Will ye also go away? which was the
voice of one taking away all force and compulsion.

And in truth they did all abandon him; yet after his Resurrection he received
them as kindly as tho they had followed him to the very Cross; and we see that
when he gave his Apostles the Power of the Keys, he ordered them only to teach
Men, and not to compel them by force; and on that occasion, when the Apostles
were discontented with the Samaritans, and would have called down Fire from
Heaven upon them, he says to them, Ye know not what Spirit ye are of: the Son
of Man is not come to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them. But the Popes, who
make a quite contrary use of this Power, are come to destroy both Souls and
Bodies too. We see that the Apostle St. Paul followed these holy Rules of
Charity when he wrote to Titus; teaching him the Duty of a Bishop, he says to
him only, A Man that is an Heretic, after the first and second Admonition,
reject. He says not, do him Injustice, kill him, ruin him by Violence, or by
Craft, break your word with him, according to the Maxims and Practices of the
Court of Rome. Chrysostom. l. 1. de Sacerdote.
According to these Principles, St. Chrysostom says these words; Apud nos non
cogendo sed suadendo id agendum est ut qui malus est melior evadat, neque enim
ad coercendos peccatores Potestatis jus nobis datum est; and si datum maxim
esset, locus non esset juris istius exercendi, cum Deus coronet non eos qui
necessitate, sed qui voluntate libera a malo abstinent: We must not endeavor
to make a bad Man better by Force, but by Persuasion: For we have no Authority
to compel Sinners; and if we had, we ought not to make use of it, seeing God
crowns not those that abstain from Evil out of mere necessity, but those that
do it out of free choice. And hence it comes that St. Hierom, comparing a King
to a Bishop, says, Ille nolentibus praeest, hic volentibus. The one rules over
those that are unwilling, the other over those that are willing. And Gregory
Bishop of Rome, writing to the Bishop of Constantinople, says to him, Nova est
and inaudita ista praedicatio quae verberibus exigit fidem: That is a new and
unheard of sort of Preaching that requires Faith with Blows. The Fathers
abhorred not only that Men should be put to death, but that any Injustice
should be done to them upon the account of Religion; for to make this use of
Religion is to betray it, and it is a sure means to make Heretics more
obdurate: for it is certain, that they who do thus, have only the Name of
Christians; and People readily believe that a Religion is nothing worth which
they are forced to embrace by such ways as these. St Athanasius speaking of the
Religion of the Arrians, who persecuted the Catholics, driving them out of all
Employs, depriving them of the means of getting their Living, prohibiting them
the Exercise of their Religion, and doing them many other Wrongs by Violence
and Fraud, and by groundless Accusations, even to the bringing some of them to
Death, says very well; Atque seipsum quam non sit Pia, nec Dei cultrix
manifestat: and shows it self how it is neither pious, nor worshipping God. The
same thing may be said of the English at present. St. Chrysostom. to the
Ephesians, 4.17.
St Chrysostom also says, Errantis poena est doceri; the Punishment of the
erroneous is to be instructed. The Emperor Antoninus, tho a Pagan, was much
more a Christian than the Popes, and their Inquisition, when in his 9 th Book
he says; Si potes meliora doce, si non potes, memento in hoc tibi lenitatem
datam. Ipsi Dii lenes sunt talibus: If thou can, teach me better; if not,
remember Gentleness* was given thee for this very purpose. The Gods themselves
are gentle to such. If the Christian Religion did establish the Inquisition, if
she justified the Perfidiousness and Inhumanities which the Court of Rome and
Heretics commit every day upon the account of Religion, I should make no
difficulty to declare it an abominable Religion, and that we ought not to be of
it one moment longer: and if People went to Heaven by such ways as these, I
should be soon of the Americans mind, who said they would not go to the same
Paradise whither the Spaniards went; nor would I go to the Paradise of the
Popes and the Inquisitors. I do maintain that the Popes have ruined the Church
in those Countries where their Inquisition has been set up, more than all the
Heresies in the World together ever could have done. We need not but consider
the good Effects which it has had in those Countries, where in truth there is
no Religion, at least Christianity scarce there to be found; and how should it
with that Ignorance which the Inquisition brings along with it, which has
produced nothing but Superstition, Impiety, Hypocrisy, dissembling of Opinions,
a thousand Cruelties and Treacheries, and all sorts of abominable Vices, which
are scarce known but in Countries of the Inquisition? And where we find them in
other Countries, they have been brought thither from Rome by those that were
devoted to the Papacy, through the too great Commerce which Princes suffer with
Rome. The Heretics may well say that they are obliged to the Inquisition that
Holland is no longer Catholic. If the Inquisi^ion be advantageous to
Christianity, Why do the most Christian Nations of Europe the best regulated
both in their Religion and their Manners, detest it? Compare the French Nation,
Germany, Flanders and Poland, with the other, Slaves to the Inquisition, and
you will say that the latter are not worthy of the Name of Christians in
comparison of the former. And for the Heretics, I esteem and Heretic that is
an honest Man, and that fears God, a hundred times more than a Catholic who
lives disorderly, or that knows not what Religion is. I know no worse Heresy
than to be without the knowledge of God; and how can He be known where the Holy
Scripture is not allowed to be read, where the Clergy are wholly lost in most
abominable Vices, and know nothing at all? where it is Crime enough to be
burnt, to discourse about Religion? where Men's Minds are filled with a thousand
Fooleries that have no relation at all to Piety? Set a Spaniard or an Italian,
who has gotten a little Sense, to discourse on Jesus Christ, and he shall not
fail to tell you, that Jesus Christ was a great Politician; Christo era Grande
Politico, because he sees that his Vicar under the pretense of Religion has
made so great Conquests, and subdued all Catholic Princes to himself. This is
the Idea which they have of Jesus Christ, and which they form to themselves
upon what they see in the Court of Rome, and in the present State of the
Church; for, as for the Holy Scripture they know less of it than of the
Alcoran. And their Divines teach them, that the Church is the most happy Body
Politic upon Earth, Corpo. Politico il piu felice che sia in terra, as
Cardinal Palavicini says Pal. l. 3. c. 18. of his Hist. of the Council of Trent.
. And the same Cardinal says in another place, that Jesus Christ would have his
Church governed, as great Politicians govern their States, and that he came
down from Heaven upon Earth to make her happy as well in this World as in the
other, by heaping upon her Honors, Riches, and Pleasures, Lib. 7. cap. 9.
secondo la carne, according to the Flesh. And of the Papacy in particular, he
says, that it is the abundant Source of Temporal Felicity. Il Principiato
Apostolico font d'utilita Temporale secondo la carne in quel modo chi e piu
conform etiandio all humana felicita: Lib. 23. c. 3. lib. 1. c. 23.
The Apostolic Primacy is the Fountain of Temporal Profit, and in such a
manner as is most conducing to Human Felicity. Nor do the Portuguees understand
things better; they are more than half Jews, and yet know not what either
Judaism or Christianity is. There are a great many of them who look for a sort
of a Messiah, who by his great Conquests ought to make them Masters of the
World; this is one of their Kings named Sebastian, whom they have made a Saint,
he was killed in the Battle of Alcazar going to assist one Moorish King against
another, and because his Body was not found after the Battle, they pretend that
he is not dead, but that he roams up and down the World, and that he will
return suddenly again to conquer all the habitable Earth, and make it subject
to the Portugal Nation. This is the Faith of the Christians in that Country,
and they learn it insensibly of the Jews. It is not long since a Man might have
borrowed a considerable Sum of Money in Portugal payable at the return of St.
Sebastian. That which does produce this horrible Ignorance among these People
is, not only that they read not the Holy Scriptures, but because the
Inquisition suffers there no Religion but its own; for by this means, there is
no body who can accuse either the Inhumanity of the Inquisition, or the Vices
and Incapacities of the Clergy. If some other Sect had liberty among them, the
Contradiction of this Sect would oblige them to study, and to instruct
themselves, which would make the Study of Divinity and other Sciences flourish
among them; and seeing every Man would have as many Censurers of his Religion
and of his Manners, as there were Men of contrary Opinions, this would make Men
take care of their Behavior; that their Lives might be more conformable to
true Christianity. Wickedness would be greatly abated, Men would be ashamed of
those horrible Crimes which the Italians now make their diversion; there would
be much more knowledge of God, more Industry and Perfection in the World. I know
that this is not at all agreeable to the Humor of the Popes and their Clergy,
who make their Markets better by Ignorance and the Inquisition. I know by my
own Experience, and what I have heard say by many good People in England, that
the expulsion of Catholics, would destroy amongst them all Devotion and
Religion, because they would have no Adversaries to awaken them, and to oblige
them to take care of themselves; their Ministers would become ignorant and
debauched, and so proportionably the People. But, say they, the Inquisition
does prohibit all ill Books; you must know too that the Word of God is of the
number of these ill Books that are prohibited; and that there are many other
Books forbidden, which have not only no ill in them, but which are very
excellent, only because they are contrary to the Ambition of the Court of Rome;
and that there is an infinite number of abominable ones allowed of, which are
fit for nothing but to be burnt as well as their Authors. By this same
Principle they have razed out of the Books of the Fathers those Passages which
were not for their purpose.

They yet insist for the justifying of the Inquisition, That the diversity of
Religion is the Cause of Civil Wars in a Nation. But what Mischief does not the
Inquisition do? All Princes, in whose Countries it is, are Slaves to it. It is
true, that among them there are no Civil Wars for Religion; but it is as true,
that they must absolutely depend upon the Court of Rome; otherwise if they
pretend to examine their Orders, the Popes shall use them like Dogs. How many
times has the Republic of Venice been like to be destroyed by these People,
only because they had a mind to keep some Liberty to themselves, and not to
suffer certain Excesses of their Tyranny? And yet do they every day insult and
attempt against all the Rights which God and Nature have given them.

It is furthermore said in favor of the Papacy, That the World is greatly
obliged to it for all the different Orders of Monks, and of Nuns, which are a
great Ornament and Advantage to the Church. It is true, that the Popes have
instituted almost all of them, and that it is no fault of theirs that there are
not twenty times as many, especially in the States of other Princes; for by
this means they erect Imperium in Imperio, their own Empire in the Dominions of
another, thereby gaining to themselves so many Subjects in all Catholic
Countries, who are at all times ready to do any thing for their Service. Now
since there is nothing in it but this, all these Institutions of so many Sects
of Monks ought to be suspected by us. Besides, it is not the Popes who have
inspired these People with the thoughts of retreating, and of Severity to
themselves, they knew only how to apply it to their own use and service. The
Inclination which these Men have to this sort of Humor and Life is well enough
known; and that in all times, and in all Countries, and in all Religions, there
have been great numbers of Men who have embraced this sort of Life, pretending
to live more austerely, and to avoid the trouble of worldly Business, affecting
to be singular in their Clothes, their Diet, whipping themselves, and other
outward Mortifications of their Flesh. There were a great many of them among
the Jews, especially toward the latter end, and when Religion fell most into
decay; we see by their Authors, that besides the Pharisees there were the
Essenes, Dositheens, and other Sects of Religious Jews. There were many of them
among the ancient Romans; there is in Juvenal an admirable description of their
Manners and Customs. It is of them that he says, Fronti nulla Fides, and qui
Curios simulant and Bacchanalia vivunt; he represents them with short Hair, and
supercilio brevior coma, and with all he says, that they lived after a very
licentious manner. There are also many of them at this day among the Pagans,
there are great numbers of them to be found among the Mahometans, Greeks,
Nestorians, Eutychians, Maronites, Abyssins, and Cophties. The Popes then have
made cunning use of the Humor of these People, whom they have supported as far
forth as they could, and even canonized them to augment their own Power, by the
Credit which they gave to these People, who became their Creatures, and who for
their parts served the Pope with all the Power and Credit they had. People had
them in great Veneration at Rome, this Veneration spread it self everywhere
abroad, so that the World did almost adore them; every thing that they either
said or did, was as highly esteemed, as what ever the Apostles themselves had
said or done; and as time served them when they had sufficiently tried the
Credulity and So^tishness of Mankind, they came to that excess of Impiety and
Impudence, as to compare their Authors to our Lord Jesus; nay, to give them the
Pre-eminence. Read but the Life of St. Francis, and a Book that was printed at
Brussels in the Year 1630, with this Title, Korte beschrijvinge van het
Aerd^s-broederschap van de Koorde Saint Franciscus; and so did other Orders
speak as great things of their respective Founders. People thought they could
not obtain Salvation without the Monks, they attribute particular Graces to
their very Habits, which, the better to impose upon the World, were of an
extraordinary fashion. Nay, there was sometimes as much imputed to them as to
the Blood of Christ it self; whosoever took this Habit they said it was as much
worth to him as a second Baptism; when any body was sick they desired to die in
this Habit. These were People who did more good than God commanded; and we see
that all these Impieties are yet vented by the Monks of our own time, who
pretend that they do more Good than is necessary for their own Salvation, and
that they can impart a share of their Merits, and Works of Supererogation to
whomsoever they please* provided that they contribute somewh^t toward the
maintenance of the Kitchen; and for that they have fo^nd out the Invention of
the^r Fraternities.

The Heads of these Sects, as I have already said, were very useful to the
Popes, and the Popes for their parts made them be esteemed by the People, and
at length, by the Ignorance and Sloth of Princes, they exempted them from the
Obedience due to their Sovereigns, to their Bishops, and to the Law of God it
self, and so they acknowledge none but the Pope. By little and little, making a
great noise like the blind Men at Paris, many of these Sects got great Estates,
others loved rather to beg, like those sturdy Vagrants, who prefer a begging
and a lazy Life before any other. They who have any wit among them employ
themselves in writing fabulous Legends of the Life of some or other of their
Order, and in composing a great many wicked Books about Religion. They are all
listed to the Pope, who pays them in Pardons, and Indulgences, and in Relics,
of which they make a good Market, in Canonizing people of their own Order, and
in exempting them from the Laws of their Prince and of their Bishops, so that
there is Impunity for them for all sorts of Crimes, they are only forced to go
out of the Province where they committed the Disorder into another. We may look
upon every Convent of Monks, as so many Garrisons which the Pope has in all
Catholic Cities to keep them under the Yoke of his Obedience; and every
different Order, so many different Regiments clothed in different Fashions, and
wearing different Liveries, who all live at the good Man's Expense, but cost the
Pope not a Farthing, having found out many Secrets to pull off the Feathers
without making the Fowl cry. They are certainly of great use to the Popes, but
I demand what Good they do us? Are there not Clergymen enough to perform the
Service without them? Are there not People enough to be maintained who are
really poor, without the begging Monks, who are the most ridiculous and the
most vicious Wretches upon Earth? If they are necessary to the Church, as some
say, how comes it to pass, that in the Primitive Church, where there was so
much Piety, there were none of them? or at least very few, and they too quite
of a contrary Character to those now a days; but that now in this languishing
State of the Church, every place swarms with them. How comes it to pass that
their numbers are much less in France, Flanders, Germany and Poland, where
Christianity flourishes a thousand times more than in Italy, Spain, and
Portugal, where it is almost extinguished? For tho there be Canonizations and
Beatifications oftentimes performed for People of these Countries, it signifies
nothing else, but that the Pope has fingered their Money, or that these Saints
were in their Lifetime greatly devoted to the Holy See. This is done upon
false-accounts given of the Lives of these Persons by some Monks of their
Order, and it is very easy to impose upon People in these Countries, by reason
of the extreme Ignorance among them, and of the Inquisition which would burn
those who should dare to contradict it. In France where People are much more
understanding, and where there is greater Liberty, it is not so easy to impose
upon and delude the World. Besides, the Protestants would not fail to discover
the Cheat and to lay it open, from whence also it comes to pass that there are
but very few Miracles wrought in France, and fewer at Paris than in any other
City in the Kingdom, because People are not there so easy to be deceived. I do
maintain, and every Man that has observed it must agree with me that there is
incomparably more Virtue and solid Piety in the honest People of the World than
among the Monks. Converse with them, and you shall find nothing but Grimace and
false appearances of a Devotion that signifies nothing, a base Devotion that
has nothing of true Piety, applying themselves to the outward parts of
Religion, neglecting, or else not knowing the true form of Piety, and upon this
they are puffed up with a value of themselves, they are presumptuous, full of
Contempt one of another, ambitious, worldly and voluptuous, which we see in
them where they have a little Liberty, as in Spain, Portugal and Italy, there
is nothing so unruly as their Behavior, their Lives are most licentious, there
is no Villainy nor Abomination which they do not commit. In France, our own
Country, where they are Saints in comparison, there is no roguish Story of a
Debauchery and Villainy, but they are at one end of it. Compare them with our
Fathers of the Oratory who are Seculars, and who yet trouble themselves with
Secular Affairs less than they, and for Knowledge, for Humility, Purity, and
lofty Sentiments of Religion, there is as great a difference as can be between
a worthy and a judicious Person, and a superstitious softpated Fellow, or
rather between an honest Woman and a Whore. I acknowledge that here and there
you may find a Man of a great worth among the Monks, but it is one among ten
thousand, and he must have a great deal of Strength and Courage to keep himself
innocent in these places where there is so much Corruption. I believe that it
is much more difficult to obtain Salvation there, than in the World, tho to
those, who have not narrowly enquired into their Lives, it appears otherwise.
They among them who are ingenious do own it, tho they are ordinarily Hypocrites
and would deceive and make us believe, that they all agree that Men must have
extraordinary measures of Grace, and would persuade the World that they
themselves have them. The most unsufferable of them, as I have already said,
are the Mendicants, those Pharisees who act wholly contrary to what St. Paul
taught and practiced, who would have all Christians apply themselves to labor,
yet they pretend to be of a better sort than the others. St. Paul, whom St.
Augustine calls the first of all Saints, says in the 20 th Chapter of the Acts,
ver. 33. that he had coveted no Man's Silver, Gold, or Apparel, and that his
Hands had ministered to his Necessities, and to those who were with him, and
makes his Glory to consist in this, that he had been a charge to no Man: He, I
say, orders all People to labor, and repeats what our Savior had said, that
it is better to give than to receive. Yet our lazy Monks have at this day
Maxims that are quite contrary: They had rather have nothing at all of their
own, that they may eat the Bread out of poor Peoples Mouths, upon whose Sweat
and Blood they live and grow fat. Of all the Monks that ever I yet heard of, I
have a value for no Order of them but those of La Trape, by the account the
World gives of them. First, they are all kept to work, they trouble not
themselves with Confessions, no more than the first Monks in the Primitive
Times. They study, they haunt neither Courts nor Cities, they are not covetous
of Legacies, nor do they pry into Peoples Wills, they are not Beggars, they
sell not holy things, they live frugally, upon a wholesome Diet to keep
themselves in Health, which makes their Minds more fit for the Service of God,
they are not desirous of News, nor of the Secrets of Families to make advantage
by it, they read the word of God carefully, making holy things their ordinary
Entertainment, and have no Commerce at all with Women. Provided that this could
continue without Vanity, and without Discontent, it is a School of Holiness.
For the others I find, that instead of being advantageous to the Church, they
dishonor it, and give the Protestants just reason to despise us. With People
that have any Understanding these Fellows Habits make so strongly against them,
that Men are apt to believe that there is both extravagancy and weakness of
Mind in those that wear them; these are marks of Distinction, which show them
not to be French Men, but that they belong to another Prince; What good do
these ridiculous Singularities do? If this Habit be necessary to make a Man
really better, we ought all to take it; if not, they are to be laughed at thus
that dress up themselves, and so much the more when they think they merit by
it. These People ought all to be reduced to one and the same Hab^t, and this
ridiculous variety of diverse Habits, and monstrous Fashions ought to be taken
away as well as the variety of Institutions, that war^ant some to beg and allow
others to be rich, and to be continually ^e^ping up o^ Wealth, and others to
eat and drink till they bu^st. It is reasonable that they should be well
clothed and fed, but it is (...) that they should beg at least if it be
voluntary; and for that (...) their number ought to be diminished, and they of
them that a^e ^ich should keep them that are poor; let them all apply
themselves to work and to study as heretofore they did. It would be very well
done ab^olutely to retrench some of these Orders that are so chargeable to the
People. Pope Alexander the Seventh did very well in suppressing two Orders that
were as good as those that are now remaining, the one was called the Order of
the Cross, and the other of ^he Holy Ghost. And in Spain they have done very
well never to endure among them the Capucins. The Council of Toledo did
heretofore ordain, that no new Religious Order should be suffered to be
established in the Church, ne nimia Religionum diversitas gravem in Ecclesia
Dei confusionem parturiat. There are no People that hate or destroy one another
more than the different Orders of the Mendicants, because they hinder one
another Trade; and there are no People in the World that debauch the Women
more than they; the Secular Priests are Angels in comparison; they are in so
good Credit and Esteem, that they are not endured in the Court of our Kings,
and they have no access to it. Their Principle of blind Obedience is both
foolish and impious, which may cause, and many times has been the occasion of
horrible Disorders in the Estates and Families of our Kings. It is a Principle
which makes the Pope, whom their Superiors implicitly obey, Master of our Lives
and of the State; for these Superiors are always as ready to inspire the Monks
with all sorts of Opinions, how horrible soever they be, provided they serve
the Pope his Designs; for this reason I have often wondered that some Law has
not been made in the State against the perfidiousness of the Monks and Jesuits,
from the example of two of our [French] Kings whom they have murdered; and
that it has not been declared, that if any such thing shall happen for time to
come, all these People should be driven out of the Kingdom: There is no other
means to hinder the Court of Rome from doing the same things hereafter. The
Parliament of England has lately enacted somewhat like this to secure the Life
of their King against the Monks. No Clergyman ought to be received without
subscribing the Condemnation of the impious Bull de Coena Domini, which is a
bottomless Gulf of Impieties, Heresies, and Inhumanities. And till the Monks
and Jesuits shall solemnly renounce and condemn this accursed Bull, it will be
no great Injustice done them, to accuse them of attempting against the Lives of
Kings. If any Man did suspect me to be an Arrian, and I knew it, and could
justify my self from such cursed Opinions, and did it not, the World would have
reason to impute to me all the Consequences of th^s pernicious Heresy. It is
well known that all the Monks, and particularly the Jesuits have by their
fourth Vow obliged themselves to the Execution of this infernal Bull. It was
the Monks, who, living in Idleness, corrupted and falsified many Ecclesiastical
Books, they have counterfeited many other Books full of Lies, and set them out
under the Names of good Authors. They are every where known for People who, by
their Artifices under pretext of Religion, are the ruin of most Families,
whose Substance they cunningly suck in themselves. It is they who have vilified
and discredited the true Orthodox Priests, drawing the People after themselves
by false appearances of Mortifications. They are good for nothing but to move
Seditions, and to bring People to Disobedienee, and when ever the Interest of
their Monarch the P^pe, is concerned, they think the Blood of their Enemies as
meritorious as that of the Cross. The Humility they boast of is a very pleasant
thing, when at the same time they take place of their Elders, and of People of
Quality. They pretend to have renounced Vanity more strictly than the Secular
Priests, and yet these Asses are called Father, Father, as heretofore the
Pharisees, Rabbi, Rabbi, they cause themselves also to be styled Reverend
Fathers, and pretend to have Merit enough besides to obtain their own
Salvation, and to impart the overplus to others. They call themselves Father
Raphaels, Father Cherubims, and Father Seraphims, with such like Names, which
are Marks of Vanity and Folly, with which there can be neither Humility nor
Piety. Their Generals also manage the matter fairly, to have the same Respect
showed them in the Courts of Princes as the Ambassadors of the greatest Kings.
These Gentlemen are all sworn Enemies to the Holy Scripture as well as to the
Court, and they do all they can to render the reading of it suspicious, they
heretofore did what they could to abolish it, because it made as much against
them as the Popes. In the Year 1192. they made a new Gospel upon the Dreams of
a Carmelite named Cyrill, this was to suppress the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
their own they called the Eternal Gospel, wherein they taught that God the
Father reigned under the Law, God the Son under Grace, and that the Holy Ghost
was now going to reign by the Establishment of four Orders of Mendicants, and
that for the future Men could not be saved but by this Gospel, that that of
Jesus Christ was imperfect, and that the Sacraments were of no great use. This
Gospel was preached almost all Europe over by the Jacobines and Franciscans,
and it was very near being received in the University of Paris, but there
remained yet some worthy Men who opposed and made it be condemned, but seeing
these new Evangelists had the favor of the Holy Father, the Doctors of the
University were forced to go to Rome, where at length they obtained that this
Book should be condemned and burned, but privately* for fear of decrying the
four Orders of Mendicants, and also that the Book of the University of Paris
should be burned; much after the same manner as heretofore at Bezancon at the
beginning of Luther's Revolt, which drew many Towns after it, the Magistra^e of
Bezancon fearing that this Fire should reach thither, forbad all sorts of
People to speak of God either Good or Evil. And there falling out lately a
Dispute between some Divines of the Sorbonne at Paris, some of whom do hold
with the Jesuits, that we may be saved without loving God, and others on the
contrary, that we ought to love God; whereupon both the one and the other were
forbidden to speak of it so that the matter yet remains undecided, whither we
ought to love God or no, or whither the Gospel of the Monks, or of Jesus Christ
be the true one. The Author of the Book against this new Gospel is called
William de St. Amor, de periculis novissimorum Temporum: See in Matthew Paris
Mat. Par. in Hist. Angl. in Hen. 3. and in lib. de Antichrist.
. At length the Monks had Credit enough, having procured several Bulls to be
given out against the Book, to obtain one by which the Author was forbidden to
set foot again in France, and the Sorbonne to receive him. Scilicet sic Petrus
sactitabat, sic Paulus ludebat. The Court of Rome, as well as the Monks, was
mortally grieved that this new Gospel could not pass, and had it not been for
the University at Paris, we should in all likelihood have never known what the
Gospel of Jesus Christ was, and the Monks would have been our Saviors.

I have heard say that in all the rich Convents there is a Father that keeps
the Evidence-Office, whose whole Employ it is to find out good Titles when they
want them, to join their Neighbors Field to their own* and there is no harm in
that, because it is for the Church. There are some of these Orders, the
Benedictines for example, who have their Pensioners in the Parliament at Paris,
like the Excise-men in the Courts of Aids to help them gain their Cause: From
whence come all the Enterprises which they daily make upon their Neighbors
Goods, stripping them as often as they can of them. People of very good Credit,
and who know the thing very well, have assured me, that this one O^der gave
more than two hundred thousand Livers a Year in Pensions to diverse Officers of
Parliament; judge then what Disorders that makes. I know not why the Monks have
not been kept to read the Holy Scriptures, and to study Divinity and Morality,
rather than so many ridiculous ways of Mortifying themselves; if they studied
or worked hard, they would need no other Mortification, but they have invented
whipping since they have left off working, which is the most extravagant thing
in the World. The reading of a Chapter of Scripture would be much better than
that; as an excellent Man said, It is not the Severities of the Body, nor the
Agitations of the Mind, but the good Motions of the Heart that are meritorious,
which shall be excited much sooner by Meditation of the Word of God, than by
all their Follies. Wherefore I have reason to ask what the Monks are good for?
The poor Orders as they are also lazy, are a burden to the State, they of them
that are rich take no care of the poor, and both the one and the other are
unprofitable, nay, prejudicial both to Church and State, they ought to do quite
otherwise than to plunge themselves into Idleness, so dangerous both for their
Souls and Bodies, and to be so chargeable to the Kingdom that keeps them and
fats them up without receiving any Service from them; they are good for none
but themselves and the Popes, whose Tyranny they support; thus the Popes in
maintaining them do good only to themselves, when certainly the Monks at
present might easily spare the Popes. Wherefore I yet once more demand what
Service the Popes do to the World?

As for the Nuns, Of the Nuns.
tho there be not by much so great Disorders amongst them as amongst the Monks,
because generally they have no share at all in the Affairs of a Civil Life, yet
I think I may safely say it, That Fathers and Mothers who are desirous of their
Childrens Salvation, ought not to send them to such Houses, and that there is
more real Piety, Chastity, and Purity of Heart among Secular Women than among
the Nuns, by reason of the little Liberty that is given them: All the good they
can do there is by Force and by Constraint, it is a place of Slavery and of
Torment. People imagine that in these Houses where they have so much time to
employ in reading and instructing themselves, they ought to be very knowing,
yet they are more ignorant and superstitious than Women that live abroad in the
World. Their Abbesses are ordinarily chosen for their Quality, not for their
Merit, and are either covetous or extravagant, fantastical, without Humanity
for these poor young Women, without Conduct, and almost always without Piety. I
have known many of them in my time, but never saw any that was worthy of this
Employment but Madam de Fontevrault, Daughter of King Henry the Fourth. In
those Houses where the Superiors of the Nuns are Elective or Triennial, there
are continual Factions and Intrigues, that the Election may fall on her that
every particular Woman likes. It would be very well that these Elections were
abolished, provided that Persons of real worth were placed in their stead. The
number of these Nuns is also too great as well as of the Monks, and they ought
to be reduced, so that those who remain should have 200 Livers a Year for their
Subsistence, and that the King should dispose of these places to whom he
pleased, for the succor of many Families, and the overplus of so many rich
Convents Revenue might be employed in the building of many Hospitals. Nor
should any young Woman be admitted to take the Vail till 25 Years old, for the
Tyranny of Fathers and Mothers, and the want of Consideration in young Girls
throws a great many of them into Despair. They ought also to be allowed
sometimes to go home to their Fathers and Mothers when their Health requires
it, and to refresh their Spirits which are sometimes overborn with Grief and
Vexation either by the Tyranny of their Superiors, or by their too long
Confinement in this Prison; without this a Convent is a perfect Shambles both
for the Body and Soul. It must be acknowledged that this sort of Relig^ous Life
is unproportionable to the weakness both of our Bodies and Minds, and is much
less proper to produce true Piety than a Secular Life. Thus the Popes are so
far from being Serviceable to Mankind, that they are matter of scandal to us,
and stumbling Blocks to turn us out of the true way of Salvation. Of what use
then are they to the World?

An Italian will tell me that they are serviceable to Italy, by their enriching
it. But it is at the Expense of other Countries which do this Honor to Italy;
which, having now lost its Temporal Empire, has by the Popes means raised a
spiritual one to make amends for it; but still this is at our Expense.

It is certain that all the Italians in general look upon themselves as having
a share in the Glory of this Empire, and pretend that they have more Wit and
Merit than other Nations* which they have in this respect subdued, especially
those of Rome, who for this reason give themselves the liberty of speaking
contemptibly of Catholic Princes, whom they look upon as their Tributaries;
the very Cobblers come in for their share, and are mightily pleased that the
Pope rules in all places. And I have observed, that they have more respect and
value for those Princes that have shaken off the Popish Yoke, as if it had been
the Effect of their Courage; nay, for the very Strangers of those Countries, as
English, Swedes, and Danes. This may seem strange; for it is well known that
otherwise they bitterly hate these Nations that no longer yield them any thing.
You would say that they were of the Humor of Tiberius, who was even vexed at
the abject Patience of those who were most suhmissive to his Tyranny. Tacitus.
Illum qui libertatem publicam nollet, says Tacitus, jam abjectae Servientium
patientiae taedebat. But to return to our Modern Romans; when they hear the
King of France called the Eldest Son of the Church, whereof the Pope is the
Spouse, who calls Kings his Sons, they esteem themselves so much the more by
half, and show an equal proportion of Disrespect for those Kings. For my part I
was disgusted, I own it, when I heard them say, that all Christian Kings were
the Popes Children, and that the King of France was his Eldest Son; and my
respect for Royal Majesty did as insensibly diminish, as theirs for the Popes
increased; nor could I ever digest that Abuse to hear that such a Cardinal was
Protector of France, and such a one of Spain, etc. What, thought I, must
pitiful Priests or Bishops, who for the most part are good for nothing, by the
Humor of People of their own stamp become one day the Monarchs of Monarchs,
and their Servants Protectors and Guardian Angels of the Kings and Kingdoms of
the Earth, and that too against all Reason, both Divine and Human! Yet all the
World submits to it, as to an Eternal Truth. I know not what Protection they
give, nor in what, nor against whom they do protect. Never was there any such
Folly in the World, and yet they are paid for it too.

That the Popes are hurtful to Italy.
But let us examine a little whether the Popes are good for Italy, or no; the
Mischiefs they heretofore did the^e are notorious. It is known that the
Republic of Venice has been like to be destroyed by them, that they have
oppressed the Liberty of the City of Rome; that they have usurped and gained,
by Craft and Violence, the greatest part of those States which they possess in
Italy; that which they call the Patrimony of St. Peter, Vrbin Ferrara, Castro,
and the Kingdom of Naples, which they have made Tributary: It is known that
they exact a Tribute all over Italy by the same contrivances as from all other
Catholic States, that by their Inquisition they keep it in Slavery, whereby
these Provinces are kept in monstrous Ignorance of Religion, and in so great
corruption of Manners, that the Vices of other Nations are Virtues to them, and
theirs not fit to be so much as mentioned in any other place. The Italians may
well say what Tacitus said, speaking of another sort of Inquisition which
reigned in his time at Rome; Tacit. in vita Ag^ic.
Scilicet illo igne vocem Pop. Romans and libertatem Senatus and Conscientiam
Generis Humani aboleri arbitrabantur; expulsis insuper sapientiae professoribus
atque omni bona art in exilium acta, ne quid usquam honestum occurreret.
Dedimus profecto grande patientiae documentum, and sicut vetus aetas vidit quid
ultimum in liberate esset, ita nos quid in servitute adempto per Inquisitiones
loquendi audiendique commercio. This is the true Representation of the
Inquisition, and of the Slavery which the Italians now suffer. It is clear that
this modern Inquisition is taken from the Example of the wicked Roman
Emperors, from whom they have also borrowed many other things. 'Twas from the
Romans that they took this Maxim of keeping the People in Ignorance, for among
them there were those who said, de actis Deorum reverentius visum est credere,
quam scire. Tacit.
It seemed a greater piece of Reverence to believe well concerning the Actions
of the Gods, than to know them. The Popes do no good even to the City of Rome,
but have ruined it, tho they pretend that the Romans are obliged to them for
many Contrivances which they have found out, to make the Water run to their
Mills, as amongst others, the Jubilee, which is a general Fair of Pardons and
Indulgences; but the Popes did this to get by it themselves: For if the People
make any Profit at this Fair by the innumerable multitude of poor Christians
that come there to obtain the Popes Indulgences, qui preconan vino y venden
vinagro, that cry Wine and sell Vinegar, all that returns back into the Popes
Purse and their Nephews, who drain this City by an infinity of Imposts, so that
it is one of the poorest Towns in all Italy. The People at Rome, as well as the
Popes, having been used to live by the Folly of other Nations, now know not how
to apply themselves to work. There remains not in all this Town one spark of
their ancient Generosity and Nobleness of Mind, that made them be heretofore
respected more than all their Power. All the greatness of those ancient Heroes
is now vanished, since the Priests became Governors. And all those Virtues
which made Rome the Admiration of the whole Earth, have been succeeded, by
Sloth, Effeminacy, Sodomy, the Art of poisoning, Treason, and all sorts of
Artifices of Monkish Tricks, a base and knavish Policy, and they now reign by
nothing but Vice and Debauchery. Voluptatibus, quibus illi plus adversus
subjectos quam armis valent. Hitherto we cannot find what the Popes are good
for.

Of the Popes calling of Councils.
There are some ignorant People who say, that the Church is obliged to the
Popes for the holding of Councils, because that without them there would be
none assembled; and they insist particularly upon that of Trent, wherein the
true Catholics were so well tried and established, and Heresy opposed, so that
since that time it has made no progress. All they who have read History a
little, know that the Popes hate Councils more than the Devil does the Cross.
We have already seen that Cardinal Julian complains of the Popes that they
would not call any Councils, Ne auferat, says he, temporalitatem nostram, lest
they should take away our Temporality. Palav. lib. 14. cap. 12.
Cardinal Palavicini says enough to confute these People in his History of the
Council of Trent, that the Popes ever abhorred National Councils, Concilio
Nationale sempre aborrito da Pontefici; and another Jesuit says, that in the
Mystical Firmament of the Church, there cannot be a Conjunction of a more
dangerous Influence than that of a General Council. P. Diego Laines, lib. 16.
cap. 10.
Nel Cielo mistico della Chieza non si puo imaginar Conjunzione di piu
periculosa influenza che un Synodo Generale.

Council of Trent.
Now for the Council of Trent in particular, all they who have read the History
of those Times, know that it was sorely against the Popes Will that it was
called, and that they never consented to it till the very last extremity,
having a great while eluded the Instances and Remonstrances made by the
Emperor, the King of France, and other Princes for the assembling of a Council.
They demanded a free Council for the Reformation of the Church, and principally
of the Court of Rome, and to bring into the Bosom of the Church those who were
gone astray from it. The Court of Rome who had more reason to fear than hope
from the good Intention that appeared in many Prince^ so desirous of a
Reformation, would not consent to the calling a Council, till at length having
without success employed their utmost skill to hinder it; they at last managed
the matter so that the Pope was to convene it, Charles the Fifth having basely
parted with the Right he had to assemble it; that it should be called in an
Italian Town, and that the Popes Legates should have the management of the whole
Affair; from that time there was no good to be expected from this Assembly. In
truth the Popes Legates did rule all a^cording to their own Fancy, almost all
the Bishops who assisted at it were Italians, and the only Mark they all hit at
was, more and more to establish the almighty Power of the Pope, wherein they
easily succeeded: except in this one point, God did not suffer Heresy to
triumph there. But as for the Popes who were the Soul and only Organ of it,
sending every Week the Holy Ghost in a Cloak-Bag, if the Heresy of Luther would
have served their turn they would have chosen it. (...). Chrysostom. Gal. 5.


Nay, without all doubt, if the Mohammedan Religion would have conduced to the
augmenting of their Power and Riches, both they and all their Court would have
embraced it presently.

This Council has done the Church a thousand times more harm than good, for it
has given the Protestants plausible Reasons of Obduracy, and to us no greater
assurance of the goodness of our Religion; for as they carried it, they made it
a Work perfectly Humane, Intrigue and Policy did all. The Pope was there a
Party, and became himself the Judge. The Protestants could not be there, seeing
the Pope was the manager both of the Convocation and of the Suffrages, which he
got for Money distributed about in Germany and Italy, before the Assembly began:
And because he would be master, some good Bishops who knew not how to manage it
so well, inesperti del maneggio, as Cardinal Palavicini says of them, offering
to speak against the Popes Interest, were treated many times unworthily by the
Legates, who gave no sort of Liberty. Christian Princes, as the Emperor
Ferdinand, Charles the Ninth, and Albert Duke of Bavaria, to whom they granted
not one of their just Demands had no more reason to be satisfied. To convince
the World that it was only the advantage of the Popes which the Court of Rome
sought after, and not the Glory of God, nor the Salvation of Men: It is not
necessary to relate at large all the base Intrigues which were unworthy of the
Legates, but only to consider the Decree which was there made against the
reading of the Holy Scripture. By this Decree all People were forbidden to read
it without leave given them by their Ordinary, who was to allow it to none but
Clergymen; that is to say, the People who were in possession of Benefices, and
whose Interest it was to maintain things in the same condition they were in.
Thus did the Legates forbid what God had commanded generally to the whole
World. And as Tyrants live in continual fear, they thought themselves not yet
secure, but fearing that they had granted too much, they made another Decree
whereby they absolutely forbad all sorts of People to read it. All their fear
was, that by the comparing the Papacy with the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, People
should discover the Imposture which they have put upon the Church, whose Face
they have disfigured and changed its very Nature, making the Government of the
Church a piece of Knavery, and a Device to supplant all the Kings and Princes
of the World, confounding Heaven with Earth, and destroying all Order both
Divine and Humane. The Heretics make a more Christian Use of it; for tho they
have been so inconsiderate as to reject many Books of the Old Testament, which
are Canonical, as the Apocrypha; yet they do not only allow, but recommend the
reading of them, and we find them bound up with their Bibles to be there read
as well as the rest. I make no doubt but that if the Legates had dared to do
it, they would have suppressed the Holy Books, or at least razed out, or
changed all those places that were against them, as the Inquisition has done
by many of the Ancient Authors. How are they who are gone away from us
scandalized at such Conduct as this? What shame has it not brought upon our
holy Religion? they cannot look upon us without abhorrence, because we suffer
such Abominations. Expediret ut suspenderentur molae asinariae in collis eorum*
ut non scandalizarent pusillos istos. It were expedient that Mill stones were
hanged about their Necks, that they might not scandalize these little ones.
This Example alone proves sufficiently, that it was a profane and worldly
Spirit that reigned in this Counc^l: It was the same Spirit that made them give
a Ball at Trent to Philip the Second, where it may be said, Palav. lib. 11.
cap. 13.
that the Pope also danced in the Persons of his venerable Legates. It was also
the same Spirit that made them give up Religion wholly to the Popes Fancy which
is evident by this, because that having made many Decrees, they say that they
shall be of force without prejudice to the Authority of the Apostolic See,
that is to say, that they shall have place no farther than the Pope himself
pleases, whereby they make the Council subject to the Pope, which is a
devilish Heresy, condemned by the Councils of Constance and Basil. The Popes
did in effect get by this Council as well as by the others dispencing both with
them, and themselves when they pleased; as Palavicini says, that if the Pope
should be bound to observe Laws, the Fountain of his Beneficence would be half
drawn dry. Introduct. cap. 11.
Se'l Papo vuol osservare quelle leggi, il font della sua Beneficenza
asciugarsi per meta. He says in another place, that the Council would not bind
his hands, who was able to do all things.

This Worldly Spirit is yet farther to be discerned by the Ambiguity which they
have affected in many places, which shows us that they had oftentimes no other
design than to throw Dust in our Eyes; they have also forbidden that any body
should pretend to interpret, reserving the knowledge of them only to themselves.

It is then clear by this account, that there is never any good to be expected
from any Council which the Pope shall call together, or where he or his
Creatures shall preside, or which shall be assembled in Italy; not only because
of the multitude of Italian Bishops, who would spoil all, but because a Council
of worthy Men would not be there in safety; for the Italians would run to all
sorts of Excess and Violence, rather than suffer that the Spiritual Empire,
which they claim over all other Nations, should be taken from them, because
they come all in for a share of the Plunder: just as we see the Inhabitants of
Barbary are concerned for the preservation of the Town and Pirates of Algier,
because they taste of their Riches, and have all a share in their Robberies.

The further insist for the Popes Advantage, that they have built a great many
fine Churches at Rome, whose admirable Structure does greatly edify Believers,
and is of it self capable to convert the Infidel Princes, as Palavicini says,
Palav. lib. 8. cap. 17.
Tali opere basterebbeno per render ammirabile la nostra Religione alli sguardi
di tutti i Monarchi Mahometani e Gentili. Such Works as these are enough to
make our Religion be admired by all Mohammedan and Gentile Monarchs. He makes
Religion to consist in these Buildings. It is the same thing that they say, who
pretend that the fine Music of the Churches, the fine Ceremonies, and the
costly Ornaments are capable of converting People. I am bold to say, that if
any Man be converted by these, he is a Fool; and I know that upon People of
Understanding, who apply themselves to solid things, and grow in Spirit and
Truth, this has a contrary Effect; for these things do debauch the Mind, and
set it on wandering. The enquiry is about seeking God, and finding him in those
places; and it is not the sight of the fine Gilding, or the excellent painting
of an Edifice, nor the hearing of a sweet Harmony, but rather the lifting up of
our Minds above sensible Objects, and separating them as much as possibly we
can from Sense and Imagination; it is the fixing the Eyes of our Understanding
with a Religious Attention upon that invisible Spirit, upon that Sun of
Justice; and when we do it with that Love and Reverence that is due to it, we
shall never f^ll of seeing and hearing the most delightful things; we there s^e
lumen in lumine, we there also hear that sweet Voice that says, My Son, thy
Sins are forgiven thee. But for the fine Churches of Rome, the Popes in
building them have built their own House, and these Material Temples have
ruined the Spiritual Temples of the Church, Malus vos pari^tum amor accepit,
male Ec^lesias in t^ctis aedificiis^; veneramini, etc.
Palavicini does acknowledge it. The Fathers were of Opinion, that Antichrist
should one day seize upon the most magnificent Temples of the Christians, this
was the Opinion of St. Hilary, and of St. Hierom, Hill. contra Au^e^tium.
Hieron. ad M^rceilam viduam.
this last mentions the very Rock of Tarpeius. Therefore the Popes ought not to
glory overmuch in their Buildings, since Antichrist shall one day place himself
in them. I know not whether other Men are of the same Mind as I am; I like well
enough to see such fine things as these; but I confess that I have more
Devotion in a little Church without Magnificence or rich Ornaments, then I have
in such places. I find that my Devotion does insensibly divide, and that Sense
does sometimes carry away a part of my Mind, and transport it to sensible
Objects which do not deserve it, and that my Affection is thereby weakened
whatever care I take to g^ther it up and unite it. This has a much more
dangerous Effect upon the common People, who have no Knowledge, and whose
Religion lies only in their Eyes and Ears; they do in horrible manner fasten on
these things which are only obvious to their Sense, and go no higher. There was
much more Piety heretofore when the Churches were not so m^gni^icent, which in
my Opinion does more harm than good. Dicite Pontifices in sacris quid facit
aurum? There was infinitely more Zeal in the time of Pope Zephirin, who
ordained that the Blood should be consecrated in a Chalice of Glass: and St.
Hierom does inform us, that in his time Exuperus Bishop of Thoulouse did
consecrate the Holy Sacrament in Calice vitreo and vimineo canistro, in a
Chalice of Glass and a wicker Basket. Then it was as Gregory the Great says,
that the Bishops were of Gold, but now their Chalices are of Gold, they
themselves are become Wood, ( cum aurei ess^nt Sacerdotes, Calices habuerunt
ligneos; nunc cum lignei sint Sacerdotes, Calices volunt habere aureos.) That
is to say, within, for witho^t they want no Gold, It is only the Gold of the
true Faith which they som^time^ w^nt, but they look upon that as a small matter.

(...) a^t oblig^d for ma^^ Reas^^s, to abolish t^^ Pa^a^^,
Having then proved, as I h^ve done, that the Popes are good for nothing, that
they are the cause of the Churches Desolation, and of the Damnation of so many
Millions of Souls which daily perish, as well by Heresy as by Ignor^nce and
Vice, the^^ ^^main^ nothing more for me to prove, but that it is the
indispensible Duty of Christian Princes, who are the Protectors of the Faith,
and to whom God has committed the Defense of his Church, to deliver this same
Church from the Papacy that destroys it. This is what they owe to God, to the
Church, to their Subjects, to themselves, and also to Human Society.

In regard of GOD, we know that Princes were commanded under the Law to take
care that nothing should be received against the pure Service of God, and we
also see that good Kings, as Josias and Jehosaphat were so careful in this
Point, as to depose the Highpriests themselves, who were instituted by God,
which the Popes are not. And now under the Gospel they are the Guardians of the
two Tables of the Law, as the Council. Paris.
Council of Paris says, so that whether the Discipline of the Church be
augmented or delayed, God will call Kings to an account for it, to whose care
he has entrusted it; and according to this the Emperors did depose the
Bishops of Rome as well as others, when they neglected their Duty. Leo the
first, Bishop of Rome, does not deny it, when he wrote to the Emperor in those
times. Debes incunctanter advertere, regiam Potestatem tibi non solum ad Mundi
Regimen, sed maxim ad Ecclesiae praesidium esse col^atam. You ought always to
r^member, that the Regal Power is g^ven to you, not only for the Government of
the World, but chiefly for the Safeguard of the Church.

As for the Church, if they are the Protectors of it, as they ought to be, and
without doubt are; if the Church be trod under foot, if Ambition, Luxury, and
Ignorance seize upon the Ecclesiastical Ministry, if the Bishops neglect their
Duty, are incapable of teaching, and look after nothing but spoiling and
turning all to their own particular Profit, if they will make the Church a Den
of Thieves, if they sell Holy Things, and keep the Price to themselves, shall
not Princes punish such Villainies? Shall they bear the Sword without being
able, even for the Good of the Church, to make use of it against the Popes, who
do all these things? Aug. contra Crescon. Gram. lib. 3.
It is in this, says St. Austin, that Princes are well pleasing to God, in
doing those things which none but Kings can do; In hoc ergo serviunt Domino
Reges, cum ea faciunt ad serviendum illi quae non possunt facere nisi Reges.
According to this they did heretofore depose the Popes, they made them give an
account of their Faith, they did assemble Councils, authorize their Decrees,
and made them be observed; and the Popes cannot alledg any Treaty made with
Princes, nor any Prescription; for there is no Prescription against the Service
which we owe to God, nor no Agreement which can bind the Hands of Princes when
it is against the good of the Church; for if at any time they have surprised
Princes, taking advantage of their Ignorance or Weakness, it is then a greater
Crime to observe these Treaties which are against the Glory of God and the good
of the Church, than it is to violate them. Here the saying is true, that
interdum scelus est fides. No Man whatsoever ought to have his Hands tied by
any Treaty from advancing the Glory of God as much as he is able by lawful
means.

Nor are Princes less obliged for their Subjects sake, to do their utmost
endeavor to extirpate the Papacy, for they are the Preservers both of
Religious and Civil Society, being the Heads both of the one and the other in
their own Dominions. It is on this account that they receive their Tribute, and
for this end were they by God ordained, that we might live in Peace and
Quietness in all Godliness and Honesty. And there is no Subject but may demand
it of his Prince, that he would enfranchise him from the Tyranny of the Pope,
or else let him renounce the Right which God has given him over him; for the
Prince has no Right to give his Subjects over to another, and at the same time
to reserve his own Power over them upon any pretense whatsoever, this is
against Nature and the Law of Nations, but he ought to defend them against all
Oppression, of either Foreign or Domestic Enemies. Now the whole World knows
that the Popes for many Ages past have dealt unworthily, as well by the
Subjects as the Persons of Princes they have smitten whole Kingdoms together
with their Anathema's, they have drained them by their Indulgences, they
plunder them by their Dispensations and by their Annates, they make them stoop
to them by their Bulls, and oblige many of them to take Oath^ of Obedience and
of Fidelity to them, and have in many places destroyed a world of People with
the Torments of their Inquisition. They may well apply to themselves this
saying of Tacitus; Subje^tos nos habuit tanquam suos, viles ut alienos.

Princes are f^rthermore for their own ^akes obliged to abolish the Papacy not
only as they are Members o^ the Church which is oppressed by it, but beca^^e
that they are God's Vi^egerents they ought to acknowledge none (...) the great
God above (...), who is the only King of Kings and Mon^^ch of Monarchs. The
P^p^^ have no more right to call themselves so, th^n those mad Men ^h^t say
they are som^times God, and sometimes Kings of France (...) he who under th^^
p^^^^nce attempted against the Life of H^n^y (...) F^^^th. O^^^t. lib. 3.
S. Op^^^ ^ays very w^ll; Cum super Imperatorem n^n (...) nisi so^us (...)
Imperatorem, dum se Donatus super Imperatorem extollit, jam quasi hominum
^xcesserat metas, ut se ut Deum, non ut hominem aestimaret. There being none
above the Emperor, but God who made the Emperor, seeing Donatus lifts himself
up above the Emperor, he has passed beyond the bounds of Men, that he might
look on himself as God and not as Man. At this day the Bishops of Rome have
this Right as they pretend, to fling down Kings from their Thrones, as a Fowler
shoots down a Bird from the branch of a Tree. They are Masters of all the
Kingdoms of the World and can give them to whomsoever they please; they not
only say so, but do it; they have done so by England, France, and Navarre, they
have done so by the East and West Indies, which they have shared between the
Spaniards and the Portugals, having outed the lawful Princes. They have dealt
thus with many other States, and are still ready to do the same thing again. It
is then the Interest of Princes for many respects that this Tyranny should be
abolished; since as the Fathers say, they have none but God alone above them,
they ought not to depend upon these Scoundrils. It is a thing unworthy of their
Majesty, and contrary to their Sovereignty to be under the Yoke of any Man
living. It signifies nothing to say that they are so only for the spiritual
part, for that is yet less to be allowed of. Jesus Christ has reserved that to
himself; and they suffer the Church to be undone by their Sluggishness and
hinder those who are gone astray from it from being converted, nay, they
destroy the very Popes who damn themselves in the foolish Opinion which they
have of their Power; they must be cured of their Presumption, and have good
done them whether they will or no, as we do to Children, a communi ed a
fanciulli convien fare il loro been senza lor voglia. It is fit to do good to
the common People and to Children, tho it be against their Will. Pope Marcellin
did not believe it possible, that a Pope could be saved, nor did Pius the fifth
think otherwise. People do not consider that it was for the sake of the
Temporality that the Popes have invented the Spirituality, and that without the
one, they would not trouble themselves with the other, as is apparent to the
World; for what shall we call Temporal if the Annates are not? and the Money for
Dispensations, the Oath which the Clergy take to the Pope, the Oath which Kings
take to the Holy See, that is to say, to the Papacy, and so many other Acts of
the basest submission of Princes (some of which do even border upon Idolatry,
as the kissing the Slipper of these wretched Creatures) and so great a
Superiority of the Popes, that Princes are become wholly contemptible? For my
part, I wonder that those, who have heard of Jesus Christ and his Gospel, do
not condemn this Pride to the severest Punishments. No Man that had the least
Fear of God would ever be Pope to act so horrible a part, not to mention the
Disorders of the Church, and the destruction of so many Souls that shall be
imputed to him. That the Papacy is against Humane Society.
Princes then ought not to defer their Endeavors of freeing the Church from
this Monster, and at the same time to deliver themselves from Tyranny, and not
suffer these Strangers to rob them of their Subjects, and as they owe this to
themselves, they owe it also to Human Society; for they are also obliged not
only to punish those who injure their own Persons or their Subjects, but
likewise those Crimes which do not touch themselves in particular, but yet
notoriously violate the Laws of God, of Nature, and of Nations, or of the
Church, or of the Authority which God has set over his People. I demand
whether the Popes are not guilty of these Crimes, they, who, under the Title of
Vicars of Jesus Christ, which they insolently assume, have cast the Church into
the most deplorable Desolation, and have ravaged all Christian Kingdoms; who
authorize all sorts of Vice and Disorder both in the Church and in the World,
dethrone Kings the anointed of God, tread upon the Necks of Emperors, dispense
with the Oaths of Allegiance in their Subjects, dispense with the Laws of God
and his Gospel, hinder Christians from reading the holy Scripture without which
we cannot be Christians, and unmercifully murder Men for their Religion by
their Inquisition; ought it to be questioned whether such People as these
should be exterminated? Innocent. c. 3. quod s^per his devoto Arch. Flor. 3.
part tit. 22. Sect. 5. Sylvanus in verbo Papa Sect. 7.
Pope Innocent himself and many others are of Opinion, that we may destroy
those that sin against Nature: Aug. lib. 5. de Civitate Dei.
And St. Augustine says, Opinantur scelera facienda decerni, qualia si quis
terrena Civitas decerneret, genere humano decernente fuerat evertenda. Seneca
7. de benef.
Seneca has also a fine saying upon this; Si non Patriam meam impugnat sed
suae gravis est, and sepositus a mea gente suam exagitat, abscidit nihilominus
illum tanta pravitas animi. In fine, no Man can doubt whether those who curse
their Father and Mother and tread them under their Feet, or those that live
upon Humane Flesh, or Pirates upon the Sea without Commission from any Prince,
ought to be extirpated, and whether all Princes have not a right to destroy
them if they can; I maintain that the Popes do all this and worse, I have
already showed it in what I have related. But besides all this, what can a Man
think of these Men, who call themselves their Holinesses, which is a Title that
belongs only to God, and is one of the most excellent of all his Attributes;
who call themselves Vicars of Jesus Christ, to dethrone Jesus Christ from his
Church and govern it at their own fantasy; who say that they are infallible and
above the Councils, that they can open Heaven and shut up Hell, put out the
Fire of Purgatory when they please, save and damn whom they please, who make
themselves be called God and the Divine Majesty, and cause themselves to be
worshipped. I demand whether there be any thing like this in the Crimes of
others the most vile and miserable Creatures, and that which is the most
terrible of all, is, that the Popes do every day cast down many Millions of
Souls headlong into Hell. Do not such things as these deserve the Vengeance of
Princes here on Earth? The Insensibility and Stupidity of Christians must be
very great, this their Lethargy to me appears monstrous, and certainly there
must be in it somewhat supernatual; (...) as Hippocrates says of some strange
Diseases, which are wholly unknown. If the Interest of God and his Church were
here only concerned, it would not be so surprising; for usually Princes seldom
trouble themselves with that; they cry Tacitus,
Deorum injuriae diis curae; but here where they are robbed of their Majesty to
dress up a pack of Rascals with it, where they are made Tributary, where their
Authority is limited, where part of their Subjects are withdrawn from them by
Exemptions and base Laws, which make them contemptible as well to those who
thus plunder them, as to others who secure themselves under the Covert of this
Tyranny; It is unconceiveable that Princes should have so much Patience; for
tho the Primacy of St. Peter could be proved that he was Bishop of Rome, and
left there his Succcessours either as he was an Apostle, or a Bishop, must, I
say, such People as these be his Successors, and make all these Crimes their
common Practice, and go still unpunished? They shall as soon make me worship
the Devil as believe it. And I really believe, that it would be no hard matter
to make them who adhere to the Papacy, both receive and serve him. They would
soon relish the Reasons of the Manicheens, who said that there were two
Principles, the one good and the other bad; or the Argument of those Indians,
who believed they ought to worship the Devil, because he could do them hurt,
and that God, being all good of himself, could do them none, and so it is not
necessary to adore him. This now looks very amazing, but they who are so much
in love with the Papacy would soon receive it, if any Man of Sense would give a
little color to it, and there were good Benefices to be hoped for by it, which
could not otherwise be obtained; if they might have fine Churches, and
re-establish the fine Ceremonies of Numa Pompilius, if their only care might be
to divert the Eyes and Ears of the People with Music and rare Shows, as
heretofore they did to those miserable Jews, who brought their Children to
Moloch, and whilst they burned they played upon all sorts of Instruments, and
entertained them with the most delightful Music, that they might not hear the
Cries of their poor Children.

Can we think it strange as things go, that the Protestants are not converted?
There would be in my Opinion greater reason to wonder if they should embrace
the Catholic Religion whilst the Pope should exercise this horrible Tyranny;
for I do maintain that there is no Man of Honor, that has any Modesty or
Sense of Christianity, that can digest this Article of the Almighty Power of
the Pope, if at least it has not been riveted in him from his Childhood, and
he been brought up in this Opinion all his Lifetime without ever making any
Reflection upon it. But for the Protestants, we must never pretend to make them
believe that the Popes are Heads of the universal Church established by Jesus
Christ to govern it as it is governed, there is no Man of Sense will ever be
persuaded to believe this. But it may be said that the great Truths which the
Cathol^ck Religion teaches, give us so great an advantage over the Heretics,
that they ought to make no difficulty of passing over such an Error as this to
enter into the Communion of the Church. For my part, I am of Opinion, that a
Man's Conversion is a work supernatural, and from the hand of God, who, filling
the Heart of Man with Light and Courage, makes him overcome Darkness and his
natural Weakness; and that a true Conversion is always accompanied with Zeal
toward God, and Charity toward our Neighbor. This being supposed, I maintain
that they who are converted by these Principles do in effect embrace with their
whole Heart the Catholic Truths; but that their Charity and the Zeal toward
God, which animates them, shall always make them resist and oppose to the
utmost of their Power all Impostures and Falsities whatsoever, that they shall
cheerfully lose their Estates and Lives, to deliver the Church from so
miserable a Slavery as the Papacy is. It is a great unhappiness that the
Protestants have separated themselves not from the Pope, but from the Church,
and that they have invented Novelties to fortify their Schism which at the
beginning had no other Original than the Tyranny of the Pope; for without these
Novelties the Church would in all likelihood have joined with them, because
that many People saw clearly the Cheat of the Papacy, and that it had no
Foundation, neither in the Scripture nor in Reason; but the Op^nions which they
began then to spread abroad, to which from time to time they added somewhat or
other new, ut nemo fit repent turpissimus* put the Catholics out of all hope,
and made them continue as they were; and it were now foolish enough to think
our selves in the wrong, to acknowledge that the Protestants are right in this
Article, and that we have not courage enough to get off this Abuse and to
detest it as well as they, wherein we do great Prejudice to our selves, to
Religion, and likewise to the Protestants whom we destroy by it; for they,
seeing that they have Reason on their side in this Point, cannot believe that
we have it in others, and so remain obstinante. For my part, as I am assured
that their Religion is contrary to the Gospel, so I cannot but confess (and I
think my self indispencibly bound in Conscience to do it) that concerning the
Article of the Papacy, they have more Reason on their side than can be imagined.

But if we find that we have too little Courage or Strength to undertake to
abolish and utterly destroy this Monster, we ought at least to endeavor to
send him home to Rome, and secure our selves from all the Mischief he is able
to do us, and not to endure any more his Approaches. I say this only to prevent
the Objection which People make, that it is extreme difficult to bring about
such an Enterprise; that this great Machine is so well joined together, this
Babel has so many Props and Arches, that they who should undertake to pull it
down would be in danger of being swallowed up in its Ruins. Mill annorum
fortuna disciplinaque compages haec coaluit, quae convelli sine convellentium
exitio non potest. It would ever be a glorious thing, both before God and Men,
to undertake so great a thing, tho it were without success. But I do not think
the danger so great as People imagine; for I am persuaded that this work does
not exceed the Strength of any great, vigorous and zealous Prince who would
manage the thing with Prudence. I own that no Prince can undertake such a Work,
who is not assured that his Neighbors shall not oppose him, and that his
Clergy and People shall not be against him: As for his Neighbors, he may
easily know their Disposition both as to their Will, and the Means they have
either to assist or hurt him. And for the Clergy, the Contrivance should be to
let them peaceably enjoy their Benefices, and to make them understand their
Rights; that according to the Gospel all Bishops are equal, and that they owe
to the Pope no more than to any other of their fellow Brethren, that the Popes
have usurped over them the Authority which they assume to themselves of giving
Bulls, and the Oath of Fidelity which they exact from them, and that these
things overturn the Gospel; and that for the Oath, if they have taken it to the
Pope, it is null in it self, being against the Law of God, as St. Austin says,
si ad peccatum admittendum fides adhibeatur, mirum est si fides appelletur. And
for the People, they must be gently used and made to understand, if they are
capable of Reason, that all the Popes of Rome, as well as other Bishops, have
Authority only in their Diocese, according to the Gospel and ancient Canons;
that the Authority which they exercise, serves for nothing else but to make
them Masters of the whole Earth, and turns to nothing but their particular
Profit: They must also be showed the Disorders which this Power has caused
both in the Church and in the World, as I have represented it in some places of
this Work. If once the People were made to comprehend this, the Monks could
never do any Mischief; for they are dangerous only among the People whom they
govern, provided they do not come nigh Princes. This being done, a potent and
prudent Prince would easily persuade other Princes all that I have said of the
Papacy, of its uselesness, of the Mischiefs it has caused in the Church and in
the World, of the Shame which it draws upon them by keeping them always under
the Yoke, of the damage which it causes to their Estates, of the Danger they
are continually in depending upon the Popes Humor, who can excommunicat^ them
when he pleases, of the Account they will have to give to God for so many
Souls that perish, as well Catholics as Heretics, the one by Ignorance, and
the others by the Obstinacy which the Papacy causes; and that Religion has no
Connection with the Papacy, that we should be more Catholics than we are if
there were no Pope, and that the Church would be Aristocratically governed, as
in the first Centuries by the way of Councils. There is no Prince who has
common Sense, but would join with another truly Catholic Prince that would
propose this; and by this means we should soon see the Prophecy of the
Revelation fulfilled, Rev. 11.15.
which says, that the Kingdoms of the World are become the Kingdoms of our
Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. But, say they,
the King and the Bishops have The Oath taken to the Pope.
sworn Fidelity to the Holy See. I answer with St. Ambrose, Amb. Offic. 1. cap.
ult.
That it is ever unjust to observe an Oath made against God or our Neighbor:
And St. Augustine said above, that if an Oath tends to a Crime, it is contrary
to Faith to keep it. I have proved that the Papacy is a Mystery of Iniquity;
and that so Princes as well as others would make themselves the Instruments of
the Popes Crimes, of their Sin against God, and of the Ruin which they draw
upon the Church. Seneca says very well, Si in omnibus obediendum est patri, in
eo non est obediendum, in quo efficitur ne pater sit; Tho we ought in all
things to obey our Father, yet he is not to be obeyed in those things wherein
he cease to be a Father. The reason then is much stronger, that we ought not
to obey a common High-way-man, who has deceived and seduced us to make us
Accomplices of his Crimes. When a Vow or an Oath is lawfully made, yet where the
thing vowed, or the Oath taken does hinder a greater Moral Good, Orthodox
Divines are of Opinion that the Oath is null, because that we owe to God a
Progr^^ in well doing so that we cannot deprive our selves of the Liberty of
making this Progress: Besides, every Oath of a Christian has this understood,
Provided that this be to the greater Glory of God, Edification of our
Neighbor, and our own Salvation: So that quod propt^r Charitatem fit, non
debet contra Charitatem militare. That which is made for Charity's sake, ought
not to militate against Charity. The Lawyers say, that sacra alienari non
possunt; Holy things cannot be alienated. And what is there more sacred than
the Zeal with we ought to have for the Glory of God, for the Propagation of the
Faith, and the spiritual good of the Church? So that there is no Oath, Treaty,
nor Agreement, but ought to give place to the good and safety of the Church,
and the Salvation of our Souls. This is l^ke the Oath which Pirates or Robbers
on the Highway force them to swear whom they take Prisoners, who, to save
their Lives, promise to be faithful to them, and to t^em what Service they can;
The Lawyers do maintain that these Oaths are not binding. Paulus
Jurisiconsultus L. si quis ingenuam 1. cod. Tit. Idem Ulpian L. Hosts. D. de
captivis.
A piratis aut latronibus capti, liberi permanent. Qui a latronibus captus est,
servus latronum non est, nec postliminium illi necessarium est. It is an
undisputable Maxim Non posse Deum obligare creaturam ad non obediendum sibi.
The Lawyers also say, that a Man cannot renounce the Right he has to defend
himself which is natural, much less a Prince.

Thus there is no Reason Divine nor Humane, but does indispencibly engage
Princes to renounce the Papacy, and to re-establish the Church in that Liberty
which Jesus Christ has left to it. But as for the Papacy, it is like the
ancient Idols of Paganism, which, when the Christians did renounce, they kn^w
well their Vanity, when they examined into the thing, but they still reserved a
certain tr^mor fatuus and lepori^us, fear and impli^i^e respect, as Gers^^
says, for them; because that from their Infancy they had their Minds greatly
a^^ected with the Power of these Idols. It is just the same thing with us and
the Pope ^er still Idolum nihil ^st in M^^do. And I am persuaded that we should
have a great deal of difficulty before we could turn him briskly away. It were
to ^e wished that he would do himself Justice, and give Glory to God; but what
li^^lihood is there of that? They will always ke^p the Titles of H^ad and
Spouse of the Church; if they would be contented with the latter, there might
be found out a way to be rid of them, which would be for the French Church to
give them once for all the same Portion, as P^ilip the Second gave to his
Eldest D^u^ht^r, when he married her to the Duke of (...) he gave her a
Cru^i^^x an^ an I^age of our La^y, but upon cond^tion, that he should never
h^ar her speak ^f a^y t^ing ^ore, and that she sho^l^ renounce for ever all
other Pret^nsi^ns, ^oth f^r her self and all ^^r (...) as this Princess did;
but if they will not ^e the Spouse at thi^ P^i^c^; the sure^t way is absolutely
to ^reak with them, and to ^^nd them to the Who^e of Babyl^n* l^st a^ length
G^d c^nsume us als^ in thi^ (...).

FINIS.

