THE Foundation of God stands sure. OR, A Defense of those Fundamental, and
so generally believed Doctrines Of The Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the
Divine Essence. The Satisfaction of Christ the second Person of the Real and
Glorious Trinity. The Justification of the Ungodly by the Imputed Righteousness
of Christ.
Against the Cavils of W. P. I. a Quaker, in his Pamphlet, Entitled, The Sandy
Foundation shaken, etc.

Wherein his and the Quakers Hideous Blasphemies, Socinian and
damnably-heretical Opinions, are discovered and refuted; W. P's ignorance,
weakness, falsehoods, absurd arguings, and folly, is made manifest unto all.

With a Call unto all such who in the simplicity of their hearts have been
deluded by the Quakers, to come out from amongst them.

And an Exhortation to all Christians, as they desire their Salvation, to
beware of their damnable Doctrines, and not to come near the Tents of these
enemies of Jesus Christ, lest they be swallowed up in their ruin.

By Thomas Vincent, sometime Minister of Maudlins Milk-street, London.

1 John 5. 7. For there are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are One. Mat. 20. 28. The Son of Man
came to give his life a ransom for many. Romans 4. 5. To him that works not,
but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted for
Righteousness. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1668.

CHAP. I. The INTRODVCTION.
WILLIAM PENN Entituleth his Pamphlet, The Foundation shaken; which however he
terms a Sandy Foundation, he acknowledges to be, at least, our Foundation:
In the beginning of his Epistle to the Reader, he does inveigh against Human
Tradition; amongst which he numbreth not only those things which are
Circumstantial, but also those Doctrines which Protestants generally believe to
be Essential: And at the latter end of his Epistle he confesses, the Doctrines
of the Trinity, Satisfaction, and Justification by imputed Righteousness, to be
cardinal Points, and chief Doctrines, firmly believed as Articles of Christian
Faith, which he tells us he has endeavored the total enervation of. It is
plain then, that this man strikes at the Root, and labors to overthrow the
Foundation of Christianity, as we have built upon it, that he might overthrow
the faith of weak and unestablished Christians: But the Foundation of God
stands sure; the great Fundamental Truths concerning our Lord Jesus Christhis
Godhead, being the second Person of the Trinity, equal with the Father; his
satisfaction which he made to God's Justice for Man's sin; and justification by
his imputed Righteousness; are like a Rock which cannot be moved; against
which, what ever waves do arise and beat, for removal of, though the noise and
clamors be great, yet the attempts will be in vain; the Rock remains where it
was, and the waves of opposition are broken to pieces* It is possible indeed
that the Faith of some may suffer shipwreck by such assaults, because, they
were never well grounded, fastened and fixed in the principles of Religion;
because, they never received the truths of the Word either with true saving
Faith, or true sincere Love; and therefore, the Lord has threatened to give
such up unto strong delusions to believe a lie, that they might be damned, 2
These. 2* 10, 11, 12. These are the persons who hear Christ's Word, and do not
practice accordingly; therefore, our Savior compares them to fools that build
their house upon the sand, upon which the rain descends, and the floods come
and the winds blow and beat, and it falls, and the fall therefore is great,
Mat. 7. 26, 27. This is the Sandy Foundation which W. P. and the Quakers may
shake, and overthrow, and be instrumental to pull down into the same ruin and
destruction with themselves: But such who have built upon the Lord Jesus
Christ, who is the only true Foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Such who have built
indeed upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, whereof Jesus Christ
himself is the chief Cornerstone. Ephesians. 2. 20. They have built upon the Rock,
(upon which whosoever stumbleth and falls, will be broken to pieces; but upon
which whosoever builds, is safe) therefore are not tossed to and fro with
every wind of doctrine; neither is it possible (because of Christ's care and
undertaking for them) that they should be overthrown by any of the blasts of
Satan, or any of his instruments, Math. 24. 24, If it were possible they shall
deceive the very, Elect. The Quakers, however, some of them, and those of the
chiefest and Ringleaders, have at sometimes let fall from their Black-mouths
most hideous Blasphemies, and vented most damnably-heretical Doctrines: as for
instance, George Fox positively affirmed thus, I am equal with God; this was
deposed at a general Sessions in Westmerland. James Nayler said in the hearing
of Mr. Baldwin, a man of eminent trust and integrity, That he did witness, that
he was as holy, just, and good, as God. In the Quakers book called, Readiness
Errand to Damascus, it is asserted, That there is no distinction of Persons in
the Godhead. Nayler and others have spoken to this effect, That whosoever
expects to be saved by him that died at Jerusalem, shall be deceived. I might
mention many other such Blaspemies and Heresies; See The perfect Pharisee, by
the Newcastle Ministers at the beginning. I say, though the Quakers have
sometimes spoken out their blasphemies and corrupt Doctrines, yet for the most
part they are so subtle, that they do not suffer the inward shape of their mind
to appear so plainly abroad, lest every one should run from them with loathing
and abhorrency; and however the import of their words be blasphemy and heresy,
yet they shroud their meaning under ambiguous phrases; and especially at their
first assault and endeavors to gain proselities and followers, they cover the
hook with the pleasing bait of sugared words and fair speeches, whereby they
deceive those that are unskilful in the word of Righteousness, and in the
method of their erroneous ways; whence it is that many ere they are aware, and
not knowing whither they are going, are drawn into their pernicious ways, by
reason of whom the way of truth is evil spoken of.

But W. P. being himself a Quaker, and speaking in their name and vindication,
as himself tells us, p. 36. and they dispersing his books, and calling for an
answer; and he being counted amongst them one of their chief, because of some
smattring of learning which they conceit he has, and which he himself seems
to have a high conceit of (which how groundless it is, shall be discovered in
the places where he does attempt to show something of a Scholar) does in his
Pamphlet plainly assert and stand up for those Quaker-Doctrines which I shall
prove to be blasphemous and damnable Heresies. And has openly made it known to
the World, that the Quakers in those three great points which he does militate
against, and endeavor the refutation of, are Rank Socinians, who more grossly
err in the Fundamentals of Religion, than the Papists themselves. And because
W. P. does take occasion from the meeting with me and others in disputation (if
it might be so called, where nothing was directly answered) to put forth his
Pamphlet; and because he gives but a lame, and in somethings a false account
of transactions; therefore, I shall 1. give a true and brief Narative of what
passed at the Meetting or Conference, with answer to his Postscript, 2
Establish the truths he objecteth against, by Scripture and Argument; 3 Answer
his objections against those truths. Lastly, apply my self to deluded Quakers,
for the recalling of them, and to all other Christians for the cautioning and
establishing of them against the attempts of such as would draw them aside into
the dark and dangerous path, which does as certainly lead to Hell as the broad
way of Profaneness.

CHAP. II. A brief Narrative of T. V's meeting with some Quakers in
Spittle-yard, with the occasion and transactions there, and some exceptions to
the account which W. P. has given thereof.
MY first meeting with the Quakers was upon desire at the house of a friend in
Houndsditch, in der to the preserving of some who were tempted to go amongst
them; I met there several Quakers, two of which were the chief speakers: It
would tire the Reader, as I believe it did the hearers, to give relation of all
their wild and impertinent discourse; I could not get them to speak out, and
plainly to assert some of their Principles, through fear it is likely lest
their mouths should be stopped before the people; yet after many words, they
asserted the perfection of Saints in this Life, and the place of Scripture
which they brought for the proof of their assertion was, 1 Job. 3. 9. Whosoever
is born of God, does not commit sin. Unto this I answered, That the words in
the Original were (...), (one of them interrupted me at the mention of the
Original words, saying, It was the smoke of the bottomless pit) that the
signification was, does not make it his business to sin; and the meaning was,
that such as were born again, did not make a trade of sin, did not go on in a
course of sin; or did not commit sin, that is, with the full bent of the will
as the wicked do; But that it could not be understood of not committing sin at
all; because, the same Apostle in the same Epistle, Chap. 1. 8. tells thus,
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.
There he speaks of himself and others that were born again, and plainly
acknowledges they were not without sin. It was further urged, that if all that
were born of God were perfectly free from sin; then it would follow, that who
ever found any sin in them, were not born of God, consequently in state of
nature, and so if they should die with any sin remaining, they would certainly
go to Hell, and so none there, yea none in the world would be saved. Moreover I
appealed to the experience of the best of them, whether they could say they
were wholly free from sin, whether they had no irregular thoughts nor
affections: this they would not affirm, neither did they absolutely deny: when
they pleaded the perfection the Apostle Paul speaks of, Phil. 3. 15. I
replied, that the same Apostle v. 12. acknowledges that he had not as yet
attained, neither was yet perfect; and if the Apostle Paul who had arrived to
so great a height in grace that he was (how ever as some think little in
bodily stature) yet taller by the head and shoulders than others in regard of
his grace and spiritual seize; how could Audacious Quakers (who if
Quakers indeed because of their damnable opinions, I am confident have not the
least degree of true grace) boast of perfection, as if they had got above the
Apostle himself. I told them that all true Believers were perfect in a sense,
they were Evangelically perfect, but not legally, not absolutely perfect; they
had perfection of parts, but not perfection of degrees; and in this sense the
work of Grace, though the work of God was not perfect in regard of our selves,
but by degrees was carried on unto further perfection. After this, when they
could give no answer to the Arguments urged against them, they burst out into a
clamor, and talking all altogether, opening their mouths as wide as they could,
and shutting their ears as hard as they could, repeating the same things over
and over again; You make your selves the Patrons of sin; He that commits sin
is of the Devil; And whilst they pleaded, That all which were born of God were
without sin, they discovered themselves to be none of those that were born of
God by the sin which they were palpably guilty of in the multitude of their
words, especially in their wresting the Scripture from its genuine sense and
meaning, and in the perverse disputings of their corrupt minds. Our discourse
was to this effect, wherein they discovered so much of their rotten Tenants, so
much of their folly and weakness, being unable to maintain what they had
asserted, that one said to them, An't please God I will believe you no more.
Others that were wavering before, were confirmed against them, and established
in the ways of Truth, and so continue still to this day.

The next week after this meeting I went into the Country for a fortnight, and
in my absence, two of my friends (Mother and Daughter) went off to the Quakers;
the Daughter was the first whose inclinations and humor carried her that way
for some time before; for the preserving of whom from the Quakers delusions
upon the request of the Mother, I had several discourses with her; I gave
several reasons against their tenants and ways, unto which she could give no
answer, nor any ground of her liking their ways, which was not answered; only
a perverse will (which I am informed her Mother has so much indulged in other
things, unbefitting a parent, that in this, it is like to prove the destinction
both of mother and child) did lead her this way, against all reasons and
persuasions; I acknowledge I did say, It was worse to go to the Quakers
meetings than to a Bawdyhouse; because the defilement of the soul with their
damnable erors, which there she was likely to contract, was more deep and more
hardly to be washed off, than the defilement of whoredom or adultery; and what
our Savior said of the Pharisees, I may say of the Quakers, that harlots go
into the Kingdom of Heaven sooner than they: moreover I told her that, If there
stood a cup of poison in the window, I would rather drink it than suck in their
damnable Doctrines, because poisoning of the body was not so bad as the
poisoning and damning of the soul. I said further (not that I would give her
up) but that, if she went again, God might give her up to believe a lie that
she might be damned: the former is come to pass, and the last is most likely
to follow; and now let W. P. call my zealous endeavors to keep a poor soul out
of the dark path, which leads to utter darkness, peevish zeal, and railing
accusations, and what he pleases, I am sure I neither did, nor spoke any thing
unbecoming a Minister of the Gospel. W. P. charge me with cautioning the
Pater-familias to exercise his authority, etc. This is false, and the Master of
the Family I am confident will not a verr it, and why he should charge it I
know not, except that he might usher in those expressions, Forgetting that they
hold their liberty by connivance and the many appeals made by their
nonconforming Brethren for indulgence; unto which I say that we do not forget
it, neither would we be unthankful either unto God or man for it; and if by the
appeals made by our nonconforming Brethren for indulgence, he does mean and
reflect upon the grateful acknowledgement, which some of them lately made unto
the Supreme Magistrate, under the protection of whose government we all do
live. He discovers little of a Christian spirit, if he finds fault with it,
since we have a command, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. That supplications, prayers,
intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men; for kings, and for all
that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty; and therefore as we make conscience to pray for our
Sovereign, so we look upon our selves, as obliged to give thanks both to God,
and unto him when through his clemency and favor, we have liberty to live
peaceable and quiet lives in all Godliness and honesty. But to proceed in the
narrative: the daughter had such influence upon the mother, that she was
instrumental to draw her into this pernicious way, which when I heard of, I
went to their house to use my endeavors for the reducing of them; where I had
not been long, but the two men I had before discoursed with in Hounds-ditch
came in; amongst other things they flatly denied that there were three persons
in the Godhead, and that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost was a threefold variety or
manifestation of God. I did not think fit to enter into a dispute concerning
that and other points then; because it was so late, and because I desired to
have witnesses on my side, as well as theirs. This was the occasion of my
meeting with the Quakers at my House, which W. P. speaks of, and was present
at, but it is false (what he says) that I bespake my usual Auditory, an hour
before the Quakers were appointed to come, for I neither gave public notice,
neither spoke to any of a sooner time than I sent sent word to the Quakers of.
W. P. charge me for bringing not only a second, but a third and fourth,
least I should incur a nonplus, etc. That I should bring one with me was
appointed when the Meeting was promised, that our number might be the same,
with the two that were to dispute with us, and whom we two had met with before;
but if other two of my Brethren were present, it was without any desire of
mine, but only their our inclination brought them thither for some time after
our discourse began; and if they spoke any thing, it was not because they
thought I stood in any need they should help me out, but because of G. W's
confused discourse and indirect answers to my Arguments, they attempted to
bring him to some order, and to have gained an answer from him, that the
dispute might more intelligibly and successfully have proceeded.

When the assembly was come together I began with prayer, which was no sooner
ended, but (the other two Quakers who promised to meet with, us not appearing,)
George Whitehead began to speak, and declared that he was there come to defend
the Quakers opinions, which I had asserted were damnable; and when he would
have first discoursed of the light within them; I told him and the people that
I owned my charge of damnablenesse on the Quakers opinions, and though I did
not decline to dispute about the light he spoke of, and other errors of the
Quakers, yet I thought it most proper to begin with the Doctrine of the
Trinity, denied by the Quakers I last met with, who directly affirmed that the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost were not three distinct persons, but a threefold
variety or manifestation, and this I asserted to be a damnable error, and
would prove it to be so, and therefore I asked him whether his opinion was the
same with theirs, unto which M. Danson added, that he had asserted the Quakers
to have an infallible spirit, so that what was the opinion of one, must
consequently be the opinion of all, and therefore that he must either own this
opinion, or disown them for Quakers. G. W. at first did neither plainly assert
nor directly deny the opinion, but filled his mouth, and the people ears with
a multitude of words, wherein was so much ambiguity and obscurity, that the
sentiments of his mind were not easily to be perceived. But W. P. stands up,
falsely and blasphemously reflecting on the Doctrine of the Trinity, as an
error sprung up three hundred years after Christ, and directly denied that
there were three distinct persons in the Godhead, with three distinct
incommunicable properties. Then I asked G. W. whether he owned W. P. for a
Quaker, and not being disowned, I urged an argument against his assertion.

If the Father be another from the Son, and the Son another from the Father,
and the Holy Ghost another from each, and all three are God; and the property
of the Father is to beget the Son, and the property of the Son, to be begotten
of the Father, and the property of the Holy Ghost, to proceed from the Father,
and the Son; then there are three distinct persons in the Godhead, with three
distinct incommunicable properties. But the Father is another, etc. Therefore
there are three, etc.


When I had propounded my argument, W. P. shrunk, saying he did not come
thither to dispute, but left it to G. W. who neither would repeat my Sylogism,
nor give any direct answer, either to the Major or Minor; I could have
multiplied words as G. W. did, and applied my self to the people, instead of
speaking to the purpose, but this I forbore propounding my argument
Sylogistically, and the distinction of three persons being denied, though no
direct answer given to the argument urged to prove it; I added another argument
from 1 Job. 5. 7. There are three that bare record in Heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. The Father, Word, and Holy
Ghost are either three substances, or three manifestations, or three
operations, or three persons, or something else. But they are not three
substances, nor three manifestations, nor three operations, nor any thing else.
Therefore they are three persons.


G. W. makes no direct reply to this Sylogism, but finds fault with the
terms, and W. P. tells us that God did not use to wrap his Truths in
Heathenish Metaphysics, but in plain language; but let the Reader judge
whether there be the heathenish Metaphysics he speaks of in this Sylogism,
wherein there is not a word but what is to be found in the Scripture; not but
that some words may be made use of, in explaining Scripture Truths, which are
not in the Scripture themselves, so they express the thing which the Scripture
does signify (in other Phrases more proper to the languages, the Scripture were
wrote in) and I could make it evident out of the Books of the Quakers
themselves, that they use many words which are not in the Scripture. No answer
could be obtained to my argument in the Meeting, but W. P. taking the argument
into further consideration, attempteth at length in his Pamphlet to make a
reply, and first taxes me to be as little a Scholar, in regard of the manner
of my Sylogism, as a Christian in regard of the matter of it. My Sylogism was
urged to prove the three glorious persons in the Godhead, the denial of which
does necessarily infer the denial of Christ to be God equal with the Father,
and let any judge who approves himself most a Christian, either W. P. in
denying this, or I in asserting and proving it. As to the manner of my
Sylogism, some Quakers (it may be) who know not what a Sylogism is, may believe
that it bespeaks me to be little a Scholar, but no Scholar will judge so from
that Sylogism, which they know to be according to rule, and to carry a firm
proof in it drawn from the Induction of particulars, but W. P. discovers
himself to be that which he taxes me for, namely, little a Scholar, and though
he has been at the University, yet that either he never read Logic, or never
understood Logic, or has forgot Logic, or that purposely he has laid aside
Logic, that herein he might be like to the Quakers in answering nothing to the
purpose; for besides his finding fault with my Sylogism, his reply to it does
most of all detect his want of Learning and gross absurdity, for which he
would have been hissed out of the Schools, had he done it in the University;
for though he tells us he will give his reason, why he will deny my Minor,
yet most ridiculously and ignorantly he argues against my conclusion. The
Minor as he repeateth it is: But they are not three manifestations, three
operations, three substances, or three some things else, besides subsistences.

The conclusion, Therefore three subsistences.

If he had indeed denied the Minor, he must have asserted that they were either
three substances, or operations, or manifestations, or something else; but he
mistaketh the conclusion for the Minor, and argues that they are not three
subsistences. No one substance can have three distinct subsistences, etc. W. P.
argues against the Trinity of persons in the unity of Essence, behold the
Christian! he argues against the conclusion of a Sylogism calling it the
Minor, behold the Scholar! yet because his argument is against our Doctrine,
therefore I shall give answer thereunto, and his other cavils together in the
sixth chap. After this, he reflected upon Mr. Madox in the 11. page, whose
answer you have in the following Chapter.

CHAP. III. An Answer to the 11. page of W. P's pernicious Pamphlet, by W. M.
ANd because G. W. willing to bring this strange Doctrine] This Doctrine is
strange to none but such as are strangers to God, and ignorant of the
Scriptures, whose eyes the God of this world has blinded, lest the light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine into them,
2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. but as Ephraim when joined to idols, counted the great things
of Gods Law a strange thing, Hos. 8. 12. so these men having prostituted
themselves to an Idol of their own brains, The Light within, which is their
Christ and Savior, count the Doctrine of the true God, a strange Doctrine.

[ To the capacity of the people] You mean, to the scorn, and contempt of the
people; for his design was not to explain, but to expose the Doctrine, and it
is absurd to imagine, that he could facilitate that to the understanding of
others, which he himself neither derstands nor believes.

[ Compared their three Persons to three Apostles] By their three persons, you
mean the three increated Persons of the ever blessed Trinity, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost. Of the insolency and wickedness of this Comparison
you shall hear by and by, only here let me tell you that we have endeavored
to make them ours, by a fiducial application of them to our selves, and it is
no dishonor to us, though it be a blasphemous reflection on them, that they are
in reproach called our three persons, because we appear in vindication of them,
[ saying, he did not understand how Paul, Peter, and John, could be three
persons, and one Apostle.] Neither did we assert it, either directly, or by
consequence; For though we call the father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons,
or He Is, according as they are held forth in the Scriptures, yet we say, there
is a vast and infinite difference between three created, and the three
increated persons; for three created persons, are so many distinct and separate
Essences, as they are persons: but all the increated persons have the same
simple and unseparated essence of God, Ioh. 10. 30. I and my Father are one, 1 John 5. 7. These three are one, not one in person, for so the Father is (...),
Another from Christ, Ioh. 5. 32. There is Another, etc. and the Holy Ghost is
(...), Ioh. 14. 16. Another Comforter, i. e. Another, as to subsistence or
manner of being, but one in nature and essence; so that though Paul, Peter, and
John, being of a finite nature, cannot be three persons and one Apostle, yet I
am sure from the Scripture, that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, being of an
infinite nature, are three persons, and yet but one God; and till you can
prove, that finite and infinite, or God and the Creature are all one, it will
be in vain to make such a comparison, for the shaking of this Foundation-truth:
--

[ A most apt comparison to detect the ridicult of their doctrine.] Or rather
to discover the monstrous blindness, hardness, and unbelief of his own and your
hearts, who dare so boldly spit in the face of God, like men that have cast off
all fear and reverence of God, as well as of men. --

[ One Maddocks, whose zeal out-stript his knowledge, busling hard, as one that
had some necessary matter for the decision of Controversy,] These extravagant
expressions, designed to cast disgrace on my person, I purposely overlook,
because I contend not for mine own honor, but for the honor of God.

[ In stead thereof, perhaps to save his brethren, or show himself, There was
no need to save my Brethren, for I do not remember one word, either of
Scripture, or right reason, that was opposed to what they asserted and proved;
so that it was neither to save my Brethren, nor to show my self, that I then
appeared, but to stop a blasphemer's mouth, and to make manifest his
wickedness, that he might proceed no further, 2 Timothy 3. 8, 9.

[ Silences our further controverting the Principle,] Your further reproaching
and reviling it, you mean; for if you would have disputed it, without your
wicked comparisons and reflections, I would not have interposed. --

[ By a Sylogistical, but false and impertinent Reflection upon G. W. his
person, it runs thus: He that scornfully and reproachfully compares the
Doctrine of the Trinity, of Father, Son, and Spirit, to three finite men, as
Paul, Peter, and John, is a Blasphemer: But you G. W. have so done, Ergo,] That
this is a false, and impertinent reflection on G. W. his person, you assert,
but prove not; I shall therefore prove the contrary. And first, that the minor
is not false, nor impertinent, appears by his words, and your confession; for
you acknowledge that in scorn to the Doctrine of the Trinity, he compared it to
three finite men, viz. Paul, Peter, and John, which you call a most apt
comparison to detect the ridicule of our Doctrine: Secondly, that the major is
not false, nor impertinent, as is manifest; for (...), to hurt or blast the
fame of another, is all one, as to blaspheme him, and hence the perverse
disputings and railings of men of corrupt minds, that consent not to wholesome
words, and the Doctrine that is according to Godliness, are called (...),
blasphemies, 1 Timothy 6. 4. And what can be more derogatory to the glory of the
infinite God, than to fasten the imperfections and limitations of finite
creatures upon him, and to assert three separate essences, as the necessary
consequent of three distinct persons? this was the old Arian Plot, whereby he
and his followers endeavored to prejudice the minds of well meaning, but
simple men, against the Deity of Christ, and the Holy Ghost; and this is to
blaspheme God and the Scriptures.

[ A strange way of argumentation, to beg what cannot be granted, and to take
for granted what still remains a question, viz. that there are three distinct
and separate persons in one essence,] What you mean by separate, I know not; if
you mean so separate, as to destroy the unity and simplicity of the Divine
Essence, I own no such separation; if you take it to be all one with distinct,
then I say it was no begging of the question; for it had been sufficiently
proved, that there are in the Divine Essence three distinct persons, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. --

[ Let them first prove their Trinity, and then charge their Blasphemy.] It is
not for want of proof, that this Doctrine is rejected and blasphemed, and still
called our Trinity, in a way of reproach; assure your self the day is coming,
when you will wish you had made it yours also: but you have a way to scorn all
that is offered in defense of it, as men's lo here Interpretations, and lo
there, and to brand all the determinations of Councels, Fathers, etc.
concerning it, as the issues of Faction, Prejudice, and Cruelty; and there is
little hope that any Arguments, though never so strong, will convince men of
such proud and insolent humors: this Doctrine is more than hinted in the first
line of the Bible, Genesis 1. 1. (...) the Verb of the singular number, signifies
the Unity of the Divine Effence, and the Noun of the plural number, denotes the
Trinity of persons, God that created Heaven and Earth is God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost: Read also Job 35. 13. God thy Makers, Heb. Consult Mr. Caryl on
the place, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember thy Creators, etc. Isa. 54. 5. My Makers is
thy husband, Heb. in all which Texts the Trinity of persons is denoted by words
of the plural number: See also Isa. 42. 1. where you have the Father choosing
and upholding the Son, and the Spirit put on him (as Mediator) three persons
spoken of Mat. 3. 16, 17. and 28. 19. Ioh. 14. 16. there is Christ praying the
Father, and he giving another Comforter, the Spirit of Truth; what can be more
plain than a Trinity of persons in this Text? So Ioh. 15. 26. the Spirit sent
by Christ from the Father, and Act. 2. 32, 33. 2 Cor. 13. 14. 1 Ioh. 5. 7. for
brevity sake I only name the Texts: I might also add, that the names,
properties, or attributes, works, and worship of God, are frequently in the
Scripture given to each of these three Persons, so that they are one and the
same perfect and infinite Essence, each of them God, and one God by nature, but
three persons. And now having proved the Trinity, W. Pen must either deny Moses
and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, and God himself speaking from
Heaven, or else confess the Blasphemy.

[ But I must not forget this persons self-confutation, who to be plainer
called them three He Is. But what self-confutation it is to call three persons
three He Is, you neither do, nor can tell; that each of them is frequently
spoken of in the Scripture as a distinct he, is so plain, you cannot deny it,
and expressed by the Pronouns (...). Ioh. 1. 2, 3. and chap. 16. ver. 8. 13,
14. 27. and I called them three He Is, to try if you would own the Deity of
Christ and the Holy Ghost under any Title, and you by refusing to call them
three Divine He Is, have made it manifest that your Quarrel is not with the
word Person (as some then apprehended) but with the Doctrine or Fundamental
Truth expressed by the three persons, viz. the modal distinction and essential
union or one-ness of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which is no less than to
deny and reject God; for though you pretend to own God the Father, yet in
rejecting the Son, you reject the Father; for says Christ, he that despises
me, despises him that sent me, Luke 10. 16 and the beloved Disciple tells
us, that whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father, 1 Ioh. 2. 23.

[ If he can find a he without a substance, or prove that a subsistence is any
thing else than the form of a he, he will do well to justify himself from the
imputation of ignorance.] That my calling the three persons, three He Is,
implies a He without a substance, is the first thing that you would here
insinuate, but this is your gross ignorance of this great mystery: For each of
these He s is by nature God, and has the entire undivided nature, substance,
or essence of God, and all that you can say to the contrary, is but like
childrens shooting Paper-pellets against a Rock; your latter phrase discovers
your ignorance of Philosophy, as much as the former does of Divinity; for a
subsistence is not the form of a he (as you suppose it to be) but it is (...)
the manner of his being, the form of God the Father is his divine nature, but
his subsistence is his manner of being in the relative property of the Father,
and the form of God the Son is the same divine nature, but his subsistence is
his manner of being in the relative property of a Son; and the form of God the
Holy Ghost, is the same divine nature, but his subsistence, is his manner of
being in the relative property of the Holy Ghost, as proceeding from the Father
and the Son: and now having found a subsistence, that is not the form of a he,
I hope I shall be justified from the imputation of ignorance, at least, as to
this particular.

[ And till their Hypothesis be of better authority, G. W. neither did, nor
does design men's inventions so much honor] What authority our Hypothesis is of,
is at present left to the Reader to judge, but shall certainly be proved one
day to be of such authority, as neither G. W. nor W. P. shall be able to
withstand: But what you mean by designing men's inventions so much honor, is not
easy to to conjecture, unless you would have us to think it is an honor to be
reproached by G. W. and it is not impossible that they who thrust all
expressions of true honor out of the world, should account their incivilities
an honor to those on whom they bestow them.

[ For it is to be remarked, that G. W. is no otherwise a Blasphemer, then by
drawing direct consequences from their own Principles, and recharging them upon
themselves.] What direct consequences did he draw from our Principles: his
telling the people that this Doctrine was the cause of those gross
apprehensions that ignorant people have of God the Father, as if he were an old
man, and of Christ like a little child, etc. and his comparing the three
increated persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to three Apostles, Paul,
Peter, and John; and his asserting the separate essences in God, as the result
of three distinct persons, are no direct consequences from our Principles: but
these are the things for which he is justly charged with Blasphemy; and if it
be Blasphemy to say that man is equal with God, I know not how it can be any
thing less than Blasphemy, to say that God is but equal with man, either as to
his essence, or subsistence, and that because three distinct men are three
distinct substances, which was the meaning of his comparison, but is boldly
asserted by you in your Pamphlet, page 13. Reas. 1. I tremble to see and read
such black lines.

[ So that he did not speak his own apprehensions, in this comparison, but the
sense of their assertion.] Our assertion will bear no such sense; For though
according to the Scripture, we call them Persons, or He Is, in respect of their
manner of subsistence, yet we still remove all imperfections, limitations, and
separation from the Divine Essence.

[ Therefore Blasphemer and Blasphemy are their own.] Your premises being
disproved, your conclusion necessarily falls to the ground; he that made that
unfit Comparison, and drew those reproachful consequences from this
Scripture-truth, with a design to blast and overthrow the Deity of Christ and
the Holy Ghost, he is the Blasphemer, and his is the blasphemy, but that was G.
W. and W. P. therefore you are the Blasphemers, and yours is the Blasphemy: The
Lord convince you both of this your wickedness, and give you repentance, that
you may recant those damnable speeches, whereby you have not only blasphemed
God your selves, but endeavored to provoke others to do the like: Now to God
the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, the one Holy, and only Wise
God, be glory now and ever.

CHAP. IV. The Conclusion of the Narrative, with an Answer unto W. Pen's
Postscript and Cavils against T. V's Sermon.
TO conclude the Narrative of our meeting with the Quakers in Spittle-yard;
when I saw I could get no answer to the Arguments I had urged for the proof of
the Trinity, and the day was now worn away, I thought it would be but lost
time, and imposing upon the Auditory, to hold them longer there in discourse
with such rambling Disputants, (who expressed cunning in nothing more than in
putting by the thrusts and dints of Arguments with diverting speeches, which if
they had received the force of with direct reply, their weakness would quickly
have appeared to the people, by their falling down before them) therefore
calling for silence, I did shut up the Discourse with prayer; and here W. P.
puts forth the sting of the serpent, and discovers the profaneness of his
spirit, in terming my prayers strangely affected Whines; What more opprobious
terms would the Dam-me Blades of the times, or the most wicked Scoffers of God
and Godliness have used? and whether I falsely accused them for Blasphemers unto
God, let the Hearers of their Discourse, and the Readers of his Pamphlet, with
the Answer, judge. That there was stigmatizing the Quakers with the name of
Blasphemers, is owned and proved; the other of Impudent Villain, as also that
there should be striking, I am confident is a falsehood, for I never either saw
it, or heard any complain of it; and it is well known that in all our meetings
there is peace, and if there were any rudeness it was when the Quakers came
amongst us. I am sure it was very rude in them to stay and make such a bauling
amongst the people after a dismiss was required, and when those which could
have answered (I cannot say stilled) them, were retired. W. P. tells the
Reader, that T. V. came palely down stairs. I fear W. P. has some defect in
his eyesight, and indeed if the eyes of his body were no clearer than the eyes
of his mind, he might easily mistake; T. V. had more reason to blush to hear
the hideous Blasphemies which were vented by them; surely he had no reason to
look pale through fear of any big Arguments which they had used against the
truth, lest they should have knocked him on the head as he came down stairs. W.
P. charge T. V. with a promise of another meeting with them; the promise was
not absolute, as several can witness; if it had been, it could not be called a
breach of promise, if he sent them word he would meet with some of them, as G.
W. W. P. and a few others, since points might more calmly be debated, and truth
might in likelihood be better sifted before a few, than before such a multitude.

And as to that which W. P. speaks of clearing themselves from their
Accusations (of Blasphemy he means) I wonder he should ever think to wipe off
the name of a Blasphemer, except he should renounce his error, there being
Blasphemy in the very denial of the Doctrine of the Trinity; so that the
greater the multitude, the greater would have been his shame; but he has taken
a course to proclaim himself a Blasphemer and Heretic before more than that
Auditory; and if such a vindication of himself does yield them any
satisfaction, he has it. W. P. further informs the Reader of his visiting my
Meeting on a Lecture-day, and that I (showing both injustice and cowardice)
shamefully slunk away, and so baulked a defense of my own Principles. Unto this
I answer, that they gave me no notice before of their coming; that I had
engaged before by promise to meet with some friends about business, so soon as
I had done; that I did not think it fit to dispute with Quakers after preaching
a Sermon, and my purpose is never to do it, because I look upon it as the
devils plot, hereby to steal away the precious seed of the Word out of the
minds of the people, that so it may prove unfruitful. Further I told W. P.
there was a Letter in the house in order to a meeting with him for discourse of
the Principles, wherein was proposed some conditions, viz. that they would
dispute Sylogistically, that they would plainly assert their principles before,
which we should dispute of, four were named, with desire to know whether they
would own them; But when I perceived that they made such a noise, and would not
receive my answer why I did not think fit to stay, and discourse with them at
that time, I went away from them, but neither shamefully nor cowardly, except
in the apprehensions of such who take any occasion, to fasten reproach upon the
Ministers of the Gospel. And yet whatever reason I had then to retire, and
though no answer were given in the dispute before to either of my arguments;
some have not spared to report in the Town, that I was worsted by the Quakers,
which how unreasonable it is, those which read this narrative, may easily
judge. And whereas W. P. at the conclusion of his Book, does charge us for want
of zeal for our Principles, want of Love to our Reputation, and want of
Conscience in our Promises, because he said we have evaded the many
opportunities offered for treaty. I answer, that these are false aspersions
cast upon us without any good ground, there were indeed Letters passed, and the
conditions before offered not being in full accepted, M. D. and my self
intended, and accordingly I sent them word, to meet with them and fully to
conclude together upon the conditions, and the time, and place of meeting; but
at that time Mr. D. had some extraordinary occasion that called him out of Town
and could not be there; I was at home expecting him every minute, till the time
was almost slipped; when W. P. and another came to my house, whom I gave to
understand that Mr. D. was not yet come, but I thought it was somewhat
extraordinary that kept him away; W P. required his presence elsewhere: about
two or three days after, Mr. D. came to Town and to my house, and we both of us
resolved to meet with them that week, but before I could send W. P. word, I had
information of a Book he had in the Press against me; and then I judged that a
meeting with him would not be of such signification as to give answer to him in
the same way as he has written against me and the truth, therefore I did
forbear to meet, and began to write. And now let any judge whether W. P's
calumnies are deserved. Before I shut up this Chapter, I shall give a brief
reply unto W. P's Postscript of animadversions, on some particulars in my
Sermon which he heard, of which he took notes, not for his edification as
others do, but that he might pick out something to cavil at, and reproach the
Doctrine withal; He terms them contradictictions, serting them in columns,
one over against another. And here he does shamefully again discover his
weakness and want of learning; if he had known what a contradiction is, surely
he would have blushed to give that term to the things he there makes mention
of, which have not so much as an inconsistency together, except the line he
puts between them should make it; What contradiction or falsehood is it for a
Person to overcome the world, and the victory in this life to be imcompleat?
Were not the Cananites overcome by the children of Israel, their force subdued?
and yet the victories they had over them were not so complete, but that some
remained amongst them, who were like pricks and thorns that did them mischief,
and sometimes rose up in rebellion against them. What contradiction is it for
Persons to be in Christ and cast off the Old man, etc. And this, that worldly
lusts cannot be extirpated out of Gods people in this world. May not? have not
worldly lusts a being and some power to oppose in Gods people, where they have
lost their rule, and their Iron yoke is taken off from their necks? will not
the experience of all Gods people bear witness to this, and what else means
that of the Apostle, Gal. 5. 17. The Flesh lusts against the spirit and Romans
7. 22. I see another Law in my members warring against the Law of my mind,
etc. was not the Apostle one of Gods people? what contradiction is this much
like the former Gods people overcome their lusts, and this their lusts sometime
take them captive? Does not the Apostle add, Romans 7. 22. that the Law in his
members did lead him captive? may not a conqueror be lead captive sometimes?
may not a man be victus in praelio and victor in bello, overcome in some
skirmishes, and yet a conqueror in the war? the Heathen will tell you this, and
should it then seem so strange in Divinity? what contradiction is it for sin to
Tyranizeover believers, but not to have dominion, it is in captivity in chains?
as if a slave in chains might not sometime break loose, and tyranize for a
while, and yet not be said to have dominion, because he has no settled rule,
but is quickly brought under, and fastened in his bonds again; what
Bedlam-distinction then is it (as W. P. calls it) between the tyranny and the
dominion of sin? if his common sense (he says it is against,) were like all
sincere Christians common sense and experience, he would not thus groundlesly
cavil: what contradiction is it, you must Overcome the world, or the world you,
and If you fight you will overcome them; or this* He leads them captive, and
They sometime take him captive. Can you forbear smiling at the man? he calls
these things contradictions, But instead of my Sermons deserving the imputation
of contradictory, his cavils do justly lay him under the imputation of weakness
and absurdity.

CHAP. V. The Doctrine of the Trinity of distinct persons in the unity of the
Divine Essence, asserted and proved.
THe Trinity of Persons in the unity of the Divine Essence, and the unity of
the Divine Essence in the Trinity of Persons, that three should be one, and one
should be three; that three should be distinguished, but not divided; that one
should not be another, the first should not be the second, nor the second
third, nor the second or third the first, and yet the first, second, and third
the same; that the first should be in the second, and the second in the first,
and both first and second in the third, and that without composition, without
confusion, all related to one another, and al distinguished one from another by
incommunicable personal properties, and yet all one and the same in regard of
one individual Essence, this is such a mystery as does exceed the weak and
narrow understanding of the most enlightened and clear sighted Christians fully
to comprehend: some by gazing too long upon the Sun become blind; and some by
prying too much into this mystery, and attempting to bring it to the standard
and module of their reason have lost the sight thereof and sunk into gross
apprehensions, and denied either the unity of the Godhead, affirming the three
persons to be three distinct Gods, or denied the Trinity, affirming the Godhead
to be without three distinct persons; thus while they have professed and
conceited themselves to be wise, they have proved themselves to be fools, and
void of true understanding, by changing the glory of God into that which is
unworthy of him. But we, having a sure word of Prophecy in the Scriptures,
which is like a light shining in a dark place, ought to give heed thereunto,
and conform all our conceptions of God according to the discoveries which he
has made of himself in his word; God knows himself better than any creature
can know, and what he has spoken of himself, must needs be so because he
cannot represent himself otherwise than he is, and if there be a mystery in him
which we cannot reach, we add folly to our weakness if we do in the least
question it: reason, it may be, will leave us in our search after the Deity in
the Trinity, and the Trinity in the Deity; but where reason fails, Faith must
supply it is room; the proper object of Divine Faith is such things as we purely
do assent unto upon Divine authority; such are not only Histories and
Prophesies, but also Mysteries, which reason cannot demonstrate unto us: in
this mystery of the Trinity we must exercise our Faith though we cannot clear
it to our selves by demonstration: not as if we were to lay reason quite aside
in this thing, or trample it under foot; not as if we should put out the eye of
reason that we might see more clearly with the eye of Faith; for though this
mystery be above reason, yet it is not against reason; yea there is the
greatest reason in the world that we should assent unto that for truth which
God has revealed of himself in his word, because he is a God of truth, and
nothing is more true than that which God has spoken. Wherefore if the
Scriptures have revealed that there are three distinct persons in one Divine
Essence, it is a certain truth, and it is reason and duty that every one should
assent unto it though the mystery of it, there being no such thing to be found
in nature, cannot be fully comprehended. Here then I shall propound my
assertion, and prove it out of Scripture.

My assertion according to the generally believed Doctrine of the Church of
God, is this, That there are three distinct subsistents or persons in the same
single Divine Essence or Godhead.

The argument bottomed upon the Scripture to prove my assertion is this: If the
Divine Essence or Godhead is and can be but one, and the Father is God, and the
Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, and the Father, Son and Holy Ghost be three
distinct subsistents or persons; then there are three distinct subsistents or
persons, Father; Son, and Holy Ghost in the same single Divine Essence or
Godhead. But the Divine Essence or Godhead is, and can be but one, and the
Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost are three distinct subsistents or persons. Therefore there are
three distinct subsistents or persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost in the same
single Divine Essence or Godhead.


The consequent of the major proposition is plain and firm, that no man of
reason can in the least question or deny.

The minor proposition is that which must be proved, and there are five things
in the proposition to be proved: 1. That the Divine Essence or Godhead is and
can be but one. 2. That the Father is God. 3. That the Son is God. 4. That the
Holy Ghost is God. 5. That the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are three distinct
subsistents or persons.

1. The Divine Essence or Godhead is and can be but one, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Hear, O
Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord, Isa. 44. 6. Thus says the Lord, I am the
first and I am the last, and besides me there is no God, Isa. 45. 21, 22. There
is no God else besides me, a just God and Savior, there is none besides me;
look unto me and be ye saved all the ends of the Earth, for I am God and there
is none else. And it cannot be otherwise for if there were more than one God,
then the Godhead might be divided, it might be limited, and by consequence
would be finite and so not God, because God is infinite. I need not insist upon
this because the unity of the Godhead is not denied by the adversaries I have
to deal withal.

2. The Father is God, 1 Cor. 8. 6. To us there is but one God the Father, of
whom are all things, and we in him. I need not multiply places of Scripture,
nor add arguments to prove that the Father is God, since it is generally
acknowledged by all that acknowledge a Deity and the Scriptures.

3. The Son is God, this William Penn plainly denies, he denies that the Lord
Jesus Christ is God, wretched blasphemy! that would thrust the Lord Jesus
Christ off from the Throne of his Godhead? His denial of the Divinity of
Christ, as well as the Divinity of the Holy Ghost is plain enough. I shall
repeat his words as they lie in his first argument against the three distinct
persons in the Godhead, page 13. And since the Father is God, the Son is God,
and the Spirit is God (which their opinion necessitates them to confess) then
unless the Father, Son, and Spirit are three distinct nothings, they must be
three distinct substances, and consequently three distinct Gods. I shall answer
the argument in its proper place, only observe here that he denies the Son and
Spirit to be God, by a plain consequence, for first he tells us that our
opinion necessitates us to acknowledge that the Father is God, and the Son God,
and the Spirit God, which shows that his opinion is otherwise that the Son
and Spirit are not God; especially it follows from the scope of the argument,
which is to prove that if the Father be God and the Son God, and the Holy Ghost
God, than there are three distinct Gods; but W. P. having plainly asserted his
belief that there is but one God, he must of necessity deny by his argument,
that the Son and Holy Ghost are God, for neither he nor any Socinian of them
all, will deny that the Father is God. Behold here the Christian! that has
offered such an affront and indignity unto the Son and Spirit, as to divest
them (what in him lies) of their Divinity; is not this a treading of the Son
of God underfoot, and doing despite to the spirit of grace? and should not
this cause the hearts of all sincere Christians who have any zeal for their
masters honor, to arise with indignation against such Black-mouthed
blasphemers, and to abhor their opinions and ways? but more of this in the
exhortation at the latter end; the Heathenism, abominablenesse and foulness of
this opinion, being such a blasphemy and reproach of the eternal Son of God,
may excuse a little disgression to express my abhorrency thereof.

The thing to be proved is, that the Son is God, I do not mean nominal, so as
those are that are called Gods, whether in heaven or in earth; but really so,
that he is God co-essential, coequal, coeternal with the Father: The only
proof of this is to be drawn from the Scripture.

I. Joh. 1. 1. 3. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God: All things were made by him, and without him was not any
thing made that was made. By the Word we are to understand the Essential, not
the written Word, namely, the Son, the only begotten of the Father, which is
Christ, it being the same whom John came to bear witness of, ver. 7. the same
which was made flesh, and dwelt amongst them, ver. 14. Now that this Word, or
Son of God, is God, is evident from this place, where 1. He is called God, The
Word was God. 2. It is said, All things were made by him. So Col. 1* 16. For by
him were all things created that are in heaven, and that are in earth visible
and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or
powers, all things were created by him, and for him. Whence it follows, 1.
That he himself was not made, for then he must be made by himself, which is
absurd and impossible; and if he were not made, then he is no creature, and if
no creature, then God; all things that have a being, being divided into God and
his creatures.

2. It follows hence that all things being made by him, that he is the
Creator, that he is Infinite in Power and Wisdom, and Goodness, as his works of
Creation do demonstrate.

3. It follows that all things being made by him, that he was before all
things, as it is said expressly, Col. 1. 17. And he is before all things; that
he was before the beginning of time, when creatures received their beings, it
being necessary that he which made creatures, should be before the creatures he
made, and therefore he must be eternal, and by consequence that he must needs
be God, none being eternal a part ante in respect of heretofore, but God.

II. Joh. 8. 58. Jesus said unto them; Verily, verily I say unto you, Before
Abraham was I am. That the Jews did apprehend him to assert himself to be God,
is evident by their taking up stones to cast at him for the Blasphemy, which
they through their unbelief of his Deity, did think he had spoken. And that he
did really hereby assert himself to be God, is evident from the words
themselves: I Am is the Name whereby God made himself known to Moses, and the
children of Israel, Exodus 3. 14. And God said unto Moses, thus shall thou say
unto the children of Israel; I Am has sent me unto you. I am does signify
infinite, eternal, necessary, independent Being, and this Christ does apply to
himself, therefore he is God. Moreover, in our Saviors saying, Before Abraham
was I am, it must needs have a reference to his Divine Nature; for in regard of
his humane nature the Jews spoke truth, v. 57. Thou are not yet fifty years
old; as man, he was a son of Abraham, and born many generations after him;
therefore his Being before Abraham (yea before the world, by the former
Scriptures proved) has a reference to his Divine Nature and Godhead.

III. Joh. 3. 13. And no man has ascended unto heaven, but he that came down
from heaven, even the Son of Man which is in heaven. That Christ was not in
heaven at that time, as man, is evident because he was upon the earth speaking
to Nicodemus, yet he tells him, He is in heaven, that is, as God he fills
both heaven and earth.

IV. Romans 9. 5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh
Christ came, who is over all God blessed for ever, Amen, Of whom as concerning
the flesh Christ came, that sets forth his humane nature. Who is over all
God blessed for ever, that evidently does prove his Divine Nature. The Title of
God with universal Sovereignty, and eternal Blessedness, cannot without
blasphemy and absurdity be ascribed unto any creature, as it is here unto
Christ.

V. Philip. 2.6. Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God. In this Scripture there are two Proof that Christ is God: 1 He
is said to be in the form of God: by the form of God we can rationally
understand nothing but the Essence of God; and to be in the form of God, is to
subsist in the Essence of God, Christ subsisting eternally in the Essence of
God, must needs be God. 2. It is said, He thought it no robbery to be equal
with God, that is, he was equal with God without robbing God of his honor,
without any detraction from the Deity; And none can be equal with God, but he
that is God, and such is Christ.

I might here add for the proof of Christ's Divinity, all those Scriptures which
ascribe the same divine Attributes to Christ, as Eternity, Heb. 1. 8. Unto the
Son he says* Thy Throne O God, is for ever and ever. Omniscience, Ioh. 21. 17.
Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. Omnipresence,
Math. 28. 20. Lo, I am with you always. Omnipotence. In making all things, as
before, and upholding all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1. 3: As also
those Scriptures which ascribe the same honor and worship to Christ, which is
due only to God. In him we must believe, Joh. 14. 1. In his name we must be
baptized, Math. 28. 19. Upon his name we must call, 1 Cor. 1. 2. At his name we
must bow, Phil. 2. 10. None can reasonably question Christ's Deity, who give
credit to the Scriptures Authority.

4. The fourth thing is to prove that the holy Ghost is God, which W. P. also
does deny, and this also I shall prove from Scripture.

I. But Peter said, Act. 5. 4, 3. Ananias why has Satan filled thine heart to
lie to the holy Ghost, to keep back part of the price of the Land? etc. Why
have thou conceived this thing in thine heart? thou have not lied unto men, but
unto God. Him whom the Apostle calls Holy Ghost in the 3d. verse, he calls
God in the 4. verse; and him whom he calls God in the 4th verse, he calls
the Spirit of the Lord in the ninth verse. How is it that ye have agreed to
tempt the Spirit of the Lord?

II. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same
spirit; and there are differences of Administrations, but the same Lord; and
there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which works all
in all. He that is called the same Spirit in the 4th. verse, is called the same
Lord in the fifth verse; and the same God which works all in all in the sixth
verse, and that what is spoken of Administrations and Operations in the fifth
and sixth verses, is attributed to the Spirit, as appears by the seventh
verse, where they are called, The manifestation of the Spirit given to every
man to profit withal; and more plainly verse 11. But all this works that one
and the same Spirit, dividing unto every man severally, as he will. And what
can be more plain to prove that the Holy Ghost, or Spirit, is God, when he
works all in all, and distributeth spiritual gifts unto men, according to his
own good pleasure?

III. Isa. 6. 1. I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, etc. v. 2, 3. Above
stood the Seraphims, and cried Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts. The three
Holies signify the three Persons; the Lord of Hosts, the one God, ver. 8. I
heard the voice of the Lord, ver. 9. And he said, Go tell this people, Hear ye
indeed, but understand not, etc. This must needs be spoken of God, and it is by
the Apostle applied to the Holy Ghost, Act. 28. 25. Well spoke the Holy Ghost,
go to this people, and say, hearing you shall hear, etc.

IV. 1 Cor. 2. 10. For the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of
God. None is omniscient to know all things, yea whatsoever is in the
unsearchable mind of God, but he that is God, and therefore the Holy Ghost is
God. I might speak further of his divine Works, as Regeneration, Ioh. 3. 5.
guiding Believers into all truth, Ioh. 16. 13. Sanctification, and the like; of
our being baptized by him, Mat. 3. 11. and in his name, Mat. 28. 19. and his
being called One, that is, one God, where he is numbered up amongst the three
Persons that bare record in heaven, 1 Ioh. 5. 7. All which undeniably prove
that the Holy Ghost is God, co-essential, and coequal with the Father and the
Son.

5. The fifth and last thing is to prove, That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are
three distinct Subsistents, or Persons. Concerning the name Person, I shall not
speak of it, because Mr. Danson intends to vindicate that word from the
cavils of W. P. in answer to what concerns him p. 10. That there are three
such distinct Persons in one Divine Essence, is evident from the Scripture, See
Math. 3. 16, 17. And Jesus when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the
water, and to the Heavens were opened unto him; and he saw the Spirit of God
descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him; And lo a voice from Heaven,
saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Here is a distinction
of all the three Persons, the Son was clothed in flesh, and came up out of the
water; the Spirit was in the shape of a Dove, which came down from heaven; the
Fa- was in the voice, saying, This is my beloved Son.

Another Scripture which holds forth this distinction, is Ioh. 16. 17. I will
pray the Father, and he shall give them another Comforter, even the Spirit of
Truth. The Son prays, the Father gives; The Spirit of Truth is the Comforter
that is given. I shall add a third Scripture, 1 Ioh. 5. 7. There are three
that bare record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these
three are one. They are the distinct Persons, but one undivided Essence.

But further to confirm this truth denied by the Adversaries, I shall prove
from the Scripture that there are three distinct Persons in one Divine Essence,
1 From the distinct. Names given to them. 2 From their distinct personal Acts.
3 From their distinct personal Properties.

1. From their distinct Names, they are called Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Math. 28. 19. Baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. Father, Word, and Holy Ghost, in Ioh. 5. 7. before cited. These
names do evidence a distinction, not of nature and essence, for they are one;
therefore of personality.

2. From their distinct personal acts, I mean such acts as can be ascribed unto
none but such as are persons. 1 Giving the Comforter is ascribed to the Father,
Ioh. 14. 16. I will pray the Father, and he shall send you another Comforter;
it is proper only to a person to give, this act requiring both understanding
and will: 2 Sending the Comforter is ascribed to the Son, Ioh. 15. 6. When the
Comforter is come whom I will send unto you from the Father: and it is proper
only to a person to send. 3 Guiding into all truth, speaking what he hears,
is ascribed to the Holy Ghost, Ioh. 16. 13. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of
Truth is come, he will guide you into all truth, for he shall not speak of
himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak. And who can deny
that these are personal acts? The distinction of the persons in these acts is
evident in all these places, where the Son speaks of himself in the first
person, I will pray, I will send; he speaks of the Father, and the Spirit in
the third person, which persons he evidently distinguishes one from another by
the preposition from speaking of the Spirit, whom I will send from the Father.
Surely he must wink very hard that does not perceive a distinction of the
persons of Father, Son, and Spirit, in these places.

3. That the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are three distinct persons, is evident
from these distinct personal and incommunicable Properties.

1. The personal property of the Father is to beget the Son, Heb. 1. 5. Unto
which of the Angels said he at any time, thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee? and the Son being eternal, as has been proved, this generation
must be eternal.

2. The personal property of the Son is to be begotten of the Father, Ioh. 1.
14. We beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father.

3. The personal property of the Holy Ghost is to proceed from the Father and
the Son, Ioh. 15. 26. And when the comforter is come, whom I will send from the
Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall
testify of me.

I shall conclude the proof of the distinction of the persons of the Father,
the Son and Holy Ghost, in the unity of the Divine Essence, with the two
arguments made mention of before in the disputation; which because no answer
was given unto, they remain in force.

The first argument is this against W. P's plain assertion, that there were not
three distinct persons in the Godhead, with three distinct incommunicable
properties. If the Father be another from the Son, and the Son another from the
Father, and the Holy Ghost another from each, and all three be God; and the
incommunicable property of the Father is to beget the Son, the incommunicable
property of the Son to be begotten of the Father, and the incommunicable
property of the Holy Ghost to proceed from the Father and the Son; then there
are three distinct persons in the Godhead, with three distinct incommunicable
properties: But the Father is another, etc. Therefore there are three distinct
persons in the Godhead, with three distinct incommunicable properties.


The consequence of the Major none can with any reason deny, because another
and another, and another do signify plainly a distinction of those persons; and
begetting, being begotten, and proceeding are real not imaginary properties.

The Minor also is firm in all the parts of it. 1. The Father is another from
the Son, Ioh. 5. 32. There is another that bears witness of me, Ioh. 8. 18. I
am one that bear witness of my self, and the Father that sent me bears
witness of me. 2. The Son is another from the Father, because the Father is
another from the Son. 3. The Holy Ghost is another from each, Ioh. 14. 16, 17.
I will pray the Father and he shall give you another comforter, even the spirit
of truth. 4. That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are God, has been proved. 5. The
incommunicable properties of each person also has been proved. Therefore it
undeniably follows that there are three distinct persons in the Godhead, with
three distinct incommunicable properties.


The second argument out of 1 Ioh. 5. 7. to prove that Father, Son and Holy
Ghost are three distinct persons was this. The Father, Son and Holy Ghost are
either three substances, or three manifestations, or three operations, or three
persons, or something else. But 1. They are not three substances, because in
the same verse the three are called one, that is in regard of substance or
Essence. 2. They are not three manifestations, for all the attributes of God
are manifestations, and so there would be more than three; hence also it would
follow that one manifestation should beget and send another, which is absurd.
3. They are not three operations, for the same reason, namely, that there are
more than three operations; and it would be very improper to asribe personal
properties, either to manifestations or operations. 4. They are not any thing
else.
Therefore the proposition remains firm and sound: That Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost are three distinct subsistents or persons in one Divine Essence or
Godhead.
The Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and yet they are
nor three Gods, but one God, the persons of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are
distinct, but the Godhead is the same, not specifically the same, as the same
humane nature is in all individual men, but numerically the same, so as no
similitude or comparison is to be found in the creatures to set it forth. The
fools gathering his skirt into three folds and pulling them abroad into one;
the affections of One, Good, True in Being; The understanding will and
executive power in the Soul, and the like similitudes may a little help the
understanding in the conception of this mystery, but all comparisons fall
short, and cannot square in every respect hereunto: Yet the (...) that it is so
has been proved from Scripture, and it is one great fundamental point of our
Christian Faith, which all Christians are bound to believe, because of the
authority of God.

CHAP. VI. Ananswer to part of the 10, the 12, 13, 14, and 15 pages of W. P's
Pamphlet, which he intituleth the Trinity of distinct separate persons in the
Unity of essence, refuted from Scripture, right reason, with information and
caution in the close.
THe word separate person, I disown any further than we may conceive it to
signify no more than distinct, (and so W. P. was told again and again in the
meeting,) I need speak no more of that, since his endeavors are to refute the
distinction not the separation of persons in the glorious and ever blessed
Trinity. And his first attempt is to refute this Doctrine by Scripture. The
Scriptures which he alleges to overthrow the Doctrine of the Trinity of
persons, are such as prove the unity of the essence, that there is but one God,
which we do not in the least deny, but have and do assert with as firm belief
as he or any in the world can do; but though the Godhead, or Divine essence be
but one, this is not inconsistent with the plurality and distinction of the
three persons in the same Godhead.

And here it is very remarkable how W. P. does discover weakness and want of
learning in the proof of the unity of the Godhead by Scripture, for however he
does attempt to show something of a Scholar in quoting one Hebrew text in the
margin, as if he were well acquainted with the original Hebrew tongue, so as to
be able to read and understand it without punets, yet most ignorantly and
rediculously he cites three texts, namely, Isa. 40. 25. chap. 48. 17. Psalm. 71.
22. to prove Gods unity, in all which the Hebrew makes no mention of it; the
translation indeed is Holy one, and Holy one of Israel, and he very sillily
writes ONE in great letters as if one did bear the emphasis of the place, when
there is no such word as (...) one, in the Hebrew, only (...) Holy, and (...)
thou Holy of Israel: in the new Testament he alleges some Scriptures which
the Socinians do make use of to prove that Christ is not God, one is Math. 19.
17. Jesus said unto him why call thou me good? there is none good but one,
that is God. Whence no Socinian can rationaly infer that Christ is not God, any
more than that he is not good; for his question does not infer a denial of his
Divinity or goodness, but is propounded according to the young man's
apprehension of him, and by way of probation. For in other places (as has been
shown) Christ's Divinity is clearly enough declared. Another Text is Ioh. 17.
3. This is life eternal that they might know thee (Father) the only true God.
In this place Christ excludes not himself from being God, but, only, excludes
all false Gods; and if you mark it, the word only, as also the word one, does
belong to the predicate God, and not to the subject Father, it being not only
thee to be the true God, but thee to be the only true God, and so it may be
applied to the Son, and Jesus Christ whom thou bast sent to be the only true
God, which is signified in that place and expressed 1 Job. 5. 10. we are in him
that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God and eternal
life.

The other Scriptures prove that there is one God essentially in opposition
unto all that upon any other account are called Gods, not being Gods by
essence, all which do but assert that which is acknowledged and has been
already proved in the former Chapter that there is but one God. In the argument
which W. P. draws from the forementioned Scriptures, he does again show his
ignorance, if he know not that in several of these places the word one is not
in the Hebrew; or his deceitfulness, if he know and dissemble it, and thinks by
laying stress on the word one, to impose upon the understandings of the vulgar,
as if there were some great force in his argument from those places, when
indeed they prove not in the least what he alleges them for.

But allowing W. P. to draw his argument from those places, which do prove the
unity of God; though God be declared and believed to be but one, it will not
follow that the Divine nature does not subsist in three persons; the Scripture
indeed does hold him forth as one God, but there it speaks of his essence;
and yet withal does elsewhere sufficiently declare that in this one essence
there are three distinct persons; therefore we profess our belief of the Holy
three (persons) as well as the Holy one God, and both according to the plain
Scripture before urged for proof hereof, 1 Ioh. 5. 7. There are three that bare
record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are
one. But this distinction of one God and three persons so plainly signified in
that Scripture, W. P. most impudently and blasphemously calls impertinent:
and the reason he gives is, because God was not declared and believed
incompleatly, or without his subsistence, nor did require homage from his
creatures as an incomplete and abstracted being, etc. which is a most egregions
non sequitur, besides that he fastneth that on us which neither we nor any
Orthodox Christian ever yet affirmed, viz: that God was ever declared or
believed incompleatly without his subsistence, or as an incomplete and
abstracted Being; we know no such thing as the essence of God without a
subsistence; we know the Divine nature only in the three persons, not
abstracted from them, or being any way out of them, and so God is not
manifested or worshipped without that which is absolutely necessary to himself,
namely without his subsistence: but the Divine essence is worshipped as
subsisting in the three persons, and so the blessed Trinity is not our nor any
man's fiction (as he impiously speaks,) but this folish and absurd notion is his
own fiction, or the fiction of some of his Socinian brethren.

After W. P's. vain attempts to refute the Doctrine of the Trinity from the
Scripture, he fronts his other arguments with the swelling but false title
Refuted from right reason, false I say, for besides that what ever attempt
reason does make for the refuting of any Scripture truth, which is the object
of faith, as this is concerning the Trinity of persons in the unity of, the
Divine essence, it does hereby discover it self to be crooked and depraved
reason, and the arguings from it are called the perverse disputings of men of
corrupt minds and destitute of the truth. 1 Timothy 6. 5. compared with the fourth
verse; W. P. (who before had charged me, for using Heathenish Metaphysics in
disputing for the Truths of God, though my terms were either Scripture-words,
or carried Scripture-sense) does here most Heathenishly make use of
Metaphysical terms, in arguing against the truth, but that so weakly, that his
Argumentation is so far from deserving the name of right reason, that more
properly it may be called no reason, as shall be made evident in the Answer
unto his Arguments, which if they seem crabbed, it is not because of the
strength, but because of the obscurlty of them, for some of the phrases are so
uncouch, and his reasoning are so odly jointed together; (to avoid that part of
a Scholar, in putting them into a Sylogistical form,) that it is more difficult
to find out what his cloudy brains conception and meaning is than to give
answer unto any of his cavilling Arguments. And here having promised to reply
to his reason, p. 10. why he flatly denied my minor proposition, (in the
Sylogism before mentioned) wherein he argues only against the conclusion,
endeavoring to prove that there are not three subsistences, and the argument
he uses being the same in sense and scope with his first argument under that
which he calls a Refutation from right reason; I shall answer both together,
and omit nothing in his argument, that has any show of cogency in it. His
argument is thus: No one substance can have three distinct subsistances, and
perserve its own unity, and not to repeat all his words in the obscure way that
he propounds his arguments, but to help him in the methodizing of them; his
consequence is, that every distinct Subsistence will have its own substance,
and consequently that three distinct subsistances will require three distinct
substances; consequently, if the Doctrine of the Trinity of subsistences were
true, there would be three Gods. And in his first argument he argues that
every person is inseparable from it is own substance, and therefore Father, Son,
and Spirit either are three distinct nothings; or if persons, then three
distinct substances, and consequently three distinct Gods.

Answer: If Substance be taken here for Essence (as it must be,) otherwise it
will conclude nothing against us, then the proposition is most false: that no
one substance can have three distinct subsistances, and preserve it is own
unity; for though a created Essence being finite, limited, and divisible,
cannot be communicated unto any more than one subsistence; yet it follows not
that the divine Essence which is infinite and indivisible, cannot be
communicated to several subsistances; neither does W. P's. reason prove the
contrary, viz: that every subsistence will have it is own substance, unless he
can prove that each distinct subsistence must necessarily have it is own
substance, (in God as well as Creatures) distinct from what the other
subsistences have; For one and the same singular nature or substance may be,
and is the substance or nature subsisting in each person of the Trinity; and so
every subsistence has it is own substance, and yet not distinct, but one and
the same, and therefore as three Essences, so three Gods cannot be concluded
from hence; and though every person in the Trinity be inseparable from it is
substance, yet it does not follow that the substance must be distinct in every
person, though the persons be distinct, neither does it follow that the persons
are either three distinct nothings, (as W. P. blasphemously reproacheth the
ever glorious Trinity,) or three distinct Gods, because the distinction is in
regard of the personality, and not in regard of the Essence, and whereas Page
10. he seems to add another reason, why the infinite Godhead cannot subsist
in three manners or forms, (he means the three persons) because then one of
them could not be a complete subsistence without the other two, and so parts,
and something finite would be in God; or if infinite, then there would be three
distinct infinite subsistences, and by consequence there would be three
distinct Gods.

Answer: Each person is a complete person or subsistent without the personality
or subsistence of the other two, that is, distinct from the other two; but not
without the substance of the other two, which is the same in all three, from
whence it does no ways follow that parts or something finite is in God nor that
there are three infinite subsistences, for though in the concrete every
subsistent is infinite, yet in the abstract infiniteness is not applicable to
the subsistence: of which more in answer to the second argument, which is to
the same purpose with the close of this page 13.

2. Arg. The Divine persons are either finite or infinite; if finite, then
something finite is in God; if infinite, then there would be three distinct
infinites, and consequently three Gods.

Answer: The Divine persons or subsistents are infinite in the concrete. The
Father is infinite, the Son is infinite, the Holy Ghost is infinite, the Father
is omnipotent, the Son omnipotent. and the Holy Ghost omnipotent, and yet three
are not three infinites, or three omnipotents, but one infinite, one
omnipotent; and the reason is because these and all other essential attributes
agree to the persons, only in regard of the Essence from whence they flow, and
therefore though person or subsistent in the concrete be infinite, omnipotent,
and the like, in regard of the Essence included therein; yet this can not be
properly ascribed to the subsistence or personality, therefore though there be
three distinct personalities, unto which infiniteness is not ascribed, yet
there being but one and the same single Essence in all the three persons, unto
which infiniteness is attributed, it does not follow that there are three
infinites, or the consequence that there are three Gods. But W. P. in his
arguings confounds the person with the personality, the subsistent with the
subsistence, the concrete with the abstract, taking the former for the latter;
but if he should understand the person in the abstract for the personality or
subsistence, then it is denied that either finitenesse for infiniteness does
properly belong unto it; it being altogether improper to ascribe the property
of the nature, to the subsistence of that nature in the abstract; as
immortality and mortality do not agree to any particular subsistence as such,
but to the nature in which it does subject; or to instance in the subsistence
of a man, it would be improper to ascribe the properties that belong to him
unto his subsistence, to say that his subsistence in the abstract is either a
learned or unlearned subsistence, a great one, or a small one; a white one or a
black one; and so it is improper to say that either of the persons in regard of
their personality, or subsistence, are finite or infinite, but in regard of
their Essence in the concrete they are infinite, which Essence being but one in
each, there is but one infinite, and by consequence but one God.

W. P's. third Argument is this: If each person be God, and that God subsists
in three persons, then in each person there are three persons or Gods, and so
from three they would increase to nine, and so in infinitum.

Answer: W. P. confounds again the concrete and the abstract together; it is
granted that each person is God in the concrete, and that God (not in the
concrete but in the abstract God essentially or the Essence of God,) does
subsist in three persons, from whence, it does not at all follow that there be
three persons in each person, but that there are three persons in one Godhead,
and so his consequence of the persons increasing to nine, and ad infinitum, is
both ridiculous and absurd.

W. P's. fourth argument being built upon the supposition that we deny the
persons to be infinite, which we have affirmed, it proves nothing, and
therefore requires no answer; and I have not leisure to trace him with remarks
upon his absurd arguings upon a false supposition, which he conceived we might
have.

W. P's last argument is this: If these three distinct persons are one, then
they are not incommunicable amongst themselves, but so much the contrary to be
in the place of one another, for if the only God is the Father, and Christ be
that only God, then is Christ the Father, and so round.

Answer: Though the three persons be one, that is, one Essence, yet it does not
follow that they are not incommunicable amongst themselves, and that they are
in the place of one another. Here W. P. confounds again the persons and the
personalities, the concrete and the abstract; the persons are in the one
Essence or Godhead, and agree among themselves, yet these persons in regard of
their personal properties, are incommunicable to each other; the subsistents
are the same in regard of the Essence, the subsistences are not the same; and
therefore though the only God be the Father, and Christ that only God, yet it
follows not that Christ is the Father, because Christ is the only God
Essentially, that is, has the Nature and Essence of God, and so has the Holy
Ghost, and yet both are personally distinguished from the Father.

The next thing that follows under that head I need not repeat, it being
nothing against us, we acknowledge the Divine nature to be inseparable from the
three persons, and communicated to each, and each person to have the whole
Divine nature; and likewise the Father to be in the Son, and Son in the Father,
Ioh. 14. 10. and the Spirit in the Son; and we know no absurdity that follows
from hence, these persons being in each other by reason of the Essence, which
is the same in every of them: and therefore the consequences he draws from
the denial hereof we have nothing to do with, so that W. P. more justly may
take shame and ridiclousnesse unto himself.

W. P's. reasonings against the ever Blessed and Glorious Trinity falling to
the ground, let us look into his Information and caution which he subjoyns,
whether any thing of truth and congency be there to be found. There he pretends
to inform the Reader concerning the original of this doctrine, and first he
would have the Reader assure himself, that it is neither from Scripture nor
reason. But I suppose most Readers will be more wise and cautious than to build
their assurance upon the bold assertions, and crude reasonings of this
presumptuous and Heaven-daring disputant. That this doctrine is not from
reason, will be easily granted, yea that it is contrary to corrupt reason, such
as W. P. has plainly declared it self to be; it is a mystery which flesh and
blood cannot reveal, but the Father which is in Heaven; yet so as it is not
contrary to right and truly sanctified reason. And whereas W. P. asserteth that
it is not from Scripture, he must not think to impose this upon Christians who
have looked into the Word, any more than what he further asserts as to the
first three hundred years, upon those that have looked into the writings of the
ancient Fathers. The Doctrine of the Trinity is as old as the Scriptures
themselves, and has been proved out of the first Chapter of Genesis and other
places of the Old Testament, by Mr. M. Chap. 4th. and abundantly out of the New
Testament Chap. 5. The Readers that search and believe the Scriptures, will
never believe W. Penn.

That the Doctrine of the Trinity came into the world above three hundred years
after the first preaching of the Gospel by the nice distinctions, and too
daring curiosity of the Bishop of Alexandria, is one of W. Pen's loud lies.

It was indeed opposed by Arius about that time, who denied Christ to be equal
to, and of the same substance with the Father, yet not first opposed by him,
but by other heretics before him; one of whose disciples (if not worse;) W. P.
has in his Pamphlet sufficiently proved himself to be; and if it were opposed
before, sure it was known before, so that W. P. might have derived the pedigree
of his abomination and blasphemy, (if he had consulted Church History) higher
than from Arius. The miserable end of which blasphemour and dishonourer of the
eternal Son of God, who voided his entrails with his excrements in a place of
easement, and so died by an unheard of death, should caution all others from
offering the like indignities unto the Son, as to disrobe him of his Deity, and
number him amongst creatures like themselves, lest he stretch forth the arm of
his Almighty power, and make them feel him (if they will not otherwise
acknowledge him) to be God by bringing some remarkable destruction upon them in
this world.

W. P. Thus was it conceived in ignorance brought forth and maintained by
cruelty, etc. What a strange composition is here of impudence and folly! thus
boldly and blasphemously to assert this great fundamental truth to be conceived
in ignorance and maintained by cruelty, and yet in the next breath he owns
persecution to be as well on the Arians side, as the other, and so by his own
confession the Arian Doctrine was maintained by cruelty, and with how great
cruelty and bitterness, those which look into the Histories of those times may
easily see. To say nothing of W. P's. so proud censuring so eminent a champion
of Jesus Christ as Athanasius was, when he shall produce the grounds of his
suspecting the Creed, commonly called The Athanasian Creed, to be the Results
of Popish Schoolmen, it will be time enough to answer that Clause.

Next W. P. cautioneth the Reader to take heed of embracing the Determinations
of prejudiced Councils, etc. and yet gives no reason why the Reader should be
prejudiced against them, except the belying of the Scripture testimony be a
reason, which I suppose was the ground of their Determinations in this point;
and no further are any Councils to be heeded than they do agree in their
Results with the Scriptures. I hope the Reader will rather take heed of
embracing such damnable Doctrine as this peremptory Dictatour would impose upon
the understanding of the weak; and indeed weak they must needs be, and blind
too, and either renounce the Scriptures, or their own senses, that will suffer
their assent to these great Scripture-truths, to be in the least enfeebled by
any thing that this raw Disputer alleges for the maintaining of this
Blasphemy and Heresy, or oppugning our received, and never to be shaken
Foundations.

And here W. P. who had discovered before his skill in Logic, by arguing
against the conclusion of my Syllogism, telling us he opposed the Minor; his
skill in the Original Tongues, in noting the Holy ONE in great letters to prove
Gods Unity, when the word One is not to be found in the Hebrew Text; does make
a third attempt to show something of a Scholar, but is as unhappy as before,
and as grossly as in the two former attempts, does signify to all that
understand Learning, that he is a proud boaster, and pretender to that which he
never attained unto. He tells us the Doctrine of the Trinity was never
believed by the Primitive Saints, nor ever thus stated by any he has read in
three first Centuries, particularly Irenaeus, Just in Martyr, Tertullian,
Origin, Theophilus, (Theophilact, who lived several hundred after Athanasius,
was cited by W. P. but I find in the Errata it is corrected Theophilus) with
many other, who appear wholly foreign to the matter in controversy. But who
ever will peruse these Authors W. P. makes mention of, with others who writ in
those times, will find both his lies to be very great, and his reading to be
very little, notwithstanding this vain flourish and boasting.

The Doctrine of the Trinity is plainly enough to be gathered from several
passages in Irenaeus, Lib. 1. Cap. 2. Ecclesia accepit fidem quae est in unum
Deum Patrem omnipotentem, and in unum Christum filium Dei incarnatum, and in
Spiritum Sanctum, qui per Prophet as praedicavit. The Faith which the Church
has received, is in one God the Father omnipotent, and in Christ the Son of
God, who was made flesh, and in the Holy Ghost, who spoke by the Prophets. Do
not these words hold forth a distinction of these three Persons, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost? And cap. 19. Omnium Deus per verbum and spiritum omnia faciens,
and gubernans. The God of all things, making and governing all things by his
Word and Spirit. Here the making and governing of all things are attributed to
the Word and Spirit, as well as to the Father; and as the former place does
show that he believed they were three distinct persons, so this latter place
that he believed they were but one God.

Just. Martyr (...). The Title of this Book being concernig faith in the holy
Consubstantial Trinity, shows he was not a stranger to this Doctrine. Read
some of his words* (...) (...). When as the Father does beget the Son of his
substance, and of the same does produce the Holy Ghost, most rightly they do
partake of the same Essence, and are dignified with one and the same Godhead.
What can be more plain? And he goes on (...), etc. How can any say that he
which begets, does not differ from him which is begotten? that he which
proceeds does not differ from him from whom he proceeds? Here is Unity of
Essence, and Trinity of distinct Persons asserted plainly. I shall add but one
place more of many, in Resp. 17. ad Ortho. (...) Therefore there is but one
God, in one indistinct Essence, and three Persons with distinction of their
Persons, or Subsistences.

Tertullian Lib. de Trinitate adversus Proaxnean, does express his faith in
this doctrine throughout the whole Book, and argues it strongly from the
Scriptures.

Cap. 12. Si te adhuc numerus scandalizat Trinitatis quasi non connexae in
unitate simplici, interrogo quomodo unicus and singularis pluraliter loquitur
Faciamus hominem ad imaginem nostram, Adam factus est tanquam unus ex nobis?
quia adhunc adhaerebat illi Filius secundae persona, and tertia Spiritus, ideo
pluraliter pronunciavit Faciamus, nostram nobis. If the number of the Trinity
does offend thee, as if it could not be joined in the simple unity, I ask thee,
how thee one and single (God) does speak pluraly: Let us make Man after our
Image, Adam is become like one of us? because the Son the second person and the
Spirit the third, did adhere to him therefore he spoke pluraly: Let us make,
our, us, Chap. 13. Pater Deus, and Filius Deus, and Spiritus Sanctus Deus, the
Father is God, and the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, Chap. 31. Pater,
Filius, and Spiritus Sanctus tres crediti unum Deum sistunt. The Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost the three we are to believe in, bold forth but one God.

Theophilus Lib. 1. Com: in Evang:, does acknowledge the Trinity. Margarita
pretiosa est Sancta Trinitas quae dividi non potest nam in unitate consistit.
The Holy Trinity is a precious Jewel, which cannot be divided, because it
consists in unity.

Origin (...) in preaemio and Cap. 2. I am informed by a learned Author, does
express his Faith in this Doctrine, but I have not that Piece of Origin by me
(as I have the rest) to consult. I could add the testimony of other Fathers,
who lived before the time W. P. makes mention of, but it is enough to cite
these for the detection of the falsehood of W. P. who tells us, that these
Fathers were strangers to the Doctrine of the Trinity; wherefore the weakness,
absurdity, falsehood, and folly of this man being made manifest, I suppose
people will be more cautious than to follow him and the guidance of the light
which W. P. says is communicated unto all, and forsake the true Light of the
Word and Spirit, which alone can guide men into all truth.

CHAP. VII. The Doctrine of the satisfaction of Christ, the second person, of
the real and glorious Trinity asserted and proved.
IF the doctrine of the ever glorious Trinity or three persons, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost in one Godhead had been overthrown by W. P. or could be indeed
shaken by the Sociniant, which with all the argument they can device, in vain,
they do endeavor, if he or they could prove (which they never can) that there
is but one person in the Godhead; then it would follow that Christ could not
be the eternal Son of God, the second person of this glorious Trinity (as W. P.
most blasphemously, styles him the second person of the imagined Trinity,) and
by consequence the Doctrine of satisfaction depending upon this person, would
fall to the ground, and might by invincible argument be refuted, it being
impossible for any mere finite creature to make plenary satisfaction to the
infinite Justice of God; But the Doctrine of the Trinity being established by
Scripture Testimony, and the Lord Jesus Christ proved to be God equal with the
Father, the Doctrine also of satisfaction dependent upon this second person of
the real and ever glorious Trinity, will remain firm against all Quaker and
Socinian attempts to overthrow it: and before I give answer unto the objections
and cavils against this Doctrine. I shall briefly assert and prove the doctrine
by the Word of Truth in the Holy Scripture.

W. P. in his title The impossibility of Gods pardoning offin, without a
plenary satisfaction refuted, seems to infinuate that he denies only the
impossibility of Gods pardoning sin without satisfaction; but whoever reads
his arguments shall find them to be the very same, which the Socinians use
against Satisfaction it self, and that he plainly denies the thing; therefore
I shall not concern my self, to enquire what God could or might do, if he
pleased; but what he has decreed and determined to do, and declared in the
Scripture to be his will; and here I affirm

1. That God never does, nor will, nor can pardon any, sinner without
satisfaction made to his offended Justice for their sins. And that because his
holiness, righteousness, and truth, obliges him to take vengeance upon all
that have transgressed his Law; the Lord is so Holy that he hates all the
workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5. 5. and what is Gods hatred, but Percatum pro
merito suo velle punire, as Bradsh. de Just. his will to punish sin and sinners
according to their desert? His Justice does engage him by no means to clear the
guilty, Exodus 34. 7. and his truth would be enfringed, if he should not curse
every one that centinueth not in all things which are written in the Book of
the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10.

II. That no sinners themselves by any thing they can do or suffer in this
life, can give satisfaction unto Gods Justice for their sins. And the reason is
because whatever good they do is no more than duty, wherein also they must have
Divine help to enable them, and when they have done their duty, their works are
but imperfect and they unprofitable servants, and this can make no compensation
for their faults before, Luke 17. 10. When have done all the things commanded,
say we are unprofitable servants, etc. Our righteousnesses are as filthy rags,
Isa. 64. 6. And what ever sinners suffer in this life, it is infinitely short
of what their sins have deserved; Gods Justice is infinite and requierth an
infinite satisfaction; sinners are finite and therefore there is no porportion
between any thing they can bring, and what Gods Justice does require for
satisfaction.

III. That Jesus Christ being (...) God and Man in one person, was only fit to
make, and has actually made satisfaction unto Gods infinite and offended
Justice for the sins of Men.

It was necessary that the person that should make satisfaction should be man,
because none but a creature could suffer, and none but a man could be a fit
High Priest to offer up Sacrifice, and make reconciliation for the sins of Men,
Heb. 2. 17. It was necessary he should be God, because none but God so nearly
united, could strengthen the manhood, to bear up under such a pressure of
wrath, and break through such sufferings as had taken hold on Christ for man's
sins; and if he had not been God as well as man, the sufferings and
satisfaction would have been but finite, and so no proportionable satisfaction,
but through the infinite dignity of his person, the satisfaction is of infinite
value. That Christ has actually made satisfaction unto Gods Justice for the
sins of men, is the great Doctrine which I shall prove from the Scripture.

1. We read in the Old Testament, of the many Sacrifices which were offered up
unto God, for the appeasing of his wrath, and the procuring remission for men's
sins, all which of themselves could not in the least attain that end, for the
Apostle tells us plainly, Heb. 10. 4. that it was not possible that the blood
of Bulls and Goats should take away sin; but these Sacrifices did typically
refer unto the Sacrifice, which Christ should offer of himself unto God,
whereby satisfaction should be made unto God, and remission obtained for men.

2. In the New Testament, the Scriptures are plain which prove the
satisfaction, which Christ made to Gods Justice, for man's sin by his death on
the Cross.

Math. 20. 28. The Son of Man came to give his life a ransom for many. and 1.
Tim. 2. 6. He gave himself a ransom, the price which Christ did pay for the
ransom of men, does evidently prove that it was for satisfaction; From what did
Christ ransom many, if it were not from the vengeance of God, which their sins
did expose them unto? and how could his giving his life ransom them, if he did
not hereby give satisfaction unto the demands of Gods Justice?

Romans 5. 6. In due time Christ died for the ungodly, and how did Christ die for
the ungodly? was it only for their good, and so give them an example? was it
not in their stead, and that by his death in their room he might satisfy
offended justice? we are said to be reconciled to God by the death of his Son,
v. 10. And could this be, if he died only for an example? Can we say that we
are reconciled to God by the death of any Saints, whose death is exemplary? Was
not Christ an innocent person? And would the Father have delivered him up unto
death had it not been in the room of others? He died for sin indeed, not his
own, he being perfectly free from sin, but for our sins.

1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the Tree: And
how did he bare our sins, but by bearing the punishment due for them? He was
wounded for our transgressions, etc. Isa. 53. 5. And wherefore did he bear the
punishment of our sins, but that he might give satisfaction unto God's justice?

Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his
blood, etc. so 1 Job. 1. 2. Christ was set forth to be a propitiation or
propitiatory sacrifice, which does plainly imply that God was angry with
sinners, and that Christ by the propitiatory sacrifice of himself, did appease
God's anger, by giving satisfaction here by unto his Justice. And therefore
also Christ is called an offering and sacrifice. Ephesians. 5. 2. As Christ has
loved us, and given himself for us an offering unto God for a sweet smelling
savor, and Heb. 9. 22. He appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself, etc. How could Christ put away sin by this sacrifice, if this
sacrifice were not for satisfaction?

Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us. How could Christ redeem us from the curse of the Law, and deliver
us from the wrath to come, part of the curse due to us for sin, if he had not
(by being made a curse for us, and thereby undergoing the punishment our sins
deserved) made satisfaction unto Gods justice?

4. It is only through this satisfaction which Christ has made, that remission
of sins, and reconciliation unto God is attained, or attainable by any of the
Children of men. The three former propositions are the reason of this last,
which does necessarily result from them, and in this the Scripture also is
clear, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness
of sins, according to the riches of his grace. So Col. 1. 14. and Verse 20.
Having made peace by the blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things to
himself. Romans 5. 10. If when we were enemies we were reconciled unto God by the
death of his Son. My small Tract will not permit inlargements in urging all the
Scripture-arguments, which may be brought to prove this great Doctrine of
Christ's satisfaction, nor to vindicate the Scriptures that prove it from all
Socinian exceptions. If any would read more largely this subject handled in
answer to the Socinians, Dr. Owen his Mystery of the Gospel vindicated, and
Socinianisme examined, I would commend to them as a Book of great worth and use
in this day, when Socinians begin so much to put forth the head; as also for a
lesser and later piece, I would commend to them, Mr. Ferguson's Justification
only upon a satisfaction. The Texts I have quoted and urged, may satisfy the
sober and considering Christian, who I believe does wonder at W. P's.
confidence in asserting that there is nothing in the Scripture that does look
toward a satisfaction.

CHAP. VIII. An Answer to W. Ps cavils against the Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction.
THe Apostle Peter tells us, 2 Pet. 3. 16. Of some unlearned and unstable
persons who wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction. W. P. has plainly
discovered himself to be such a one whom the Apostle does speak of, as will
appear in the review of the Scriptures he alleges against Christ's
satisfaction, wherein I shall show how they are wrested by him.

Exodus 34. 6, 7. The Lord passed by, etc. proclaimed The Lord, the Lord God
gracious and merciful, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin. If W. P. had read and considered, and believed the
following words in the same 7. verse. And will by no means clear the guilty;
the beams of Gods justice and holiness might have shined with such a luster in
his face, as that he should not have dared to offer such an affront and
indignity thereunto, and incur the guilt which God there threatens, he will
not clear men of (without the supposition of a satisfaction to his offended
justice) to set up his mercy and love as inconsistent herewith; and what
blasphemy as well as absurdity is this to say, that God could not be gracious,
should he exact the utmost farthing, when he is so much the more gracious unto
men in exacting nothing from them, but taking his whole satisfaction at the
hands of Christ, whom of free grace he sent into the World to dye, and hereby
to satisfy his justice in their stead. God indeed proclaims himself to be
gracious and merciful, whereby he declares what he is in his Son, whom he had
before promised to give, and in whom alone all Nations of the Earth that ever
should obtain his favor were to be blessed. 2 Chronicles. 32 9. If you turn again
to the Lord, the Lord is gracious and merciful, etc. I deny the consequence
from this Scripture, that Gods remission is grounded on Men's repentance, but
his grace and mercy through Christ is the reason of his invitation of sinners
to repent and turn unto him, as is evident from that Scripture, Ephesians. 1. 6. that
we are made accepted only in the beloved, without whole satisfaction and
intercession, the repentance and reformation of sinners would not in the least
avail for remission and acceptance.

Neh. 9. 17. Thou art a God ready to pardon, etc. Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked
forsake his way, etc. Let him return to the Lord, and he will have mercy on
him, etc. Jer. 31. 34. I will forgive their iniquity. Mic. 7. 18. Who is a God
like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, etc. These and the like places prove
God to be gracious and merciful, ready to forgive, and that he has engaged
himself to do it: And who is there that denies all this? But where is the
inconsistence between this and Christ's satisfaction? Yea, where would have been
the exercise of any grace and mercy toward us, if it had not been for Christ's
satisfaction? He has promised to pardon sin in the new Covenant, but was not
that Covenant ratifyed with the blood of Christ? and does not the Apostle tell
us plainly, Heb. 9. 22. That without shedding of blood there is no remission?
So that our opinion, or rather belief is not strange, but his consequence is
so; and his denial of satisfaction does destroy the design of the Covenant of
grace (which cannot be of force without it) and not our asserting of it; And
though God be exalted upon the Throne of his mercy to forgive sinners, that by
faith are interested in the merits and satisfaction of his Son; yet W. P. and
all Quakers and Socinians which deny Christ's satisfaction, and thereby ipso
facto, exclude themselves from all share in it, will find at the length, that
God is exalted upon the Throne of his judgment, to take vengeance upon them
all, that will not be beholding to his Son to appease his wrath. Math. 6. 12.
And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. From whence W. P. argues,
that which is forgiven is not paid. I answer, that which is forgiven is not
paid by us, but it is paid by Christ, and it is free to us, though it cost
Christ dear. He further argues, that we are to forgive without satisfaction,
and therefore God does; I answer, that God does forgive without satisfaction
from us; and as those that do injure us, we ought to forgive them freely
without satisfaction, because vengeance does not belong to us, but unto the
Lord, who in our room, as it were, will have satisfaction one way or other from
them, and has threatened to recompense every injury upon their heads; so the
Lord does freely forgive us, and yet so, as that still he does preserve the
honor of his justice in taking satisfaction from Christ.

Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, etc. This Scripture is nothing to
W. Ps purpose, but strongly against his error, because if we be saved only by
faith in Christ, than it must need be in Christ, as a sacrifice for sin, as
fulfilling the Law and bearing Gods wrath, and by consequence, as making
satisfaction: I grant that Gods love of benevolence, or electing love is not
the effect of Christ's satisfaction, from whence it was that he sent his Son
into the World for our salvation, but his love of complacency is the effect of
Christ's satisfaction, Math. 3. 17. He is well pleased with us only in Christ.

Romans 8. 31, 32. Carries the same argument, and therefore may have the same
answer, neither is it any absurdity to say that God should be at the charges of
his own satisfaction. Job 33. 24. I have found a ransom.

Act. 10. 34. Whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins. This
place is grossly wrested and perverted by W. P. since remission is through faith
in Christ, called faith in his blood, Romans 3. 25. And how in his blood, but as
his blood is the price of our redemption? but W. P. calls faith only a
believing of his testimony; yea, he adds obeying his precepts, as a
concurring cause of remission, which is rank Popery, importing justification by
works.

2 Cor. 5. 18. That God himself reconcileth sinners to himself by Christ is
most true, and most strongly argues against his error, and for our cause; for
how does God reconcile us to himself by Christ, but by the blood of his Cross?
Col. 1. 20. And what does this import, but satisfaction by this blood, without
which there is no reconciliation?

Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins according to the riches of his grace. This place is an invincible argument
for Christ's satisfaction, redemption through Christ's blood on our part, clearly
importing satisfaction through Christ's blood on Gods part, and therefore this
with other places, which W. P. mentions against the truth, do prove to be for
the truth, and cut the throat of his own tenants, who most childishly (God
infatuating of him) brings arguments to the destruction of his own cause. His
arguing that grace is not justice, because forgiveness is according to the
riches of Gods grace is very weak, for though grace be not formally justice,
yet grace and justice are very well consistent, as Romans 3. 24. Being justified
freely by his grace, etc. verse. 25. To declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins, verse. 26. That he might be just, and the justifier of him
that believes. As God is just (in respect of Christ) he pardons them that
believe, because of his satisfaction, though all be free grace in regard of us.

1 Pet. 5. 10. But the God of all grace that has called us, etc. This has the
same consequence, as the other, and therefore needs no other answer.

1 Job. 4. 9. In this was manisested the love of God, etc. I have granted it is
out of love that God sent his Son, but it does no way follow, that therefore
his Son did not make satisfaction to his justice; and therefore though W. P. in
enumerating some of the ends of Christ's mission into the World, does reach no
higher than his setting him forth as a perfect example, which is the Socinian
doctrine, yet the Scripture teaches us otherwise, that the great end of Gods
giving his Son, and Christ's coming and laying down his life, was to purchase
remission and salvation for us. Therefore though W. P. tells us the Scripture
is silent in reference to the doctrine of satisfaction, it is a sign his Ears
are dull, and his Eyes closed, if he have not a conviction of this doctrine,
undeniably proved from the Scripture; and it is not our asserting, but his
denial of Satisfaction that does reflect Indignity upon God, and is repugnant
to the Nature, Conditions, and Tendency of the second Covenant.

The Absurdities and gross consequences, as W. P. terms them which follow
from this Doctrine, do show the absurdity and grossness of this man's
Conceptions; to the first I have shown the consistency of Grace and
Satisfaction. To the second I have given an undeniable reason why man must in
some cases forgive without Satisfaction, and God will not; but how absurd and
Blasphemous is it (this supposed) to say man is more capable of extending mercy
than God, when Gods mercy to us (which this satisfaction of Christ does make
way for the exercise of) is so great that all our mercies are Cruelties in
comparison, and the Lord takes no more Satisfaction from those he extends his
especial mercy unto, then we do which freely forgive private injuries. The
third Absurdity (as he calls it) in words we own it to be sound Doctrine,
which appears to be gross to none but such whose reason is depraved, and
therefore I am sure W. P. can have no right reason to refute this doctrine. He
argues, If Christ satisfied Gods justice, he did it either as God, or as Man;
or as both God and Man. But he did it not as God, nor as Man, nor as both God
and Man.

Therefore he has not satisfied Gods justice at all. I shall not here argue
against his conclusion, but deny his minor asserting, that Christ did satisfy
Gods justice as God-man; and it does not follow, if his proof should be good
that he could not do it alone as God, or alone as Man, that therefore he could
not do it as God-Man; neither is it true, as be obscurely phraseth it, that
where two middle positions are inconsistent with the nature of the end for
which they are brought, their Conjunction does rather augment than lessen the
difficulty of their accomplishment. For as the Soul cannot see without the Body
for want of an Organ, nor the Body cannot see without the Soul for want of a
visive faculty, yet the man can see, and so both Soul and Body can do that in
Conjunction which neither can do in Separation. Therefore though God separately
cannot satisfy, (from a better reason than any he brings) because he cannot
suffer, and man separately cannot satisfy, because the satisfaction would not
be of Infinite value, yet as God-man he satisfied, the Manhood suffering, and
the Godhead putting a value upon it.

The consequences, which he further deduceth from this Doctrine of
Satisfaction, he very fitly styles irreligious and irrational; but I deny they
are deducable from this Doctrine.

To the First, Who do ascribe more Grace and Mercy to God, then we who do
apprehend it in his Son? How then do we say it is unlawful and impossible he
should be gracious?

To the Second, What compaltion or force does this Doctrine inser to be laid
upon God in the exercise of his justice? when he does exercise his justice
freely, as he does love his Image, in his people freely, yet both are
necessary, because natural, and neither forced and compeld by any external
Agent.

To the Third, What a wretched audacious sinner is this! to fasten unworthiness
upon God, if he punished an innocent person, and required satisfaction where
nothing was due; when the Son did voluntarily undertake to be our surety, and
was punished as bearing our sins, and satisfied for us, and not himself; what
unworthiness in God to change the persons, and put his Son to death to save us
alive? Is it not unworthiness and abominable baseness in any of the Children of
men, to open their mouths against God for this? And if it were unworthy to
punish an Innocent person, and it is certain Christ was punished, if he were
not punished for us to satisfy Gods justice, it will follow from W. P's words,
that Christ should be a sinner (which is Blasphemy) and that he was punished
for his on sins.

W. P's fourth Consequence is abominably false, and the contrary true, this
Doctrine does the best answer the real intent of Christ's Life and Death.

The fifth Consequence is as impious as unreasonable, when the Love and
Compassion of the Father and the Son is alike; the one in sending, the other in
coming to redeem lost Sinners.

The sixth Consequence is ridiculous, that Christ's satisfaction should rob God
of the gift of his Son for our Redemption; who sees not (but some blind Moles)
that our Doctrine does ascribe God the greatest glory for this gift?

The seventh consequence is childish, and a shame that a man that pretends to
any brains should mention it, That though Christ has satisfied for us, the
debt remains still to Christ, as if when one man discharges for another, the
debt should still abide.

The eighth Consequence is so abominable, that it might make the Reader tremble
and wonder, that a Worm, whom the Lord could easily crush, should open his
mouth thus against the glorious Jehovah, as to say, that it Gods justice be
satisfied by Christ, then Man is no ways beholding, or the least Obliged to
God; as if we were not beholding to God for giving his Son, for accepting this
Satisfaction, for giving us a share therein; are not we beholding to God for
all, though Christ has purchased all?

The ninth Consequence, that God should hereby lose all power of enjoining
Godliness, and punishing Disobedience, does not in the least follow; for
Godliness is enjoined upon all, though not in order to the meriting Eternal
Life, and God threatens to punish the Disobedient, whom if they continue to
the end in their Impenitency and Unbelief, he will punish eternally in Hell,
notwithstanding this Satisfaction of Christ in which they have no share; but
Believers that are interested herein, God, as he has brought them out, so he
has engaged to keep them out of a course of Disobedience; and if they do
transgres in some particulars, he has threatened to chastise them, which is not
inconsistent with Christ's satisfying his justice for their sins, since
Chastisment is not an act of Vindicative Justice, but Fatherly Love.

W. P. concludes with a Caution, wherein he labors to persuade People, not
to entertain this Principle concerning Christ's Satisfaction, which is in
effect, to persuade them to cast off the Christian Religion, and turn Turks and
Mahomitans; for what is there in the Christian Religion, if there be not
Satisfaction by Christ, the Foundation of all other privileges? Take away
Christ's Satisfaction, and you take away Gods Favor, Remission of sin, Peace
of Conscience, Immunity from the Curse and Condemnation of the Law; Take away
Satisfaction, then the Word and Spirit and we are false Witnesses thereof; then
is our preaching vain, and your Faith also is vain, then you are all yet in
your sins, then you must all of you of necessity be damned and punished
eternally. Take away Satisfaction, and you take away Christ; and you take away
all. And therefore let not W. P. think to easily to persuade people to let go
this Principle, which whosoever does it, has made Shipwreck of his Faith, and
of necessity must fall into the Ocean of Gods Wrath, which none can escape
without this Satisfaction.

And therefore I would here caution W. P. with more reason then he does the
people, and speak to him according to the Words of the Apostle Peter, to Simon
Magus, Acts 8. 21. 22, 23. I perceive thou have no part in this matter (namely
Christ's Satisfaction which thou deniest) neither is thy heart right in the
sight of God; but hereby evidently do declare thy self to be in the Gall of
Bitterness, and the bond of Iniquity; yet repent of thy wicked Blasphemies, and
Abominable heretical Assertions, if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may be
forgiven thee.

CHAP. IX. The Justification of the Ungodly, by the imputed Righteousness of
Christ asserted and proved.
HAving proved and vindicated the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction from the
Cavils of W. P. The Doctrine of Justification by Christ's imputed
Righteousness, does evidently follow from it; for since there can be no
Remission of sin (therefore no Justification) without Satisfaction to Gods
offended Justice, as has been proved; and since this Satisfaction cannot be
given to God by Sinners themselves, and Christ only has given it, which also
has been proved, there is no way imaginable how we can be justified, but by
the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. For he has made
him to be Sin for us who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness
of God in him. As Christ was made sin for us, though Innocent, by the
Imputation of our sin to him, for which he was condemned and punished: So we
are made the Righteousness of God in him, though guilty, by the Imputation of
his Righteousness unto us, whereby we are justified. And what other meaning
than Justification by Christ's imputed Righteousness can that Scripture have,
which speaks of the Blessedness of the Man, unto whom the Lord imputes
Righteousness without Works, Romans 4. 6. That this Blessedness spoken of, is
Justification, appears from the scope of the place which is to prove the
Doctrine of Justification, and the following words also do evince it, verse. 7.
Blessed is the Man whose Iniquities are forgiven, etc. That this Righteousness
is not a man's own is evident, because it is a Righteousness without Works, and
then whose Righteousness can it be, but the Righteousness of Christ? and that
this Righteousness is imputed are the words of the Scripture, therefore the
proof is firm, that we are justified by the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness. Unto which Scripture, I may add for the further clearing and
Confirmation of this Doctrine of Justification by Christ's Imputed
Righteousness, this Argument grounded upon Scripture. If there be no other way
for Sinners to be justified, but by Faith in Jesus Christ, then Justification
is by the Imputed righteousness of Christ. But there is no other way for
Sinners to be justified, but by Faith in Jesus Christ. Therefore Justification
is by the imputed Righteousness of Christ.


The Consequence of the Major is evident, because Faith justifies only with a
respect to Christ's Righteousness without us called therefore Righteousness by
Faith, distinguished from our own Righteousness, Phil. 3. 9. and how is this
Righteousness by Faith, but as it is applied by us, and imputed by God to us
through Faith; Faith cannot justify as a work, because all works are excluded
in the matter of Justification, therefore it must Justify as an Instrument
applying Christ Righteousness, which being without us, can be made ours no
other way than by Imputation.

The Minor, that Sinners are justified only by Faith in Jesus Christ, is as
clear as any Doctrine in the whole Book of God; it being the design of the
Apostle Paul, to prove this expressly, in the first part of Epistle to the
Romans, and in the second and third Chapter of his Epistle to the Galatians.
How many times does he say, we are justified by Faith without Works? and how
strongly does he Argue the necessity of Justification this way, because of the
universal Guilt upon Mankind, and deficiency of Righteousness inherent,
therefore that they must seek for a Righteousness without themselves, which is
Christ's Righteousness, therefore that they can be justified only by Faith;
which Faith he puts in opposition to all works, not only of the Ceremonial
and Morral Law; but also to all Works wrought in Faith (which are works still)
such as Abraham's Works, and David's Works were, who yet were not justified upon
the account of any of their Works, that all Boasting might be excluded. Romans 4.
2. And the Apostle tells us plainly verse. 5. That God justifies the Ungodly,
no Persons being the Subjects of Gospel Justification but as Ungodly, that is
as having sinned, and as having no Works, no Righteousness of their own to
procure Justification for them; The sense is that God finds every one
Ungodly, Guilty, Filthy, whom he does justify freely by his Grace, through the
Redemption and Righteousness of Christ; but he does not leave them Ungodly;
where he removes the guilt of sin, he removes also the filth of sin,
Justification and Sanctification being inseparable Companions; and though
Justification be altogether distinct from Sanctification, yet it is never
without Sanctification; which if W. P's cloudy Brains had rightly apprehended,
it would have given an answer, in the making of them, to most of his
Objections, which he has brought against this Doctrine, where he argues from
the Concomitant unto the Cause, and his deductions or most pitiful non
sequitur's. I intended to have run through them all, and given particular
Answers to them, but that Mr. Danson who is concerned to reply to something in
his Book, Intends to answer him in this Point, and withal, to give a
Synopsis of Quakerisme in other points (besides these three) Namely, their
asserting: 1. Good Works to be the Meritorious cause of our Justification. 2.
That a State of Freedom from sin is attainable in this life. 3. That there is
a leight in every Man, sufficient to guide him to salvation. 4. That the
Scripture is not the Word of God, nor a standing rule of faith and life. 5.
That there is no resurrection of the body. 6. That there is no need or use of
Ordinances, Baptism, Lords Supper, etc. The book he intends will be small,
but the use of it may be great, (in this day when the Quakers are so busy to
gain proselites) for the establishment of Christians in the truths and ways of
God.

In W. P's conclusion, by way of caution, he teleth us, he does not disown
Father, Word, and Spirit to be one, but he disowneth them to be three Persons,
which has been proved out of the Scripture; that the Trinity (as he says)
has not a foundation in the Scripture; that its original was three hundred
years after Christianity was in the World, has been proved to be false. What
he speaks concerning the Council of Sirmia, That the controversy concerning
the Trinity should not be remembered, because the Scriptures made no mention
thereof, is also falsely alleged; for by that very Council the Doctrine of the
Trinity is expressly asserted as a chief article of the Christian faith; and the
distinction of Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, plainly employed in the
Anathema, which was pronounced upon those that asserted they were but one
Person; that which W. P. cites is concerning the word (...), in which this
Council was heterodox, as it might well be, when so much influenced by the
Emperor Constantius, who himself was infected with Arianisme. But W. P. should
have looked into the Councils more ancient and authentic, than the Sirmian,
namely the first Nicene Council, which condemned the Arian heresy,
blasphemously denying the Son to be coeternal and coessential with the Father:
the first Constantinopolitan council which condemned the Macedonian heresy
denying the Deity of the Holy Ghost. The Council of Ephesus Chalcedon, who with
other approved ecumenical Councils, generally assented to the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and the Consubstantiality of the three Persons.

What W. P. further adds concerning the occasion of Idolatry, is groundless;
the scandalizing of Turks, etc. is no wonder, when the preaching of Christ
crucified was such a stumbling block of old. After he confesses that Christ
offered unto God a Satisfactory Sacrifice, and yet he denies Christ's
Satisfaction and Justification by his imputative Righteousness; all which three
Doctrines being Fundamental, established by the Word of Truth, W. P's attempts
to subvert them are in vain, and have discovered him to be both a Blasphemer
and an Heretic.

Since I began my Answer to W. P. there came to my hands a Pamphlet, subscribed
by Solomon Eccles, styled The Quakers Challenge, wherein amongst others he
challenges me at two Weapons (as he calls them) to Fast seven days and seven
nights; and to Wake seven days and seven nights, and that hereby trial shall be
made who are in the truth.

Though the Pamphlet be ridiculous, yet I was unwilling to let it pass without
any remark; and my Answer is, when the Lord has appointed these ways for trial
of the Orthodox and Heretics, I shall undertake them; but not finding any such
Command, or Warrant in the Word to forbear Food or Sleep so long; but on the
contrary, because it is a tempting of God, and a breach of the sixth
Commandment, which requires all lawful endeavors for the preservation of our
own life, as well as the lives of others, therefore it would be a God-provoking
sin, to endanger selfmurther by such Weapons. The Scripture Instances of
Fasting many days together were miraculous, and not for our imitation; others I
have heard of that have lived as many days together as he speaks of, without
meat, or drink, or sleep, but they have been distracted people, amongst whom
this man deserves to be numbered: and if I should answer him in the way he
challenges, I should be accounted by the sober as mad as himself. His Lie he
venteth concerning me, is refuted already in my Narrative.

CHAP. X. The Call, and Exhortation.
HAving asserted and proved the three great Doctrines of the Trinity,
Satisfaction, and Justification, denied by W. P. I shall further add by way of
premise to the Call and Exhortation (what was before intimated) that these
three are great Fundamental Truths of the Christian Religion, necessary to be
believed in order to Salvation; the unbelief and denial of which, will bring
unavoidable damnation.

1. The Doctrine of the Trinity of distinct Persons in the Unity of the Divine
Essence is a Fundamental Truth, because the Godhead in the three persons is the
proper object of saving Faith and right Worship, and those that do not savingly
believe, and rightly worship God, cannot possibly be saved; besides, the denial
of the three distinct persons in the Godhead, does necessarily infer the
denial of the coeternal co-essential Deity of the Son and Holy Ghost, which is
Blasphemy and damnable Heresy, so accounted by the most ancient and
authentic Councils, and by the true Church of God in all Ages.

II. The Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction and Justification by his imputed
Righteousness, are Fundamental Truths also, without which there can be no
Redemption, Reconciliation, Remission, and consequently no Salvation.

This being premised, I shall now apply my self first to the Quakers, and then
to others.

To W. P. and other Quakers who believe these and other Quaker damnable errors,
I shall propound these four Queries, which I shall answer according to truth.

Que. 1. Do you know what you are?

1. You are strangers to Christ, (whatever your fancy be of Christ within you)
and I am confident that none of you all that believe these errors, have had
experience of the new birth and forming of Christ's image upon your hearts,
since there never is a work of regeneration and uniting the souls of any to
Christ, that leaves them in such darkness and error, as you are left and bound
up in: No, had you been ever truly regenerated, you would have been humbled and
emptied of your selves, you would have seen your selves lost in your selves,
and your need of Christ's satisfaction and imputed Righteousness, without which
you would have been assured that there is no possibility Gods anger should be
appeased, and your souls saved; It is not turning Quaker, that is turning from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to Christ: but on the contrary
it is a turning from light to darkness, and from Christ to Satan, and what will
be the issue hereof? not remission of sins and salvation, but the fastening of
guilt upon you, and eternal destruction.

2. You are enemies to Christ; and I believe that Jesus Christ has scarcely
greater enemies under the Sun than you* who are greater enemies to Christ, than
those who deny his eternal Deity? (as I have proved to be the plain consequence
of W. P's words, and of the denial of the Trinity) who are greater enemies to
Christ, than those that deny his Satisfaction and Justification by his merrits?
who are greater enemies to Christ, than those that oppose his faithful
Ministers and Ambassadors, and that lie in wait to deceive and mislead
Christians? you are enemies to his truths, and ways, and ordinances, and cause,
and interest, and Ministers, and true Disciples; and all this with Christ in
your mouths, and I am confident the Lord does hate and abhor you for such
hypocrisy.

3. You are Children of the Devil; and the works of your Father you do, and
will do; you are his more close and subtle agents, that in a seeming more
refined way, do all you can to enlarge the bounds of his Kingdom; and like
Satan when the Sons and Daughters of God assemble themselves to worship their
Father, some of you will appear amongst them to disturb them; I wonder how you
can have the face to pretend Religion, when it is so apparent that you are more
than ordinarily acted by the Devil to oppose it.

4. You are Serpents and a generation of Vipers, full of deadly poison, poison
in the head, the poison of damnable errors, from whence poison does drop forth
at your lips and into your pens; you are Serpents putting forth your stings
where ever you come, hissing at all those who are not of your brood: If our
Savior were on Earth to preach to you as he did to the Pharisees, he would
with as great reason thus style you, as he did them.

Que: II. Do you know where you are?

1. You are in the Devils School; he is training you up in some of the deepest
mysteries of his Kingdom; some amongst you are but raw Scholars, and in the
lower form, but you that I speak to are arrived to some proficiency, and are
well instructed in some of the chief principles of the Devils Catechism, so
that you are able also to instruct others in the Devilish Doctrines you have
learnt of him. Your master is a liar from the beginning, and the Father of
lies, and you have learnt and believed some of his lies, as if they were
certain truths.

2. You are in the Devils arms; he huggeth you so fast, that it is more
difficult to pluck you from thence than the most wicked and profane.

3. You are in the Devils chains, whereby he is leading you captive at his
will, they are chains of darkness and error, which he has upon you, whereby
he is dragging you toward the regions of eternal darkness

Que: III. Do you know what you are doing?

1. You are dishonouring God; in dishonouring the Son, you dishonor the
Father, in reproaching Gods Ambassadors, you reproach the King that sent them;
you are spots, and blemishes to Religion, and render it ridiculous to the
profane world.

2. You are murdering your own Souls, embruing your hands in your own blood,
you are poisoning, wounding, killing your selves; and you are some of the
greatest soul-murderers of others, of any that live upon the Earth.

Que. IV. Do you know whether you are going?

You are going the certain way to Hell; your way is not in the common rodewith
others, but it is a by-way and dark path, in which you often stumble and fall,
and at length it will meet with the great rode of the world, at the Gate of
Hell, in which you will as certainly enter at last, if you go on in this path,
as Cain and Judas, that are there already. And here I might sound a peal of
Judgment in your ears, and forewarn you of the wrath to come (to escape which,
one day, you would give ten thousand worlds for an interest in Christ's
Satisfaction and imputed Righteousness, when it will be too late,) but for the
present most of you are Judgement-proof and Sermon-proof; and so prejudiced
against us Ministers, who are employed as Watchmen by the Lord, to forewarn
the people of their danger) that our reproofsand warnings are rejected, and
railing language is the return of our admonitions.

Yet in the name of the Eternal and Living God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
whose I am, and whom I serve in the work of the Ministry, I call upon you that
are eluded by the Quakers, and have not as yet sucked in all their poisonous
principles, which they have cunningly concealed from you, but now have made
manifest to the world, that without any further delay, you would come out from
amongst them, and separate your selves; that you would save your selves from
this untoward generation; that you would deliver your selves as a bird out of
the snare of the fowler, and as a Roe out of the hand of the hunter, praying to
the Lord to grant you repentance, (for going amongst them) unto the
acknowledgement of his truths (which they deny) and that you may be recovered
out of the snare of the Devil, who has hitherto led you captive; considering
that if you go in this way, your steps will certainly take hold on Hell; O then
hasten, hasten, poor captived deluded Souls! hasten for the Lords sake, for
your poor souls sake, hasten from these Soul-murderers unto the Lord Jesus the
Soul-Savior, and into the ways of life and salvation, which he has prescribed
in his word.

Lastly, I shall in a word bend my speech unto all (as yet undeluded)
Christians, by way of exhortation to stedfastness in the truths and way of the
Lord, and as they desire their salvation to beware of the Quakers damnable
Doctrines. There are two ways, whereby God does try his people, the one is by
persecution, and other is by heresy, and the Apostle tells us, 1 Co. 11. 19.
that it is necessary heresies should, arise that they which are approved might
be made manifest; this later way does sometimes discover more unsound
Professors than the former; the approved and elect of God I am sure will
stand, and if any go out from us, it is a sign they were not of us, for if they
had been of us, no doubt they would still have continued with us, 1 Ioh. 2. 19.
And here I shall again repeat what I did before assert, that it were better for
you to drink a cup of poison, than to suck in the Quakers damnable opinions;
Take heed of this infection which is worse than poison and plague, more
dangerous and destructive. For this end labor to get on the girdle of truth,
let the truths of the word be fastened about the loins of your minds, that is,
get the principles of Religion fixed in you; which that they may, mingle them
with faith and love, and live under the powerful influence of them: And that
you may be the further off from danger, avoid the Company and Meetings of the
Quakers, (lest coming thither out of novelty, being out of Gods way, you be
left by God, and as too many have been, you be caught by the Devil in the
snares which there he lays) and come not near the Tents of these enemies of
Jesus Christ, lest you be swallowed up in the same ruin which is coming upon
them. If you would save your selves from their plagues, you must keep your
selves out of their ways. I shall shut up all with the exhortation of the
Apostle Peter, having told believers of the unlearned and unstable, who did
wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction (as do the Quakers,) he exhorts
them, 2 Epist. 3. cap. 17. 18. v. Ye, therefore beloved, seeing ye know these
things before, beware lest ye also being lead away with the error of the
wicked fall from your own steadfastness; but grow in grace and in the knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; Now to God the Father, to God the Son,
and God the Holy Ghost, be glory and honor, both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
THe speeding of the sheets off the Presses, has caused too many both literal
Errata's and in the sense too, the chiefest found out in a hasty reveiw you
have as follow, and are desired to mend.

Page 9 line 21 read destruction, p. 11. l. 25 read own, p. 15 l. 11. read
understands, p. 16 l. 30 r. redicule, l. 32 r. heart, p. 17 l. 24 (...), p. 18
l. 8. (...) l. 12 Job 35. 10. l. 2 my l. 14 for my r. thy, l. 18 r. for 18, 28
p. 20 l. 3 for the r. three l. 10 after substances, add therefore the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost are three distinct substances, or three distinct nothings,
p. 23 l. 27 blot out, W. P. required his presence else where, p. 27 l. 18. blot
out Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, p. 28 l. 17 r. blasphemer, p. 34 l. 28 r.
Three, p. 35 l. 33 r. their, p. 40 l. 6 r. (...) l. 23 r. true, where ever you
find subsistence read subsistence, p. 42. r. foolish l. last, r. reasonings, p.
45 l. 15 r. there p. 48 l. 18 r. W. P's. p. 51 l. last r. (...) p. 52 l. 1 r.
(...) l. 12 r. (...) l. 17 r. Praxean l. 28 for thee r. the p. 53 l. 8 r. (...)
l. 34 r. arguments p. 54 l. 27 r. much concern my self. l. 29 r. but chiefly,
p. 55 l. 2 r. peccatum, l. 7 r. when ye have etc. p. 56 l. last r. to give, p.
59 l. 31 r. out of.


