CHRIST'S Certain and sudden Appearance TO JUDGMENT.

By Thomas Vincent, sometime Minister of Maudlins Milstreet, London.

Heb. 10. 37. For yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and
will not tarry. LONDON, Printed for George Calvert, and are to be sold at the
Bible in Iewen-street. 1667.

TO THE Citizens of London.
YOu have heard God's Terrible Voice in the City, expressing it self in the
late dreadful desolating Judgments of Plague, and Fire; the sound of which has
gone forth, not only into every corner of the Land, but I believe also by this
time, unto the farthest end of the World. Give me leave to sound another
Trumpet in your ears, and to forewarn you of a ten thousand times more dreadful
Judgment, I mean the last and general Judgment of the whole World, at the
second appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ, who will most certainly and very
quickly be revealed from Heaven in flaming Fire to take vengeance upon all them
which shall be found ungodly on that Day.

Could I have certainly foretold the many thousands, that sell by the Plague,
in the year 1665, of their so near approaching death, surely they would have
endeavored to prepare, that the sting and fear of death might have been
removed; could I have foretold the Citizens of London of the many thousand
Houses which should fall by the Fire, in the year 1666, surely they would have
endeavored to prevent the Fire, or at least have removed all their goods
beforehand; but these things could not be foreseen, and therefore as the
Judgments were unexpected, so they took the most unprovided: But I can
certainly foretell you from God, who cannot lie, of the future (...) Judgment,
by the Lord Jesus Christ at the last day, which is the subject of this ensuing
Treatise: And when you have warnings hereof out of the Word of Truth, and
awakening motives to prepare, by dreadful temporal Judgments, you should
neglect to do it, and after all be found unprovided at the appearance of
Christ; as your sin will be the greater and more inexcusable, so your dread
will be the greater at the sight of your Judge (whom those very eyes which read
these lines, will behold ere long coming in the Clouds) and your punishment
will be the more intolerable: But if the Lord incline your hearts to follow
the directions and counsels of his Word to prepare for this great and notable
day, you shall lift up your heads with joy, when the greatest part of the World
shall be filled with terror and confusion, and when the Lord Jesus does
appear, you also shall appear with him in glory. The design of these sheets is
to set forth the glorious appearance of Christ, with the certainty and
suddenness thereof, that sinners might be awakened to repent, and believers
might be comforted with the hopes of it, and all might be in a readiness for
the day, which is so sure, and near; which that you may be, and that my
endeavors may be blessed for your help herein, is the prayer of an earnest
wellwisher to your souls.

Thomas Vincent.

The Contents.
2. Doctrines. Doct. 1. That the Lord Jesus Christ will certainly and quickly
appear. Doct. 2. That there is an earnest desire and longing in the Church
after Christ's appearance. page 1, 2.
1. Concerning Christ's appearance. 1. In the Flesh. p. 2, 3, 4. 1. The manner
of his appearance. p. 5. 1. With great Power. 1. Over Death. p. 6. 2. Over Men
and Devils. p. 7, 8.
2. With great glory. p. 8, 9. 1. He will be attended with a glorious retinue
of Angels. p. 10. 11.

2. The end of Christ's appearance and transactions of that day. p. 15. 1 He
will raise the dead, p, 16, to 19 2 He will gather all Nations before his
judgment Seat, p, 19 3 He will separate the righteous from the wicked, p, 20,
21 4. He will open the Books, 1. Of Gods remembrance p. 22. to 27. 2. Of Men's
consciences: p: 27: 3 Of the Law: p: 28 4 Of the Gospel, p, 28, 29 5 Of life,
p, 30,
5. He will judge both the righteous and wicked. p. 30 Where 1. Concerning
their particular Judgment. 2. Concerning the execution of their sentence
pronounced p. 30.
1 The immediate Antecedents are 1 Their Resurrection, p, 31, 32 2 Their
meeting with the Angels, p, 33 3 Their meeting one with another, p, 34 4 Their
being caught up together into the air, p, 35 5 Their meeting with the Lord, p,
36, to 40
1 He will take an account of them, p, 41 1 Of their graces, p, 42 2 Of the
improvement of their talents, ibid. 3 Of their works of mercy, p, 43 4 Of their
afflictions, p, 44
2 He will pronounce the Sentence upon them, p, 44, 45

1 The immediate antecedents are 1 Their resurrection and meeting of body and
soul, p, 46, to 50 2 Their meeting with Devils, p, 50, 51 3 Their meeting one
with another, p, 52 4 Their seeing the righteous caught up to meet the Lord, p,
53, to 61 5 Their seeing the Lord Jesus Christ coming to judge them, p, 59, to
64 6 Their seeing the Judgment of the righteous, p, 64
1 The Judge in 8 properties, p, 64, to 72 2 The Assessors, p, 73 3 The
Malefactors, p, 74, 75 4 The crimes, p, 76, 77 5 The accusers 1 God, p 78, 79 2
Men good Minist. p, 80 to 83 godly friends, p, 83 to 87
bad
3 Devils, ibid. 4 Their own consciences, p, 87
6 The conviction, where twenty sorts of sinners are called forth and convicted
by the Judge from p. 87, to 115 7 The sentence, p, 116, 117

1. The execution of the sentence on the wicked. 1. Of the wicked going away 1.
From whom, viz. 1. Christ, ibid. 2. Saints, 119
2. From what, ibid. 3. Six vexing considerations in their going away, from p.
120, to p. 130
2. Of the wickeds going into punishment. 1. Of the punishment they shall go
into, p, 131 1. The Inflicter. p. 132, 133 2. The Subject. Soul, p, 134 Body,
p. 135 3. The properties. 1. Universal. 2. Extreme. 3. Continual. 4.
Remediless. 5. Eternal. p. 136. to 142

p. 143, 144

2. The execution of the sentence on the righteous, p. 145 1. Of the righteous
going away. 1. From whom, viz. Devils, p. 146 Wicked, p. 147
2. From what, ibid. 3. Three sweet considerations in their going away; from p.
147. to 152
2. Of the righteous going into eternal life. 1. Of the eternal life they shall
go into, or their happiness. 1. Subjectively. body, 153, to 157 soul, 158, to
160
2. Objectively, 161 3. Formally, 162 to 166
2. Of their entering into eternal life, p. 167






p. 168. to 206 Sodom's burning, applied, etc. from p. 207. to 224 1. More
general, from 225, to 229 2. More particularly. 1. To sinners 1. To discover
them, from p. 230, to 234 2. To awaken them, from p. 235 to 246 3. To exhort
them, from p. 247 to 263
1 For the trial of them from p. 264 to 269 2. For the comforting of them, from
p. 270, to 28^
1. To believe. 2. To consider. 3. To prepare; where twelv^ Duties requisite in
order (...) preparation. From 283. (...) the end.



Christ's certain and sudden Appearance to Judgment.
Revel. 22. 20. Surely I come quickly. Amen, Even so come Lord Jesus.
CHAP. I.
THe last words of a Dear friend are usually most remarked, and best remembered,
especially when they speak great affection: these are the last words of Jesus
Christ, the best friend that the children of men ever had; which he sends his
Angel from Heaven, after he had been some years in glory with the Father, to
speak in his Name unto his Churches upon the earth. v. 16. I Jesus have sent
mine Angel to testify these things in the Churches: and of all the things
which he testifies by his Angel, this is the last and the sweetest in the
Text, Surely I come quickly. Which words of Promise coming down from Heaven,
and expressing so much Love to the Church, are followed with (...) Echo, and
resound of the Churches earnest desire, Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus, etc.

Hence observe, Doct. 1. That the Lord Jesus Christ will certainly and quickly
appear.

Doct. 2. That there is an earnest desire and longing in the Church after
Christ's appearance.

D. 1. That the Lord Jesus Christ will certainly and quickly appear.

Here I shall speak, 1. Concerning Christ's appearance. 2. Show that he will
certainly appear. 3. Show that he will quickly appear. 4. And lastly, Apply,


1. Concerning Christ's appearance. There is a twofold appearance of Christ,
which the Scripture makes mention of.

1. In the Flesh. 2. In Glory.
CHAP. II.
1. THe first appearance of Christ was in the flesh, above sixteen hundred
years ago in the Land of Judea, unto the people of the Jews, the
only-then-visible-Church upon the Earth. There it was that the Word was made
Flesh; and amongst that people he dwelt for a while, some of whom beheld his
Glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and
truth. There it was that the eternal Son of God was made man, being conceived
miraculously by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin Mary,
without the contamination of original sin, which all ordinary conceptions do
introduce: His real Mother, and supposed Father were both of the Tribe of
Judah, and of the lineage of David, and he was born in the Town of Bethlem,
according to the Scripture predictions: who, after he had lived thirty years in
obscurity, was baptized by John Baptist, his Forerunner and Harbinger; in
whose Baptism, when John saw the Heavens opened, and the Spirit of God
descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him, and heard the voice from the
excellent Glory, saying, This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. He
gave his testimony concerning him, that he was the Son of God, and the Lamb of
God, who takes way the sins of the world. Who after his own baptism and
temptation, and John's imprisonment, made his appearance more openly unto
Israel, showing forth his glory, not in outward pomp and splendor, but in a
more high, eminent, and wonderful manner, altogether Divine, exceeding the
imitation of any Earthly Monarch in the World.

He showed forth the glory of his power, in the Miracles which he did work,
namely in opening the eyes of the blind, and ears of the deaf; in loosning the
tongue of the dumb, and the bonds of other infirmities; in cleansing the
Lepers, and healing other diseases with a word; in casting out Devils after
long profession; in calming the Sea and Winds when boisterous and stormy; in
raising up the dead, before, and after burial for some days, and the like.

He showed forth the glory of his Knowledge, in looking into the hearts of
those which came unto him, being able to perceive their most secret thoughts
and imaginations, and needed not that any should restifie of man, for he knew
what was in man.

He showed forth the glory of his Wisdom, in his most wise answer, to the
ensnaring questions of the Pharisees and others, in the most excellent and
heavenly doctrine which he preached, wherein he did not teach his Disciples
subtle and empty speculations, which the greatest wits in the world have
busied themselves about, but great soulsaving truths; indeed he revealed some
great and deep mysteries (above the reach of the highest wit, of the greatest
Scholar, without the teachings of his Spirit) which were momentous and needful
in order unto practice, but the greatest part of his doctrine was plain and
easy.

He showed forth the glory of his Holiness, in his exact walking, and perfect
obedience unto the Law of God, without the least deviation or sin.

He showed forth the glory of his Goodness and tenderness toward the children
of men, in going about to do them good, and give succor to them which were in
misery, casting out none which came unto him.

Especially he showed forth the glory of his Mercy and infinite Love to his own
people, in submitting to so low a condition as he lived in for their sakes; in
humbling himself and becoming obedient unto death, even the cursed,
disgraceful, painful death of the Cross; besides the soul miseries which he
endured through sense of Gods wrath due for their sins, that he might satisfy
Gods justice, and deliver them from eternal death and wrath to come, and
purchase Life and Glory for them.

Thus Christ lived, and thus Christ died for our sins, according to the
Scriptures; and being dead, the bonds of death could not hold him, neither did
the holy one see corruption, but the third day rose again from the dead,
according to the Scriptures; and after his resurrection, was seen of Mary
Magdalen, of Peter, James, all the Apostles, of five hundred brethren at once,
according to the Scriptures. After forty days was taken up into Heaven, and is
there in his humane nature at the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in
the heavens, making intercession for his people, where he will abide until the
second appearance.

Thus concerning Christ's appearance in the flesh.

CHAP. III.
2. THe second appearance of Christ will be in Glory at the last day, when the
world shall come to an end: this is the appearance we are treating of, and
therefore I shall speak of it more largely, and show, 1. The manner of this
appearance. 2. The end and transactions at this appearance.


1. Concerning the manner of Christ's second appearance, what tongue of Men or
Angels is able to set it forth? what heart can conceive the splendor thereof?
Something the Scripture does reveal, and taking the Scripture for my guide, I
shall assay to speak something of it. See Luke 21. 27. Then shall they see the
Son of man coming in a Cloud, with Power and great Glory.

1. Christ at his second appearance will come with Power, with great power; he
has all power put into his hands in Heaven and in Earth now, and does exercise
it more secretly; then he will exercise it more visibly and apparently in the
sight of the whole world. To give instance,

1. He will come with power over Death. Death has had great power since the
Fall, and is the greatest Conqueror in the world; Death has made an universal
Conquest over all the sons and daughters of Adam (Enoch and Elias only
excepted) which lived in former generations, and has led them captive, binding
their faces in secret, chaining their hands and their feet, and clapping them
up close prisoners in the grave, and none have been able to make resistance;
yea, Death did assail the Lord of Life himself, and got the victory for a
while, and shut him up in prison; but he got loose before three days were at
an end, broke open the doors, and gave Death a deep wound, as it were, and an
abolishing stroke in his Resurrection, 2 Timothy 1. 10. presaging the complete
victory which afterward he would obtain over this enemy of mankind. Now when
Christ makes his second appearance in the world at the last day, he will
exercise his power over death, he will lead captivity captive, he will lay his
first Hands on Death, and tread this Conqueror under his feet, and strip him
of all his force and spoils, which he has been treasuring up for so many
years; he will snatch the keys of the grave out of the hand of Death, and open
the prison doors and let forth all his captives; he will loosen all the bonds
of Death, and knock off his chains, and bring out all his prisoners into
freedom and enlargment: as it is said, Hos. 13. 14. I will ransom them from the
power of the grave; I will redeem them from Death: O Death! I will be thy
Plagues! O Grave! I will be thy destruction! And it is said, 1 Cor. 15. 25, 26.
that all enemies shall be put under the feet of Jesus Christ, and the last
enemy which he shall destray is Death. And v. 54. When this mortal shall put
on immortality, then Death shall be swallowed up in victory. And surely Christ
must needs come with great power to get victory over such a potent enemy.

2. He will come with power over Men and Devils, he will have power over all
his enemies, which have rebelled against him; over all the Principalities and
Powers on the Earth, that exercise Lordship and dominion in the World; he will
bring the Kings of the Earth down from their seats, and pluck off the robes of
Princes; he will take the staff and the sword out of their hand, and divest
them of all their royalty and greatness; and they who have employed their
borrowed power against him, how will they quake and tremble before him? See
Rev. 11. 15, 16, 17, 18. When the seventh Angel sounded, there were great
voices in Heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of the World are become the Kingdoms
of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever. And the
four and twenty Angels fell on their faces, saying, we give thee thanks O Lord
God all-mighty, which art, and wast, and art to come, because thou have taken
to thee thy great power, and have reigned. And the Nations were angry, and thy
wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged; and that
thou should give reward unto thy servants the Prophets, and to thy Saints,
and them that fear thy name small and great, and should destroy them which
destroy the Earth.

The Kings of the Earth, and great Potentates will be angry when they are
dis-throned; and the wicked of the Earth will be troubled, when the Lord Jesus
shall come down from Heaven to call them to Judgment: If all the Powers of
wicked Men and Devils too, who are greater in power than Men, could, they would
make head, and resist the Lord Jesus Christ, and pull him from his Throne, and
put him to death, as the Jews did at his first appearance; if they had but any
hopes, of making their party good against him, how would they call their
forces, and gather their Armies, and wage War with this great King; especially
when all the wicked shall be raised up, and the ancient Rebels, the Giants of
the old World, shall come forth of their dust, and the Prison of Hell, where
some of them have been tormented by him many years? O how would they combine
their strength, and so many millions of them together, rush upon him with rage
and violence; and endeavor to avenge themselves upon him, at least defend
themselves against him, when he comes to torment them? but Christ will come
with so great power, that he will be able to deal with the whole wicked world
of men together, when they are raised and united in one body, and have obtained
more strength of body, and are filled with more rage and spite of mind than
here they had, and are out of all hopes of making any peace with him, and have
the whole flock of all the Devils in Hell to join in to their company; I say
Christ will come with sufficiency of strength to bind them all in Chains, and
so to hold them all down that they shall not be able to make the least
resistance; he that has power to raise the wicked from the dead, will have
power to keep all his Enemies from Rebellion, he will come with Power.

2. Christ will come at his second appearance with great glory; At his first
appearance, he came like a Servant, yea like a Servant of Servants; at his
second appearance he will come like a Lord, yea like a Lord of Lords, like the
great Lord of glory; at his first appearance he was ^loathed with dishonor,
and a chain of contempt was put about him; but at his second appearance he will
be clothed with glory and honor, and most excellent Majesty will be put upon
him; at his first appearance his Deity was veiled, his beauty was masked with
infirm flesh, his brightness was under a Cloud; though sometimes some beams did
break forth with such a dazzling luster, as made Peter fall at his feet saying,
Depart from me, for I am a sinful Man, O Lord, Luke 5. 8. And others in the
Ship to worship him, acknowledging of a truth thou art the Son of God: Mat. 14.
33. And often filled his Disciples with fear, and astonishment; but he was so
disguised in flesh, that few knew him at all, none knew much of him, when he
was so disrobed, and so meanly attired, and attended. It is said the Princes of
this World knew him not, else surely they would have laid down their Scepters
at his feet, had they known him, they would not have dared, so disgracefully,
to have crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8. But at his second appearance,
the Vail will be so drawn aside, that the Deity of Christ will shine forth with
amazing splendor to the view of the whole World; his humane nature will be
glorious beyond any other Creature; but oh how glorious will his Divine nature
be, when the eyes of the whole World shall be opened to see God in such a way,
as now we are not able to conceive? He will appear in the brightness of his
Fathers glory, so that they which see him will see the Father; the Majesty,
Authority, Dominion, Power, Holiness, Justice, and love of the Father, will be
like so many sparkling gems, to deck the Crown of Christ at his appearance; but
who can conceive the royalty and surpassing excellency of Jesus Christ, when he
comes down out of his Fathers Palace, into the World? He will come in great
glory, God will come down in him and with him; the Throne of God will be
removed, the Palace will be below, Heaven will be upon the Earth, where Christ
is, there is Heaven, there is God in his greatest glory to be seen; he will
come in great glory, never was there such glory seen upon the face of the
Earth; never did the eye of man behold such a sight, as then it will behold; we
read of great and pompous shows, which some Princes have made in their
triumphs: but never was there such pomp in the World, as there will be at this
appearance of Jesus Christ, when he comes triumphing over all his enemies,
when he comes with the spoils of principalities and powers, making a show of
them openly, and decked with such excellent glory. A little further to set this
forth,

1 He will come attended with a glorious retinue of Angels, we read M^tth. 26.
53. Of more than twelve legions of Angels. And Dan. 7. 10. Of thousand
thousands, yea ten thousand times ten thousands, which Minister about the
throne of God; yea further, Rev. 5. 11. Of a number of ten thousand times ten
thousand, and thousands of thousands of Angels, and Heb. 12. 22. Of an
innumerable company of Angels. All these Angels will attend upon Jesus Christ
at his second appearance. It is said M^tth. 25. 31. That all the holy Angels
shall come with him. Now the Angels are dispersed in several places, some of
them are upon the Earth ministering unto the saints, which shall be heirs of
salvation. Heb. 1. 14. Others are in heaven, beholding the face of the Father
ready to execute his will, some are ascending, some descending; but then they
will all be gathered together into one company, and like so many Courtiers
attend upon this great King in this his glorious appearance in the World; all
will descend with Christ; Heaven will be emptied of Angels, they will all come
forth, and come down from their old habitation; and oh how glorious will this
train be! he will come with all the holy Angels, Angels that are holy and
glorious; not like those rotten Courtiers which attend upon some Earthly Kings,
who have no other glory upon them, but what lies in their rich and splendid
apparel; the bodies of some of which if they were uncas'd, would appear to be
full of loathsome diseases; but whose souls are monstrously ugly, and deformed;
full of loathsome and noisome lusts, besmeared with dung and filthiness; who,
could their inside be turned outward, and the deformity of sin be seen with
bodily eyes, would appear too hideously black, and swarthy, and more misshapen,
than those which are born with the greatest blemishes of nature; who carry Hell
in their bosoms, and like so many bears and ugly hounds are led about by the
Devil in chains; such, such follow many Kings on earth, when they appear
abroad, with hearts full of lust; with eyes full of adultery; with mouths
full of oaths and filthy ribauldry; who are like so many spots in the faces of
their Princes, or like a Cloud about their brow, which darkneth their glory in
the eyes of the serious and sober minded: but Christ will come attended with
millions of holy Angels, arrayed in such pure and white garments, as shall not
have the least spot, or tincture of sin upon them, he will come with holy
Angels, who will be like so many flames of Fire, full of holy svveet burning
Love, and covered with such Light and glorious excellency, as will not darken,
but illustrate the glory of their Lord and Prince, they attend upon.

2 Christ will come with a glorious Brightness, and great noise; such a light
will shine in him and about him, as will a thousand fold surpass the light of
the Sun, when it shines in its full strength: we read Matthew. 13. 43. That the
righteous shall shine like the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father; how then
will the Sun of righteousness shine? from whom they will receive all their
brightness by reflection, as the Moon and some other Stars do from the Sun in
the firmament. It is said, Mat. 24. 29, 30. That at the coming of Christ, the
Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars of
the Heaven shall fall, and Rev. 6. 12, 13, 14. That the Sun shall be black as
Sackcloath of hair, and the Moon shall be like blood, and the Stars of the
heaven shall fall to the earth, even as a Fig Tree casts her untimely Figs,
when she is shaken of a mighty wind; and the Heavens shall depart as a scroll
when it is rolled together, and every Island and Mountain shall be moved out of
their places. At the coming of Christ there will be such a brightness as will
darken the Sun and other Luminaries in the Heavens, even as the Sun, does
darken the lesser Stars, who though shining all night with a twinkling light,
and like so many Candles in the Firmament, yet upon the Suns first lifting up
his head in a morning, and casting about its beams, they presently sink in
their sockets and disappear; so the Sun it self, and other Luminaries of Heaven
will disappear, when this more glorious Sun does arise in the morning of the
last day, they will then lose their light; and what further need of them? in
Heaven it will be all day: Rev. 2. 22. In the City of the new Jerusalem there
will be no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it; for the glory
of God will enlighten it, and the Lamb will be the light of it: and Chap. 22.
5. There shall be no night there, and they shall need no Candle, nor the light
of the Sun, but the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever
and ever. In Hell it will be all night and* no day, there will be blackness of
darkness for ever, and not the least beam of light shall shine into that place;
and if the Sun and other Stars be given for the measure and distinction of
times and seasons, when the last day is come, Time will be no longer, and all
must launch forth from the confines of Time, into the vast Ocean of Eternity,
which cannot be bounded nor measured: It is said, Rev. 20. 11. When the great
white Throne shall be set, and Christ is placed thereon, that the Heavens and
the Earth shall flee away from before his face, and no more place be found for
them: and 2 Pet. 3. 10. When the day of the Lord comes, that the Heavens shall
pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat,
and the Earth with all its works shall be burnt up. Christ will come with a
glorious light, and with a roaring dreadful noise, which will further set forth
the glory of this appearance, see this expressed, 1 These. 4. 16. The Lord
himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and the Trump of God, and Matthew. 24. 31. He shall send forth his
Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, who shall gather in his Elect from the
four minds, Never was there such a noise heard in the World, as then will be
heard; when Christ shall appear, the heavens will roar; the Earth will be in
flames of Fire; there will be a great shout, and the sound of the last Trump in
the Air; this shout will be given by Jesus Christ himself, as is likely, for
it is said, John 5. 28, The hour is coming, in which all that are in their
Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; we read John 11. 43. When
Christ came to raise Lazarus, that he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus come
forth, surely then when he comes to raise the World, he will cry and shout with
a much louder voice: Such a voice likely will come down from him in a roaring
shout, Awake ye dead and come to Judgment, or arise ye Children of Men, and
come forth of your Graves. Never was there such a shout given, as then will be
given, which will be accompanied with the sound of the Trumpet, the Angels
shall sound the Trumpet: we read Exodus 19. 16. When the Lord gave the Law from
Mount Sinai, that there were thunderings and lightnings, and the voice of a
Trumpet exceeding loud, which made all the People which were in the Camp to
tremble. O what thunderings will there be in the air at Christ's second
appearance? and how exceeding loud will the sound of this last Trumpet be, when
Christ comes to judge them which have broken this Law? That Trumpet was heard
only by the Nation of the Jews, which were together about the Mount; this
Trumpet will be heard by all Nations throughout the World; that Trumpet was
heard only by those which were alive at that time; this Trumpet will be heard
not only by them that shall remain alive upon the Earth at the last day, but
also by all those which have dyed throughout all Generations from the beginning
of the Creation; such a noise there will be as will awaken all that shall be
asleep in their graves. Such a noise as will make all the corners of the earth
to ring, and the pillars of the world to tremble; but O how will it startle the
wicked when they hear it, and fill them with terror and amazement? Thus you
have something of the manner of Christ's second appearance set forth unto you,
he shall come with power and great glory.

CHAP. IV.
2. THe second thing is to speak of the end of Christ's second appearance, and
the transactions of that day.

The end of Christ's second appearance will be to judge the world; the end of
his first coming was not to judge, but to redeem and save, as he tells his
disciples when they desired him to execute some judgment from Heaven upon those
Samaritans which would not receive him, Luke 9. 55, 56. Ye know not what spirit
ye are of, for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save
them. And John 7. 47. If any man hear my words and believe not, I judge him
not, for I came not to judge, but to save; but when Christ does appear the
second time, he will come to judge the world, Jude 14. 15. Behold the Lord
comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, etc.
Matthew. 26. 31, 32. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the
holy Angels with him, then shall he sit on the Throne of his glory, and before
him shall be gathered all Nations; and so he goes on in description of the
last judgment. In speaking of Christ's judging the world, and the transactions
at that day, I shall show, 1. That Christ will raise up all the dead one of
their graves. 2. That he will gather all Nations before his judgment Seat. 3.
That he will separate the righteous from the wicked. 4. That he will open the
Bo^ks out of which all must be judged. 5. I shall speak more particularly of
the judgment of the Righteous, and the Wicked.


1. Christ at his second appearance will raise up all the dead out of their
graves: there shall be a general resurrection, John 5. 28, 29. The hour comes
in which all that are in their graves shall hear his voice and come forth, they
that have done good to the resurrection of life, they that have done evil to
the resurrection of damnation. Something has been spoken already concerning
Christ's victory over death, and loosning all his prisoners, but give me leave
to illustrate the resurrection a little further; and here I shall endeavor to
set it forth by an allusion to that notable place, Ezekiel. 37. and the ten first
verses. The hand of the Lord was upon me* and carried me out in the Spirit of
the Lord, and set me down in the midst of the valley, which was full of bones.
And caused me to pass by them round about; there were very many in the open
valley, and so they were very dry. And he said unto me, Son of man, Can these
bones live? and I answered, O Lord thou know. Again he said unto me,
Prophecy upon these bones, and say unto them, O ye dry bones hear the Word of
the Lord, Thus says the Lord unto these bones, Behold I will cause breath to
enter into you, and ye shall live. And I will lay sinews upon you, and bring up
flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and you shall
live, and ye shall know that I am the Lord. So I prophesied as I was commanded,
and as I prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones
came together, bone to his bone. And when I beheld, ^o the sinews and flesh
came upon them, and the skin covered them above, but there was no breath in
them. Then said he unto me, Prophecy unto the Winds, Prophecy Son of man, and
say to the Winds, Thus says the Lord God, come from the four Winds O breath,
and breathe upon these slain that they may live. So I prophesied as he
commanded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood upon
their feet an exceeding great Army. Something like this will the Resurrection
be at the last day. Now the bones and bodies of all former generations are
scattered up and down in the valley of the shadow of death: some are sunk into
the deep, others are buried in the earth, the flesh is consumed, and resolved
into its first elements, and the bones of some remain, of other are mouldred
into earth; now when the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God shall come down from
Mount Sion which is above, into the valley of this inferior World, he will
Prophecy over all the bodies and bones of all the children of men that are
dead, and speak unto them to live; he will say unto them whilst they lie
rotting in their graves, Live; he will say, Awake ye that sleep in the dust:
and O what a noise and shaking will there be then in the ground? what a
clattering of bones together in the coming of bone to his bone? If the body
has been quartered and buried, part in one place and part in another; (as the
Levites concubine, who was divided into twelve parts, and sent to the twelve
Tribes of Israel, and it is likely buried in twelve distinct places;) the bones
will fly through the air out of all those places, and meet together in one
body. O what a great part of the air, water, and earth will there run into
conjunction, by the command of Christ, and be turned into those very bodies
which were resolved into them by death, and the corruption of the Pit; but with
the addition of such new qualities as shall sublimate, spiritualize, and refine
them from all that dreggishness, and ill humor that shall be the foundation of
any sickness or death for ever; then the bones will come together, and be made
like stones for strength; then the sinews will be as it were Iron sinews, and
the flesh brass; such strength will be put into them, as I conceive is not to
be found in the strongest creatures which hitherto God has made; that they
might be fitted, the bod^es of the righteous for an eternal life of happiness,
and bearing the glory of Heaven: the bodies of the wicked for an eternal life
of misery, and bearing the torments of Hell; either of which the body, now as
it is, would sink under. Then the Sea will give up her dead, and the Earth will
give up her dead, Rev. 20. 13. As the Whale cast Jonah upon the shore after he
had lain three days in his belly: so the Sea will cast up all the dead that
for so many years have been buried in its bowels: but what a st^rring will
there be in the earth! those which are alive will wonder to see such a strange
metamorphosis of the ground; to feel men and women stirring and moving under
their feet, arising and crouding for room amongst them. Then will the Lord
bring down all the souls of the righteous which have been in Paradise with him
many years, and they shall find out their own bodies, and he will open the
prison of Hell, and let out the souls of the wicked for a while, that they also
may find out their own bodies, which shall be prepared for both, that they
might both be prepared for the last judgment; of which more when I come to the
particular judgment of the righteous and wicked.

Thus Christ will raise up all the dead out of their graves.

2. Christ at his second appearance will gather all Nations before his Judgment
seat, Rev. 20. 11, 12. I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it. And
I saw the dead small and great stand before God, 2 Cor. 5. 10. We must all
appear before the Judgment seat of Christ. And Matthew. 25. 31, 32. When the Son
of man shall sit on his throne, all Nations shall be gathered before him. O
what a vast number will there be when so many hundred generations of people
shall be alive together, and gathered together into one place! if so be the
multitude of the righteous will be so great when they are got together into one
body, that no man can number them. Rev. 7. 9. After I beheld, and lo a great
multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations and Kindreds, and People,
and Tongues, stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white
Robes, and Palms in their hands. What then will the multitude of the wicked be,
when they are gathered together; in comparison with whom, the righteous are but
few? All Nations shall be gathered before Christ's Judgment seat.

3. Christ at his second appearance will separate the righteous from the
wicked, the Chaff shall be purged from the Wheat. Matthew. 3. 12. the Tares shall
be gathered from the good Corn. Matthew. 13. 30. the bad Fish shall be divided
from the good, v. 48. The Goats shall be separated from the Sheep, Matthew. 25.
32. By the Chaff, Tares, bad Fish, Goats, we are to understand the wicked; by
the good Corn, good Fish, Sheep, we are to understand the righteous: who will
be separated one from another, however they are now in some places mingled and
linked together; the elect shall be gathered together into one company from the
four winds, Matthew. 24. 31. and they shall stand on the right hand of Christ,
and the reprobate wicked shall stand on the left, Mat. 25. 33. In which
gathering and separation, there shall be no mistake, as there may be now. Many
close hypocrites may in this world pass for true children of God; they may live
together, and hear together, and pray together, and receive the Sacrament
together, and make the same profession of Religion; yea, some hypocrites may,
as to ourward appearance, seem to outgo some of Gods own children in zeal and
forwardness; the lamps of the foolish Virgins may seem to shine with a greater
blaze than some of the lamps of the wise; when they have not the least dram of
the oil of true grace in the vessel of their hearts, Matthew. 25. at the
beginning; yea, some of Gods own children may here be mistaken for hypocrites
(their chiefest life being secret, and out of view) by them which are
uncharitable; and they may also mistake themselves, through the temptations of
the devil, and the doubtings of their mis-giving unbelieving hearts; but at the
last day, there will be no mistake; not only the more openly profane and
notoriously vile generation of the wicked, who were even professed enemies of
Gods people, and shun their company, and separate themselves now, shall be
separated from them by Jesus Christ at the last day; but also all those who
were more ^ober, and had some kind of love to them, but none unto Jesus Christ:
Yea, all hypocrites, who seemed to be of their company, shall then be parted
from them: Christ will look upon all with a pier^ing distinguishing eye, he
will easily discern and discover all the hypocrites, however they may plead
that they have eat and drunk in his presence, and some of them cast out devils
in his ^ame; he will not judge according to the outward appearance, but
according to the truth which has been in the heart; and they which ^ave so
much deceived men, shall not be able to ^eceive him: None of them shall twine
themselves ^^perceivably, and crowd into Heaven amongst (...) righteous: Then
the lamps of the foolish vir^^ns will be gone out; then the vail and mask of
(...) outward show, will be rent and torn to pie^^s; then the sheeps-skin will
be plucked off, and ^^ey will appear unto the whole world to have ^een but
goats, and amongst the goats they must (...); Christ will not leave one of the
goats amongst the sheep, and he will not leave one of (...) sheep amongst the
goats; all that belong to his fold shall be gathered into one society; of their
meeting, more in their particular judgment.

4 At the second appearance of Jesus Christ, the Books will be opened, out of
which all must be judged, Rev. 20. 12. I saw the dead small and great stand
before God, and the Books were opened, and another Bo^k was opened, which is
the Bo^k of Life, and the dead were judged out of th^se things which were
written in those Books, according to their works. There are five Books which
will then be opened. 1. The Book of Gods remembrance. 2. The Book of Men^ own
consciences. 3. The Book of the Law. 4. The Book of the Gospel. 5. The Book of
Life.

1. The Book of God's Remembrance will be opened This we are to understand in a
spiritual sense, no as if there were a real Book, which God did mak^ use of,
for his remembrance of things, as men (...) who have frai^e and weak memories,
which would let slip many things of note, without such a help but hereby we are
to understand that God do^ take an exact notice of things, and remembers the^
as if he had them written in a Book by him. The Bo^^ of Gods remembrance will
be opened, wherei^ will be sound recorded,

1. The names of all the Sons and Daughters (...) Adam, what ever Age and
Generation they ha^^ lived in, from the beginning of the Creation (...) the
consummation of all things; as also the rel^^tions they stood in, and the
charge was commi^ted to them. Such and such were Magistrat^ and had such and
such subjects under them; (...) had the sword of justice put into their hands,
(...) their charge was to rule under Christ; to enc^^^rage and reward them that
did well; and to punish evil d^ers; such and such were Ministers, and they were
entrusted with the care of souls, they were set by the Lord for Watchmen, to
forewarn the people of judgments; as Stewards to dispense the food of the Word,
and to give every one their portion; such and such were Governors of Families;
whose work was to set up Religion, and the worship of God in their houses, and
labor in their places after the salvation of the souls, as well as to set
those under them about their civil work, and to provide for their bodies: such
and such were Children and Servants, whose charge was to yield obedience to
Parents and Governors, in the Lord, with meekness and fear, with readiness
and diligence.

2 There will be found recorded the places where such Persons lived; such
indeed lived in the dark places of Heathenisme and Idolatry; but such and such
lived in Israel, in a Goshen, in a Land of Light; such and such lived in
England, in London, in such a religious Family: there will be recorded the
means of grace, which they have enjoyed in those places; such lived under such
a powerful Ministry, heard such heart-awakening and heart-warming Sermons, and
had such sweet showers of the Word dropping upon them; they were planted in a
fertile soil, and they had fat pastures to feed in.

3 There will be found recorded, the various dispensations of Gods providence
toward them for their good; such and such had not only Gods Word, but also
Gods Rod to teach them; they lived under the sound of awakning Judgments, they
lived in London, when the Plague raged so sorely; and when the Fire brake forth
and consumed the City; and such were preserved, when thousands fell into the
Pit; they were brought down to the Doors of the Grave, and Eternity, and they
were brought up again; they were preserved and provided for, and every day
tasted of the Cup of Gods goodness, they were laden with his mercies.

4 And especially there will be found recorded, all the actions of all the
Children of men, and their carriage toward God, and toward one another, in
those places, in those relations, under those ordinances and providence.

1 There will be found recorded all the good that has been found in, or done
by any from the day of their Childhood, to their dying hour; such and such,
they were obedient to Parents when they were young; they were diligent in
learning their Catechism, and ready to receive instructions in the Principles
of Religion; such were acquainted with the Scriptures when they were but
Children; such had tender hearts in their tender years; such loved God and
followed God, when they were but youths; such and such, had their hearts opened
in hearing of the Word, and enlarged hearts in prayer; such were awakned by
such Sermons, and convinced and humbled for sin, and persuaded to repent and
turn to the Lord: such opened the door to Jesus Christ, when he knocked, and
set up his Throne in their hearts, and put their necks under his yoke. Such and
such, were frequenters and lovers of the Ordinances and Ministers of Jesus
Christ. Such made it their business to be religious; such walked with God in
their Families, and were up^ight in their dealings in the World; such used to
deny themselves, and took up their Cross and labored to follow Jesus Christ
where ever he led them; such mourned for the sins they could not reform; were
thankful for the mercies they received; were faithful in the relations they
were placed; were fruitful under the means they enjoyed; were merciful to their
brethren in misery; were patient and cheerful under the Rod, which was laid
upon them* and all the good actions of men will be had in remembrance.

2 There will be found recorded, all the evil actions, all the sins of the
Children of men. Such and such were disobedient and untoward children; slighted
the commands of God and their Parents; were idle, and careless of instruction,
and would not open their ear to discipline; such were old in sin, when young
in years; were strong and skilful in wicked sinful practices, when their bodies
were but weak, and minds sotishly ignorant in the things of God; such had good
examples before them, but they would not follow them; they saw dreadful
judgments, but were hardened under them; they received many mercies, but they
abused them; they had seasons of grace, but they misspent them; they had
calls, but they shut their ear against them; they had convictions of
conscience, but they stifled them; they had motions of the spirit, but they
quenched them; they had proffers of Christ, and pardon, and salvation, but they
refused them, and turned Gods glory into shame, and his grace into wantonness.
Such and such were Sabbath breakers. Such were Svvearers. Such were Drunkards.
Such were unclean persons, and Adulterers. Such were Thieves. Such were
covetous persons, and Idolaters. Such were unjust and unrighteous in their
dealings; Such were bitter and reproachful in their speeches. Such were
injurious in their actions. All the sins of Men and Women will be found in the
Book of Gods remembrance. Deuteronomy. 32. 34. Is not this laid up in store with me,
and sealed amongst my treasures? God stores and treasures up the sins of the
wicked and ungodly, against the day of his wrath, and their perdition; it is
said, Job 14. 16, 17. Thou numberest my steps, dest not thou watch over my sin,
my transgressions are sealed up in a Bag, and thou sowest up mine iniquities.
God numbereth the steps of sinners, one by one, sin by sin, as a man would
number every step; and he watches that he may number aright, he takes exact
notice of the footsteps of every sin; which leave an impression in the Book
of his remembrance, as the footsteps of the body do, when a man walks in
soft Clay. He puts the transgressions in a bag, and sows the Bag, and
seals the bag; all which expressions denote Gods exactness in recording and
laying up the sins of men. It is said, Ier. 17. 1. That the sin of Judah is
written with a Pen of Iron, and the point of a Diamond. All secret sins will be
found there recorded, for nothing is secret to God, whose eyes are like a flame
of fire, which gives light to every dark corner; darkness hides not from him,
but the night shines as the day; he looks into every corner of the Earth, and
into every corner of the heart, and has set our secret sins in the light of
his countenance: and all open sins will be found there recorded; no man has
taken so much notice of others sins, as God has done; he does as it were, book
all down in his remembrance, and when Christ comes at the last day, the book of
Gods remembrance will be opened.

2. The second Book which will be opened at Christ's coming, will be the Book of
Men's own Consciences: and this will be the counter-part to every Man's
particular, of What is written in the book of Gods remembrance, they will find
the same thing there registered; indeed conscience now may seem to be asleep,
and say nothing whilst men are eating, and drinking, and ^inning; yet
conscience is secretly awake, and busy in writing, and taking notes of every
Man's actions, every day; conscience has its day-book, which has not an empty
page; the mouth of conscience may be shut, and with much ado, for the present,
restrained from speaking, and biting; but the eye of conscience cannot be shut
from seeing, nor the hand of conscience restrained from registring what it
takes notice of: every one in the World has as it were whole volumes of his
own actions in his bosom, written down by conscience; and though the letters
of some things done long ago, may seem to be rased and worn out; so that a Man
cannot read them now; yet when this Book shall be opened at the last day, they
will appear; in very legible characters; like as when a Man writes with the
juice of a Lemmon upon fair paper; the juice is white, and the paper is white,
and he cannot read a word when it is written, nor while it is writing; but let
him keep the paper many years by him, and after bring that paper close to the
fire, the white letters will turn black, and become very legible: so the
conscience of wicked persons is writing, whilst they are sinning, and they do
not perceive it after it is written; they forget many of their old sins, yea
they do not take notice of them as sins, whilst they are committing them; but
when the last day is come, and Christ is come, who will be reveased from heaven
in flaming fire, to take vengeance, upon them, and the Book of their
Consciences shall be opened before the fire, then all the notes of conscience
will be plain and easy to be read, and a ready confirmation conscience will
give of all that is written in the Book of Gods remembrance: and O how sweet
will the testimony of conscience be of good actions? how bitter will its
records be of sins?

3. The Third Book which will be opened, will be the Book of the Law: which
requiring perfect and perpetual obedience, will condemn all both righteous and
wicked, because all have sinned, and by the Law are cursed, Gal. 3. 10. Cursed
is every one that continues not in all things, which are written in the Book
of the Law, to do them; but then an appeal will be made.

4. The fourth Book which will be opened, is the book of the Gospel: and there
the righeous will find the merits of Christ, though they have had none of
their own; they will find exceeding great and precious promises of pardon, and
salvation, and eternal happiness, which have been made to all them that did
repent, and believe in Christ, and restifie the same by their sincere love to
God, making choice of him for their chief good and happiness, and laying up
their treasure in Heaven, and by their sincere obedience to his commands, and
walking in heavens way; and then conscience will give in evidence, and Gods
remembrance will confirm it, and the Spirit will witness it, and Christ himself
will acknowledge it; that all his true disciples have had the qualifications,
which have shown their interest in the promises; yea, the weakest of believers,
whatever doubts and fears they have now, will then certainly know, and
confidently plead these qualifications which they have had; they will be able
to say, that they had true faith, though it were but weak; that they did truly
lay hold on Christ, though it were with a trembling hand; that they had the
faith of reliance and recumbance, though they had not the faith of assurance
and strong confidence; that they did heartily repent and grieve for sin, though
they had not that measure of godly sorrow, which they desired; that sin did not
reign in them, though sometime it did rage and domineer: that they had chosen
God for their chief good, above the whole world, and the byas of their wills
was toward him; and that they had a sincere love to him, though they fell
short in the fervency, which they desired to have; that they did walk and keep
on in heavens way; and if sometimes they wandered, that they found their way
again; if some times they stumbled, that they got up again; and this book of
the Gospel, will give all true believers such acquittances as that they shall
not come into condemnation, John 3. 16. Whosoever believes in the Son, shall
not perish, but have everl^sting life. And Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation,
to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit. And the like.

But the unbelievers will get no benefit by this book; they may find great and
sweet promises, but not one promise in the whole Book of the Gospel belonging
to them, because they do not belong to Christ; they lived and died in
impenitency and unbelief, and neglect of Christ and salvation, and now they
cannot find one favorable word for them; and therefore they will be sent back
to be tried by the Book of the Law, only the Gospel will double the
condemnation of such as have not yielded up themselves unto its obedience.

5. A Fifth Book which will be opened, will be the Book of Life: Where all the
names of the Elect are enrolled, which when they read, how will they adore the
riches of the free grace of God, in choosing them before the foundation of the
world was laid; and all those whose names are not enrolled in this Book, shall
be condemned and cast into the lake of Fire, Rev. 20. 12, 15.

5. The fifth thing proposed, and the chiefest, is to speak more particularly,
of Christ's judging both the righteous and the wicked, at his second appearance.

And here I shall speak, 1. of their particular judgment.

2. Of the execution of their sentence pronounced in judgment.

1. Concerning the judgment of the righteous and the wicked.

CHAP. V.
THe judgment of the righteous will be first, and therefore I shall first treat
of it, and here speak, 1. Of the immediate antecedents to their judgment. 2. Of
the judgment it self.


1. Concerning the immediate Antecedents to the judgment of the righteous.

1. The first Antecedent to the righteous judgment will be their resurrection
from the dead, 1 These. 4. 16. The dead in Christ shall rise first; when Christ
descends from heaven, the souls of the righteous shall descend with him, 1
These. 4. 14. Them that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. The spirits of
all the just men and women made perfect shall then come down and find out
their own bodies, which have been sleeping in the bed of their graves, and they
shall enter again into their old habitations; they went out of them, it may be
with fear and trembling, with grief and sorrow, being unwilling to leave them
behind, though they were so rotten and ruinous: but O with what joy will they
return and enter again, when the building shall be repaired, when their bodies
shall be raised by the power of the Lord Jesus Christ, and healed of all
infirmities, when they shall be made incorruptible and immortal! see 1 Cor. 15.
52. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last Trump, for the Trumpet
shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be
changed. And verse. 54. So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption,
and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass
the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in Victory, then shall they
triumph over death, and the grave, saying, verse. 55. O Death, where is thy
sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? The Lord Jesus will then make them
victorious over this conqueror, verse. 57. Thanks be to God, who has given us
the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. The parting of soul and body was
never so sad unto any of the Saints at their death, as the meeting will be
sweet at their resurrection; O how will the soul wonder at the sudden and
strange metamorphosis of the body? when the soul left the body vile to putrify
and corrupt in the grave, and shall find it come forth more bright and
glorious than gold, after it has been refined in a Furnace; when the vile body
shall be fashioned like unto Christ's most glorious body, Phil. 3. 21. O how
will the soul delight in the beauty, strength, and immortality, which then shall
be put upon the body, whereby it will be more suited to its nature, and fitted
for its operations, and participation in its glory? and how will the body
delight in the wonderful glories and shining excellencies which the soul has
attained since its separation? If the love between the soul and the body were
so great, when the body was so vile, and the soul so sinful, what will it be
when both are glorified? If the conjunction between the soul and body were so
sweet when the body was so frail and subject to death, and the soul a
spiritual and never-dying substance, what will it be when the body shall be
made immortal, and in some sort spiritual? O with what pleasure will the body
awake out of its long sleep and arise and shake off its dust, and put on its
beautiful garments of immortality and glory? with what delight and joy will it
first open its eyes upon those beautiful and glorious objects which will
quickly present themselves to its view? Thus concerning the resurrection of
the righteous bodies.

2. The second Antecedent to the Judgment of the righ^eous, will be their
meeting with the Angels at their Graves mouth, Matthew. 24. 31. He shall send his
Angels with the great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather the Elect from
the four winds, from one end of Heaven to the other: no sooner are they
awakened and risen out of their Graves, but they are entertained by Angels,
those holy and excellent creatures, who have such a dear love to them, and
before have done many good offices for them, though, when before in the body,
they did not perceive it, and were too low, and unfit for their acquaintance:
but they will then know them, and be able to discern the beauty of those lovely
spirits* who for so many years have been beholding the face of their Father in
heaven, which will have cast such a luster upon them that will be matter of
their admiration; and these shall be part of their acquaintance and companions
in glory: instead of Devils, those Angels of darkness, which used to assault,
buffet and molest them, when in the body before; they shall now have Angels of
light with them, and about them to join together in the Love and praise of the
great Jehovah. The Angels will be sent to call them, and gather them, and we
may ^ationally imagine that they will salute them at their rising, and welcome
them out of their graves: we read of the Angel Gabriel's salutation of Mary,
Luke 1. 28. Hail thou that ar^ highly favored, the Lord is with thee, blessed
art thou amongst Women; and the same Angels words to Daniel, chap. 9. 23. Thou
art greatly beloved. Such salutations possibly the Angels may give, to the
Saints at their resurrection. Arise you that are highly favored of God, come
forth ye that are greatly beloved; welcome, welcome ye happy ones; ye that
are blessed amongst the children of men; your Lord is come down and stayeth^
for you; he has sent us to call you, and convey you into his presence, and
bring you where he is, that you may see and share in his glory: O how will such
words make their hearts to glow within them! how joyful will such a message be
unto them! O happy they that ever they were born! or rather that ever they were
new born! O happy they that they should live, that they should be raised to see
such a day as this will be! O what looks! what speeches! what joys will they
have, when they are entertained by the Angels?

3. The third Antecedent to the Righteous Judgment, will be their meeting one
with another: Matthew. 24. 31. The Angels will be sent to gather the Elect
together, 2 These. 2. 1. I beseech you ^rethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and our gathering together unto him; the Saints will be all gathered
together, and we shall be gathered with them, if we be found in that number;
there we shall meet with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the holy Kings,
and Prophets, and Apostles, and Martyrs, and holy Men, who have lived in all
Generations; and all these in another hue than when they lived upon the Earth,
they will arise like so many shining Suns ou^ of the Earth; O how shall we be
delighted with the ^ight of such a glorious train and company, when we see the
Image and picture of the Lord upon them, drawn so to the life? what sweet
greetings shall we have, and mutual congratulations of our old acquaintance in
the flesh, who were with us acquainted with the Lord? and is this the end of
our hearing and fasting, and praying, and self-denial, and mortification, and
the poor services we have done for the Lord? Is this the issue of our pains and
labor? O happy we that ever we repented, and believed, and closed with Jesus
Christ! O happy we that laid up our Treasure, and waited for our glory and
happiness till this time.

4. The fourth Antecedent is that the righteous shall be caught up together in
the air; all the righteous shall be caught up, they that are raised from the
dead, and they that remain alive upon the Earth on that day, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16,
17. The dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive and remain,
shall be caught up together with them, to meet the Lord in the air: we read of
the two witnesses, which were slain; after three days and a half, the spirit
of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon the^r feet, and they
heard a great voice from Heaven saying unto them, come up hither, and they
ascended up to Heaven in a Cloud, etc. Rev. 11. 11, 12. In the morning of the
resurrection, the spirit of life from God will enter into the bodies of all the
Saints, and they will stand up, and possibly they may hear a voice from Christ
in the air. Come up hither: and then they will be caught up, and ascend into
the air to meet with their Lord; O what unexpressible pleasure and delight
will they find when they Feel themselves begin to move upwards, when they are
leaving the Earth and wicked men, and so many glorious persons of them together
ascending to meet their most glorious Lord!

5. The fifth antecedent to the judgment, is their meeting with the Lord in the
air: 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up
together with them, to meet the Lord in the air. We have spoken of the meeting
of the soul and the body; of the meeting of the Saints with the Angels; of the
meeting of the Saints with the Saints; all which meetings will be very
delightful, but the meeting of the Saints with the Lord himself will be beyond
all. O how sweet will the sound of Christ's coming be unto them before they see
him? When they hear the long expected shou^, and the sound of the last Trump!
This, this will be music indeed in their ears; Then, then they will lift up
their heads with joy; and do but think how transporting the first glance of
their eye will be upon the Lord Jesus Christ, when they see him yet afar off,
clothed with such brightness and beauty; never did their eye behold such an
object before; they admired to see the Saints, and to see themselves so
transformed; but how will they admire to see the Lord in such glory? if so be
that some of his Disciples did gaze after him with wonder, when he was taken
from them, and ascended into Heaven, Acts 1. 11. With what wonder will all his
Disciples (most of which never saw him in the flesh, none of which saw him in
such glory) then gaze upon him, when he shall come down from Heaven! Ye Men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? Say the Angels. this same Jesus
which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye
have seen him go into Heaven; if you look and wonder now at his going, how will
you look and wonder at his coming, which will be as surely, but far more
gloriously? But when they are come nearer unto Christ, and have a fuller view
of him, O what thoughts! What affections! What joys will there then fill
their souls! O what workings, what beatings of heart! what transports and
ravishment of spirit will they have! O how would they be overwhelmed with this
sight, and utterly unable to bear it, if they were not strengthened beyond
their present capacity! And is this the Savior and Redeemer of the world? O
glorious Son of righteousness! Did this most excellent Person, who thus appears
in the brightness of his Fathers glory, and is now come down from his glorious
habitation, with such a glorious train of Angels, once vouchsafe to dwell with
men, and veil his glory in the flesh! Did this eternal Son of God stoop so
low, as to take upon him our nature, yea to take upon him the form of a
Servant! Did he live in such meanness and obscurity; and endure, such hardship,
contradiction, reproach and injury, when he was upon the earth! O infinite
condescension! Did this Lord of life and glory, in the days of his flesh so
weep, and pray, and cry; sweat, and bleed, and die, though with such pain,
anguish, and disgrace; yet with such willingness and patience, in our steads,
that he might redeem us from sin, and death, and wrath to come; that we might
not perish, but have overlasting life? O wonderful, uncon^eivable love! What,
so glorious a Person to be made man! to be made sin! to be made a curse! to do
such things! to suffer such things! for such mean, vile cursed ^inners as we,
that we might be blessed and happy with him; O surpassing superlative kindness!
Is this he who made choice of us, when he chose so few, that called us when the
most were passed by, that pitched his love upon us, when there was no attractive
in us, nothing to move him, but his own bowels, that revealed his secrets to
us, when he hid them from the wise and prudent, that brought us nigh when we
were afar off* and made us fellow-Citizens, and fellow-heirs with the Saints,
and of the household of God, who were by nature children of wrath, even as
others? O astonishing free grace! Is this he who clothed us when we were
naked, even with the robes of his own righteousness? that washed us when we
were defiled, even in the fountain of his own blood? that cheared us when we
were troubled, even with the comforts of his own Spirit? that strengthened us
when we were weak, even with his might and glorious power in our inner man? was
it from this Person that we received our pardon, our peace, our supports, our
graces, our encouragements, and all the sweet refreshments we have found in
Ordinances?

Is this the Advocate whom we made choice of, relied, and trusted upon f^r life
and salvation? Is this the Master whom we followed, and whose work we were
employed about? Is this the Captain whose colors we wore, and under whose
banner we fought? Is this the Lord whom we obeyed! the friend, the husband whom
we loved? and is he so glorious! O how will the Saints be wrapped up with
admiration and joy! how will they be all in a flame of burning love and
affection, when they come to behold the Lord Jesus Christ himself, and view him
in such glory, as then he will be decked withal? when they come to see him
face to face, who has such loveliness in his face, and such love in his heart
unto them. It is said, 1 Pet. 1. 8. whom having not seen ye love, in whom
though now ye see him, yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakab^e and full
of glory.

If so be that the Saints do now love Christ, whom they never saw, only have
heard of, and bel^eved the report of the word; how will they love him when they
have this sight of him, and see a thousandfold more beauty in him than was
reported, or could be imagined? if so be that now sometimes they rejoice, with
glorious and unspeakable joy in believing, what will they do when they come to
see him in his glory? If they can now rejoice in tribulations, and take
pleasure* in the cross and reproach of Christ, what will they find in their
masters joy, and the Crown which he now comes to put upon their heads? O how
glad will they be that they have been counted worthy to suffer any thing for
such a Savior? It will be a joyful time indeed unto the Saints when they are
caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air.

And the joy of Christ will be no less, to meet with them; O with what an eye
will he view them, when they are arising and ascending with so much of his
beauty and luster upon them* none can conceive the love and delight which the
Lord Jesus will take in them at that day: he will look upon them as those who
were beloved by the Father and himself from all eternity; as those who fetched
him out of heaven before to redeem them, and now to glorify them; he will look
upon them as the travel of his soul; as the price of his blood; he will look
upon them as his Jewels; as spoils taken out of the hands of his enemies; he
will look upon them as plants grown up unto perfection; as servants who have
done their work; as those who have kept up his honor in the world; he will
look upon them as members of his body; he will look upon them as his dearest
spouse, and most beautiful bride, who now comes to be joined to him more
nearly, and to live with him for ever. O the love and joy of Christ at this
meeting! If so be that Christ so dearly loved his Spouse, and could delight in
her too, when she was black and sooty, when her clothes were spotted, and
stained, when her affections were weak, low, and inconstant; how will he love
and rejoice in her when she is made perfectly like to himself, and so beautiful
with his comeliness? when her stains are all washed off, and she is presented
before him without spot, wrinkle, blemish, or any such thing? when she shall be
arrayed in white, and has put on her shining garments, and appear so lovely,
and her love shall be so high, and full, and strong, and flaming? Never did
Lovers meet with such delight, and joy on their wedding day, as Christ and his
Spouse will meet at the day of his second appearance; O the sweet smiles the
Saints will see in the face of Christ! Smiles upon them, such glances of love
will sparkle forth from his eyes, as will ravish their hearts; O the sweet
words they will hear! the welcome he will give them when they first meet! when
they are come, he will place them at his right hand. So much concerning the
more immediate Antecedents of the judgment of the righteous.

CHAP. VI.
2. THe second thing is to speak concerning the Judgment it self, of the
righteous. An^ there are two things the Scripture speaks of, which Christ will
do at his second appearance, in the judgment of the righteous.

1. He will take an account of them. 2. He will pronounce the sentence upon
them.
1. Christ will take an account of the righteous Romans 4. 10, 12. We shall all
stand before the judgment seat of Christ, and every one of us shall give an
account of himself unto God; though the righteous shall not be brought to
condemnation, yet they shall be brought into judgment, which will be for their
masters honor and their own; especially of those who can give a good account
of the Talents their Lord has entrusted them withal.

I know it is a question amongst Divines, whether the sins of Gods people will
be mentioned, and made manifest at the last day of judgment; I shall not
determine the question, since the Scripture is not so plain; Possibly the Lord
having pardoned them, covered them, blotted them out of the book of his
remembrance, he will not mention them on that day; but sure I am if they should
be mentioned, it will not be to their disgrace and grief, but to their more
abundant jo^ in the Lord, who has forgiven them: If they should read their
sins in the book of Gods remembrance, they will find them, like so many debts
crossed out with the red lines of Christ's blood: If the Devil should be
permitted to accuse them at that time, who is now the accuse^ of the Brethren,
and rip up their secret faults; the Lord himself will stand up and plead for
them; he will make known the sufficient value of his merits for their ransom,
and publicly acquit them from all guilt and condemnation; who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods elect, it is God that justifies? who is he that
shall condemn? it is Christ that died for them. Romans 8. 33, 34.

But these four things Christ will take an account of, in the judgment of the
righteous.

1. He will take an account of their graces. The vessels of the Virgins will be
looked into, what Oil they have go^; the hearts of the Saints will be looked
into, what graces they have obtained. Christ will then take notice what godly
sorrow they have had for sin, their secret weeping and mourning will then be
made manifest; he will take notice what humility and meekness, what self-denial
and patience they have had; especially what faith, and love; and hope, and
spiritual joy, they have had, and all their raised affections toward himself,
and heavenly things, in his ordinances; and his judgment of grace will not be
according to the appearance and show which has been, but according to truth;
and then the Saints shall be ranked, not according to their esteem and dignity
in the world, but according to the measure of the graces they have attained.

2. Christ will take an account of the improvement of the talents of graces and
gifts, and opportunities of service which he has entrusted them withal. Mat.
25. 19. and Christ will then take chief notice of those which have been most
industrious and faithful, and instrumental for doing most good, and bringing
most glory to his name; and though all shall have a full reward, that are found
truly faithful, and shall enter into their masters joy; yet they shall have a
more full reward, and be capable of more joy and glory than the other.

3. And especially, he will take an account of their works of mercy, Matthew. 25.
35, 36. I was hungry, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink;
I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and
ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me, etc.

It will even astonish and confound the righteous, to hear such language as
this from the Lord Jesus Christ, when he appears in such glory, they will be
ready to question, when he was in any want, and received relief at their hands:
When saw we thee a hungry, or a thirst, or naked, and ministered any help? we
received all from thee, but we could give nothing to thee: thou did relieve
us, and redeem us out of the deepest poverty and misery in which we were sunk,
and should have perished without thy help; but what relief had thou from us?
Then the King will answer and say unto them, v. 40. Verily I say unto you, in
as much as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have
done it unto me. At such a time, and such a time, the poor came to you for
relief, making use of my name, whose backs for my sake you clothed, and whose
bellies you refreshed, and whose necessities you supplied; that was done unto
me; though they were poor, they were my brethren; some of my servants were
brought into straights for conscience sake, and you received them, or sent help
to them; you received me then, and gave help to me; that money was not thrown
away, it was given to me, and I am come to give you a thousandfold reward. Were
this truth more effectually believed, what a forwardness would there be in
Christians to works of mercy? Surely they would look upon that part of their
estate as best improved, which in such works is bestowed. Christ does not
mention any other use which they put their money unto, which if worthy to be
compared* would be made mention of; he does not speak of so much laid out in
building, so much laid out in clothing, so much laid out for food; so much
laid up in portions for children; all this the wicked can do; but so much laid
out to the poor, and me in them, which is the only part you have laid up for
your selves; and which I am now come to return unto you with usury.

4. Christ will take an account of the afflictions which the righteous have
endured; especially, of their sufferings for his sake; such reproaches, such
losses, imprisonments, banishments, buffetings; but if they have suffered
death, with what honor will this be made mention of? with what great esteem
will he receive and speak unto them, which have come out of great tribulation?
and O the joy in this morning, after the tears of the night! then they will
find that their light affliction which they have endured for a moment, has
wrought for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4. 17.

2. The second thing in Christ's judegment of the Saints, is the Sentence which
he will pronounce upon them; which will be a most gracious invitation of them
to take possession of the Kingdom of Heaven, which he has prepared for them,
Matthew. 25. 34. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared from you, from the
foundation of the world.

All Christ's invitations in Scripture are very sweet. Come unto me all ye that
labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest, Matthew, 11. 28. How sweet
is this to a troubled conscience, and an oppressed spirit, ready to sink under
the burden of sin? Ho every one that thirsts, come to the waters; and he that
has no money, come buy wine and milk without money, and without price. Isa.
55. 1. O what sweet words are these to those which are parched, and pained, and
ready to die with spiritual thirst, and can find nothing in the creatures
which can give them any satisfaction or ease? But of all the words that ever
Christ did speak, of all the invitations that ever Christ did make, this will
be the sweetest, which he will give to his Disciples at the last day, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation
of the World. Come ye blessed and happy ones, however accounted miserable ones
by men, yet blessed of my Father, Come inherit the Kingdom prepared for you^
from the foundation of the World: Take possession of your eternal inheritance;
Come enter into the Kingdom of glory, which the father has chosen you unto,
and called you unto, and which I have purchased, and now fitted and made ready
for you: Come along with me, and I will show you my glory; and where I am,
there ye shall be also. Come along with me into Heaven, and ye shall live and
reign with me for ever and ever. Come along, and enter now into your Masters
joy; come and I will show you the Father, and bring you into his house and
presence, where there is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore. And now
Beloved, think with your selves, what joys! what exultations! what clapping of
hands! what shou^ings! what Hallelujahs! what Hosannahs! what triumphing
acclamations the Saints will make upon the hearing of these words. But here
words fail* conceptions fall short, who can utter what the affections, and
behavior of the righteous will be, when they have their sentence, and hear
such sweet, and gracious words from the mouth of their Judge and Redeemer?

Thus concerning the Judgment of the righteous.

CHAP. VII.
2. COncerning the judgment of the wicked, at the second appearance of Jesus
Christ; in treating hereon, I shall as in the judgment of the righteous, speak,

1. Of the immediate antecedents. 2. Of the Judgment it self.
1. The immediate Antecedents of the judgment of the wicked will be,

1. The Resurrection of their Bodies from the grave; all the wicked that are
dead shall be raised, though not so soon, yet as certainly as the righteous,
Ioh. 5. 28, 29. The hour comes, that all that are in their graves shall hear
his voice, (not only) they that have done good shall come forth to the
Resurrection of life, (but also) they that have done evil, to the resurrection
of demnation. When the wicked die, their bodies are clapped up in the Prison of
the Grave, where they rot and putrify under the chains of death, which are
laid upon them* and their souls are shut down into the Prison of Hell, where
they are bound up in chains of darkness, and woe, and reserved unto the judgment
of the great day; when the Lord Jesus shall appear to judge the World, he will
bring the keys of death and hell along with him, and open both these Prison
doors, not to give liberty and releas^ to the Prisoners; but as Prisons are
opened at Assizes, to bring them forth unto Judgment; he will open the Prison
of Hell, and all the souls of the wicked shall come forth like so many Locusts
out of the bottomless Pit; and he will open the Prison of the Grave, and all
their bodies shall creep like so many ugly ^oades out of the Earth; and then
soul and body shall be joined together again, and this meeting will be sad,
beyond expression; the meeting of the souls and bodies of the righteou^ will
not be more joyful, than the meeting of the souls and bodies of the wicked will
be doleful; possibly some of the wicked had no bands in their death, and their
souls went forth of their bodies without much pain or fear; but their entrance
into their bodies again, will be with unexpressible horr^ur; and if some of the
wicked had their consciences awakened at death, and they lay down with terror;
when they awake and rise again from the dead, it will be with far greater
terror. The old World dyed in a fright, with the deluge of Water, which
overwhelmed them; Corah, Dathan, and Aliram, with their Company, died in a
fright at the cleaving and opening of the Earths mouth, which swallowed them
up; Judas and other despairing souls died in a fright, at the apprehensions of
the open mouth of Hell, ready to receive their guilty spirits; but none of the
wicked could go forth of their bodies in such a fright as they will enter into
them again at the last day: the damned souls have been lying in Hell many
years, full of anguish in their separation, and they know that their anguish
will be increased by the torment of their bodies in their union, and no wonder
if they be exceedingly unwilling and fearful to enter into their old lodging;
their bodies have been sleeping all this while in the dust, and have felt no
pain at all; and O how unwelcome a guest will their souls then be? never was
death so terrible unto them, as life will be at that day; they had rather sleep
still in their grave, and continue in their rottenness and corruption; they had
rather lie hid for ever in the dust of oblivion, or be quite annihilated like
beasts, than to arise again unto such torments, as now they must undergo; but
they must arise willing or unwilling; It is said that the vile bodies of the
righteous shall at the last day be fashioned like unto Christ's most glorious
body, Phil. 3. 21. They shall be made like unto Christ's body in beauty and
glory; but the bodies of the wicked will have another hue and fashion; if it
were possible to fashion bodies like Devils, those impure and foul spirits,
such spiritual bodies the wicked should have; be sure their bodies shall have
no glory put upon them; but as they lay down vile bodies, they shall rise up
far more vile; they lay down in dishonor, and they shall be raised in far
greater dishonor; indeed they will be raised incorruptible and immortal; but
this will not be for their glory, but that they may be capable of the greater
and longer torment and misery; their bodies will be so far from being made
beautiful like unto Christ, that I believe they will not regain that natural
beauty which they had here upon the Earth; now some of them ou^-shine Gods own
Children (whose chief beauty lies inward) in external comeliness; then none but
the bodies of Gods children will shine; the bodies of the wicked most probable
will be swarthy, black, ugly, monstrous bodies; if there be a ghastliness upon
the bodies of the most beautiful, when they are dead, what a ghastliness will
there be upon the bodies of all the wicked, when the second death shall seize
upon them? were their bodies never so beautiful in themselves, yet their
features would quickly be altered by the horrible passions of their mind; the
blackness and dread of the soul would quickly appear in their countenance;
besides the impressions which the Fire of Hell will have upon them. The soul
will find nothing in the body which will give it any delight or ease, or in
the least contribute unto the asswagement of its anguish; it will return into
the body as into a Prison, or Dungeon, where there is no pleasure to be found:
and if the body be black, how black will the soul be, after so long abode with
foul Devils in the lower Regions of darkness? And when such foul souls, and
such vile bodies meet, what a meeting! what a greeting will there be! we may
fancy a kind of language to be between them, at that day. The soul to the
body, Come out of thy hole thou filthy dunghill flesh, for the pampering and
pleasing of whom, I have lost my self for ever; who have stolen away my time,
and thoughts, and heart from God, and Christ, and Heavenly things, to feed, and
cloth, and cherish thee, and make provision to satisfy thy base deceitful
lusts, when I should have been making provision for thine and mine everlasting
happiness. Awake and come forth of the dust, thou bewitching dirty flesh, who
did lull me asleep so long in thy pleasing chains, until thou did suddenly
open thy doors and thrust me out, where I was awakened in torments before I
was aware, now I must come into thy doors again, that thou may share and
taste the bitter issue of sinful pleasures and delights. And O how will the
body be affrighted, so soon as the soul is entered! never did the soul taste so
much of the bodies delights, as the body will then feel of the souls anguish.
The body to the soul, And have thou found me out O my enemy? Could not thou
have let me alone to lie still at rest in this sweet sleep? have thou used me
as a slave, and employed all my members as servants of iniquity, and
unrighteousness, and art thou come now to torment me! and is this the fruit of
all the pleasures we have taken together? should not thou have been more
wise, and provided better for thy self and me? O what cries and shreeks will
the tongue give forth, so soon as it has recovered its use! O what fearful
amazing sights will there appear before the eyes, so soon as they are opened,
when they first peep out of the Grave, and sinners see Heaven and Earth on Fire
about them, and Christ coming in ^laming Fire, to take vengeance upon them? O
how dreadful will the shout, and the voice of the Archangel, and the sound of
the last Trumpet summoning them to judgment be unto the ears? O how will every
joint and member of the bodies of the wicked tremble, when they are raised
again at the last day?

2. The second Antecedent to the judgment of the wicked, will be their meeting
with Devils; the righteous will meet with Angels to welcome them out of their
Graves; the wicked will meet with Devils to entertain them at their
resurrection; and then they will not appear unto them, like Angels of light, as
sometimes here they have done; but like foul Angels of darkness, as they ever
were since their first fall; they will not then entertain the wicked with
pleasing baits, and sweet alluring temptations, and pretend to be their
friends, who consult their good and satisfaction, beyond God himself, the chief
good of mankind; as they did when their abode was in the world before: but they
will spit forth their venom, and malice, then, in their faces; possibly they
may buffet their bodies, and lay painful strokes upon them; surely they will
terrify their souls for those sins which they have drawn them unto the
commission of; O how will they mock, and deride their folly, and madness for
opening their ears to their vvhispers, for opening their heart so readily,
when they have knocked at the door, and entised them unto sin? then the damned
will perceive that the Devils design was their ruin and misery, when the
pretense and show was consultation for their good and happiness; that he
labored to please and delight them, not out of love, but malice, that he might
undo them; that he lulled them asleep, that they might not perceive their
misery, till it was too late; that poison was in his sweetest baits; and that
their softest pleasures were Satan's silken cords, by which he was dravving
them unto endless woe and bitterness; then they will perceive how the Prince
of Darkness has blinded their eyes, and deluded them; how the old Serpent
has beguiled them through his subtilty, and deceived them; how they have been
gulled of a Crown and Kingdom they had the proffers of, and were in a
capacity to obtain; then they will perceive whose slaves they have been, whilst
they were serving diverse lusts; that the Devil was their Lord and Master, and
led them captive at his will; and now they will meet with their Masters, whom
they have served, unto their terror and amazement; how will they be affrighted
at the apparition of so many Devils about them? When they shall throw into
their thoughts such hideous apprehensions, and lash their spirits with horrible
scourges, when they shall seize upon their bodies, and tear them, and drag them
to the Judgment Seat, and there is none to rescue and deliver them.

3. The third Antecedent to the judgment of the wicked, will be their meeting
one with another; as the Elect, so all the reprobates will be gathered together
into one company; O what an innumerable company of Rebels, and Traitors, and
Villains, will then be got together! how fiercely and horribly will they look
one upon another? and if they speak, what language of Hell will there issue
forth of their lips? they may meet with their old companions and
fellow-sinners, but it will not be like such as they now call meetings of
good-fellowship, when they get together in a Tavern and Alehouse, or some
house of wickedness, to drink, and sing, and dance, and sin, and make merry in
the pleasing of their flesh; they shall not then have Ale, and Wine, and Women,
and Music, or any incentives to mirth and sensual pleasures; the last meeting
will be no merry meeting, but sad and dismal; the pleasing affections which
they formerly had to their friends will be changed; their love will be turned
into hatred; and the joy they have found in them will be turned into grief and
anger; O the angry countenances the wicked will have on that day! it is said,
the Nations shall be angry; O the angry speeches! how will they rage and storm
at one another? especially at those who have drawn them into sin, how will they
curse and ban one another? O the horrible noise that* will be amongst the
damned crew when they are got together! It may be from words they fall to
blows, and tear one another ^air, and spurn at one another bellies, and bite
one another flesh, and even claw out one another eyes; we cannot conjecture
so much of the mi^ery of the wicked, as will be on that day.

4. The wicked that are alive on the earth at the ^econd appearance of Christ,
shall see the righteous that are dead, arise out of their graves with
mar^ellous beauty and joy; and those which are alive wonderfully changed into
the likeness and fashi^n of Christ; and all of them suddenly caught ^p together
in the clouds to meet the Lord in the ^ir; which ^ight will be fearful and
amazing to them, when they perceive themselves to be left ^ehind. We read Rev.
11. 11, 12. When the two witnesses after they had lain dead for some time ^ad
the spirit of life put into them, and they stood upon their feet, and were
called up, and ascended ^p into Heaven; it is said their enemies beheld them,
and great fear fell upon them: so when all ^he witnesses and servants of the
Lord shall have (...) spirit of life put into them, and stand upon ^^eir feet,
and be called up, and caught up in the ^^ouds to meet the Lord; their enemies,
and the ^icked on the earth will behold them, and great ^^ar will fall upon
them. But, O the fear and ^^ouble which will be upon the spirits of those
^nbelieving Christ-less, grace-less sinners, whose (...) de shall at that day
be amongst the believers, and some of them linked in the nearest relations
(...) them, when their believing relations shall be ^aught away from them, and
carried up into the air, with the rest of the glorious train of Saints, when
themselves shall remain below upon the earth; It is said, that at the time of
Christ coming, Luke 17. 34, 35, 36. Two men shall be in one bed, the one shall
be taken, the other left; two women shall be grinding together, the one shall
be taken and the other left; two men shall be together in the field, the one
shall be taken the other left. Friends will be together at that day as at other
times, not expecting Christ's coming, and it may be less expecting it than
before they did; some will be in fields together, some in houses together, some
will be in beds together, some will be in Churches together, it may be
Ministers preaching, and people hearing, as you are hearing me this day.

Suppose that the heavens should just now open and you should hear the sound of
the last Trumpet, and Jesus Christ should descend with a glorious train of
Angels into the air; then all yo^ that are believers, and have got an interest
i^ Christ, would immediately be caught up in the clouds, to meet with the Lord:
but all you tha^ are impenitent and unbelievers, would be left behind: and
think what terror would fall upon you to see us caught away from you; it may
be some of you might come hanging about me and other^ when you see us arrayed
in shining garments, an^ suddenly changed into the glorious likeness (...) our
Lord, and called by the Angels to go up (...) him: O take us up along with you!
what, wi^^ you leave us behind! Alas what can I do for (...) then; I must say,
I told you of this time and this before; but you did not seriously regard it,
so as to pr^pare; I called you often to repentance, and preach^^ Jesus Christ
to you, and showed you the way of sa^^vation; but you would not accept of him,
ye refused him, and lived in the neglect of your own salvation. I told you, if
you did not forsake such and such sins, they would be your ruin; and yet you
would not be persuaded to leave them. I forewarned you of the miseries which
would come upon you at Christ's coming, but you would not take warning.

Fain would I have had you all up along with me, to meet my Lord; and if I
could have been instrumental to convert, and turn you unto him, my joy and
crown would have been the greater: O how glad should I have been of your
company in this Tri^mph: some did hearken and believe; some did awaken when
they were called, and repent, and reform their lives: some were wise, and did
fore-think and make provision for this day; and now see how they shine; see the
mirth and joy in their countenances; see the issue and fruit of their tears,
and self-denial, of their faith, and love, and holy walking. Now, now, we are
going together to our Lord, whom we have sought, and served, and trusted for
our happiness: and O that you would have hearkened, and been persuaded to have
joined your selves to our number, that we might have gone together; O that you
would have joined your selves to our Lord, and have had fellowship with them
who head fellowship with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, and broken ^ff
your fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, and workers of iniquity;
but you would go on in the broad way, because it was more easy; the way to
heaven was too narrow and difficult for you: if profession would have been
enough, and external joining you selves to Gods people would have brought you
to heaven, this some of you could do with readiness sufficient; but when you
must have a power as well as a form, and when you must mourn for sin, crucify
the flesh, mortify the deeds of the body, deny your selves, take up the cross,
be so strict in your lives, make conscience of thoughts, words, and all your
actions, this you could not away with: you could brook to be religious
sometimes by the by, and when you had nothing else to do; but to make it your
business to be religious, you could not endure: you could put on a form and
outward vizard of godliness on the Sabbath days; but to be religious on the
week days, and every day, to be holy in all manner of conversation, this was
too much, and a hard saying which you could not bear: and if you did not like
the terms of the Gospel, and would be the servants of the Devil, whilst you
seemed to be the servants of Christ; and go on covertly in the way to Hell,
whilst you seemed to be going in the way to Heaven; what can I do for you now?
I thought you would have shined and gone with us, when you shined so much in
profession; and is your Lamp now gone cut, when the Bridegroom is come? ^las!
who can supply you now with Oil? I have little enough for my self, and none to
spare for you; and do you ask me for Oil? alas! if I had enough I could not
part with it, and put any into your vessels ^t Now, now it is too late, I came
with Oil often to sell from my Lord and Master, and you might have had it for
nothing; you might have bought it without money, and without price; but then
you slighted and refused all pr^ffers of grace, which were made; you valued
your lusts, which you must have parted withal (...) it, at a higher rate; you
refused the Oil altogether, or at le^st took no more than would light your
Lamps; you would not receive any into the vessels of your hearts: and do you
think I can supply you with Oil now? Some of you had convictions once in the
time of the Plague, when death raged amongst you, and ^^me good work was
beginning then in you; and is (...) off, and come to nothing, and dwindled into
an empty profession? Alas? what shall I do for you now? You know I ventured my
life for you, to preach to you, when the arrows were flying so thick about you;
I ventured my liberty for you, my health for you, and was often spent for you,
and amongst you, that I might be isntrumental to call and save you: but when
the thunder of Judgments was a little over, and out of hearing, you quickly
dropped asleep, and the voice of preaching could not enter your ears and awaken
you: Alas! why do you look upon me now with such rufull countenances, and stand
with such trembling joints, and speak so earnestly unto me, as if something
might yet be done for you, and are loath to let me go from your company? Alas!
what can I do for you now? should I stay and preach unto you again, and call,
and invite you to Jesus Christ, and open the treasures of the Gospel, and now
you will open your ears, and hearts to receive? Alas! now the mystery of God
is finished, the treasures of the Gospel are shut up, and sealed, and the day
of grace is quite spend and gone, and cannot be recalled; could not you have
opened before, when you know I knocked often, and hard, in my Masters name for
entertainment? I called, but ye refused; I stretched out my hand, and lifted up
my voice like a Trumpt; but you did not regard and follow the counsels which
were given unto you; and now my preaching work is done for ever. Should I sty
and pray with you, and for you, that God would pardon your sins, or defer your
judgment but a little while, if it were but for a week, or a day, that you
might prepare your accounts, and O how presently would you make your peace with
God, how readily would you accept of Christ on any terms; do any thing, suffer
any thing, deny self, take up cr^sse; O how diligent would you be in the
service of God, and resist Satan, and take heed of sin; Alas! poor souls all
these desires are too late: I have prayed with you, and for you, and you have
had warning and time to prepare your accounts, and have been called to these
duties before; but now the Oath is sworn by him that lives for ever and ever,
that time shall be no longer; now the ear of God is shut, and no prayer can
enter.

Now Christ is come down from the mercy Seat; from the right hand of the
Father, where he made intercession; and the Throne of Grace is now turned into
a Judgment Seat; now there remains no more sacrifice for sin, nothing but a
fearful looking for o^ judgment to devour the wicked. Alas! why do you hang
about me with tears and weeping? what can I do for you now? can I carry you
all up with me in my arms? would not the load be too great for me? and if all
of us together could hand and help some of you up into the air with us, and
bring you into the presence of our dear and glorious Redeemer; With what
confidence could you stand before him? With what face could you look upon him,
when you are so black, and ^ilthy, and have such guilt upon your consciences?
Would not your looks betray you to be none of our number? Would not your black
and trembling joints speak what you are? and would not Christ then frown you
away from our company? and then we must of necessity let you fall from on high
amongst your fellow hypocrites and unbelievers. Could we carry you up with us?
if you should lay hold on us, would not the Angels snatch us out of your arms?
or would not Devils tear you away from us? And could I rescue any of you out of
Satan's hands, when he comes to seize upon his own? Alas! what can I do f^r you
at this time? I must away, and be gone, and bid you now adieu for ever; The
Saints are all risen, and have put on their glorious attire, and we are called
for; It is your own faults that you did not help to fill up this number; and
when such of us as belong to Christ should be caught up in the clouds; O how
dreadful would it be for you, and all that should be found in the number of
them that are left?

5. The fifth and most dreadful Antecedent to the Judgment of the wicked, will
be their sight of the Lord Jesus Christ himself: who will be revealed from
Heaven, at that day, in flaming Fire, to take vengeance upon them. 2 Thessalonians. 1.
7, 8. The sight of their judge will affright them: Rev. 1. 7. Behold he comes
with Clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also that pierced him, and
all kindreds of the Earth shall wail because of him: even so, Amen. Every eye
shall see him, not only the righteous, but also the wicked; and they also that
pierced him, that is, the Jews which crucified him, as he says, Matthew. 26.
64. Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man, sitting on the right hand of power,
and coming in the Clouds of Heaven. O how fearful will the sight of Jesus
Christ be to Judas, that betrayed them, unto the Officers that took him, unto
the base Servant that smo^e him with the palm of his hand; unto the people that
mocked and spit upon him, unto the Pharisees that accused him, unto Pilate that
scourged and condemned him, unto Herod that scorned him, unto the Soldiers
that mocked and crucified him, unto the Priests that stirred up the People and
Pilate against him, and in the midst of his agony and anguish railed on him?
though they did not see him come down from the cross, yet when they see him
come down from heaven, they will believe that he was the Messiah; and O how
will this sight terrify them? then they will smite their breasts indeed, and be
filled with horror, when they perceive that the same Jesus was the Son of God,
and is now the Judge of the World, and is come to call them before his Bar, who
then did stand before theirs; the High Priest that rent his clothes, when
Christ called himself the Son of God, will be ready to rend himself in pieces
for not acknowledging it; and with what face will Judas look his Master in the
face, when he sees him come in such glory! and if some Soldiers that kept
Christ's Sepulcher, did so shake, and become like dead men at Christ's
resurrection, when they saw the Angel, whose countenance was like lightning,
and raiment white as Snow, come and roll away the Stone from before the door
thereof: Matthew. 28. 2, 3, 4. O how will they all that had a hand in his death,
quake and tremble, when they see the Lord Jesus Christ himself come with such
Power and Glory, and all the Holy Angels with him, to call them to Judgment?
Further it is said that all the kindreds of the Earth shall wail because of
him, so Matthew. 24. 30. All the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn, when they see
the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven; this we are to understand of the
wicked kindreds and tribes of the Earth; the sight of Christ will be matter of
the greatest Joy unto his Disciples, but of the greatest sorrow unto the wicked
World; the mourning of the wicked, see how it is set forth, Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17.
And the Kings of the Earth, and the great Men, and the rich Men, and the chief
Captains, and the mighty Men, and every Bondman, and every freeman hid
themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks* and in the Mountains. And said to the
Rocks, and to the Mountains, f^ll on us, and hide us from the face of him that
sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lawb, for the great day of
his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? Then profane and wicked
Kings, who would not submit unto the Government of Christ, but brake his bands
asunder, and cast away his cords from them, shall see this King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, come down from heaven to judge them, and O with what fear would
they then run and hide themselves in Dens, or under some great Rocks and
Mountains, if they could, from the face of him who will then sit upon the
Throne of Judgment! and with what trembling will they stand amongst the meanest
of their subjects, divested of all their power and dignity? then the Nobles and
great Men of the Earth, who having been lifted up above the ordinary degree of
men, have lifted up their hearts also with pride and haughtiness beyond
measure, and let loose the reigns unto licentiousness, and wallowed in filthy
delights and pleasures, shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds; and O
how will their proud hearts then be brought down, and their haughtiness laid
low, and their sweet sinful delights be turned into bitter gall and wormwood!
then they will cry to the Rocks to cover them, and the Mountains to hide them:
if they can find any such place to receive them in this terrible day. Then the
chief Captains and mighty Men, who employed their force and strength under the
banner of the Devil, and endeavored to promote the interest of his Kingdom in
the World, and rebelled against the Lord of Hosts, shall see the Heavens
opened, and this mighty Captain come down with the Armies of Heaven attending
upon him in white, to execute vengeance upon them, and then their courage will
fail them, and the wrath of the Lamb will make them tremble, and they would
creep into a Rock, or any hole to hide them; then the rich men who have placed
their hearts and confidence in their riches; especially those who have heaped
up riches by injustice and unrighteous practices shall see the Son of Man
coming against them, and weep and howl for the miseries which are coming upon
them; and their riches will be so far from profiting them in the day of wrath,
that they will be witnesses to accuse them and aggravate their condemnation;
Then every Bondman and every Freeman that are slaves to the Devil and their
own lusts, shall see the Son of Man coming to judge them, and be in the number
of the mourners, crying to the Mountains to fall on them. Then there will be
distress upon all Nations, and great perplexity, Sea waves roaring, and Men's
hearts failing them, for fear, when they are looking up into the Clouds, and
see the Son of Man is come down, and his Throne is prepared for judgment. The
Heathen Nations will mourn to see him, especially the wicked who have had the
name of Christians upon them, and have sat under the light of the Gospel; O how
will their faces be filled with shame and confusion, and their hearts with
terror and astonishment, when they behold the face of the Lord Jesus Christ
shining with such beauty and glory, but looking on them with anger and disdain?
And is this glorious King that Jesus Christ whom we heard so much spoken of
when we lived upon the Earth? Was he indeed so great whose commands we
disobeyed, whose threatenings we slighted, whose grace we abused, and whose
wrath we dis-regarded? Was it so excellent a person, who was described and set
forth to us by Ministers in such superlative expressions, all which he exceeds?
and yet could we see no form, nor comeliness in him, nothing for which we
should desire him? Was this the Savior that was preached to us, and proffered
to us? This the Jesus Christ that we were pressed so frequently and so
earnestly to get an interest in, with so many powerful arguments, and yet
could not be moved and persuaded? Was it this Person that did call us, and
stretch forth his hand all the day long to us, that did woo us, and entreat us
by his messengers, to accept of parden, and grace, and salvation, and knock at
the door of our hearts again and again, by his Word and Spirit for
entertainment? and did we shut our ear and our heart against him, and refuse
all his gracious tenders which were made unto us? What, did we hearken to the
Devil when he tempted us to sin, that he might destroy us; and not hearken to
Christ, who would have persuaded us to faith and obedience, that he might save
us? Could we harbor base lusts, which were like so many vipers in our bosoms,
and give no entertainment to Jesus Christ, who would have brought riches and
glory with him? O what fools and mad men and women have we been! How have our
cursed hearts deceived us, and the devil deluded us? How have we been
bewitched, to prefer the v^nities of the World, and the satisfaction of the
desires of our flesh, before an interest in such a Savior? Woe! woe! woe! be unto
us, for now the great day of the Lord is come, and who is able to stand? This
is the fifth Antecedent to the judgment of the wicked* they shall see the Lord
Jesus coming in the clouds, and be summoned to the bar, and plaeed at his left
hand; of which before.

6. The sixth Antecedent will be their seeing the Judgment, and hearing the
Sentence of the righteous, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the World. And oh how will they grind
and gnash their teeth, and their hearts be ready even to burst with envy and
indignation, to see those poor mean Christians, whom some of them have
separated from their company, and accounted as the off^scouring of the earth,
and not worthy to set with the dogs of their flock, exalted to such dignity,
shining in such glory, and adjudged to such happiness, when themselves are
looked upon with such contempt, and stand waiting for their judgment and final
Doom to Torments and eternal misery. These are the Antecedents of the Judgment
of the wicked.

CHAP. VIII.
2. COncerning the Judgment of the wicked it self. I shall here speak of 1. The
Judge. 2. The Assessors. 3. The Malefactors. 4. The Crime. 5. The Accusers and
Winesses. 6. The Conviction. 7. The Sentence.



^. The Judge of the wicked, as of the righteous, will be the Lord Jesus
Christ. It is said, Romans 3. 6. God shall judge the World; but it will be God in
Christ, and God by Christ, Act. 17. 31. God was in Christ reconciling the world
of the elect unto himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19. and God in Christ will judge and
condemn the world of the Reprobates. The Father has committed all judgment
unto the Son, Joh. 5. 22. and he has given him authority to execute judgment,
because he is the Son of Man, v. 27. The same Jesus whom the wicked would not
submit unto, and take for their King, to rule over them; they must submit unto,
and have for their Judge to examine and condemn them. The properties of this
Judge are worthy here of our observation.

1. Christ will be a most glorious Judge: Never was there such a Judge seen on
the earth: It will be the greatest Judgment; there will be a general Assize of
the whole world; and Christ will be the greatest Judge; the greatest for
dignity, and glory that ever eye did behold. Christ will be most glorious, in
regard of his person; he will appear to be the Prince and Lord of glory; and be
admired not only by the Saints, but also by the wicked, amongst whom, before
they saw him, he was despised. The despisers shall behold the luster of their
Judge, and wonder, and perish, as it is said in another case, Act. 13. 41.
Christ will be most glorious in regard of his retinue; all the holy Angels,
those glorious Spirits who are about the Throne of God, shall attend upon him,
Matthew. 25. 31. When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all his holy Angels
with him; yea, all the holy Saints also, shall attend upon him in the judgment
of the wicked, Jude 14. 15. Behold the Lord will come with ten thousand of his
Saints to execure judgment upon all the ungodly, etc. Yea, he will come with
all his Saints, 1 These. 3. 13. The whole innumerable company of Saints shall
attend upon Christ in white shining garments, with bodies like unto Christ,
more beautiful and glorious, than the most splendid attire can make them; and
Christ then will be admired in all the Saints and believers, by the wicked
which shall behold them: And Christ will sit upon the Throne of his glory,
Matthew. 25. 31. I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, from whose
face the Earth and the Heaven fled away, Rev. 20. 11. We read of a glorious
Throne which Solomon made, 1 King. 10. 18, 19, 20. But the Throne and Tribunal
seat of Christ will be far more glorious than Solomon's, or any Monarchs that
ever lived upon the face of the earth.

2. Christ will be a most powerful Judge: He will have power to raise all the
wicked out of their graves unto life again; which requires as much power to
effect, as the giving them their being and life at the first: he will have
power to bring all the wicked to his foot, to keep them in awe, that they shall
not stir, nor lift up the hand in the least, in a way of rebellion; which is
more than the most potent Prince that ever lived could do: He will have power
to execute vengeance upon all the wicked together, and inflict an infinite
punishment upon them; and he will put forth no less power in the destruction of
the wicked at the last day, than was put forth in the first creation of the
world; herein he will make his power known, Romans 9. 22. When the wicked shall
be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power, 2 These. 1. 9.

3. Christ will be a most knowing Judge: He will know all the persons of the
wicked; not one shall escape his eye; he will not know them in any way of
nearness, and familiar acquainting himself with them; but he will know them in
a way of perfect cognizance of their persons; he knew them when they lived and
rebelled against his Law; and he will know them again, when they are raised; he
will not only have a general knowledge of them, but he will know them
particularly: none of the ancient rebels shall be able to hide themselves,
either under rocks and mountains, or in the crowd and throng of the wicked
which shall be gathered together before him on that day; Christ will find out
all his enemies: and he will know all their crimes; he will read them all
written in the book of Gods remembrance; and the book of their own consciences
being then opened, will present all their sins to his view; the eye of the
Judge will be a piercing, all-seeing eye, which cannot be blinded, and
therefore there will be no mistake and error in the judgment, through
ignorance or false information, as there may be in the Courts of judicature
upon the earth.

4. Christ will be a most holy Judge: He will be without any the least stain of
sin; he was so when he lived amongst sinners on earth, and surely he will be
so, when he descends from the Holy of Holies in Heaven: some earthly Judges
are guilty in the same kind with the malefactors which are brought before them;
so that whilst they judge others they condemn themselves: but there will not be
the least more of sin in the eye of Christ; nor any tincture of defilement; and
therefore as it will be impossible to blind him, because of his knowledge: so
it will be impossible to bribe and corrupt him in judgment, because of his
holiness; and by consequence.

5 Christ will be a most impartial and strict Judge: he will be most impartial
in regard of the persons whom he will judge; the high degree and quality of men
upon the earth will be of no account with him; the rich will be no more
regarded than the poor; nor the highest Princes more than the meanest of their
subjects; Death levels all men, and puts a conclusion unto all earthly
dignities; and in the resurrection all will stand upon even ground: now some
Lords and great men may murder, and oppress, and break Laws, and through favor
escape punishment, which crimes, if meaner persons had been found guilty of,
would have cost them their lives: but Christ will have no more favor for a
Lord, or a Knight, or a Gentleman, no nor for a King or a Queen, or the
greatest Lady, than for the most contemptible beggar; he will not accept of the
persons of any, and connive at the sins of some, which those that should
reprove them now can wink at, as if they were no faults; because the faults of
such persons as are high, whose favor they desire, and from whom they might
receive damage and dis-esteem should they be plain and faithful; but Christ he
will neither need the favor nor fear the anger of anyl; and he will not court
and flatter any because of their Nobility and greatness; but impartially judge
the highest and greatest, by the same rule as he will do the lowest and
meanest; and Christ will be a most strict Judge in regard of crimes; he will
bring forth all the sins of the wicked to light; not one sin which they have
committed from the day of their birth to the hour of their dissolution, but
shall be had in remembrance, and be brought unto public view, when the Lord
shall enter into judgment with the ungodly world: some of the wicked do now
sin more secretly, they have sweet morsels rolling under their tongues, which
are not perceived; they have their Dalilahs in corners, who are not known; they
shroud themselves under the shadow of the wings of the night, that they might
conceal some of their wicked lewd practices, which, should they be found out
in, would fill their cheeks with shame and blushing: but Christ will call them
at the last day to a strict account, and bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, 1 Cor. 4. 5. And O the contempt and confusion which they will be
covered withal when all their shameful and abominable sins shall be made
manifest.

6. Christ will be a most righteous Judge: he will judge the wicked in
righteousness; some of them will be found to have been unrighteous in their
judgments; and others righteous in their dealings; and all of them unrighteous
in their state; but Christ will judge them all in righteousness: he will judge
them according to their works: as he will be righteous in not inflicting upon
them a greater punishment than their sins have deserved, he will not punish
lesser sinners with more stripes, and greater sinners with fewer stripes: so
neither will he be unrighteous in inflicting upon them a lesser punishment than
their sins have deserved; but will proportion their punishment to their
offense, Rev. 18. 7. How much she has glorified her self, and lived
deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her. Christ will be exactly
righteous in his judgment, severely righteous, without the least mixture of
mercy; the wicked shall have from him the summum jus, and that sine ulla
injuria, they shall have the highest right and justice, without the least
injury; Gods justice requires satisfaction for their sins, and Christ will
satisfy the demands of justice to the full upon the ungodly, by distribution
of such punishments as are the just desert of their sins; Christ will even all
scores at that day* between God and sinners; at least he will begin to take the
payment of that debt from them which they owe for sin, which they will be
paying unto all eternity. Christ will come with the Balances and Sword of
Justice in his hand, he will come to take just vengeance upon disobedient
sinners.

7. Christ will be a most furious Judge: he will be most gracious toward the
righteous, but most furious against the wicked. He will come in flaming fire,
to take vengeance upon them, 2 These. 1. 8. He will come in flames of love
toward his people; but in flames of anger against his enemies; a Fire shall
devour before him, and, it will be very ^empestuous round about him; see Isa.
66. 15. Behold the Lord will come with Fire, and with his Chariots, as with a
whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, his rebukes with flames ^f Fire. We
read of such wrath on that day in the Lamb, as makes the Kings and great men
of the earth to tremble, and call to mountains and rocks to fall on them and
hide them from it* Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17. Never was there greater love, and more
tender bowels of compassion and pity, than is to be found now in the Lord
Jesus Christ, toward all them that apply themselves unto him, under a sense of
sin, for salvation, here in this world; and never was there greater wrath and
revengeful fury, than will be found in the same Lord Jesus Christ, when sinners
shall come before him to be judged at the last day; He will be very furious,
ten thousand times beyond a Bear when she is bereaved of her whelps, or a Lion
when he is hunger-starved; How fiercely will Christ look upon the wicked? What
scorn and contempt of them will they see in his face? What dreadful frowns in
his brow? What fiery anger will there sparkle from his eye, in his looking upon
them, as if he would look them dead, or look them into Hell, before he has
pronounced the sentence? How fiercely will he speak unto them? There will be
terror in his looks, and there will be terror in his voice: he will speak to
them in his wrath, and vex them in his hot displeasure. His anger then will
break forth into a flame; he will appear to be jealous and very furious, when
he comes to execute vengeance on his adversaries, and punish his enemies for
their sins.

8. Christ will be an inexorable Judge. None is now more easy to be entreated
as a Savior; whosoever comes unto him may be welcome to him; he has promised
in no wise to cast out such, Ioh. 6. 37. The most rebellious sinners may find
entertainment with Jesus Christ now; and prevail with him to procure pardon,
and peace, and salvation, upon their repentance of their sins: but when he is
come down from Heaven to judge the world, he will be inexorable; No prayers or
entreaties; no tears or arguments will in the least move him to take any pity
on such as shall then be found in their sins. When the wicked at the day of
judgment shall have their eyes opened to behold the Lord Jesus Christ in his
glory and Majesty, in such excellency and shining beauty; then one smile of his
countenance will be really accounted of more worth than the whole world; and to
be made like to such a person, and to dwell for ever in his love and joy, they
will then clearly see to be unconceiveably beyond all the enjoyment of the
creatures in their fullest delights; and to be thrust out of his presence they
will account their chiefest misery: then they will have other apprehensions of
Hells torments, when they are just ready to be cast into the burning lake; when
they are awakened in the morning of the resurrection, and are brought to
Christ's bar, and they perceive how near they are to execution; and great
distress will be upon them, when they look about them, and all refuge fails,
and they see no way for them to escape; If now with their cries and
supplications they might prevail with the Judge for some commiseration, if they
had but the least hopes of moving his bowels, and pacifying his anger, and
obtaining the favor of admission into the inheritance of the Saints; O how
would they all fall down upon their knees before him with the lowest submission
and reverence? how would they cry and weep, entreat and beseech? how would they
kiss his feet, wash them with their tears, and wipe them with their hairs? how
earnest and importunate would they be with him for a pardon, if importunity
would prevail? If there were but one promise left in the whole Book of God for
them, which might possibly bring unto them some relief; how greedily would they
all catch at it, and humbly woo the Lord for mercy? No, no, the Judge will
then be inexorable: they may cry, but it will be to no purpose; he will shut
his ears against their prayers, and hide his eyes from their misery; they had
promises enough whilst they lived, but they did not regard them, they did not
believe and apply them; and now nothing but threatenings belong to them, and
remain for them; Christ often cried to them by his Ministers, and moved them by
his spirit to open the Door of their hearts, and give him room and
entertainment; but they shut their ears and hearts against him; and now Christ
will shut his ears, and the door of mercy, and Heaven against them. He will be
inexorable. Thus concerning the Judge of the wicked.

2. The Assessors, or those which shall sit with Christ in the judgment of the
wicked, will be the righteous. This promise the Lord makes particularly and
especially to the twelve Apostles, Matthew. 19. 28. Verily I say unto you, that
ye which have followed me (that have denied your selves, and parted with all,
and taken up your Cross, and followed me) in the Regeneration, (or restitution
of all things, when the Day of Resurrection does come) and the Son of Man shall
sit on the Throne of his Glory, (when I shall sit upon my judgment Seat, and
gather all Nations before my Bar, to receive their doom) Ye shall sit on
twelve Thrones, Judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, and though the Apostles of
Christ will be especially honored, and exalted in the day of Judgment, and
have seats, or degrees of dignity above others; yet this honor also shall all
the Saints have, to sit with Christ in Judgment, 1 Cor. 6. 2. Do ye not know
that the Saints shall judge the World? They judge and condemn the sins of the
wicked World now, by their holy conversation; and they will judge and condemn
the persons of the wicked at the last day, by their approbation of Christ's
Judgment. The crimes of the wicked will be scanned before the righteous; their
secret sins will be ripped up and made manifest unto them; they will not only be
brought in as accusers and witnesses against some of the wicked, of which I
shall speak by and by; but also they will join with Christ in the examination
of all the wicked; and they will also approve of Christ's justice and
righteousness in the condemning of sinners for their sins, and when Christ does
pronounce the sentence of condemnation upon them, Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, they will join
with him, and approve of this sentence; it may be they will with one voice say,
even so Amen: or with a loud shout accompany Christ's words, saying, Depart ye
cursed into everlasting Fire. A strange turn and change of things will there be
at that day; Felix, who sat on the Judgment Seat, when Paul was at the Bar,
will stand at the Bar when Paul shall sit amongst the Judges. The Lord will
bring down the mighty from their seats, and all wicked Princes and Judges of
the Earth shall be dis-throned, when the righteous, though of a low degree,
shall be exalted to sit as Judges upon them.

3. The Malefactors which shall be judged, will be,

1. Devils. 2 Pet. 2. 4. The Angels which fell, are said to be delivered into
Chains of darkness, and to be reserved unto Judgment; they are punished in part
now, but their punishment is not yet complete; when Christ came the first time
in the flesh, and began to dis-lodge the Devils from their habitation, in those
Persons whom they had got the possession of, they were afraid that he would
have completed their torment presently; and therefore they cry out, Art thou
come hither to torment us before the time? Matthew. 8. 29. And let us alone, art
thou come to destroy us? Mark 1. 24. But when Christ comes the second time in
his glory; then he will judge and condemn the wicked Angels; and the Saints
shall join with him herein, I Cor. 6. 3. Know ye not that we shall judge
Angels? Then the measure of their sin will be completed, and the time of their
torment will be come, and their punishment shall be completed too; the way and
manner of their Judgment is not spoken of in Scripture, and therefore I shall
not speak of it; but that they shall be judged to everlasting Fire, is evident
from the sentence pronounced on wicked men, in which it is said, that
everlasting Fire is prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

2. All wicked Men and Women, that ever lived, or shall live on the Earth from
the beginning of the Creation, unto the dissolution of the World, that have no
Interest in Jesus Christ, will be the malefactors, which shall be judged by
Christ at the last day; this day is called the day of Judgment and perdition of
the ungodly. 2 Pet. 3. 7. And the unjust are said to be reserved unto the day
of judgment to be punished, Chap. 2. Verse. 9. And the Apostle Paul tells us,
that the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming Fire, taking
vengeance on them which know not God, and obey not the G^spel, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8.

1. By them which know not God, we may understand the Heathen and Gentile
Nations, this being the Character given of them, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5. Not in lusts of
concupiscence, as the Gentiles which know not God. And the Ephesians whilst
Heathens before the Gospel came amongst them, were strangers to the Covenant of
Promise, having no hope, and without God in the World, Ephesians. 2. 12. All the
Heathen Nations shall be judged by Christ; but I shall not speak of their
judgment, in which we are not so much concerned.

2. By them which obey not the Gospel, we are to understand all those Nations
upon whom the light of the Gospel has shined, and unto whom the sound of the
Gospel has come; but yet have not yielded obedience thereunto, so as heertily
to accept of Christ for their Savior upon his own terms; all Christless,
graceless Persons, who have heard of Christ, and enjoyed the means of grace,
will be the chief Malefactors in the day of Judgment. I might here give a
Catalogue of the sinners which shall be judged, take one in 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
The unrighteous, fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, effeminate, abusers of
themselves with Mankind, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners,
and all other unjustified, unsanctified sinners. But more of this when I come
to speak of the conviction of the wicked.

4. The Crime for which the wicked shall be judged, and condemned by Christ,
will be sin.

1. Sin against the Law, and that 1. for sins of omission, Matthew. 25. 42. I was
an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink,
etc. 2. for sins of commission, and that 1. for sins of thought and heart, 1
Cor. 4. 5. When the Lord comes, he will make manifest the counsels of the
heart, he will condemn men for their wicked thoughts and contrivements, for
their sinful lusts and desires, and delights. 2. For sins of word, Matthew. 12.
36, 37. But I say unto you, that every idle word, that Men shall speak, they
shall give an account thereof in the day of Judgment: For by thy words thou
shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall* be condemned. If for idle
words men shall be judged; much more for taking Gods name in vain, for hideous
Oaths and Blasphemies; if for unprofitable speeches, much more for corrupt
communication, for lying, slanderous, bitter, reviling speeches. 3. Christ will
judge the wicked for their sins of deed. Romans 2. 6. He will render to every one
according to their deeds. And verse. 8, 9. To them that obey unrighteousness,
indignation, and wrath, tribulation, and anguish upon every soul of Man that
does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile.

2. The sins against the Gospel, will be the chief condemning crimes of the
wicked. No sins against the Law will be found so heinous, but if sinners be
found after the commission of them to have obeyed the Gospel, to have repented,
and believed, and yielded the fruits of new obedience; they will have a pardon
and absolution on that day; but final disobedience to the Gospel will be
unpardonable; final impenitency, and unbelief in those which have been called
to repent, and to close with Jesus Christ will certainly bring men under the
sentence of condemnation; I might here give a more particular Catalogue of the
sins which the wicked shall be judged for by Christ, but something more of them
under their conviction by Christ.

5. The accusers of, and witnesses against the wicked, being the same, I shall
join them together, and they will be, 1. God. 2. Men. 3. Devils. 4. Themselves.

1. God will be an accuser of, and witness against the wicked, at the day of
judgment.

1. Gods justice ( to speak after the manner of men, seeing this judgment is
set forth in such a manner, for our better apprehending of it, because we are
not able to conceive in this state the way exactly of Gods proceeding against
sinners in Judgment on that day) will arraign the wicked before the judgment
seat of Christ, and draw up as it were a Bill of Indictment against them.
Whereas these Men and Women who lived in such and such places, and times;
though they were my Creatures and subjects; were made by me and for me; and I
gave them my holy and righteous, and good Law, to be the guide and rule of
their life and actions; yet having no fear of me before their eyes; they did
shake off my yoke, and break my Laws, they did cast my Commandments behind
their back, and lived in a course of rebellion and disobedience against me;
committing such and such sins: And when I sent my Son into the World to die for
sinners, who gave me sufficient satisfaction; and I made him known, and the way
of salvation by him, and pr^ffered him unto them, and entreated them by my
Ambassadors to be reconciled; but they shut their ear, and hardened their
heart, and refused my Son; trampled upon his blood; grieved my spirit; and
neglected the salvation of their own souls; therefore I now require
satisfaction from themselves, and that a condign punishment be inflicted upon
them, for their disobedience.

2. Gods goodness, and bounty, and patience will accuse them, when they are
thus arraigned and indicted by his justice, which will aggravate their sins: I
nourished and brought up these creatures like children; and yet they rebelled
against me; I spared them, as a Man spares his Son, which serves him; and yet
they had no regard of me; I delivered them in six troubles, and in seven;
recovered them often from a sick Bed; and brought them back from the Grave,
when they were ready to go down into the Pit; and yet they knew not that I
healed them, and were so much the more disobedient unto me; I loaded them with
mercies, and yet they loaded me with iniquities; I would have led them to
repentance by my patience and goodness, but they were the more impenitent and
hard-hearted, and resolved to do evil; I stretched forth my hand all the day
long to these disobedient and gainsaying Creatures, and would have received
them, had they returned into the arms of my mercy; but nothing would win and
persuade them to leave their sins, and come unto me; and now my patience is
spent, and long-suffering is at an end, and bowels shut up against them for
ever; and let them now smart for all their abuses, affronts, and contempts,
which they have offered unto me.

3. God's omniscience will be a witness against the wicked at the day of
Judgment; their sins have been all committed under the view of God's all-seeing
eye; and they have been noted down upon the Book of his Remembrance; and God
will witness against them: I saw these wretched sinners when they were b^rn,
and traced all their steps; I compassed their path, and their lying down, and
was acquainted with all their ways; I did beset them behind and before, and
mine eye was continually upon them; I perceived the first sproutings and
buddings of sin in their tender years; I took notice of their disobedience to
their Parents, when they were young; of their lies, and pride, and vanity, of
their idleness and sloth, and mis-spending their precious time: I was an
eyewitness to all their sins, from their youth to their dying hour; I beheld
them when no eye besides was upon them; I saw their privy lewdness, and all
their deeds of darkness, which they committed in dark corners: when I kept
silence and did not speak, I was not blind so as not to see; and although I
did not smite, I did note: and what one of them all have the confidence to deny
any one of their sins which I have been a witness unto? The first accuser and
witness against the wicked will be God himself.

2. Men will accuse and witness against the wicked at the day of Judgment, and
that both the Godly and ^ngodly.

1. The Godly, and that both Godly Ministers, and Godly Friends,

1. Godly Ministers, will be the accusers and witnesses against the wicked.
Ministers must give an account then to their Lord of the souls which he
committed to their charge, Heb. 13. 17. And in some of their Flock they will
rejoice, because their testimony concerning Jesus Christ was believed; because
the Gospel which they preached amongst them was obeyed; because the Word was
received as the Word of God; they will rejoice in them which have been
effectually wrought upon by their Ministry; in those which they have been
instrumental to regenerate and espouse unto Jesus Christ; to persuade to leave
their sins, and submit themselves unto the yoke and Scepter of the Lord; such
will be the joy and crown of rejoicing to their Ministers on that day; of whom
with unspeakable comfort they will say to their Lord, Behold the Children which
thou hust given us, Thine they were and are, and thou did give them unto us,
and they have believed and kept thy word; and now as they have shared in thy
Grace, let them and us share in, and participate of thy Glory. But alas! what a
sad account will they have to give of others of their Flock, who have not
believed and yielded obedience to the Gospel, which they have preached; it will
be sad for them, when they must bring in heavy accusations against them. Lord
thou did send us upon thy Embassage unto them; but they regarded neither
Messenger, nor Message; we preached often in thy Name, but either they would
not hear when they might, or they would not believe and yield obedience when
they heard: we often told them of their sins, and foretold them of their
danger, if they did not repent and reform; but they would not receive
conviction, nor be persuaded to repentance and reformation; if we spoke of sin
more generally, they did not look upon themselves as concerned, and made no
Application, except it were to others: if we came more home and close, they
shrouded their sins as close as they could under the Veil of some thin
excuses; they shut their eyes and would not see; and if the beams of light
brake in upon them, and in a start they opened their eyes a little; they were
either offended, that we should disturb them in their sleep, or they quickly
shut their eyes again, and dropped asleep faster than before; and soon wore off
the convictions and troubles of mind which sometimes they have had under the
light and alarm of thy word. We often showed them their face in the Glass,
but they have gone away and forgotten what manner of Men and Women they were:
we have told them of the works of the flesh, which would certainly exclude
them the kingdom of Heaven, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. That no unrighteous Person,
nor unclean Person, nor Drunkard, nor covetous Person, nor Reviler, nor
Extortioner, could be saved, without Repentance and Sanctification: I Cor. 6.
9, 10, 11. And yet they would not leave their sins; they would be unjust and
unclean still; they would be covetous and revilers still; they would wallow
still in their filthiness, and hold fast their sin, whatever we could speak
against it. We preached unto them of the day of Judgment, and foretold them out
of thy Word, of these very things which are now come to p^ss; but they did not
believe it, nor consider it, nor take any care to prepare for this day; they
thrust the thoughts of judgment out of their mind, and put the evil day far
from them. We preached unto them the Gospel, opened the rich treasures thereof
before them, made known the exceeding great and precious promises of the
Covenant of Grace, the inestimable privileges and unspeakable benefits, which
belong to those that belong to Christ; and pr^ffered all unto them in thy name
if they would accept of them, and yield obedience unto thee; but all these
things were slighted and undervalued by them. We called and cried, we beseeched
and entreated them that they would be reconciled unto God; but they would not
give ear unto us. We held thee forth, Lord, to them, and studied to set thee
forth in the best words we could think of; told them of thy beauty and love,
and desirableness above all Persons and things in the World; told them of their
need, and that they were undone without thee: tendered to them thy blood, and
the purchase thereof, pardon and peace, and happiness for ever; but they were
like the deaf Adder which will not hear, they were like Rocks unmoved, they
refused thee and thy treasures, trampled upon thy blood, and put both us and
thee to shame by their refusal: we invited them unto the marriage Feast, but
they would not come; all excused themselves with one consent; one had bought a
Farm, and he must see it; another was engaged in a great Trade, and he must
follow it; another had married a Wife, and he could not, and none of them would
come, and taste of thy Banquet; the cares of the World, the deceitfulness of
riches, the pleasures of this life, and the lusts of other things, did so
overcharge their thoughts and hearts, that the Gospel and rich provisiens
thereof lay by disregarded.

Such will be the accusations of some Ministers; such witness must they give at
the last day against those of their Flock, who shall be found in the number of
the wicked and disobedient to the Gospel; then their Sermons, now forgotten,
will be remembered, and be so many evidences against them; O that our People
would remember them now! O that they would now consider, and believe, and turn,
and live, and avoid the accusations and witness, which otherwise we must be
forced to give in then against them.

2. The godly friends of the wicked will be their accusers, and witness against
them; some of them are linked in near Relations to the godly, who now are
endeavoring to be instrumental for their salvation; but if they do not
prevail, they will hereafter be their accusers and witnesses for their
condemnation.

I. The believing Husband will then accuse and witness against his unbelieving
Wife, Lord she lay in my bosom, and was beloved by me as my self; I cherished
her, and was as tender of her as my own flesh, according to thy command; but
all my love and kindeness to her could not win her heart for thee: I told her
often of thy beauty, and thy love which was a thousand fold ^eyond what I, or
any Man alive could possibly express; but she was stupid and unbelieving, and
wh^lly disregarded both thy Person and thy love: I covered her faults with
love, as much as I could, from others; and used many entreaties and loving
persuasions to draw her to amendment; telling her the danger and destructive
issue of a sinful course; but she would not hearken to amend; her heart was
set upon sin and vanity; she was proud and foolish; she was wanton and froward,
and would not be reclaimed: she did see my grief and sorrow for sin, she was a
witness to my tears and mournful complaints; and yet she could bear up under
greater guilt without any sense: she did see me often retire into my Closet,
and knew that I spent time daily between me and thee alone; and yet, though her
need was as great, she would not be persuaded to an imitation: I have often in
the secret silent night, when sleep has fled from both our eyes, taken
advantage of such opp^rtunities to discourse with her about her sou^-affaires;
told her of the sleep of death which ^re long would seize upon us; the night we
must stend in the Grave; of the morning of the Resurrection; of thy second
coming, and our appearing before thy Tribunal Seat; but nothing would quicken
her to make preparation for Death and Judgment, she heard as if she were
asleep, as indeed she was asleep whilst awake, and dead whi^st she was alive,
asleep and dead in sin and security.

2. The believing Wife will then accuse her unbelieving Husband. Lord thou
know how I loved, and honored, and reverenced, and obeyed him in lawful
things, and was faithful to him according to my duty; ^ut he would not love and
honor thee, he was ^nfaithfu^, and would not obey thy m^re reasonable
commands, unto whom he owed a greater subjection: I have often sat alone like
a widow at home, when he has been revelling abroad with his companions: I
have been pouring forth tears for him, at the Throne of grace in my Closet,
when he has been pouring in Wine and strong drink in Taverns and Aie-houses: I
have been troubled for him, when he has stayed our so late; and troubled more
with him, when he has come in so full of drink, and p^ssion; and with much
patience have endured his foul speeches and behavior, which he has used: I
have watched the most fit opportunity I could take, to put him in mind of his
sin and danger; and I have done it with the greatest humility and meeknes, and
tender affection as I could; but either he has not regarded my words; or slew
out into a rage against me: O how fain would I have persuaded him to draw in
the same yoke of Christ with me; but he would draw another way, do what I
could; none of my prayers, nor tears, nor arguments, no, not the l^ve of
Christ, nor the love of his own soul, could prevail with him to change his
course; he would (...) leave his drunkenness, and adultery, his worldliness and
i^justice, his lying and overreaching, his swearing and bitterness against thy
people, by no means would he be persuaded.

3. Believing Parents will then accuse and witness against their ungodly
children, and servants:

Lord, we endeavored to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of thee;
we labored to put good principles betimes into them; we dr^pped many wholesome
instructions upon them; we prayed frequently for them, and with them, and spoke
plainly and earnestly to them about their soul-concernment; we told them of the
immnr^atity of their s^uls, the preciousness of their time, the evil of sin,
their need of thee, the excellency of grace, their danger of Hell, the way to
escape it, the glory of Heaven, the way to attain it; but alas, to the grief of
our hearts, they shut their ears against all our instructions, and would take
none of our reproofs or counsels, they would go foolishly and stubbornly on in
a course of sin, and neither thy law, nor our fear would restrain them.

Thus these and other godly relations will rise up in judgment, and witness
against the wicked.

3. The ungodly friends and companions of the wicked will at that day be their
accusers and witness against them; especially those who have been drawn by them
into sin; however now they are very well pleased with them, and delight in
their company, because sin pleases them, and they do not feel nor believe the
bitterness which will be consequent; yet when they come to be judged, and
punished for those sins, they will with rage and madness accuse, and curse
those wicked persons which were their first tempters: Drunkards will accuse
those that drew them first into Taverns, and Alehouses, and persuaded them by
healths, and other ways to drink beyond their measure; Adulterers and
Adulteresses will accuse those which first enticed them unto privy lewdness:
ungodly servants also will then accuse their wicked masters, and ungodly
children their wicked parents, who have been drawn into sin by their example.
Thus men will be accusers and witnesses against the wicked,

3. Devils will be the Accusers and Witnesses against the wicked; they are now
accusers of the brethren, then they will be accusers of the wicked; they accuse
the brethren falsely, they will accuse the wicked truly; now they please and
flatter the wicked, and persuade them to sin; then they will accuse them for
those very sins which they have persuaded them unto; they have done the devils
drudgery all their days, and been his faithful slaves; and this is his
recompense, he will be their accuser at the last day.

4. The wicked will be accused by themselves, their own thoughts shall accuse
them in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, Romans
^. 15, 16. their own consciences will accuse them, and be as a thousand
witnesses against them; they will find all their sins registered in that book,
and that book will then be opened, and they will not be able to deny one word
of what they shall find there recorded. Thus of the accusers and witnesses
against the wicked.

6. Concerning the Conviction. And here I shall speak of the conviction of some
particular sinners; especially of such who have lived in the days and places,
where the Gospel has been preached, whom the Lord Jesus Christ with upbraiding
having of full evidence with convict of their sins. To set this out the more
lively.

Suppose that this very day were the day of Judgment; and in this very Church
were the Judgment-feat; that here were a great white Throne, and the Lord Jesus
Christ himself sitting upon it in his glory, with millions of holy Angels about
him, and all the Saints in white at his ^ight hand; and on his left, all the
wicked gathered together into one body, as it will be at the last ^ay; And the
Judge should cry with a loud voice, ^ring the prisoners to the Bar, Bring the
sinners to judgment, and so summon and convict particular sinners.

1. Come forth all ye ignorant persons; who have not known the father, nor me,
nor the mysteries of salvation, however clearly revealed in my Word; who lived
in darkness, and loved darkness, and bated the light, least your deeds should
thereby have been reproved; What dark in a Goshen! ignorant in London! in a
place of so much knowledge and instruction! Did not Parents teach you when you
were young? how is it that you would not be taught? If Parents neglected to
instruct you, had you not Ministers, who were ready to do it* How is it that
you have not learnt? If knowledge did not offer it self to you, why did you not
seek after it? why did not you learn of your selves? was there any thing in the
world that did concern you more to know? was not the knowledge of me, and my
ways, worth the looking after? had you a capacity for other knowledge, and not
for this? have not others learnt, who were naturally as dull, and had as few
helps, (...) you? had you time to spend about other things, i^ sports and sins,
and not time to spend in getting knowledge? had you an ear, and yet not hear,
so as to learn^ had you an eye, and yet not see so as to understand? And if you
were naturally blind, had not I eye salve? could not I have opened your eyes?
was I not willing? did I not stand in the gates to call upon you, How long ye
simple ones will you love simplicity? and fools hate knowledge: Turn unto me,
and I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and make know^ my words unto you? Prove.
I. 22, 23. Have (...) neglected me through ignorance, is not your fou^ double,
because you have neglected knowledge too? have you committed many sins through
ignorance, (...) not this an aggravation of your sin? did not you (...)
knowledge, and therefore dis-regarded it? did not yo^ love sin, and therefore
shunned the light, which would have discovered it, and disturbed you in your
wicked courses? have you liked darkness so well, and is it not fit then that
you should go to the place where there is blackness of darkness for ever? Take
them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

2. Come forth all ye slothful and uprofitable persons. Had not ye Talents
committed to you for my use and service, and what have you done with them? did
you bury them in the earth? or lay them up in a napkin? what could you lie down
and slumber, when you had so much work to do? could you trifle away so many
hours, when time was so preci^us? could you sleep in the day, in the day of
grace? sleep in the Harvest, which was so rich and plentiful, where you lived?
could you stand idle all the day long in the marketplace? were you born for
nothing, that ye lived so unprofitably, and were good for nothing? would not
religion have found you employment sufficient, if you had followed its
direction? Did the difficulties of duties discourage you, and therefore you
would let them alone, though they were so necessary? had the command of God no
force with you? would not your own good and happiness move you at all to
diligence? did fear of men, and suffering damage in the world, keep you off
from zealous profession, and a strict course of life; and should not the fear
of God, and danger of Hell, have kept you more from sin, and stirred you up
unto the most difficult hazzardous duty? was there a Lion in the way to Heaven?
and were there no Lions in the way to Hell? did not some sin ^^st you p^ins and
labor? did you find no difficulty i^ the service of the devil, and your own
lusts? and was not holiness more worth your pains to get? would not I have
proved a better master, had you been diligent in my service? could you be
diligent in your callings, to get a livelihood for your selves and families?
and neglect the life and salvation of your precious souls? would not my work
have brought wages with it? was there not sweetness mingled with the
difficulty? and would not the fruits have been sweet? would not a Crown and
Kingdom, a weight of glory, and eternal pleasures, move you to undergo some
difficulty? was there so much difficulty in obedience to my commands (which
were not grievous to a spiritual heart) and is there not more difficulty in
suffering what you m^st unavoidably suffer for your neglect? if my yoke were
painful to an unaccustomed neck could not I have fitted your neck to it, and
made it easy? if my burden were heavy to a weak back, could not, would not I
have put under my shoulder, and helped you to have born it? were not the most
difficult duties I required, for your own good, and so many privileges, and
the best work you could be employed in? were any of my servants so wearied with
my service, with the hardest work I set them about, as you were wearied with
your idleness, and doing nothing? did not the Earth groan under such
unprofitable burdens? did not Hell gape for you long ago, and Devils long for
this time when you should be delivered into their powers. Take them Devils
bind them hand and foot.

3. Come forth all ye that have neglected Family Worship, and never sought
after God in your Closets; Were not you creatures, and did the law of Creation
require no worship? were not you subjects, and should not you have shown homage
to your S^veraign? did not you live upon Gods finding and b^unty every day, and
should not you have acknowledged your dependence? did not God bring you into
your Family-relation, and did he require no duty? Did not he threaten to pour
out his wrath upon irreligious families? and yet would not you set up Religion
in yours? had you any business to do in your houses, of that consequence, as
worshipping God in your houses? if you had not ability to pray at first with
others, might not you have attained it, had you used to pray by your selves?
would not God have helped you, had you been ^illing to have been helped? had
you been sensible of sin, would you have wanted words in confession? had you
been sensible of your wants, would you have lacked expressions to make them
known? was it curiosity and elegancie of words, that God so much looked for?
would not sighs and groans have been understood? would not the Scriptures have
furnished you with expressions, had you used to read them? would not Sermons
have furnished you with matter and expressions, had you used to repeat them?
had you need of such and such things for your families, and had you no need of
Gods blessing? and could you hope for his lessing, if you did not worship him?
might not you have prospered more in the world, if you had used to pray more in
your houses? might not you have had more comfort in your relations, if you had
daily engaged with them in the duties of Gods worship? might not family prayer
have prevented much sin and sorrow which you ^rought upon you? did not you fall
into many ^^ares duty, for want of the armor of prayer? had our children and
servants no need of religious educa^ion? were they like to be obedient and
faithful to you, if you did not teach them to be obedient and faithful unto
God? had not you the charge of their souls put into your hands? and what
account can you give? ^ave not you brought their blood upon your heads? ^ave
not you contracted to your selves the guilt of (...) sins? can you endure to
hear their curses and banning of you for neglecting to give them such religious
education, as might have been the means of their salvation? And you that were
under government in families which had no religion, could you so willingly
imitate the governors, and the rest, in neglect of Gods worship? Could you
contentedly go to Hell for company? is it any ^lleviation of your grief and
horror that all your family is together? can your masters or fathers answer
for themselves, or you? had not you a greater master in Heaven, whom you should
rather have obeyed? did not you understand your duty? and if you could not
worship God more publicly, should not you have sought out retiring corners? if
others would not pray with you, should not you have prayed alone by your
selves? what if you had no example for it in your house, had you no precept for
it in the Word? what if you were under command, and much business was required
of you, and you were discouraged in such duties, could not you have found time
when business was over, or before business began? could not you have redeemed
time from sleep and recreations, rather than have neglected Gods worship daily?
would not God have encouraged and rewarded you? what if you had been s^^ft at,
and reproached for this? would not the favor and smiles of God have
compensated the flou^s and ^c^rns of men? would not Heaven have been worth all
the reproaches you could have undergone? could you eat, and drink, and sleep,
and not pray to God, which was more necessary than any thing which is m^st
necessary for your bodies? and if there was no worship of God at home, could
not you have looked alroad? were there none lived near you, who would have been
glad of your company in the worship of God, and way to Heaven? could y^u find
out no religious young men or women suittble to your degree, who would have
quickened you, and heartned you against discouragements? Did not you devote your
selves rather to the service of some lusts, and were glad of any excuse when
conscience would have minded you of your duty toward God? Take them Devils,
bind them hand and foot.

4. Come forth all ye Sabbath Breakers, you that have spent the day in
sleeping, in eating and drinking to excess; who instead of holy meditations,
have been thinking and contriving your worldly business; instead of religious
conferences, have discoursed only of earthly matters: instead of going to
Church, to worship God, have walked into the Fields, and spent the time in
recreations; or if you have seemed to give God a half-day service by your
presence at Church one part of the day; yet have worshipped him only with your
bodies, when your hearts were removed far from him; had not you an express
command for the Sabbaths observation? and if the day of first institution were
changed, was the day and worship thereof laid aside, and ceased to be a duty?
If the Jews were obliged to keep a day holy, were not the Christians much more?
Was not the Sabbath made for man, was it not his Privilege to take that time
for holy rest and worship? and did the Gospel straiten men's Privileges? Did
not the morral Law, of which Sabbath observation was one precept, bind
throughout all generations? could you call other days holy, which the
Scripture gave no warrant for, and not observe that holy day which you were
enjoined? Did not God allow you six days for labor in your Callings? and was
it unequal for him to take one day for his own worship? had he eased you of the
burdensome Ceremonies under the Law, and was the Sabbath so burdensome to you?
could you reasonably hope to enter into eternal rest, and keep a Sabbath in
Heaven? if you would not celebrate the appointed Sabbaths on Earth? Were not
the works of the Creation and Redemption worthy your memorial? was not
communion with God in Ordinances desirable? had you no need of those spiritual
provisions, which God did use to deal forth on the Sabbath days to them that
waited upon him for them? What! not worship God either in your own houses, nor
in his house; neither on the weekday nor Sabbath Day? could your sometimes
could and formal services be counted worship? Did you think that lip-prayers
would ever be heard by God that searches and requires the heart? Did you
think that Sermons un-minded, un-remembred, which you did neither believe, nor
were affected with, would be effectual to save you? Take them Devils, bind
them hand and foot.

5. Come forth all ye swearers, and profaners of the Name of God; Did you never
read nor hear the third Commandment, which forbad this sin? Did you never hear
of my strict Injunction, that you should not swear at all in your discourses,
but that your communication should be yea and nay? Were you never told that
swearers would fall into condemnation? Was the Great and dreadful Name of God
of so little regard, that you could not only use it irreverently, so
frequently; but also even tear it in pieces by your oaths? What profit did you
get by your swearing? and are you like to sustain no loss? what pleasure did
you find in your swearing? and are you like to reap no litterness? was it for
your honor to swear by the Name of God? or rather was it not for your
dishonor? but how did you dishonor God? What an affront did you offer to him
hereby? you called upon him sometimes to damn and sink you; can you speak in
that language now, now damnation is so near you? Worms! could not God have
trodden you under his feet, or crushed you as easily as you could do a fly,
every time you profaned his Name? and because he was patient, would you
presume? because he did not presently punish, did you dare him, and fly in
his face to provoke his fury? You have sworn in your solly, and have not
repented; and God has sworn in his wrath, and will not repent, that you shall
never enter into his rest. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

6. Come forth all ye scoffers at Religion, and the zealous Professors
thereof; who thought and spoke of Religion, as if it had been a fancy, and
cunningly devised Fable; and of the most holy, humble, and self-denying
Christians, as if they were the most mean-spirited, foolish, and contemptible
People upon Earth; and have used the name of a Saint in derision, and Proverb
of reproach. Have you the same mind now, that Religion was but a fancy? Is
your Resurrection, and my appearance, but a fancy? Is your punishment
eternally in Hell, like to be bus a fancy? Had you not a sure ground and
bottom for your faith in the Scriptures? Could you have desired more
reasonable evidence of things done before your age? Could you laugh at
Scripture-threatnings; And can you laugh now you are come to Execution? Could
you contemn Gospel-promises; And are they so contemptible now in your eyes,
when now you see the accomplishment of them before you? Against whom was it
that you opened so wide a mouth? Whom was it that you did flout and scorn? What
my Disciples! because they were meek and humble, and did not take the pleasures
of sin with you, and were strict in their profession and conversation: What
think you of them now? Were they so mean-spirited and contemptible? Were they
so foolish, which made so wise a choice? Did they well, or ill, in staying till
this time for their happiness? Look upon the Persons now, whom once you
scorned, and thought unworthie of your company; Was it so rid^culous a thing
to be a Saint, as you imagined? Was not shining with them in glory, at all
desirable? Would not you be glad to be numbered amongst them now? Why do you not
laugh and fleer at the Saints now? Ye fools and blind sots, do you know what
you s^oft at? Could you see no excellency in Holiness, and the Divine Nature,
in my Image, which was engraven upon them? Did ever any Man of understanding
laugh at the light of the Sun? They were lights in the dark World, where they
lived; what mock at Holiness? hereby you mocked at God himself, who is so
infinitely glorious in this attribute, and hereby distinguished from all his
Creatures; vile Wretches! Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

7. Come forth all ye Persecutors of my Disciples; Was it not enough for you
to mock them; but you must persecute them too? Was it not enough to persecute
them with the tongue, but you must persecute them with the hand? What could you
betray them like Judas for a piece of money, or out of malice which was worse?
Could you disturb them in their service and worship of me, when they were
praying for your conversion and salvation? Could you hale and drag them to
Prison, who endeavored to keep you out of the Prison of Hell! Could you seek
the ruin of such as were the best Friends of your souls? when you never
received injury from them; could you be so injurious to them? Do you know whom
ye persecuted? It was m^, it was me whom you persecuted, when you persecuted
my Disciples; it was me whom ye wounded through their sides; it was me you
betrayed in betraying them; it was me ye imprisoned, in imprisoning them; it
was me you spurned at, when ye lifted up the heel against them; and did you
ever think to prosper in this way? You, you have been above all other Persons
upon the Earth, my professed Enemies, and most like your Father the Devil; Come
ye Wretches, gird up your loins like Men; gather your forces together; put on
strength and courage; if you have any; and life up your hand, if you dare
against me; do you find strength to fail you now, and your forces too weak to
niake resistance? and were you so foolish as to engage in battle, where you
might have known, you should certainly be conquered at the last? does your
courage fail you upon the sight of the Captain? and should you not have been
afraid to touch my anointed ones, my lifted Soldiers? You served the Devil,
and fought under his banner against me and mine, and can be deliver you now out
of mine hand? can be defend you against my rage and fury? or would he do it, if
it lay in his power? had you ever more spite and malice against my people,
than the Devil had against you, in setting you about persecution work? did not
he design your ruin herby? did not he think of this day, and on purpose drew
you to this sin, that you might be the more horribly tormented? and does not
be with his Angels wait now for you, that they may drag you unto torments? Take
them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

8. Come forth all ye intemperate and licentious Persons; who have indulged
your slesh, and laid no restraint upon your sensual appetite; who have made
provision for your flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof; but made no provision
for my glory, and took no c^re to fulfill my commands; did you never hear of
such a duty as self-denial, which I required of all my Disciples and
followers? Were you never told that if you followed the inclinations, and
obeyed the commands of carnal self, it would be to your ruin and destruction?
that bitterness and sorrow would be the issue of fleshpleasing? that lust if it
conceived would bring forth sin, and sin when perfected, would bring forth
death? did you never read that if ye lived after the flesh, ye should die,
and that you must, through the spirit, mortify the deeds of the body,
otherwise life and happiness could not be obtained? and yet would you lay the
reins on the neck of your lusts? if you had no faith, had you no reason
neither, to keep you from intemperance? if you did not live like Christians,
would you not live like Men? would you needs be bruits, and live as if you were
all body, and had no souls of such high capacity? were you so blind as not to
see afar off before this day of Judgment, when I should call you to an account?
or to see a little before you, to the day of your death, which would put a
conclusion to all your sensual pleasures? Could you bribe and muzzle
conscience, and lay it asleep whilst you took your pleasures? Could you tread
reason under foot, and resolve you would not be controuled by any light, or
law, or government from your eager prosecution of your carnal delights?

Come forth all ye Gluttons; who have pampered your flesh with delicious food;
but never had the least regard to seed your souls* which had more need; who
have s^e^ many hours and days in feasting your bodies, nourishing your selves
against the day of slaughter; but when you were invited by my Messengers to the
marriage fe^st, to the feast I had prepared for you, of the richest and most
c^stly spiritual dainties; you had no stomach, no appetite, and could not,
would not come; what! did you indeed make your belly your God? and can such a
God save and make you happy? did you think that food which perishes could give
happiness to a never-dying soul? did you not know that both meat and belly
would be destroyed? and that your bodies would become food for worms? and yet
could you make it the chief business of your lives to feed your bodies? you
were allowed food convenient, and something for delight, that your bodies might
serve your souls with strength and vigor, and both their Lord and Master; but
excess you were forbidden, which did distemper both body and mind, and unfit
you for the service of the Lord; and yet would you overcharge your selves? now
reap the fruit of this intemperance, and taste the Gall and W^rm^ood which your
sweet bits are turned into.

Come forth ye Drunkards, who if you have not overcharged your bellies with
excessive eating, yet have often entoxicuted your brains with the fumes of
excessive drinking; who have drowned your understanding, wit and fancy, your
natural parts and ingenuity, which might have rendered you useful in the
Church, or Commonwealth where you lived, and made your selves mere sots by
your drunkenness: and what account can you now give of the talents you were
entrusted withal? what excuse can you find for this sin? were you entited to
it, And overtaken before you were aware? but who could entice you to drink a
potion which would kill your bodies? and was not the death and damnation of
your souls more to be avoided? would you be enticed to that, unto which a very
Beast will not be forced? but were you not forward of your selves to the sin?
did you not like the company well that joined with you therein? did not you
overtake the sin by your desires? did not the liquor please your appetite? did
not you s^^ill it in without persuasion? if you had cen overtaken, would you
have been so often guilty? would you have come so often into the places and
company where you fell into it? was not your chiefest mirth amongst your Cups,
and drunken Companions? were not you melancholic and troubled, when your
meetings of good-fellowship were disappointed? you would have your Cups, and
drink Wine in Bowls, and strong Drink without measure; and now also you shall
have a Cup to drink of, even the Cup of the Wine of the wrath of the angry
Allmighty God; now ye shall drink of the dregs of this Cup, which has ten
thousand times more bitterness in it, than your other Cups have had sweetness.

Come forth all ye Adulterers, you that have neighed like full fed Horses
after your neighbors Wives, and assembled by troops into Harlots houses; or
if not so, have committed this sin in secret corners: was there no shame in
you, to keep you from this nasty, filthy sin? could you delight so much to
wallow in mire and dung? was there no fear in you to restrain you? did not
conscience check and rebuke you, when this lust first conceived in you? did you
never hear that Whorem^ngers and Adulterers God would judge? and did you not
think you should be called to an account for this sin? Could you melt in filthy
sinful pleasures of the flesh, and not consider how you should consume in
torments? were your short pleasures comparable to an eternity of pain and
misery? were there not pleasures of a higher nature, and sweeter relish
attainable in life, if you had forgone and denied your selves unlawful
pleasures? have you not l^st them and the unspeakable eternal joys of Heaven
by your intemperance. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

9. Come forth all ye covetous persons, whose tre^sure, and heart, and hope,
and confidence has been in earthly things; who have made the world your God,
desiring, and loving, and delighting, and trusting in your wealth and riches,
as if they could yield the most contentment, and be the best defense unto you;
whose greatest thoughts, and care, and lab^ur have been spent about getting and
keeping an estate and portion in the world, with little heart to use it for
your selves, much less for the good of others, and glory of God that gave it:
Did you not know that c^vetousness was Idolatry? and that no Idolater shall
have any admittance into the new Jerusalem? Did you not know that the love of
the world was inconsistent with the love of the Father? had you such mean
thoughts of God, that you chose the world before him? were the riches of grace
of so small esteem, that you preferred earthly riches? had the treasures in
heaven no more worth in your account, that you should neglect and disregard
them, and make choice rather of treasures on earth? When you had tried the
world, and found it vain and empty, would you still set your heart upon it?
when you felt such thorny cares, and piercing sorrows in your eager prosecution
of this world, could not this damp and deaden your affection to it? when your
own and other riches sometimes suddenly took flight as upon an Eagles wing, and
left you, could not you forbear, but must fly upon the wing of desire after
them? did you not foresee how naked and bare death would strip you of all? and
yet would nothing wean your whorish heart from the love of the world? were you
never told that riches could not profit you in the day of wrath? is not all
your wealth consumed now? treasures there are indeed prepared for you, but they
are treasures of wrath which your sins have deserved. Take them Devils, bind
them hand and foot.

10. Come forth all ye unmerciful persons; whose bowels have been shut up
against the poor, and needy; who have spoken churlishly to the poor, and looked
upon them a far off; or if you have spoken to them fair, and said to the naked
and destitute of daily food, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and be ye filled;
yet have not given unto them things needful for the body, whatever abundance
you had by you, who have had no pity on my distressed members, so as to
contribute any relief to their necessities; I was hungry, and ye gave me no
meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; I was naked, and ye clothed me
not; I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; I was sick, and you visited me
not; I was in prison, and ye did not administer unto me. 'Did you not
understand it was your duty to relieve the poor? had you not your rickes given
to you for this end? was not this the best use you could put them unto? would
not works of mercy have brought into you the best returns at last? might you
not hereby have laid up for your selves a good foundation against this day? if
you had laid out your estates according to my prescriptions, might not you now
have laid hold on eternal life? were you never forewarned, that such should
have judgment without mercy, that did not show mercy? And you that have had no
mercy ^; forgive, that knew not how to pass by real, or conjectural injuries,
which you have received; th^^ were ready to take your brother by the throat for
^hundred pence, when you might have been forgiven your ten thousand talents
which you owed unto God* were ye never told, that the King of Heaven would
deliver you to the tormentors, if you were unmercifull? Take them Devils, bind
them hand and foot.

11. Come forth all ye unrighteous persons who have wronged Widows, and
Orphans; who howover-reached your Neighbors in your dealings; who have heaped
an estate together by unrighteous practices; who have squeezed and oppressed
the poor, which have had no helper: was not the Law of right written upon your
heart? did you not read it more plainly in the Word? did not men condemn you?
did not your own consciences secretly condemn you for your unrighteousness? and
did not you think that the righteous God would condemn you much more? did you
not know, that no unrighteous person should inherit the Kingdom of Heaven?
that the Lord would avenge himself upon you for this sin? did you wrong others
so much as you have hereby wronged your selves? is the gain of the world
comparable to the loss of your souls? is a little Silver or Gold (now taken
away from you) comparable to the loss of Heaven, and eternal glory? did you
think such faults would be winked at? did you not expect to hear of them again
at the day of Judgment? is it an unrighteous thing to punish you for your
unrighteousness: Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

12. Come forth ye Liars; you who have taught and accustomed your selves to
this sin; who have not only reported lies, but also made them; whose words have
been feigned and deceitful; Did you not know, that God who made you, and to
whom you owed all subjection and obedience, was a God of truth, and that he
required truth? that every man should speak truth to his neighbor? that he
abb^rred lying lips? that he threatened to punish liars with the second death,
and give them their portion in the lake of fire? and had you no fear of God, no
fear of future judgment to restrain you? might you not as easily have spoken
truth, as uttered falsehood? would not you hereby have gained more credit in the
world? would not you have been more fit for society? would not you have had
more peace in your consciences? did you excuse faults by your lies? but was it
not a greater aggravation of them? if you hid them by lies, from men, could you
hide them from God, who searched your heart? did you show kindness to any by
your lies? and did you not injure your selves a thousand fold more? did you
harm others by your lies so much as your selves? Did you not know that the
Devil was the father of lies, and liars? and were you so desirous to be like
him? were you so forward to do him service? Take them Devils, bind them hand
and foot.

13. Come forth all ye slanderers and backbiters; who have walked about with
slanders, and carried about tales unto the reproach and injury of your
neighbors good name; Did you not know it was your duty to endeavor the
preservation of your neighbors reputation as carefully as your own? were you
not commanded to speak evil of none? could you s^^tter others before their
faces, and alter your speech so much when their backs were turned? did not your
own self-contradicting words condemn you? did you find good in backbiting,
and speaking evil of others? did you gain reputation, by wounding others
reputation, or rather did not you give occasion to others to speak as
reproachfully of you? Did you not alienate affection, and separate near friends
by your standers? did you not know many things to be false, which you spoke to
others disparagement? could you with confidence have averred the same things to
the persons themselves? would not they easily have disproved you, and put you
to shame? and if you were privy to some real faults of others, should you not
have concealed them? if you had had real love, would you not have covered them?
did you do as you would be done by? had you not as great faults of your own?
and could you be content to have them blazed abroad? you have accused others
falsely, and now you are accused truly, and you shall be punished justly. Take
them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

14. Come forth all ye proud and ambitious persons; you that have builded your
nests on high; that have taken many dirty steps to get into the seat of honor;
whose hearts have been lifted up with high touring imaginations, and conceits
of your own excellencies, unto the scorning and contempt of others; who have
had proud hearts, and proud looks, and proud speeches, and proud carriage
toward others, especially toward them that have been of meaner degree; who
have looked upon others after off, and have disdained the converse and company
of some, of whom the world has not been worthy: Were you acquainted with no
higher honor and dignity, than the world could give unto you? might you not
have had seats in Heavenly places if you had looked after them, and less after
the other? did you not know that the highest places on the earth were the most
slippery places? did you not foresee the turning of the wheel upon you? did you
not believe that God would cost down the mighty from their seats? that the
higher you were lifted up in dignity, if your hearts were withal lifted up
with pride, the lower and greater would be your fall? And was the favor and
applause of men so desirable? was it not an empty breath, an inconstant wind?
If you had been ambitious, should you not have been ambitious of the favor of
the King of glory, which would have been so beneficial and lasting? And are You
the persons that once were so proud and sornfull? You proud! had you such
reason? Proud, when creatures! depending creatures! who had nothing, but what
was borrowed, and received from God! proud, when such mean creatures! proud,
when fallen! fallen into the dirt, and so defiled! proud, when sinners! sinners
so vile! so full of sores! when you had such loathsome spirits! when you had
such leprous souls! could you lift up the plumes, when you had such black feet?
could you be proud, when you had last Gods Image, and were so like unto foul
devils? proud, when such beggarly sinners! clothed in such filthy rags! proud,
when such slaves, and vassals to the vilest and basest Tyrants! proud in chains
and fetters of Satan, and lust! You had reason indeed to be proud and
scornful, and to look so high, and speak so big, when you were so odious to
God, and such low, mean-spirited miserable wretches, who were drudging in mire
and dirt, and were led by the devil in chains, like dogs, toward the prison of
Hell: you had need scorn the company of my disciples; as if dirty, dunghill
beggars, should scorn the company of highborn noble Princes! you were high in
conceit, but now you shall be debased, and laid low indeed. Take them Devils,
bind them hand and foot.

15. Come forth all ye envious and malicious persons; you that have grieved at
the good of others, which they have had, or done; that have grieved at the good
estates of others, and that they have thrived faster than you in the world;
that have grieved at the sweet and comfortable relations of others, and that
yours have not been like to them; that have grieved at the beauty or strength
of body, the gifts and endowments of mind of others, beyond what your seives
have had; that have grieved at the honor of others, that they have been
esteemed and preferred before your selves; that have grieved because others
have done more good, and been more useful than your selves; and hence have
secretly and deeply hated them, and born malice toward them in your minds; and
have entertained thoughts and desires of doing them some mischief, and were
glad when any mischief did befall them: You, you have been children of the
Devil indeed, and the likeness and lusts of your father you have had: Was your
eye evil, because God was good? did not God put the difference between them and
you? and should not you have been contened? was not God good to you, and had
not you reason to be thankeful? did not you put a stop to the current of Gods
goodness by your envy? did not you lose the comfort of the good things you had,
by this sin? did not you hereby loose the benefit you might have had by the
good things of others? should not you have rejoiced in their good things? if
you had loved them indeed, would not you have done it? did not you rack and
torment your selves by your envy? had you been humble, would you have been
trumbled? had your affections been set upon things above, would this sin have
so much prevailed? had you been sincerely desirous to promote Gods glory, would
you have been so much concerned, that your glory should be clouded, when Gods
glory was advanced, though by others more than your selves? were you not warned
to lay aside all envy and malice, if you would be Christians indeed? if you had
put your spirits under my government, would not I have conquered by my Spirit
their inordinate motions? should not you have found sweetness and comfort in
love, if you had labored after, and lived in the exercise of this grace? Did
you not know that these were works of the flesh which would exclude you the
Kingdom of Heaven? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

16 Come forth all ye wrathful and contentious persons; you that have had fiery
Spirits, and fiery tongues; whose tongues have been like Swords, wherewith you
have lashed and wounded others in your reproachful reviling speeches; who have
had the poison of aspes in your hearts and lips, which has vented it self in
virulent language; whose words have been bitter and clamorous, full of anger
and wrath, and contention; who have been incendiaries in the places where you
have lived, who have disturbed the peace of your families, and turned all
things into uprore and confusion: Did you not know the precepts of the Gospel,
which commanded peace, and gentleness, and meekness, and easiness to be
entreated? did you disturb others peace by your contentions, and did you not
disturb your own? did you raise an uprore in your houses, and was not there a
greater uproar in your hearts? did you not taste the bitterness of such a
conversation, and yet would you persist therein? did not you receive some blows
and wounds by your contention sometimes; and yet would you not hearken to such
rebukes? were you angry with others without just cause, and was there not good
reason that God should be angry with you? was not the fire of your tongues
kindled by the fire of Hell? and is it unreasonable that you should be thrust
into the place of burning for your contention? Take them Devils, bind them
hand and foot.

17. Come forth all ye civil and moral persons, who have had moral
righteousness, and been upright in your dealings, but wholly strangers unto the
power of godliness; who have observed some Precepts of the second Table of the
Law in reference to your selves and others externally; but have grossly
neglected the duties of the first Table, which have had reference to God; who
have had no knowledge of God, nor fear of him, nor love to him, nor delight in
him; who have never sanctified his name or day in your hearts, nor worshipped
him in a spiritual manner according to the prescriptions of his words; who
never yielded obedience to the Gospel, never saw your need of me, and obtained
interest and acquaintance with me, what ever calls and opportunities you had:
and do you think I should know you, and own you now, when you are none of mine?
will your moral righteo^sness stand you now in any stead, when you are to give
so strict an account? did not I tell you in my word, that unless your
righteousness did exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
should in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? that you must be born
again, or else you could not be saved? that you must be holy, or else you could
not be happy? did you not hear of the young man, who had as much moral
righteousness as you, and yet mist of Heaven, because he would not obey my
other commands? has your moral righteousness been so perfect, that it has had
no flaw? have you lived free from sin, in regard of the second Table of the
Law, besides your breaches of the first? will not Conscience tell you of some
slips, some stumbles and falls, as to your external walking? were you never
guilty of unrighteous dealing? never distempered your selves with drink? never
were lustful and wanton? never told any lies, nor uttered any slanders? and if
you have been fair in your outward carriage and converse, have you not had ^oul
insides? had you not need of pardon for your sins, and my blood to wash you
from your filthiness? have not the best of your works been sinful, in regard
of the principal, and end, and manner of performance? did you think the works
of nature would save you, when the works of grace cannot, without the
imputation of my righteousness, because of their imperfection? must not Gods
Justice be satisfied for your sins? and how do you think it should be done, but
by your eternal punishment in Hell? had you believed in me, and yielded
obedience to me, my righteousness should have been yours, and then you might
have held up your Heads with joyful expectation of glory on this day; but you
cleaved to your own righteousness, and were well and whole, and did not see
your need of me to be your Physician and Savior, and would not submit unto,
and accept of my righteousness, and what have you to say, why judgment should
not pass upon you? did you think such works as yours would satisfy Justice,
when if you had done better, and kept the whole Law for the greatest part of
your life, yet you had done but your duty, and the sins of your youth were
enough to sink you into Hell; but was any of your righteousness perfect? did
you think to merit Heaven by such works? do you think you deserve a Crown of
Glory for your civility, or morality? where have you a promise of it? and if
you had no promise, could you think you should ever attain it? what, is your
mouth stopped, and are you speechless now? Take them Devils, bind them hand and
foot.

18. Come forth all ye Hypocrites. who have made a show of Holiness; and have
born the name of zealous Professors of Religion; but have been acted by carnal
designs and principles; who have used religion as a Cloak for your
covetousness; who followed me only for the loaves, who have been hollow at
heart; rotten at the Core; painted Sepulchers; blazing Comets; wandering and
falling Stars, for whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever: what did you
mean by your shows and outward appearance of worship and service? did you
think that the all-seeing, heart-searching God, judged according to outward
appearance? did you think that lip-service, and bodily exercise would be
accepted by him? or was it acceptance only with Men which you sought after?
that reward you had, and can you expect any other reward, when you did not
desire it, nor design it? and what does it, can it now profit you, that Men
accounted you religious? will their esteem of you procure pardon and salvation
for you? could you be content to cast away and loose all your external services
for want of sincerity, and an internal living principle? did not you think that
all your services would rise up one day in judgment against you? did not you
affront the highest Majesty by the mockery of your shew-worship? did not be
very well understand which way your heart went, when you seemed must devout?
was not be acquainted with the secret lusts which you harbored in your heart,
and secret way of wickedness which you walked in, when you made a show of
mortification, and self-denial, and a holy, and strict conversation? were you
not warned against hypocrisy, and told how odious it was unto God, and that
hypocrites portion would be in utter darkness, where there is weeping, and
weiling, and gnashing of teeth? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

19. Come forth all ye Back-sliders and Apostates from me and my ways; You
that turned back to ways of profaneness, and open wickedness, after some time
of profession, and joining your selves with my people; was my service so
burdensome that you could endure it no longer? was the way to Heaven so
unpleasant, that you would walk no longer therein? after some trial in show of
me, did you prefer and make choice of the Devil before me? after some washing
your selves, would you wallow in the mire again? after heaving some vomit off
of your stomach, would you again lick it up? after some sweepings and dressings
would you open the door, and let in seven worse spirits to defile your hearts?
after you seemed to be escaped, were you again entangled? would you needs put
your foot again into the snare, and bind your selves in fresh bonds of sin?
did you prefer the company of the wicked which were going Hell-ward, before the
company of my people, which were going Heavenward? could not you now wish that
you had held on, and held out with them unto the end? would not you have
rejoiced if you had now been found in their society? did you repent of your
repenting, and do you not now repent of your backslidings? were not you told,
if you drew back, my Soul would have no pleasure in you?

And you that have turned aside from me and my ways, into ways of error,
that sucked in damnable Heresies from faise Teachers. Did you not know that
there were damnable Heresies, as well as other damnable sins? were you not
warned that Satan sometimes appeared as an Angel of light? would you so
quickly turn aside after some workings and strivings of my spirit with you, and
some hopes which you gave of your conversion and reformation? did not you
perceive how Satan lay upon the catch, so soon as you began to be awakened, to
prejudice you against the truth, and draw you aside in another way to serve
him? did you not understand the mysteries of his delusions? if you had heartily
loved the truth as it was in me, would you have been so deluded? was not deep
humiliation and mortification of every last too hard a Doctrine, and therefore
you chose such as would give you more scope, and liberty, and shroud your lusts
under some other name, and term your hatred and anger against my people by the
name of zeal for my glory? did you think if you gave Satan one hold, that it
would not be sufficient to undo you? had you stuck close to my Ministry and
Ordinances, would you have been so deluded? did you think your selves wiser
than my Ministers, so soon as you got a little glimmering of light? could you
so readily open your ear to slanders, and receive prejudices against them,
through Satan's and his Instruments persuasions, to the shipwracking of your
own Souls? did you not find how wavering and unsteady you were, how like
Children tossed too and fro with every wind of Doctrine, when once you forsook
my Ministry, which I appointed for your establishment? did you conceit that you
might live above Ordinances in the World? did you imagine to get into a higher
form, when you went forth of my School? and when you expected perfection most,
were not you more imperfect than before? when you fancied a clearer light, were
not you most full of darkness? when you thought your selves so holy, as none
like you, and none must be holy but those of your way; were not you most
unholy, and like a smoke in my nostrils? could I accept of your worship out of
the way of my Ordinances and Institutions? when you thought your selves must
guided and acted by the spirit, was it not a spirit of delusion? did my spirit
lead you, and act you in a way which my word did not allow of? were not you the
renders and ^^^rers of my Church? was it not by reason of you that the ways of
truth were evil spoken of by evil Men? were not those without prejudiced
against my very ways, because of your delusions, which made so forward a
profession? suppose I permitted some of mine to mistake in circumstantials, was
this a just excuse for your errors in fundamentals, when the word was open for
you to inform your selves in the truth? did not you wrest the Scriptures to
your own destruction? suppose you denied your selves some things, were they
those things that I commanded: suppose you suffered some things in your way, do
you hope for a reward for sufferings, which I never called you unto, and which
did but so much the more harden your party, and promote your delusion? did you
know what a snare you were hampered in, so soon as you put your foot into the
way of error, and turned aside from that old strait, narrow way of my Word and
Ordinances, which have brought so many to Heaven? were not you in a greater
unlikelihood of being called effectually, than Drunkards and Adulterers, and
the most vicious, who lay more naked to the blow of the Word, and were more
ready to receive instruction? you were more forward to reprove my Ministers,
than to receive my Ministers, and conviction from them; you could call them
Antichristian, and false Prophets, though they adheared to and maintained
nothing, but the truths of my word; and when I gave them so many seals of their
Ministry in the conversion of many Souls; you could call them self-seekers and
hirelings, though they gave such evidences of self-denial, and many of them
forsook all that they had, rather than they would make a breach upon their
consciences; you could, some of you, emrench upon their office, though you had
no call, nor commission from me; you had the Scripture to discover to you the
right way, but you shut your eyes against the light, and ch^se ways of
darkness, and is it not sit that you should go to the place of darkness. Take
them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

20. Come forth all ye Impenitent Persons and Unbelievers, all ye that have
not yielded obedience to the Gospel; were you not called to repentance by
Ministers, and the spirit in Ordinances? and when a stiller voice was not
heard, were you not called louder by God in his Judgments? did you not know,
that except you repented, you would certainly perish? that iniquity would be
your ruin, unless your heart were broken for it and from it, and yet were you,
though you lay under the guil^ of so much sin, could you be so impenitent and
hard-hearted? were not you called to me by the voice of the Gospel? did not I
call you and stretch out my hand all the day long to you? did not I stand at
the door of your heart, and wo^ hard for entertainment? and yet could you shut
the door against me, though you had so much need of me? had you not commands,
and encouragements to believe? could you rationally desire firmer ground and
footing for your faith? did not you give God the lie by your unbelief? have you
not hereby fastened the guilt of all your other sins upon your selves, which I
was willing to take off from you? would any sin against the Law have condemned
you, had you turned from it, and yielded obedience to the Gospel? were you not
foretold of the wrath to come, and yet would you not fly from it? were you not
pr^ffered a Savior, and yet would you not accept of him? had you not treasures
opened before you, end would you not look after them? were you not shown the
way to Heaven, and would not you walk in it? how can you escape, that have been
guilty of disobedience to the Gospel? Take them Devils, bind them hand and
foot.

Christ at the day of Judgment will convict the whole ungodly World, especially
those who have lived under the sound of the Gospel; their crimes will be made
manifest and evident, and every mouth will be stopped, when they are found
guilty before him, and they cannot deny it: then the wicked will be speechless
and stand after their full conviction like so many Rogues in Chains before the
Judge: And think now with your selves what the behavior of the wicked will be,
when they are thus convicted of their sins, and are ready to receive their
sentence; I believe some of you have seen Malefactors at the Bar, when the Jury
has found them guilty, and the Judge has been proceeding to give the sentence
of Death, how their countenances have changed, and their joints trembled, and
unexpressible horror seized upon them; but O the dread and terror that will
be upon the spirits of the wicked, when they are convicted of sin by this
Judge! and with what trembling expectations will they wait for their sentence!

7. And this is the seventh particular to spea^ concerning the Sentence, which
the Lord Jesus Christ will pass upon the wicked in Judgment, see Matthew. 25. 41.
Then shall he say unto them on his left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Depar^ from me! ye
that have formerly said in your hearts unto me, Depart, we will not have thee
(...) reign over us: that have said to my Minister^ Depart, we will not hearken
to your words; that have said to my Spirit depart, we will not yield to thy
motions. Now depart! depart from me, ye that would not come unto me; ye have
often been called and invited to come, but ye refused, now depart! ye shall
not have one Call more; you shall not have one proffer of grace more for ever;
Depart! never shall ye hear my voice any more; never shall ye see my face any
more* Depart! be gone out of my sight: Depart from m^ ye cursed! as ye cared
not for blessing, so sha^^ it be far from you; as ye loved cursing, so shall it
be unto you; Depart with the curse of the Law, with the curse of the great God
upon you; let the curse of God cloathe you like a garment, and bind you like a
chain; let it enter into your flesh and bones like Oil, to enrage so much the
more the flames of Hell about you; and let it pierce into your soul, and fill
you with horrible anguish; Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire. Ye
shall not depart into your old habitation to spend an eternity in sinful
sensual pleasures; no, Depart into torments, Depart into Fire, into the fire of
Hell; into the burning Lake; into Tophet ordained of old for you, into a stream
of Fire and Brimstone, enkindled by the breath of God; Depart into everlasting
Fire; Go dwell with devouring Fire, and inhabit everlasting burnings: Depart
into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels; ye served the
devil and diverse lusts, whilst you lived in the world; now go and live with the
Devil and his angels in Hell fire for ever, partake of the torments, primarily
prepared for him, and belonging also to you, because ye belonged to his Kingdom.

And when the sentence is irreversibly pronounced by the Judge upon the wicked,
O what direful shreeks will they give forth! With what horror will they cry
out, How shall we be able to endure the devouring flames, and everlasting
burnings of Hell!

Thus have I done with the Judgment it self, both of the righteous and the
wicked, at the appearance of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. IX.
2. THe second thing is to speak of the execution of the Sentence pronounced
upon both in Judgment, which you have spoken of together, Matthew. 25. 46. And
these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life
eternal.

1. Concerning the execution of the Sentence on the wicked. These shall go away
into everlasting punishment. Here I shall speak, 1. Of the wickeds going away.
2. Of their going into punishment.


The former does imply the punishment of loss, the latter their punishment of
sense.

1. The wicked, when the Sentence is pronouned, shall go away; and here I shall
show, 1. From whom they shall go away. 2. From what they shall go away. 3. The
aggravations, or vexing considerations, which Gospel-sinners will have in their
going away.


1. From whom the wicked shall go away.

1. They shall go away from Jesus Christ; the righteous are at his side, and
shall remain with him; but the wicked shall go away from him; the righteous
shall go with him, and abide with him, where he is, there they shall be also;
they shall be for ever with the Lord; but the wicked, must go away, and be
eternally separated from his presence. The righteous shall behold his glory,
and share in it; they shall see the smiles of his face, and be entertained by
him with unexpressible love; but the wicked shall be thrust out of his presence
with frowns and indignation; it will be one great part of the misery of the
wicked, that they shall go away from so glorious a person as the Lord Jesus
Christ.

2. They shall go away from the Saints; now some of them are mingled with Gods
people, the Tares and the Wheat grow up together; the sheep and the goats feed
in the same pasture; and though it was bitter to the wicked to dwell with the
righteous, because of the contradiction, which was in their lives, to their
lusts; yet then it will be more bitter to them to be excluded their society,
because then they will perceive their excellency with admiration: when they see
them shine with such beauty, and rejoice with Songs of triumph, and they must
be gone away from them; this will fill their hearts with racking envy, and
torment them unspeakably.

2. From what the wicked shall go away; they shall go away from happiness, from
the happiness of heaven; the doors of heaven shall be shut upon them; they
shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and many come from the East, and the
West, and the North, and the South, even an innumerable multitude of all
kindreds, and Nations, and Tongues, and enter in and sit down in the Kingdom of
God, and themselves thrust out, and thrust down to Hell.

3. Concerning the aggravations, or vexing considerations, which Gospel sinners
will have in their going away; as the sin of those is more heinous, who sin
against the light of the Gospel, than of those who sin only against the light
of nature: so their punishment will be more severe; all shall be beaten, but
these persons with many stripes; as there will be degrees in glory; though all
will be filled with glory, yet some will have a larger capacity: so there will
be degrees of torment and misery, all shall be filled with torment, but some
will have a larger capacity, especially Gospel sinners will have stings beyond
what heathens will be capable of in their punishment of loss; when

1. They shall have a clear discovery of the glory and happiness which they
have missed; now they hear of heaven and the happiness which the Saint^ shall
have in the vision and fruition of God; but there is a vail of unbelief upon
their minds, that they do not apprehend such a happiness as is spoken of; they
have mean thoughts of God, and of Heaven: they think there is no heaven like
the earth; and no happiness like the fruition of the creatures; no glory like
the glory of the world, no treasures like earthly treasures; and no delights
like those which they find in the objects of their sense: but when their
portion in this life shall be spent; and the good things which they enjoyed
shall be taken away from them; when their honors shall vanish like smoke, or a
thin vapor; their riches shall fly away like an Eagle, or sail like a ship
out of their ^ight; when their sensual delights and pleasures shall fail them,
and die like sweet flowers in their hands; when the bright cloud of earthly
things, which shadowed the glory of heavenly things from their view, shall be
blown away, and the vail shall be torn in pieces which was before them, and
hindered them from looking into the Holy of Holies; and the scales shall fall
off from their eyes: In a word, when the heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth, with the
works thereof shall be burnt up; and they shall be awakened out of their long
sleep in their graves, and shall be summoned before the tribunal seat of
Christ, and stand there stripped and quite naked of all their enjoyments in the
world, which they had set their hearts upon; and they shall be examined and
condemned for their sins; then, then their eyes will be opened, and they will
clearly see their mistake of happiness; then they will perceive and be fully
persuaded of the fullness of joy and unspeakable pleasures at the right hand of
God, the least taste of which would ravish their hearts ten thousand times more
than all the full draughts, which they have taken in the sweetest of all their
sinful delights: I say, they shall see this happiness, and that which will vex
them to the heart will be, that they shall only see it, not enjoy the least
share in it. O what high apprehensions will they then have of the glory of
Heaven; they will see the Crown which will be put upon the head of the
righteous, which will have more worth then in their esteem, than all the Crowns
and Scepters of the greatest Kings upon the earth; then they will be clearly
convinced that the choicest treasures were in Heaven, and the sweetest delights
were to come, and the thoughts of missing this Crown and glory, such treasures
and sweetness, will tear their very hearts: they must go away from heaven and
happiness.

2. In going away they shall remember the capacity which they had once of
obtaining this happiness; if they had been bruits indeed, and had capacity for
a sensitive life only; and grace and glory had been removed so far beyond their
reach, that it had been impossible for them to attain it; it would not much
trouble them to lose it, whatever other miseries they should endure; but they
were capable of the beginnings of Heaven in the life of grace, and the
completing of their happiness in glory; they will remember that they had souls
endued with reason, and hereby advanced to a higher capacity than beasts; that
they had minds capable of divine contemplation, and hearts capable of divine
affection; that they had wills which might have chosen God for their portion,
and Heaven for their heritance; that they had desires, and loves, and hopes,
and joys, which if they had wrought-god-ward, and Christ-ward, as they did
toward the creature, if they had wrought upward, and heavenward, as they did
downward and toward the earth, and earthly things, they might have been happy
for ever; they will see that others, who had the same natures, as they had, and
were guilty at first of as great sins, as they had committed, yet repented and
turned, believed and reformed, were changed and saved; and with unexpressible
vexation they will think that thus it might have been with them, if they had
not been fools, if they had seriously endeavored to fill up the capacity, which
God has given them.

3. In g^ing away they will remember the proffers which they had of this
happiness; that they lived in places where the light did shine, and the Gospel
did sound, and Christ was preached and tendered with all the benefits of his
purchase; they will remember how often they were called to repent, how
earnestly they were entreated to be reconciled; they will remember the
discoveries, which were made to them of future glory, and the invitations which
they had to come unto Christ that they might have pardon and life, and partake
of the inheritance of the Saints in light; all which was little regarded by
them; they will remember how long, and how loud Christ knocked at the door of
their hearts for entertainment; that he knocked by such a Sermon, such a motion
of the Spirit, by such a judgment, such an affliction, such a deliverance; and
yet that they barred the door, deafned the ear, and if they did not fully
resolve to keep him out, yet they put him off with such redious delays, until
on a sudden death knocked at their door and broke it open, and dragged them away
to Hell before they had given entertainment unto Jesus Christ, and had provided
an eternal habitation for their souls: they will then remember the
opportunities and seasons of grace, which once they enjoyed; that once they had
a Day, a Day of grace, and that with some of them it was a long Summers day;
and that they had calls at the first hour, and the third hour, and the ninth
hour, and at the eleventh hour, and that all the day long God stretched forth
his hand unto them; but they did not know the day of their visitation; they
were more foolish than the Crane and the Stork, and the Swallow, they did not
understand their appointed time; they did not mind the things which belonged to
their peace, until they were hid from their eyes; they slept in the harvest,
they loitered away, and sinned away their time, and wasted their day, in which
they should have made provision for their souls: O how will they be then ready
to tear themselves in pieces, that they should neglect so great salvation, in
the day when salvation was attainable? yea, that they should refuse the
proffers of grace, and pardon and peace, and life and happiness, which in that
day were so frequently and earnestly made unto them: then they will wish that
they had opened their ear and heart, that they had regarded and accepted such
gracious proffers, whatever they had neglected or parted withal: then they
will wish they had embraced and improved the opportunities which once they had
for prayer, and hearing, and attendance upon Gods Ordinances; that they had
been in the Church, when they were in the Alehouse; that they had associated
themselves with Gods people, when they frequented the company of the lewd, and
ungodly; that they had been upon their knees with grief confessing sin; when
they took so much delight in the commission of it; that they had taken time
from their sports to make their peace with God; that they had worshipped God in
their Closets, and worshipped God in their Families, and laid up for themselves
treasures in Heaven; and horrible will their vexation be that they did not so.

4. In going away, they will remember for what it was that they refused this
happiness; that it was only for the satisfaction of some foolish and
unprofitable lust: If two Kingdoms of equal worth and glory were proposed to a
Man's choice, it would not trouble him that he had refused the one, to obtain
the other; but if a Man were to choose whether he would be a King or a slave; if
he should refuse the former, and choose the later, when he came to feel the
misery of his bondage, this would trouble him, more than the bondage, that he
might have avoided it, that he has chose this thraldom, and parted with a
Kingdom for it: they will then perceive that they have chosen to be slavesunto
sin, and Satan, rather than to be Heirs unto the Kingdom of Glory; I know
that though now they are slaves, and serve diverse lusts, and though their
bondage is a thousand fold worse, than if they were Vassals to the cruellest
Tirant upon Earth; yet they are not sensible, neither are they weary of their
bondage; because their wills are in thraldom, and their affections are
captivated; and though heirdome to the glory of Heaven, be the choicest
privilege upon Earth, and most desirable; yet they do not desire it, but
prefer their slavery before it; because they are blind, unbelieving, besorted
sinners, and judge of things according to sense; yet on the day of Christ's
appearance, all things will appear with a new face, and they will look upon
things with a new eye; they will then perceive that they were slaves all their
days; and that there was no such drudgery as that which they were employed in;
and that there was no such glory and happiness, as that which they refused, and
foolishly cast away; then it will sting them indeed to remember that they have
chosen rather to do the work of the Devil, and yield obedience to the basest
lusts, for which they must now be repayed with the wages of death and eternal
misery, than to do the work of the Lord, who would have rewarded them with
eternal life, and a Crown of glory and immortality. Then they will say, What
profit have we got by those things, whereof we are now ashamed! What fruit does
all our labor and toil in the World now yield unto us? What are we the better
for our riches and great estate on Earth, for our honor, and high esteem
amongst men, for our luscious pleasures and delights, (now vanished and gone)
which we bought at so dear a rate, as the loss of our precious and immortal
souls, and the forfeiture of an Inheritance in the kingdom of Heaven? Then
they will cry out, O bewitching World! O deluding Devil! O deceitful hearts
and lusts! O what fools and madmen have we been, that we should trample Jewels
under our feet like Swine, and in stead of them, put dross and dung into our
Cabinet! that we should so greedily drink the sweet poison of sin to the bane
and ruin of our souls; and refuse to taste of the Cup of salvation, which all
our days was held forth unto us! Then they will cry out of their
voluptuousness, their covetousness, their pride and haughtiness, and the like
lusts, which have kept Christ out of their hearts, and kept them out of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

5. In going away, some of them shall remember how nearly they missed of this
happiness; that they were almost persuaded to be Christians, in deed as well as
in name, and to accept of Christ upon his own terms; that they were not far
from the Kingdom of Heaven; that they were come even within fight of the
Heavenly Canaan, and yet died in the Wilderness; that they were come even to
the Gate of the new Jerusalem, but finding it too strait for them, and the
luggish of their sins together, there they stuck and could not enter in; that
they climbed up a great way of the Hill to Zion, but did not reach the top, and
tumbling down, their fall was the greater; they will remember the means of
grace which they enjoyed; the Ordinances which they sat under; and the
treaties which the Lord did make with them by his word and spirit, about their
life and salvation; and the carriage of their hearts toward the Lord in those
treaties; some of them will remember what convictions the Lord wrought in them
of sin, and what tremblings of conscience, for fear of Hell and wrath to come;
and if they had followed that preparative work, they might have quickly been
acquainted with Christ, and escaped the misery which they feared; but they
^tifled convictions, and shook off their troubles, they shut their eyes against
the light, and stilled the noise of their consciences, and calmed their spirits
with the delights and pleasures of the World; and so grew more hardened in sin
than before, and gave such repulses to the spirit, that the spirit quite
departed from them: Others will remember that they were persuaded to ascend
some steps higher, under the Ministry of the Word: when they were reproved for
such and such gross sins, which they lived in the practice of, that they could
have no ease in their consciences, until they had broken off that wicked
course; that they left off their drunkenness and their swearing, their
uncleanness, and unrighteous dealing; and were in a great measure reformed in
their lives; but there were some lusts in their hearts which they hugged
secretly, and delighted in, and could not be persuaded to leave, which were
their undoing: pride, revenge, uncharitableness, covetousness, or the like
remained in their reigning power, which were inconsistent with the power of
godliness: others will remember what profession they made, and that they went
with some kind of gladness in the company of Gods people, unto his House and
Ordinances, and heard the Word, and received some impressions thereof; yea
obtained some kind of graces under its influence; that they had a kind of
righteousness, repentance, faith, desires, love, joy, hope, that they had some
tastes of the heavenly gift, and the powers of the World to come, and thought
themselves as fair for Heaven as the best, and who ever missed, that they
should not miss of glory: but O the confusion and vexation, which will be upon
the spirits of these Persons when the Lord Jesus shall disown them, and shut
them out of his Kingdom^; O what tearings of heart will they have, when they
perceive that they were mistaken, and find themselves disappointed of the
happiness which they had such hopes of, and confident expectations to obtain:
when they find that their silver was but dross, and their graces were
counterfeit, and not of the right stamp, that they had not the Image and
superscription of Christ upon them; when they remember that they had a
righteousness, but it was like the morning Cloud, which the wind of affliction
or temptation had driven away; that they had some repentance, but it was leg^l,
not Evangelical; that the tears they had sometimes shed for sin, were like the
early dew, which the bright Sun of prosperity did quickly dry up; that they had
a faith, but it was a temporary faith, which wanted deep rooting in the heart
and what ever flourishing fruit it quickly sent forth* yet the hot Sun of
persecution did wither it, that i^ came to nothing when they were put upon the
Trial; that they had desires after Christ, and the favor of God and spiritual
things; but they we^^ but faint velleities, they were like the untimely birth
of a Woman, which never came to any perfection; that they had love to God in
show, or it may be at some time a passionate glow of heart under an Ordinance,
which was not enkindled by a spark falling down from Heaven upon them, blown up
by the spirit of God; but a false or more inferior Fire, which arose from a
sympathy with Ministers or other Christians in the more inferior workings and
expressions of their love, which in the sincere arose from the right principle;
that they had some kind of hope, but it was like a spiders web, broken quickly
to pieces, or swept down by the beesome of destruction with them into Hell;
that they had some joys; but they were flashy and ungrounded; some tastes
arising from misapprehensions of Gospel-priviledges, and misapplication of
Gospel-promises, all which did quickly vanish and come to nothing: They will
find, if not before, be sure at that day that they were mistaken, and have
lost all their pains and labor, for want of a through work of grace; for want
of soundness at the root; for want of hearty sorrow, deep humiliation;
good-grounded, and deep^rooted faith: supreme love; well-bottom'd hope;
universal reformation and mortification of the deeds of the body; that none of
their actions were accepted by the heart-searching God for want of a right
principle and end; now when these Persons are sentenced to Hell, and are going
away from Christ and the glory which once they had hopes of, and were so near
unto, and had they gone but a step or two further, they might have attained, O
with what unconceivable grief and curtings of heart will it be? they will
remember then that they did seek to enter in at the strait Gate, and they will
wish with all their hearts that they had striven, that they had taken more
pains, that they might not have missed and fallen short of salvation: possibly
then with unutterable anguish they may say, There is a glorious Inheritance in
Heaven, which we are now, departing from, we often prayed for it when we were
upon the Earth; and if we had been sincere and fervent, if we had resolved to
take the place by storm and would not have been denied, we might have got it;
we have read of it in the Word, and heard of it in Sermons, and it has been
proffered to us freely; and if we had renounced the World, and forsaken sin,
and chosen it for our portion, we might have had it; we parted with some sins,
if we had left all, it should have been ours; once we had some hopes of it,
when we had some taste of it, and had done some things to obtain it; and if we
had gone a little further, we might have indeed obtained it; if we had taken
pains with our hearts before God to get them raised to things above; if we had
denied our selves, and mortified our members upon the Earth; if we had cast
away all our transgressions, and c^st away our own righteousness, and rolled
our selves wholly upon Jesus Christ, and acted faith upon him and the promises
of this Kingdom, and walked in the narrow way which we seemed to walk in, we
might now have been made passessours hereof, and shined amongst yonder glorious
Saints, some of whom were our companions, and hoped for our company, and wonder
to see us separated from them; But alas we were sloathfull and careless; we
were unwatchfull and idle; our pains was more to appear religious, than be
religious; we had some lusts which lay nearer our heart than Jesus Christ; we
did some things with seeming vigor, but carnal motives were the chief
incentives to our duties; and how ever lifeless, faithless, and empty of true
grace they were, yet we trusted in them, and made them our Savior, and never
were brought clear off from our own bottom, unto a closure with Jesus Christ,
and we have fooled away our salvation, and made our selves unworthy of eternal
life. Deservedly, deservedly do we lose this crown; for our folly! O that we
had been sincere, and thorough Christians!

6. In going away it will sting the wicked to think that now this happiness of
Heaven is irrecoverable, once they might have obtained it, and that upon easy
terms; yea after some refusals of it they had fresh proffers and invitations;
the door of mercy, and gate of salvation and glory stood open a long time; but
now the door is looked upon them, and will never be opened more; they must go
away without any hopes of ever entering into the new Jerusalem, or obtaining
the least degree of the happiness of the Saints; they must bid adieu unto joy
and comfort for ever. These considerations will sting Gospel-sinners in their
going away.

Thus concerning the first particular in the execution of the sentence on the
wicked, they shall go away.

2. They shall go into punishment, and here I shall speak, 1. Of the punishment
which they shall go into. 2. Of their entering into this punishment.


1. Concerning the punishment which the wicked shall go into. Take two or three
places of Scripture which set forth this punishment, Matthew. 25. 41. D^p^rt ye
cursed into everlasting Fire, Mark 9. 43, 44. Then to go into Hell, where their
worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched. Rev. 14. 10, 11. They shall drink
of the Wine of the wrath of God, which shall be poured out, without mixture,
into the Cup of his indignation, and be tormented with Fire and Brimstone, and
the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever. The punishment then
will be Gods wrath, which the damned shall drink of, so as to feel the
immediate impressions thereof upon their souls; and Fire and brimstone kindled
by the breath of God, the impression whereof they shall feel upon their bodies;
but what tongue can express the punishment of the wicked in Hell? if some
expressions in Scripture concerning it be metaphorical, surely they fall short
of what the real punishment will be; the drops and sprinklings of Gods wrath
here are but small in comparison with the Ocean, which the wicked shall be cast
into: the top of the Cup has nothing of the bitterness which they will find
in the dregs: never was there such a Fire on Earth, as the Fire of Hell;
never was there such a pain endured by those which have undergone the more
exquisite torments; as the pains and torments which shall be inflicted
hereafter upon the damned. Yet, though we are not able here to conceive how
dreadful this punishment will be, we may conceive it to be unexpressibly more
dreadful than any punishment on Earth; if we consider, 1. The Inflicter of it.
2. The subject of it. 3. The properties of it.


1. Concerning the Inflicter of the punishment which the wicked shall go into,
and that will be the most holy, just, powerful, and sin-revenging God; the
wicked will then fall into his hands immediately, and O how fearful a thing
will it be to fall into the hand of the living God? Heb. 10. 31. Wicked men now
have no fear of God before their eyes; though their sins and affronts to God be
great; and his anger and displeasure against them be great; yet because his
goodness and patience toward them is also great; because he keeps silence, and
does not speedily execute his vengeance upon them; therefore they are secure,
and insensible of his displeasure; and have slighter thoughts, and lesser fear
of him, than of weak dying worms like themselves: but when their eyes shall be
opened, at the last day, and a discovery of God shall be made unto them in his
infinire Majesty, and greatness, and power, and holiness, and fiery indignation
against them: O how fearful then will it be to fall into his hands? It will be
very sweet to fall into the arms of his Love; but very dreadful to fall into
the hands of his displeasure; when God does execute his vengeance himself, he
will do it very terribly, especially if we consider,

1. That he will glorify his infinite wisdom in the punishment of the damned,
which will contrive such tortures for them, that if all the men in the world
should join their wits together, and take to their help all the Devils in hell,
they could not invent the like; dreadful ingredients will his wisdom find out
to put into the cup, which he will put into the hand of the wicked to drink.

2. That he will glorify his infinite power, he will make bare his arm, and
smite with an infinite force; the blow of a child will take little impression,
but if a Goliath smite with a Goliah's sword, he will smite to the ground; the
weightier the hand, the heavier the stroke; there is more difference between
the power of God and the strongest creatures, than between the strongest
creature and the weakest child; It would be dreadful to be delivered up to the
power of some strong fierce and cruel creatures: what will it be to be
delivered up to the power of the omnipotent and most furious God. God will
glorify the power of his anger in the destruction of the wicked, Romans 9. 31.
What, if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, etc. God
will show what his power can do in the punishing of the wicked; his last work
of power in punishing, will be as glorious as his first work of power in
creating; and he will glorify the power of his anger in hell, as he will
glorify his goodness and love in heaven; in heaven he will open the treasures
of his love, and in hell he will open the treasures of his wrath. God will
inflict the punishment.

2. Concerning the subject of the punishment which the wicked shall go into,
and that will be both soul and body.

1. The souls of the wicked will be punished; not only with the loss of the
glorious and comfortable presence of God, and the happiness of heaven; but also
I conceive that they will be fille^ with anguish through the impressions of
Gods wrath upon them; they will be filled up to the brim with the fierce wrath
of God; the Arrows of the Almighty will be shot up to the head in them, and
pierce them through and through; we read Romans 2. 8, 9. Of indignation and wrath,
tribulation, and anguish, which at the day of wrath shall be upon every soul
that does evil. The impressions of Gods indignation and wrath on the soul will
effect tribulation and anguish: such wounds they will have in their spirits, as
will be unsupportable, such tribulation as will be horrible, such anguish as is
inconceivable, when the hand of the Lord is upon them, when they see the frowns
of his brow; when he strikes them with the blow of his anger. Christ tasted the
bitterness of Gods wrath in his soul, for the sins of others, which caused his
bloody sweat in the garden, and such roarings upon the cross: O how bitter will
the wrath of God be to the wicked, when their souls taste of it for their own
sins; It will be Gods wrathful presence, which the souls of the damned will
feel the impressions of, which will make Hell to be Hell, as it will be the
glorious and comfortable presence of God, which the souls of the righteous will
feel the impressions of, which will make Heaven to be Heaven.

2. The bodies of the wicked shall be punished, they have been sharers in sin,
and they must share in torment; they must lie in the Lake of fire and
brimstone, Rev. 21. 8. the torment of the bodies of the wicked will be
dreadful; besides the impression which the anguish of soul will make upon them,
they will have their own proper torment, through the sense of the fire which
will be kindled about them, and burn more horribly than Londons fire did, when
it had got into the heart of the City; their torment will be greater than if
scalding lead were poured into their bowels; than if they were torn in pieces
with wild horses; than if their breasts were ripped up, and their heart were
plucked out with burning pincers; it will be worse than if they were cast into a
caldron of boiling pitch or lead; or put into Phalaris Bull, or Nebuchadnezzars
fiery Furnace: the torture of the damned's bodies will be far beyond the
sharpest pain now incident to humane nature by racking diseases, or have been
inflicted upon any of the children of men by the most cruel tyrant; for the
bodies of the wicked when raised again, will be strengthened unto a greater
capacity for punishment, when they will be made incorruptible and immortal, and
punishment will be the end of their resurrection; but more of this punishment
under the properties.

3. Concerning the properties of the punishment which the wicked shall go into.

1. It will be universal, it will not only be in soul and body, but also in
every part of both: in every faculty of the soul, in every member of the body:
O the black thoughts! the dismal apprehensions! the grisly fancies! the heavy
griefs! the sinking fears! the dreadful terrors! the hellish gripes! the utter
despair! the horrible anguish, and confusion! which the soul will have, when
the wrath of God shall be poured in upon it like water; the wicked will not
only be in hell, but they will have a hell in themselves; in their consciences,
they will have a never dying worm, which will gnaw and tear them; they will
have a storm in their spirits raised by the wind of Gods wrath, which will
blow most fiercely upon them; every faculty of the soul will be afflicted
according to its capacity: and every member of the bodies of the wicked will be
tormented. O how will their eyes glare! their tongues roar! their hands and
feet fry! their flesh roast! no part will be free from the devouring flames of
this horrible burning Fire, There are many diseases which the body is exposed
unto in this world, but very seldom do they meet together in the same subject;
if the head ache, the members may be free; if the foot be pained, the hand may
be at ease, and ready to contribute some relief unto the pained part; and if
the body be sick, the soul may give some consolatory arguments to alleviate the
irksomeness of the disease; but in hell the punishment of the wicked will be
universal, it will be in every member of the body, and every faculty of the
soul.

2. The punishment of hell will be extreme; the souls of the wicked will be
filled with anguish, as full as they can hold; their capacity will be larger,
and they will be filled up to the height of their capacity; and their bodies
also will have the most exquisite pain, as it is possible for them to endure;
their sense of pain will be quicker, and their strength to endure pain greater;
and their pain will be in the uttermost extremity: some pains of the body here
are not very acnte; and some troubles of mind may well enough be born; but any
disease in extremity is very irksome; the pain of the head, or the tooth in
extremity, the gout, stone, chollick in extremity; especially the troubles of
the mind in extremity, will make a man weary of his life; but to have every
part afflicted in extremity, and the uttermost extremity, and that beyond our
now capacity or conception, this will be very dreadful.

3. The punishment of the wicked will be continual, without any intermission or
alleviation; the wicked will have no rest day nor night, Rev. 14. 11. there
will be nothing but weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 22. 13.
The most painful diseases here have their fits, which do not continue long; the
diseased find after their fits some ease and asswagement; they have
intermissions sometimes; some lucida intervalla, lightsome intervals; but the
wicked in hell will have no ease or asswagement; no lightsome intervals of
their grief and pains; there will be no mixture of comfortable ingredients in
the cup of God's wrath, which the damned must drink of; there will be but one
fit in their disease, and this fit will always be at the height; they will not
have the least drop of water to cool so much as the tip of the tongue, which
shall be tormented in flames; their grief will not have any allay, they will
not have one comfortable thought, no eye to pity them, none to bring any
relief unto them: O how bitter will their sins be to them; here they are but
bitter sweets, then they will be nothing but bitterness, and gall, and
wormwood, unto them; Their punishment will be continual.

4. The punishment of the wicked will be remediless; there will be no escaping
or flying from the wrath of God; now sinners may flee from the wrath which is
to come; but when it is once come, and has got hold on them; it will hold them
down, so that they shall never get loose from it: now they may agree with their
adversary upon the way; they may make their peace with God in this world; there
is no sin for which they may not obtain a pardon, but the unpardonable sin
against the Holy Ghost, which carries men away from God; but hereafter in hell
there will be no more sacrifice for sin; the Savior of mankind will be their
judge, and pass an irreversible sentence of condemnation upon them; it is
possible now for the wicked to be delivered from this punishment, but it will
be impossible then to be delivered out of it; their punishment will be
remediless.

5. The punishment of the wicked will be eternal, hell fire will be
unquenchable, Mark 9. 43. everlasting, Matthew. 25. 41. the smoke of the torment
will ascend up for ever and ever. Rev. 14. 11. This eternity of punishment will
be a fearful aggravation of it; If you saw a malefactor torn to pieces with
wild horses, or thrown into a fiery furnace, and there burned to ashes; you
would say that either of these were dreadful punishments, though the pain
possibly might not endure a quarter of an hour, for death concludes all bodily
pains here: what then will it be to endure the torments of hell for ever? a
small pain, if it should last long, would be very irksome; much more some
racking pains by the stone, strangury, gour, cholick, and the like, if they
should continue for a year, or a month together, how miserable would they make
the life to be? yea, if a man should hold but one of his fingers in the fire
but for a day, it would afflict him more, than all outward comforts could
delight him; the torments of Hell will not be in one part only, but in every
part; not in a weaker degree, but in the greatest extremity; not for a day, or
a month, or a year, but for ever; the wicked will be always dying, never dead;
the pangs of death will be ever upon them; and yet they shall never give up the
ghost; if they could die they would think themselves happy; they will always be
roaring, and never breathe out their last; always sinking, and never come to
the bottom; always burning in those flames, and never consumed; the eternity
of Hell, will be the Hell of Hell. When our Savior endured equivalent punishment
to this of Hell, for his people, it had not this circumstance of eternity in it;
there not being that need, because of the excellency of his person; so that
though the pains of Hell gat hold on him, yet they could not keep him in hold,
but he brake through them, and triumphed over them, and could say in the
conclusion, It is finished: but the damned will not be able to break through
their punishment; they will be compassed about with them, and hedged in, and
shut down, and never be able to lift up the head; never shall they say of this
punishment, It is finished, for their pains will always be as it were
beginning; when they have spent the time of as many years in Hell as there are
Stars in the Firmament, Sands on the Sea shore, and Moats in the Sun, their
torment will be as it were beginning, and no nearer a conclusion; than the first
day they were cast into that place. Who can express this eternity? when we
lanch forth our thoughts in the consideration thereof, we lose them quickly; it
being such a deep which cannot be fathomed, such a vast Ocean which cannot be
measured; yet a little to extend your thoughts in the consideration of the
Eternity of the wickeds punishment. I shall by one or two suppositions
illustrate something of the vastness hereof.

Suppose that this globe of Earth on which we tread were hollow, and that it
were filled with great folio Books, as full as it could hold; and moreover
there were Books heaped up upon it to fill the whole circumference of the air
round about it; yea that the whole space of place to the uttermost verge of the
Empyrean Heavens were filled with Books; and all this vast number of Books were
filled with figures in the highest degree of multiplication; O what a number of
Books would there be in the whole space of place? what a number of figures in
these Books? and what a vast number would there be deciphered by these figures?
A bit of paper half as broad as an half penny will hold the figure of the
number of as many years as have been since the creation of the World; what then
would a whole leaf of a great folio hold? what would a whole folio hold: what
then would a room full of folios hold? but what would the whole World full of
folios hold? now if at the end of time, when the wicked go to Hell, God should
fill the whole space of the World with folios full of figures of numbers; and
tell the wicked that every thousand year one of these numbers should be
subtracted, and promise them when all the numbers were subtracted our of all
these Books, they should have a release out of their torments; they would have
a small spark of hope, that after the substraction of so many millions,
millions, millions of innumerable numbers, in the revolution of so many
millions, millions, millions of innumerable years, yet at last there would be
an end; there would be time then set and a wearing toward an end; yet if we
could cast our thoughts so far in a supposition, that all this number of years,
wherein all this number of figures were subtracted by one in a thousand years
were past and gone; yea wherein they were all subtracted, as many thousand
times as the number of the figures in all those Books would amount unto; yet
even then the punishment of the damned would be as far from ending, as at the
very first beginning of them.

Yea suppose further, that there were as many Worlds as the number in the Books
before supposed would arise unto; and these Worlds should continue as many
years as by this account there would be Worlds; and all these Worlds were
filled with Angels and Men; and all these Angels and Men should be employed in
nothing else from the beginning of these Worlds unto the end of them, but in
conceiving numbers of years unto the uttermost conception which they could have
of numbers; what a-to-us-inconceivable number of years would there be conceived
by so many Angels and Men, in so many years, in so many Worlds? yet if all that
vast number of years were joined to the end of the time wherein all the numbers
in the figures of so many beforementioned Books, were subtracted by one in a
thousand years; and these multiplied as many thousand times as numbers were
conceived; such a vast number of years would reach a great way, but they would
not be so much as a hairs breadth in the measure of eternity; and if we should
suppose the space of all these years too, to be spent by the damned in
torments, even then their torments would be as far from a conclusion, as they
were upon their first entrance into Hell. O Eternity! Eternity! Eternity! how
vast is Eternity! how infinite and immeasurable! how horrible will the thoughts
of Eternity be unto the damned! to be punished so extremely, and that without
any intermission, or hopes of a conclusion! to fall into such a horrible Pit,
and fiery Lake, and there burn for ever without any possibility of ever getting
forth! O dreadful! O blind World! O sottish sinners! that take no more care
now to avoid, and get deliverance from such a punishment as this, which they
are exposed unto, and will be the certain consequent of sin without repentance.

Thus concerning the punishment which the wicked shall go into.

2. Concerning their entrance into this punishment; when the whole crew of
wicked and ungodly persons, together with the whole Flock of Devils are
departed from the presence of Christ, and the glorious Saints; and Heaven is
now upon their backs, and Hell before their face; and they are now come to the
very mouth of the bottomless Pit, unto the Doors and great Gates of Hell; and
now they are opened before them, and unto them, and for them; and they see the
black smoke ascending up from thence, and smell a horrible stink from the
sulphurions Fire, which they must be thrown into; and when they behold the
horrible slakes of Fire flashing forth from the Furnace of Hell, ten thousand
times more dreadfully than those which were seen to arise from London on the
Monday night; and now begin to feel the heat; and see others tumbling in before
them, and they following of them; and when they begin first to put their hands
and their feet into the Fire; and now they are in and covered with flames, and
begin to boil and fry, and when they perceive the Gates of Hell to be shut
upon them, and great Stones rolled before them which can never be removed, and
great Bars put upon them which can never be broken, and they are out of all
hopes of ever breaking Prison, and getting forth; O how will they shreek, and
roar, and cry out in the anguish of their souls, and torture of their bodies,
Woe, woe le unto its miserable sinners! and is this the Hell which Ministers
warned us to fly from? and yet trould we needs run our selves into such
flames? Is this the wages of our sin? has our drunknness, and swearing, and
whoring, and lying, and unrighteous dealing, such a dreadful consequent as
this? Is this the company we must take up our eternal abode withal? and this
the place of our eternal habitation? must we then dwell in this devouring Fire?
and inhabit these everlasting burnings? O miserable! miserable! forlorn
wretches we! would God we had never been born! O that we had been Dogs or
Swine! O that we had been Serpents or Toads! O that we had been the meanest
Worms, or Stones, or anything without Souls who are now annihilated! O that we
had been nothing, or might be turned to nothing! O that we could recall our
time! how would we improve it. O that it were with us, as once it was, when our
being and abode was upon the Earth, when the day of grace did shine upon us,
and the means of grace were afforded to us! how would we pray, and hear, and
watch, and strive, and live! how would we forsake sin, accept of Christ, and
deliver up our selves unto universal obedience! But alas time is fled! the day
is spent! the door is shut! we are bound up in Chains; which cannot be
loosened! we are now in torments, which cannot be remedied; and are extreme,
and will never be ended! O the pains of my eyes! would I had none! O the pains
of my tongue! would it were out, and I were dumb! O the torture of my hands and
feet! would they were off, and my whole body were consumed! O I am sick! I am
sick! and here is no Physician! I am sad! I am sore troubled! and here is none
to pity me! my head does burn! my heart does ache! O the terrors which I feel!
O the gripes and tearings of the never dying worm within me!

But who can conceive what the thoughts and complaints of the damned will be at
their first entrance into the punishment of Hell? Thus concerning the execution
of the sentence pronounced by Christ upon the wicked.

CHAP. X.
2. THe second thing is to speak of the execution of the sentence pronounced by
Christ upon the righteous. Matthew. 25. 46. These shall go away into everlasting
punishment, There is the execution of the sentence on the wicked. But the
righteous into life eternal, there is the execution of the sentence on the
righteous. And hear I shall speak, 1. Of the righteous going away. 2. Of the
righteous going into life eternal.


1. Concerning the righteous going away, The wicked shall go away, and the
righteous shall go away too; the wicked shall go away from Christ and Saints,
and the happiness of Heaven; and the righteous shall go away from Devils and
wicked Persons, and the misery of Hell, which with some considerations will be
unspeakably comfortable unto them.

1. The righteous shall go away from Devils; Christ does here redeem them and
deliver them from that tyrannical power which the Devil had over them before
conversion, yet they are not wholly freed in this life from all his assaults
and baits and snares; some of them are much buffeted and oppressed by him most
part, if not all their days; but at the last day they shall all go away from
Satan; the Devil and all his Angels will be locked up in the bottomless Pit,
and the righteous will never be molested with any of them any more, however the
righteous sometimes are foiled by Satan here, and receive some wounds in their
spiritual combat; yet then they will be victorious, and triumph over
principalities and powers, and leave them bound in Chains behind them; they
shall go away from Devils.

2. The righteous shall go away from all the wicked Persons; some of the wicked
separated them from their company when they lived on Earth; now God will
separate them from the company of all the wicked; they were hated by the wicked
and troubled by them, and some of them suffered much under their reproaches and
persecutions; then the wicked will cease from troubling them any more: their
hearts were grieved with their oaths and filthy lewdness and ungodly
conversation in the World; but now they shall go away from the wicked, no
Devil, nor wicked Persons shall be admitted into their society, or have any
room in the place whether they are going.

3. The righteous shall go away, from that place and state of misery which the
wicked shall go into; they shall be delivered from the damnation, and
punishment of Hell, and all fears of it for ever: and herein their joys will
be unconceivable, in that,

1. They shall have deeper apprehensions of the punishment of Hell, than ever
did here enter into their hearts to imagine; they were told by the Word and
Ministers what a dreadful punishment was preparing for the damned; and they did
believe it, and fear it, and flee from it; but the one half was not told them;
the Fire which they conceived, was but as it were a painted Fire in comparison
with that which they will see the wicked cast into; the pains they fancied were
but fleabitings, in comparison with those which they will see the wicked
undergo: they guessed something at the wrath of God, by the little scortchings
thereof in their first conviction of, and contrition for sin; by the sweetness
of Gods smiles of love afterward, they judged that his displeasure and fury
would be unsupportable; but their thoughts were mean, and short of that fiery
vengeance and dreadful wrath which then will break forth into a flame to
consume the ungodly: as the wicked will have high apprehensions of the glory and
happiness of the righteous beyond whatever entered into their hearts to conceive
here in this World, and it will be their unutterable grief to be deprived
thereof, and shut out for ever from the Kingdom of Heaven, which the righteous
with joy and triumph shall go into: so the righteous shall have deep
apprehensions of the sufferings and misery of the wicked, beyond whatever they
did imagine here; and it will be no small part of their joy that they are
delivered from this misery, and saved from the torments of Hell, into which
they shall see the wicked go into, with such dread and horror. Lazarus will
then see Dives tormented; the other Apostles will see Judas thrust into Hell,
and all the righteous will be Spectators of the vengeance which the Lord Jesus
will execute upon the ungodly World; and O how will they then adore Gods
electing love? how will they value the blood of Christ, which was shed for the
redemption of them? how will they bless God for pardoning mercy? how will they
hugg the feet of their Savior, who has delivered them from this so dreadful
wrath, and fearful torments which they will see inflicted then upon the damned?
especially,

2. When they consider in their going away, that they were by nature Children
of wrath, even as others; Ephesians. 2. 3. That they had as soul natures as the
vilest; that they had as leprous, poisonous, odious hearts, until they were
renewed and sanctified, as those which they shall see condemned and tormented;
that they were sometimes foolish and disobedient, serving diverse lusts, and
pleasures, hateful and hating one another, until the kindness and free love of
God was manifested in the regeneration and renovation of them by the holy
Ghost. Tit. 3. 3, 4, 5. That they were dead in sin with others, and walked
according to the course of the World, according to the Prince of the power of
the Air, who wrought in them, as in other Children of disobedience, so that
they were as forward as others to fulfill the desires of the flesh and of the
mind, and ran with others to the same excess of riot; until God who is rich in
mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved them, had quickened them and saved
them by his grace, and hereby put a difference between them and the wicked, who
went on to the end of the sinful course in which sometimes they were running
with them in company. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. yea some of them will remember,
how they out-stripped others in sin, and were guilty of more gross breaches of
the Law than many millions of the wicked, whom they will see condemned; and
that they should escape, and be awakened to repent, and enabled to believe and
reform; and that they should obtain pardon and salvation through Christ, when
others were passed by, and let alone to perish under smaller sins; this will
fill them with astonishing admiration, and wondering joy: when they see some of
their near Relations going to Hell, their Fathers, their Mothers, their
Children, their Husbands, their Wives, their Brethren, their Sisters, their
intimate Friends, and Companions; however they are grieved now to see them take
such courses, and walk in the way to Hell, and they labor to pull them out of
that way, and would fain persuade them to walk with them in Heavens way; and
are troubled to forethink of the torment which they must endure, if they go on;
yet hereafter relative ties, and those affections which now they have to
relations out of Christ, will cease; and they will not have the least trouble to
see them sentenced to hell, and thrust into the fiery furnace; but rejoice in
the glory of God which will be manifested upon them in their destruction; and, O
the joy that they will be filled withal to think that they were not passed by
with the rest of their relations; that they are not under the same
deserved-condemnation with them; that God should choose but one or two in many
families, and they should be in the number of the chosen ones; that when his
chosen were comparatively so few, and the reprobates so many, that they should
be elected; when there was no motive in them to incline God to the choice of
them, that he should choose them freely; if he had not chosen them, if they were
now to change places with some of their wicked relations going to Hell; this
would be dreadful; but that they are going from Hell, when their relations are
going into it, this will fill them with joy unspeakable. Especially,

3. When they consider in their going away, that they were sometime so near to
Hell; that whilst they were in a state of nature, and under the guilt of sin,
that some of them were near to death; that they were brought to the sides of
the pit, to the doors of the grave, to the very brink of Hell, before they had
repented, and accepted of Jesus Christ; some of them will remember how near
they were to death when they were young; how near they were to death by some
casualties: how near by some diseases; some of them will remember the great
Plague in London, which swept away so many thousands* how ill they were
provided for death at the beginning thereof; how nearly they escaped the
disease; and some which had the disease, how nearly they escaped death by it;
and if they had died then, that they should certainly have gone to Hell: O how
will they admire the Providence of God in keeping them alive, notwithstanding
the many dangers they were in of death, all the days of their unregeneracy;
and when they moreover consider how they tried Gods patience, and trampled upon
it, by their heinous provocations; how they abused his goodness, and turned his
grace into wantonness; how they did hasten in the ways of sin toward hell,
and were come even to the end of the line; that some of them were Drunkards,
and Sabbath Breakers, and profane persons, and swearers, and unclean persons,
and persecutors of the people of God, and were arrived even to the height of
wickedness, and wan^ed but a step or two of falling into Hell; and yet that the
Lord should meet with them, with a flaming sword in the way of sin, they were
driving on so fast and furiously in, and stop them, and turn them; and change
them, and bring them home to himself; yea, when they had deafned their ears
against many calls, and stifled many convictions, and often quenched the
motions of his spirit, and were so unwilling to leave their sins, and to come
out of the way of destruction, and were so desperately bent upon their ruin;
that yet he should knock, and call again and again, and follow them still by
his Spirit; that he should lay hold on them as the Angels did on Lot, and bring
them out of Sodom, even by force; and overpower the contranitency of their
stubborn wills, and break open the door of their hearts, and overturn the
strong holds of sin and satan, and set up the throne of his Son within them;
that he should snatch them like firebrarnds out of the fire; and pluck them out
of the snare of the devil, that had almost dragged them into Hell; O how will
they be astonished to remember Gods infinite pity and love, and the power of
his rich grace that did work salvation for them? especially when they perceive
how dreadful the misery is which they were hastening unto? I have heard of a man
who in the night galloped over a high bridge which was broken down all but a
narrow plank, which Gods providence directed his horses feet upon; which if
they had slipped never so little on the one side or the other, horse and man had
fallen into the deep stream, and been drowned; which the man did not know till
the next morning; but then, viewing the place, and considering the danger he
had so narrowly escaped, was struck with such astonishment at it, that he fell
down dead in the place. When some of Gods people shall go away from Hell at the
last day, and look behind them into the bottomless-pit, and take a view of the
streams of fire and brimstone, which are running in the burning lake; and
remember how they have galloped over those streams, when they were in the
carreer of their sins; and by how narro^ a planke they passed over them; that
if they had slipped but a little aside, they had fallen into the lake, from
whence they could never have got out; when they shall remember how near they
were to Hell, and how narrowly they have escaped such horrible torments; ^urely
they will be struck with such admiration and joy which now they could not bear,
but would over-whelm their spirits, and bring immediate death upon them; but
then their nature will be strengthened to bear this joy, which might be enough
to sweeten an eternity, if they had no other happiness than the consideration
of the misery from which they have been so wonderfully delivered. Thus
concerning the going away of the righteous from the wicked, and the miseries
which they shall endu^e.

2. Concerning their going into eternal life: and here I shall speak, 1. Of the
eternal life they shall go into. 2. Of their going into eternal life.


1. Concerning the eternal life which the righteous shall go into. Eternal life
is taken in Scripture frequently for the life of grace; but chiefly, and so
here, for the life of glory: by eternal life we are to understand the glory and
happiness which the righteous shall have in Heaven, of which happiness in
Heaven I shall speak, 1. Subjectively. 2. Objectively. 3. Formally.


1. Subjectively. The subject of the happiness in Heaven, will be both the
bodies and the souls of the righteous.

1. The bodies of the righteous will be subjects of the happiness of Heaven.

1. They shall be most glorious bodies, 1 Cor. 15. 43. They are sown in
dishonor, when they die; they shall be raised in glory at the resurrection;
some glory and Majesty is put upon the bodies of men now, in comparison with
the bodies of inferior creatures; but the bodies of the righteous shall then
be made a thousand-fold more glorious; there is not so great a difference
between celestial bodies and terrestrial bodies; between the body of the
glorious Sun, and the body of the meanest fly or worm, as then there will be
between the bodies of the righteous on earth, and in heaven: they will be
celestial bodies; they will shine like Stars, Dan. 12. 3. Yea, like the Sun in
the Kingdom of their father, Matthew. 13. 43. their bodies will be transformed,
whereby their dirty hue will be changed, more than if all the stones in the
street were turned into Diamonds, Phil. 3. 21. Their vile bodies will be
fashi^ed like unto the glorious body of Christ: Now their bodies are vile,
being so frail, especially as they are the instruments of sin; they are earthy,
as they bear the image of the earthy Adam; then they shall be glorious, because
they shall bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam: the bodies of some do now
shine with Gold and Pearls, and costly Apparel which are about them, and yet
under all, their bodies remain vile bodies; but hereafter the bodies of the
righteous shall shine with a m^rvellous brightness and glory through the
qualities which shall be in them, beyond what the richest attire can give.

2. And by consequence the bodies of the righteous shall be most beautiful
bodies: they shall have a perfect beauty, beyond whatever eye did behold, in
the fairest women that ever lived upon the face of the earth.

Their bodies will have the most exact symetrie of parts; those which were
misshapen here, shall then be healed of that imperfection in their bodies; the
crooked back shall then be made straight; the members which now are wanting,
shall be supplied, and the parts which now are dissolved shall be put into the
right place; and all joined so exactly together; especially the lineaments of
the face shall have such a figure and composition, as shall render their
feature most lovely, and graceful, beyond what the greatest observers, and
admirers of beauty, can conceive in their fancy.

Moreover, the bodies of the righteous shall have a most sweet mixture of
colors; there will be no black skin, no swarthy complexion, no pale face, no
wan look; their color will be most lovely, without change or fading; there
will be no wrinkles of old age, but they will be always young, fresh, and
blooming; if the composition of these elements, which are so dreggish, does
give forth in some such loveliness of color, what will the more refined
composition of the bodies of the righteous do, and when the Lord will fashion
their bodies after the pattern of his Sons body: and therefore I conceive
further that the bodies of the righteous shall have a most comely stature, not
dwarfish not gigantick; but according to the measure of the stature of Christ:
And lastly, to complete their beauty, I doubt not but they will have most
graceful gestures and sparkling motions in their countenances; they will have no
grief to deaden their beauty, no anger or envy, or the like, to change and
transform their visage; but love and joy will continually look out at their
eyes, which will marvellously add to the luster and sweetness of their beauty;
they shall have most beautiful bodies.

3. The bodies of the righteous shall be most strong, that they may be suitable
to their great soul, and fit for such works as in heaven they must be employed
in; were they weak as now they are, they would never endure such works and
motions, they would tire and faint, their spirits would quickly be spent; but
in Heaven there will be no lassitude and weariness; no fainting, or failure of
spirits; all their motions, though never so great and continual, will be sweet
and delightful; and therefore their bodies must be strong that they may be
suitable hereunto: Moreover the glory of Heaven, which they shall have in their
eye would sink a weak body, and the ravishing joys and love, the transports
of their souls in the visions which they shall have, would crack a weak vessel
to pieces; they must be strong to bear the glory of the place; and when besides
they must endure unto all eternity; and all this without reparation, by meat,
or drink, or sleep; I conceive that no bodies visible to us are made so strong,
as the bodies of the righteous will be made at the last day.

4. Hence it follows, that their bodies will be most healthful bodies, they
will be free from all pain, and disease, which may in the least weaken them;
the temperature of their bodies will be so exact, that there will be no
fighting of contrary qualities within them, no flowing of ill humors: In
Heaven there will be no plague nor ague, not fever, nor gout, not stone, nor
strangury, nor any distemper, no need of food to preserve health, nor physic
to recover it.

5. The bodies of the righteous will be spiritual bodies, I Cor. 15. 44. not
absolutely spiritual; for then they would cease to be bodies; but
comparatively, to what they are now, they will be spiritual, that is, I
conceive they will be quick and nimble in their motions, like spirits; now they
are dull, and slow, and heavy, and a clog to the spirit; I conceive that
hereafter they shall be like Angels for quick and nimble motion; they may be so
qualified, as in a moment to move many thousand miles; why may not they move so
quick then, as well as the Sun and other Stars in the Firmament do so now,
which are bodies of many thousand times greater magnitude.

6. The bodies of the righteous will be incorruptible and immortal, 1 Cor. 15.
43. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption. And v. 52, 53. In a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump, the dead shall be raised
incorruptible; for this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal
must put on immortality. And v. 54. Then shall come to pass the saying which is
written, Death is swallowed up in victory, Now death is unavoidable, and unto
some is very terrible; death has all the children of men in the chase, and
shoce^ his arrows at the righteous, as well as the wicked; and though they be
delivered from the sting of death which is sin, yet they are not delivered from
the stroke of death; but however death play the tyrant here on the earth, and
spare none; yet he will have no footing in Heaven; the bodies of the righteous
when raised up again will be impassible and immortal; immortality will be
swallowed up of life, and the life of the body, as well as of the soul will be
everlasting.

2. The souls of the righteous will be the subjects, and the chief subjects of
the glory and happiness of Heaven; if their bodies shall be glorious, their
souls shall be much more glorious; as being their more excellent part, and
capable of more glory than their bodies will be; we read, Romans 8. 18. Of the
glory which shall be revealed in us, that is, in the soul; and the Apostle
tells us, that, The sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with this glory; the greatest sufferings and calamities in this World
have not that evil and misery in the least shadow of comparison, with the
happiness of the glory which shall be put into the souls of the Saints; indeed
the Apostle does compare them, and see how he makes this future glory to
out-ballance. 2 Cor. 4. 17. These light offlictions, which are but for a
moment, do work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. The
afflictions are light, but the glory will be weighty, the afflictions are but
for a moment, but the glory will be eternal; the weight of glory will be
exceeding, more exceeding, far more exceeding, here the Apostle lays one high
expression upon the back of another, and another upon that, like so many great
Mountains upon the back one of another, and when he has got upon the top of
the highest of them, yet he is too low to look into the glory of Heaven, and
his expressions and apprehensions fall short of the glory which shall be
revealed in the soul, when it shall be received into the new Jerusalem, for it
is yet to be revealed: and therefore as the Apostle John says, I Ioh. 3, 2. It
does not yet appear what we shall be, but when Christ shall appear, we shall be
made like him; not only the body shall be made like his glorious body, but also
the soul shall be made like his glorious soul, for we shall see him, as he is*
as the eye does receive the image of the object, which it looks upon, so the
soul in its vision of Christ shall receive the Image of Christ, and have a
perfect similitude and likeness unto him; the soul will be made most beautiful,
the perfect lineaments of Christ will be drawn upon it: if grace makes the soul
to shine here, how much more will glory, which is grace in the perfection of
it, make the soul to shine in Heaven? and therefore grace is called glory, it
is glory begun: 2 Cor. 3. 18. We all with open face beholding, as in a Glass,
the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, as
by the spirit of the Lord. The Vail, which was under the Law, is now taken
away, and with open face we behold the glory of the Lord, that is, I conceive
the Lord Jesus Christ who is the glory of the Father, the brightness of the
Fathers glory; which glory was more dark to our view under the Law, represented
by the cloud, which filled the Temple; but now there is more clear revelation
of Christ without the Vail, and clouds of types and figures, whom we now see in
the Glass of the Word and Ordinances, and hereby are changed into his Image,
and receive from him impressions of grace, which is glory begun, through the
operation of his spirit in his Ordinances upon us; yet still we see him in a
Glass, and therefore there is a darkness, through this interposition; and the
eye of our faith which looks through this Glass upon Christ is weak, and
therefore our Graces are imperfect, and our similitude to him is imperfect; but
when the Glass shall be removed, and instead of the sight of faith, we shall
have an immediate Vision, then our souls will be changed into a perfect
conformity unto his Image, and it will not be from glory to glory, from one
degree unto another, but glory will be arrived unto its height, and the souls
of the righteous will be made perfectly glorious; their souls will then have
perfection of holiness without the least remainders of sin, which in this World
the most holy Persons are not wholly free from.

1. Their thoughts shall be holy; no bla^phemous thoughts shall then arise in
their mind, no filthy thoughts, no e^vious and malicious thoughts, yea they
shall not have the least vanity or impertinency in their thoughts, all their
thoughts shall then be brought into p^rfect obedience unto Jesus Christ.

2. Their understandings shall be holy; there shall not be the least Cloud or
mist of ignorance or error to darken and ^ully them, when they appear before
the glorious Sun of righteousness, the brightness which will issue forth from
his face will dispel all clouds, and they will have a clear understanding of
all things which will be needful for them to know, to make them happy; God will
then unlock his treasures, open his Books, which ^^w are sealed, and open their
understandings too, that they may conceive those mysteries of his word, and
that manifold wisdom of God, which now do exceed their comprehensions.

3. Their memories shall be holy; they shall be strengthn^d to retain and bring
forth continually out of their treasures whatever things, new or old, shall
tend to feed them with love and joy, and elevate their souls in the prai^es of
God.

4. Their wills shall be perfectly holy; there shall be a sweet harmony between
their wills and ^he will of God, a perfect compliance with the sweet Law which
they shall be under, without the least contranitency, or contradiction; they
shall not have any evil motion, or inclination of will in Heaven.

5. Their hearts and affections shall be perfectly holy; the inner room of
their hearts shall then be swept clean of all cob-webs, there shall not the
^east dust of sin-remain; the roots of bitterness will be plucked up then, and
the stains which now are upon them shall be washed off; all the disorders and
distempers in their affections shall be removed, yea some affections which now
they have and are suitable to this estate of sin and imperfection, shall be
removed in their state of glory; ^uch as grief, anger, fear, and the like; they
shall ^ave no bitterness upon their spirits, no sorrow in their hearts, no
sinking and fainting of spirit, no discouragement and dispondency, no terror
or ^erplexity, no anguish or anxiety; all these shall flee away like a Cloud,
yea they shall have no ^ope in Heaven, nor desire as I conceive, because ^hese
affections suppose the chief good to be ab^ent, and imply imperfection; but
there they shall have a perfect enjoyment and rest of soul in ^he chief good;
which is the next thing to be spo^en of, namely the object of the Saints
happiness (...) Heaven.

2. Objectively, The object of the happiness of ^e righteous in Heaven, or the
chief good which ^ill make them perfectly an^ completely happy, ^ill be God,
who is infinitely good in himself, and infinitely blessed in the enjoyment of
himself, and in him will the happiness of the righteous consist; that which
fills an Ocean, surely will fill a Bucket, or nut-shell; God will be the
happiness of the righteous for ever; it is but a thin and subordinate happiness
which is to be found in the creature; it is but an imperfect happiness which is
here to be found in God, because of our blindness and sin, and incapacity; but
in Heaven God will be a perfect happiness unto the Saints: It is said 1 Cor.
15. 28. That God shall be all in all. God will be the whole happiness of the
righteous, Go^ in himself, God in his Son, God in the Angel^ God in other
Saints, God in themselves, God will be all in all, the only object of their
happiness.

3. Formally, the happiness of the righteous in Heaven will consist in the
union of the subject and object together, God will be united to their minds by
Vision, and to their hearts by Love, from whence will spring unspeakable joy.

1. The minds of the Saints, will have a perfe^ vision of God, which will
infinitely transcend a^^ the visions and sweetest discoveries of God, which
they have, or ate capable of in this World; hereafter their capacity will be
enlarged, their minds will be elevated; here they see God darkly, there they
shall see him clearly; here they see him af^^ off, there they shall see him
nearly; here they see him as he is represented, there they shall see him as he
is; here they see him in a Glass, there they shall see him immediately; here
they see aliquid de Deo, there they shall see Deum; here they see his
footsteps, some impresses of God upon the Creatures, especially upon his
Children, chiefly they see his Image in Christ, whom they view by faith in the
Glass of the Gospel, (as was said) yet the uttermost they can here attain unto,
is to see his backparts, but in Heaven they shall see his face, they shall see
him face to face; they shall see him as he is. This, this will be the happiness
of the righteous in Heaven, to have the immediate sight, the beatifical vision
of God.

2. The hearts of the righteous shall be joined to God, who is their chief
good, by love. But who can utter the love which the Saints shall have unto God
in Heaven? it will exceed our now conceptions, much more will it exceed the
love which those of the most intimate acquaintance with God do here at^ain
unto; that it will be heightened beyond what now it is, we may apprehend, if we
consider,

1. That the righteous will have an immediate vision of God, as has been
shown; now they live in a dark World, and have a Cloud upon their minds, and
see but a little of God through the perspective Glass of his Ordinances, a
little in the works of his hands, and in the works of his spirit upon the
hearts of his Children; and if when they see and know him so little, they can
love him so dearly above the whole World, how will they love him when they
behold his face, when the Clouds shall be dispelled, and the Sun break sorth?
when they behold his beauty, and the transcendent excellencies which are in
him, beyond whatever they could here imagine? how will their hearts be ravished
with love to look God in the face* when they see him in himself, when they see
him in his Son, when the Divinity of Christ shall appear in him, and shine so
gloriously before them, when they see the Angels so full of God, and the Saints
so full of God, and every thing in Heaven represent the glorious Jehovah unto
them?

2. The love of God will heighten their love to him; to be loved by such an
excellent Person, and with such a superlative love, O how will this inflame
their hearts with love unto him? when they take a review of the past
expressions of his love, and find the love of God in many things, which they
did not mind, when they were in the World and when they see a thousand fold
more love i^ those things which they did take notice of, but with low
apprehensions, and dull affections, how will it raise their hearts? when their
apprehensions of his love shall be raised; they will admire electing love so free
toward them without any prevision of merit in them; they will admire his love
in sending his Son to redeem them, and sending his spirit to convert them; his
love in pardoning their sins, i^ adopting them to be his Children; now they
admire his love sometimes, Behold! what manner (...) love is this, that we
should ^e called the Children (...) God! I Ioh. 3. 1. Then they will admire it
te^ thousand times more; they will see Gods love i^ all his fatherly provisions,
protections, yea in hi^ chastisements, and corrections, and all his providence
working for their good; but O what lov^ will they see in his special
distinguishing mercies beyond what now they apprehend; and Gods pa^^ love will
have a present and deep impression upon their hearts; further they will see the
treasures (...) his love open, the heart of God opened, and the glory which in
Heaven he will confer upon them, (...) which they shall never be deprived; and
what a demonstration of Gods love will this be unto them. Moreover then they
shall have no doubtings of his love, which here do damp affections, they shall
know assuredly that he has loved them, does love them, and will love them
unchangeably, and eternally; and withal they shall have a full sense of his
love upon their hearts, which will make such an impression, as to raise their
hearts to an unconceivable height of love.

3. The righteous will have a higher capacity for love in Heaven, than here
they have, and they shall be filled with love unto the height of their
capacity; they will be able to love a thousand times more than now they can do,
and they shall love unto their utmost ability; they will see perfection of
loveliness in God, and all that are about him, and they shall have perfection
of love; here their love is sincere and growing, but it is weak and imperfect,
hereafter it will be grown up to the full height of it, and perfect love will
cast out all tormen^; here their love is mixed, the stream is divided, ^t runs
and wastes it self in many small rivulets, which empty themselves upon the
creatures; but then the whole stream will run forth unto God individedly; not a
drop of their love shall be ^p^lt on the ground; God will be the sole object ^f
their love: here their love is uneven and inco^stant to God; sometimes it ebbs,
and some^imes it slows, sometimes they have a high and ^pring-ti^e of love to
God, but at other times it (...) low water; hereafter their love to God will be
^ven and constant, and always at the greatest ^eighth.

3. And O what joy will there be in their hearts, through the union which the
righteous shall have unto God the chief good, when their minds shall be joined
to him in immediate vision, and their hearts in perfect love! O how sweet a
fruition of God will this be! what delights will spring from hence! if the
Saints can now rejoice exceedingly in God, when they see him so little, and
their love is so imperfect, what will they do when they see and love him
perfectly and fully? if they are now exceeding glad sometimes with the light of
his countenance, though they have but a glimpse thereof, what will they be,
when they shall have a constant view thereof, and live eternally under the
beams of that light! their love to God is sweet now, though it be weak; but
what will it be in Heaven, when the conjunction of their hearts to God by love
shall be so nee^ and close? if the Saints can now rejoice in hope of the glory
of God, what will they do in the possession thereof, when faith shall be
changed for vision, and hope turned into fruition! O how will the Saints
rejoice and triumph, when they are sailed quite through the tempestuous Sea o^
this world, and are landed safely in Heaven, where there is rest, and peace,
without any windy storm^ when they have got the victory over the devil and sin,
and are now placed out of the gun-sho^ of temptation, and have conquered
through Christ, the grave, and death, and are out of fe^^ of his arrows; when
they see that they have escaped the terrible wrath of God, and find them
selves in the arms of his love; when the^ perceive that they are in Heaven now
in^deed, notwithstanding all their sins, and doubts and fears, and now they
have that blessed vision of God which they so much desired; and the full
fruition of God in love which they hoped for; when they shall look about them,
and see so much glory about them, and shall look within them, and see so much
glory there revealed, beyond whatever they could imagine; O how will they be
transported with joy! then they will have fullness of joy in the presence of
God, and their pleasure and happiness will be perfect without interruption or
possibility of a conclusion. And the eternity of their happiness will be the
Heaven of Heaven, as eternity of misery will be the Hell of Hell.

Thus concerning the happiness of the Saints, or the eternal life of glory,
which they shall enter into.

2. Concerning the righteous going or entering into eternal life. The righteous
after the pronouncing of their sentence, and their seeing the execution of the
sentence of the wicked, shall pass away from them, and go with Christ into
eternal life; they shall go with singing to the Zion which is above, and
everlasting joy on their heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow
and sighing shall flee away. Isa. 51. 11. It will be a most glorious train, such
as eye never has seen, which will go together unto Heaven. The Lord Jesus
Christ will be in the head in shining glory, all the holy Angels will be with
him, and the whole company of the righteous will be together, that ever lived
in all generations; and O with what mirth and gladness will they move toward
Heaven together; with what shoutings and Hosannah's will they attend upon the
glorious triumph of our Savior, unto the new Jerusalem! but when they are come
to the gates of Heaven, and the everlasting doors shall be lifted up to them,
and they look into the place prepared for their eternal abode; when the Lord
Jesus shall bring them into the glorious presence of the Father, and they shall
have the beatifical vision of his face, and see the smiles of his countenance
and are received into the imbracements of his love; Then, Then they will find
themselves to be happy indeed! then their heart will be filled with joy, and
their tongues with singing; then they will sing the new Song, the Song of the
Lamb, which now cannot be learned* then they will sound forth the praises of
God and cry with a loud voice, as Rev. 7. 10, 11. Salvati^n to our God, (...)
upon the Throne, and to the L^mb, And worshipping God they will say, Amen,
Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Than^sgiving, and Honor, and Power, and
Might be unt^ our God for ever and ever, Amen. And there shall they live and
reign for evermore.

Thus concerning the execution of the sentence^ on the righteous; and
concerning the second appearance of Christ, and end thereof.

CHAP. XI.
2. COne^rning the Certainty of Christ's second appearance.

I'shall prove this by several Arguments.

1. A^g. If the Scriptures have clearly revealed an^ (...) Christ's second
appearance to judgment, an^ (...) the Scriptures are certainly true, then this
second appearance of Christ is certain: But the Scriptures have clearly
revealed and foretold this second appearance of Christ to judgment; and the
Scriptures are certainly true: Therefore the second appearance of Christ is
certain.

1. The Scriptures have clearly revealed and foretold Christ's second
appearance to judgment. It is not a truth written in the book of nature, it is
not to be found in the writings of the Philosophers, and those who have had the
highest speculations of natural causes, and effects, and products; this is a
mystery which the world by wisdom could never find out; it is a secret which
has been hid in God, and is revealed by his Spirit in his Word: this coming of
Christ was foretold by Enoch, Jude 14. 15. And Enoch also the seventh from Adam
pr^phesied, Behold the Lord ^^meth with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute
judgment upon all, etc. So that it is of ancient revelation. The first coming
of Christ was foretold to Adam, in the promise, that the seed of the woman
should break the Serpents head; and the second coming of Christ was foretold to
En^ch. It is foretold by the Angels, Acts 1. 10, 11. Whilst the Disciples
looked steadfastly upon our Savior in his Ascension, two Angels say unto them,
Ye men of G^lilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? this same Jesus which is
taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come down in like manner as ^e have
seen him go into Heaven; however Devils are Liars, and the Fathers of Lies and
Liars; yet the good Angels are true, and Ministers of truth, and this is a true
restimony; further this is foretold by the Ap^stles, who were employed to be
the Penmen of part of the holy Scripture, and were guided by an infallible
spirit; the Apostle Paul speaks often of it, especially see his testimony, I
These. 4. 15, 16, 17. For this we say unto you by the Word of the Lord, that we
which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them
which are asleep: For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God: and the dead in
Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we
ever be with the Lord; Thus he sets forth Christ's coming in a comfortable
manner unto his people; therefore exhorts Christians to comfort one another
with those words, and hopes of Christ's glorious appearance, when they should be
caught up to meet with him, and be with him for ever: and he sets it forth in a
dreadful manner, in regard of the wicked, 2 These. I: 7, 8, 9. The Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from Heaven, with his Mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them which know not God, and obey not the Gospel, who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power. Moreover this coming of Christ is spoken of by the
Apostle in every Chapter of both of these Epistles, I Epist, Chap. 1. 10, And
to wait for his Son from Heaven. Chap. 2. 19. What is our hope, or joy, or
crown of rejoicing, are not ye in the presence of the Lord Jesus at his coming.
Chap. 3. 13. To the end he may establish you, unblameable in holiness at the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Chap. 4. 16. The Lord himself will descend
from Heaven with a shout. Chap. 5. 23. I pray that your whole spirit, and soul,
and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2.
Epist. Chap. 1. 10. He shall come to ^e glorified in his Saints. Chap. 2. 1, 3.
Now I beseech you brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our
gathering together unto him; that ye be not soon shaken in mind, etc. Chap. 3.
5. And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and patient waiting
for Christ. I might turn you to further testimonies of his. Tit. 2, 13. Looking
for the blessed hope, and glorious appearance of the great God, and our
Savior. Heb. 9. 28. Unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second
time unto salvation. We have also the testimony of the Apostle James, Chap. 5.
7. Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. Of the Apostle
Peter, 1 Epist, Chap. 5. 4. When the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall
receive a Crown of glory which fades not away. 2 Epist. Chap. 3. 10. The day
of the Lord will come as a thief in the night. Of the Apostle John, 1 Epist.
Chap. 3. 2. When he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is. And in his Revelation frequently, Rev. 1. 7. Behold he comes with
clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also that pierced him, and all
the kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so Amen. To
conclude, we have the testimony of our Savior himself whilst on earth, to his
Disciples, Mat. 16. 27. The Son of man shall come in the glory of the Father,
with his Angels, and then he shall reward every man according to his works.
Matthew. 24. 27. As lightning, so shall the coming of the Son of Man be. V. 30.
They shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of Heaven. V. 31. And he
shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet to gather the Elect from
the four Winds. Mat. 25. especially from the 31. to the end, where his judicial
proceedings are set forth; and our Savior does testify to his enemies, that
he would come again, Matthew. 26. 64. Hereafter ye shall see the Son of Man
sitting at the right hand of power, coming in the clouds of Heaven. And our
Savior testified by his Angel to John his beloved Disciple, after his
ascension into Heaven, that he would come again, especially, Rev. 22. where we
have three promises of the same thing. V. 7. Behold I come quickly, Blessed is
he that keeps the sayings of this Book. V. 12. Behold I come quickly, and my
reward is with me, to give to every man according as his work shall be, V. 20.
Surely I come quickly, Amen. Even so Come Lord Jesus. If any one word in the
whole Book of God may be believed, this concerning Christ's second coming and
appearance may be believed, of which we have such frequent and evident
testimonies in the Word; as surely as he came the first time in the flesh,
according to the predictions hereof in the Old Testament: so surely will he
come the second time in glory, according to the predictions in the New
Testament. God can as soon cease to be God, as this Word concerning Christ's
second coming fail; when the Sun goes down in the evening, we believe it will
return and arise at such a time in the morning, and accordingly it comes to
pass: So now Christ the Sun of righteousness is gone into Heaven, whilst the
night of this world does last, though we cannot know the certain time, yet we
may believe that he will certainly return, and come down from Heaven in the
morning of the resurrection; it is more possible that the Sun when it is set,
should abide for ever in the other parts of the world, and never arise any more
in our Horison, than that Christ should abide for ever in Heaven, and not
return to judge the World, when the thing is evidently revealed* and frequently
promised in the Scripture.

2. That the Scriptures are true is evident, because they are the Word of God;
who is a God of truth, and cannot lie; who can as soon cease to be God, as
cease to be true; untruth in God would argue weakness and imperfection in God,
which cannot be, since to be infinitely perfect is his essential property. That
God does know whether Christ shall appear to Judgment, I suppose none will
deny, who acknowledge the Deity, and by consequence his omniscience and
prescience, especially when the futurity of things does depend upon his
predetermination; and that his revelations of future things are true, I suppose
none will deny, who acknowledge his being and perfection, whence follows an
impossibility of Gods speaking untruths, and falsehood; besides that he need not
do it: But then the question will be, concerning the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures, whether they are indeed the Word of God, which (if proved) will
evidence the certainty of Christ's coming to Judgment, which is there revealed
and foretold.

That the Scriptures are the Word of God, will appear, 1. From the
Superscription and Image of God upon them. 2. From the mavelous power and
efficacy of them. 3. From the Historical Relation in them of Prophesies
fulfilled, and Miracles whereby they were confirmed, and the rationally
unquestionable certainty of this History, as it is handed down to p^sterity.


1. From the superscription and Image of God upon them, I mean in that, 1 They
bear the name of the Word of God. 2 In that they bear such evident marks and
characters of Divinity.

1. The Scriptures bear the name of the Word of God. 2 Timothy 3. 16. All
Scripture is given by divine inspiration. We cannot rationally imagine that the
all-seeing and jealous God should permit such an impious forgery and deceit to
receive credit for so many generations, amongst the most zealous worshipers of
him in the World; and by such wonderful providence preserve and maintain the
Scriptures against the rage and fury of an ungodly World, who have opposed the
truths therein contained, and endeavored the suppressing of the Light, which
therein has shined, if so be that they had been a forgery and deceit indeed,
and the fancies and inventions of Men, fathered upon him as his Word, and will,
and proceeding from the inspirations of his spirit; but that he would have made
known their falsehood unto some, at least, who had the greatest love and respect
to his name and honor, and have been the most diligent enquirers after truth,
and unwilling to be imposed upon with deceits, especially in such things as are
of the highest concernment; which the Lord having given no testimony against,
but all along owned; and when none in the World, either worshippers of him, or
others of highest pretensions to reason have any evident and swaying reason to
believe that the Scriptures are a deceit; (whatever some black mouths mutter in
corners) it is not irrational for us to believe, that the Scriptures are indeed
the Word of God, which they bear the Title of.

2. Moreover and especially, the Scriptures appear to be from divine
inspiration, insomuch as they bear such evident marks and characters of
divinity beyond all other Books.

1. The first character of Divinity in the Scriptures, is the clear discoveries
and high praises, which they give of God, and the chief design of the whole
Book, which is Gods glory. No Heathen Philosopher or Writer could think, or
speak so highly of God, as the Scriptures do speak. However God has put
characters of himself in the Book of the Creatures to be read of all, making
known by his Works his eternal Being, his infinite Power, Wisdom and
Goodness; yet most of the wisest Men, who have lived in the Heathen World, and
have been the greatest Students of the Book of the Creatures, and have had no
view of the Book of the Scriptures, have been so gross in their conceptions of
God, that as the Apostle says, Romans 1. 22, 23. When they professed themselves
to be wise, they became fools; and changed the Glory of the incorruptible God,
into an Image made like to corruptible Man, and to Birds, and four-footed
Beasts, and creeping things; They have figured to themselves and worshipped
many Gods, unto the dishonor of the true God: And if some of them have arrived
by the light of nature, unto the notion of one God; yet their conceptions of
him have been low, mean, and unworthy of him: and in no Book in the World is
God set forth so fully and highly in his glorious attributes, and superlative
excellencies, as he has set forth himself in the Book of the Scriptures. We
may find in heathen Writers high Elogium's and Panegyricks of some men and
Women, famous in their time, for their valor, and some moral virtues, whom
they have deified in after ages, and given room amongst their feigned Gods and
Goddesses, dedicating Temples, and giving worship unto them: but in no Heathen
writings shall we find the praises of the true God, and rules given for the
service and worship of him alone, as we shall find in the Scriptures. Large
Volumes some Heathens have left behind them, the design of which has been
their own glory, and (as much as in them lay) the eternizing their Fame, which
is an evidence that themselves were Authors of them; because we cannot
rationally think that any motive should induce others to make, and put forth
Books in their names, that they might obtain glory for them unto whom it did
not belong: so this little volume of the Scriptures, designing the glory of
God, and the promoting of his Interest in the hearts of Men, and the Penmen
employed in the writing thereof, not in the least pretending, that what they
wrote, was the invention of their own brain, does evidence God himself to be
the Author of this Book. Wherefore the Scriptures being so clear in their
discoveries of the one true God, and setting him forth more gloriously than any
other Book, and ascribing all praise and honor to him, and appointing all
religious worship to be given to him only, and designing his glory throughout
the whole, does evince that the Scriptures are indeed the Word of God.

2. The second Character of Divinity in the Scripture is, the sublime mysteries
therein revealed; namely concerning the Trinity of Persons in one nature and
essence of God; the hypostatical union of the two natures of God and Man in one
person of Christ; the mystical union of Christ and his members, and the like;
which mysteries are so sublime, so high, that no mortal Man of the highest
reason, and most elevated understanding could possibly invent, in as much as
no^ they are revealed, they exceed the capacity of the most enlightened to
understand: especially if we further consider by whom these mysteries were
revealed; not by the great Scholars, and subtle Philosophers of the World; not
by them who were brought up in Schools, and had conversed with Books and
learned Men; not by Men of high parts, who had polished their reason, and
heightened their understandings by all possible humane helps* but the most of
the Penmen of the Scripture, especially those by whom the greatest mysteries
are revealed, were Fishermen, Publicans, and the like; Men of mean education,
illiterate Men; Men of no reading, and of but mean natural abilities; as
appears not only by the history, but also by the style of their writings;
which has not that politeness as is to be found in many humane Authors; which
does not run in such a golden stream of eloquence, neither is dressed with such
neatnesses of wit, nor garnished with such flowers of Rhetoric; which is not
methodized by the rules of Logic, nor enterlarded with any peepings of humane
wisdom; which does not savor of high parts, and great natural ingenuity, or
give the least suspicion of cunning and subtilty, which these Men had above
others; But some of the highest mysteries of divinity are set forth by these
Pen men in a passsing-mean and homespun dress, yea they are left even naked
and bare of such apparel, as the ingenuous Men of the World have clothed their
matter withal, which has given the light of the most glorious truths and
mysteries more evident discovery; not but that some parts of the Scriptures
have such a strain of divine eloquence, as does exceed humane writings; but the
plainness of the style, especially of the Apostle John in his Gospel, and
Matthew, etc. Does evince that what they delivered was not their own invention,
but that they were acted by another spirit in the writing of them, even by the
spirit of God, who did reveal all the mysteries, which they speak of in whole,
unto them.

3. A third Character of Divinity in the Scriptures is the wisdom which there
does appear, especially the wonderful contrivement of God's wisdom in Man's
redemption and salvation by Jesus Christ, which is there made known; No Book in
the World does shine with such beams of wisdom, as the Word does; it does
teach Men wisdom, spiritual and divine wisdom, in comparison with which all
the wisdom of the World is but foolishness; It does irradiate the mind with
the most glorious light, and proposes to the understanding the most noble
objects; it discovers the greatest truths of the greatest concernment; it
shows the way to avoid the most dreadful effects which sin will produce, and
to obtain the highest happiness which humane nature is capable of; which is one
part of its divine stamp. Moreover the Scriptures do set forth the infinite
wisdom of God, in the wonderful contrivement of the salvation of fallen Man by
his only Son the Lord Jesus Christ, the only Savior of Mankind, which wisdom
being so transcendent, does evidence both the Contrivement thereof in Man's
salvation, and the discovery thereof in the Scriptures to be from himself: so
that as by the light of the Word we may know what this wisdom was, even so by
this wisdom we may know the Word to be the Word of God.

To clear this Argument, I shall show, 1. That the way of Man's salvation by
Jesus Christ, which the Scriptures reveal, must needs be the contrivement of
Gods wisdom. 2. That the revelation of this contrivement must needs be from
God, which I suppose will be an evident demonstration of the Divine Authority
of the Scriptures.

1. That the way of Man's Salvation by Jesus Christ was the contrivement of Gods
wisdom, will appear, because it was impossible for any Man of the most
searching brain, and most notable invention to have imagined it. Man being
guilty of sin against the Law of God, inscribed upon the hearts of all Men,
which natural Conscience will accuse of, if sinners listen thereunto; and Gods
Justice being engaged to inflict a punishment proportionable unto the crime
without a satisfaction, which right reason will say is but reasonable; and this
justice of God being infinite; must in reason require an infinite satisfaction;
Now what created understanding could of it self have contrived or conceived a
way how this should be done? Every thing that has a being, is either God or a
Creature; all the Creatures are finite in their Beeings and actions, and
therefore could not make an infinite satisfaction; It is God only who is
infinite, and he being the party offended could not make satisfaction to his
own justice, especially since his justice requires punishment for satisfaction,
which God as God, being impassible, is incapable of; not to say any thing that
the same nature which did commit sin should in justice suffer the punishment;
would not reason now conclude, that it were impossible for this satisfaction to
be made? Surely it was none but the wisdom of God that could contrive the way
of satisfaction to his justice, by the incarnation of his Son, by the union of
the divine nature in the second Person of the Trinity, unto the humane nature
in the Person of Christ, that so by virtue of the hypostatical union, the
humane nature might not only be strengthened to undergo the wrath of God, which
was due for the sins of Men, in the sufferings which he endured before, and
upon the Cross; but also that through the communication of attributes, the
sufferings of Christ might be of infinite value, because the sufferings of such
a Person as was God, as well as Man, that so they might be a full satisfaction
unto Gods justice for sin; and through Gods Covenant with him, and gracious
acceptance of this satisfaction from the surety, instead of the offenders
themselves, the sins of Men might be pardoned, and their souls saved. O the
depth of the Wisdom of God! here is the wisdom of God in a mystery! surely
they are blinded and hoodwinked by the Devil, who do not acknowledge that this
was the contrivement of Gods wisdom.

2. That the Revelation of this contrivement of wisdom, was from God: will
appear in that none could know the mind of the Lord herein, unless he himself
had discovered it; What Man, says the Apostle* kn^^eth the things of Man, but
the spirit (...) which is in him, even so the things of God ^noweth no Man but
the spirit of God. 1 Cor. 2. 11. And the spirit of God searches all things,
even the deep things of God; and unless the spirit had revealed these things,
we must have remained in our ignorance of them, since it could not have entered
into our hearts to have conceived them: seeing then none could have discovered
the deep contrivements of Gods wisdom, unless God by his spirit had revealed
them, and seeing these contrivements are revealed in no other Book, but the
Book of the Scriptures, it is evident that the Scriptures must needs be the
Word of God: which also will further appear, if we consider the manner of the
Revelation of the mystery of Man's redemption and salvation by Jesus Christ,
that it was revealed by pieces, and more obscurely at first; and that diverse
Men were made use of in the discovery thereof in diverse ages, who spoke hereof
mostly in dark sayings; and where they spoke most clearly, yet themselves had
not a clear understanding of what they were moved to speak by the Holy Ghost;
but searched what, and what manner of time the Holy Ghost which was in them did
signify, when it testified of the sufferings of Christ, and the design of them;
whence it is evident that they were not, neither could be the Contrivers of
what they revealed, but that the Revelation was from the spirit of God, which
did inspire the Prophets, and was the same in all the Penmen of the holy
Scriptures, whom Men of insight in the Scriptures may plainly perceive to be
guided and acted by the same spirit in their Revelation of the contrivement and
way of Man's salvation by Jesus Christ.

4. A Fourth Character of Divinity in the Scriptures is the Purity and Holiness
of them; the Scriptures, are like Silver or Gold purified, and seven times
tried in the Fire, wherein no dross does remain. Psalm. 12. 7. the Scriptures
are pure and holy, from the beginning of them to the end: In no Histories shall
we find such examples of holiness, as the Scriptures do record; in no Writings
of moral Philosophers, shall we find such precepts of holiness, as in the
Scriptures are enjoined: Indeed, the light of nature has been improved by some
Heathens so far, that they have given excellent rules for the restraining of
vice, and obtaining of moral virtues, and the ordering their conversations in
such a virtuous way, that those persons, who have observed these rules, have
been illustrious in their generations, and have shined with some kind of
brightness in the dark places where they have lived; but in no book that ever
issued from the brain of man, shall we find such exact rules for holy living,
as in the Book of the Scriptures; In this Book we find the moral Law summarily
comprehended in the Ten Commandments, which was written by God himself on the
Tables of Stone, when Moses was with him in the Mount; in which there are such
holy precepts* as no Heathen author can show the like: the Heathens were
blind, as to the duties of the first Table of the Law, which have a reference
unto God, and in observance of which, man's holiness does chiefly consist; in
the second Table duties they had some understanding, yet they were much
mistaken in some things, accounting some sins, as ambition, self-murder in some
cases, and the like, to be virtues; and they had not so deep an insight into
sin, they did not apprehend the inclination of the heart, and the previous
motions to the consent of the will to evil, (which the Scriptures do discover)
to be sinful and offensive in the eyes of a pure and holy God.

Moreover, in the Scriptures we find the holy precepts of the Gospel, which
the Heathens were strangers unto; and a way discovered not only for the
obtaining the pardon of sin, but also for the subduing and mortifying of sin:
where means are made known, not only for the restraining of a vicious nature,
but also for the changing of it, for the regenerating of the soul of man, and
forming it after the Image of the holy God, in knowledge, righteousness, and
true holiness, the making men partakers of the divine nature, which Heathens
never understood the meaning of: the Scriptures show the way of obtaining the
sanctifying graces of Gods Spirit, which do further exceed the mo^all virtues
of the Heathen in luster, than the Sun does exceed the lesser Stars in
brightness and glory.

Mavelous is the purity and holiness of the word, such as does not savor of
any thing ter^ene and humane; yea, it is such as is directly opposite to the
natural biass of the hearts of all men and women in the world, whilst they are
in a state of nature; such as does contradict carnal affections, and against
which the carnal mind has a natural enmity; and unto which all such and none
but such have a liking and love, as are ^egenerated by the Spirit of God;
whence it strongly follows, that the Scriptures could not proceed from men, but
that this holy Book did proceed from the immediate inspiration of the holy
Ghost, in those holy men which were the Penmen thereof.

2. It will appear that the Scriptures are the word of God from the mavelous
power and efficacy of them. Such a power and spirit has and does accompany the
preaching of the Gospel, which in the Scriptures is contained, as does evidence
them to be from God alone: we read 1 Pet. 1. 12. of them which preached the
Gospel with the holy Ghost sent down from Heaven. This has been this is unto
this day.

1. The wonderful power of the Gospel in the first preaching of it, does evince
that it was from God when so great a part of the world was in so sho^^ a time
subdued unto the obedience thereof; when the Gospel prevailed not only amongst
many (...) the Jews after Christ's ascension, and the effusion of the holy Ghost
more largely upon the Apostles, so that three thousand people were converted to
the faith by one Sermon of the Apostl^ Peter, Acts 2. 41. and five thousand
mo^e, Act. 4* 4. but especially, in that it prevailed among^^ the Gentiles and
Heathens, and so many Churches of Christ were planted and brought, not b^
carnal weapons but by Spiritual, to the subjection and obedience of the Lord
Jesus. This power will appear to have been from God, if we consider,

1. How few men were employed in the first preaching thereof; there were not
many which we read of, besides Paul and Sar^abas who preached unto the Gentiles
at the first. If there ha^ been multitudes of witnesses, it might have given
the more credit to the Doctrine, when the testimony of a few is not easily
believed and received.

2. That these men were but of little esteem in the world; that they were Jews
whom the Gentiles had an antipathy against; and so were not so ready to believe
their report, and entertain their message; that their persons were contemptible
in their eyes; that they were like crucified persons to the world, and
therefore unlikely to find acceptance.

3. That whatever humane Learning and Wisdom any of them were endowed withal,
yet they did not make use of it in their preaching, they did not come with
excellency of speech and wisdom in declaring the testimony of God, but used all
plainness, which was not likely in it self to produce such great effects.

4. That the doctrine which they preached was, 1. New to the world, and tended
directly to pull down the old religion, and superstitious worship of the
heathenish gods, which they had been brought up in, and wedded unto, which
could not be done by any humane power.

2. Strange, they preached such things as were above reason, and therefore the
world might have had much show and pretense of reason, to have excused
themselves from yielding obedience thereunto.

3. Strict, severe, and contrary unto natural inclination and interest, they
taught the world to deny themselves, to crucify the flesh, to mortify the
deeds of the body, to take up the cross, to mourn and weep for sin, to endure
hardship, to forsake father, and mother, and wife, and children, and houses,
and lands, if they stood in competition with Jesus Christ; to venture
imprisonments, yea to lay down their life for Christ, as many of necessity must
and did do, that would be Christians indeed in those days; and when the
Doctrine of the Gospel was such, surely it was not likely of it self to receive
entertainment, unless the power of God had accompanied it.

5. The power of the Gospel in the first preaching appears, in that it met with
so much opposition; the Devil stirred up instruments against it, the powers of
the Earth were against it, as well as the powers of Hell! great men did oppose
it, Philosophers were against it, Learned men did oppose it; the Jews were
against it, and raised up persecution against the Apostles, and the hearts of
all men naturally were against it; and when there was such an opposition
against it, surely it was none but the power of God which could cause it to
prevail and conquer, and cause so many Nations to bow and yield obedience
hereunto.

2. The wonderful power and efficacy of the word, where it is preached unto
this day, is a strong argument that it is the Word of God.

1. The power of the Word to search the heart, and convince of sin. Heb. 4. 12.
The Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged Sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart; there is a light in the
Word, which discovers the dark filthy corners of the heart, and convinces of
secret sins; and there is a sharp edge in the word to cut and wound; no word in
the world searches and pierces, like the word in the Scriptures.

2. And especially the power of the Word does appear in the work of conversion
and regeneration, which it effects; it is called the incorruptible seed, by
which men are born again. 1 Pet. 1. 23. Of his own will begat he us by the word
of truth. Iam. 1. 18. there is a great power goes along with it, ^o break
rockie hearts, to bow stubborn wills, to spiritualize carnal affections, to
subdue strong lusts, to work a gracious and through change in the heart of man,
which exceeds the power of nature, or moral suasion; and in so much as all
are not wrought upon by it which read or hear it, yea sometimes the more
disposed subject receives no impression thereby, and the less disposed subject
is effectually changed; which shows, that the ^ower does proceed from God, and
that the work is effected by his Spirit, and proves the di^ine Authority of
this Word.

3. The Word is powerful, not only for the first working of grace, but also for
the increase thereof, for the building up believers, Act. 20. 32. for the
perfecting of the Saints, and the edifying the body of Christ; there is Milk in
the Word for babes, and strong meat for strong men; wholesome words, which have
much spiritual nourishing virtue in them: the Word is powerful, for the
^uenching Satan's fiery darts, for the repelling and driving back the tempter;
for the comforting and rejoicing of distressed and disconsolate souls, ^hen
they are brought even to the brink of de^air; there are no such joys in the
world, as ^^ose joys which Christians sometimes find in ^eading and applying
the Word, when they ming^e it with faith, and have the breathings of the Spirit
therewith; and there is no book in the world that can produce such powerful
effects, a^ the Scriptures do, wherefore it must needs follow, that these
Scriptures are indeed the Word o^ God.

3. The Scriptures appear to be the Word of God from the Historical relation in
them of Prophecies ful^filled, and of miracles, whereby they were confirmed,
a^^ the rationally unquestionable certainty of this History as it is handed
down to p^sterity.

1. In the Scriptures we have relation of Pr^^phecies, and the fulfilling of
them, which do^^ prove these writings to be from God alone; because he alone
can certainly foretell futu^^ things; indeed wise men may guess, and through
prudence foresee the effects of some things in their causes, and foretell some
things the are not very far off, yet not certainly, and wi^^ all their
circumstances; But it is Gods prerog^^tive to foresee and foretell such things
(certainl^ and with their circumstances, and long before (...) time) for which
no cause in nature can be a^signed, suc^ as many of the Prophesies of (...)
Scriptures were. By this argument God does (...) the Prophet Isaiah prove the
Heathenish gods (...) be no gods, because they could not foretell fu^ture
events. Isa. 41. 21, 22, 23. Produce your cau^^ says the Lord, bring forth
your strong reasons: (...) them show us what shall happen, and declare to (...)
things to come: show the things which are to (...) hereafter, that we may know,
that ye are Gods. (...) v. 26. There is none that shows, there is none th^^
declares, etc. Therefore he concludes, v. 29* Behold they are all vanity,
their works are nothing their molten Images are wind and confusion (...) The
Prophesies of Scripture, as they prove the Lord, who spoke them by the Prophets
to be God; so they prove the Scriptures in which they are spoken, to be of
Divine authority. It would take up too much room in this small* Treatise, to
enumerate all the Prophesies of Scripture; take two or three instances. See
Genesis 15. 13, 14. God fore^elling to Abraham that his seed should be strangers
in a Land, which was not theirs, and serve them, and be afflicted by them four
hundred years, and that afterward they should come* forth with great substance.
This Prophecy is fulfilled Exodus 12. So also the return of the children of
Israel from the Babylonish captivity, after seventy years, was foretold, Ier.
25. 12. and the name of Cyrus, who should deliver them, before he was born,
^sa. 45. 1, 2. So also the name of Josiah, who should destroy the Altar which
Jeroboam had rea^ed, and burn the bones of the Priests upon it, was foretold
three hundred thirty and three years before he was born, the Prophecy is in 1
King. ^3. 2. the fulfilling of it, 2 King. 23. 17. But ^specially the
Prophesies in the Scripture concer^ing the Messiah, are remarkable, of his
birth, l^fe, death, and the fulfilling of them in the History of the
Evangelists; the Prophecy of the destruction of the Temple, and Jerusalem by
Da^iel, and especially by our Savior, and the ^ulfilling thereof, before that
generation wherein our Savior lived, were all in their graves.

2. In the Scripture we have relation of Mi^^cles, whereby they were confirmed:
such as the ^lague of Egypt; the dividing of the Sea for the ^^raelites to pass
^horow; the raining of Manna from Heaven; the standing still, and going back of
the Sun: the preservation of the three Children in the fiery Furnace, and the
like, in the old Testament; especially the Miracles wrought by our Savior and
his Disciples, which the new Testament do record, such as healing the sick, the
lame, blind, deaf, leprous, by a word, the feedin^ many thousands with a few
Loaves of bread, the calming of the Sea, the raising of the dead afte^ burial,
and the like, all which did exceed the power of nature; and however wonderful
things might be wrought by Men in a praestigiatory way which God may permit
some to be deluded with^all; yet all true Miracles, as these were, could b^
wrought by none without his immediate power which he would never put forth for
the confirm^^tion of lies and deceits; therefore we may strong^ly argue from
hence, that the Scriptures which have been confirmed by these Miracles, are
indee^ the Word of God. I know the great question then will be, whether there
were ever such Mira^cles wrought, which the Scriptures makes mention of,
whether the historical relation both of Prophe^sies and Miracles be not a
forgery, for the introd^^ction of the worship, which the Scriptures calls for
therefore,

3. I might show at large the rationally unquesti^^nable certainty of
Scripture-History, as hand^ to posterity; But in brief, when these things we^
so notable, and remarked in their times; when the^ were not done in corners;
when they were the o^^ject of sense; when they were so many; when they had so
many spectators and witnesses; wh^^ there are diverse records of the same
things, an^ all in the main agreeing; when the way they (...) declared in,
speaks so much simplicity in the relators; when there were so many Copies of
the Records dispersed into so many diverse places; when Enemies could not deny
the truth of things recorded, only imputed them to other causes; when mention
is made of these things in profane Histories; when we have the Writings of the
ancient Fathers by us, who lived in all the Centuries between us, and the time
of Christ, and with one consent acknowledge these things, who might easily have
found out the deceit, had there been any, when they lived some of them so near
to the days wherein the chief of these things were done; when we cannot
rationally assign an end, which should move Christians to deceive themselves
and posterity, since they exposed themselves to such losses, persecutions,
reproaches and afflictions by their profession of Christianity; neither can we
rationally imagine how all the Christians in the World could meet together from
so many Coun^ries, for the forging of things which were never done; much less
how they should agree together about it; and least of all how they should keep
his secret, but their adversaries would have found ^t out, and made it known,
some hint of it would ^ave been given in History; all these things being said
together, we may rationally conclude, that ^he History of the Scripture is as
certain, yea more ^ertain than any profane History, which we ^ave the least
doubt of; and if the Histories of ^rophesies fulfilled, and Miracles wrought be
^^ue, it is a strong Argument that the Scriptures which hereby are confirmed,
are indeed the word ^f God. These Arguments for the Divine Autho^^ty of the
Scriptures may be sufficient to stop the mouths of gainsayers, but without the
testimony of the spirit in and by them, none will be sufficient to effect a
saving faith. Thus it is evident from the truth, and divine Authority of the
Scriptures, which do so clearly reveal and foretell it, that the Lord Jesus
Christ will certainly appear to Judgment.

The second Argument to prove the certainty of Christ's appearance, may be drawn
from the certainty of the Resurrection.

2. Arg. If all the dead shall certainly le raised at the last day, and the
Lord Jesus Christ shall raise them, then the appearance of the Lord Jesus
Christ to do it is certain; but all the dead shall certainly be raised at the
last day, and the Lord Jesus Christ shall raise them, therefore the appearance
of the Lord Jesus Christ is certain.

1. That all the dead, which are or shall be brought into that state, shall be
raised at the last day, is a truth so clear in the Scripture, that nothing is
more clear. The general Resurrection of the dead is one great Article of our
Christian Faith; one Principle of the Doctrine of Christ made mention of by the
Apostle: Heb. 6. 1, 2. The dead sm^^l and great shall be raised, and stand
before God: Rev. 20. 12. We read of the Resurrection of the I^st, Luke 14. 14.
Of the Resurrection of the Just and Unjust, Acts 24. 15. I might multiply many
Scriptures to prove this Doctrine of the Resurrection, but I shall further
speak but of two places which purposely treat thereof, and being so full of
Arguments, I shall make use of no other than there I find for the evidencing
of this truth.

1. The former Scripture is in Matthew. 22. from verse. 23. to the 34. The same
day came the Sadduces to him, which say there is no Resurrection, and asked
him, saying Master, Moses said, If a Man die having no Children, his Brother
shall marry his Wife, and raise up Seed to his Brother. Now there were with us
seven brethren, and the first when he had married a Wife, deceased, and having
no issue, left his Wife unto his Brother. Likewise the second also, and the
third unto the seventh; And last of all the Woman died also. Therefore in the
Resurrection, whose Wife shall she be of the seven, for they all had her. Jesus
answered and said unto them, Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the
power of God: For in the Resurrection, they neither marry nor are given in
marriage, but are like the Angels of God in Heaven. But as touching the
Resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by
God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. And when the
multitude heard this, they were astonished at his Doctrine. And verse. 34. it is
said, He put the Sadduces to silence.

Here we have a Disputation concerning the Doctrine of the Resurrection,
wherein we may take notice of,

1. The opponents, and they were the Sadduces, who denied the Resurrection,
they denied the immortality of the Soul, for they said there was no Angel nor
Spirit: Acts 23. 8. And they denied the Resurrection of the body.

2. The Respondent, and that was the Lord Jesus Christ, the wisdom of the
Father; he that when he was but twelve years old, did dispute with the Doctors
in the Temple, and filled all that heard him with astonishment at his
understanding and answers, Luke 2. 46, 47. And much more now, when he was so
much increased in wisdom, was he able to deal with the Sadduces, and answer
them about this truth, of which (he coming out of the bosom of the Father, and
being acquainted with his secrets) he had so perfect knowledge; he had answered
the Herodians before most wisely to their ensnaring question, whether it were
lawful to pay tribute to Caesar; and he was able to give answer to the Sadduces
about the Resurrection.

3. The Objection of the Sadduces. Master, Moses said, etc. their Argument
against the Resurrection is this, If there were a Resurrection, then there
would be a confusion in Relations, insomuch as seven Men having been in this
World married to one Woman, all of them would claim a propriety in her, and to
whom should she belong, would not this breed a discord? Must not six of them
with grief be deprived of her, who once was their Wife? And could this agree
with the state of perfection and happiness, in which all the just should be
raised? The Sadduces thought now they had our Savior upon the hip; they
thought now it is likely, that they should confound him with this Argument,
that they should gravel him and shame him before the People; they could not
answer it themselves, and they thought that out Savior could not answer it
neither; and truly the objection has subtilty in it.

4. The answer of our Savior lies in verse. 30 In the Resurrection they neither
marry, nor are given in marriage, but are like the Angels of God in Heaven.
Hereby he gives them to understand that there would be no confusion in
Relations at the Resurrection, that there would be no enjoyment or deprivation
of conjugal Relations there, because such Relations would then cease; and Men
and Women would then be like Angels, which neither have, such Relations,
neither do stand in need of them; the end of such Relations will then cease,
and the Relation will cease too.

1. One end of the conjugal Relation here, is, the propagation of Mankind,
insomuch as the number is incomplete, and will be incomplete till the end of
the World, and the number is completing by Generation; but at the Resurrection
the number of Mankind will be complete; the number of the Elect will be
perfect, and in this regard they will be like to Angels, whose number was
complete at the first, and therefore this end of marriage ceasing, the Relation
should cease also.

2. Another end of marriage is mutual help; and this end also will cease; at
the Resurrection the wicked they shall have no help, the righteous shall have
no need of help from such Relations; God will supply All, they will be perfect
in him; God will be All, and in All: God will be instead of Father, Mother,
Husband, Wife, and all unto them, like Angels they shall behhold the Face of
their Father, and have no need of conjugal Relations.

5. And with this Answer to the Sadduces Objection, we may take notice of
Christ's Discovery of their error, and the grounds thereof, namely their
ignorance of the Scriptures, and the power of God; whereby, our Savior does
suggest a strong Argument, to prove the Doctrine of the Resurrection, drawn
from the power of God, and the Scriptures; the Argument is this, If there be
power in God to raise the Dead, and in the Scriptures he has revealed that he
will do it, then there will certainly be a Resurrection of the Dead; But there
is power in God to raise the dead, and in the Scriptures he has revealed that
he will do it.

1. That there is Power in God to raise the Dead, is evident, and none which
acknowledge his Deity can rationally deny; he that had power to make the World
out of nothing, has power to raise the Dead out of their Graves; he that had
power to give life, has power to restore it; he that has all power, has this
power; he who is infinite in power, who is omnipotent, unto whom nothing is
difficult, he can raise the dead, and join soul and body together after a long
separation. There is little doubt, but God can raise the dead, but the great
question lies in his will, whether he will or no. Therefore,

2. The Scriptures reveal his will herein; he that in the Scriptures has
promised that he will raise the dead, being so powerful and faithful, he will
certainly do it; but God has promised in the Scriptures, that he will raise
the dead. And though in the old Testament the Doctrine of the Resurrection be
spoken of more obscurely, yet our Savior fetches a proof of the Doctrine out
of the Book of M^ses, which the Sadduces (as is observed) did not acknowledge.
Verse. 31. 32* As touching the Resurrection of the De^d have ye^ not read what
was said to you by God, I am the God of Abraham, etc. God is not the God of the
de^d, but of the living; our Savior proves the Doctrine by strong inserence
drawn from this place, which needs a little opening to perceive the argument.

It is not unlikely but our Savior cleared the thing in more words, (for we
have but the heads in Scripture of many things which were delivered in large
discourses) he made it so clear that is satisfied the people, and silenced the
Saduces.

The Argument formed up is this: If God be the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, when they are dead, then Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
will rise again from the dead, and so there shall be a resurrection from the
dead; but God calls himself the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac; and the
God of Jacob, when they are dead, as they were, when he spoke those words of
Moses out of the bush; therefore they shall rise from the dead. The consequence
our Savior proves, because he is the God of the living, and not of the dead;
if that Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, be living before God, in regard of his
purpose to raise them from the dead, because he is their God, when their bodies
lie rotting in the grave, and therefore they may be called living when dead, by
him who quicknefh the dead, and causeth-those things which are not (but shall
be) as though they were. Romans 4. 17. then Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob shall
be raised from the dead, as certainly as if they were actually living; but they
are living before God, in regard of his purpose and promise to make them alive;
which is evident from the nature of the covenant which he has made with them,
which does include a promise of blessedness, and perfect happiness, which he
will give unto them. If God be the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob, he is their God in covenant, and by consequence will make
them perfectly happy, not only in regard of their souls, by receiving them into
glory, when they die; but also in regard of their bodies too, by raising them
from the dead at the last day, till which time their happiness is but in part,
and imperfect; and therefore hence may strongly be inferred, that they shall be
raised; and by consequence all in covenant shall be raised, to receive the
perfect happiness promised in the covenant; and by parity of reason, that all
out of covenant shall be raised to receive the complete punishment threa^ned to
sinners for their sins; and by consequence that there shall be a general
resurrection. Thus our Savior confirms this great doctrine of the
resurrection, whereby he stopped the mouths of the Sadduces; his answer made
the people astonished, and the Sadduces confounded; they came with their mouths
open, but they went away with their mouths shut* they came with full cry, but
they went away in silence; he put the Sadduces to silence.

2. The second Scripture to prove the Resurrection, is in 1 Cor. chap. 15.
thorowout; It seems, that some amongst the Corinthians who called themselves
Christians, did deny the Resurrection; now the scope of the chapter is to
refu^e this dangerous error, and to prove the truth, which the Apostle does by
several arguments.

1. The first argument is drawn from the Resurrection of Christ; If Christ be
risen from the dead, then believers which are his members, shall be raised
also; he will not suffer his members to lie for ever rotting in the grave,
because his mystical body then would never be grown up unto perfection: Christ
is the first fruits of them that sleep, v. 10. As certainly as he was awakened
out of his sleep in the grave on the third day, to certainly shall all those
that do, or shall sleep in Jesus, be awakened out of their grave at the last
day: But Christ is certainly risen from the dead, which the Apostle proves,

1. From the Prediction thereof in the Scriptures, as his death was foretold,
so also his resurrection was foretold in the type of Ionah's being ^ast out of
the belly of the whale on the third day.

2. From the testimony of those persons to whom the Lord Jesus Christ did
appear after his resurrection, namely of Cephas, all the Apostles, above five
hundred brethren at once, who saw him before his ascension; and last of all, in
that he was seen by himself upon the way to Damascus after his ascension: all
which witnesses did with one mouth confirm the truth of Christ's Resurrection.

3. From the absurdities which would follow if Christ were not risen.

1. The Apostles would then be found false witnesses, and the Spirit of God
which spoke in them, would be a false spirit, which is impossible.

2. Then their preaching would be in vain, and the whole doctrine of
Christianity, which was built partly upon this foundation, would fall to the
ground.

3. Then their faith would be in vain: because if Christ were still dead, he
would not be a meet object for their faith, for then he could not be the Son of
God, nor a Mediator between God and man.

4. Then Believers would be yet in their sins; their sins would remain
unpardoned; because satisfaction to Gods justice would not have been
completed, had the bonds of death still held ou^ Savior.

5. Then they which were fallen asleep in Christ would be perished in regard of
their bodies, li^^ the beasts when they die; because if Christ were not risen,
it would be impossible that they should ever rise any more.

6. Then believers should have hope only i^ this life; because if Christ were
not risen an^ ascended into Heaven, to prepare room for the^ there, they could
not have any good-grounde (...) hope of ever being received into that place;
an^ by consequence it would follow, that believe^ the best of men upon the
earth, would be the m^^ miserable men of all others, because they a^ exposed to
so many sufferings for the sake of Jesus Christ: If they had hope only in this
life, the^ would be most miserable in regard of sorrow (though not in regard of
sin) for their hopes (...) future glory do support and comfort them und^^ all
their afflictions; if they should loose their hope^ they would loose their
comforts, and be of all others the most forlorn and sorrowful; it would break
their hearts, and bring them to despa^^ Certainly then Christ is reisen, and as
certainly sh^^ the dead be raised.

2. The second argument whereby the Apostl^ proves the resurrection, is drawn
from the Pa^^lel between the first Adam* and Christ the secon^ Adam, v. 21,
etc. Since by man came death, (...) man also shall come the resurrection; for
as in Ad^^ all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive. (...) Adam sin came
into the world, and death by sin, and death passed upon all his posterity,
because all have sinned, at least in him: By Christ came righteousness into the
world, and by righteousness life, and all his posterity shall be raised by him
unto eternal life at the last day, because all are partakers of his
righteousness.

3. The third Argument is drawn from the reign of Christ at the right hand of
the Father, until all his enemies be put under his feet; and the last enemy
which shall be destroyed is death; and death is no ways perfectly destroyed,
but by the resurrection of the dead out of their graves, and the putting
immortality upon the body: then when this corruptible shall put on incorruption,
and this mortal shall put on immortality, death shall be swallowed up in
victory; therefore since death, with other enemies, shall be put under Christ's
feet, it is necessity that there should be a resurrection.

4. The fourth Argument is in v. 29. Else what shall they do that are baptized
for the dead: if the dead rise not, why are they baptized for the dead? The
words are difficult; various are the interpretations which are given; I like
Calvin's best; if it will hold with the words, Why are they baptized for the
dead, or for dead? that is, why are they that are dying, and given over for
dead? baptized? if the dead rise not; why will any when they are going out of
the world be baptized in the name of Christ? if they did not hope for a
resurrection at the last; that as they are buried with him by baptism unto
death, so they should rise with him not only unto newness of life here, but
also unto everlasting life and glory hereafter.

5. The fifth argument is drawn from the jeopardie and sufferings of
Christians, which they would not undergo unless they had hopes of the
resurrection.

6. The denial of this Doctrine opens a door to licenciousness. People would
eat and drink, and let l^o^e the reigns to sensual delights, and commit sin
with greediness, if they must die, and there were no hopes of a resurrection to
glory and happiness, and no fears of a resurrection to torment and misery.

Besides, Scripture testimony and argument, which is the only firm proof of the
resurrection. I might add for illustration, some Emblems of the resurrection in
nature.

Naturalists tell us of a Phaenix which rises out of the ashes, into which she
had burned her self before; but it is more certain, that some birds lie in
holes dead all the winter, and get life again in the Summer; we see Plants,
Herbs, Flowers, and the like wither in the Winter, and spring forth again when
the cold weather is gone; we see the Sun sets at night, and arise again in the
morning; and we our selves, as we have an Emblem of death upon us when we are
asleep, so our awaking again, and arising from our beds, is an Emblem of our
resurrection at the last day. It is certain that the dead shall be raised,
which has been proved.

2. And secondly, it is as certain that Christ shall raise them. I will raise
them at the last day. Ioh. 6. 40. this is spoken of believers; but it is spoken
also of all, Ioh. 5. 28, 29. The hour is coming, in which all that are in their
graves* shall hear his voice and come forth: they that have done good, to the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, to the resurrection of
damnation.

Hence it strongly follows, If the dead shall certainly be raised, and the Lord
Jesus shall raise them, that the appearance of Christ to do it, is certain.

3. Arg. The third Argument to prove the certainty of Christ's second
appearance may be drawn from the certainty of the last general Judgment.

If there will certainly be a day of general Judgment, and the Lord Jesus
Christ will be the Judge; then the second appearance of Christ is certain: But
there will be certainly a day of general judgment, and the Lord Jesus Christ
will be the Judge; therefore Christ's appearance is certain.

1. The certainty of the last judgment is evident from Scripture, Heb. 6. 2. 2
Pet. 3. 9. Romans 2. 5, 6, 7. and elsewhere frequently, and I shall further prove
it by Scripture arguments.

It does appear there will be a day of Judgment,

1. From Gods app^intment. Act. 17. 31. He has appointed a day wherein he will
judge the world in righteousness. God appointed the creation of the world,
which accordingly he effected: he appointed the reconciliation of the world to
himself, which he brought to pass; and having arpointed the judgment of the
world, it shall as certainly be brought to pass in its day. Nothing can
frustrate God's appointments, God being so infinite in wisdom, does not appoint
any thing about which there shall be any reason to after his determination; and
God being so infinite in power, nothing can hinder the effecting of what he
has determined shall be done.

2. From Gods Supreme and universal Sovereignty; he is the blessed and the
great Potentate, which rules over all the Kingdoms of the earth; He is the King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Tim^ 6. 15. All the children of men are not only
his creatures, but also his subjects. As it is the work of earthly Kings to
judge their subjects, and to dispense rewards and punishments: so God being the
supreme Sovereign, will judge all his subjects; Kings are but Gods Vicegerents,
they rule under him, and they must give an account unto him; God will judge the
Judges of the Earth: men do often judge unrighteously, sometimes through their
own wickedness and partiality; sometimes through ignorance and false
information; the righteous are condemned by some, and notorious offenders are
acquitted; and those which judge most righteously, cannot find out all that
should fall under the lash of the Law, and the strictest laws of men do not
reach all offenses against God; therefore there is need that the Sovereign Lord
and King should call the whole world to another judgment, which will be at the
last day.

3. From Gods most excellent Wisdom in the mannagement of his government over
the children of men; the wisdom of God now is much out of sight, and is little
taken notice of in the world: there seems now to be a great disorder and
confusion in the government of men; the most faithful subjects of the King of
Heaven in most places are trodden under foot, and have many bitter cups put
into their hands; and the most vile Traitors and Rebels, against the highest
Majesty, are lifted up into the seat of honor, and spend much of their days
in mirth and jollity; we read in Scripture of the various and great afflictions
of Gods People. Heb. 11. 36, 37. Some there were mocked, and s^ourged, and
tortured, they were sawen asunder, they were slain with the Sword, they
wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted and
tormented, and yet such as the World was not worthy of; whereas it is said of
the wicked, Psalm. 73. 5, 7, 10. Their eyes stand out with fatness, they have
more than heart could wish, and Waters of a full Cup are wrung out unto them;
and they are not in trouble like other Men, neither are they plagued like other
Men. See also Psalm. 17. 14. Job 31. from the 7. verse. to the 14th.

So that if there were not another Judgment, God would seem to have been an
ill-contriver of Government for the welfare of his people, and to have
ill-consulted his own glory in the World; yea his enemies would seem to have
out-wi^ted him; therefore it is needful there should be a day of Judgment, when
all things shall be set at rights, and put in order; when Gods wisdom all
along shall plainly appear in the view of all, and his glory be made manifest;
when his people shall be exalted, and his enemies debased.

4. From the infinite holiness of God, now the holiness of God is trampled
under foot by ungodly sinners; they scorn and deride it, wherever they see any
Image or apearance thereof; they scoff at the name of a Saint; they hate
holiness, and many do their uttermost to banish it the World; which is a high
affront, which such Persons offer to the highest Majesty in this high
attribute; it is therefore necessary that there should be a day of Judgment,
that God may redeem the honor of his holiness, which now lies under such
contempt; then he will make his holiness to shine with an amazing excellency in
the eyes of all those that did despise it.

5. From Gods justice and righteousness; God has given unto Man a most just
and righteous Law, and annexed threatenings of everlasting punishment, which he
will inflict upon the breakers thereof; Gods justice cannot be satisfied
without execution of his vengeance in the punishment of all transgressors,
except it be of such who have an interest in the satisfaction, which was made
by the Lord Jesus Christ; and all the Children of Adam being transgressors,
and very few of them having an interest in Christ and his merits, and none
receiving condign punishment for their sins in this life; therefore there will
be a day for the revelation of the just and righteous judgment of God, Romans 2.
5. This righteousness of God does engage him not only to punish the wicked for
their sins, but also to give his people that reward which the Lord Jesus Christ
has purchased and prepared for them; therefore there must be a day for him to
do it in.

Thus it does appear, that there will be a day of general Judgment.

2. That Christ will be the Judge, is also evident from Scripture, Acts 17. 31.
He has appointed a day wherein he will judge the World in righteousness by the
Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all Men, in
that he has raised him from the dead. And Romans 14. 10. We shall all stand
before the Judgment Seat of Christ. And 2 Cor. 5. 10. For we must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done
in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. And
Christ's judicial proceedings is set forth at large, Matthew. 25. Hence then it
follows, that the Lord Jesus Christ shall certainly appear to Judgment. I might
add other Arguments drawn from the faith, and hope, and expectation of the
righteous, and Christ's faithfulness, love, and the engagement of his honor to
appear again, but so much concerning the certainty of Christ's second appearance.

CHAP. XII.
3. THe third thing proved, is to show that the Lord Jesus Christ will quickly
appear, that is, 1. He will come within a short time. 2. He will come suddenly
and unexpectedly, when he does appear.

1. Christ will come quickly, that is, within a short time. Heb. 10. 37. Yet a
little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. He that
shall come will come, there is the certainty of his coming, and yet a little
while, he will come, and will not tarry, there is the speediness of his coming.
The Lord is at hand, Philip. 4. 5. The coming of the Lord draws nigh, James
5. 8. The Judge stands at the door, verse. 9. The end of all things is at
hand, 1 Pet. 4. 7. Therefore out days are called the last days. 2 Timothy 3. 1.
And upon us the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10. 11. We live in the end
of the World, in the last days, in the old age thereof. The World has as it
were three ages, the youth, the middle age, and the old age; the Youth of the
World was from the creation to the Flood; the middle age from the Flood to the
first coming of Christ; the old Age from the first coming of Christ, to the
second coming, the old age and last days of the World began in the Apostles
time, now many of them are spent, and we are come not only to the declining
years, but also to the decrepit age of the World; and if the Lord Jesus Christ
were to come shortly in the days of the Apostle, much more shortly will he
come now, when so many years are past since the Scripture was writ, and these
things foretold.

If any should doubt of the certainty of Christ's appearance, because the
Scripture speaks of the speediness thereof, as if Christ had been in those
days presently to come, and yet above sixteen hundred years are past, since
the promise was made.

I answer, that the Apostle Paul who in his first Epistle to the Thessalenians
spoke of Christ's coming, as if it might be in his time, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16, 17. The
Lord himself will descend from Heaven with a sho^t, etc. And the dead in Christ
shall rise first; then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up in the
Clouds, etc. The same Apostle tells the Thessalonians in his second Epistle,
Chap. 2. 3. Tha^ the day of the Lord should not come, till there was ^ falling
away, and the Man of sin should be revealed, etc. And verse. 7. That there was
then a let to the Revelation of the Man of sin, which was the Heathenish
Roman Empire, which let was not likely in haste, neither was removed till
some hundred of years after; and therefore it is eviden^ from that place, that
the coming of the Lord was not to be until several ages after the writing of
the Scriptures. This may be sufficient to give satisfaction concerning the
length of time, since the Scripture tells us that the Lord Jesus would quickly
appear.

If any profane Mockers shall scoff at this answer, and say, where is the
Promise of his coming? Do not all things remain as they were since the
Creation? Do not the Sun, and Moon, and Stars keep their constant course? And
what likelihood of the darkning of the Sun, and falling of the Stars, and the
passing away of the Heavens with a great noise? Is not the Earth established
upon sure foundations, and what likelihood of moving it and burning it, with
the works which are upon it? and if Christ would have come so quickly, would
not he have been here before now? I answer,

1. That the Apostle Peter foretells, that in the last days such scoffers should
arise. 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4.

2. That all things are not as they were from the Creation, for the World in
the time of Noah was drowned with the Flood, Noah only excepted, and those
which were with him in the Ark; surely there was a great transformation of
things in that age, verse. 5, 6.

3. That by the same word of command, whereby the old World was drowned with
Water, by the same Word, the World that now is shall be burned with Fire at the
day of Judgment and perdition of the ungodly, verse. 7.

4. That though many hundred years be p^st since the promise, that the Lord
would come quickly, yet there is not a failure, in regard of God; for though
the time be long, in regard of our account, who are of so short continuance;
and time seems tedious to us, because of the miseries of our short life; yet in
regard of the eternal God, the time is but short, for in his sight a thousand
years is but as one day, and by that account there are not yet two days past
since the promise. verse. 8.

5. The reason of Gods protracting this appearance of Jesus Christ to Judgment,
is for our sakes; it is from his long-suffering to usward, that hereby he
might lead us unto repentance, verse. 9. The Lord has a number to be called,
some of which may be unborn, others not yet newborn, but scattered amongst the
wicked; but when the Elect are all called, and persuaded to repent, and
believe, and are gathered into Gods Family, I doubt not but the Lord Jesus
Christ will be here immediately. The Lord Jesus surely now will come within a
short time; the certain time of his appearance is unknown, Matthew. 24. 36. But
of that day and hour knows no Man, no not the Angels, but the Father only;
this is a secret which God has locked up in his own breast, it is written in
the Book of this Decree, and however other things are revealed and unfolded to
Men, yet the leaf where this is written is folded up and sealed, so that none
can read it; yet surely it cannot be long before the mystery be finished, and
Christ be revealed from Heaven; yet a little while and he will be here, he
stands at the Door, and the Door will quickly be opened, and then he will make
his appearance.

2. The Lord Jesus Christ will come quickly, that is suddenly, and
unexpectedly, especially in regard of the ungodly World. The day of the Lord
will come as a s^^re upon all them that dwell on the face of the whole Earth:
L^ke 21. 34, 35. And sudden destruction will then come upon the wicked, as
pains on a Woman with Child: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. The Lord will come in a moment, in
the twinkling of an eye: 1 Cor. 15. 52. As lightning comes out of the East,
and shines unto the West, so shall the coming of the Son of Man be: Matthew. 24.
27. Further, this coming of the Lord Jesus is set forth in Scripture.

1. By the coming of a Thief in the night, Rev. 16. 15. Behold I come as a
Thief: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. For your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord
so comes as a Thief in the night: 2 Pet. 3. 10. The day of the Lord comes as
a Thief in the night, in which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise,
etc. The Lord will not come like a Thief, in regard of any wicked purpose and
design; but he will come like a Thief, in regard of the suddenness and
unexpectedness of his coming. Men do not think of, they do not know of, they
are not aware of, they do not desire the coming of Thieves: so the Lord will
come at a time, which Men do not know of, when they do not think of it, when
they are not aware of it; and he will be more unwelcome at his second
appearance to the greatest part of the World, than a Thief, who comes suddenly
in the night, and breaks in upon their Houses, to steal their goods, and take
away their lives; when the Lord Jesus shall suddenly unfold the Doors of
Heaven, and come down in his glory, and summon the wicked to Judgment, how will
they start, and be affrighted out of their deep sleep of security, and be
filled with horror and amazement!

2. Christ's coming is set forth by the coming of a Bridegroom at midnight, in
the Parable of the ten Virgins, Matthew. 25. 6. At midnight there was a cry made,
Behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye forth to meet him. The Virgins were all
asleep, the wise as well as the foolish, they did not expect the Bridegroom at
that time; the coming of Christ will be sudden and unexpected, as to the
particular time unto his own Disciples; yet they will quickly arise, and trim
their Lamps, and receive him with joy, when the Lamps of the foolish Virgins,
for want of Oil, will go out, and they shall be shut out of the Bride-chamber
of Heaven for ever.

3. Christ's coming is set forth by the coming of the Flood upon the old World,
and Noah's entering into the Ark: Luke 17. 26, 27. And as it was in the days
of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the Son of Man; They did eat, they
drank, they married Wives; they were given in marriage, until the day that Noah
entered into the Ark, and the Flood came and destroyed them all. The old World
was very licentious, and secure in the days of Noah; though universal ruins
and destruction were so near, yet it being a thing which was unseen, they did
not expect it, nor take any care to prevent it. It is said of Noah, Heb. 11. 7.
That by faith being warned of God, of things not seen as yet, moved with fear,
he prepared an Ark to the saving of his house: By faith he knew that the Flood
would come, when there was no appearance of it, nor possibility, in regard of
the ordinary way of the working of second causes; he believed it, because God
who could effect it, and who cannot lie, had foretold it; and therefore he
prepared, according to Gods direction, this great Vessel, to defend himself and
Family, and some living Creatures of every kind, against the Waters, which he
foresaw were coming upon the Earth; but the ungodly World, having no eye of
faith, could not discern this unseen thing; it is most likely they heard often
of it by Noah, who was a Preacher of righteousness; but they did not believe
it, therefore they did not expect it, nor fear it, nor prepare for it: they
are, and drank, and slept, and sinned as if no such thing had been coming upon
them: It is likely, when they saw Noah build the Ark, such a large and
capacious Vessel, on the dry Land, that they scoffed at him, and accounted him
no better than a madman, as we should do a Man that should build a Ship on the
top of a Mountain, and expect that Waters should come up thither, and waft it
away.

But when the days of a hundred and twenty years, which the Lord had appointed
the old World to continue, after his threatening of their destruction, were
expired; when the decree had brought forth, and the year of Gods recompense was
come, and the day of his fierce anger, wherein he sent the Flood upon the
Earth, O the terror and amazement which did surprise the secure sinners of the
World at that time! when the Windows of Heaven were opened from above, out of
which God looked forth upon sinners, with such a furious countenance, and
poured forth his anger in such streams of water; and the Fountains of the
great deep were opened from beneath, and the Flood began to arise, and lift up
the head, and swell about them; when the Valleys were filled with running
Waters, and the Plains were covered, as if they had been a Sea; when this enemy
did combine so many Forces together (having a Commission from God to destroy)
and strengthened it self on every side, and environed these rebellious sinners
round about, and assailed them in every quarter; when not only smaller Cortages
were overturned, but also the streams brake in with irresiftible force upon
the strongest and greatest edifices; when great Doors were lifted off of their
hinges, or broken to pieces, and the Water (like a Thief) climbed in at the
Windows, and roaring all about with a hideous noise, pursued those which fled
from it, following them up stairs, even to the highest room until it had
overtaken them, and devoured them without mercy; think what a hurry and
affright the World was in at that time; how every one shifted for himself, if
possible, to preserve himself from the fury of this Conqueror; how they forsook
the lower grounds, and flocked together to the Hill-Countreys in great haste,
leaving their substance behind them, with a sad heart; how they were drenched
with the Rain from Heaven, and wet to the skin as they went along, and scarcely
were able to take breath, the storms was so impetuous about them; and when
they perceived the Flood to beset the highest Mountains, (whither some of them
were fled, and upon the top of which some of them had climbed, hoping (it may
be) that they had got unto an inaccessible place) and that the billows were
mounting toward them; and now the whole World sees their death and ruin to
be inevitable, that there was no contending with, no resisting or flying from
these armed Waters, which God had sent to execute his vengeance upon them for
their sins; we may imagine something of the horrible perplexity of their
minds: O how did they look one upon another, when such a judgment as this was
come upon them, which they never looked for! how did they speak! how did they
weep! how did they cry and shreek! what distress was there then upon all
Nations, and how did their hearts fail them, and sink within them through fear,
when they looked upon the flood that was come upon the earth; when they heard
the winds blowing, and waves roaring, and saw no way of escaping? Then they
which had heard Noah foretell and threaten them with this judgment, too late
believed the truth of his words, which before they did not regard; then they
which had seen Noah build the Ark, and had accounted him no better than mad,
were convinced of their own folly and madness, that they did not with him take
some course for the defense of themselves at this time; then they were
persuaded of Noah's wisdom above all others on the earth, and could have
wished that they had imitated his wisdom, in building for themselves such
another Ark, or that they were with him in his; and possibly some, when the
waters were come, and Noah was shut in by God in his Ark, might run to the
place and endeavor to clamber into it, and be washed off with the stream.

Thus will it be at the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ to judgment,
his coming will be sudden and unexpected: the wicked of the earth will be
eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage; they will be as sensual
and sinful, and as secure withal, as they are at this day; they are told
frequently, by the preaching of the word, that the day of judgment is
appointed, and that it hastneth greatly; that the Lord Jesus Christ will come,
and that he will come quickly; but they want faith to believe it, and therefore
they do not expect it, nor fear it, no^ prepare for it: It is said, Luke 18.
^8. When the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? Some
interpret this place as spoken not of Christ's second personal coming to
judgment; but of his coming in a way of eminent deliverance of his people
from the cruelty and oppression of their enemies, which will be so strange and
unexpected, because they shall be brought so low, insomuch that there will
hardly be faith in any to believe a desiverance. Others interpret this place,
as speaking of Christ's last appearance to judgment; that the earth will then be
generally secure, and that wicked men, and unbelievers, and oppressors of Gods
people will abound, and that true believers will be rare, and very hardly to be
found: I shall not determine which is the true sense of the place, but sure I
am the wicked will be many, and very secure at the day of Christ's appearance;
though the wicked be forewarned of this day, yet they do not believe this
thing, than which nothing is more certain; the wicked, which are mingled
amongst Gods people, think strange that they do not run with them unto the same
excess of riot; they look upon them as no better than fools, and people
besides themselves, when they see them deny themselves, slight the pleasures
and profits, and vanities of the world, and are so iollicitous above all other
things to prepare an Ark for the saving of their souls, to get an interest in
Jesus Christ, typified by the Ark, that under his shelter they may be defended
from the storm of Gods wrath, which shall beat upon the head of the wicked at
the last day. The wicked do expect Christ's coming no more than the old world
did the Flood in the days of Noah.

But when the time which the Lord has appointed the world to continue, is
expired, and the Angel has lifted up his hand to Heaven, and sworn by him that
lives for ever and ever, that time shall be no longer; when the mystery of God
is finished, and all the things to be done in the world are accomplished, and
the day of judgment of old ordained, is now come, and Christ has received his
commission from his Father to summon all to his judgment seat: O the dread that
will on that day fall upon the wicked tribes of the earth! when they shall see
the heavens opened above, and such a glorious Majesty, with such a glorious
Train appear in the air; and when the earth and the graves shall be open
beneath, and all the dead bodies of all generations shall be raised and come
forth, and some of them shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the clouds, and
themselves with the most to be left behind; and when they feel the wrath of God
to begin to assail them like a flood, and to be poured into their souls like
water; when they see Christ coming in flaming fire to take vengeance upon them
for their sins: O this will be an unexpected and terrible appearance, and so
much the more retrible, by how much the less expected: Then they will not
endeavor to climb up mountains, but to creep under them to hide them from the
wrath of the Lamb, but all to no purpose, no mountain will receive them, for
all the mountains, and earth it self, with the heavens, will flee away from the
face of the Lord Jesus Christ, when his Throne is set for Judgment, Rev. 20.
11. they will then look about them, and perceive all refuge to fail them, and
no way of escaping for them; then they will with grief remember the warnings
which they had of these things, and be vexed at the very heart that they did
not take warning; then they will wish for an Ark; and O that they had an
interest in Jesus Christ! and they will account believers, whom once they
esteemed as fools and mad men, to have been the wisest people upon the earth;
and O that they were in their condition! possibly some may endeavor to clamber
up into the air with them, when they are ascending to their Lord; but they will
have weights sufficient to keep them down. The dread of sinners at the last
day, when Christ does come so suddenly and unexpectedly will be far greater
than the dread of the old world in the days of the Flood.

4. And lastly, to name no more, the suddenness and unexpectedness of Christ's
coming is set forth by the raining of Fire and Brimstone from Heaven upon
Sodom, and Lots going out of that wicked place, Luke 17. 28, 29, 30. Likewise
as it was in the days of Lo^, they did eat, they drank, they bought, they
sold, they planted, they builded: But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom,
it rained Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all: Even thus
shall it be in the day when the Son of man shall be revealed. The Sodomites
were notoriously wicked, they were worse than beasts, they would have offered
violence, and buggered the very Angels which were sent to Lot; they were
generally wicked, there were not so many as ten righteous persons in the place,
though righteous Lot dwelt amongst them; it is likely ^here was not one
righteous person, besides what was in Lots family; and though they were so
wicked, and the cry of their sins was gone up ^o Heaven, and the Lord was
provoked unto so great displeasure by them; yet they are jovial and secure;
they did not think in the midst of their peace, that sudden destruction was so
near; Abraham with his servants had not long before delivered them out of the
hand of Chedorlaomer, (against whom they had rebelled) and Amraphel, and the
other Kings which had conquered them, and sacked the place; they did not think
of a more ^urious enemy, who was arming himself against them, even the King of
Heaven, against whom they had worse rebelled, and out of whose hands none could
deliver them: They ate, and they ^rank, they did not think that their flesh,
and all ^he provisions thereof should so soon be devoured by flames; they
bought, and they sold, they did little expect that both money and merchandise
should be consumed so suddenly; they planted and they builded, they did not in
the least imagine that instead of showers of Rain from Heaven to water their
Plants, to make them grow, they should have showers of Fire and Brimstone to
burn up their plants, and burn down their houses to the ground. The Sodomites
did not in the least look for such a Judgment as this: it is said, Genesis 19. 14.
That Lot went out and spoke to his sons in law, which had married his
daughters, and said, Up, get you out ^f this place, for the Lord will destroy
this City: but ^e seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in law. His words
were unto them like idle tales, which they did not believe, otherways they
would not have remained in the place until they had been consumed; and if Lot's
sons in Law, (who in likelihood were some of the best of the place) did not
believe nor expect the judgment, though they were forewarned by their Father;
much less did the rest of the Sodomites expect it, that had not before heard of
it. This Fire from Heaven was altogether unexpected in Sodom.

But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained Fire and Brimstone upon
them, and destroyed them all. The morning was clear, when Lot went forth, and
the Sun did shine with a glorious brightness, when he got into Zoar; but then
we may imagine that a strange darkness did quickly fill the Heavens, when the
Lord came down clothed with vengeance as with a garment, and wrapped in thick
clouds of the sky; when the Lord thundered in the Heavens, and the highest gave
hi^ voice, Hailstones and coals of fire; when the Lord rained Fire and
Brimstone upon the place; Wh^ can utter the horrible perpexity of the Sodomite^
on that day, under this unthought of, unexpected, sudden, and so dreadful
un-heard-of Judgment? when they opened their windows and doors of their houses
in the morning, and perceived the fashion of the heavens to be altered and the
tempest of Fire and Brimstone to beat (...) upon them so sorely and suddenly;
when the (...) was strangely converted into fire, and such scalding sulphurious
matter enkindled by the brea^^ of God did fall upon them; when the whol^ place
was put into flames together, and ever house was set on Fire by this Fire from
Heaven when they saw if the^ went forth of doors they should be burnt by the
fire of Heaven, if they stayed within, they should be burnt by the fire of
their houses; when there was such a dreadful burning heat by the Fire,
accompanied with such a stinking, noisome, suffocating smoke by the brimstone;
when there was a little kind of Hell in that place both for torment and sin; O
the Dread of the Sodomites at that time! then those beasts which would have
forced themselves into Lots doors, to commit leudness, and were stricken by the
Angels with blindness, when they began to feel the violence of this Fire, and
their pampered flesh began to be roasted by these flames, how did they howl
like Dogs, how did they roar and yell with anguish and horror? Then all the
sinners of the place, whose sins before went up with such a loud cry into the
ears of God, what a loud cry did they send forth out of every house under the
sense of their torments? then the sons in law of Lot, who were forewarned, I
believe, were above others perplexed and filled with unspeakable vexation, that
they did not hearken to the voice of their Father, and remove with him from
that place before the Fire came; then they knew he did not mock them, but was
in good earnest, and that his words were not idle tales, but the truth of Gods
intention, which he was sent to give them notice of: Sodom is now made a fiery
Furnace, and all the wicked of the place are consumed together suddenly and
unexpectedly.

Even thus will it be in the day when the Son of Man shall be revealed, when
the Lord Jesus Christ shall come to Judgment. The world is very wicked, and the
longer it does continue, the worse it grows; the sins of the wicked world, like
the sins of Sodom have gone up with a loud Cry to God; and the Lord has
exercised his patience a long time to lead them unto repentance; and if there
had not been some righteous persons on the Earth, the day of Judgment would
have been long ago; if there had not been some Lots in Sodom, I mean some Elect
Persons in their sins, that are yet to be called, and some as yet un-born, that
must be gathered, the World would ere this have been consumed, for the
wickedness thereof; there is a measure appointed for the Worlds sins, which
will be filled up, and there is a number appointed of chosen Persons, who ere
long will be brought in, and so soon as Lot is got into Zoar, God rains Fire
and Brimstone on Sodom; and I conceive that so soon as all the Elect Persons
are got into Christ, that then Christ will appear to Judgment; and as it was in
the days of Lot, so will it be on the day of Christ's appearance; the wicked of
the World will be secure, eating and drinking, buying and selling, planting and
building.

The day before Christ comes will be a merry day with some ungodly sinners,
they will be eating and drinking, feasting and carouzing, singing and
rejoicing, and putting the evil day far from them, even when it is so very
near; but how will their cheer be changed the next morning? how will their
singing be turned into howling, and their joy into heaviness and dreadful
terror?

The day before will be a gainful day, it may be with many in their buying and
selling, possibly they may have got a good bargain in their buying, and got
good profit in their selling; and it may be a busy day with others in their
planting and building, which may fill their time and thoughts with Worldly care
and contrivements for many years to come, little thinking that the World is not
of a years, nor two days standing longer; but O what terror will seize upon
these Worldings the next morning, when Christ does appear to judge them! and
they find, that whilst they have gained something in the World, which they
cannot now keep, and will yield no profit in this day of wrath, that they have
lost their souls and happiness for ever, which they cannot regain; that whilst
they have been busy about trifles, they have neglected the one thing
necessary; then they will wish, that instead of planting Trees in their Ground,
they had spent their time in getting grace planted in their hearts; that
instead of building Houses for their bodies, they had laid a good foundation
for this time, and got a title to the building of God, the House not made with
hands, which is durable and eternal.

The day before Christ's coming will be a sinning-day with all the wicked, and a
day of general security; some will be swearing and cursing, others will be
oppressing and grinding the faces of the poor, others will be reproaching and
persecuting of Gods people; and the very night before, it may be many wicked
Persons may be got together Carding, and Dicing, and Drinking all night unto
Drunkenness, and others may be got into the unclean Bed, and there lie in their
filthiness, and all will be sleeping in sin and security; but the sound of the
last Trumpet will startle and awaken them all; when sinners open their eyes on
this morning, and see the Heavens open before them, and the Lord Jesus Christ
descend in such glory as has been described, none can utter what their
perplexity will be at that day; and the suddenness of Christ's coming will make
their horror the greater; some of them were told of this day of Fire, when the
Heavens should pass away with a great noise, and the Elements should melt with
fervent heat, and the Earth (with the works thereof) should be burnt up, and
what course they should take, to escape the vengeance of this day; they were
persuaded to leave their sins, to flee from the wrath to come, to hasten out of
Sodom, if they would not be consumed in its flames, to get away, and not look
back, to flee presently into Zoar, where only they could be hid, to get into
the City of refuge, if they would escape the vengeance which did pursue them,
which had them upon the chase; they were invited into Gods Family, and into the
arms of his mercy; they were invited unto Christ, and to partake of his grace
freely; they were told again, and again, if they did go on in the way of sin,
that iniquity would be their ruin, that so long as they did abide in a state
of impenitency and unbelife, that the wrath of God did abide on them; they were
told how sweet: Savior the Lord Jesus Christ was, and how ready he would be to
receive them, if they applied themselves by faith, with repentance for sin unto
him; and they were told how furious and inexorable a Judge he would be, and
what vengeance he would take upon them at the last day, if they did not take
warning in the day of grace, which they had allowed them; they were told that
Hell Fire was very hot and intolerable, and that Heavens pleasures were very
sweet, and most desirable, and they were earnestly entreated to fly from the
former, and accept of the latter, upon the most reasonable terms, on which
they were proffered: But they were like Lot's Sons in Law, they did not
believe: Ministers which warned them, seemed in their eyes, as if they had
mocked them, their words seemed like idle tales; whatever haste the Lots made
out of Sodom, they would not stir; they did not look after a Zoar to fly unto;
they hugged their sins, and would not leave them; they heard of Christ, but
they neglected, slighted, refused him; they did not apprehend such need, which
they had of a Savior; they were fearless of future wrath, and careless of the
salvation and happiness of their souls. But when Christ does come down so
suddenly and unexpectedly to judge and condemn them, and shall cast them into
the Lake, which burns with Fire and Brimstone; then they will remember these
things with vexation, far greater than that of Lot's Sons in Law, (when Fire
and Brimstone was rained from Heaven upon them) who would not hearken to the
counsel of their Father to escape it.

CHAP. XIII.
The Application.
THe Lord Jesus Christ will certainly and quickly appear.

The day is appointed by the eternal and unalterable decree of God, and he has
revealed the thing, though not the time, in his word of truth; the day
approaches, it cannot be far off; time is flying away upon swift wings; the
day of the World is almost spent, the shadows of its evening are stretched
forth to a great length; yet a little while, and Christ will be here; he will
appear in his glory; never did eye of Man behold such glory and majesty in the
greatest earthly Potentate, as will be seen in the Lord Jesus Christ on this
day; all the state, and pomp, and splendour, and glittering glory, which some
Princes have been decked withal in their Triumphant shows, is no more to be
compared with the pomp and splendour of the Lord Jesus Christ in this
appearance, than the shining of a Candle, or Glowworm, or rotten stick in the
night, is to be compared with the shining of the Sun in its noonday glory: Ere
long the great Gates of Heaven will lift up their heads, and those everlasting
Doors (within which Christ does, for the present, remain) will be opened; and
then this King of Glory will come forth, and come down with mavelous
splendor and brightness of Majesty; It is said, Psalm. 47. 5. God is gone up
with a shout, the Lord with the sound of the Trumpet; then God will come down
with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a Trumpet, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. The
Chariots of the Lord are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels: Psalm. 68.
17. All the holy Angels shall attend upon him, and blow the Trumpet before him,
at this last Assizes, to awaken and summon on the World to judgment: then the
Sun in the Firmament will be darkened, when this more glorious Sun does appear;
then the whole frame of Heaven will shake, and the foundations of the Earth
will be moved, the everlasting Mountains will bow, and the perpetual Hills will
shrink; yea the Heavens will pass away with a great noise, and like a skroll be
rolled together, and the Elements will melt with fervent heat, and the Earth
w^^l be on Fire, and every Mountain and Island will flee away from before his
face; then the Sea will roar, and all living Creatures, likely, will be in a
strange consternation; then the wicked Tribes of the Earth will mourn, and the
Saints will rejoice at this glorious appearance of the great God, and their
Savior.

But who will be alive on this glorious day? who will be the Spectators of
these great things? whose eyes shall behold this blessed sight? who shall see
the Lord Jesus come in such glory? many Kings and Prophets, and righteous Men
desired to-see Christ come in the flesh, and did not see him; and to hear the
things which he taught, but they did not obtain their desire; many Generations
were asleep in their Graves before Christ's first appearance; the righteous saw
him afar off, and darkly, in types and figures; few lived in the days when our
Saviors abode was upon the Earth; he had not many Disciples whom he made happy
with his personal acquaintance and abode with them; A great access there has
been since Christ's departure unto the Church, who though they have loved him,
and believed in him, yet they never saw him with bodily eyes: Three things one
desired to see, Christ in the flesh, Paul in the Pulpit, and Rome in its glory;
but past things are fled out of sight, and the wishes of such things are ^o no
purpose; death has closed the eyes of many millions of Christ's Disciples, who
have heard the report of him, but never saw him: And is not their hopes of
seeing Christ perished in the Graves with their bodies, which are turned into
rotten^ess and purrefaction? and are not we all hast^ing toward those dark
Chambers, where no ^eam of light does shine, and nothing can be seen? the
righteous indeed which remain, when Christ does come down, will be happy, when
they see their Lord in the air, but if we die before the time, what shall we
be the better?

Beloved, let me tell you, or rather believe the Word of God, which does tell
you, that all of you will be spectators of the great things which shall come to
pass at the last day; all Generations of Men and Women that ever lived upon the
face of the Earth, and are sleeping in the dust, shall then be awakened, and
raised, and be alive together, and you shall be found alive amongst them: that
which our Savior spoke to the chief Priests and Elders of the Jews, before
whom he was accused, and stood as a Prisoner. Hereafter ye shall see the Son
of Man sitting at the right hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven:
Matthew. 26. 64. The same may I say unto all you that hear me this day, hereafter
ye shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven: Rev. 1. 7. Behold
he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him. These very eyes with which
you look upon me, or one upon another, shall see the Lord Jesus Christ come in
the air; these very cares with which you hear me preach this Doctrine unto
you, shall hear the sound of the last Trumpet, and the great shout with which
Christ will descend out of his Fathers Palace into this inferior World; these
very bodies which are standing or sitting in this place, must stand before
Christ's Tribunal Seat at the last Day.

Death has a Commission from God to pull you out of your habitations, and drag
your bodies into its Prison, and this enemy is upon the way, and has you all
in pursuit, and how near he is come to your Doors you do not know; his arrows
are flying about your ears, and you will be smitten sooner or later, either
when you are younger or older, none can escape his stroke; your time is
wasting, your Glass is running, and ere long you will be expiring your last
breath, and these bodies which you are clothing, and feeding, and providing
for every day, will lie a dying, and be carried by your mourning friends, to
your Graves; And as certain as Death, so certain will your Resurrection be at
Christ's coming. Christ has received a Commission from God to judge the World,
and he will come down from Heaven with the Keys of Death and Hell, and open
the Doors, where you shall have your lodging, and bring you forth to judgment;
I must awake on that day, if I fall asleep into my Grave before, and arise, and
give an account of my self, and the souls committed to my charge, unto my Lord
and Master; and you must awake also, and give an account of your selves and
actions, unto the glorious Judge; your lives then will be reviewed, your
actions will be examined, and it will be known then what you have been doing
ever since you came into the World, how you have spent your time, how you have
improved the seasons and means of grace; then it will appear who are Christ's
sheep, and who the Goats, however they now flock together sometimes in one
company; who are wise, and who the foolish Virgins, however now all have Lamps
shining; then it will be known who have been wise unto salvation, who have made
their peace with God in the way, who have furnished their hearts with grace,
laid up their treasure in Heaven, and improved their talents for their Masters
use upon the Earth, and who have foolishly slipped and sinned away the harvest,
and day of grace, neglecting Christ, and the things which belonged to their
peace and happiness, until they were hid from their eyes, who have been
hypocrites and unbelievers, and served diverse lusts, instead of serving the
Lord of life and glory; and all ungodly sinners will be found out and punished:
then all of you, yea the whole World will believe the doctrine, which we now
preach concerning the vanity of the Creatures, the evil of sin, the necessiry
of Christ, the excellency of grace, the happiness of Gods Children; and O what
will the pardon of sin, the favor of God, the least measure of grace be worth
then? our Doctrine concerning these things is as true now, and the worth to
Christ and grace, and salvation as great, though then Men's valuation will be
greater, because the worth will be more apparent.

But give me leave to apply this Doctrine concerning the certainty and
speediness of the coming of Christ to Judgment.

1. To Sinners. 2. To Believers. 3. To both.
1. I shall speak to sinners.

1. To discover them. 2. To awaken them. 3. To exbort them.
1. For the Discovery of Sinners.

Will the Lord Jesus Christ certainly and quickly appear to Judgment? and must
the whose World be summoned unto his Bar? surely then it does above all things
concern all of you to sit down, and consider how you are provided for this day;
all of you will be spectators of Christ, and his glory on that day; but you
will not be idle spectators, as sometimes you have been of great shows in the
City, whilst it was yet standing, which have passed away, and you have gone
away without much regard of the things you have seen; No, you will all be most
highly concerned in this appearance of Christ, more then Persons, who are to be
tried for their lives, are concerned at the appearance of the Judge, who comes
to pa^s sentence upon them; you will all be tried on that day, and your
everlasting weal, or woe will depend upon the account you shall give, and the
sentence which shall be pronounced upon you by the great Judge: therefore let
me beseech you all to examine your selves, whither you are prepared for this
day of Judgment; it will be a woeful day to such sinners, whom the Lord Jesus
will condemn unto everlasting torments; and are there no such Persons amongst
you? are there no ungodly ones gathered together into this place? are all of
you Saints, and Children of God? if you are not such, you will wish you had
been such at that time; but are you all such now? the worst of you may be such,
if you seriously, diligently, and timely seek such a privilege, but are you
such yet? are there not many here, whom the Lord Jesus Christ will come in
flaming Fire to take vengeance upon? It would take up too much room to speak of
all those sinners whom Christ will condemn, especially having already spoken
particularly of them under the conviction, from page 87. to 115. But briefly
and more summarily for the discovery of such Persons, that you may examine your
selves whether you are in their number, The sinners which Christ will condemn
at his appearance may be known by these Characters: They are, 1. Carnal. 2.
Sensual. 3. Earthly. 4. Devilish.


1. Christ will condemn such as are carnal; I mean such as are in the flesh,
such as are in the state of nature, such as never were regenerated, or born
again by the Word and Spirit, as never have had experience of a work of grace
upon their hearts; such as are blind, and never had their eyes opened to see
their sin, and their Savior, who are muffled up in the darkness and hoodwinked
with the vail of ignorance and unbelief, and upon whose eyes there are such
thick scales, that the glorious light of the Gospel has never been discerned
by them in a spiritual and saving way; such who are asleep, and never had their
consciences awakened out of their carnal security, whose consciences are seared
as with a ho^ Iron, and permit them to sin with little check or control; such
who are dead in sin, and never were quickened by the Spirit of life; such as are
slaves to their lusts, and under the reigning power of sin, and never were
delivered from this worse than Turkish bondage; that never were converted, and
savingly changed; never were humbled and emptied of themselves, never truly
repented, and mourned for sin, never were powerfully drawn unto, and savingly
closed with Jesus Christ; that never were renewed in their minds and hearts,
transformed after the Image of God, transplanted into the garden of the Lord,
and engrafted into the new stock; such in whom all old things remain, and are
wholly carnal, in the same state in which they were first born; their persons
will all be condemned by the Judge, John 3. 3. Matthew. 13. 3. Romans 8. 13. 2 Cor.
5. 17. Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. 1 Cor. 15. 50. Matthew. 5. 8. Heb. 12. 14. Luke 13. 3.
Revel. 21. 27.

2. Christ will condemn the sensual: I mean such who are so far from denying
themselves, crucifying the flesh, mortifying the deeds of the body, taking up
the cross, walking in the narrow way of ^trict obedience, striving to enter in
at the strait gate, which alone can bring unto eternal life and happiness, and
subjugating their thoughts, will, and affections unto the government of Christ,
and so living as if they were his servants indeed whose name they bear; that
they labor either to imprison, or banish, or hide themselves from the light of
those truths which would reach them these things, to bribe or muzzle conscience
which would urge them, yea to shake off the government of reason it self, which
would put a curb upon them, and so give up themselves to licentiousness, making
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof with all greediness; such
who are so far degenerated and fallen from that primitive holiness which nature
was endued with at the first creation, that they have lost the relicts of Gods
Image, and blotted out the characters of his law engraven upon the hearts of
all men, and have made themselves like beasts, yea more vile than the beasts
that perish; such are they that are sensual and luxurious, and seek for their
chiefest happiness in pleasing their sensual appetites; such are drunkards, and
gluttons, and adulterers, who wallow in the mire of such sins, who spend their
days in such pleasures, and gather as much of them as they can find, without
any regard to Gods Law, which does forbid them, or to those higher, sweeter
pleasures which they are capable of, and might obtain if they did seek after
them in the way which God has appointed; All these which fulfill the desires of
the flesh are children of wrath, Ephesians. 3. 3. and they which please themselves,
and live deliciously here, will have torment and sorrow given them by Christ at
his appearance, Rev. 18. 7. Luke 6. 25.

3. Christ will condemn the earthly, such who lay up for themselves treasures
on earth, and neglect the heavenly treasure, Matthew. 6. 19, 20. who love the
world, and things in the world, and have no true love to the Father, who is the
God of love, and the chief good of mankind, 1 Ioh. 2. 15. All covetous
worldlings will be condemned by Jesus Christ for their heart Idolatry, Ephesians. 5.
5, 6. especially unjust and unrighteous persons, oppressors and extortioners;
earth will be all the portion of such who make choice of it, no room will be
found for them in the Kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor. 6. 10.

4. Christ will condemn the Devilish; all such as are children of the devil, as
bear his Image, and do his work, that yield themselves to be his slaves and
servants, and endeavor the promotion of the interest of his Kingdom; all such
as are under the power of Devilish pride, and Devilish envy, and Devilish
malice; all Devilish liars, and Devilish slanderers, and Devilish persecutors
of Gods people: In a word, all such persons as live in a course of sin, and
never brake off the trade thereof by repentance, and obtained a pardon of sin
through faith, and yielded up themselves unto the obedience of the Gospel will
be condemned by Christ at his appearance.

Beloved, examine your selves seriously hereby, and what has been before said,
whether you are not in the number of these persons; whether none of you are
carnal, in a state of nature; whether none of you, are sensual or earthly;
whether none of you are children of the Devil; whether none of you are
Drunkards, Adulterers, Liars, slanderers, unjust, unrighteous, and withal
impenient persons, unbelievers, and children of disobedience, against whom the
wrath of God will be revealed, when the Lord Jesus Christ shall be revealed
from Heaven to Judgment.

2. For the awakening of sinners. Will the Lord Jesus Christ certainly and
quickly appear to judgment? methinks this doctrine should awaken sleepy
sinners, and arouze them out of their carnal ^ecurity. Does conscience accuse
you, and secretly tell any of you, that you are in the number of those persons
whom the Lord will condemn at the last day, and sentence unto Hell; methinks it
should make you startle, and look about you; methinks it should make your hair
stand an end, and every joint to tremble; methinks it should fill you with
fear, and imprint such trouble upon your spirits, as would damp all your
earthly comforts and delights, to confider the danger which ye are in by reason
of sin^ the guilt of which does still lie upon you. Every word of this Doctrine
is awakening.

1 Awake sinners, awake! Christ will appear to judgment. Christ will appear,
whom you have read of, and heard of, and have had frequent proffers of, but
could never be prevailed to accept of; Christ will appear in his glory, in whom
you could see no beauty, or desirableness; Christ will appear as a Judge, whom
you might have had for your Savior. Sinners, the Judge of the whole world will
appear, and can you sleep under the guilt of sin? He will be a most glorious,
powerful, wise, holy, righteous, strict, furious, inexorable Judge, as has
been shown from p. 65. to p. 73. and yet are you secure and fearless? you have
heard God's terrible voice in the City, and that has not awakened you; and
will not Christ's appearance to Judgment awaken you neither? You have been
asleep under the sound of temporal judgments, and can you sleep under the
thoughts of the last judgment, when the punishment, which shall then be
inflicted, will be eternal?

2. Awake, sinners awake! Christ will certainly appear to Judgment; if there
were only a peradventure of Christ's coming to Judgment, methinks it should
awaken the guilty, but when there is a certainty of it, how should it awaken
you? as certainly as God is true, as certainly as the Scriptures are his Word,
as certainly as you are creatures, and sinners; so certainly will the Lord
Jesus Christ appear to judge the ungodly World for sin, at the last day.
England has of late been under the stroke of several temporal Judgments; and
England is in danger of further and greater calamities; God may put a more
bitter Cup into our hands to drink, than yet we have tasted of; the danger of
which should awaken secure sinners, because they cannot promise to themselves
any shelter at such a time: yet there is a possibility that the Lord may be
entreated to spare, and put up his Sword, and prevent our ruin, which we have
deserved; but the day of Judgment is most certain; God, who cannot change, has
decreed it: God, who cannot lie, has revealed it; the iniquities of the World,
which are great, do call for it; therefore it must be, the day will certainly
come; and yet can you sleep in sin? If a Thief knew after he had robbed his
neighbor, that he should certainly be taken and judged, and condemned, and
pun^shed, it would affright him; you may know that Christ will certainly come
to judgment, and that all guilty sinners shall be brought forth and condemned,
and should not this awaken you, especially since if you sleep on, your
damnation and eternal punishment, will be certain?

3. Awake sinners, awake! Christ will quickly appear to Judgment. The coming of
the Lord draws nigh; the Judge stands at the Door; the Lord will suddenly
come down; when you least expect it, the Lord may be here; and can you sleep,
when the appearance of Christ is so sure, and so near too? can you slumber,
when your judgment lingreth not, and your damnation slumbreth not? If the day
of general Judgment should be protracted for some time longer, until all the
Elect be gathered, and the things foretold in the lord, be fulfilled; yet your
time for preparation may be almost spent, you may suddenly go down into your
Graves, where there is no operation; and can you sleep in sin, when you are
liable every day to the stroke of death, which will cut you off from all
opportunities of making your peace with God for ever, and deliver you up at the
last day into the hands of the Judge, under the same guilt as it found you,
when it first laid its arrest upon you?

4. Awake sinners, awake! when Christ does appear, ye also shall appear; when
Christ is descended from Heaven, ye shall be raised from the Earth; you shall
be awakened out of the sleep of death, and will not you be awakened out of the
sleep of sin? If there were any hopes, that by getting into your Graves before
this day, you could hide your selves, and lie buried there for ever, you might
be the more secure; but when your death is not more certain, than your
resurrection will be, when the appearing of Christ to judgment is not more
certain, than your appearance on that day to be judged, you have reason to
shake off sleep, and bethink your selves how you are provided; Death will be
terrible to you, if it come with the sting of sin in its mouth, if it shoot its
poisoned arrows into you; but your resurrection will be a thousand fold more
dreadful, if you awake at the last day with the guilt of sin in your
consciences; Sinners, think what terrors will invade you, when you are raised
out of your Graves; when you first lift up your heads and eyes to Heaven, and
see the Lord Jesus Christ, the glorious Judge of the World, come down with
millions of mighty Angels, clothed with vengeance, like flames of Fire, and
look down with a furious countenance upon you; when in your rising you hear the
sound of the Trumper, and such a shout given in the air, as will make a louder
noise, than if twenty thousand great pieces of Ordnance were shot off together,
just before you; when you have a summons given you, and you are dragged with
the rest of the damned crew, which have lived in all ages of the World, to the
Tribunal Seat of Jesus Christ; O how will you quiver, and tremble, and be
filled with confusion then? and yet can you sleep securely now, as if you were
not at all concerned?

5. Awake sinners, awake! when Christ does appear, you shall be judged by him:
Then the Books will be opened, where all your actions are recorded; then your
sins (now it may be forgotten and slighted) will be called to remembrance, and
your secret sins, which now you are ashamed of, will then be made manifest
before the whole World; your old sins will be reviewed; your old uncleanness,
your old drunkenness, your old unrighteousness; and you will be made to hear of
all your sins, past and gone many years before, in such a manner, as shall make
your ears to tingle, your hearts to quake, and tremble; and when Gods justice
shall arraign you, and the Devil accuse you, and your conscience shall bear
witness against you, and the Lord Jesus Christ shall pronounce the Sentence
upon you, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels; and the Saints it may be accompany him with a loud shout,
Even so Amen, or say with one voice, Go ye cursed into everl^sting Fire, and
so pass from you into Heaven, and leave the Devil and his Angels to drag you
unto torments, and when you see there is no remedy, no reversing of your
condemnation, and the Devils seize upon you, and tear you, and hale you away. O
how terrible will this Judgment be unto you? O how will the terrors of the
All-mighty flow in upon you? how will your consciences gnaw, and sting, and
torment you? how will your spirits fail and sink within you, and hearts melt
like drops of water? How will you weep, and wail, and gnash your teeth? and cry
out in the fearfulness and horror of your spirits, Woe, woe, woe be unto us
that ever we were born! Woe, woe, woe be unto us that ever we have sinned!

6. Awake sinners, awake! The execution of the Sentence, which Christ will
pronounce upon you for your sins at the last day, will be in Hell: and do you
know what Hell is? what tongue can express the future torments, which the
damned shall endure? what heart can conceive the miseries, which God has
prepared for sinners in Hell? yet look into the Perspective-Glass of the Word,
and you may perceive something of the dreadfulness of the punishment, which
will be inflicted upon you, if you be found in your sins at Christ's second
appearance.

1. Sinners, consider the greatness of the punishment; you must dwell with
devouring Fire, and inhabit most horrible burnings; and think with your selves
how you will be able to endure, to have those bodies (unto whom the prick of a
Pin is so irksome, and a little scorch of a culinary Fire is so painful) cast
into the great Furnace of Fire, which God will kindle with his breath; which
will turn them it may be, into a burning Coal, that shall not waste, neither
ever be consumed; be sure will torment them with a thousand-fold more accute
sense of pain, than the body is capable now of feeling, under the most
exquisite torments; think what the overwhelming grief, what the horrible
anxiety, what the despairful agonies, what the hideous terror and
unexpressible anguish of your souls will be under the immediate sense of Gods
wrath and indignation, and the thoughts of that glory and happiness of Heaven
(once proffered unto you, but refused by you) which you will then perceive your
selves shut out from for ever.

Awake sinners, awake! will you sleep in sin until you are awakened in the
midst of flames? will you not leave off sinning, until you have sinned your
selves into Hell? will you needs run into these burnings? Awake! open your eyes
a little and look down, and see how deep the Pit is, into which you are
leaping, it is a bottomless Pit, from whence there will be no returning;
consider how hot the Fire of Hell will be, unto which you are hastening, it will
be an inconceivable hot Fire, of which there will be no avoiding, if you go on
in that broad way of sin, which is leading you thereunto: Awake, and look up
sinners, there is a Door open, the Door of mercy is open, and the Door of
Heaven is open, and will you shut your eyes, and turn your backs upon God, and
refuse the proffers of grace which are made to you? will you trample Crowns
under your feet, and slight future glory and happiness, which now is possible
for you to obtain? will not this tear your hearts in Hell, to remember that you
have been the cause of your own ruin, and brought misery upon your selves,
that you suffered your selves to be cheated by the Devil, and your own
deceitful lusts, of the unspeakable joys and glory of Heaven, which God did
once make tenders of unto you?

2. Sinners, consider the sureness of the punishment of Hell; it is most
certain that God has prepared such a punishment, and it is certain that you
shall endure this punishment, if you abide under the guilt, and persevere in
the way of sin, which you now are walking in; God has threatened this
punishment, and his justice does require it and his truth does engage him to
execute his threatened wrath, and inflict this deserved punishment upon you; and
can you then have the least hopes to escape it? will God, can God prove a liar,
to save you from the torments of Hell? I^ it not equal that you should reap
that which you have sown, that you should gather and taste the bitter fruits of
your own evil ways? if you sow to the flesh, will not torment be the fruit
hereof^ if you sow sin, will not you reap Hell?

Awake sinners, awake! are not all your hopes of happiness in the uncertain and
empty Cisterns of the Creatures meet dreams, when such dreadful miseries are
so surely prepared for you? and what senseless dreams then are your hopes of
Heaven and Salvation, whilst you are going on in the way of sin to Hell, and
destruction? Is there any mercy for impenitents? Is there any pardon for
unbelievers? Does God love those which are haters of him? shall those live with
him, who have no likeness unto him? to join these things together which God
has never joined. is like the senseless fancies in the sleep of strange
Chimaeraes and Monsters, which nature never produced: Awake sinners, it is but
an idle fancy to join Heaven to the end of a sinful course; no! the footsteps
of sin will certainly take hold of Hell; and without holiness none shall see
God; and as one says, Sooner may Angels turn Devils, Men beasts, and Beasts
stones, and all the World just nothing, than that an unholy Person should have
an entrance into Heaven; yea, and that it is as possible that God should cease
to be God, as that any Man, not made after the Image of God, should be received
into the blessed Vision, Possession and fruition of him in Glory. Sinners, if
there be no room for you in Heaven, and your entrance there is impossible,
whilst you are in a state of nature; then your punishment in Hell is sure,
which methinks should awaken you.

3. Sinners, consider the neerness of the punishment of Hell: I mean the
soul-punishment, which will be the greatest part of the punishment; the perfect
and full punishment of body and soul cannot be far off, because the time of
Christ's com^ng is not far off; but the punishment of your souls will begin, so
soon as your lives come to an end; no sooner will your souls be separated from
your bodies, but they will appear before God, to ^eceive their particular
judgment; and they will ^e banished his glorious and comfortable presence, and
filled with horror through the impressions of Gods wrath.

Awake sinners, awake! you lie upon the brink of ^he Pit, you are sleeping over
the burning Lake; you are like Saylors, which drop asleep on the top of a Mast,
whom a great wind would blow into ^he Sea; so the wind of death, which may
sud^enly beat upon you, will blow you into Hell, into the Ocean of Gods wrath;
and can you secure your selves a moment from the stroke of death? when you are
most secure, may not death be most near? when you think you shall live many
years to eat, and drink, and take your pleasure like the rich fool in the
Gospel, may not death knock at your door that night, and break in upon you, and
fetch away your bodies to the grave, and Devils drag your souls to Hell?

Awake then, before you sleep the sleep of death awake out of the sleep of sin,
think with yo^ selves, this night we may be in Hell, and free, ^ rather bound
in Chains of Darkness and horro^ amongst the damned; or to morrow we may b^ in
torments with Cain and Judas, with the Dev^^ and his Angels: and therefore give
not sleep (...) your eyes, nor slumber to your eyelids, until yo^ have
redeemed your selves out of the snare of the Devil and sin, as a Bird out of
the snare of the Fowler, or a Roe out of the hand of the hunter.

4. Sinners, consider the everlastingness of yo^ punishment in Hell; when your
Souls are on^ in, they shall never come forth, until they (...) brought forth
unto the last Judgment at Christ's a^pearance; and when soul and body are joyne^
and sentenced to this place of torment, and thru^ into it, the Door will be
shut upon you, and yo^ will be locked in, so that it will be impossible s^ you
to get forth for ever; your bodies as well (...) souls will be immortal, and
the Fire of Hell wi^ be everlasting, those flames will never be quenc^ed, and
your torments will never be ended; wh^^ you have been ten thousand times ten
thousa^^ millions of years in Hell, it will not bear the p^^^portion of a
moment of time, to the unmeasu^rable space of Eternity, in which you must be
tormented for sin; your punishment will always be in the beginning of it,
never, never, never will it come to a conclusion, nor your to any hopes of it;
as long as God lives, and Heaven continues, which will be for evermore, so long
will Hell continue, and you abide in extremity of torments, without any
possibility of release and deliverance.

Awake sinners, awake! think how horrible the thoughts of Eternity in Hell will
be; Extremity! and Eternity! will be the great aggravation of your misery;
methinks the danger of such torment should fill you with such fear and terror,
that nothing should be able to remove, until you had secured your selves by an
interest in him, who alone can deliver from the wrath to come; and yet can you
be secure, when you are in the greatest danger?

Awake, think whether the pleasures of sin for a season, are to be compared
with the eternal tor^ments of Hell; or the uncertain treasures of Earth, with
the eternal store of Gods wrath, or the empty vanishing wordly honor, with the
exceeding and everlasting weight of misery, which the damned shall sink under
in Hell? If any sleepy sinners begin to startle with such thunderclaps of
Judgment, and being unwilling to part with their sins, feel their hearts to
rise within them against the message and Messengers, for thrusting such harsh
things into their ears, for molesting their spirits, and disturbing the peace
which they have hitherto had in their sinful way: cannot Ministers let us
alone, will they be called to an account for us? will they suffer for us? and
why do they thus affright us with Peales of Judgment?

Beloved, we Ministers are set as Watchmen to sound the Trumpet, and warn you
of Judgment, which if we should neglect to do, your blood would be required at
our hands, Ezekiel. 33. from the 1. verse. to the^^ 1. And we shall be called to an
account, for the Souls committed to our charge, Heb. 13. 17. And therefore
having notice given us by God in his Word of the coming of Christ to judge and
punish the ungodly World at the last day, and knowing the terror of the Lord,
how terrible the day of Judgment will be unto you, if you be found amongst the
ungodly, and how terrible the day will be unto us, if we be sound unfaithful to
your souls, we warn you, and persuade you to flee from the wrath to come; and
can you blame us then for using harsh language, when we cannot omit it without
danger to our selves and your souls? when otherwise we cannot be faithful to
you, nor to our Master, who has sent us to declare these things? we might
indeed (like some) sla^ter you, and sooth you up in a way of sin; we might
speak smooth things unto you, and prophecy deceits; but what advantage would
it be unto you to be deceived? if you were pleased with us, and did commend us
here, I am sure you would curse us for our unfaithfulness hereafter; Sinners,
it is not cruelty, but pity and mercy to shoot the sharp arrows of Gods
threatenings into your consciences; it is not out of hatred, but tender love to
your souls, that we endeavor to thrust the sword of the spirit into your
bosoms, that if possible we might wound sin to the heart, and fetch forth the
blood thereof, as it were, which if it still live in you, will be your ruin:
Christ will certainly and quickly be here, and when he does appear, we shall
appear to be judged, and is it not good you should know it before hand, that
you might be prepared?

If any be so awakened by this Doctrine concerning Christ's coming to Judgment,
that they begin to feel a sting and wound in* their spirits, and are so
perplexed with fear of being condemned for their sins, which their consciences
do accuse them of, that they know not what to do, yet are willing to take any
course to prevent their ruin and those dreadful miserics which they are in
danger of at that day. I shall speak unto such by way of Counsel and
Exhortation.

3. For the Exhortation of Sinners.

Will the Lord Jesus Christ certainly and quickly appear to Judgment? there are
two things I would exhort sinners unto, that they may escape the wrath of God,
which on that day will be revealed and inflicted upon all the wicked of the
Earth.

1. Flee from Sin. 2. Flee unto Christ,
If you would flee from wrath and Hell.

Or, 1. Repent of Sin. 2. Get an interest in Christ.
And then you may be able to stand with confidence before the Son of Man at his
appearance, yea, whatever your sins be now, do these two things effectually,
and when Christ does appear you also shall appear with him in glory.

1. Sinners repent of sin. Acts 17. 30, 31. God commands all Men every where
to repent, this is a duty which God requires of all, Because he has appointed
a day, in the which he will judge the World in righteousness, etc. This is the
Argument to enforce the duty. It is your duty to repent, because you have
sinned, and God commands you to do it; and it is your interest and
concernment to repent, because God will judge the World by Jesus Christ for
sin, and condemn you if you be found impenitent. Sinners, you have tasted the
sweetness of sin, in the Commission of it, O labor to taste the bitterness of
sin in your repentance for it; your sins have been displeasing to the holy and
jealous God^et them be displeasing to your souls; your sins have wounded the
Lord Jesus Christ, let them pierce your hearts; the spirit of God has been
grieved and quenched by them, be you grieved and troubled for them; grieve for
sin, not only because of its consequential evil, but also because of its
incrinsecal evil; not only because it is like to damn you, but also because it
has so much defiled you; not only because it is likely to sink you into Hell
amongst Devils, but also because it has debased you, and made you more vile
than the Beasts that perish.

Sinners mourn for sin: Be afflicted, mourn and weep: Let your laughter be
turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness, Jam. 4. 9. Get your proud
hearts humbled, and your hard hearts broken for those sins whereby you have
broken Gods Law; get your hearts broken for sin, and get your hearts broken
from sin; Break off your sins by Repentance; Cast away all your transgressions
like menstru^us clothes, saying, get ye hence, Isa. 30. 22. Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and turn to the Lord,
etc. Isa. 55. 7. Thrust these Iuhabitants out of doors who have so long had
possession; suffer not to lodge any longer within you; remember that they are
Vipers which will poison you, that they are enemies which will wound and kill
you: Do not harbor sin any longer, do not entertain it with smiles and a
pleasing countenance, but with tears and frowns: Get your hearts set against
sin; labor for deep-rooted hatred of it, and accordingly behave your selves
toward it; get the strong holds of sin demolished in your hearts; get the
rooms in which your lusts have scattered defilement, washed with the tears of
Repentance, and the blood of Jesus Christ: let Christ have his Throne where sin
has reigned; let your thoughts and affections be brought into captivity and
obedience unto Jesus Christ: Keep the door of your hearts with all diligence,
least your old enemy enter again upon you: Flee from sin as from a Cockatrice,
and if you be pursued, man^ully resist, resist even unto blood, striving
against sin; never parley with sin, hearken not to any terms of composition;
Be not enticed unto sin by pleasing baits, neither be affrighted to sin by
frowns and threatenings: Fight the good fight of Faith; Turn by repentance from
sin, break off the course of sin, and walk not in the way thereof, and turn by
repentance unto the Lord; let the Biass of your hearts be turned unto him;
Deliver up your selves unto the obedience of his Law, yield your selves unto
God, etc. Romans 6. This is Repentance. And that you may repent of Sin:

1. Examine your selves: Christ will examine you at the last day, and you must
give an account unto him; examine your selves and call your selves to an
account, that you may repent and prevent the future misery which will be the
consequent of sin; Find out your sins that you may mourn and turn; that which
the eye sees not, the heart will not, cannot be affected withal; Consult the
Register of your consciences, turn over the leaves and read what is recorded in
that Book: open your hearts to the beams of the light of the Word, and be ready
to receive the convictions of the Spirit; Find out your sins, your original
sin, the defilement of your natures, your actual sins, your great
Conscience-wounding sins; find out your bosome-sins, which your hearts are most
nearly joined unto, and are most loath to part withal; find out your
Constitution-sins, your Calling-sins, the sins which bear the greatest sway,
and are most supported by the interest of the flesh, and your hearts are ready
to cloak and cover under the veil of excuses and plausible pleas: Think how you
will be able to answer for them at the great Day, to the Heart-searching Judge.

Sinners, find out your sins, otherwise your sins will find you out, and
Christ will find you out, and Wrath will find you out, and then woe be unto
you.

2. Judge and condemn your selves for your sins: this is the way to escape the
judgment of God, 1 Cor. 11. 31. If you judge others, you shall be judged,
Matthew. 7. 1. but if you judge your selves you shall escape; and therefore

3. Make confession of sin; Spread the black Catalogue of your sins before the
Lord; come with ropes about your necks, and tears in your eyes, and sorrow in
your hearts unto the Throne of Grace, and fill your mouths with humble
acknowledgements of your sins: rip up your hearts before the Lord: open before
him your soars: stand no^ in your own defense and justification, but fall down
prostrate at God's feet, and confess what sinful natures you have, what vile
hearts, what wicked lives you have lead; confess how you have broken his Law,
and disobeyed his Gospel; charge upon your selves the guilt of your particular
and most heinous sins, and do not extenuate but aggravate them with all the
circumstances you can think of; look upon your selves as cursed wretches
whilst under the guilt of sin, as miserable, lost, forlorn creatures, whilst
God is your enemy and his wrath abides on you; acknowledge your sins and the
demerit of your sins, that you have deserved not only temporal plagues, but
also eternal torments; that you have forfeited all outward mercies, and are
unworthy of the least grace and favor, much more unworthy of eternal life. Lie
very low before God, ^ick the dust; look upon your selves as Worms, as Toads,
yea as more vile and more full of poison.

4. If under the view of sin and confession thereof, you find your hearts hard
and senseless like rocks, or Adamantine stones within your hearts, yet be not
discouraged; the sense of hardness is some beginning of softness; but do not
rest in beginnings: take pains with them to get them melted thoroughly, to get
them broken to pieces: Read and consider, and apply, and urge at the Throne of
Grace the gracious Promise, Ezekiel. 36. 26. I will take away the stony heart out
of your flesh, and give you a heart of flesh. Be sensible of your own inability
of your selves to repent of sin, and persuaded th^^ it is Go^s grace; remember
it is free, but withal that (...) promised; beg the influence of his Spirit
upon your hearts to mel^ them; beg the application of the blood of Christ to
mollify them: the blood of the Goat only can break an Adama^t stone, and it is
the blood of Christ the Scapegoat which alone can break the hard hearts of
sinners.

If any be discouraged with the difficulty of Repentance, that it is hard to
obtain, and a very grievous thing to endure; Let them

1. Consider; That Repentance is necessary: it is necessary Virtue praecepti,
by virtue of Gods Precept; it is a necessary Duty; Acts. 17. 30. God commands
not only some men, but all men: not only in some place, but every where to
repent: and it is necessary virtute medij, as it is a means to avoid misery and
obtain happiness; you must sow in tears, if you would reap in joy; and you
must go forth weeping bearing precious seed, if you would return again
rejoicing bringing your sheavs with you, Psalm 126. 5. 6. The showers of tears
make way for the Sunshine of comfort here: and the wet seed-time of
Repentance, is necessary to the harvest of everlasting glory and joy; and if
Repentance be difficult: yet since it is absolutely necessary, this should be
so far from discouraging you, that it should quicken you unto more diligent
endeavors after it.

2. Consider, that Repentance is attainable; the vilest sinners may be enabled
through Gods Grace to repent, as well as the most holy Saints at their first
turning unto God. It is difficult unto you, yea impossible for you to repent of
your selves, because there are no seeds of this Grace in Nature, but it is
easy with God to work you to it, and he can carry you through the difficulty;
pray to God for this grace, and endeavor to repent and in your endeavors God
may assist; God is easy to be entreated, and is ready to give this Grace unto
them that desire it.

But some are discouraged from Heb. 12. 17. where it is said, that Esau was
rejected, and found no place for repentance, though he sought it carefully with
tears: hence concluding, that though they seek repentance carefully with tears,
they may be rejected, and find no place for repentance.

I answer, 1. That this place which speaks of Esau's rejection, has not a
reference to his rejection by God (though that may be included in it) but his
rejection by his Father Isaac, in reference to the Blessing, which his younger
brother Jacob had by a wile got before him. 2. That Esau there did not seek to
God for repentance, but he sought to his Father for his blessing. 3. That he
did not seek repentance for himself, but he sought with tears to his Father,
that he would repent his giving the blessing to Jacob, and give it unto him.
Such as with tears seek repentance of God, it is a sign they have some measure
of this Grace.

3. Consider, the worth and excellency of this Grace; though it be difficult,
yet it is excellent, Pulchra sunt difficilia, the best things are not obtained
without difficulty; had you this grace, you would not be without it for a
world, you would not change your tears and sorrow for sin, for all the
sweetness and pleasure that others find in the commission of it; if you did
but truly repent, you would not think it so grievous a thing to be bourn, but
the more you had of it, the more you would desire, and be best pleased, when
you could act this grace most strongly.

4. Consider, that the greatest dissiculty is at first: Flesh may contradict
and violently oppose the beginnings of Repentance, which does so manifestly
seek its ruin and destruction; but after you are accustomed to the yoke, you
will find it more easy; after you have got mastery over your flesh, and have
attained some degrees of mortification, you will find it suitable to the new
man to live in the exercise of Repentance, and reap much sweetness from it.

5. Consider, That you must repent and mourn for sin here, or you will be
damned and burn for sin for ever; You cannot avoid grief for sin, if you have
it not in this world, you will be sure to have it in the other world; And is it
not a thousand-fold more eligible to grieve for sin here? especially
considering,

1. If you repent of sin now, your grief will not be in extremity: it will have
some allay, some alleviation, some mixture of secret comfort, at least
something will be given in to support, when you are even ready to be
overwhelmed: when the heart is most broken and contrite under the sense of sin
and apprehensions of Gods wrath, yet God will not suffer the Spirit to fail
before him, Isa. 57. 15, 16. the Lord will keep up the soul from quite sinking:
and I am confident, that such persons as are most heavy laden with grief for
sin, would not change their condition when at the lowest ebb, with the most
prosperous worldling: But if you repent not till hereafter, your grief will be
extreme, without the least mixture of comfort or support. In hell you will have
nothing but weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; you will be there
utterly consumed with terrors, quite overwhelmed with sorrows, and be always
sinking in the bottomlesse-pit under the weight of grief, which will be
un-supportable.

2. Your repentance of sin now will be pleasing unto God: We read, Luke 15. how
well pleased the Father was when his Prodigal son returned home, and with grief
did acknowledge that he had sinned against Heaven and against him; and was not
worthy to be called his Son; the Father meets him in the way, and kisseth him,
and cloatheth him with the best Robe, and kills the fatted Calf for him, and
makes merry with him; so, though you have been prodigals hitherto, have gone
astray from God, and wasted your time, and talents in the service of the Devil,
and your own lusts; yet if at length you come to your selves, and with
repentance, and humble confession of your sins, you return unto the Lord, he
will pity you, his bowels will yern toward you whilst you are yet upon the
way; and he will meet you, and embrace you, and cloth you with the Robes of
his sons righteousness, and be pleased with you, and rejoice over you; yea,
and the Angels also will rejoice in your conversion; there will be joy in
Heaven at your repentance amongst the Angels, and joy on earth amongst the
Saints, Ministers will be pleased and rejoice; they will pity you and pray
for you; and Saints will be pleased and be ready to help and advise you; but
Gods pity is beyond all. See how God is taken with repenting Ephraim, Ier.
31. 18, 19, 20. I have surely heard Ephraim ^emoaning himself, etc. Surely
after I was turned, I ^epented; and after I was instructed I smote upon my
^high, I was ashamed, yea even confounded, because I ^id bear the reproach of
my youth; there you have the description of Ephraim' ^ repentance; and O the
sweet words of most tender Love which the Lord does express himself in, toward
Ephraim under his repentings! Is Ephraim my dear son? is he my pleasant child?
for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still? therefore my
bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy on him, says the Lord.
But if you repent not till hereafter, your grief will not only be extreme, but
also you will have no eye to pity you; God will not pity you in the least,
but laugh at your calamity, his bowels will be shut against you; your grief
then will not be pleasing in the least, and your cries and complaints of sin
then will be like the howling of a Dog in his ears: He will then instead of
meeting you to embrace you, he will meet you to destroy you; instead of
speaking kindly to you, he will speak to you in his wrath, and vex you in his
hot displeasure; Angels and Saints will then turn from you, and Devils will
drag you with them into torments.

3. If you repent of sin now, you may obtain the pardon of sin; I will surely
have mercy on him, says the Lord, concerning repenting Ephraim, Jer. 31* 20.
He that confesses his sins, that is, with repentance, so as not only to grieve
for them, but also to leave and for sake them, shall find mercy, Prove. 28. 13.
Yea; God has promised abundantly (...) pardon such as forsake their evil
ways, and by repentance turn to him, Isa. 55. 7. and if sinners ceas^ to do
evil, and learn to do well, that though their sin^ be as scarlet, they shall be
white as snox, though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as wool, Isa. 1.
16* 17, 18. And not only his mercy, but also his justice and faithfulness is
engaged to pardon such as acknowledge their sins with repentance, and apply
themselves to him by faith: 1 Ioh. 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
The Door of mercy is now open to all true penitents, and the golden Scepter of
Grace and Reconciliation is hel^ forth unto them; the Lord Jesus Christ is now
interceding at the right hand of God, ready to make their peace with God; but
if you do not repent until hereafter, a pardon will be unattainable; there will
remain no sacrifice for sin; then the day of grace will be quite spent; and the
Door of mercy will be fast shut: then Jesus Christ will have finished his
interceding work, and it will be impossible to obtain remission.

4. If you repent of sin now, you may get strength against sin; you shall be
delivered from the reigning power of sin presently, and you shall be freed from
the rage and tyranny of sin by degrees, and at the last you shall obtain a
perfect freedom from the being of sin, and be wholly delivered from the
bondage of corruption. But if you do not repent until hereafter, you will for
ever abide under the power of sin, you will not only be tormented in Hell, but
also be for ever sinning in Hell.

5. If you repent of sin now, you will escape the panishment of sin: I do not
speak of some temporal calamities, which God may exercise his people withal in
this World; but you shall assuredly be kept from the eternal punishment of
Hell, which shall be inflicted upon the ungodly World; but if you do not repent
of sin until hereafter, your punishment will be unavoidable, no cries nor
tears will then save you from the torments of Hell, which you will be
condemned unto; now you are condemned for sin, whilst unbelievers, but in this
World the sentence is reversible, you may fly from the Bar of justice, to the
Throne of Grace, and if with repentance and faith you apply your selves unto
Jesus Christ, he will deliver you from the wrath to come, and free you from
condemnation; but hereafter, when the Lord Jesus Christ shall appear unto
Judgment, and summon you, and examine you, and find you guilty, and pass
sentence upon you, to depart into everlasting Fire; this sentence will be
irreversible, and your repentance will be too late to procure freedom from, or
the least mitigation of your punishment.

6. If you repent of sin now, your grief will be but for a time; for a season,
a short time, a few days, a night, a moment, a short moment, 1 Pet, 1. 6. Rev.
2. 10. Psalm. 30. 5. Isa. 54. 6, 7. Weeping may endure for a night, ^ut joy
comes in the morning; God will not permit you to weep and grieve for sin long;
it is not a life of grief which he calls you unto, but a life of faith and
love; it is not grief for it self which he requires, but in order unto your
comfort, and therefore it shall not be of long continuance; your grief for sin
does make way for spiritual comforts, for the joys of the holy Ghost, which
after sorrowing times the Lord does often give in abundantly unto his Children
in this World; in which they find incomparably more sweetness, than ever they
could find sweetness in sin, or bitterness in sorrow; they have pleasures of a
higher and more transcenden^ nature; be sure your grief for sin will make way
for your everlasting joys in Heaven, where all tears shall be wiped away from
your eyes, and all sorrow and sighing shall be removed from your hearts, and
you shall obtain gladness unspeakable and everlasting. But if you do not
repent until hereafter, as the pleasures which you find in sin, will be but
for a season, and your tryumphing but short, Death be sure will put a
conclusion unto all: so your grief for sin then will be long, the days of
darkness and sorrow will be many, yea your grief will be eternal.

Repent then sinners, repent; Christ will come certainly to judgment, therefore
repent truly; and Christ will come quickly to judgment, therefore repent
speedily. Protract not the time, endeavor presently without any further delay.
Considering.

1. Your particular judgment may be suddenly, and the time of your preparation
may be spent quickly; You may be within a few months or weeks, or days, yea,
it may be within a few hours smitten by Deaths arrows, and there will be no
place for repentance and preparation in the other world.

2. If you defer your repentance, it is a thousand to one that you never repent
as long as you live, If your life should continue many years; because not one
in a thousand that defer their repentance, do afterward repent; there are
millions in hell that lived under the light of the Gospel who intended to
repent, but were prevented by death before they were aware; and it is a
thousand to one if you defer any longer, but ere long you will be received into
their number; have not you deferred your repentance before this till such a
time and such a time? and yet when such times have come again and again, have
you not deferred it still? and will not your deceitful hearts still find as
plausible excuses till it be too late? Remember this sinners, that it is a
thousand to one but you will be damned, if you any longer defer your repentance.

3. The longer you defer your repentance, the more difficult will you find the
work to be, because you will be the faster bound in Satan's chains, and not so
easily loosned; because you will be the faster asleep in sin, and not so easily
awakened; because your hearts will grow the harder by the Jong practice of sin,
and not so easily broken; because your sins will be the more increased which
you must repent of; because your time will be the more decreased which you are
to repent in; so that if it should come to pass (which is a thousand to one)
that you should repent after procrstination or deferring repentance; yet you
will find the work to be very difficult.

4. Think what glory you may bring to God, what service you may do if you
repent and reform presently; all which time, whilst you defer repentance, is
spent in the service of the Devil and your own lusts, unto the dishonor of God.

5. Think what measures of grace and comfort you may attain here, and what
degrees of glory you may attain hereafter, if you repent without delay, which
by deferring the work, you are like to lose.

6. If you defer Repentance, it is a question whether your last repentance will
be true; and if it should be true, it is a question whether ever you shall
obtain the evidence of the truth thereof.

7. And lastly, If you defer your repentance, God may never call you to
repentance; Yea, he may give you up to a judiciary hardness, and seal you up
unto condemnation, swearing in his wrath that you shall never enter into his
Rest.

Thus much for the exhortation of Sinners to repent.

2. Sinners, will the Lord Jesus Christ certainly and quickly appear to
judgment, be persuaded then to flee to him, and get an interest in him before
his appearance. I am sure that there is none of you, but would be glad of an
interest in Christ when he comes in his glory to judge the world; the vilest
persons upon the earth, those who despise and reject Christ now, those who hate
and scorn the ways of godliness, as being too mean a way for their high
spirits, would give ten thousand worlds if they had them, for the room of the
meanest Believers who have an interest in Christ at that day; But let me tell
you sinners, that this world is the only place, and this time while the day of
Grace does last, is the only time of obtaining such a privilege as this is;
if you have not an interest in Christ whilst you live, it will be impossible to
obtain it after death, or at the resurrection; If you are none of Christ's now,
he will not know you, nor own you at the day of his glorious Appearance.

1. Get an interest in Christ as your high Priest and Advocate; Be sensible of
your sins: be assured of his death for sin and satisfaction to Gods justice; Be
persuaded of his intercession at the right hand of God, and that he is able and
willing to save you; apply your selves to him, that through him you may obtain
remission of sins, and an inheritance amongst the Saints; and if through the
mediation of Christ now, you obtain a pardon of all your sins here: how welcome
will your Redeemer be unto you, and with what joy will you lift up your heads
out of your graves when the day of your Redemption and perfect Salvation is
come, and your Savior does appear to take vengeance upon unpardoned sinners,
but shall own and acquit you before the whole world.

2. Get Christ to be your Master; Enter your selves amongst his Servants and
Disciples: submit to his Teachings: learn his Lessons; believe and obey his
Commands: follow his Example; promote his honor and interest in the world; be
ready to do, or suffer any thing for him; and when your Lord and Master comes
in his glory, you will find that it was not in vain to serve him, though in
ways harsh and grating to flesh and blood. O what a Reward will be give then
to his Servants! What a crown of glory will he put upon their heads! It is a
sweet encouraging Promise which Christ has made now, and will make good to all
his faithful servants at that day, John 12. 26. If any man serve me, let him
follow me, and where I am, there shall my servant be; if any man serve me, him
will my Father honor.

3. Get Christ to be your Husband. Sinners, We Ministers are sent to invite and
woo you to enter into this most near and sweet Relation unto Jesus Christ; we
are to tell you of the beauty and excellency of his Person, of his Love and
tender affection to poor sinners, of his willingness to be yours, and to make
you sharers in his riches; O accept of him, it is the best motion that ever was
made to you, and it may be the laft motion: accept of Christ to be your
husband, lay off your filthy Garments; put on the white Robes of his
righteousness; join your hearts to him; divorse your selves from sin, and
dedicate your selves unto Christ alone; and if Christ be your husband, O how
joyful will his appearance be unto you, when you shall see his glorious face,
and sweet smiles, and be received into his embracements, and be carried by him
into his Fathers house, where you shall live with, and delight in his loves for
evermore.

4. Get Christ to be your Captain; list your selves under his banner; wear his
Colors; arm your selves with his Weapons; follow his conduct; fight against
his Enemies; endure hardness as good Soldiers, and do not shrink when you are
put upon the trial: and if you have an interest in this Captain, and be
victorious here over your spiritual enemies; when your Captain does ride in
Triumph at the last day, you shall be caught up into the Clouds, and Triumph
with him, and receive a Crown of Glory from him which fades not away.

Sinners, get an interest in Christ in all his Offices, in all his Relations;
it is he only can save you from sin, and wrath, and eternal death. It would be
too large a subject here to treat of salvation by Christ, and the way of
attaining it; I may (God giving leave) hereafter treat purposely on some words
whereby we may be saved, from Acts 11. 14. He shall tell thee words, whereby
thou and thy House shall be saved, which I thought to have added to the end of
this, with some words of advice unto young Men, from 1 Ioh. 2. part of the 14.
verse. I have written unto you young Men, because ye are strong, and the Word
of god abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. All which I did
indeed at the first inte^a to have joined together in one small Volume, with
God's terrible voice in the City; but thoughts have so multiplied in putting
them into writing, that I am even forced to separate them into three parts,
which I thought at first the room of one would hold.

CHAP. XIV.
HAving spoken to Sinners, I come now to speak,

2. To Believers, and that in two words.

1. For the Trial of them. 2. For the comforting of them.
1. For the trial of Believers; the Doctrine of Christ's certain and sudden
appearance to Judgment, is a most dreadful Doctrine to sinners, which are in
sin; and it is a most comfortable Doctrine to believers, which are in Christ:
but because many sinners, which are still held fast in the bond of iniquity, and
are under the reigning power of some sins, are apt to mistake, and without good
ground do persuade themselves that they are believers, who at the last day will
be found to be hypocrites; and through their mistake of their state, do ward
off those strokes of Gods threatenings which are made at them, and save
themselves hereby from those terrible apprehensions of Christ's appearance to
Judge and condemn them, which did they entertain, might be a means to startle
them, and awaken them to take an effectual and speedy course for the salvation
of themselves from future vengeance; and because many true believers, who are
really united unto Christ by faith, are apt also through the temptation of
Satan, and their own ignorance, and doubting misgiving-heart, to mistake
themselves, and look upon themselves to be hypocrites, and therefore fear that
when Christ does appear, that they shall be condemned by him, being so ready to
condemn themselves, and therefore gather matter for trouble from this Doctrine,
which indeed is matter of the greatest comfort; therefore it will be needful
for the undeceiving of the former, that they may not falfly apply comfort, and
the rectifying the mistakes of the latter, that they may not put off comfort,
to make some trial of true believers: It would be too large to present to you
all the character which we may find in the Word of God of true believers:
therefore I shall make mention but of one, which the Text holds forth, and is
the second Doctrine observed from the Words, in the beginning of our Discourse.

Doct. 2. That there is an earnest desire in the Church, or true Believers,
after the second appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ.

You may try your selves whether you are true believers by your desires after
Christ's appearance; this is the Character which the Apostle Paul gives of
Believers, that they are such as love, and by consequence desire the appearance
of the Lord Jesus Christ: 2 Timothy 4. 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a
Crown of right^^sness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me at
that day; and not to me only, but also to all them that love his appearance:
All such, and none but such shall have a Crown of righteousness, who love
Christ's appearing; believers are said to look for Christ's coming, Heb. 9. 28.
Unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time, without sin unto
salvation. He will appear unto all, but only to them that look for him, will he
appear unto salvation. Believers look for Christ's appearance, with an eye of
faith, of hope, and of desire.

1. Believers look for Christ's appearance with an eye of faith; they expect it
as sure as death, yea as more sure, because the death of some will be prevented
by it; it is not impossible that the Lord Jesus should come in our days: they
surely believe that the Lord will come.

2. Believers look for the appearance of Christ with an eye of hope; Tit. 2.
13. Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great
God, and our Savior. As they have hopes of the glory of Heaven, so they have
hopes of the coming of Christ, who will receive them into glory, who will put
the Crown upon their Heads, and bring them with Triumph unto the new Jerusalem.

3. Believers look for the appearance of Christ with an eye of love and desire;
they love and long for his appearance, they look with many a glance of love
toward the Palace above, where their Lord is, and they have many a longing
wish, that he would come forth, and come down, and receive them unto himself,
that where he is, there they might be also. The Bride says come, and the
desire of the Spouse is, Make haste my belived, and be as Roe upon the
Mountains of Spices: Cant. 8. 14. Believers pray, Thy Kingdom come, in the
Lord's Prayer, which he taught his Disciples, they desire the coming, not only
of the Kingdom of grace, but also of the Kingdom of glory; and in the Text,
the Church breathes forth this desire, after Christ's appearance, Amen, even so
come Lord Jesus.

Now examine your selves whether you are true believers by this Character. Do
you love and desire Christ's appearance?

Obj. If any object against themselves, and say, alas! we fear then we are no
true believers, because we cannot say that we love and desire Christ's
appearance, we are so far from desiring it, that we are afraid of it, and it is
matter of the greatest trouble unto us to think of it.

Ans. 1. See you to that, many go under the name of believers, which have only
the name; take heed that none of you be found in the number of such, at the
last day.

2. Possibly some of you may condemn your selves without reason, as Gods
Children are more forward to do than hypocrites, who have the most reason; It
may be you do not desire that Christ should come immediately, but do not you
desire that Christ should come at all? a Wife may sincerely and greatly desire
the coming home of her Husband, when he is gone a long journey; and yet if her
House be out of order, and not fitted to her mind for the receiving of him, if
she be not dressed and got into such a garb, as she knows would be pleasing to
him; she may be content that he would stay a little longer, until she be better
prepared, yea she may be afraid of his coming whilst she is unprepared; the
Harlot or Adulteress could be content that her Husband should never return, but
the true wife does desire the coming of her husband, though sometimes not the
present coming: so true believers they do desire Christ's coming, who is gone a
long journey to Heaven, though they may not desire his present coming, because
they are not so fitted as they desire to before the receiving of him; they
desire his coming, they would not for all the World that he should stay away
for ever in Heaven; unbelievers could be content Christ should stay away for
ever, and that they might live for ever upon Earth, but believers could not be
so content, they may fer Christ's immediate coming, because of their
unpreparation, but they desire his coming.

Quest. How should we know whether our desires after Christ's coming be sincere?

Answ. 1. If you love Christ's person, it is ^ sign your desires after his
coming are sincere; (...) desire the coming of friends to us, whom we love* Do
you love Christ in sincerity? Do you love him for himself, for his own
excellencies, his love^liness, his love, and spiritual love tokens? do you love
him upon a spiritual account?

2. If you do sincerely desire the coming (...) Christ into your hearts in
regard of his Spirit and grace, it is a sign you have sincere desires after his
coming in glory; when grace will arrive to it^ perfection; Can you
understandingly and heartily pray Thy Kingdom come; I mean, that Christ's
Kingdom of grace should be erected in your hearts; and are sincerely desirous
to have all things within you brought into subjection and obedience thereunto?
Do you sincerely and earnestly desire the presence of Christ and the breathings
of his Spirit upon your hearts in his Ordinances? it is a sign that there are
at least true radical desires in you after his second appearance, though by
reason of doubts and fears they may not be so express.

3. If you have laid up your treasure in Heaven, and placed your happiness in
things above: if you have cast the Anchor of your hope upward into that which
is within the Vail, it is a sign you have true desires after Christ's
appearance, that he might give you possession of the happiness which you have
made choice of.

4. If you are careful to please the Lord, and whether present or absent, to be
accepted of him; and are afraid of sin, because it is grievous to him; and are
diligent in the use of means to fit and prepare your selves, and make all
things ready for the receiving of him, it is a sign you do both look for his
coming, and do desire it.

5. And lastly, if you have lively hopes of his coming, and can rejoice in
those hopes, if you can with earnestness pray, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly;
this is a sign indeed of your desires, though all true Believer have not
attained to so great a height.

Unbelievers, they do not desire Christ's appearance, because they do not
believe in him, because they do not love him, because their hearts are set upon
the world, because they are under the guilt and power of sin, and because when
Christ does appear, he will judge them, condemn them, and punish them; But
though they do not desire Christ's coming, nor think of it, nor prepare for it,
yet Christ will come, and his coming will be dreadful unto them.

Believers, they desire Christ's coming, they (...) looking for it, and waiting
for it, they are ^^ping for it, and preparing for it, and he will certainly, he
will quickly appear, and they shall appear with him in glory, and this
appearance (...) be a most comfortable and joyful appearance u^^ them: which
leads unto the second Word whi^^ I am to speak.

2. For the comforting of Believer.

Will the Lord Jesus Christ certainly and quic^ly appear to Judgment: here then
is a full brea^ of the sweetest consolation, at which you may su^ and be
satisfied and exceedingly refreshed; As (...) very word in this Doctrine speaks
terror to Si^ners, so every word does breathe forth comfort true Believers: and
therefore I shall endeavo^^ hence to help work up your hearts unto sp^ritual
Joy.

1. Rejoice, Believers rejoice! Christ will app^^ to Judgment: Christ will
appear in his Glory, t^^ great God and your Savior will appear, He, the is
your Savior and Advocate will then be the Judge of the World; your Lord and
King wi^^ appear attended with a glorious Train of he^^ venlie Courtiers,
decked with glorious bea^^ of most excellent Majesty! Your Captain (...)
appear, the Captain of your Salvation, with (...) spoils of his and your
enemies: and he will ri^^ triumphantly in the Clouds; your dearly belove^
Friend and Husband will appear with such beaut^ and loveliness in his face,
and with such de^^ love toward you in his heart, as has not entre^ into your
hearts to conceive: the Lord Jesus Christ will be glorious in the eyes of the
whole world on that day; and should not this rejoice your heart to think of the
glory of your Lord, which will be then so conspicuous, and of your interest in
such a Person?

2. Rejoice, Believers rejoice! Christ will certainly appear: if there were any
grounds to doubt the truth of this thing, you would have reason to grieve; but
when the thing is so certain, when God has revealed it in his Word so
clearlie, when the Lord has promised it to his people so faithfully, and given
his People hopes and expectations of it, he will not disappoint them: You have
reason to rejoice, there is nothing more certain, as has been proved, than the
second appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ at the last day,

3. Rejoice Believer^s, rejoice! Christ will quickly appear; the coming of the
Lord draws nigh; there is a time set, though you cannot know it, because God
has locked up this secret in his own bosom; yet you may know that it cannot
now be far off; the Lord will not tarry much longer in Heaven before he come
down to Judgment: Look up then, and lift up your heads with joy, for the day of
your Redemption draws nigh, Luke 21. 28. You will not long groan under the
bondage and burden of corruption; You will not long mourn and complain under
the persecutions of cruel Enemies; You will not long be assaulted and bufferred
with the temptations of Satan; You will not long live in the dark Prison of
the world, Christ will quickly be here and open the Prison-doors, and deliver
you into the glorious liberty of the Children of God.

4. Rejoice, Believers rejoice! When Christ does appear, ye also shall appear;
Possibly some of you may remain alive until his appearance, be sure all of you
shall be made alive; if you go down into your dust before, you shall not be hid
there for ever, you shall not be buried there in eternal oblivion; but the Lord
Jesus will awaken you out of your long sleep of Death; and raise you out of
your beds of darkness; He will send his Angels to gather you from the four
Winds; Think, O think how joyful a day this day will be unto you, when the
Voice is proclaimed the Bridegroom is come, Go ye forth to meet him; when the
Trumpet does sound in the Air, and you are called out of your graves by the
Angels, and gathered into the company of all the Saints of God which lived in
all generations from the beginning of the Creation; and in a moment, in the
twinkle of an eye, such of you as are alive shall find your bodie^ strangely
transformed, and all that come forth of the ground made incorruptible and
immortal; and when you shall see the Lord Jesus Christ come down with such
brightness, and beauty, and glory, and such royal Attendants, and you are
all caught up to meet with him in the Air; when you shall find your selves in
the number of those blessed; happy ones, whom the Lord will send for, and
receive to himself, when the greatest part of the World will be left behind,
crying to the Rock to cover them, and the Mountains to fall upon them, to hide
them from the wrath of this furio^^ Judge, that is come to condemn them; O how
will your hearts then be filled, and even ravished with transporting joy, which
no heart now can conceive!

5. Rejoice, believers rejoice! when Christ d^^ appear, ye shall be judged by
him; ye shall not be condemned by him, but ye shall be judged by him; your
advocate will be your judge: Who shall then lay any thing to your charge? God
will then justify you; who then shall condemn you? Christ will acquit and
absolve you. You will openly be declared righteous on that day, through the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, which here has been imputed to you* Christ will
own you then for his redeemed people, whom he has purchased with his own
blood; then all your works of mercy will be made mention of; all your services
of Christ in the World will be had in remembrance; all your graces will be
taken notice of; and the Lord will kindly accept of the improvement of the
smallest talents, which he has entrusted you withal, Well done good and
faithful Servants, ye have been faithful in a few things, enter into the joy
of your Lord, Matthew. 25. 21. And if you have been persecuted for righteousness
sake; if you have been imprisoned, banished, reproached, and greatly afflicted
for Christ's sake; if you have left Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Houses,
Lands, yea and have laid down your lives for the testimony of Jesus, and that
you might keep a good conscience, think what entertainment the Lord Jesus will
give to you at that time? and O how will you rejoice that the Lord should
confer so great honor and dignity upon you, as to call you forth and enable
you to suffer for his name? and think how sweetly the sentence which Christ
shall pronounce upon you, will sound in your ears! Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World.

6. Rejoice Believers rejoice! when Christ does appear, he will reward you, he
will give you a crown of glory, which fades not away; he will not only judge
and sentence you to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, but he will receive you
into the Kingdom, he will give you possession thereof, he will carry you along
with him unto glory, he will lead you, and bring you into the new Jerusalem: he
will show you the Father unto your full satisfaction, and you shall behold his
glory and share in it, he will put you into those mansions which he has
prepared for you; Then, and never till then shall you be perfectly happy, and
the fore-thoughts of this is matter of exceeding great comfort, especially if
you consider these four properties of Heavens happiness.

1. Believers consider the greatness of the happiness of Heaven, it will be
full, and you will be filled therewith unto your utmost capacity, yea beyond
what here you are capable of; consider these particulars in your happiness of
Heaven.

1. Think what bodies you will have; they will be most beautiful and glorious
bodies, they will be most healthful, strong and immortal bodies; you will then
bear the image of the Heavenly Adam, in regard of your bodies, as well as in
regard of your souls.

Rejoice then believers rejoice! what though some of you have crooked and
deformed bodies now? what though some of you are blind or lame, or maimed, or
have your bodies filled with irksome pains, and weakened with long sickness?
what though you live in expectation of death, and these bodies, whatever their
mold and shape be, must ere long be carried to the cold stinking grave, and be
turned into putrefaction? yet rejoice you that are believers, because your
bodies will be made so glorious in the resurrection, when all blemishes of
nature will be healed, and all sickness and pain will be removed, because they
will be raised in incorruption, and freed from any more dominion of death for
ever.

2. Think what Souls you shall have; you will be glorious without, your bodies
will shine; but you will be far more glorious within, your souls will shine
much more; then your souls shall be washed clean from all remainders of sin, so
that they shall not have the least spot or stain; then you shall be cleansed
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and arrive unto perfection of
holiness; then the feeds of grace will be grown up into the flowers of glory,
and O what a fragrant garden will your souls be? when the rude draught, as it
were of Christ here in your hearts, shall be finished and perfected by Gods
Pensil, and your spirits shall be made perfectly like unto your glorious Lord,
O how beautiful will they be in the eyes of God!

Rejoice then believers, rejoice! it grieveth you when you look within you, and
perceive so much remaining defilement; when you feel such strong opposition of
the flesh against the spirit, and you find your selves sometimes foiled
thereby, your weaknesses and infirmities trouble you; but rejoice believers,
because in Heaven you will be perfectly freed from sin, you will never be
foiled nor defiled with it any more, but you will be made perfectly holy, and
perfectly happy.

3. Think what habitations ye shall have; you shall have Mansions in the
Fathers house, Joh. 14. 2. A building of God, a house not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1. your persons will be glorious, and your
habitations will be glorious.

Rejoice then believers, rejoice! what though some of you live in poor and mean
cottages; then you shall live in the glorious? Palace of the King of Kings;
what though your houses have been burned with fire, and some of you have not
where to lay your head, and none of you have a certain dwelling place which you
can secure to your selves? yet rejoice because there are Mansions provided for
you, out of which it will be impossible for you to be burned or turned out for
ever. The City which is above has foundations which cannot be over turned, and
the building of God which is not made with hands, cannot be destroyed by hands,
neither is exposed to flames of fire, which may demolish the fairest City in
the world.

4. Think what Company you shall have: you shall have the presence of the
Father, you shall dwell with the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Spirit of God will
dwell in you for ever; you shall have the company of holy Angels, and all the
glorified Saints; all your companions will be most lovely and glorious.

Rejoice then believers rejoice! what though wicked men separate you from their
company, and think you unworthy of their fellowship? God will not think you
unworthy of his fellowship, nor separate you from his presence; what though
some of you are forced to dwell in Meseck, and are linked in near relations to
some ungodly persons, and are every day vexed with their ungodly conversation?
Rejoice, for in Heaven you will be freed from such company, no wicked person
will be permitted to come into that place.

5. Think what Treasures you shall have; you shall have Treasures which cannot
be corrupted by moth, nor stolen by thief, your riches will be durable and
unsearchable.

Rejoice then believers, rejoice! what though you are poor in the world? you
are rich in says, and hope; what though you have no inheritance on earth? yet
you are heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, you shall have an inheritance which is
incorruptible, and undefiled; what though you endure some hardship in your
journey through the world? when you come home to your Fathers house you shall
be freed from all want, and have such treasures to spend upon, which can never
be exhausted.

6. Think what Honors you shall have; the meanest of you will be exalted unto
higher dignity than the greatest Monarch that ever lived; you will be crowned
with immortal glory, you will be honored by God and the Angels; and you will
not only have honor, but you will be made most honorable.

Rejoice then believers, and take comfort, though you are scorned by some, and
accounted as the offscouring of the earth; you are reproached and vilified by
men here, but all your reproaches, especially those which you have born for the
sake of Jesus Christ, shall be wreathed into a Crown, and make you the more
glorious in Heaven; there you shall not have the least disgrace cast upon you
any more; and you shall be kept from doing any unbecoming action to blot and
sullie you in the least, but you shall shine like so many Stars, or glorious
Suns in the Kingdom of your Father.

7. Think what Peace and Rest you shall have; you shall have a most sweet peace
and tranquillity of mind, no enemy without to disturb and molest you, no devil
to tempt and assault you, no lusts within, or distempered passion to disquiet
you; then you shall have perfect peace; and then you shall rest from all
wearisome imploiments, and take up your repose in God for ever.

Rejoice then believers, and set this cheer your hearts in your passage through
the tempestuous sea of this world; ere long you will come to the haven, where
there will be no waves nor winds; sometimes now you are troubled on every side,
and have no rest in your spirits; without are fightings, within are fears; but
in Heaven you shall be freed perfectly from all disturbance and molestation.

8. Think what Joys and Pleasures you shall have; you shall have fullness of
Joy, Psalm. 16. 11. you shall drink of the rivers of pleasures, Psalm. 36. 8. O
the delights which you shall have in the immediate views of Gods face, in the
sense of Gods love, in the high actings of your love; in the fruition of the
chiefest good, and the high emploiment which you shall have in Heaven.

Rejoice then believers, rejoice in hope of these joys; now you mourn and weep
for your sin, and because of the eclipses of the light of Gods countenance; it
troubles your hearts that you can see and enjoy so little of God, that your
love is so low and inconstant, that your highest services are but mean, and
diverted many times by little trifling businesses in the world, from converse
with God; in heaven all tears will be wiped away from your eyes, and all
sorrow, with all the grounds thereof will be removed, you will come with
singing into the new Jerusalem; you will enter and live in the vision and
fruition, in the love and joy, and spend an eternity in the praise of the Lord.

2. Believers, consider the sureness of the happiness of Heaven; as surely as
you are believers, so surely shall you obtain this happiness; you cannot be
sure of any thing in the world, but you may be sure of the glory of heaven, and
though there be not the certitudo subjecti: and many of you be not assured of
it, but are full of doubts and fears that you shall fall short; yet there is
certitudo objecti, the thing is sure to you.

Rejoice then believers, rejoice! your names are written in the book of life,
our of which they shall never be blotted, labor to answer your doubts, and to
get your hearts wrought up to a full assurance of this happiness, by such
arguments as these, which will evidently prove, that if you be true believers,
you shall not, you cannot miss of Heaven.

I. God has chosen you to glory, he has elected you to salvation before the
world was, Act. 13. 48. As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed.
Hence it follows, that all believers were ordained to eternal life; and I These.
2. 13. God has chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the spirit,
and belief of the truth. All true believers are elected persons, and Gods
decree of election cannot be frustrated, because God is unchangeable; because
God changes not, therefore you are not consumed; because God changes not,
therefore you shall be saved.

2. God has promised this happiness to you, I John 2. 24. This is the promise
which he has promised, even eternal life. And Tit. 1. 2. In hope of eternal
life, which God who cannot lie has promised. If God has promised this
happiness, and your faith does give you interest in the promises, and God be
faithful to fulfill to them, it being impossible for God to lie; then as
certainly as God is true, you that are believers shall obtain.

3. The Lord Jesus Christ has purchased this happiness for you, it is called
the purchased posfession, Ephesians. 1. 14. as certain as the purchase, so certain
will be the possession.

4. The Lord Jesus has taken possession of Heaven for you, The forerunner is
for us entered, Heb. 6. 20. He is preparing these mansions in the fathers house
for you, Ioh. 14. 2. and as certain as Christ is in Heaven, so certainly shall
those that are believers be received thither in time.

5. Christ prayed that you might have this happiness whilst he was on the
earth, Iah. 17. 24. Father I will that those which thou host given me, be with
me where I am, that they may behold the glory which thou host given me. Which
prayer was made for you, if believers, as well as for his present Disciples, v.
20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word. And for this thing Chirst intercedes above, and whatever he
prays and intercedes for, he will prevail for you, and therefore you will
obtain.

6. Ye are Christ's, as ye are believers, and therefore all things are yours,
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. amongst which, things to come are
enumerated; ye are Christ's servants, and do his work, and he will give you your
wages; You honor him in the world, and therefore you shall be honored by him;
You follow your Master in a way of self-denial and suffering, and if you suffer
with him, you shall reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. 12. and be glorified together,
Romans 8. 17. and where Christ is, there shall his servants be, Ioh. 12. 26. Ye
are Christ's members, and where the head is, there shall the members be; Ye are
Christ's Sponse, you are joined, married to him, and therefore shall live with
him, all the powers of earth and hell, cannot separate you from his love, and
therefore cannot keep you out of heaven, Romans 8. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.

7. Ye are justified by faith, Romans 5. 1. and therefore absolved from the guilt
of sin, therefore freed from the condemnation of hell, Romans 8. 1. therefore
shall not perish, seeing the cause thereof is removed, therefore you shall have
eternal life, Ioh. 3. 16. whom God justifies, them he also glorifieth, Romans 8.
30.

8. Ye are the adopted children of God, Gal. 3. 26. For ye are all the
Children of God, by faith in Jesus Christ. And if children, then heirs, Romans 8.
17. and if heirs, you shall be sure to have the inheritance.

9. Ye are called with a Holy calling, and sanctified with the holy Spirit, and
thereby in some measure fitted and qualified for this happiness by the work of
grace, consormity to the Lord in holiness; grace is glory begun, and is called
eternal life, and God has promised to perfect it, Philip. 1. 6. grace has
relation to Heaven, as sin has relation to hell; and as sin will certainly
bring men to hell if it be not pardoned, and subdued; so grace will certainly
bring men to heaven, because it cannot be wholly eradicated.

10. You have made choice of Heaven for your portion, you have laid up there
your treasure, and God has set your souls a longing after it, and given you
hopes of it; and therefore you shall not miss it, your desires shall be
satisfied, and your hopes shall not make you ashamed, Romans 5. 5.

11. And if besides all this, you have the witness, and seal, and earnest of
the spirit, giving you some first fruits, and foretastes of this happiness;
(though all believers do not obtain it) then you may know without question,
that this is a sure happiness, both in its self, and unto you.

Therefore believers exercise your faith, that you may be filled with all joy
and peace in believing.

3. Believers consider the neerness of the happiness of Heaven, Christ's
appearance is not far off, but your happiness may be nearer, I mean the
happiness of your souls in Heaven, which will begin, so soon as your lives come
to an end: the wicked walk upon the brink of Hell every day, when they die,
thither they are carried; you walk upon the borders of the Heavenly Canaan, the
Paradise which is above, when you die, thither you shall be conveyed; and you
may die suddenly, and as s^ddenlie you will be in glory.

Rejoice then believers, rejoice! you may be in Heaven before you are aware; it
may be to morrow God will send for you, within a few days you may be out of
the body, and present with ^he Lord Jesus, and amongst the spirits of just Men
made perfect; when you break Prison from the body, you will be delivered into
the marvelous light of Gods glory; rejoice to think how near your happiness is.

4. Believers consider the everlastingness of the happiness of Heaven, there is
fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore; Psalm. 18. 11. When you are come to
Heaven, there you shall abide, your happiness will be constant and eternal,
without diminution, intermixture of sin or sorrow, without interruption, or
possibility that ever it should be brought to an end. It would alleviate the
torments of the damned, if they had any hopes of ever being let out of Hell;
and it would weaken the joys of the Saints, yea fill them with unspeakable
grief, if there were any danger and fear of being ever thrust out of Heaven.

Rejoice then ye believers; ye shall rejoice for evermore in the eternal
vision and fruition of God, labor to begin your Heavens joys now; let faith
so realize and bring near the things which you hope for, and make evident the
things which as yet you do not see, but shall possess, that you may have a
sweet foretaste of this happiness; and begin your Heavens work to praise the
Lord for his great and undeserved love wherewith he has loved you, and for
those things beyond conception, which out of love he has prepared for you.

CHAP. XV.
LAstly to conclude, I shall speak a word both to Sinners and Believers.

Will the Lord Jesus Christ certainly and quickly appear to judgment? let me
then in his name persuade you to three things.

1. Believe that Christ will appear, mingle the Doctrine you have heard or
read, with faith; you have had evident proofs of it, believe the thing.

Sinners believe that Christ will come to judge and condemn you, if you be
found in your sins, did you believe it effectually, you would quickly become
Saints.

Believers labor for more faith in this truth, did you believe* it more
strongly, you would live at a higher rate.

2. Consider that Christ will appear; meditate on this thing, let it dwell in
your thoughts, let it lie down with you at night, and arise with you in the
morning, let it sit down with you at Table, and walk with you abroad; think
often of the antecedents of Christ's coming, the judgment it self and the
consequents thereof, and get a deep impression of the last Judgment upon your
spirits.

Sinners, consider how the wicked will be judged, think how they will be
accused and condemned, think of the dreadful sentence, and the execution
thereof in Hell, and then think that you are in the number of those that are in
such danger, unless you speedily secure your selves, by making your peace.

Believers, consider how the Saints will be judged, think how Christ will
acquit them, and invite them to take possession, and then will give them
possession of Heaven; and then think that you are in the number of these
blessed ones, which shall be made thus happy.

3. Prepare for the appearance of Christ to judgment, and that you may be
prepared, as a conclusion to this Doctrine, take these directions.

1. Be diligent, that ye may be found of him in peace, it is the advice of the
Apostle, after his discourse of the coming of the Lord, and the glorious things
of that day. Wherefore beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be
diligent, that ye may be found of him in peace. 2 Pet. 3. 14.

1. Make your peace with God; sinners God is your enemy, make your peace with
him; you have offended him by your sins, and his justice must be satisfied, O
labor to ge^ an interest in the satisfaction of Christ, that your sins may be
pardoned, and God may be reconciled; lay hold on Christ by faith, as yet you
may be welcome to him, hereafter, it will be too late. Believers, make sure of
a pardon, you cannot be too sure in a thing of such concernment.

2. Diligently endeavour^after peace in your consciences; sinners, get the
wounds which fin has made there, healed with the blood of Christ; Believers,
take heed of making any breaches there, maintain peace within, when you have
obtained it.

3. Diligently follow after peace one with another, take heed of hatred,
variance, emulations, wraths, strifes, seditions, envyings, divisions,
clamours, evil-speakings, back-bitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults; and
follow after those things which make for peace, as love, joy, humbleness of
mind, meekness, long-suffering, patience, and the like, that you may be found
of the Lord in peace.

2. Give diligence, that ye may be found of the Lord, without spot, and
blameless, as the Apostle does advise in the same 14. verse. And read ver. 11
Seeing all these things shall be dissolved, what manne^ of Persons ought ye to
be, in all holy conversatio^ and godliness. Get the spots of sin washed of^ not
only the guilt of sin removed, but also the de^filement; labor to be holy in
all manner of con^versation, to be blameless and harmless, the Chil^dren of God
without rebuke, in the midst of crooked and perverse Generation; Take heed
(...) the sins of the times and places wherein you live join not with them in
their sins, least you share (...) their Plagues at the last day. Let your
conversa^tion be as becomes the Gospel; let your action be ^qu^^ed by the
Word, as those which must giv^ an account, and receive a reward according (...)
your works.

3. Sit loose from the World, let not your hear^ be overcharged with the cares
of this life, n^ filled with the love of the World, and that da^ overtake you
at unawares, Luke 21. 34. Remem^ber that riches will not profit you in the day
(...) wrath, that the fashion of this World passes ^ way, and you are passing
away, and therefo^ live here as strangers and so^journers.

4. Lay up your treasure in Heaven, Matthew. ^ 20. And get your affections set
upon things abov^ Col. 3. 2. And then the appearance of Jesus Chr^^ will be
joyful to you, because he will give (...) poffession of Heaven.

5. Be ready to do and suffer whatever the Lo^ calls you unto; patiently
continue in well-doin^ for in due time ye shall reap; be steadfast and (...)
movable, always abounding in the work of (...) Lord, because your labor shall
not be in vain (...) the Lord: Gal. 6, 9. I Cor. 15. 58. And what ever
afflictions ye suffer for Christ, they are light and momentany, but the glory
which Christ will give, is weighty and eternal. 2 Cor. 4. 17.

6. Give Christ your hearts, let him have the highest room, give him your whole
heart, let him have the choicest and chiefest of your affections; and then he
will give you his Kingdom, and such expressions of his love will he make unto
you at his appearance, as now you have not thoughts to conceive.

7. Maintain communion with Christ in his Ordinances; prize Ordinances upon
this account, because Christ does walk there; and improve Ordinances for this
end, that you may meet with Christ; ^est not in the outside and carnal part of
Ordinances, but seek after Christ in them until you find ^im, and labor to
grow into acquaintance with Christ, and to keep fellowship with him; and ^hen
when he does appear, he will know you again and own you, and receive you to
live with him ^or ever.

8. Stand up for the honor of Christ in the World, ^onfess him before Men, and
he will confess you before his Father in Heaven, Matthew. 10. 32. Be ^ot ashamed
to profess your selves his Disciples, and to own his ways and truths, when
they are ^ost contemned and despised by the ungodly ^orld, because if you be,
he will be ashamed of ^ou when he comes in his Glory. Mark. 8. 38.

9. Improve your Talents for the use of the Lord, ^ho has entrusted you with
them: All of you have ^alents, lay them not up in a Napkin, but lay ^em out in
the service of the Lord; whatever ^ifts or graces you have, put them forth to
usury, ^at you may give an account with joy to your Lord, when he shall come to
call you to an account.

10. Stand upon your Watch; when our Savior had foretold his Disciples of his
coming, he exhorts them, and all to watch, Mark 13. 37. What I say unto you, I
say unto all, watch. Watch against sin; watch your senses, which are the inlets
of sin; watch your hearts, from whence are the issues of sin; watch, take heed
of sleeping in sin, least you lose your Garm^nts, and be found naked.

11. Be frequent and fervent in Prayer, our Savior joins these duties together
in his exho^tation of his Disciples: Luke 21. 36. Watch* ye therefore, and
pray always, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things, which
shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man. Pray without ceasing,
pray without fainting, be often upon your knees, and be earnest with the Lord,
that he would prepare you for this day, that he would deliver you from that
dreadful wrath which shall be revealed when Christ does appear, and which you
have deserved for your sins: and pray that he would give you those
qualifications, as may embolden you at the last day to hold up your heads with
confidence; that he would keep you without spot, and blameless until the coming
of the Lord.

12. And lastly, Look for the appearance of the Lord; look with an eye of hope,
labor to abound in hope, by the power of the Holy Ghost, and let this hope be
an Anchor fastened within the Vail, to stay your sinking hearts in the midst of
those fierce storms, which do or may beat upon you in the World; and look with
an eye of desire; look and long for Christ's appearance; dart up your wishes
often to Heaven* O when shall we see the Heavens opened, and behold our Lord in
his Glory? When shall we hear the Trumpet sound and be gathered by the Angels
from all the quarters of the Earth? When shall we put off this dust and
corruption, and be clothed with robes of immortality? When will the Lord Jesus
come down, and show us his glory, and receive us to himself, that where he is,
there we may be also? Christ has spoken from Heaven to Earth, Surely I come
quickly* let there be an echo back from Earth to Heaven in your desires to
this voice: Amen, even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly

I shall conclude all with the words of the Apost^e Jude* verse 24, 25. Now unto
him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before
the presence of his glory with exceed^ng joy, To the only wise God, our
Savior, be glory and Majesty, dominion and power, now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

