THE Great Change: Discoursed of in a FUNERAL SERMON, Occasioned by the Death
of Mrs. MARTHA THOMPSON, Late Wife of Captain WILLIAM THOMPSON In WAPPING.
Preached by Nathanael Vincent, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

The memory of the just is blessed. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the
Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers-Chappel, 1682.

To his much respected friends, Mr. Robert Thompson the Father, and Mrs. Martha
Thompson the Mother, and Captain William Thompson the Husband of the late
Deceased Mrs. Martha Thompson.
YOur desires, which also have been seconded by the desires of others, have
brought forth this discourse into the World. It is not, I must confess, at all
against my inclination to make it Public; because the deserved Character I
gave your Deceased Relation having sounded only in the Ear, might be soon
forgotten; but being Printed, may prove a very good Copy for others to imitate,
and write after. How few Saints at this day are exemplary! This is an Age in
which those that are Evil wax worse and worse; and many that are gracious are
under great languishing and decays. A Christian that grows in Grace, and whose
Soul prospers, and whose Conversation is a Conviction to the World, that there
is both a reality and efficacy in Religion, is Rara avis in terris; not easily
to be found.

I cannot blame your grief that you have lost One who was so dear, and so
worthy to be so dearly loved. Only I would have you remember, That Believers
are to weep as if they wept not: they are not to mourn over the Dead as without
hope. And Hope being so well grounded, will keep Sorrow within due limits. How
easily, when the Sun rises, does its light supply the room of the Stars, whose
twinkling light is vanished! Creatures at best, though they have never so great
a Luster, are but little things: and their absence may be brooked well enough,
if the All-sufficient and Gracious God, does but vouchsafe more of his special
and reviving presence.

My friends! Turn your Sorrow into a right Channel: God puts those Tears into
his bottle, which are shed for Sin; but those which the Sorrow of this World
draws from our Eyes as common water, are spilt upon the ground. Sin does best
deserve your grief; and the Lord, whose Being and kindness is unchangeable,
what ever changes are among the Creatures, is as much to be loved, delighted,
and rejoiced in as ever. A curious Cistern has been broken to pieces, I wish
you may all have recourse to, and drink more largely of the Fountain of living
Waters.

That God would sanctify the breach he has made, and satiate your Souls with
himself, and wean you from this World, and bring you at last safe to his
Heavenly Kingdom, is the Prayer of

Your much obliged Friend and Servant for Jesus sake Nathanael Vincent.

Job XIV. Ver. 14. latter part. All the days of my appointed time will I wait
till my change come.
THere had been a strange and sudden alteration in the temporal Estate of Job:
so that He who was as good and as great as any of the Sons of the East; nay, a
Nonsuch for uprightness and the fear of God, is in an instant spoiled of all he
had, and reduced to extreme poverty. Never Riches did take unto them swifter
Wings, and they flew away altogether as an Eagle toward Heaven. Satan from
Hell, his Instruments on Earth assaulted Job: and the God of heaven permitted
both, for the trial of his Faith and Patience, and the proof of his Sincerity.
This change in his outward condition caused him to be deeply apprehensive of
another change, which he concluded could not be far off. Affliction is called
by the name of Death in Scripture, because of its tendency to it; and ought to
be looked upon as an admonition concerning it.

In the beginning of this Chapter, Job speaks of Man's frailty in the general:
Man that is born of a woman, is of few days: his Days are few; but so are not
his Troubles, for they are many, his Life is full of them. He is not compared
to the sturdy Oak, or the lofty Cedar, which will stand long, if let alone, and
must have many a stroke to make them fall. No, no, a flower, a shadow, are
much fitter comparisons. He comes forth as a flower, and is cut down: he
flees also as a shadow, and continues not. This general Doctrine of
Mortality, Job in the Text particularly applies to himself; and truly he is
very close in that application. He saw himself changeable, his actual Change he
saw as near; and waits for the coming of it. All the days of my appointed time,
etc.

These Particulars are observable in the Words.

1. There is the practice which Job resolves upon, and that is to wait, which
implies a certain Expectation, and a diligent preparation suitable to such a
certain expectation.

2. That which he waited for, was, the coming of a Change. This Change some
refer to the Resurrection, which as it ought most firmly to be believed, so
with joy to be thought on. But others with greater probability do understand it
of Death, which is a great Change indeed, with reference both to good and bad:
with reference to the Bodies, and the Souls of Men. For though the Soul dies
not, yet it is mightily altered after its separation.

3. This Change Job calls his own Change, or the Change of himself; the Hebrew
Word is (...) which is translated Immutatio mei, The Change of me; as if he
should say, The Lord by Affliction, has made a Change in my Estate; and shortly
by Death he will make a Change in my Person. The things of the World have left
me, and I my self shall leave the World quickly.

4. Here is the time of waiting. The time which was appointed him in this
World. The Hebrew (...) may be Translated Dies Militiae, the days of my
Warfare. Our days are appointed for Combat with our Spiritual Enemies; and if
being strong in the Lord, we are vigorous in the Combat, we are sure to come
off Conquerors.

5 Job is sensible of the danger and unreasonableness of Carnal Security at any
time, and therefore purposes every day to be in expectation of his Last Day.
All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come.

I raise Three Doctrines from the Words

First, That Man's time in this World is an appointed time. Secondly, A Change
will come, and put an end to this time which is appointed to man. Thirdly, To
be waiting for this Change, is the practice of the Saints, and would be the
wisdom of all.
Doctr. 1 I begin with the first, That man's time in this World is an appointed
time, Job 7. 1. Is there not an appointed time to man upon Earth? are not his
days also, like the days of an hireling? So Job 14. 5. Seeing his days are
determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed his
bounds that he cannot pass. In the handling of this Doctrine I shall,

1. Speak concerning time which is appointed to Man. 2. Show you who has
appointed it. 3. To what end it is appointed.
And then make Application.

In the first place, I am to speak of Time, which is thus appointed unto Man.

1. This time is continually passing. It had a Beginning, it will have an End;
and to that end it is always hasting, Eternity was before it, and Eternity will
be after it. Time is commonly divided into past, and to come; that which is
past, is past recalling; that which is to come, may quickly be past also. The
present time is but an instant, which in the twinkling of an Eye is swallowed
up in that which is past away. Those similitudes of a Weavers Shuttle, of the
Ships of desire, of an Eagle hasting to the prey, are used by the Holy Ghost,
Job 9. 26. to signify the swift passage of time. Times Glass is always
running. Augustine has a pretty observation, I. 2. Confess. c. 23. When Joshua
was fighting with the Canaanites, Sol stabat, tempus ibat: The Sun stood still,
but Time did not.

2 This time is called a time of sojourning. 1 Pet. 1. 17. Pass the time of
your sojourning here in fear. This World is not to be the Eternal Home of any.
All that are in it, are hastening out of it. The Wicked shall not long be
permitted to Sin nor the Righteous to suffer here. The Saints are so wise as to
look upon themselves as Strangers, and Sojourners, and Pilgrims. Psalm. 39. 12.
I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my fathers were. And the
Carnal minded, though they live as if they were to live here always; yet their
time is really very short, and sometimes much shortened by Sin: they will soon
be at their long home.

3 This time is said to be lived in the flesh, 1 Pet. 4. That he no longer
should live the rest of his time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the
will of God. While the Soul of Man is linked to the Flesh, there are sensitive
Appetites and Inclinations, which are apt to be eager, and to exceed due
bounds. The Senses are doors at which, many things enter, which prove a snare
to the Soul; and are made use of by the Tempter to entice and entangle the
Heart, and to draw it away from God. Here is great reason for vigilance, lest
the pleasing and minding of the body cause the neglecting of the Soul, and the
ruin of both for ever.

4 This time is styled the accepted time, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Behold, now is the
accepted time: behold, now is the day of Salvation. Now is the time, wherein
Man may accept of Christ, and God will accept of Man. Man may accept of the
of^ers made in the Gospel, and God will accept of returning Prodigal ^ if being
weary of the far Country, they come home to their Fathers House, Luke 15. They
that have been guilty of the greatest Sins, and have made themselves most
abominable, and foul, and vile; yet, if they look to Jesus, and cry to God,
iniquity shall be taken away, they shall be graciously received, and healed:
but when Time is ended, not one offer of Grace shall be made more.

5. This Time when once ended, more Time will never be granted. Death puts a
stop to Time; and immediately we enter upon Eternity. The end of all things is
at hand, 1 Pet. 4. 7. Time will end quickly. There are several truths which God
has confirmed with an Oath; as that In blessing, He will bless his people; that
the Unbelieving shall never enter into his rest: And among other truths, this
is one thus confirmed, That there shall be time no longer, Rev. 10. 6. If it
had been possible to be obtained, the Rich Man in Hell would rather have begged
for an Inch of Time, than a drop of water. Presently after the Dissolution, the
Gulf is fixed, the Gates both of Heaven and Hell are shut so fast, that the
happiness of the one, the misery of the other, must needs be unchangeable.

In the Second place I am to show you, by whom Man's Time is appointed: It Is by
that God, who is the Ancient of days, who is from everlasting to everlasting;
who is Lord of Time, and Lord of All. He determines Times, as well as the
bounds of our habitations, Acts 17. 26. In Him all men live, and move, and have
their being; and Life can last no longer, than he affords his gracious
Visitation to preserve it. Time is in the hand and power of none but God.

Three things here observable.

1. It Is the Lord that vouchsafes to man the time he has; and this is an
argument of his Good will to him. We read not of any Time that was granted to
the Apostate Angels; as soon as they had sinned, they were not spared, but cast
to hell without delay, 2 Pet. 2. 4. No space was given them to Repent; no Time
allowed to cry for Pardon* no ground at all appeared for hope of reconciliation
and recovery.

2. He orders and appoints the time he gives, for such and such uses; this
Talent he requires should be employed. not according to the Lusts of Men, but
according to his own will, 1 Pet. 4. 2. Time is too precious a thing to be idly
wasted and lavished in Sins service. To throw away our Gold or Jewels about the
streets, is not so pernicious a folly, as to be prodigal of our Time. He has
work enough to do with his Time, that is to work out his own Salvation: and
this is the main business for which Time is given.

3. It Is the Lord who sets bounds and limits unto man's Time, and it expires at
his pleasure. When he says to those who were formed out of the Dust, Return
unto your dust again, immediately they must obey; they that are the greatest
Princes, must here be perfectly subject. Their breath, when God calls for it,
goes forth, as well as the breath of others; They return to their earth, and
that very day their thoughts perish, Psalm. 146. 4. The Apostle would have
Christians sensible, that they live at Gods will, and no longer than he wills;
and that the present life they live, is but a vapor, which appears for a
little while, and then vanishes away. Jam. 4. 14, 15.

In the Third place, I am to tell you, to what end Time is appointed. The end
of Time, that is, its Expiration; The end of Time, that is, the Design of
giving it; is not at all understood by the most of men.

1. Time is appointed for seeking; Now is the Time in which our Lord Jesus
comes to seek and to save that which is lost. He seeks after them that are
straying, and have lost themselves in the Wilderness of this World, that he may
bring them safe home. Now is the Time also for man to seek what is so highly
worth finding. He is to act the wise Merchant, and seek the Pearl of great
price, Matt. 13. 46. which will both enrich, and beautify, and save the Soul
which is possessed of it. He is to seek the Lord while he may be found, and to
call upon him while he is near, Isa. 55. 6. Now the face and strength of God
shall not be sought in vain.

2. Time is appointed for making Peace. When the Enemy is dreadful, his Wrath
intolerable, his Power irresistible, certainly Peace is desirable. Now though
God be such an Enemy, and that most justly an Enemy; yet he is forward to be at
peace; he beseeches us to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 20. He tells us, that he is
ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy to all that call upon him: Now is the
Time to obtain Mercy, to believe in Jesus the Peacemaker: and if we will
believe in this Mediator, God will be no longer a Foe, but a Friend; nay, a
Father: and being justified by the blood of Christ, we shall be saved from
wrath through him.

3. Time is appointed for conversion and healing. They are now called to
return, who have fallen by their iniquity, Hos. 14. 1. How loud, how frequent
are these Calls! what earnestness is used to make Sinners willing and obedient!
The Lord protests solemnly by his own life, that he has no pleasure in their
Death, Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death
of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye
from your evil ways; for why will you die, O house ^f Israel? And if such Calls
to turn, are hearkened to, ^ncere Converts, though before never so ungodly,
shall be loved freely, their Souls healed and saved.

4. Time is appointed for working. That was a just rebuke which was given, Mat.
20. 6. Why stand ye here all the day idle? There is a Work which we are with
all care and fear to avoid; and that is the serving of sinful Lusts and
Pleasures: Have no fellowship, says the Apostle, with the unfruitful works of
darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. But the Work of God we should be employed in, with heart
and hand, with our whole might and strength, we should count it our Meat and
Drink to do it. Now is the Time to depart from evil, and to do good, that we
may dwell for evermore. And though we are never so steadfast, though we abound
never so much in Gods Work, our labor shall not be in vain.

5. Time is appointed for Warring. The enemies of our Salvation are many, and
mighty; but they are conquerable; nay, they have been already Conquered, and
Triumphed over by the Captain of our Salvation. He has condemned Sin in the
flesh, Romans 8. 3. He has spoiled Principalities and Powers, and made a show of
them openly, triumphing over them in the Cross, Col. 2. 15. He has overcome the
World, Joh. 16. ult. What though these enemies are above our Match; if we
vigorously engage in the Combat, being strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might, putting on the whole armor of God, we shall be more than Conquerors
in the end. Sin is the worst Enemy of all; if Sin be subdued, we need not fear
any other.

6. Time is appointed to make provision for eternity. A future State is
certain, and it is very near. Man must of necessity be to Eternity; and
therefore not to think of, or be concerned about, or provide for Eternity, is
the very height of madness. We should justly blame a man that should spend his
Estate in fareing sumptuously for a day, and beg all his days after. But how
much more blameworthy is he, who minds only a short and present Consolation,
and ventures upon Eternal Misery! Now is the time to lay up in store for our
selves a good foundation, that we may lay hold of eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 19

7 Time is appointed to render Man inexcusable in case of final obstinacy and
impenitency. When God calls, if man refuses, and will not know the day of his
gracious visitation, but neglects the things which concern his peace; then if
he dye an Enemy, and is dealt with as an Enemy, and is thrown into everlasting
Punishment, the fault is his own. God will be justified and cleared when man
receives the Sentence of Eternal Condemnation. How may the Reprobate Angels
accuse and plead against sinful Man at the great Day, and say, O thou Righteous
Judge! They have done worse than We, they have contemned Mercy which we never
had the offer of; We never had any; but they have had space to Repent, and yet
they Repented not.

Use 1. If time is appointed to man, acknowledge the merciful kindness of God
toward him. His suffering sinful Man to live so long, and to enjoy the seasons
and means of Grace, is a plain demonstration of his Compassions toward him,
and how unwilling he is that Man should perish. To this purpose speaks the
Apostle, 2 Pet. 3.

The Lord is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but
that all should come to Repentance. Man is dead in Law, condemned to die; how
great is that Mercy that steps in between Sentence and Execution, and allows so
much time to sue for Pardon!

Use. 2. Admire the lasting of time where it is sinfully wasted and lavisht
away. When only Sin and Satan are served with that Time, which God gives, it is
a wonder that it i^ not suddenly taken away. The Patience of an All-seeing,
All-powerful, and Holy God, is a mavelous thing toward sinful Man: though he
lives to the provocation and dishonor of his Maker and Preserver, yet behold,
he lives still. Yet, let not Man presume, for the more patience has been
abused, the greater will be the following fury; and the Viols of Wrath will be
the fuller against the day of Righteous Judgment.

Use 3. Comply with Gods design in vouchsafing time to you. Much is lost, and
oh what a Preasure was that which is lost! therefore redeem the remainder. If
you Time be done, and your Work undone, you are undone without remedy. The
slothful servant who was sleeping, when he should have been Working, was bound
hand and foot, and cast into utter Darkness. Work hard in the Lords Vineyard,
that when he comes to reckon, he may find you employed diligently, Luke 12. 43.
Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

Use 4. Remember that the bounds of time are unknown, and therefore do not
reckon as if there were a great deal to come. The Prodigal that thinks his
Estate will never b^ spent, how does he send it flying? if you reckon you shall
live very long, it is a thousand to one but you will live very ill. How was the
Old World drowned in wickedness, before it was drowned in Water? and one reason
might be, because 'twas usual for men to live Seven or eight, or nine hundred
years; hence grew security in Sin, God was neglected, Death unthought of, and
Repentance delayed. Death may be very near, when you least think of dying. You
are not to boast of to morrow, which possibly you may not live to see; but as
the Holy Ghost says, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts,
Heb. 3. 7, 8.

Doct. 2. The Second Doctrine is this, A Change will come, and put an end to
this time, which is appointed to Man. Mortality and Change are consequent upon
Sin. As Soon as we are born, Death sets out toward us, and it approaches
nearer and nearer every moment. What man is he that lives and shall not see
death? Psalm. 89. 48. Every one that lives, as sure as he lives, shall dye.

In the handling of this Point, I shall,

1. Show in what respects Death may be called a Change. 2. Prove, that Death
will come. 3. When this Change at Death comes, that time will be at an end.
Lastly, make Application.

In the first place, I am to show, in what respects Death may be called a
Change.

Death is a great Change in reference to Sinners, and in reference to Saints.

1. Death is a Change in reference to Sinners. A sad and bad Change, which they
may tremble to think of. Sinners wish they might live here to Eternity, that
they might Sin to Eternity; and they justly deserve Punishment to Eternity: but
though their wills be desperately bad, yet their wishes are vain. Though Death
is more bold than welcome, yet 'twill make bold with the highest and securest
of them. Their Change is coming: now Death is a Change in several respects.

1. Death is a Change, in reference to their outward comforts. All these take
their flight at Death; or rather, Sinners take their flight away from them. The
Rich Man in the Gospel, Luke 16. after Death, tastes no more of his sumptuous
fare, he is turned out of his House, he is stripped of his purple and fine
linen; all the good things that he received here, he left behind him when he
went into another World. I grant, the Godly leave their outward Comforts too,
but they exchange them for better: but Wicked Men here receive all their
Consolation; and nothing but Evils and Torment abide them after their
dissolution. Death lays their Honor in the Dust, pushes off the Crown from the
graceless Monarchs Head; proves the Richest, mere Beggars.

2. Death is a Change in reference to their outward Man. Their Bodies, which
the ungodly take so much time and pains to adorn and pamper, are strangely
altered; the sprightly Heat, is turned into coldness, Strength into the clean
contrary, Beauty into a ghastly paleness, the best Constitution into rottenness
and corruption.

I grant the Earthly Tabernacle of the Saints also falls to the ground, but
'twill rise again with advantage; but the Bodies of the Wicked will rise to
Punishment, and that this may be Eternal, put on a wretched Immortality.

3. Death is a Change, in reference to that peace and confidence that sinners
before were full of. The hope of the wicked is as the giving up of the Ghost;
and all their trust is as a Spiders web, spun out themselves, weak, and easily
swept away. Immediately after Death, they will perceive their mistakes, and
smartingly be convinced, that their confidences were vain. Now they cry peace
and safety, and let the Curse ring never so loud, they bless themselves in
their hearts, though they walk on in their evil way; but then they will
perceive and curse their Carnal Security. Their Building being on the sand,
will fall, and great will be the fall of it, Matt. 7. 27.

4. Death is a Change in reference to Hope and possibility of Salvation. As
vain hopes will be at an end, so All hope will be gone; The Gospel will be
clasped and sealed up for ever: the Night will be come, and the time of working
out Salvation, over. Hark what was said to the Rich Man in Hell! There is a
great gulf fixed between us and you, which it is impossible to pass. This
Despair will cause unutterable Anguish, 'twill prove the Hell of Hell. How
intolerable will that Fire be, which there is no hope of having quenched! How
dreadful that Worm, where there is no hope of its dying.

5. Death is a Change, in reference to that patience that was exercised toward
them; for Judgment, Sentence, and Eternal Punishment does follow upon the abuse
of it. God will then cast the Ungodly away for ever, and he will be favorable
no more; but in Anger shut up all his Mercies. All their Sins will find them
out at Death, accompany them to the Judgment Seat, cry out for Vengeance upon
them; God will ease himself of such Adversaries that were a burden to him while
they lived; and they will sadly find, that while they despised his goodness and
long suffering, they treasured up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath,
Romans 2. 4, 5.

2. Death is a Change, with respect unto the Saints, and this is as blessed as
the the other is dismal. A gracious Change is wrought in Believers at their first
Conversion; and that Change is perfected at their Dissolution. What an
excellent Creature will a renewed Soul be, when it is out of the Body, and made
perfect in glory! Surely there is no just ground for a Saint to fear dying; but
upon many accounts it is really desirable.

1. At Death the Saints change their habitation; they leave the Earthly
Tabernacle, and go to a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, 2
Cor. 5. 1. They no longer say, Woe is us that we dwell in Meshech, and inhabit
the tents of Kedar. This Earth was a place full of trouble to them; they were
gazed at, scorned, reproached, persecuted; but in Heaven they meet with other
kind of company; there is nothing but love, and peace, and sweetness among the
innumerable company of Angels, and the general Assembly, and Church of the
First born, which are Enrolled in Heaven. The house of Clay is changed to a
City which has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God.

2. Their State of absence is changed, and they are present with the Lord. It Is
true, Believers in this World are brought nigh to God by the Blood of Christ;
they are brought into his favor, and admitted unto fellowship with him;
whereas, wicked Men are far from God, and dwell in the Suburbs of Hell and
Destruction: but yet, this Nearness of the Saints to Christ, and to his Father,
is but a Distance in comparison of that Nearness which will be in Glory:
Therefore says the Apostle, Whiles we are at home in the body, we are absent
from the Lord. And are willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 6, 8. Desertion, though the common exercise of
Saints on Earth, will in Heaven be no more; they shall be delivered from all
causes of Gods withdrawing, they shall be so near as to see their Lord as he
is; and his Face will be toward them, and the light of his Countenance shine
upon them, without the least interruption or Eclipse, unto Eternity.

3. There is a Change, from ignorance and darkness, (much of which remained
even in the children of light) unto perfect knowledge. Believers in this World,
who are most of all Enlightened, do know but in part, and therefore it is their
duty to be still growing both in Grace and Knowledge; but when Death comes,
that which is perfect is come, and that which is in part shall be done away, 1
Cor. 13. 10. Heaven is called an inheritance in Light. Oh what a full
understanding will there be of the Works and of the Word of God! What clear
views of God himself, and Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns at his right hand,
will be there vouchsafed! All the ignorance that followed upon eating the Tree
of Knowledge, will be cured; all strangeness and doubtings concerning God, his
Goodness and his Love, will be at an end: Glorified Saints see, what Militant
Saints cannot bear.

4. There is a Change at Death, from incomplete grace, to glorious and sinless
purity and holiness. The body of sin is put off when the Saints put off this
Mortal Body. The separated Souls of the Just ones, have no External Senses, nor
any sensual and fleshly inclinations; Death removes them out of the World, so
that nothing hence is any longer a Temptation; they are also out of the
Tempters reach; and then they have a sight of their Lord as he is, and this
sight Transforms them into his likeness, 1 John 3. 2. Grace that was here only
in the bud, will then be full blown; Holiness will be perfected, and all
filthiness both of the Flesh and Spirit cleansed away: It may truly be said
then concerning the Spouse of Christ; O my love, thou art all fair, there is no
spot in thee.

5. There is a Change, from War and Labor, unto Rest and Triumph. It Is no
easy matter to be Saved. The Saints are put upon hard work and service, they
are to watch, to pray, to stir up themselves, to lay hold on God. They are to
contend earnestly for the faith, to strive to enter in at the strait gate. They
are to use an holy Violence, that they may by a kind of storming take the
heavenly Kingdom; all opposition from the Worlds Rage, and the power and wrath
of Hellish Principalities, they must break through. But at Death their Warfare
is accomplished, they rest from their Labors, Rev. 14. 13. They go then to
their Lord, and receive their reward which he has freely and faithfully
promised; and having been faithful in a little, they are made rulers over much;
they have fought the good fight, and finished their course: and having been
more than conquerors through him that loved them, they sit down with him on his
throne, and are Crowned with Life and Glory, and shall wear that Crown for ever.

6. When the Saints dye, there is a Change from all manner of Sorrow, unto
fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore. Oh how glad will they be to see
themselves safely arrived to the fair Haven, after the many Storms which beat
upon them in this World! to perceive themselves safely secured in Heaven, and
that they are made pillars in the temple of God, and shall go out no more! Rev.
3. 12. When they come to see their Lord and Husband Jesus, and God their
Father; and to the uttermost of their capacity, they are filled with his Love,
and satisfied with his Image; Oh then all tears will be dried up, Sin and
Sorrow are Eternal Strangers in the New Jerusalem; Joy will be full, and the
fuller, because 'twill never end.

In the Second place follow the Arguments to prove, That Death which is such a
Change, will certainly come.

1. Death is merited by Sin: It was upon the Sin of Man that that Sentence was
past upon him, Genesis 3. 19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread,
until thou return to the ground, for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou
art, and unto dust shall thou return. Now all having Sinned, Death passes upon
all, Romans 5. 12. As Soon as Man became a Sinner, presently he became Mortal.
Death had not been able to have entered into the World, if Sin had not first got
entrance: If Man had never Sinned, the Tree of Life was to assure him, he
should never have died.

2. Death is appointed, and the appointment is most firm and unchangeable: let
an exception be made of Enoch and Elias, and them that shall be found alive at
the Last Day, and the appointment is general, Heb. 9. 27. Constitutum est
omnibus semel mori; plerisque bis. It is appointed unto all men once to die,
and the Second Death will be the Portion of the most that Live. The Grave is
called, The House appointed for all the living, that is the dark and silent
place where all the dwellers upon Earth must make their abode until the
Resurrection.

3. Christ does not deliver those that are dear to him from the stroke of
death, though he does always from the Sting of it. If there were any hope to be
freed from tasting of Death, that expectation must be from our Mediator: but
though he makes the bodies of Believers his own Members, and the temples of his
Spirit; yet he suffers them to fall down to the ground, that too visible a
difference may not be made between the Righteous and the Wicked here, and that
his power may be glorified in raising them up again at the Last Day. And
certainly the Lords power and love, will be exceeding Glorious, when this
corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality.

In the Third place, I am to make it manifest, That Time comes to an end, when
this Change comes.

1. One Argument shall be drawn from the Eternal Rewards which upon their
dissolution are received by the Righteous. The Saints in Heaven need no more
time, for their work is done: As Soon as they depart they are with Christ; they
are clothed upon with their house which is from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 2. They have
no need more of a Day of Grace, who have received an exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory. And truly it is well for them that their time is over, since
they have made good use of it; and time being over, they are in Eternity, and
now their State and Happiness is fixed. Romans 6. 23. The gift of God is eternal
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

2. A Second Argument shall be drawn from the Everlasting Punishments which
after Death are inflicted on the wicked. We read Luke 16. That the Wicked Rich
Man died and was buried; and the next News we hear of him, is, That he was in
Hell, and shut up there, so as never to come out more. He does not pray for a
release out of his Torments, that was despaired of; but only for a little
mitigation; and truly it was but a small kindness, that a drop of water could
have done him, in the midst of such flames as are in Hell; and yet even that is
denied. The ungodly that are taken out of the World, had time afforded them:
but they were such Fools as to spend it all in Sin and Vanity; and now no more
shall be granted for further Trial, after Eternal Punishment has overtaken them.

Use 1. If a Change is coming which will put an end to Time; See the vanity of
things Temporal. The Apostle thought them not worth his love; nay, not worthy
of a look, 2 Cor. 4. 18. We look not at the things that are seen, but at the
things that are not seen; for the things that are seen are temporal, but the
things that are not seen are eternal. The wise Man, because of the
Non-continuance of Earthly things, charges them with a Nonexistence, that he
might disgrace them, and show the unreasonableness of being eager after them.
Prove. 23. 4, 5. Labor not to be rich, cease from thy own wisdom; Will thou set
thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make themselves wings,
and fly away as an Eagle toward heaven. And it may truly be said, that Honors
and Pleasures have as swift wings as Riches.

Use 2. Study how vain you your selves are; Let Man cease from himself, from
being conceited of himself, from trusting in himself; for his breath is in his
nostrils, and wherein is he to be accounted of, Isa. 2. ult. Man was the Cause
why the Creature was made subject unto vanity, Romans 8. Now the Philosopher
says, Propter quod unumquodque est tale, illud est magis tale: The fire that
makes the water hot, has a greater heat in it self; and if Man was the cause of
the Creatures Vanity, certainly in a sense he is the vainest Creature. This
methinks should hide Pride from Man, and make him very humble, since the
Psalmist speaks generally of all, though in the most exalted Earthly State,
that they are Vanity in the Abstract, Psalm. 39. 5. Verily every man at his best
estate is altogether vanity. Selah.

Use 3. Remain not under the guilt and dominion of Sin, which will make Death a
Change so very dreadful. Come unto Jesus, in whom both Strength and
Righteousness is to be found? that you may be delivered from Sins Power, and
escape Sins Punishment: Remember, that Sin is the very Sting of Death, and
merits Hell; that all its gains and pleasures are deceitful; Oh hasten from
under the Curse it deserves, and the bondage of it. If you hear and believe on
the Son of God, he will make you free indeed, from Sin, which is indeed the
greatest evil. Remember Death both first and second, are Sins Wages; will you
any longer serve it? Oh change your Master quickly, and have your fruit to
holiness, and the end eternal life.

Use 4. Think it not strange when relations are taken away, and sorrow not as
without hope, when you have good reason to hope that they sleep in Jesus.
Valerius Maximus l. 5. c. 10. tells, that when Anaxagoras was told of the loss
of his son, he replied, you tell me of nothing unexpected, Ego enim illum ex me
natum sciebam esse mortalem, I knew my son to be but mortal. If an Heathen
speaks thus, shall Christians show less strength and patience? that children
and other relations dye, is no marvel: that they live so long, and that the
change of such frail creatures does come no sooner, is the greater wonder. The
better our relations are, their loss is the greater, but yet the greatest loss
may be born with greatest patience, understanding how gainful death is to them.

It was the desire of that excellent Christian lately deceased, that her
Funeral Sermon might be preached on a Lord's Day, because more might hear, and
be awakened, and made serious and profit by hearing. It was far I am confident
from her desire to be publicly commended: but those that least desire, do best
deserve commendation. There were several gracious qualities which God had
endued her with, which I think it useful to mention, that others may be brought
into an imitation.

1. I begin with her humility. She had low thoughts of her self: was very
sensible of her imperfections, and that by the grace of God she was what she
was. Though her estate was very plentiful, yet she did not affect a flanting
garb, but went like a daughter of Sion, not of Sodom. I never saw a Bull-Tower
or a Curl upon her forehead. She took more pains about her heart, then to dress
and adorn her head. All that did observe her, must needs acknowledge that she
had very much of that ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price.

2. She valued the Ministry and Ordinances of Christ at an high rate. She felt
the power of the Lord Jesus, and saw his matchless beauty in his house, at his
table, and therefore rightly judged it was good far her to ^e there. It was the
desire of her Soul, to dwell in the Sanctuary of her God; there she understood
the end of the ungodly, and that in their greatest prosperity, they stand but
in slippery places. She looked upon the counsels of God as a safe guide to
glory; she saw that in God, as made her desire him above all, and choose him to
be her portion for ever.

3 She had her spirit and passions hugely under government. If he that is slow
to anger be of great understanding: certainly she was a person of great wisdom.
Some were ready to question whether she could be angry. This gentleness of
Christ shining forth in her, made her conversation very amiable. A great
eveness of spirit I observed in her, very patient under her last sickness,
which truly was long, tedious, and very painful: and as she did not murmur
against God tho under his mighty hand: so she was far from being easily
provoked by any one.

4. She was not at all talkative, she knew an unbridled tongue will make all
profession of religion vain. She was swift to hear, and slow to speak, as well
as slow to wrath. A rare virtue, for in multitude of words says Solomon, there
wants not sin. An argument of prudence: For says a greater than Solomon, For
every idle word which men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof at
the day of Judgment.

5. She was well settled and established in the way of truth. Temptations she
sometimes met with to seduce her, but upon trial was found not to be like a
child tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine. She was girt about with the
girdle of truth, had on the breast plate of righteousness, fought the good
fight, and kept the faith unto the end.

6. She was a singular example of obedience to Parents. I have heard her father
say, she was a child that never disobeyed him, tho being an only child, her
disobedience if it had been, was more likely to be pardoned: so good in all her
relations, that I wish her Father and her Husband grace from above to bear the
loss they have sustained, and that her Mother may have extraordinary strength
vouchsafed, that she may not be overwhelmed, and dye with extremity of grief
and sorrow.

Such an one she was while she lived; and to conclude, Her God was with her,
when she was in the valley of the shadow of Death. Melancholic vapors
prevailing, Satan took an advantage against, to perplex her with hurries, and
doubts, and fears. But not many hours before she died, the Clouds were
scattered, and Evidences for Heaven cleared. When I asked her concerning the
frame of her Spirit: Her answer was, she had no Doubts at all; these were her
very words, concerning her Eternal State, Mark the perfect, and behold the
upright, for the end of such is peace.

Well, She who was so serious and attentive an hearer among us, that used with
such longings after Christ, and hungrings after Righteousness, to Communicate
with us at the Lords Supper: her Change is come, and she is joined to another
Congregation. She is gone to the Heavenly Jerusalem, to the general Assembly
and Church of the Firstborn, to an innumerable company of Angels, and the
spirits of just men made perfect; where her Eternal employment will be to be
singing hallelujahs to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever.

Doctr. 3, The Third Doctrine follows, To be waiting for their Change, is the
practice of the Saints, and would be the wisdom of all. Thus Job in the Text
waited, the thoughts of Death were so frequent and familiar, that he seemed to
dwell in the Grave while alive: the Grave is my House: he claims kindred with
the Worms and Corruption; I have said to Corruption, thou art my Father; to the
Worm, thou art my Mother and my Sister.

In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall

1. Tell you what it is to wait for this Change. 2. Why thus to wait is the
Saints practice; and if there be good reason for their practice, 'twill be
evident without more ado, that this would be the Wisdom of all. Lastly,
conclude with the Application.
I begin with the First, What it is to wait for this Change.

1. Waiting, implies a firm belief and persuasion, that this Change will be.
It Is easy in the general to believe that all must dye; but particularly to
apply this to ones self is very difficult; this knowledge of ones own frailty
comes from Heaven; and a right Faith concerning Dying, is really the gift and
work of God. Hark to David, Psalm. 39 4. Lord make me to know my end, and the
measure of my days what it is, that I may know how frail I am: and being thus
taught, then he cries out, My days are an hand-breadth, and my age is as
nothing before thee.

2. An expectation of this change, as that which is possible every day. The
Apostle protests that he died daily, 1 Cor* 15. 31. He not only advanced in the
work of mortification, and dying to sin, and this world, every day, but he
looked upon Death as every day possible. Stobeus, Ser. 1. Relates of Musonius,
that he was of this opinion, that A man cannot live a day well, (...) unless he
lives it as his last. How many accidents may befall us, that may dispatch us,
and speed us into another world every day? If death be every day possible, it is
but rational to take notice daily of that possibility.

3. Waiting for this change implies preparation for its coming. And truly hic
labor hoc opus est, here lies the great difficulty. Much must be done before a
man can be fit to dye; much must be done in him, much must be done by him:
several other changes must go before that great change, or else that great
change will be a dismal one.

1. The State must be changed. Man's natural State is a State of wrath; he must
therefore come to the Son of God, that he may be justified by his blood, and
pass out of this State of wrath, into a State of grace. This is excellently
expressed by the Apostle, Romans 5. 1, 2. Being justified by faith, we have peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom also we have access by faith
into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. If
the State be changed, fear of death may be turned into a joyful hope of future
glory.

2. The heart must be changed: the heart of man, by him that is the
heart-searcher, has a very bad Character given it. It Is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked. Jer. 17. 9. Out of the heart proceeds whatever
does defile the man. The heart therefore must be made a new one, that its
thoughts, desires, affections, designs, may become clean and holy, and that
this change may be wrought, God must be sought, and his promise pleaded, Ezekiel.
36. 26. A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you.

3. The life must be changed; and where there is a new heart indeed, there will
be a walking in newness of life. Holiness of life is necessary in respect of
Gods honor, and the Gospels credit; we must cast off the works of darkness,
and be zealous of good works; for after death we shall be judged according to
our works. Now that the life may be thus changed, we must beg, that according
to his promise, God would put his spirit within us, and cause us to walk in his
statutes, and to observe his judgments, and do them.

4. This saving change must be evidenced. Grace must be increased, that the
actings of it being vigorous and strong, its truth and being may not be
doubted. We must be diligent observers of our selves, and in no wise contented
to be at uncertainties about our eternal State. A certain evidence of grace,
will be worth much more than a whole world, when we come to lie upon a
deathbed. Give diligence to make all sure, to make it out that you are
effectually called: then you may conclude your interest in Gods electing love;
and when you come to die, an abundant entrance will be administered into the
everlasting kingdom.

4. Waiting for this change implies desiring it. The Saints are not to expect
it, as an evil; but to desire it, as that which will put an end to evil. The
Apostle, who was able to say, To me to live is Christ, adds, and to die is
gain. And with good reason does he afterward profess, I desire to depart, and
to be with Christ, which is far better, Phil. 1. 23. Christ died to unsting
Death, and to deliver from the fear of it. The Saints need not look upon it as
terrible; but should groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with their
house which is from heaven; that mortality may be swallowed up of life, 2 Cor.
5. 2, 4. Death is theirs as well as Life; Theirs, to do them a kindness; too
much theirs, to do them any injury.

5. It implies Patience, and establishment of heart. Till this Change is come
indeed, Believers are engaged in a Warfare, and they must stand to their Arms,
and be upon Duty, till the Captain of their Salvation call them off, in order
to their crowning. They have need of Patience, that they may act, and fight,
and suffer unweariedly. Hark to the Apostle, Heb. 10. 36, 37. For ye have need
of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye may receive the
promise: for yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will
not tarry All our life long, by patient continuance in well doing, we must seek
for glory, and honor, and immortality; and then upon our dissolution, we shall
lay hold of that life which is eternal.

In the second place I am to lay down the Reasons, why it is the Saints practice
to wait for their change.

1. Because the coming of it is so certain in it self, and so uncertain as to
the time when 'twill be. All our cares cannot prevent our Change: Death will
surely come: The Decree concerning it is much more unalterable than those of
the Medes and Persians, Dan. 6. 12. But the time of its approach is concealed.
To some it comes in the evening of their Age, to some at midday, to some in
the very morning of their time. All graves are not of a length. Some old, and
that is no wonder; some Infants, and some in their greatest vigor, have been
struck down by Death, and shall rise no more till the last day. All therefore
at all times should be watchful.

2. The spiritual advantage is vastly great, which follows upon serious waiting
for their change. Waiting for Death will make men flee from sin. When Satan
speaks of sin's pleasure and gain, if answer be made, O but at death will sin
be thought pleasant and gainful? This will be enough to silence him. Waiting
for Death will make this World contemptible. When Esau was at the point of
Death, he cries out, What profit will this birth right do me? Genesis 25. 32. So
if we have Death in our eye, we shall cry out, What profit will the World then
do us, when we are just about to leave it? Again, Waiting for death, will keep
our Affections moderate; neither grief nor joy will be excessive about earthly
things. Christ will be the more prized, and Heaven more longed for.

3. The misery is inconceivable which falls upon them who never thought of
Death so as to be prepared for it. It is terrible in it self, but hell
following after it has ten thousand times a more terrible second. Death is sent
unto the ungodly in wrath as an Excecutioner, they dye as malefactors. The
righteous indeed are cut down as Corn that is fully ripe, that it may be
gathered into the barn, Mat: 13. 30: But Death hews down the wicked, as a man
fells fuel for the fire, they are evil trees that cumber the earth, Luke 13. 7.
Cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground? And immediately they become eternal
feul for those flames that never can be quenched.

Use. 1. Of Reproof to those who cannot endure to think of Death; or if they do,
make an ill use of it. Many quite banish the thoughts of dying, they are
resolved to live wickedly, and don't care to consider, that such a life will
end, nor to consider how 'twill end. The Rich Man had Death quite out of his
thoughts; and reckoned upon living many years, in which he should take his
ease, eat, drink, and be merry: When Death was entering in at his door, and his
Soul just ready to be required, God calls this man a fool; and after he was out
of the World, he saw reason to call himself by that Name for ever. Others also
are sharply to be reproved, who, because they must dye, are resolved to indulge
the Flesh while they may. What profane frantic Epicures were they, who said,
Let us eat and drink to day, for we shall die to morrow?

Use 2. Of Exhortation to the imitation of Holy Job in tbe Text. Let me
persuade you all, All the days of your appointed time to be waiting for your
Change. Have many a solicitous thought, whither it is that Death will send you?
Ask your Souls, whither they are likely to go, when they dislodge and leave
this Earthly Tabernacle? Dye you must; it is dreadful to dye in sin, and few dye
otherwise. Prepare, I beseech you, for that which you cannot avoid. It Is in
vain, when death is within view, to plead thus: O Death, I never thought of thy
approach; none of my main work alas is done, I am utterly unfit to go to the
Judgment Seat; If I dye now, I dye miserable, and shall be miserable for ever.
Death comes at Gods command, and whether you are prepared or unprepared, when
God says, Strike, it cannot hold its hand. Think of this, and let Death find
you ready, come when it will.

Two things you are here to be advised to:

1. Let there be a looking to Jesus to take out the Sting of Death. Believe in
him, that he may give you Victory over this last Enemy. Christ can deliver you
from the Curse of the Law: now the Law, the Apostle tells you, is the strength
of Sin, as Sin is the Sting of Death. Apply and rely upon the Blood of Jesus,
to be Justified, and to be Saved from Wrath. The Apostle desired to be sound in
Christ; and if Death find you in him, it may kill you, but it cannot hurt you;
nay, if you are in Christ, and live to him, Death will be gain, and greater
gain, than while you live you can conceive.

2. Look unto Jesus to be freed from that bondage which is caused by the fear
of dying, Heb. 2. 14, 15. You cannot be completely happy while you live,
because you will remain incompleatly Holy: Study the vanity of every thing that
makes you fond of Living. Clear up your interest in Jesus Christ, and preserve
Conscience clear and peaceable. And let your Eye be after your Risen and
Ascended Lord; who was dead, and is alive, and lives for evermore: that so you
may long to go to him, to be with him in those mansions he is gone to prepare.
O beg for Conquest over your Fears, and that you may see heaven plainly by the
Eye of Faith; and heaven open, and Christ ready to receive your Spirits, as soon
as you have put off your sleshly Tabernacle. Life is then lead in peace, when
Death ceases to be dreaded, and becomes desirable.

An Epitaph upon Mrs. Martha Thompson.
Her Name was Martha, but she had the Heart
Of Mary; for She chose the Better part.
In patience, meekness, humbleness of Mind,
She did Excel the most of Womankind.
She waited for her Change; which being Come,
She Is at her Blisful and Eternal Home.
Her Friends lament they have lost her; whereas She
Has bid Farewell, World, Sin, and Misery.
FINIS.
Books Published by Mr. Nathanael Vincent, Sold by T. Parkhurst.
1. The Spirit of Prayer, with directions to attain the Gift. 2. Worthy
walking, the Call of the Gospel. 3. Heaven or Hell upon Earth, in a Discourse
concerning Conscience. 4. The little Child's Catechism, with several short
Histories. 5. Mr. Janeway's Funeral Sermon. 6. Mrs. Bakers Funeral Sermon. 7.
The True Touchstone, which shows both Grace and Nature.

