A Just Reprehension TO JOHN NORRIS Of Newton St Lo, FOR HIS Unjust REFLECTION
on the QVAKERS, In his Book, Entitled, Reflections upon the Conduct of Human
Life, etc.

Together with his False Representation of their Principle of the Light, in his
Postscript, wherein he Opposes it to his Notion of the divine (...) or Ideal
world, as he terms it.

His Confusion and Self-contradiction therein manifested; and the Doctrine and
Principle of the Quakers thereby cleared from his Abuse; occasionally written
by way of Letter, with Advice to him, and may serve for a better Information of
the Quakers Principle, to whom the knowledge of his and this shall come.

By Richard Vickris.

Printed, and Sold by T. S. at the Crooked-Billet, in Holywell-Lane, in
Shoreditch, 1691.

A Just Reprehension to John Norris of Newton St. Lo, for his Unjust
Reflection on the Quakers, in his Book, Entitled, Reflections upon the Conduct
of Human Life, etc.
John Norris,
I Need no Apology for this brief Reprehension, if thou think I do Review
the first page of thy Epistle Dedicatory, (viz.) He that shall point out any of
the Irregularites or Mistakes of the Conduct of Human Life, ought to be looked
upon as a universal Friend, and promoter of the public Happiness; and the more
severe he is in his Censure (provided it be true and well grounded) the more
charitable he is in his undertaking, and the more like to be serviceable in his
performance.

When first I perused thy Reflections upon the Conduct of Human Life, with
reference to the studdy of Learning and Knowledge, I was and still am pleased
with all that tends to the propagation of Original and necessary Truth, but
rejoice where I find it spring from an upright mind, pure intention, and clean
Vessel; for whosoever undertakes to reprehend the intelligible Conduct of Human
Life, ought first to purge himself from the Irregularities of his moral
Conduct, which does cloud and darken his understanding.

Howbeit, I was so far from a Spirit of Detraction or Emulation, that
considering from whence it came, I in some sort rejoiced in it so far as it was
sound and true, hoping and desiring that what was either clearly and rightly
detected, or equally and fairly recommended, might gain upon the Understanding
of such whose Education and Literature had either prejudiced, or at best
mistated and unfitted them for receiving the same Truth, and divine Principle
by meaner Instruments, respecting worldly esteem; which Principle has been and
is by many such faithful Witnesses plentifully born testimony to, as well by
doing as suffering, by the supposed learned Rabbis of our day, as also by
Doctrine, in Word and Writing, though not altogether under some of thy Terms,
or pretended Phylosophical Notions; yet according to the Demonstration of the
Spirit, and in words approved and chosen of God to make known himself by, and
taught us in the holy Scriptures, God having in his divine Wisdom in this Age,
as in former Ages, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. Chosen the foolish things of the world
to Confound the Wise; and the Weak things of the world to Confound the things
that are mighty, and base things of the world, and things that are despised
has God chosen; yea, things which are not, to bring to naught things which
are, that no Flesh should glory in his presence. Agreeable to this is that
divine acknowledgement of Christ Jesus to his Father, Matthew. 1.11, and 25. I
thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things
from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes. Matthew. 18.10.
Take heed that ye despise not one of these little Ones: I fear thou art guilty
in this particular, viz. of despising the Testimony of God in this Age through
the meanness of the Instruments; Consider what is said, These. 10.4.8. He
therefore that despises, despises not man, but God, who has also given unto
us his holy Spirit. From the too apparent Reflection thou makes in the 77th
page of thy Book New Edition, one might at first think, that thou were a great
stranger to the Conversation of the People, called Quakers, and more especially
to their Writings, which had unwarily subjected thee to a rash and immature
Censure, in rendering them dark, awkward, untoward, and unprincipled in the way
of representing their Principle, viz. the Light within, thereby discrediting,
as thou say, one of the noblest Theories in the World; but the thing in it
self, rightly understood, is true. I being under some dissatisfaction about
these Expressions of thine, took occasion to visit Joseph Langton of Newton St
Lo, a person of my respect and acquaintance, and near Neighbor of thine, with
whom I had some discourse about thy aforesaid Book, and in particular the above
recited passage, recommending to him Robert Barclay's Apology for the true
Christian Divinity for thy perusal, and having understood by him, thou had
been Conversant with it, I confess it extremely dampt me, and gave occasion for
other thoughts than a supposed Ignorance of the Persons, and manner of their
representing their Principle, whom thou had thus evilly treated, and exposed
without reason or provocation as I know of; and now I shall proceed to show
thee wherein, though I presume thou already know: Robert Barclay in his
fifth and sixth Propositions treating of this universal and saving Light of
Jesus Christ, page 110. calls it supernatural Light and Grace, quotes John 1.9.
That was the true Light which lights every man that comes into the World.
Which place, as he observes, does so clearly favor the Quakers Doctrine, that
it is called their Text; hence he draws this necessary Conclusion, That the
Life that is in him, viz. the Word Christ, is the Light of Men, John 1.4. In
other places he calls it according to Divine Instruction, The Seed sown in
several sorts of Ground, The Word of the Kingdom, The Word of Faith, The
Implanted or Ingrafted Word which is able to save the Soul; quoting Cyrillus
Alexandrinus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Augustine, Buchanan, etc. in confirmation
of this Doctrine, as thou may see at large, whereby it appears, whatever thou
art, he was so far from the Ambition of being thought the first promulgator of
that heavenly Doctrine of the Universallity and Sufficiency of this Light
within for Salvation, that he rejoices to meet with it, embracing it wherever
he finds it, improves the interest of it, and instead of calumniating its
Votaries, represents it to the world, Cleared from the Rust of darker Ages, and
advantaged with the Confessions and Testimonies of purer Primitive Times.

And now I Enquire, what are the Dark, awkward and untoward Expressions, and
unprincipled way of representing this Principle that thou alledgest the Quakers
are guilty of? are any of these here quoted out of the aforementioned Author
part thereof? or in what other Book or Writing of the Quakers may they be found?

I shall now farther say, that this Divine Word, Light, Grace and Truth, or
whatever else it has been called by its Followers through divine instruction
in any age, is a wise and understanding Spirit, Holy, etc. according as it is
written in the Book of Wisdom, Chap. 7. In all Ages entering into holy Souls,
makes them Friends of God and Prophets. And in Chap. 4. verse. 4. Its said,
Into a malicious Soul Wisdom will not enter, nor dwell in the Body that is
subject unto Sin; for the holy Spirit of Discipline will fly Deceit, and
remove from Thoughts that are without understanding, and will not abide when
Unrighteousness comes in; for Wisdom is a loving Spirit, and will not acquit a
Blasphemer of his Words, for God is witness of his Reins, and a true beholder
of his Heart, and a hearer of his Tongue. Verse. 8. Therefore he that speaks
unrighteous things cannot be hid, neither shall Vengeance when it punishes pass
by him. Now seeing these Sayings are true and righteous, and that it is
possible to profess this Doctrine of the Divine Word, Light, Grace, Spirit of
Wisdom and Truth, and the Teachings of it, and yet not possess it nor be
learned of it, nor led by it, but whilst preaching of it to others, but a Cast
away: I advise thee to consider in what ground and nature thou yet stand'st and
liv'st in, and what Spirit lives and rules in thee: has not Unrighteousness
entered in through Self-love and Esteem, which blinds the Eye, and causes the
Tongue to speak unrighteous things? Is not Self exalted to sit in the Temple of
God, as God in thee? And art thou not decking thy self with thy corrupt wisdom,
which is the forbidden Fruit, and will prove folly in the end? Be not
high-minded, but fear, so shall thou learn the Ways of the Lord, and walk
therein safely, and have unity and fellowship with the Saints in Light, not in
the talk and profession of it only, though never so high; for with the Heart
man must believe, before with his Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation.

Who knows this Work, can glorify God, and bear Testimony of his Son Christ
Jesus; and the work he has done in his earthen vessel, which none else could
do, viz. of Sanctification and Redemption through the Truth, whose Word is
Truth, whereof he has made many living Witnesses to the Praise of his Name,
whose own Works praise him, and to the joy of the upright for evermore. And
this is better and beyond all the high Notions, and Self-conceited Imaginations
from the wisdom that is below, and who is brought to this estate, and abide
therein, walking in Wisdom's Path, dare not speak unrighteous things, knowing
he cannot be hid, nor be a Blasphemer of his words; for God is witness of his
Reins, and a true beholder of his Heart; know therefore, its not a light thing
to speak Evil of things one understands not; read 2 Pet. 2. verse. 12. and Jude
10. much less wilfully to blast the Fame of God's Name and Work in the Earth,
in and by his People, because they agree not with man's ways and conceited wise
Notions, which God's wisdom from above ever did, and will confound; and how
greatly thou art found gulty in this particular, by the following Reflections
on thy Postscript may appear: And so I conclude this part, having discharged my
self to thee on the aforementioned occasion.

Since my first perusal of thy Book, I have lately met with thy Postscript,
whereby I perceive thou art zealous of being esteemed a Proselite to the
Quakers Doctrine; I am ready to believe thy above recited Ignominious
Reflection, was calculated to obviate such an Imputation, which perhaps thou
thought would be as little honor to thee, as they may justly conclude thy
Pretentions to their Principle would be a Credit to it; for they desire no such
Proselites who affects not their Principle for its own sake, but for some
worldly Honor and Esteem they hope to get by it; Therefore though theirs, if
rightly understood, be true, as thou confessest thy self, page 77. and that it
is such Quakerism as makes a good part of St John's Gospel, and St Austin's
Works; and according to thy Postscript, if the Quakers understood their own
Notion, it would not very much differ from thine, which I take to imply a sort
of Confession to their Principle; for Truth and Error are opposite, the Defect
it seems must lie somewhere, and that according to thy Judgment must be the
Quakers Ignorance, how to explain their Notion of the Light, and into what
Principles to resolve it; but seeing this would imply a Difference only in
Terminis, and so not reach thy Case, like one that forgets what he had said
last, thou proceeds to magnify the difference to set thee far enough from
being reputed a Proselite, which to avoid them needed a greater Discrimination;
This I take to be the Design of thy Postscript, where thou undertakes to
explain the Quakers Principle, by thy Suppositions and false Distinctions the
better to set off and expose thine, by rendering it the more novel to this age,
and so to avoid symbolizing with the Quakers in thy notion of the Divine Light;
how unfairly and unsincerely, as also confusedly, with respect both to their
and thy own Principle thou have dealt herein, is my present design to manifest;
whosoever undertakes to Confute the Principles of any People, ought to take them up
and state them rightly, and honestly, according as they are believed and owned
by themselves, quoting their own Words and Authors, and not barely as he
conceives and imagines them to be, as suiting his design: Otherwise he is
unjust, and quarrels with his own Shadow, and is like a man that beats the Air,
which in thy Postscript thou art found doing; for first thou say, The Quakers
usually talk of this Light within, as of some Divine Communication and
manifestation (only:) How does this appear to be true, thou quotes no Author
for it, I apprehend thou intendest hereby, or else thy assertion has little
weight or matter in it, viz. that the Quakers own the Light within to be an
accident, and not a substantial inherent Principle of Divine Excellency, which
is a great mistake, and it is to be feared a wilful one too, seeing it is
generally known, and thou confessest it too, that they quote the Testimony of
John the Evangelist for their Principle, as thou have done for thine, they
believing according thereunto, Chap 1. verse. 4. In him was Life, and the Life
was the Light of Men: And if the Life of the Word be the Light of men, then
surely the Quakers cannot be supposed to believe it any thing less than a Real
Spiritual Substance, which the Soul of man is capable to feel and apprehend;
For all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that
was made, John 1.3. Thus thy first distinction falls to the ground: Thy second
is as insignificant, and like an Arrow shot at Random, lights on thy own head,
being attended with some Contradiction to thy former, viz. Thou say, The
Quakers represent this Light within as a sort of extraordinary Inspiration:
Where learnt thou this? Before it was a Divine Communication and Manifestation
only; and now an Extraordinary Inspiration. Thou would have done well to have
let the Quakers Principle alone till thou had learnt it better, and more
honestly to represent it: Is not Extraordinary more than Common, or
Communication and manifestation (only?) Have not the Quakers declared the Light
to be Universal, as well as Divine, in its gift and manifestation to the Sons
of men? It is certainly true they have, and yet I deny not but such who apply
their minds in Obedience to the teachings of this Light and heavenly Gift, may
be made partakers of more, viz. extraordinary Gifts and Graces by the
Inspiration of the same Spirit, etc. If for this they have the Name of
Enthusiasts given them, as in the Section of thy Postscript; Though it be in
Derision, they will rejoice in it, for it shall be as an Ornament of Grace to
their Head, and Chains about their Neck. Again, in the same Section thou say,
I suppose it, viz. The Light within to be a man's natural and ordinary way of
understanding. And just before thou made it to be the very Essence and
Substance of the Deity, which are thy own express words; see thy Confusion and
Self-contradiction; by these Words, ( viz.) a man's natural and ordinary way of
understanding, I take thee to intend the same thing as in page 77. where thou
call'st it Reason and Conscience; and yet at the same time call'st it, The
divine (...), and Region of Truth, in which are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom
and Knowledge, the great and universal Oracle lodged in every man's Breast,
whereof the ancient Vrim and Thummim was an express Type or Emblem. Here thou
Debasest and Confoundest thy Principle, making it to be a part of man's Nature,
whereas the Principle or divine Light, as held by the Quakers, is a distinct
thing from man's Soul, Reason, or natural Conscience, viz. a more excellent
Spirit and Principle. And herein I confess is a material Difference betwixt thy
principle of Light, and the Quakers, as thou have expressed it; sure I am it is a
great Error to render the Divine (...), by which all things were made, and are
upheld, to be no higher a Principle than man's Reason and Conscience, or
natural and ordinary way of understanding, which reason is a property Essential
to him as Man. I confess, to know the things of a man, according to that
Scripture, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11. But as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, neither have entered into the Heart of man the things that God has
prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed them unto us by his
Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, yea, the Deep things of God: for
what man knows the things of a man save the Spirit of a man that is in him,
even so the things of God knows no man but the Spirit of God. Again, Mat.
11.27. Neither knows any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him. By which it manifestly appears, that the true knowledge of God
and Spiritual things are attained by the Spirit, which is superior to man's
rational Principle or natural Conscience, which may be defiled, and corrupted,
as it is said expressly of the Impure, that even their Mind and Conscience is
defiled, Tit. 1.15.

In thy third Sestion, thou come in with (a Salvo Errore) If I mistake not)
the Quakers confine their Light within to some certain Objects, namely Morral
and Spiritual Truths, in order only to the direction of Practice. How should
thou do otherwise but mistake the Principles of others, seeing thou art so
confused about thine own? however, I must tell thee its no small Fault at such
an uncertainty to Expose peoples Principles, and it is an abuse to say the
Quakers confine the Light within: It is Divine, Supernatural and
Uncircumscribeable, in it are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge;
where have the Quakers taught otherwise? Have they not testified and declared
the Light and the Spirit of Truth are one and the same in Being, which will
guide into all Truth, John 16.13. The Quakers believe this divine Light to be
the quickness of their understandings to know, and of their wills to love, and
practical Truth, and that it assists the natural Faculties of the Soul in the
seize of necessary Arts and Sciences, as well as capacitate it to know
and practice Morral and Spiritual Truths. Thou may read what the Author to
the Book of Wisdom says on this subject, in the 9th and 10th Chapters.

And whereas thou say, The Quakers make the Light within a Supplement to
Scripture, which they say is not sufficient without it, nor indeed any more
than a mere dead Letter.

I Answer; These words Supplement to Scripture are thy own, not ours, and this
seems to be a Composition of thy own notion of the Quakers Faith concerning the
holy Scriptures, without any quotation of their Words or Writings, and as it is
an objection is built upon thy mistake. In thy former Section, viz. The Quakers
represent this Light within as a sort of extraordinary Inspiration; Which has
been already answered, proving the Universallity of the Divine Light in man,
which considered, there is no just cause for this as an Objection against the
Quakers, assigning the Scriptures to be insufficient without the Light, because
the knowledge of the holy Scriptures cannot occur to the understanding without
it, and the formal reason thereof is its presence and manifestation. The
Quakers believe that Christ Jesus by his divine Light within, does in these
days, as in the Days of his Flesh, expound, fulfill and open to the true
Believers the holy Scriptures, which according to the Apostle's exhortation to
Timothy, Chap. 2.3, 15. Are able to make wise unto Salvation (note) THROUGH
FAITH which is in Christ Jesus. The word Supplement in this sense, I hope, will
be found no Error, but according to thy Construction of the Quakers
representing the Light within as a sort of extraordinary Inspiration, Sect 2.
Or special privilege of a certain order of men their own party, as in Sect. 4.
And then making them to say the Scriptures with relation only to the Direction
of Practice, as thy Lines import, Sect. 3. are not sufficient without it, nor
indeed any more than a mere dead Letter, is to render the Quakers not only
singular and Erroneous in their Principle of the Light, (which shall be more
duly observed in its place) but also Contemptuous of the holy Scriptures, as
useless and insufficient to all but themselves, which is a great and heinous
abuse of a Society of People, without cause and provocation, and contrary to
their public and known Assertions, both by Word and Writing, who believe
according to the same Apostle to Timothy, Chap. 2.3.16, 17. That all Scripture
given by Inspiration of God, is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God may be
Perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works. And this shall suffice for an
Answer to thy third Section.

The fourth is a downright falsity (viz.) The Quakers make their Light within
a special Privilege of a certain Order of men their own party, not indeed as
to the possibility, yet they do as to the act making none but those of their
own way to be actually enlightened by it.

This is so abundantly Confuted by the Writings in general of those People,
more perticularly in the afore-recited Book of Robert Barclay's, which
considering thou have read, I am the more amazed at thy Assertion: They say all
are actually enlightened by it, all are Called, but all have not obeyed,
according to these Scriptures, Micah 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is
Good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do Justly, and to love
Mercy, and to walk Humbly with thy God, 1 John 9.3.19. 1 Cor. 13.7. Tit. 2.11.
etc. Thy distinction of a possibility, and not actually with respect to the
Divine Illumination of this Principle, is trivial, though not with respect to
Salvation by it: The Capacity or Possibility is not, nor can be in man abstract
from the actual Illuminating Power and Spirit, no more than seeing if the light
be separate from the Eye; The Quakers have, and still do declare, that Christ
Jesus, the Light of the World, is the universal free Gift of God, for the
benefit of all men, in order to their Salvation; and is not this Common yet
Special privilege, because dearly purchased and freely bestowed on lost man,
that thou may not want occasion to traduce the Quakers, thou have so much
over-done it in this Section, as to contradict thy self in the fifth; as for
instance, Sect. 4. to be actaully enlightened according to thy Principle, is no
special privilege, but the common and universal benefit of all men, yea, of
all the intelligent Creation, who all see and understand in this Light of God,
without which there would be neither Truth nor Understanding: On the contrary,
Postscript Sect. 5. thou say, Thy Light does not formally enlighten or
instruct thee, but when thou carefully attends to and consults it, and read
what is written in those Divine Ideal Characters: The like Doctrine thou have,
page 71. of thy Book, Sect. 5. and 6. where treating of thy double illumination
of thy divine (...), viz. Fundamentally and Potentially, or else effectually or
actually, in the former sense (thou say) he inlightens every man in the
latter, only those who duly consult him, and attend to him. See what
Contradiction thy strained Notions run thee into one while to be actually
enlightened, is the Common and Universal benefit of all men; another while only
of those who Consult it, and attend to it, and all to avoid being thought to
Symbolize with the Quakers in thy notion of the Divine Light; thy Distinction
of Potentially and Actually can have no more in it than the Difference in the
subject, the one universal act of the Word or Light, enlightening every man,
comprehends both; these are but new invented terms to express the most ancient,
and more Divinely, and better revealed Truths of the Gospel: Thy fifth I take
in the first part of it to be the same in substance with thy first, Differing
in form of expressions, viz. The Quakers by their Light within understand some
Determinate formed dictate or proposition expressly or possitively directing or
instructing them to do so or so; as in thy first thou call'st it, some divine
Communication or Manifestation ONLY. Where did thou learn this definition of
the Quakers Faith and Doctrine of the Light within? The Quakers believe the
Light of Christ within to be God's divine Oracle of Wisdom in the Soul, the
former Dictater, and determiner of heavenly Propositions, their Directing and
Instructing what to choose, and what to refuse, as the original Cause of the
knowledge and love of Truth, which are its proper effects. Now wherein is the
Quakers Light, as thou term'st it, Inferior to that which thou call'st thine,
except in the Differing Character thou give it? they own the Real and
Substantial Truth of God, the Life of the Word, the Light of men, as Christ
said of himself, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life: That this divine Light
which is the Light of men, is always in some degree and measure present in the
Soul, by which it is upheld either in God's love or anger, the Quakers believe;
and that in him we live, move and have our being, though with respect to
operation after a different manner and measure, and passing the understanding
of man. And whereas thou say, Thy Light is only the essential Truth of God:
This is a high presumption, about which I have already showed thy Confusion in
other places, calling it Reason and Conscience, and a man's natural and
ordinary way of understanding; consider Mat. 6.22.23. The Light of the Body is
the Eye; if therefore thy Eye be single, thy whole Body shall be full of Light:
but if thine Eye be evil, thy whole Body shall be full of Darkness; if
therefore the Light that is in thee be Darkness, how great is that Darkness? So
may I say, if that Doctrine and Principle thou recommendest to the World for
Truth and Excellency, be erroneous and faulty, how great is that Error and
Fault? Again, thou say, Thy Light is always present to thy understanding,
and Intimately united with it still, Sect. 5. Which in thy sense of the Light,
is to say, thy Soul is never without thy Reason and Conscience; I wish they
were both reformed, that thou may be no more guilty of these and such like
false Aspersions; That the Light, as supposing it to be what really it is, viz.
a Distinct Principle from the Soul is always present to the understanding,
which implies its operation upon the natural Capacity, or Organ, the ordinary
means of knowing, I conceive is more then can be safely or experimentally said,
because the Organ may be hurt, and the understanding in that sense interrupted,
and consequently no fit Medium or Receptacle either for the Soul or its Light:
besides, the Soul may be absent from the natural understanding, by the
interposition of Spiritual, as well as Natural causes, and yet present with the
Light in its spiritual way of understanding: But to say as thou do, that Thy
Light is only the Essential Truth of God, and that it is always present to thy
understanding, and intimately united with it, and yet that it does not formally
inlighten or instruct it, but when carefully attended to and consulted; seems
to discover a Contradiction in it self, and to the formal Reason of its Being,
and Presence, and Sufficiency in the one act of the same Principle, as well as
to the state and nature of Intimate Union; for how can any thing be intimately
united to its Principle, and not partake of its Nature and Influences, which is
the reason and manner of its union? And how can this be, and not carefully
attended to and consulted? is not this manifest Confusion? That the presence of
the Light does enlighten and instruct all in some sense and degree, is
sufficiently proved by Scripture; By thy word formally enlighten, I apprehend
thou intendest the operative Exercise, as in page 17. and as here applied to,
Light signifies no more than actually to enlighten, ex part objecti; I grant
such as do not carefully attend to and consult this Divine Light, does not
witness the increases of it unto the Redemption and Salvation of their Souls.

It is the Path of the Just that is as the shining Light, that shines more and
more unto the perfect day; if the Light, as thou asserts, does not formally
enlighten or instruct, but when carefully attended to and consulted, how then
should it quicken and raise the Soul from Death to Life, according to the
multiplied Experience of holy David? And how does God speak once, yea, twice,
yet man perceives it not? Job 33.14, 15, 16, 17. In a Dream, in a Vision of
the Night, when deep Sleep falls upon men, in slumbring upon the Bed, then he
opens the Ears of Men, and seals their Instruction, that he may withdraw
man from his purpose, and hide Pride from man. Again, in Isa. 65. I am sought
of them that asked not for me, I am found of them that sought me not: I said,
Behold me, behold me, to a Nation that was not called by my Name. How
frequently does the Lord complain by his Prophets of his Calling to his people
to return and Repent, but they would not answer. Note, the Call of God is not
without Instruction; read Micah 6.8. and Prove. 1. from 20. to the end. And see
what Wisdom does also in Nehemiah, how they rebelled against God,
notwithstanding he gave his good Spirit to Instruct them. The Testimony of John
the Evangelist, the 5th and 21st. Ephesians. 2.1. 4, 5. You has he quickened, who
were Dead in Trespasses and Sins; but God who is rich in Mercy for his great
love wherewith he has loved us, even when we were dead in Sins, has quickened
us together in Christ, by Grace ye are saved. 2 Cor. 4.6, 7. God who commanded
Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give us the Light
of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; but we have
this Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the excellency of the Power may be of
God, and not us. These and many other Texts abundantly prove that God quickens
and enlightens man, before man can turn unto him: Thy sixth and last Section, I
take to be an extravagant noise and bluster against the Quakers, to supply the
want of real matter of Objection; what means else so great and general
Reflections, without offering any Proof, or reducing it to a particular Charge,
to say the Quakers do not offer any rational or intelligible account of their
Light within proves nothing; to tell the world, as thou do, they Cant in some
loose and general Expressions about the Light, does little else but impose upon
trust, which is to beg Credit, whilst thou mentions not what those loose and
general Expressions are; but to say they Confirm them by the authority of St
John's Gospel, is in some sort to contradict thy assertion, for so to confirm
them, argues they agree to what is there taught, and if so, as is most
certainly true, and that the Quakers do adhere to those divine Words and
Expressions; it looks like too much profaneness, to account them loose and
Canting; and to say, that the Quakers understand neither the Light which they
profess, nor St John's Gospel, is an Evil presumption, and what if I say
Blasphemy, against some that dwell in Heaven. As for thy terms, viz.
Omniformity of the Ideal world, they may be either thy own, or some borrowed
Invention, which not being taught them by the holy Spirit and divine Testimony
thereof in the holy Scriptures, the Quakers reject the more, seeing it is such
an Idol, that although they sincerely confess and believe in the Light,
according to John's Gospel, they shall not be allowed to understand either,
without bowing thereto; What art thou O man, that boasts thy self? art thou
wiser than thy Maker? whose Wisdom has brought forth and taught his People
these expressions; Can thou by searching find out God, or the Almighty unto
perfection? I tell thee nay, but God will Confound thy Wisdom, and bring to
naught thy understanding, wherein it is exalted; for he has Determined to
stain the Pride of all Flesh, the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

This is written for the clearing of Truth's Testimony from the Rubbish thou
have cast thereon, in good Will to all, and desiring thy Soul's welfare.

By R. V.
THE END.

