(...);

THE More Excellent Way TO Edify the Church of CHRIST OR A DISCOURSE
CONCERNING LOVE: The Design of which is to Revive that Grace (now under such
decays) among Protestants of ALL persuasions.

By NATHANAEL VINCENT, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

1 Pet. 4. 8. And above all things have fervent Charity among your selves.
Phil. 4. 5. Let your Moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand.
Gal. 5. 15. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed
one of another. (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. London, Printed by J. A. for Tho.
Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel and
at the Bible on London Bridge, near the Gate. 1684.

TO THE READER.
READER,
ALthough my Name be in the mouths of many, and Tongues have scourged it most
severely, and most false Reports have been spread concerning me both in City
and Country; yet I could more patiently have born the killing of my
Reputation, if the Honor of God had not been at all concerned. A regard to his
Name, and his Gospel's Credit, prevails with me to break silence; and Love to
others, makes me fear their being scandalized to their prejudice. There is a
design driven on by Hell and Rome, to introduce Atheism in order unto Propery;
to make men really of no Religion, that they may not stick to profess
themselves of the Romish, when they shall apprehend it is for their Secular
Interest. Now because some men's lives by the Grace of God have been
unblameable, and tended to convince the World, that there is a reality and
power in Godliness; these upon this account are singled out, and loaded with
Calumnies and Reproaches; that being represented as Hypocrites, all Religion
may the more easily be suspected, as a (...). 2 Pet. 1. 16.
cunningly devised. Fable.

Let not those who have stupefied their own Consciences, think that I have
acted of late against Mine. Though I think I ought not to keep at such a
distance from the Church of England, as I did; yet I have no preferment in it,
neither can I submit to the terms of such preferment. Nay, I have exceedingly
hindered my own secular advantage, by my Moderation, which is not the way to
thrive in such a Violent Age as this. A moderate man is like one that parts two
which are fighting; instead of being thanked, he is liked by neither; he has
blows from both, for wishing them no worse a thing than Peace.

From profane tongues I expect lies and slanders: That Master whom I serve,
met with no better usage. He was called a Wine-bibber, a Friend to Publicans
and Sinners; nay, said to have a Devil. But though the Slander be never so
gross, it shall not hinder me from praying for the Slanderer; and I hope I
shall be enabled to live so still, as that no body shall believe him. If
Professors who are Non-conformists, speak against me, and censure me as a
Temporizer; My Answer is, That with me it is a small thing to be judged of them,
or of man's judgment. My own Conscience speaks other kind of language; and in
that one, I have Mill testes, a thousand Witnesses of my Integrity. God is
convincing me of the vanity of popular Applause; and how soon that kind of wind
may turn and change. And if a Conviction of this makes me more humble and low
in my own eyes, Dishonor will do me a far greater kindness than Praise. I will
say to Humility, O and praesidium, and dulce decus meum, my safety, and sweet
Ornament; and next unto Heaven, expect the greatest rest to my Soul, in the
exercise of this lovely Virtue.

The fury of those who have been most, enraged against me, has but heightened my
love to them: I have poured out more prayers and tears for them than they are
aware of; and they will know what a true Friend I have been to them, when they
come into another World. Those whose Heads are hotter than their Love, shall
not move my anger, but my pity and sorrow: And let them call me what they
please, I shall own what is good in them; and requite their Censures with
Supplications, that their Light and Faith, their Humility and Love may be
increased; and that they may do nothing unbecoming the Children of the God of
love and peace; nothing prejudicial to the Church, or to themselves!

I have preached heretofore to multitudes, while I was permitted: For all the
Churches in London not being able to hold the tenth part of all the
Inhabitants, I thought they had better hear a Doctrine agreeable to the
Articles of the Church of England, from my mouth, than not hear at all. But it
never was my practice to preach up a party; and it troubles me to see how much
of Religion is placed in smaller things, as appears by men's eagerness about
them: As if some thought a Church, others thought a Conventicle like the Ark of
Noah, out of which it is impossible to escape drowning in Perdition. My design
all along was to bring men to God by Faith in Jesus; and that their hearts
might be purified, and to persuade them to be holy in all manner of
Conversation. I confess I am somewhat altered from what I was; but it is in the
extensiveness of my love: But I am persuaded that this is an alteration for the
better, and makes me more to resemble Christ. Who can justly blame me for
imitating the blessed Jesus! who loves all sincere Protestants, of all
persuasions, and has Communion with them all. I add no more but that of the
Apostle, Romans 15. 7. Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received
us to the glory of God.

EPHESIANS. IV. 16. latter part. -- Makes Increase of the Body, unto the Edifying of
it self in Love.
IF I had a voice as loud as Thunder, I would cry Fire, Fire, with a wish that
all England might hear. A Flame is kindled much worse than that which burnt
down London* which threatens both Church and State with ruin: and that is, the
Flame of fierce Contention. Men's Hearts are as hot as Hell; their Tongues do
set on fire the course of Nature; such wrath, such bitterness, such animosities
every where appear, as plainly show the body Politic and Body Mystical are in
a dangerous fermentation and Fever, which I wish may not issue in dissolution
and destruction. That Prediction of our Lord is fulfilled; Iniquity shall
abound, and love shall wax cold. Lust indeed breaks out into a flame; men's
Passions are hot unto the highest degree, and fury makes them abound in
transgression; but a deadly damp has seized on Love. No wonder that the
Churches pulse does beat disorderly, no wonder that she is languishing, and
ready to dye, for Love is the cause of her increase and Edification.

Is there no Balm in Gilead? is there not a Physician there? are the spots and
symptoms such as show the disease is mortal, and that there no remedy? Though
the case be deplorable, it is not desperate. Were my Text but minded, in it
might be found a sure Recipe. Christ is the Churches Head and Healer; and were
but Love revived, it would quickly bring his Body to a better and more healthy
temper. Light may do much, but Love will do more. Love covers a multitude of
sins; Love cures a multitude of Maladies: The Church increases and edifies it
self in Love.

Though the Apostle was a Prisoner, yet we find his Heart enlarged toward the
Ephesians. Having before discoursed concerning the Mysteries of Faith, in this
Chapter he presses Unity and Love with the greatest vehemence; and in order
hereunto he exhorts to all lowliness and meekness: He knew that pride is the
cause of contention, and that humility and love are the way both to the Souls,
and to the Churches Rest. He uses great strength and cogency of Argument, that
he may prevail. The Saints are Members of one Body: They have been regenerated,
and are acted by one Spirit; who has effectually called them to a lively hope
of one and the same incorruptible Inheritance: And in that Inheritance, there
is not, there cannot be the least discord. They serve one Lord, who is best
served, when his Servants best agree together. They are instructed in one
Gospel, justified by one Faith, baptized in one Name. Finally, that God is one,
who is a most compassionate and indulgent Father to them all: And from so many
Premises, how strongly and undeniably may we conclude, that all Saints should
be of one Heart, and of one Soul!

The Apostle in thus preaching Love and Peace, showed he had a very great
regard to the glory of Christ the Head, who is ascended far above all Heavens,
that he might fill all things; and that he had a great concernedness for his
Body, the Churches edification: For according to my Text, it increases and
edifies it self in Love.

In the Words there are four Propositions worthy of our observation.

First, The Church of Christ is compared to a Body.

Secondly, This Body of Christ is imperfect in this world, and therefore
continually should be increasing.

Thirdly, The Body of Christ should diligently endeavor the edifying of it
self.

Fourthly, The more Love abounds among the Members of the Church, the more the
whole Body will be edified.

Proposit. 1. I begin with the first Proposition: The Church of Christ is
compared to a Body. The Scripture often uses this Metaphor of a Body; now a
Metaphor is a similitude in a word; and indeed there is a great resemblance
between an Humane Body, and the Church of Christ, as by and by will be made
evident. Believers are sometimes called the Brethren of Christ, Joh. 20. 17.
which intimates a very near relation: Sometimes they are called his Spouse,
whom he has betrothed to himself for ever, Hos. 2. 19, 20. and that is a
relation much nearer; and signifies a more intimate and dear affection and
familiarity: Sometimes they are called Branches, Joh. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. and this
expresses a nearer Union still; and that both the life and fruitfulness of
Christians depends upon their being and abiding in Christ the true Vine. But
because Branches, though they grow, are without sense and feeling, so that
neither themselves, nor the Vine feel any pain when they are cut or broken:
therefore Believers are styled Members, the Church a Body, and Christ is the
Head; who is very much concerned both in it and for it. Ephesians. 5. 2, 3. Christ is
the Head of the Church, and he is the Savior of the Body. So Ephesians. 3. 6. That
the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his
promise in Christ by the Gospel. Again, Col. 1. 18. And he is the head of the
body, the Church, who is the beginning and firstborn from the dead; that in
all things he might have the preeminence.

Zanchius upon this Text takes notice of two things.

1. That by the Body we are (...), Phorius in scholiis.
to understand Verum Christi Corpus Mysticum, the true Church, the true
mystical body of Christ. This Church is made up of them that are really
sanctified; of this Hypocrites are not members; for though such are visibly
Saints, yet in truth they are under the dominion of sin, and shall receive for
their hypocrisy greater damnation. Though hypocrites profess themselves Christ's
members, yet really they are not united to him; Christ lives not, rules not,
acts not in them, as he does in sincere Christians: Let them seem to be his
followers, let them pretend never so highly to be his friends, yet really they
are strangers, whom Christ will profess at the great day, he never knew. Luke
13. 26, 27. Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our streets. But he shall say, I tell you, I
know you not ^hence you are, depart from me all ye workers of iniquity.

2. By the Church we are to understand the Church Militant, that part of the
body of Christ which is militant on earth, not which is triumphant in Heaven.
The Church above needs not exhortations to grow and increase in Knowledge and
Grace; it needs not the means of edification: Sermons of love are not to be
preached there. Glorified Saints have not the least sinful defect; they see God
face to face, and Christ as he is; and their love to their Father and Redeemer
is answerable to the sight they have, and as much as they are capable of. And
being refined from all remainders of sin, they are become such lovely
Creatures, that they cannot but love one another with a most pure and perfect
love. It Is the Church of Christ on earth the Apostle speaks of; this is the
Body that is to be edified; and alas, in how many respects, how certainly in
all respects does it stand in need of edification.

In the handling of this Proposition, I shall first of all show the great
resemblance that i^ between the Church of Christ and a Body. Secondly, What
kind of body the Church of Christ is. Lastly, Make Application.

In the first place, I am to show the great resemblance between the Church of
Christ and a Body.

1. The life of the Body depends upon its conjunction with the Head. Christ is
the Churches life, and the Nos Christo adglutinamur, non sicut populus
Principi; sed sicut membra bumani corporis suo Capiti.
Church could no more live without Christ, than a body could remain alive after
the head were severed from it. Our Lord calls himself the Way, the Truth, and
the Life also, Joh. 14. 6. By his blood he frees his Church from the sentence
of death and condemnation which sin had brought her under; and makes her
spiritually alive by his quickening Spirit. So that the Church breaths after
God, walks with him, labors in his work and service, all which are evidences
of life spiritual. We read 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son has life, and he
that has not the Son has not life. They that by faith receive the Lord Jesus,
are purified, are regenerated, and shall live for ever, but as many as through
unbelief reject him, remain dead in sin and doomed to Hell. Union with Christ
is a most necessary, a most happy union. The Churches life from this has its
beginning, and continuance, unto consummation.

2. The Head has a mighty influence upon the Body. There is a powerful
influence from Christ upon his Church; and what good it does, is done by virtue
of this influence. He is said to be exalted far above all Heavens, that he
might fill all things, Ephesians. 4. 10. Whatever grace and strength, and comfort is
communicated to believers, it is really and all from Christ. He fills
Ordinances with efficacy, mercies with sweetness, afflictions with light and
usefulness, and Souls with greater degrees of Grace and Holiness; out of that
(...), all-fulness it has pleased the Father should dwell in him, Col. 1. 19.
Our Lord tells his Disciples they must abide in him, for separated from him
they can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5. No wonder the Apostle professes, That Christ
is all and in all, Col. 3. 11. Though the Body, the Church, should be never so
much increased, a deficiency in the Head Christ need not be feared; neither is
it indeed possible: for in him there is all the fullness of the Godhead. And
consequently his Rightousness and Grace must needs be sufficient for the whole.

3. The Body has many Members, and these members have different Offices. The
Church likewise has various members, and their different stations, relations,
callings, diversify their work and duties; and yet the doing of these duties is
both comely and advantageous; and the more every one does his own work, the
more all are benefited. Romans 12. 45. the Apostle tells us, That as we have many
members in one body, and all members have not the same office, so we being many
are one body in Christ: And from thence infers, that All should use the gifts
they have received, which are differing according to the grace and good
pleasure of God the Giver. It would be unreasonable for the Ear to attempt to
speak like the Tongue, or the Hand to see like the Eye: The several members
have their uses and work proper to them. All are not Apostles, all are not
Prophets, all are not Teachers, all are not Governors, 1 Cor. 12. 29. There
are many indeed, most in the Church, that have need to be taught and governed;
and those that think themselves wise enough to instruct and govern themselves,
and so despise their spiritual Guides, usually are the most ignorant and
unruly, and hugely need the help and conduct of others. The members must abide
in their place and calling, Masters, Servants, Parents, Children, Husbands,
Wives, Magistrates, Subjects, Pastors, People, doing their duties which the
Scripture in their several stations and relations calls for.

4. The Body is fitly joined; and thus fitly joined is the Church of Christ.
The word (...) signifies that there is a congruous order among the members of
Christ. Without Order an Army would be a Rout and not an Army; a Kingdom would
become a confused self-destroying multitude. The Churches God is the God of
Order and not of confusion. 1 Cor. 14. 33. There is a rule for Order and
Government, and a subordination in the Church; it is not a body of levellers; if
there were a perfect parity, all would affect to rule, none would care to be
ruled. The reproof of two or three, is more than the reproof of one; the
Churches admonition and censure is still with greater authority. The flock is
to submit themselves ^o their Pastors who are over them in the Lord. Heb. 13.
17. and both Pastors and people are to submit especially unto Christian
Magistrates, who are prophetically promised in the Old Testament, that they
should be Nursing Fathers to the Church under the New. A right Order in
Churches and Families, will have a mighty influence to make believers steadfast
against temptations both to Error and Wickedness. The Apostle rejoiced in the
Colossians, chap. 2. 5. when he beheld their order, and the stedfastness of of
their faith in Christ.

5. The Body is compact together, so is the Church of Christ; the word (...)
shows that the Church is firmly knit unto Christ the Head, and the members one
unto another. The hypostatical Union between the Natures of Christ shall never
be dissolved, neither shall the mystical union between him and his members; and
if so, then his true members must needs remain closely knit together. There are
ligaments, joints, bands, whereby the Body of Christ is held together: The
Spirit of Grace, and Love unites the body to Christ, and members to members.
The Ministers of Christ are subservient unto this union; and ought to be
preaching and commending love, which is a grace of an uniting nature. The
Apostle had a concernedness for the Colossians, which he expresses by a great
conflict, and that which he wished so vehemently for, was this, that their
hearts might be comforted, beingknit together in love, Col. 2. 1, 2.

Where is the member of the natural Body that grows weary of its fellowship,
and is willing to be cut off. The Arms, the Hands, the Legs, the Feet, are
desirous to keep their places; and and nature makes them abhor to be severed.
True grace makes the members of the Church to dislike separation. As they
believe so, they very well like, and are desirous of the communion of Saints. A
very black mark is set upon them who are of a contrary inclination. 1 John 2.
19. They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us,
they would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out that they might
be made manifest they were not all of us.

6. God has set the Members in the body as it pleased him; the different gifts
and graces which are in the Church of Christ and the members of it, are
according to Gods will and pleasure. He bestows larger gifts upon some, and
less upon others; and yet those that have less, are not unuseful. Some Saints
receive greater measures of Grace, others smaller; but all have that grace
which is true, and which at last will end in glory. Some members of the Church
are higher, others lower, and yet they should not envy or despise one another;
for God has assigned their place unto both: the higher, may direct the lower,
the lower may serve the higher. The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need
of thee; nor the head to the feet, I Have no need of you; and those members of
the body which seem to be more feeble are necessary. 1 Cor. 12. 21, 22. By the
grace of God the members of Christ are what they are. They have nothing but
what they have received; and the more any have received, the more humble and
diligent they should be; for where much is given, much will also be required.

7. In the Body Nourishment is conveyed unto the parts, and the whole is hereby
sustained. The body of Christ also by joints and bands having nourishment
ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase of God. Col. 2. 19.
The Church of Christ has food to eat which the world knows not of, it has
spiritual senses, a spiritual appetite, and its food is spiritual. The word of
God is compared to food; here is milk for Babes, and stronger meat for more
grown Saints. No food so profitable and nourishing, no food so pleasant, no
food so necessary. Hark to the profession of Job, chap. 23. 12. Neither have I
gone back from the commandment of his lips; I have esteemed the words of his
mouth more than my necessary food. David cries out, How sweet are thy words
unto my taste! yea sweeter than honey to my mouth. Psalm. 119. 103. And the
Prophet speaks to the same purpose; Jer. 15. 16. Thy words were found, and I
did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart.

The body of Christ is nourished by his Word, and other Ordinances are
appointed for the increase of this body. A famine of this word deserves to be
dreaded as a very sore judgment.

The better the food, if it be well digested, the better the chyle, and the
purer the blood; and the body will be more prosperous and healthy; the more
purely and sincerely the word of God is dispensed, the members of Christ will
become stronger, and the inward man be the more renewed day by day. As Christ
gives his word, so he vouchsafes himself to be food to his members. His flesh
is meat indeed, his blood is drink indeed, Joh. 6. 55. And by this they are
nourished unto that life which is eternal. It might also be added, that Christ
is the clothing, as well as the nourishment of his Body; his Righteousness is
the Robe which covers their guilt and nakedness, his Grace beautifies and
adorns his Saints; therefore they are bid to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
to make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. Romans 13. 14.

8. In the Body, the Members and parts are operative and active for the good of
the whole; in the Church there is an (...), effectual working in the measure
(...). Phot.
of every part, that the whole may be increased. The new Nature which is in
sincere believers, inclines them unto action suitable to that nature; sloth is
exceedingly opposite unto Religion. God is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him: to seek him negligently is indeed to neglect him. The members of
Christ are industriously to do their duty toward their Father, and their Head,
and likewise toward one another; hence it is that we read of the labor of
love, which the Apostle requires and encourages, Heb. 6. 10, 11, 12. God is not
unrighteous, to forget your work and labor of love which you have showed
toward his Name, in that you have ministered to the Saints and do minister; and
we desire that every one of you do show the same diligence to the full
assurance of hope unto the end; that ye be not slothful, but followers of them
who through faith and patience inherit the promises. The members of Christ's
Church are to be active, but in their place, and calling; for if they act
irregularly, that action will be against the Body, and to its prejudice, not to
its edification. Every part has its place, and that place it must keep, and not
aspire higher without a call; and that measure of grace which it has received,
it must faithfully exercise, with a regard to the Churches good as well as its
own.

9. The whole Body and all its members are animated by one Soul; and the Church
with all its true members are animated by one and the same Spirit. We read Ephesians.
4. 4. There is one body and one Spirit: and again 1 Cor. 6. 17. He that is
joined to the Lord is one Spirit. The same Spirit which is in the Head, is in
all the members which are joined to him: And the Apostle sticks not to say, If
any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8. 9. All that
light which the members of Christ have, is from the Spirit; he has caused a
mavelous light to shine into their hearts, which before were under the power
of darkness: he likewise is the worker of that liberty and ability which they
have unto what is good: whereas before they had a freedom, but it was only to
evil continually. These members of Christ are all changed into his image, which
is their glory: but the beginning of that change, and the progress of it unto
greater glory, is from and by the Spirit. 2 Cor. 3. 17, 18. Where the Spirit of
the Lord is there is liberty, but we all with open face beholding as in a glass
the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from Glory to Glory even
as by the Spirits of the Lord. The Spirit dwells in all true believers, and
Christ has promised that he shall abide in them for over, Joh. 14. 16, 17. Soul
and Body indeed may be separated, but the Spirit and the Saint shall not.

The very bodies of believers are affirmed to be the Temples of the Spirit,
where he dwells and abides, 1 Cor. 6. 19. What know ye not that your body is
the temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which you have of God, and ye
are not your own? And if the body be his Temple, surely the Heart and Soul
should be as it were the sanctum sanctorum, the holiest of all; filled with
light and grace, that it may be also filled with peace and joy.

10. The Body is under the Souls conduct and command; the Church is conducted
and ruled by the Spirit of Christ. The eyes do see, the ears hear, the hands
work, the feet move, according to the Souls will and pleasure: and as it has
despoticum imperium, the command and government of the members, so it acts
them, and their operations are from the Souls presence; for if the Soul were
gone, the body would immediately become a clod of Earth, and the members be
deprived of all strength and motion. The Spirit of Christ commands and acts his
Members; he makes them to see the invisible God, and that world which is
invisible; he makes them hear the voice of Christ, so as to obey his call; he
makes the hands holy, having first purified the heart, and employes them in
working Righteousness: He turns the feet into the way of Gods testimonies; and
strengthens believers so as that they run, and are not weary, they walk without
fainting.

A Christians conversation is styled a walking in the Spirit, Gal. 5. 16. This
I say then, walk in the Spirit; in his Light, in his Strength, and according to
his will, and fulfill ye not the lusts of the flesh. Without this walking, it is
a vain thing to pretend to be in Christ, or to hope for Justification by his
Righteousness; for the Son of God was made a Sacrifice for sin, that the
Righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in them, who walk not after the
flesh but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 4. What kind of Saints would there be! What
exemplary Members! What illustrious Assemblies! if every one had in a greater
measure crucified the flesh with its lusts and affections, and had a more
attentive and obedient ear to hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. You
see the Resemblance between the Church of Christ and a Body.

In the Second place I am to tell you, what kind of body the Church of Christ
is.

1. The Church is a Body of Men. Ezekiel. 34. 31. And ye my flock, the flock of my
pasture, are men, and I am your God, says the Lord God. I grant the Elect
Angels have Christ to be their Head; but all the Apostate Ones were left in
that misery into which by sin they brought themselves. And though the Son of
God be the Lord and Keeper of the Holy Angels, yet he is not their Redeemer, as
he is of his Church, for whom he died. When this Savior was born, the Tongues
of Angels proclaimed peace on earth, good will toward men; Luke 2. 14. Though
the World lie in wickedness, yet the Church is gathered out of the World. The
Saints themselves were sometimes dead in sins and trespasses; and walked
according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the power of
the air; fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind; and were by
nature the Children of wrath, even as others. Ephesians. 1. 1, 2, 3.

All the stones of Gods spiritual Temple are dug out of the common Quarry of
Mankind; and to keep them humble; they should often look to the rock from
whence they were hewn. All the Sons and Daughters of the Lord Almighty, are of
Adams lapsed race without exception. The Grace of God is admirable, in making a
Church of such as these: The Body of the first Adam was formed out of the dust,
but the Mystical body of the second Adam was formed out of that which is a
great deal worse, a mere mass of corruption. And as there is not a Saint, but
was once a Sinner; so those Sinners who are chosen, and called, and made
faithful, they are not of the wise commonly, or of the mighty, or noble of the
World: But God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the
wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the World, to confound the things
that are mighty; and base things of the world, and things despised, yea, and
things that are nor, to bring to naught things that are; that no flesh should
glory in his presence; but according as it is written, He that glories, let
him glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 27. 31.

2. The Church is a Body governed by the best Laws: The Lord himself is their
Lawgiver; and he is holy, and just, and good; and his Commands are like
himself, holy, just, and good also, Romans 7. 12.

There is a (...), Law of sin, which the men of the world obey. This Law
commands what the Law of God forbids, forbids what the Law of God commands:
Darkness and light are not more contrary, than these two Laws are. But this Law
of Sin is (...), a Law of Death: Obedience is destructive to him that yields
it. The Law of the Lord is quite of another nature; there is life and peace in
the doing of it; Prove. 7. 2. Keep my Commandments, and live, and my Law as the
apple of thine eye. Psalm. 119. 165. Great peace have they that love thy Law,
and nothing shall offend them. The more the Church conforms to the Laws of her
Lord and Head, she recovers the more of the Image of God which was lost by the
Fall, and partakes the more of the Divine Nature, escaping that corruption that
lust causes in the World. This Law is written in the Heart, which is changed
and renewed; and the Heart being suited to the Commandment, delights in
obedience: Psalm. 40. 8. I delight to do thy will, O my God, yea, thy law is
within my heart. This Law is of the highest authority, therefore the Saints
should endeavor to keep it without spot; and whatever penalties they suffer,
they will never have reason to repent of their faithfulness to their Lord, or
their obedience to his Precepts.

3. The Church is the wisest Body and Society in the World. Indeed all the
World besides are a company of mere Fools and madmen: Are not they fools that
hate knowledge? are not they fools that join with Satan to undo themselves? are
not they fools who venture for a mere trifle, a little sinful gain or pleasure,
to lose their precious Souls, which are of more value than the whole World put
together? are not they fools, who have Salvation, Life, and Immortality offered
to them, and neglect the offer? who are warned to flee from future Wrath, and
the vengeance of eternal Fire; and yet will needs run thither, and are angry
with any that endeavor to stop them? Oh how has sin bereaved men of their Wits
and Understandings!

But the Church of Christ is sayingly enlightened, all her true members made
wise unto Salvation: They are so wise as to make their peace with God,
believing in Jesus, and relying on his blood for Reconciliation; they are so
wise as to follow the Lamb, and that path must needs be best and safest,
wherein he leads them: They are so wise as to make timely provision for
eternity; and to commit the keeping of their Souls into a strong hand, which
never lost any that it undertook to keep and to secure. Therefore the Apostle
speaks with so much confidence, 2 Timothy 12. I know whom I have believed, and I
am persuaded he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that
day. What is the wisdom of this World compared with the Churches wisdom, which
is spiritual? the Apostle undervalues the policy of Princes, in comparison of
the Gospel; that policy comes to nothing, this Gospel guides to glory; 1 Cor.
2. 6, 7. Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect; yet not the
wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this world, (who yet get most by
their wisdom) that come to nothing: but we speak the wisdom of God in a
mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world unto our
glory.

4. The Church is a Body of great beauty and excellency, called therefore in
the Song of Solomon, the fairest among women, Cant. 5. 1. Sion is affirmed to
be the perfection of beauty, Psalm. 50. 2. The Church is excellent in regard of
her Original, for she is of Heavenly extraction, and born of God himself: All
her true members are new Creatures; they are beautified with the image of God,
and resemble him in Knowledge, Righteousness, and true Holiness. As Sin is the
greatest deformity, so Holiness is the truest beauty; it is this which makes the
Angels shine; nay, it is the glory of God himself. Exodus 15. 11. Who is like
unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods! who is like thee, glorious in Holiness! How
certain is it, that the Righteous man is more excellent than his Neighbor: Now
the Church is called the Generation of the Righteous.

The Church is likened to a Woman, because the Woman excells the man in beauty;
but she is such a Woman, as the like is not to be found: Rev. 12. 1. She is
clothed with the Sun, the Moon is under her feet, and upon her head a Crown,
not of Gold, and Diamonds, but better; a Crown of twelve Stars. What can equal
this Glory of the Church? All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the
flower of the field, which soon withers, and fades away. She is said to be
clothed with the Sun, because justified by Christ, the Sun of Righteousness;
the Moon is said to be under her feet, because all changeable things are below
her spiritualized and raised Affections; the twelve Stars, which are her Crown,
signify the Doctrine of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, whereby she is
enlightened, and brought at length to that light which is everlasting.

5. The Church is a Body of great strength; for this Body is strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might. Sinners are without strength; they cannot
please God, they cannot profit themselves; but the Churches members are
strengthened with might by the Spirit in their inward man; so that they can do
things beyond the power of Nature; they can see the invisible God, they can
believe against hope, they can overcome and deny themselves, they can wrestle
with the Almighty, and as Princes prevail with him; they can foil the
Principalities and Powers of darkness, they can fight the good fight of Faith,
and lay hold of eternal life; and all these are mighty acts indeed, too great
to be performed by any that are Hypocrites and ungodly. The Church is most
opposed, and yet is most victorious; and will still abide in the world,
notwithstanding all the worlds rage; like the Immortal Regiment among the
Persians, that never was destroyed till the Empire was destroyed; for if any
Soldier was killed, another presently was listed in his room. This bush of the
Church is unconsumed in a flame; nay, it has been most green and flourishing
when the flame has been fiercest. God has strengthened and preserved her, and
her preservation may be looked upon as one of the greatest Arguments and
Miracles of a Providence.

6. The Church is a Body to whom the whole world is beholding: It should be the
joy, for it is the security of the whole earth. How soon would the Tares be
plucked up, bound in bundles, and cast into the fire, if it were not for the
Wheat which grows among them? Mat. 13. 29. The Church is a Friend, and wishes
well to Mankind; it is her Prayer, that Gods way may be known on earth, and his
saving health among all Nations; that the Kingdoms of the World may become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ: And like a Mother, she is in travel
for the conversion and salvation of a greater multitude of Souls. Why should
the World be angry, and recompense evil for good? they should all be wise at
length, and desire to be incorporated into the Church, and be resolved to go
with her; for they may be well assured that God is with her. Zech. 8. 23.

7. The Church is a Body that will at length by many degrees be made more
glorious than it is at present. Now it is truly sanctified, it is highly
dignified; but it does not yet appear what it shall be; 1 John 3. 2. But when
Christ the Head shall appear the second time, without sin, to salvation, what a
glorious Church will appear with him! Col. 3. 4. Every member will shine as the
Sun in the Fathers Kngdom. Mat. 13. 43. And what a glorious spectacle will that
be, to behold all the Saints together in a company, and every one of them
shining forth as the Sun; and the Son of God at the head of them all! How with
our cries and groans, and serious diligence in preparing for it, should we
continually be hastening the coming of that day of God! Christ's Body, the
Church, has its defects and blemishes, while it sojourns here below; but at the
last day all the spots will be off, all the wrinkles smoothed, and the end of
Christ's death will be fully attained. Now the Apostle tells us, He gave himself
for his Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, and present it to
himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but
that it should be holy, and without blemish: Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. How gorgeously
apparrel'd, how richly adorned, how amiable and lovely will the Lamb's Bride at
last be, when Satan shall be quite vanquished, Death swallowed up in Victory,
and sin shall cease to have a being! when light shall be without any darkness,
joy without sorrow, purity without the least mixture of defilement! When Christ
does put the Crown of Life upon his Churches Head, then that Scripture will be
fully verified, Cant. 4. 7. Thou art all fair, my Love, there is no spot in
thee.

I come now to the Application.

USE. I. Let the Church and all the members of it, consider their relation unto
Christ their Head, and do that duty which such a relation calls for: They are
Christ's, and not Mammons; they are Christ's, and not their own; they are his
purchase, his Spouse; nay parts, and pieces, and Members of him, which he has
bought, and united to himself: It Is highly against all reason, that they should
seek, or please themselves in a sinful and self-destroying manner.

Their Duty toward Christ, their Lord and Head, is in several Particulars.

1. The Members of Christ should love him in great sinoerity. The Apostle
wishes, that the grace of God may be with all such sincere Lovers, Ephesians. 6. 24.
Dissembled and seeming Love is really none at all; and in several respects
worse than none. Christ's Love to his Church was most real: How exceeding low
was his humiliation, that she might be advanced! how great his Sufferings for
her eternal Redemption! The Apostle speaks as one amazed at the height, and
length, and depth, and breadth of this love of Christ which passes knowledge,
Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. And if the Head be so full of love to all the Members,
certainly the Members will be in the worst sense unnatural, if they return not
love to their Head and Savior; they should prize him most highly, counting all
things but loss and dung that they may win him, Phil. 3. 8. They should mourn
when he withdraws, but rejoice exceedingly when they enjoy his presence, and
see his face who is altogether lovely. They should value his Word and
Ordinances, in which he is to be found, and delight themselves in the
contemplation of his fullness, and that great and everlasting Salvation whereof
he is the Author. Their very Souls should love him, Cant. 3. 4. which
expression intimates both the truth, and the strength and fervency of
affection: and truly our Lord is so excellent, that there is no danger or
possibility that Love to him should be excessive.

2. The Members of Christ should endeavor to promote his Honor and Glory:
They should be very zealous that their Head may be advanced, and have the
preeminence over all things. Their tongues should be showing forth his praises,
commending him to the World as the best of Princes, as the only Savior; and
declaring the unreasonableness of the Worlds prejudices against his yoke and
burden, which are so easy and so light. Mat. 11. ult. They should earnestly
desire that Christ their Lord, may be the Worlds Universal Monarch; and that
all Earthly Kings and Emperors may cast down their Crowns before him, and
willingly submit to his Scepter and Government.

3. The Members of Christ should obey all his Commands. Joh. 14. 15. If ye love
me, keep my Commandments. And v. 21. He that has my Commandments, and keeps
them, he it is that loves me. It is a monstrousness in Nature, if any of the
Members should not be placed under the Head: Surely then all the Members of
Christ should readily be subject to him. Thus to be Subject is to Reign.
Obedience is the great Sacrifice to be offered under the New Testament; the
Saints are styled Priests; Kings as well as Priests; (...), a Royal Priesthood,
1 Pet. 2. 9. So that to obey the Lord Jesus contains in it no less than a Regal
Honor. He should be reverenced, all his Commands performed. He that hears
Christ's sayings, and does them, is the wise Builder, whose House shall never
fall; is indeed the blessed man, and is in the right way to Life and
Immortality. Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they
may have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the gates into the
City.

4. The Members of Christ should live by faith upon him: They are to expect the
Remission of sin, and deliverance from wrath to come no other way: when they
have done their best and most, they must look unto Jesus, that they through him
may be accepted: For there is no way to be accepted, but in the Beloved. Ephesians.
1. 6. In all their Temptations, Sorrows, Sufferings, they are to depend upon
him for succor, joy, and Grace sufficient. The Body is secured, and in the
Spiritual Warfare, has both conduct and conquest by acting Faith in Christ the
Head. Every Member therefore should imitate the Apostle, who said, Gal. 2. 20.
The life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God,
who loved me, and gave himself for me.

5. The Members of Christ should do nothing unbecoming his Members. The Glory
and Name of Christ, and the Credit of the Gospel should be very dear to them;
and they ought to be blameless and harmless, without rebuke, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Generation; and shine as lights in the World. Phil. 2. 15.
They should manifest that they abide in Christ, by walking as he walked; they
should he patient, meek, and lowly as Christ was, contemn the world as he
contemned it, count it their meat and drink to do the will of God as he did:
and since Christ endured the contradiction of sinners against himself, so
should they. Though the Foes of Christ are numerous, and oppose his interest
with never so great force and fury, yet his members must never be ashamed to
own their Head, nor afraid to follow him. It becomes them, and it concerns them
to cleave to him with full purpose of heart, Acts 11. 23. For to leave him is
to be lost for ever, and to bid farewell to blessedness, and life eternal.

USE. II. Let the Members of this Body the Church, consider the relation they
have one to another. They are indeed very near, and should look upon themselves
as very near one to another: And this Relation should be of mighty efficacy to
persuade them to perform those mutual Duties which are incumbent upon them. In
the general, All particular Members should consult the good of the whole
Church: They believe the Holy Catholic Church, and their Love should run
parallel with their Faith; and care will be an effect of true Love. A private
Spirit is very prejudicial to the Body of Christ, whilst only one part is
minded, and not another: It Is just as if there should be an endeavor to make
one member of the Body natural great and strong, with an unconcernedness how
weak, and feeble, and small soever the other Members remain. It Is lamentable
that there are so many Parties in the Christian Church; but it is more to be
lamented, that these Parties are so selfish, and so little mind the common
interest; which being neglected, their private interest cannot be regarded so
truly as it should be. For if a whole Town be burnt down to the ground, no
particular house escapes the fury of the flames: No man's Cabin can be secured,
if the Ship be cast away, and sinks to the bottom of the Sea.

There are several Counsels which I would entreat the Members of the Church to
follow, that it may be the better with the Church, and with themselves.

1. Let not the higher Members despise the lower. You that are higher, what
have you that you have not received? why then should you glory, as if you had
not received it? 1 Cor. 4. 7. That Is a Scripture whose sharp point should prick
the bladder, and let out pride and self-conceitedness. Phil. 2. 3. Let nothing
be done through strife or vain glory; but in lowliness of mind let each esteem
other better than themselves. Moses the holiest and most useful man in his
time, was the meekest man upon earth, Numb. 12. 3. The Apostle Paul, though he
labored more abundantly than all the Apostles to spread the Gospel and Faith
of Christ, yet in what an humble style does he write of himself, and surely his
Heart and Pen went together, 1 Cor. 15. 9. I am the least of the Apostles, that
am not worthy to be called an Apostle. Nay, he abases himself beneath all
Saints, as well as all Apostles, and ventures the Critick's scoff, in coining
the word (...), to show how low he was in his own thoughts: Ephesians. 3. 8. Unto me
who am less than the least of all Saints, is this Grace given, that I should
preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ.

2. Let not the lower Members of the Church be discontented. Every Member is
highly favored, highly honored; every Member is under the Head's care, and
shall at last be fully happy in and with Christ Jesus. To be a Doorkeeper in
the House of God, was looked upon as an honor and Privilege by a King of
Israel, Psalm. 84. 10. The least degree of true Grace is more worth than all the
Gold and Silver that God has made. Saints are to be blamed when discontented
because they are not of the highest rank; for all Saints are Children, all are
Heirs, all are firstborn; therefore the Church is called (...), the Church of
the firstborn, Heb. 12. 23. nay, they are all, even the meanest of them,
advanced to Kingly Dignity. Rev. 1. 5, 6. To him that has loved us, and washed
us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God,
and his Father; to him be glory and dominion for ever.

3. Let the Members of the Church be sensible of the need they stand in one of
another. How much are the higher Members of the Body beholding to the Feet,
which are the lowest of all! the Body could not go without them, but only lame,
and a Cripple. God has ordered it so in his Church, that as the Members are to
have their main and principal dependence upon Christ their Head, so they are to
have some kind of dependence upon one another: and the reason is, that those
two excellent Graces of Humility and Love may flourish among them. Though the
Hand by the Philosopher be fitly styled (...), the most useful Member, yet it
cannot do every thing: It cannot see like the Eye; nor speak like the Tongue;
and if a man should attempt to go upon his Hands, he would walk after a sorry
and odd fashion. The strongest Saints, nay, the ablest Ministers are beholding
to the meanest Believers; the stronger are encouraged when the meaner do their
Duty. A word sometimes from a weak Christian, may be much to the edification of
a Christian more grown. The Apostle says, he lived, if the Thessalonians stood
fast in the Lord, 1 These. 3. 1. And a beggar could not beg more heartily for an
Alms, than he did for the Prayers of the Saints at Rome. Romans 15. 30. Now I
beseech you Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and the love of the
Spirit, that you strive together with me in your Prayers to God for me.

4. Let the Members of the Church have the same care one of another that they
have of themselves, 1 Cor. 12. 25. In the natural body it is thus; if the Face
be struck at, the Arm endeavors to ward off the blow; if the Body be in danger
in one place, the feet are ready to carry it to a place of greater strength and
safety. Christians should be concerned for their fellow Christians as for their
fellow Members: and mind that of the Apostle more, 1 Cor. 10. 24. Let no man
seek his own; that is, his own only, but every man another wealth.

5. Let the members of the Church sympathize with suffering members. We are
commanded to weep with those that weep, Romans 12. 15. The sorrows of afflicted
Christians should be ours, and we should feel their burdens. It Is the glass
eye that sheds no tears, it is the wooden Arm and Leg that feels nothing: Every
Member of Christ should be full of Bowels. The Injunction is plain, Remember
them that are in bonds as bound with them, and them which suffer adversity as
being your selves also in the body. Those were upbraided, and threatened
severely for their carnal security and hardness of heart, who were at ease when
Zion was in trouble, and were not at all grieved for the Afflictions of Joseph,
Amos 6. 6.

6. Let the members of the Church be concerned about such fellow members that
are sinfully distempered. If any part of the body natural aile any thing, all
the other parts are ready to afford the utmost relief and assistance they are
able. And why should Christians be careless of Christians, as if they were of
Cains temper, who said, Am I my Brothers keeper? If a beast be fallen, we pity
him, and are ready to help unto the lifting him up again; and should not a
member of Christ who has fallen into sin and hurt himself so much by his fall,
move our compassions? We are indeed carefully to avoid infection by those that
are lapsed: yet it is our duty to restore them in the Spirit of meekness,
considering our selves, lest we also be tempted, Gal. 6. 1.

7. If one member of the Church be honored all the members should rejoice with
it. Is the hand envious at the eyes quickness? or the ear envious at the hands
activity? Envy is as unreasonable in the body mystical, as in the body natural.
We ought to rejoice in the gifts of others, and in their graces, and in their
usefulness; else the Spirit of God who has given these gifts and graces, and
has made them thus useful, will be grieved, and we shall hinder our selves of
that profit which we our selves might reap from them.

8. Let there be no discord among the members of the Church, but they should
perfectly agree together. By that Apologue concerning the unreasonableness of
the Members falling out with the Body, Menenius Agrippa did put an end to a
contention that was likely to prove fatal, between the Roman Senate and the
common people. How unreasonable would it be that the hand should envy the eyes,
and endeavor to put them out? that the feet should take it amiss that they are
lowermost, and should fall a kicking all the parts which are within their
reach? Discord among Saints is such a kind of unnatural and foolish contention.
If Abraham the Father of the faithful said unto Lot; Let there be no strife
between Me and Thee, for we be Brethren, Genesis 13. 8. surely Christians a
fortiori may argue with one another, Let there be no strife among us for we are
Members, (...). Romans 12. 5.

USE III. Let the World take heed how they deal with the Church which is the
Body of Christ. It Is Luthers observation, That if any part of the Body be hurt
and pained, the signs of feeling appear in the Head, the Brows are contracted,
the Tongue cries, Oh! the Visage is altered. Christ the Head, knows all the
sorrows of his Church, nay in all her Afflictions he is afflicted. When Saul
made havoc of the Body on Earth, the Head in Heaven cries out, as having felt
his fury; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. 9. 4. Let the world be
wise, and the highest and greatest in it, for whatsoever injuries are done to
Christians for Christ's sake, he accounts them as done to himself: in hurting
his Body they strike him there where he is most tender, most sensible, and such
blows without Repentance, will be dreadfully revenged. Christ who is the
Churches Head is to be the Worlds Judge: and if when the Lord comes with ten
thousands of his Saints, hard speeches shall be remembered; Surely the Worlds
hard usage of his members shall not be forgotten, shall not pass unpunished. If
at the great day, the not feeding and clothing of hungry and naked Saints,
will be punished with everlasting fire; oh what a sin will it be found to take
away their food and raiment from them? if Christ will be so angry with those
who visited not believers in Prison, Mat. 25. 42, 43. where shall they appear
that were the Imprisoners of them? The World should not be cruel to Christians,
since Christ will quickly appear to judge the World in Righteousness. So much
for the first Proposition, That the Church of Christ is compared to a Body.

Proposit. II. The second Proposition is this, That this Body of Christ is
imperfect in this World, and therefore continually should be increasing. Hence
it is that Christians are exhorted to grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 3. 18. and not only to be steadfast, and
unmovable; but always to abound in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58.

In the handling of this Proposition, I shall first show, in what respects the
Church of Christ here on earth is imperfect. Secondly, In what sense the Church
should be continually increasing. Thirdly, I shall produce several Reasons for
this Increase of the Church. Lastly, I shall give you the Uses that may be made
of it.

I begin with the first of these; and shall show, in what respects the Church
of Christ here on Earth, is imperfect. Two things are here to be considered.
First, The number of the Churches Members is not yet completed. Secondly,
Those Members which actually are of the Church, are imperfect, the very best of
them, as long as they remain in this World.

1. The number of the Churches Members is not yet completed. There are more
still to be called out of the World, and brought home to Jesus: All are not
gathered, which the Father has designed to give him. Joh. 10. 16. And other
sheep I have, who are not of this Fold; them also I must bring, and they shall
hear my voice, and there shall he one Fold, and one Shepherd.

1. Many, it is to be hoped, who have heard the Gospel, shall be converted,
though as yet they are not. Though they have hitherto resisted the Holy Ghost,
yet at last they shall yield unto his Call and striving. When once the day of
power, and the time of love is come, they shall be made willing to receive a
Savior, to be the Lords, and to serve the Lord; though now never so great an
obstinacy and unwillingness is discovered. Psalm. 110. 3.

2. Many who are in the loins both of Believers and Unbelievers, shall in due
time be born, and born again. The Church shall never quite discontinue; it may
indeed sometimes be less visible, but it always has a Being. God will have a
Seed to serve him in every future Generation. Psalm. 22. 30.

3. The Natural Branches are to be graffed in again to their own Olive Tree.
Romans 11. 24. For if thou were cut out of the Olive Tree which is wild by
nature, and were graffed contrary to nature into a good Olive Tree, how much
more shall these, that is, the Israelites, which be the natural branches, be
graffed into their own Olive Tree? Blindness in part is happened to Israel, but
they are still beloved for their Fathers sake; and at length the veil which is
upon their Hearts, shall be taken away, and they shall look unto him whom their
Fathers crucified, and be saved by him: For he is the Messiah, the deliverer
that is come out of Sion, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, Romans 11.
26. Now when Israel shall be added to the Christian Church, how will this
Church be increased! it will be a very glorious augmentation, like a
Resurrection from the dead, Romans 11. 15. For if the casting away of them be the
reconciling of the World, what shall the receiving of them be but life from the
dead?

4. The Kingdoms of the world are to become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of
his Christ, Rev. 11. 15. I grant this is in part already; the Gentiles have
been preached to, and have obeyed the Gospel; Christ, according to the Fathers
Promise, has had the Heathen given to him for his Inheritance, and some of the
uttermost parts of the earth for his possession; but we may rationally
conclude, after the destruction of Antichrist, and the utter overthrow of his
power and usurpation, that many more Kingdoms of the world will submit unto the
Lord Jesus; and his Church hereby will have a vast increase. We find Rev. 18.
Babylon destroyed, the Kings of the earth, and the Merchants that committed
Fornication with her, crying, Alas! alas! and lamenting her sudden and utter
downfall; The Heavens, and the holy Apostles and Prophets rejoicing over her,
because God had avenged them upon her. And then it follows, Rev. 19. 12. that
upon the head of Christ were many Crowns, which shows the subjection of many
Kings to him: and v. 6. there is a voice of a great multitude, as the voice of
many waters, and as the voice of mighty thundrings, as if all the World did
join together in saying, Alleluia, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns. From
all this it appears that the Church as yet is incomplete: and that greater
numbers of Converts are to be expected; and how should the Promises of the
Churches enlargement in the latter days, be thought upon with joy; and how
earnestly should we pray that those Promises may be accomplished!

2. Those Members which actually are of the Church, are imperfect the very best
of them, as long as they remain in this World. How plainly does the Wise man
speak, Eccl. 7. 20. There is not a just man upon Earth, that does good and
sins not. There is many a just man upon earth; and every just man his
practice is to do good: but there is not one that so does good, as not to be
chargeable with the least evil. The Apostle James that is so much for joining
good works with faith, yet acknowledges in many things we offend all, Jam. 3.
2. And the Apostle Paul, that great Saint and Preacher, speaks thus of himself;
(and surely he would not tell a lie through abundance of humility: Phil. 3. 12,
13. Not as though I had already attained either were already perfect, but
forgetting the things which are behind and reaeching forth to those things
which are before. I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of
God. The imperfection of the Saints and Members of the Church on Earth, will be
evident in several respects.

1. The Knowledge of the Saints is imperfect. He that knew as much as any,
says, We know in part, and prophesy in part, and now we see through a glass
darkly, 1 Cor. 13. 9. 12. David, who was wiser than his enemies, who had more
understanding than all his Teachers, than the Ancients; yet prays still that
God would teach him, that God would open his eyes, and give him understanding,
Psalm. 119. which expressions show a remainder of ignorance in him, a trouble at
it, and a desire after a more perfect instruction.

2. Holiness at present is imperfect in the best of men, as well as Knowledge.
Other Graces cannot be perfect, if Knowledge be not. He that does not know the
evil of sin so fully as he ought, cannot hate it so much as he should. He that
is imperfect in his knowledge of God and Christ, must needs fall short in his
Faith and Love, and holy Fear, and Reverence. There is not one sanctifying
Grace in us, but needs further degrees. The Apostle makes it the constant work
of Believers here below, to be cleansing themselves from all filthiness both of
the flesh and spirit, and to be perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor.
7. 1.

3. The victory over spiritual enemies is not yet fully obtained by militant
Saints. They are combating but they have not conquered, they resist Satan, and
force him many times to flee; but he returns again and renews his assaults: and
the God of peace has not yet done it, though he has promised to tread him under
their feet shortly, Romans 16. 20. They have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts; but though the flesh is fastened to the Cross of Christ,
and therefore the old man is said to be crucified with him; yet the flesh
struggles upon the Cross: the Body of Sin is not quite destroyed, some fleshly
and worldly lusts and affections are stirring which are not totally mortified.
Militant Saints are not as yet complete Conquerours, for their enemies still
make a head, and continue the war, though at length they shall be made more
than Conquerours through him that loved them, Romans 8. 37.

4. The Joys of believers also are imperfect. All tears shall at last be wiped
away from their Eyes, but at present their Eyes are full of them. The worlds
wickedness, and folly in that wickedness; professors degeneracy; the Churches
divisions, and distresses and corruptions; the dreadful tokens and signs of
Gods displeasure, if not of his departing; finally, their own spiritual
distempers, which are so far from being perfectly cured; alas! these are enough
to hinder their joy from being perfect.

5. Their Happiness is as yet but an imperfect Happiness. All the world are
miserable besides, and the Saints are the only happy ones; and yet these by
many degrees are not so happy as they shall be. This sad effect sin has by
coming into the world, that not a man, not the best man can be fully happy,
till got out of the world. The Churches true members are happy indeed, because
God is theirs, Psalm. 144. ult. because Christ is theirs; but they must needs be
happy only in part, because God and Christ are but in part enjoyed.

In the second place I am to show, in what sense the Church should be
continually increasing.

I. The Church should endeavor to increase in numbers, and that the stone cut
out without hands may become a great mountain, and fill the whole earth, Dan.
2. 34, 35. It Is the worlds misery that it hates and keeps at a distance from
the Church of Christ. But if this world were but taken into the Church, and
were brought to believe in the same Jehovah, in the same Jesus, and to yield
Subjection to the same Gospel, what a New and Happy world would there be
presently! This increase of the Church in numbers, is to be endeavored several
ways.

1. Prayer should be constant and very fervent for this increase. All the Sons
and Daughters of Sion should be importunate, that the City of God may be
enlarged; that the Church may not have a barren womb, or dry breasts; but that
by reason of her numerous Offspring she may enlarge the place of her tent, and
without sparing she may lengthen her cords and strengthen her stakes, and
stretch forth the curtains of her habitation, Isa. 54. 2. There is mercy enough
in God, though the miserable sinners that come to him are never so great a
multitude. The fullness of Christ is so infinitely unmeasurable, that it is
sufficient to supply and to enrich the whole empty and beggared race of Adam.
Heaven is of capacity to contain millions of inhabitants more. Let us therefore
pray that the conversion of Souls may be by thousands; and that they may fly
as a cloud, and as doves to their Windows, Isa. 60. 8.

2. The promises of the Churches increase are to be believed, and pleaded. In
what a strain does God speak unto his Church, what Promises does he make her!
Isa. 60. 3, 4, 5. The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the
brightness of thy rising. Lift up thine eyes round about, and see; all they
gather themselves together, they come to thee. Thy Sons shall come from far,
and thy Daughters shall be nursed at thy side. Then shall thou see, and flow
together; and thy heart shall fear and be enlarged: Because the abundance of
the Sea shall be converted unto thee: And the Forces of the Gentiles shall come
to thee. And v. 11. Thy Gates shall be open continually, they shall not be shut
day nor night; that still there may be greater confluence. And v. 16. Thou
shall also suck the Milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the breasts of Kings;
and thou shall know that I the Lord am thy Savior, and thy Redeemer, the
mighty One of Jacob. These and such like Promises are certain; that God who has
made them, is easily able to make them good: His Glory and Name, and his Sons
Honor, are much concerned in fulfilling them: And he is delighted to see his
Saints desirous with a respect to his Name, that these Promises may be
performed.

3. The Church is to be increased by the powerful preaching of the Gospel. This
Preaching by all means is to be encouraged; for Faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10. 17. Those that most preach Christ, and
least themselves, are likeliest to enlarge the Church of God. Those that are
most skilful to convince men of sin, that are wise to win Souls, that know
Christ themselves, and how to reveal him to others, and with greatest zeal do
press the love and practice of Holiness; these are the Pastors after the Heart
of God, and are likely to do as Jacob did to Laban, vastly to increase the
Flock of Christ. The Apostle was so far from hindering the preaching of the
Gospel, that he was glad it was preached by those that did not preach
sincerely: Surely the Church may have some benefit and enlargement by such.
Phil. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18. Some preach Christ even of envy and strife, and others
also of good will: the one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely,
supposing to add affliction to my bonds; but the other of love; knowing that I
am set for the defense of the Gospel. What then I Notwithstanding every way,
whether in pretense, or in truth, Christ is preached; and therein I do rejoice,
yea and will rejoice.

4. The avoiding of Scandal is much for the Churches Increase. The Scandalous
and loose lives of Professors, make the World conclude the Gospel but a
cunningly devised Fable; and harden the men of it in Irreligion, and a profane
contempt of God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. The evil works of such as
are called Christians for many of these latter Ages, has been a great
impediment to the spreading of Christianity. Our Lord says, Woe to the World
because of offenses, Mat. 18. 7. for the World hereby is confirmed in prejudice
and Wickedness, and at last more certainly ruined: But when the Members of the
Church do work out their own Salvation with fear and trembling, and show a
vehement desire after the Worlds Salvation also, this is the way to gain the
World to Christ, and to turn it unto righteousness.

5. The Church is mightily increased by the exemplary conversation of her
Members. When Believers are zealous of good Works, and without rebuke and
blame. When they are patterns of Piety, Justice, Mercy, Meekness, Patience,
Self-denial; when they go about doing good; and by the heavenliness of their
discourse and carriage, declare plainly that they seek a better country than
is to be found in this World; hereby they adorn the Gospel, and render it more
lovely in the Worlds eye, and more likely to be entertained: the ignorance of
wicked and foolish men is silenced by well doing, 1 Pet. 2. 15. nay, they be
forced to a confession, that God is in his Church of a truth; and may at length
consent and desire to be Members of that Church, where there is so much of God,
and of his presence visible and apparent.

2. As the Church should increase in numbers, so all the Members of the Church
should strive to increase more and more in grace and goodness. They should
strongly be induced to this; because of their own imperfection in Grace, which
imperfection fills them many times with inward trouble, and tormenting doubts
and fears; and makes outward affliction but highly necessary. Besides, Holiness
is of such an excellent nature, and so perfective of the Nature of man, that
the strongest desires are to be justified, the most diligent endeavors after
it to be commended.

Grace is increased in the Members of Christ several ways.

1. By a Serious and frequent engaging in those Ordinances which he has
instituted. He that has instituted these, has promised his blessing, and adds
the efficacy. Prayer, Fasting, giving of thanks, receiving the Supper of the
Lord, attending upon the Word preached, and searching the Scriptures, and the
like means of Grace, when seriously used, do exceedingly promote the growth of
a Christian, making him to become strong in Spirit. The Church is the Garden of
God; the Saints are planted there; the Word and Ordinances of Christ are like
the showers from Heaven, and the Husbandmans pains, which makes these Plants to
thrive and flourish. Psalm. 92. Those that be planted in the house of the Lord
shall flourish in the Courts of our God: But still it must be remembered, though
means are to be used, yet we must look beyond them, unto him that has appointed
them, else they will never attain their end, 1 Cor. 3. 7. So then neither is he
that planteth any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase.

2. Grace is increased by the improving of Providence. The Dispensations of
Providence were various toward David; he was exercised with great Severity,
and likewise with great Goodness; we read Psalm. 116. 3. That the sorrows of
Death compassed him, and the pains of Hell gat hold upon him, he found trouble
and sorrow: and v. 10. He was greatly afflicted; in this distress he calls upon
that God who is merciful and gracious, for deliverance, and his calling is
heard, and his Soul is delivered from Death, his Eyes from Tears, and his Feet
from Falling: And now how is his Heart affected! his Graces strengthened! He is
filled with Love, he is resolved to give himself to Prayer as long as he lived,
his Soul is at rest in God who had dealt bountifully with him, he offers the
Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and he cries out, Oh Lord I am thy Servant, truly I
am thy Servant, v. 16. as if he should say, Lord! thou art a Master beyond all
comparison; and as it is my firm resolution, so it is my Happiness and Honor,
as well as Duty to be a Servant to thee.

3. The Covenant of Grace is to be Studied, and the Promises applied in order
to a Christians increase. God has assured his People that he will perfect that
which concerns them, and that he will not forsake the work of his own hands: He
has said, that his Servants shall Spring up as among the Grass, and as Willows
by the Watercourses, Isa. 44. 4. That the Righteous shall hold on his way, and
they that have clean hands shall wax stronger and stronger, Job 17. 9. That
they shall bring forth fruit even in Old Age, and even then be flourishing, and
this shall be to show that the Lord is upright, Psalm. 92. 14, 15. Such Promises
being prized and applied, will make the New Creature full of vigor, and
perseverance will be certain. Hark to the Apostle, Phil. r. 6, 7. Being
confident of this very thing, that he who has begun a good work in you, will
perform it unto the day of Jesus Christ, even as it is meet for me to think
this of you all.

4. Grace is increased by Having recourse unto that fullness which dwells in
Christ. Therefore growing in Grace and growing in the Knowledge of Christ are
joined together; for Christ is full of Grace and Truth, and out of his fullness
says St. John, We all have received and Grace for Grace, Joh. 1. 14, 16. that
is, Grace answerable to that Grace which is in him. Grace is his purchase, he
has it in Possession, he gives it to all that have it, and every new degree is
from the same hand; He is the Object, the Author and the Finisher of Faith,
Heb. 12. 2. They are the most growing and established Saints, that are least
taken with the World, that have least confidence in themselves, that do best
understand, and most look unto Jesus.

5. All impediments of increase must be carefully shunned, as Pride, and sloth
and earthliness, carnal and corrupt affections; if these, or things of like
nature prevail, they will prove to the Soul, what Diseases are to the Body, and
make the Members of Christ to be feeble and languish, depriving them both of
their Strength and Beauty. These are like peccant humors, which must be Purged
if we would have our Souls healthy and prosperous: These are like weights which
must be laid aside, if we will run the Race that is set before us, so as to
obtain the Prize, Heb. 12. 1.

In the third place I am to produce several reasons why the Church should be
continually increasing.

1. This increase is for the Fathers glory, the more Saints there are, God is
honored by the more; and the more any are Saints, he has still the more glory
from them. The stronger the members of Christ grow; their Faith in God is
firmer, their fear more filial, they love him more with their heart, and Soul,
and strength, they walk more humbly with him: all which shows what right
apprehensions they have of him, and that they glorify him as God, believing
his presence, power, mercy, truth and righteousness. That our Lord might
persuade unto fruitfulness and increase, he says Joh. 15. 8. Herein is my
Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples.

2. This increase of the Church is for the honor of Christ the Churches Head.
The largeness of a Dominion, and the multitude of Subjects, is the honor of a
Prince: The more sincere Christians there are, the Kingdom of our Lord is the
more enlarged, and He himself is magnified the more. The Redeemer is glorified
when the Everlasting Gospel runs; when his word which is the Scepter of his
Kingdom is believed and obeyed: when Souls by whole multitudes come flocking to
him, to be justified by his blood, sanctified and healed by his grace, and
saved to the uttermost. How was Christ honored, when after the ten first
Persecutions the Roman Empire submitted to the Faith, the Eagle gave way to the
Cross, and Constantine the Great threw down his Crown at the feet of the Lamb
of God: Then was that Scripture signally fulfilled, though a further
accomplishment is still to be expected, Isa. 55. 5. Behold thou shall call a
Nation that thou know not, and Nations that knew not thee shall run unto
thee, because of the Lord thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel, for he has
glorified thee.

3. In this increase of the Church the operaetion of the Spirit is very
illustrious. He wrought the miracles for the confirmation of the Gospel, and
made it at first to be entertained in the world. Wherever there is true Faith,
it is of his bestowing. Those that are regenerated are said to be born of the
Spirit, Joh. 3. 6. The renewing of a Soul is of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. All
spiritual gifts, all true grace, all solid comforts are from the Spirit. The
more therefore Light is spread, the more largely gifts are distributed, the
more plentiful communication there is of grace, the more peace and joy abounds;
the greater is the Spirits glory. The Nicene Creed calls the Spirit (...), the
Lord and Giver of life. Quot Membrae, tot Miracula; So many members as Christ
has, so many miracles there are of the Spirits working; for he has raised them
all to life, who were once dead in sins and trespasses as well as others.

4. This Increase is for the Churches advantage, therefore it should be
endeavored. It Is matter of joy and praise to Saints, to behold sinners
converted and sanctified, to see Prodigals coming to themselves, and coming
home to their Fathers House; to see strangers and foreigners made
fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God, Ephesians. 2. 19. And
when these Saints perceive, that more of light is imparted to themselves, and
that they are filled fuller with the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus
Christ, to the Glory and praise of God; they must needs apprehend this to be
for their profit, if the truest riches may be called gains, and Pearls of the
greatest price be of any value.

5. The World is benefited by the Churches increase. Not a Soul gathered out of
the World, but something is secured of greater value than the World. If a City
were on fire, and burning apace to the ground, the more persons are saved, the
more Goods are secured, the greater kindness is done to that City; because
these Persons, these Goods escape the fury of the flames. Sin is ruining the
World apace; but all that in time come out from the World, and touch not the
unclean thing, and are incorporated into the Church of Christ; are safe as in a
Sanctuary, shall be delivered from the common destruction, and escape the
vengeance of eternal fire, in which all the wicked must burn for ever.

6. The Angels themselves are concerned at the increase of the Church. The
Apostate Ones are confounded, when by all their subtilty and strength they are
not able to hinder the increase of Christ's Government; nay, that they are so
overruled, that they are made to promote his Kingdom by those very means which
were designed to overthrow it. And the Elect Angels are affirmed to rejoice at
the Repentance and Conversion of a Sinner: Luke 15. 10. Likewise I say unto
you, there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that
repents. And if they are so glad at the Conversion of one, what an accession
would it be to their joy, to behold thousands and millions, added to the Church
of Christ! It Is pleasing to the Angels to behold peace on Earth, and Gods
good will expressing it self in the Salvation of Men, Luke 2. 14. and upon this
account they cry, (...), Glory be to God in the highest.

The Application follows.

USE 1. Of Reproof to them that hinder the Churches increase. The furtherers of
it I am sure are few, the hinderers many; therefore the more are concerned in
the Reprehension.

1. Enemies without endeavor with might and main to hinder the increase of the
Body of Christ. They hate the light, and would fain hinder it from shining;
they are grieved that Jesus is preached, are angry as well as grieved; for they
are unwilling his Subjects should become numerous. The World upon this account
raises Persecution; and how many at such a time do fall away! Mat. 13. 21.
Cyprian laments the pressure of that Persecution which had so woefully wasted
the Flock he was over; and says that positi erant inter plangentium ruinas,
and timentium reliqutas; inter numerosam languentium stragem, and exiguam
stantium paucitatem. L. 4. Ep. 4. Many were ruined, the rest feared, the Church
languished; and few did stand against so furious an assault. We have large
Martyrologies; but if all Apostates were registered, how vast would be the
Catalogues of them! It Is well Tribulation lasts but ten days, a short time;
else the World might tread the Church under. But the Worlds rage is without
reason, against the Church of Christ, which will do no harm, and desires to do
the World the greatest kindness.

2. Hypocrites within are to be reproved, for they hinder the Churches
increase; fitly compared to Vipers, which are said to eat the bowels in which
they were bred. Our Lords anger is very hot, and his words sharp against
Hypocrites, Mat. 23. 13. For they shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men;
they refuse to go in themselves, neither suffer they them that are entering to
go in. They profess high, but when they fall, and notoriously discover their
unsoundness, they wound the reputation of Religion, unto the Churches grief and
disadvantage, and the hardening of the Ungodly in their wickedness; their
Convictions hereby being quite and clean extinguished.

3. The Churches increase is likewise hindered by imprudent Members. Such are
not so careful to avoid appearances of evil themselves; and they blaze abroad
the Infirmities of others, which love should find a Mantle to cover; nay many
times they hear and report the most errant lies and slanders, whereby not only
the Person slandered, but likewise Religion and the Church suffers. These fools
deserve to be lashed severely for their inconsiderate talkativeness, and
uncircumspect walking: And they should remember, that the Disciples of Christ
are to be wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves, Mat. 10. 16.

4. Erroneous Members and Church-dividers are deeply guilty of hindering the
increase of the Church. Error has a natural tendency to division; for they
that speak perverse things, endeavor to draw away Disciples after them, Act.
20. 30. And Division is a grand Impediment to edification. The Church of Christ
after the giving of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost, did grow exceedingly;
and one reason was, because the Multitude of them that believed, were of one
heart, and of one soul; Act. 4. 32. But division weakens the Churches strength,
and turns her own Members against her, by turning them one against another. The
Apostle severely rebukes the Corinthians upon this score, 1 Cor. 3. 3. For ye
are yet carnal; for whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and
divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? q. d. This unpeaceable and
dividing temper makes you act not not like Members of Christ, but like Men of
the World, whom Christ bids his Disciples to beware of, as Enemies to his
Interest and Kingdom. Indeed the Corruptions of others are not to be approved;
yet what is good and sound is to be owned; and we are to be taken with the
Image of Christ in whomsoever we see it shining.

5. Slothful, unfaithful, proud and selfish Pa^tours deserve as sharp a rebuke
as any, because the Churches increase is hindered by these with a witness. Such
seek their own things, not the things of Christ; their own profit, not the
profit of many that they may be saved. It Is ordinary with them, to make the
heart of the righteo^^ sad, whom God has not made sad, and to strengthen the
hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, by
promising him life * Ezekiel. 13. 22. The Prophet prophesies sharply against the
Shepherds of Israel, Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3. 4. Woe to the Shepherds of Israel who feed
themselves, not the flock. The diseased have ye no^ strengthened; neither have
ye healed that which was sick; neither have ye bound up that which was broken,
neither have ye brought again that which was driven away; neither have ye
sought that which was lost: but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them.
Now if the flock be thus neglected, it is likely to be lessened, and the Church
to be brought very low. Oh dreadful account that such Pastors have to give
both of themselves and of the flock, unto the Great Shepherd, at the last day!

USE II. Of encouragement unto the Church of Christ notwithstanding her
Imperfection. Her Spirit should not sink into despondency because perfection is
not yet attained to; but several truths may be offered as grounds of support.

1. That Righteousness which is imputed to the Church of Christ is perfect.
Though their Faith, though their evangelical obedience be imperfect, yet the
Righteousness of Christ, which their faith lays hold on is every way complete.
The obedience of one, that is the Son of God, is sufficient to make many
righteous though never so many do believe, Romans 5. 19. By one offering he has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. The Apostle indeed is
ashamed of his own Righteousness, and afraid to be found in it, and desires to
be found in Christ, and that he might have on that Righteousness which is of
God by faith. The obedience and sufferings of Christ are the Righteousness
imputed to them that believe; and it is called the Righteousness of God, because
God contrived it, and accepts it; and Christ who obeyed and suffered, is not
only man but over all God blessed for ever. Christ has done and suffered enough
to satisfy divine justice, to ransom and save souls; and to obtain eternal
Redemption for us: and here is a firm ground for the Churches consolation.

2. The Sins of the Churches Members are all pardoned; not so much as one is
unforgiven; Col. 2. 13. Having forgiven you all trespasses. Psalm. 103. 12. As
far as the East is from the West so far has he removed all our transgressions
from us. Vxori lis non intenditur. The Church is espoused to Christ, and he has
satisfied the Law and Justice for all her offenses: it may joyfully be said
therefore, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.
1. Her Head and Husband having paid the Churches debts; payment from her is not
expected, shall not be demanded.

3. Though the Churches members are imperfect, yet the least degree of true
grace shall be owned. The smallest Stars are Stars, and are fixed in Heaven as
well as the greatest. The weakest Saints are Saints, and as such shall be
regarded. It Is said of Christ, He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd, he
shall gather the Lambs with his Arm, and carry them in his bosom, Isa. 40. 11.
The feeblest of Christians stan^ in need of cherishing, and they shall have
that they need. Our Lord will not break the bruised reed; nor quench the
smoking flax; until he sends forth judgment unto victory, Mat. 12. 20.

4. The Church of Christ notwithstanding her imperfection, is in a safer state
than Adam was in Innocence. The Union between his Creator and Him, was not so
indissoluble as the Union between Christ and true Believers. Life was promised
to him upon condition of his perseverance in obedience, but he had not a
Promise of Grace to make him persevere: But the Saints have such a Promise; God
has said. He will put his fear in their Hearts, that they shall not depart from
him, Jer. 32. 40. That he will strengthen and uphold them with the right hand
of his righteousness, Isa. 41. 10. That none shall pluck them out of the hand
of Christ, nor out of the Fathers hand, who is greater than all, Joh. 10. 28,
29. That nothing shall be able to separate them from the love of God which is
in Christ Jesus their Lord, Romans 8. ult. Adam was entrusted with a Treasure in
his own keeping; but he lost it, and beggared himself and his whole Progeny:
Believers therefore are not thus trusted; both themselves and their Treasure
are in the hands of him that is able to save to the uttermost, and so both are
secured: Their life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3.

USE. III. Of Advice unto the Church of Christ, and all her true Members.

1. Let their imperfection keep them humble. There is not a Soul without a
stain, nor a Grace without a mixture, nor a Duty without a failing, nor a Saint
without some sin remaining. All therefore, nay, the very best of all, have
reason to be low in their own eyes. The more humble we are, the more our hearts
are suited to our present imperfect state; and the more of Gods reviving
Presence, notwithstanding our imperfection, will be vouchsafed. For, thus says
the High and Lofty One, who inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is holy; I dwell in
the high and holy place; with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit,
to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite
ones, Isa. 57. 15.

2. Let the Churches Members hunger and thirst after a greater measure of
righteousness. Those that to do so, are blessed, for they shall be filled,
says he in whom all Fullness dwells, Mat. 5. 6. This is an hunger truly sacred,
that never ends in starving, but in satisfaction. We should long more for the
Waters of Life; the Soul should thirst more vehemently for the living God,
desiring to behold his glory, and to be changed more fully into his glorious
Image. Such kind of desires widen the Souls capacity, and make it meet for a
larger participation both of Grace and comfort.

3. Let the Church believe and long for that enlargement and glory that is
promised in the latter days; but especially to be translated unto those
Mansions above, which her Head is gone to prepare for her. Let her long that
her Warfare may be well accomplished, her course faithfully finished, and the
Crown of Life and Righteousness received: And to this end, let all her Members
tear the Air, and pierce the Heavens with their cries; Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly, Rev. 22. 20. Thus, of the Second Proposition; That the Body of Christ
is imperfect in this World, and therefore continually should be increasing.

Proposit. III. The Third Proposition follows; That the Body of Christ should
diligently endeavor the edifying of it self. Before the Apostle had used the
Metaphor of a Body; now he uses another Metaphor of an Edifice or Building. The
Church is to edify it self, but the Power to do this is from God; and her Lord,
who acts and strengthens her in this action, lays a just claim to all the
glory. The Church is an Edifice, or an House, but a Spiritual one; therefore
called a Temple. Ephesians. 2. 21, 22. In whom, that is, Christ, all the building
fitly framed together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord: In whom you
also are builded together for an habitarion of God through the Spirit. This
Temple is holy, for God has set apart such as are godly for himself: The
Stones are lively, for all Saints are quickened, to live to God, and act for
him. In this Temple Sacrifices are offered, but they a^e spiritual; Prayers,
Praises, other Duties, and the Heart of him that performs them. And though
these Sacrifices are never so spiritual, yet they are not accepted upon their
own account, but they are acceptable unto God through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5.

In the further handling of this Proposition, I shall First, Show upon what
foundation the Church is to Edify it self. Secondly, To what end this
Edification must be. Lastly, Make Application.

In the first place I am to show, upon what foundation the Church is to edify
it self.

1. The Knowledge of God is styled a Foundation. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Nevertheless the
foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, The Lord knows them that
are his. God has from eternity foreknown and chosen his Church in Christ, that
she should be holy and without blame before him in love, Ephesians. 1. 4. This is a
Foundation laid before the Foundation of the World; and will endure infinitely
longer than the World shall. The Churches Members should give all diligence to
make their calling and Election sure; for if they do these things, they shall
never fall, but an abundant entrance shall be administered to them into the
everlasting Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Now Election is made sure by hearkening
to, and obeying the call of the Gospel, and departing from Iniquity.

2. Christ the Rock, is called a Foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Other Foundation can
no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Though he was set at
naught by the Jewish builders, yet he is the head Stone of the Corner; neither
is there Salvation in any other. The Churches Faith must be firmer in Christ;
her hope in him more and more abundant; and she may build without fear; for the
Foundation will never fail the Superstructure.

2. The Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets is also styled a Foundation, Ephesians.
2. 20. Both were inspired by the Holy Ghost; and the harmony and agreement
between Apostles and Prophets, between the Old Testament and the New, makes the
Foundation more sure. The Church, that she may edify her self, is to eye the
Scripture; then she will build according to the right rule. Unwritten
Traditions that would impose upon her Faith what the Scripture has not
revealed, are to be rejected; and that light within that would lead her away
from the written Word, is no more to be followed than a foolish Night-fire. If
she has Scripture for her Faith and Practice, she has good ground for both; and
both may be justified before the Judge of all the World.

4. Obedience and good Works are called a Foundation. 1 Timothy 6. 19. Laying up
in store for themselves a good Foundation against the time to come, that they
may lay hold on Eternal life. This is done by doing good, by being rich in good
works. Though good works are not meritorious, for Eternal Life is the Gift of
God; yet they are necessary to evidence out Faith, and that the Promises may be
fulfilled * Glory and Immortality is promised to them who by patient
continuance in well-doing seek for it, Romans 2. 7. He builds firm, that builds
his house upon a Rock; and he builds thus, who hears the Words of Christ, and
does them: But he that hears, and does them not, is a foolish man, and builds
his house upon the sand; and when the rain descends, and the winds blow, and
the floods come, and beat upon his house, it will fall, and great will be the
fall of it, Mat. 7. 24, 25, 26, 27.

In the second place I am to tell you, to what end this Edification of the
Church must be.

1. The Church must Edify it self, that it may grow Stronger. The stronger her
Faith is, the more will she Glorify that God in whom she believes: Romans 4. 20.
it is said of Abraham; He staggered not at the Promise of God through Unbelief,
but was strong in Faith, giving glory to God. The stronger her Love, the more
it will constrain her to labor in her Lords work, and cast out the fear of
suffering for his sake; for a strong love is stronger than Death, and has a
most vehement flame; many waters cannot quench it, neither can the floods drown
it, Cant. 8. 6, 7.

2. The Church must Edify it self, that it may become Larger. Prayer should be
instant and constant, and pains should be taken both by Pastors and People, and
Godliness should be both in Form and Power, that so the Mountain of the House
of the Lord, may be established in the top of the Mountains, and exalted above
the Hills, and all Nations may flow unto it, Isa. 2. 2.

3. The Church must Edify it self, that it may become more Beautiful and
Glorious. The great day of the Churches public Marriage to the Lamb, is
approaching; how careful should she be to cleanse and adorn her self, that she
may be found of him, in Peace without spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3. 14. This
Beauty and Glory which the Church is to endeavor after, and to long and hope
for, you have described Rev. 21. 9, 10. Come hither, and I will show thee the
Bride, the Lambs Wife: And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high
Mountain, and showed me that great City the holy Jerusalem, descending out of
Heaven from God, having the Glory of God; and her light was like unto a stone
most precious, even like a Jaspar-stone, clear as Crystal, the walls were
high, the twelve Gates were all Pearls, the Street of the City was pure Gold,
as it were transparent glass: and I saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God
Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it: And the City had no need of the
Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, for the glory of God did lighten it,
and the Lamb is the light thereof. What is the glory of Solomon's Kingdom or
Temple, or of the whole World, if compared with the Beauty of the new
Jerusalem, which the most valuable things in nature, as Gold and Jewels, are
used to set forth, but fall exceeding short of what they signify?

I shall now make a brief Application.

USE I. It is matter of great Lamentation, that the Church at present is so far
from Edifying of it self, that it is doing quite the contrary; it is about to be
Felo de se, to destroy and to pull it self down to the ground, if the God of
Wisdom, Love and Peace, do not hinder. The Poet looked upon it as truly
lamentable, that the Roman State was engaged in a Civil War where there could
be no Triumph after Victory; that Pompey and Caesar, both brave, both Roman
Generals, should fight so eagerly, so bloodily one against the other: but
surely it is one of the saddest sights in the World, to see the Members of the
Body of Christ at variance, and biting and devouring, and doing that to one
another, which the siercest Persecution was never able to effect. Alas for Woe!
that the Church of Christ should be militant, not only because of her fighting
with Enemies, but because of the Discord among her own Members. Suis and ipsa
Ecclesia viribus ruit.
The Church employes her own force to her own ruin. Pastors are set against
Pastors, Saints against Saints, Sermons against Sermons, nay, Prayers against
Prayers, and Sion is become like a Babel of Confusion! -- Quis talia fando
Temperet a lachrymis? --


Well may the Prophets words be here applied, Ezekiel. 19. 14. This is a
lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.

USE II. Of Advice. Let the Churches Edification be minded: Let all study and
follow the things that make for Peace, and things wherewith one may Edify
another, Romans 14. 19. It Is not below the greatest of men to put their hands to
this work, of Building. the House of God; indeed it should strenuously be set
about by All, Magistrates, Ministers, People.

1. The Churches Edification is to be minded by Magistrates. Their Authority
should be subservient to the Authority of Him by whom they Reign, Prove. 8. 15.
By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice. The Laws of Kingdoms and States
should always promote and encourage the Progress of the Gospel. Truth and
Holiness do ever deserve the countenance of Authority, but sin is worthy of a
frown. Those Princes who are most for the Churches welfare, do most consult
their own; If Righteousness exalts a Nation, and sin be the reproach and ^^^ine
of any People, Prove. 14. 34; then the more the Church is Edified, the more
firmly both Throne and Kingdom are established. Hezekiah his Zeal for Religion
was attended with a blessed Prosperity, 2 Chronicles. 31. 21. In every work that he
began in the Service of the house of God, and in the Law, and in the
Commandments, to seek his God, he did it with all his Heart, and he prospered.

2. The Churches Edification is to be minded by Ministers: it is their office
more peculiarly to be Laborers together with God, in his Husbandry and
Building, 1 Cor. 3. 9. They should Pray, Preach, Live so as to Edify.
Reputation and worldly advantage are poor things; Edification! Edification is
most truly considerable, and should sound in their Ears, should be upon their
Hearts, and endeavored with their utmost abilities. They must be blameless as
the Stewards of God, and faithfully dispense food to Souls; They must not be
Self-willed, not soon Angry, not given to Wine, no Strikers, not given to
filthy L^cre; but lovers of Hospitality, lovers of good Men, Sober, Just, Holy,
Temperate, Tit. 1. 7, 8. Then they are like to Build the House of God indeed.

3. The People also should endeavor the Edification of the Church: They should
by a good example provoke one another to love and good works; No corrupt
Communication should proceed out of their Mouths, but that which is good to the
use of Edifying, and which may administer Grace to the hear^rs, Ephesians. 4 29. They
are to please one another for Edification: Romans 15. 2. And in all Reproofs let
Love and a desire to Edify be apparent in the Reprover.

I conclude with a few Arguments to persuade all to Edify the Church.

1. The Church of Christ is hugely out of repair, the breaches are great, and
there is much rubbish to be removed: and where there is so much work to be
done, the Laborers should be the greater number, and the more diligent.

2. While you are building his Church the Lord himself will be with you, and
then no matter for opposition. Greater is he that is in you, than he that is in
the World. When Nehemiah was building Jerusalem, he was derided, he was
opposed, but he was not discouraged, neither did the work cease; and the
Enemies were forced to an acknowledgment that God was with him.

3. Your labor shall not be in vain, either as to success or as to reward.
Some good you shall do, who do desire it, and God takes notice how much more
you would do, and will reward you accordingly. The Lord is too good a Master to
suffer any of his faithful laborers and servants to want encouragement. David
had it in his heart to build him an house; and God establishes the house of
David, 1 Chronicles. 17. 23. and his family was upheld, till Christ the Son of David
came. I have done with the third Proposition; That the Body of Christ should
diligently endeavor the edifying of it self.

Proposit. IIII. The fourth and last Proposition is this. The more Love abounds
among the members of the Church, the more the whole Body will be edified; or
more briefly thus: Love is exceedingly for the Churches edification. I might be
large in discoursing of Love to Christ, and manifest how this will constrain
all in whom it is, to endeavor the edification of his Body, and to seek the
welfare of those for whom he died. One who loves the Lord Jesus in sincerity,
how can he choose but love all Saints though of different persuasions, since
notwithstanding that difference they are all so dear to him, that he gave his
life a ransom for them all; and the blood of God was shed for every one of
them, that there might be a price paid sufficient for their Redemption.

But the Apostle is to be understood in my Text of Christians love one to
another. This is that Charity which the Scripture calls so loudly for: Joh. 13.
34. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another; as I have
loved you, that ye also love one another; the command is doubled, and called a
new commandment, because though delivered long before, yet here it is delivered
with a new example, that of Christ himself, (as I have loved you) and
consequently with a new and strongly enforcing motive. The Apostle Peter gives
this charge, 1 Pet. 4. 8. Above all things have fervent charity among your
selves. Gifts though excellent, may be abused, and perversely employed, to
instill Error, and rend the Church of God. Knowledge if it be alone, will not
profit but puss up him that has it: But Charity edifieth, 1 Cor. 8. 1. Love is
greatly beneficial; its acts are pure, and peaceable, and gentle, full of mercy
and good fruits; and it is against the very nature of it to work ill to any.

In the handling of the Proposition, I shall First, Discourse concerning the
Nature of Love. Secondly, Discover the Properties which the Scripture
attributes to it. Thirdly, Demonstrate how it is for the Churches Edification.
Fourthly, Show the vanity of those excuses that are made for the want of love.
Lastly, Apply.

In the first place I am to discourse concerning the Nature of love. There is a
fourfold Love, Carnal, Natural, Civil, Spiritual.

1. Carnal, and impure: Thus Amnon loved his fair Sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13. 1.
and Sampson fell in love with Delilah; but this impure affection cost both
these their lives, and brought the one and the other to an untimely end. This
may more properly be called Lust than Love; and in whatever heart it is
harbored, how does it defile and harden! If but a spark of lust be let alone,
what a flame may quickly follow, which may consume the Estate, the Reputation,
the Body and the Soul: it may indeed be extenuated; but it is threatened with the
wrath of God. Not only for fornication but for evil concupiscence, comes the
wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience, Col. 3. 5, 6. When Lust is
suffered to conceive and bring forth actual Adultery, how do the Adulterer and
his Strumpet show their hatred one to the other! The mischief they do
themselves is inconceiveable: and how do they defile each the others Body,
wound each the others Conscience, and delight in that whereby they damn each
the others Soul!

2. There is a Love which is Natural. I mean Natural affection. To have this
natural affection is a duty, for it is planted in the heart by the wise and
gracious God, as that which has a mighty tendency to the conservation of
Mankind: therefore to be without natural affection, the Apostle makes one of
the crimes of them who were given up to a reprobate mind, to do those things
which were not convenient, Romans 1. 28, 31. Natural affection we owe unto
Relations; which debt if we refuse to pay, we shut our ears to the dictates of
Nature, as well as the word of Christ, and become worse than Infidels, nay
worse than the beasts that perish. Parents must love their Children, Children
their Parents, Husbands and Wives be full of affection to one another: But
Grace should spiritualize this Natural affection. Not only the persons of our
Relations must be loved, but their Souls; and their eternal Salvation most
earnestly desired and endeavored; and if we cannot bear the thoughts of a
Parents, Husbands, Wives, or Child's pain, poverty, slavery, starving; the
thoughts of their being eternally damned, should be much more intolerable! and
all means should be used to prevent it.

3. There is a Love which may be styled Civil. This is one of the great bonds
of Humane Societies, whereby they are kept together; whereas hatred and
discord, do first divide and then destroy them. This Amor patriae, love to our
Country, the more it prevails, the more will our Country flourish. In a
Kingdom, the whole should be concerned for every individual; and every
individual for the whole; and all the parts for one another. No member should
hastily be concluded a gangrened one; that is

Ense recidendum, ne pars sincera trahatur; Presently to be cut off, lest the
whole Community be endangered. Draco is not looked upon as one of the wisest
Legislators, who made almost every Offense capital, and therefore is said to
have writ his Laws in blood. A mild Government, such as our English is, does
best suit with Christianity, and is likeliest to attain the end of Magistracy,
the Highest Sovereigns glory, the King and Kingdoms safety. Love should make
all the Subjects of a Kingdom to consider the Relation they have to, and their
concern in one another; and no Plots and Conspiracies should be allowed; but
only designs and endeavors of one another wealth and welfare; especially the
truest wealth, and the welfare that is eternal.

I cannot but here bewail the want of this Civil love, and the variance that is
in my Native Country. New Names of discrimination are invented, which our
forefathers knew not. Breaches grow wide as the Sea; who but the God of Love
and Peace can heal them? A perverse Spirit mingles it self among different
Parties; and differences are kept up, and still increased with an unusual
animosity. When Phaeton had set the World on fire, the Poet by an elegant
Prosopopoeia brings in the Earth it self thus pleading, Hosne mihi fructus?
hunc fertilitatis honorem, Officiique refers? etc. --

And may not England, which at this day is in a flame of Contention, be
introduced thus speaking to her Inhabitants?

O Englishmen, what means this more than civil Discord and Fury among you? In
Me you have been born and bred: And considering the temperateness of the
Climate, the fruitfulness of the Soil, the variety of Delights; where can you
find a better Land, that might reasonably be wished to have been the Land of
your Nativity? Be not I beseech you so unnatural, as to fill and load me with
sin, and to make me desolate, a Land not inhabited. The Corn I bear, the
abundance of pleasant Fruit I produce, the Beasts I nourish for your food, the
wholesome Air you breath in; for all these, it would be an unworthy requital to
turn me into an Aceldama, a Field of Blood. I have been a Land of Light to you,
as well as fruitful: The Sun of Righteousness has shined as clearly and
gloriously in Me, as in any Nation under Heaven. Oh sin not, quarrel not away
that which is my truest glory, that which is your greatest Privilege. Study
and mind the things which concern your peace: Make your peace with God by faith
in his Son, and that faith accompanied with Repentance and Reformation; and be
at peace among your selves; and then you need not fear your foreign foes: And
I should again become a Land of Renown; and be both feared and courted all
Europe over.

4. There is a Love which is Spiritual: The grounds and attractives of this are
Spiritual. And this kind of love the Text speaks of. Christians Hearts should
be filled with it: And the more this is expressed, the more the Church must
needs be edified. The Nature of this Love I shall explain in these Particulars.

1. Love is a Grace wrought by the God of all grace, 1 John 4. 7. Let us love
one another; for love is of God, and every one that loves is born of God, and
knows God. That Spirit which brings a man to the knowledge of God, and
regenerates him, and makes him a New Crea^^re, works in him this Grace of Love;
there^^re we read. That the fruit of the Spirit is (...), Gal. 5. 22. Though
Good Nature be an cellent thing, and the dispositions of many incline them to
be full of loving kindness; yet this natural sweetness of temper does greatly
differ from Christian Charity. The best Nature is regardless of the Soul;
neither is it concerned for it self or others, beyond the things of sense, and
of this present World. The Apostle thus describes a state of Nature, in which
he sometimes was as well as others, Tit. 3. 3. We our selves were sometimes
foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in
malice and envy, hateful and hating one another. So that true love to others is
of an Heavenly Original.

2. Love is in Obedience to the Divine Command. Christians love one another,
because their Lord and Savior has commanded them, Joh. 15. 12. This is my
Commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved you: Both Law and Gospel
insist upon this. The Sum of the second Table of the Law, is this, Thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self. And by the Gospel this Law is established.
Faith in Christ therefore and Love are joined. 1 John 3. 23. And this is his
Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and
love one another as he gave us Commandment. Obedience to the Command sanctifies
our love to our Neighbor, and renders it not only more profitable to him, but
acceptable to God himself. When we love others, that Gods will may be
fulfilled, and he may be pleased, and because of the Image of God and Christ
which we see in them; then we love truly: And this is the meaning of that, 1 John 5. 2. By this we know that we love the Children of God, when we love God,
and keep his Commandments. When love to God, and a care to keep his Laws,
induce us to love his Children, because he bids us, and for his sake.

3. Love implies a Mortification of contrary Passions. The Poet says, Virtus
est vitium fugere. Virtue is, to fly from Vice: So may I say, Love is, to fly
from Anger, Wrath, Malice, Bitterness, Envy, Revenge, which are sins of such a
nature, that they carry their punishment in their bowels, and make an Hell as
well as deserve one. The darkness of the night is chased away when the day
returns, and the Sun rises; sickness is removed, when health is restored; and
in like manner those sinful and corrupt passions, which benight the Soul, and
are the diseases of it, are purged out, where this Grace of Love is indeed
infused. The Apostle plainly shows this, Ephesians. 4. 31. compared with Chap. 5. 2.
In the former place he says, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and
clamor be put away, with all kind of malice. In the latter he says, Walk in
love, as Christ also has loved us, and gave himself for us. Compare also Col.
3. 8. with v. 14. and you may perceive, that we must put off anger, wrath,
malice, when we put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness.

4. Love implies an Inclination to Union. The nature of it is to unite and knit
things together. Thus by the love of Friendship, the Soul of Jonathan was knit
with the Soul of David, 1 Samuel 18. 1. and the Hearts of Christians are knit
together by this excellent Grace of Love, Col. 2. 2. Union is of God, and is
indeed the Churches strength. The bundle of rods in the Fable, while they
remained bound together, could not be broken; whereas every single one might be
snapt asunder with ease. So far as the Church is divided, so far it is certainly
and dangerously weakened. There is an admirable Union in the Godhead: Three
distinct Persons are in one incomprehensibly glorious Nature. A wonderful Union
also in Christ himself; two distinct Natures in one Person and Mediator; and
these two Natures infinitely more differing than Earth and Heaven, than the Sun
and a Molehill; and yet behold them inseparably united. The Churches Union is
Mystical; they are Many Members, but love makes them one Body; for it makes
them of one heart, and of one Soul. Love alters the contentious and cruel
nature, and inclines to Union and Peace. So that, to use the Prophets Phrase,
The Wolf dwells peaceably with the Lamb, the Leopard lies down with the Kid;
the Calf and the young Lion and the Fatling together; and a little Child may
lead them: the Cow and the Bear feed, their young ones lie down together; and
the Lion eats straw like the Ox: the sucking Child plays on the hole of the
Asp; and the weaned Child puts his hand on the Adders den; so far as love
prevails, there is no hurting nor destroying one another in all Gods holy
Mountain, Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. Christ prayed for this Union, as that which
would be for the Churches benefit, and for the Worids Conviction, that he came
forth from God. John 17. 21. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in
Me; and I in Thee; that they also may be one in us, that the World may believe
that thou have sent me. How needful is Love to unite Christians, and to make
them one; since divisions strike at Christ himself, and harden the World in its
infidelity!

5. Love enlarges the Heart, and frees it from the bonds of selfishness; and
makes its desire others welfare as well as our own. Love to our Neighbor
breaths forth in servent wishes, that it may be well with him both in Time, and
to Eternity. We are in every respect to consider our Brethren; and true love
will make us long that every way they may be benefited; that they may not want
any needful fecular comfort and encouragement; especially that they may be
blessed with all Spiritual blessings: And above all that they may attain
Eternal Happiness and Salvation. The Apostles love vents it self in a Prayer
for the Corinthians temporal prosperity and increase. 2. Cor. 9. 10. Now he
that mimistereth seed to the Sower, both Minister brend for your food and
multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your Righteousness. So St.
John writing to his beloved Gaius, wishes him health and prosperity, 3 John 2.
Beloved, I wish above all things that thou may prosper and be in health, even
as thy Soul prospers. But the Apostles wishes that Souls might be sanctified
and saved, were most vehement, and most pathetically expressed, Romans 10. 1.
Brethren my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel, is that they might be
saved. Phil. 1. 8. God is my record how greatly I long after you all in the
bowels of Jesus Christ. Gal. 4. 19. My little Children of whom I travel in
birth again until Christ be formed in you. Behold how the Apostle loved Souls!
I don't wonder that he wishes his love as a blessing to the Church; 1 Cor. 16.
24. My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.

6. Love is the fulfilling of the Law, the doing of which is so much for our
Neighbors benefit, Romans 13. 8. He that loves another, has fulfilled the Law.
As love to God includes the whole first table of the Law, so love to our
Neighbor includes the second: with reason it is called (...), the fulfilling of
the Law, for it causes an affectionate and obediential respect unto every
Commandment of the second table, and there is not one of these precepts but
it is hugely for the good of Mankind.

1. Love has a regard ^o the Honor and Authority of Others. That honor which
is due to Natural Parents, love is ready to yield. They that were instrumental
in giving us our very Being, and that nourished us with such tenderness and
care when we were not abl^ to shift for our selves, may rightfully challenge
obedience from us. Upon a supposition that Parents are fallen into decay, that
piety that Children show them in relieving them is called a Requiting them, 1 Timothy 5. 4. so that Childrens disobedience as it is unnatural, so it has a great
deal of ingratitude in it.

Love ascends higher than our Natural Parents, and reaches the very Thrones
where Kings and Princes are placed. Kings are Patriae Patres, Fathers of their
Country; all the inhabitants of a Kingdom are the Children of the King, and as
a Common Father their very hearts should love and reverence him. It was not a
Court complement, or a strain of Rhetoric, but an expression of religious
Loyalty, when the Prophet called the Anointed of the Lord the breath of the
peoples nostrils, Lam. 4. 20. and signifies how dear his life should be unto
them all. Love will cause tribute and custom to be willingly paid, fear and
honor to be rendered, Romans 13. 7.

Christian Princes, according as it was prophetically promised, Isa. 49. 23.
(...)
are Ecclesiae Nutritij, the Churches Nursing Fathers. The Church of Christ in
this world is not arrived to such mat^uity, but it stands in need of nursing;
the Magistrates care is needful, and his Authority is a good fence unto the
Christian faith. And if the Doctrine of the Gospel has a legal establishment,
how should this endear the Supreme Magistrate unto all inferiors. Where
Christian love reigns in the hearts of Subjects, there Christian Kings will
reign with greater security. Love and rightly informed Conscience wherever
found, will do more than Rods and Axes (though these are also necessary) to
support and defend the Civil Government.

2. Love has a regard to the Lives of Others. The guilt of blood is great, the
cry of blood is loud. Murder! how does it wound the Murderers Conscience, and
defile the very land which receives the blood of him that is murdered! Love
utterly abhorrs cruelty and slaughter. It considers the meekness and gentleness
of Christ. When James and John would by miraculous fire have consumed a
Samaritan village that would not receive their Lord, He rebukes them, and says
ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of; for the Son of man is not come to
destroy men's lives but to save them, Luke 9. 55, 56. Love is so far from
thirsting after blood, that it will not allow of malice in the heart; nay rash
and causelefs anger it dislikes, for that will make a man in danger of the
judgment, Mat. 5. 22. Were but love every where revived, it would put an end to
the Iron one, and cause the Golden age to return, Swords would be beaten into
Plough-shares, and Spears into Pr^ning-Hooks, and Nations would not learn War
any more.

3. Love will not violate others chastity. Lust is strongly inclined to such a
violation; but the grace of love is of an holy and clean nature, and abhorrs
all obsceneness. It is so far from consenting to defile another body, that it
will not allow the heart where it is, by a filthy thought or desire to be
defiled: for our Lord says, Whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after her,
has committed adultery with her already in his heart, Mat. 5. 28. Love looks
upon the bodies of Christians as Members of Christ, as temples of the Spirit;
now the Members of Christ are not to be polluted, the temples of the Spirit are
not to be profaned. How little of true love is there in this lustful Age, in
this adulterous generation! An affection that is indeed Christian, is rarely to
be found; but a reprobate and brutish concupiscence is very rise both in City
and Country, though hereby both are ripening apace for vengeance; Jer. 5. 7,
8, 9. They assembled themselves by troops in the harlots houses, they were as
fed Horses in the morning, every one neighed after his Neighbors Wife; Shall I
not visit for these things, says the Lord, and shall not my soul be avenged on
such a nature as this?

4. Love will not steal away the substance of another. It abhors to be
injurious to any; it is for following that which is altogether just. It is
ready to distribute, willing to communicate to the poor; according to that
charge, 1 Timothy 6. 18. and the poorer any are, it is so much the more
communicative. Love is liberal; for he that sows sparingly shall reap
sparingly, he which sows bountifully shall reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9. 6. But
though it will give away pounds to them that are needy, it dares not unjustly
take away a penny or a farthing from another though never so wealthy. Solomon
tells us that a false balance is not good, and diverse weights are an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 20. 23. and they are also an abomination unto
Love. No duty more clearly discovered by the light of nature, than to do
justly; and what does God in his written word more expressly require? the
unrighteous being plainly threatened with the loss of the Kingdom of Heaven;
and what poor and petty things are their unjust gains compared with such a
Kingdom! Wronging another, though it be in so sly a manner, that humane eyes
observe it not, humane laws cannot punish it; yet will be overtaken with divine
Vengeance; 1 These. 4. 6. That no man go beyond and desraud his brother in any
matter; because the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned
you and testified. Love to our Neighbor implies a Love of Justice, is to give
our Neighbor his due. Love can as soon cease to be Love, as begin to be
Injurious. Nay, if a man has heretofore been guilty of Injustice, it will
incline and constrain him to make restitution; for, The wicked must restore the
Pledge, and give again what he has robbed, and walk in the Statutes of Life;
then he shall live, he shall not dye, Ezekiel. 33. 15.

5. Love is very tender of others Names and Reputation. It detests all manner
of Lying, as that which is an abomination to God, Prove. 6. 17. and exposes the
Liar himself to the burning lake: Rev. 21. 8. But a slanderous or malicious
lie, that wounds the Name, and murders the Reputation of another, it hates
exceedingly; for this is an abomination most abominable, and more against the
very letter of the Law, Tho^ shall not bear false witness against thy
Neighbor. The Name of a man ought to be very dear to him, especially if he be
a Christian; because God, and Christ, and the Gospel are concerned in it: A
Christian cannot be aspersed without some aspersion on Christianity it self.
Love is very wary, and that with great reason, and will not cast into the
precious Ointment a dead Fly, to make it send forth an evil savor. Love
hinders the Tongue from evil speaking, and makes it subject to the Law of
kindness. Love is so far from raising a false report of another, that it dares
not take it up, much less spread it all abroad. The Citizen of Sion who shall
dwell with God both here and for ever, this is part of his Character; He
speaks the truth in his heart, he back-biteth not with his tongue, nor does
evil to his neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor, Psalm.
15. 2, 3.

Light may as well become darkness, as Love be guilty of Lying and malicious
Defamations. Professors ears are ready to tingle when they hear the sound of
hellish Oaths, and horrid Execrations, wretched men making bold with the Life
of God, the blood and wounds of Christ, and hardly a sentence is pronounced
without an Imprecation that God may damn them: But these Professors would do
well to consider, that the same Mouth of Truth which has forbid and threatened
Cursing and Swearing, has forbid and threatened Lying and Slandering; and if we
observe how much injury may be done by a slanderous tongue, we shall not wonder
that the throats of such Slanderers are compared to open Sepulchers, and their
Tongues to whetted Swords and sharpened Arrows, and the Poison of Asps is said
to be under them.

6. Love is contented with its own, and hinders us from coveting what belongs
to another. Sinful lustings and desires after that which is our neighbors,
precipitate unto those acts whereby he is injured; thus Ahabs inordinate desire
after Naboths Vineyard, makes him a Murderer of Naboth, and that with many
aggravations, that he might enjoy it. Love breeds contentation, and instead of
coveting what is another, it wishes him both a quiet possession, and an holy
improvement; and Love expelling these inordinate lustings, it plucks up the
very root of bitterness from whence do commonly grow all those injuries that
the Sons of men do one to another. Thus Love is Eagleeyed to observe whatever
God in his Law has commanded for our neighbors good, and since the wise and
gracious Lawgiver has manifested his care of our neighbor, in fencing his
Life and all that is dear to him with so many Commandments, Love rationally
inferrs, it ought to be our care not to break this fence, but to keep all these
Commandments without exception.

7. Love breeds sympathy when our fellow Christians are in misery: It makes us
fear least harm befall the Church of God, and when the Church is actually under
Affliction, it causes us in that affliction to be afflicted. Love is the great
Law of Christ, and Chistian Sympathy is a fulfilling it, Gal. 6. 2. Bear ye one
another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ. The Captive Jews their
Harps were out of Tune, and their Hearts had little list to Mirth and Music;
nay, By the rivers of Babylon they wept when they remembered Sion, Psalm. 137. 1,
2. Love easily melts the heart of a Saint into sorrow, when other Saints are in
sadness and calamity; nay, it is re^dy to put on bowels when it sees any in
misery. This Sympathy of Love is a real thing, and shows it self in a
forwardness to relieve and help. Love enlarges the Heart in Prayer for the
distressed Church of Christ, and all his Members; it makes us in the Churches
languors ready to faint and dye away our selves; Love draws forth our
Compassion toward the divided and distressed Land of our Nativity: and in some
it arises to so high a degree, that they are ready (such are their holy
Agonies) to wish Their Names blotted out of the Book of ^ife, and themselves
ac^ursed from Christ, rather than England should become desolate, rather than
God should depart, and the glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ be removed!

8. Love makes us to delight in the Communion of Saints. Sin has brought a
great deformity and unloveliness upon Mankind; the Scripture speaks thus of
Men, considered in their natural State, They are all gone aside, they are
altogether become filthy, there is none that does good, no not one, Psalm. 14.
3. But the Grace of God lias made a difference between the Saints and other
men, they have put off the old man which is corrupt according to deceitful
lusts, and they put on the new man which after God is created in Righteousness
and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 22. 24. Now this Holiness makes them truly amiable.
Love makes us pity the World that lies in wickedness, but to delight in those
who by Regeneration are called out of the World, and made New Creatures. David,
though a King, looked upon Saints as the excellent ones, and his delight was all
in them, as the most eligible and suitable Society, Psalm. 16. 3. Love is
exceedingly pleased with the holy and unblameable and exemplary Lives of
others, it finds a Melody and Sweetness in their gracious and edifying
Discourses, when their Hearts are warm, and their Graces are in vigorous
exercise; the delight is greatest when Saints are most like themselves,
discovering most of real Sanctity, and least of sinful Infirmity. Love is for
Communion with all Saints, though of different persuasions: He that likes
Saints of his own Judgment only, it is a sign he is fond of his own Opinion,
and that his Complacency is not so truly in the Image of God, wherever it
shines. It Is want of light that makes Saints of different sentiments in
Religion, and it is want of Love that makes them so shye, to look so strangely,
to speak so strangely, and to act so strangely one toward another.

9. Love causes a joy in the good of others. In the natural Body if one Member
be honored, all the Members rejoice with it, 1 Cor. 12. 26. Christians in like
manner are to rejoice with them that do rejoice, Romans 12. 15. It was an
excellent Spirit in John the Baptist, and it argued the Truth of his Love to
the Messiah, of whom he was the forerunner, that he rejoiced to see Christ
increase, though he himself decreased, Joh. 3. 29, 30. The Apostle was
persuaded of the Corinthians affection to him, when he said, I have confidence
in you all, that my joy is the joy of you all, 2 Cor. 2. 3. The more Love
abounds, the more the joy of one Christian will be the joy of every one. Love
rejoices to see the Spirit of God poured out in the most plentiful manner, to
see useful and excellent gifts distributed to others. It is really glad of
their highest seize, their enlargements, their comforts, their honor and
esteem following upon all this. We are all Members one of another; and why
should we not rejoice in one another honor, since we are really honored one
in another; and the honor of all redounds at length to our Lord Jesus Christ,
who is the Head of all?

10. Love covers a multitude of sins and Infirmitie^, 1 Pet. 4. 8. Not that
there is any merit in this Grace of Charity, to deserve the pardon of sin in
our selves; but instead of spreading the faults of others, it spreads a veil
over them. Love makes us tenderhearted and kind, ready to forgive others, as
we our selves for Christ's sake have been forgiven. And indeed the offenses and
injuries done to us by others are but like the debt of a few pence, compared
with our offenses against God, which amount to many Millions of Talents. The
Apostle Peter asked Christ, Lord, how often shall my Brother sin against me,
and I forgive him? till seven times? Jesus says unto him, I say unto thee, not
till seven times, but until seventy times seven, Mat. 18. 21, 22. Some think
that there is allusion to the custom of the Jews, to show favor every seventh
year, but especially in the year of Jubilee. As there is a greater measure of
light in the Christian Church than there was in the Jewish, so ought there to
be a greater measure of love. We must not only forgive to seven times, or seven
times seven, but seventy times seven; a certain ^umber for an uncertain;
intimatin^ we must pardon our trespassing Brother without any stint or
limitation. Our Lord calls the time of the Gospel (...), the acceptable year,
Luke 4. 19. Christians should abhor all manner of revenge, and be as
charitably inclined to pass by their Brethrens faults, as if their life were a
perpetual Jubilee.

Where is the love of those, who not only harbor in their hearts a grudge
against their Brethren, but their mouths are like Trumpets to sound forth their
failings. Nay, they tarry not to examine whether failings or no; but boldly and
blindly conclude them to be such, and proclaim and exclaim against them: Nay,
their eager tongues tarry not for a certain Information; but whether reports to
the disparagement of others be true or false, they make them run like
wildfire. What Is become of Love the mean while? Love hi^es a multitude of
sins, but these persons will not conceal one: Love covers real Crimes, but these
forbear not spreading false reports. The Tongue by Drexelius is called Orbis
Phaethon, the Phaethon of the World, that sets it in a flame. If as the Apostle
says, an unruly tongue defiles the whole body, and he that seems religious,
and bridles not his tongue, does but deceive his own heart, and his Religion is
in vain, Jam. 1. 26. Let a multitude of Professors at this day, tremble, and be
astonished, and cry out, Who among us shall be saved?

11. Love is projecting and designing the good of others. Thus the Apostle
abased himself that others might be exalted; and sought not his own profit, but
the profit of many, that they might be saved, 1 Cor. 10. 33. Love works no
ill to his neighbor; but is very fruitful in contriving, and operative in
promoting his Neighbors welfare. Love is not in not in word and in tongue
only, but in deed and in truth, 1 John 3. 18. It will not only say, depart in
peace, be ye warmed and filled, but it is ready to cloth the naked, and to feed
the hungry: nay, it devises liberal and charitable things; and considers the
wants of Souls as well as Bodies, cordially, according to its capacity;
endeavoring that both may be supplied. The Apostles love to the Corinthians
was very active, notwithstanding a woeful failing on their side. 2 Cor. 12. 14,
15. I seek not yours, but you; and I will very gladly spend and be spent for
you; (in the Greek it is (...), for your souls) though the more abundantly I
love you, the less I be loved. Thus have I explained the Nature of Love.

In the Second place I am to speak of the Properties which the Scripture
attributes to it, and requires should be in Love.

1. Love must proceed from a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1. 5. A heart must of necessity
be made a new one, before this Grace of Love can dwell there. If Satan cannot
make us hate our Brother, he will endeavor to defile our Love. There is need
of the greater care, that our Love be not defiled by selfishness, or lust and
filthiness. Our affections should be pure and clean; as Angels may be conceived
to love one another. All impure motions must be detested utterly; and our
hearts being first circumcised to love a God of Holiness, must love Saints for
their holiness sake. Our love should always have an holy aim, and never
degenerate, so as to design the polluting of others, or our selves with them.

2. Love must be joined with a good Conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 5. A Christian should
not be conscious to himself of any sinful or by-ends that he has in his love to
others. He must not have persons in admiration because of advantage; nor allow
of any Hypocrisy, which Conscience cannot choose, if tender, but condemn.
Therefore says the Apostle, Let love be without dissimulation, Romans 12. 9.
Conscience observes whether our inward affection answers our speeches, our
shows, and our pretenses; and should be able to bear witness of our integrity.
Our love to our neighbors should be for Christ's sake, and should make us to
pursue the ends for which Christ died on their account.

3. Love must flow from faith unfeigned. In that forecited place, 1 Timothy 1. 5.
Now the end of the Commandment is Charity out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned. There must be a firm belief of Gods
good will toward men, of Christ's love to his Church, so as to give himself for
its Redemption and Salvation, and that he much insists upon this Command, that
Christians should love one another; and when love is the product of this
belief, then it is right, then it is acceptable. The Apostle gave thanks without
ceasing in the behalf of the Ephesians, when he heard of their faith in the
Lord Jesus, and love to all the Saints, Ephesians. 1. 15, 16. How can he refuse to
love any one Saint, who unfeignedly believes that Christ died for all;
especially if withal he be upon good grounds persuaded, that Christ loved him,
und gave himself for him.

4. Love must be fervent, 1 Pet. 1. 22. Seeing ye have purified your Souls in
obeying the truth through the Spirit, unto the unfeigned love of the Brethren,
see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently. It Is ill with the
Body if the natural heat abates; it argues a dangerous decay in the new
Creature, if Love wax cold. If Christians Love one toward another languish,
proportionably there will be also a languishing of their love to Christ
himself; and this is very perilous. When there was not a fervency, but
lukewarmness in Laodicea, Christ threatens to spue her out of his mouth, Rev.
3. 16. When Ephesus had left her first love, he says, I will come unto thee
quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent, Rev.
2. 4, 5. The great love of God in Christ, his frequent injunctions that love
may continue, the excellency, sweetness, usefulness, and even absolute
necessity of love for the Churches conservation; all this should be as
perpetual fuel to maintain this holy fire.

5. Christians Love must be Brotherly: Christ says to his Disciples, All ye
are Brethren, Mat. 23. 8. The whole Body of Believers is called (...), the
Brotherhood, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Christians are all Children of the same heavenly
Father, who by one Spirit, according to his abundant mercy has begotten them
again to a lively hope; all of them have Christ to be their Elder Brother, and
are born again of the same seed which is incorruptible; how reasonable then are
those injunctions, Love as Brethren, 1 Pet. 3. 8. And let Brotherly love
continue, Heb. 13. 1. Alas for woe! that the sinful Defects and Passions of
Brethren are to be found among Professors, but not the Affection. Multitudes at
this day resemble the Brother, spoken of by Solomon, Prove. 18. 19. A Brother
offended is harder to be won than a strong City, and their Contentions are like
the bars of a Castle.

6. Love should be extended so as to become Catholic; and the more extensive
it is, the more it makes a Man resemble God himself.

1. Love is to be extended to the whole Church, to all Saints. When Love is
limited to a party, it is Imprisoned as it were, which ought to enjoy the
greatest Liberty. It Is common and needful to distinguish between Conversion to
a party, and Conversion to God: There is a distinction likewise to be made
between Love to a party, and Love to the Church of God. It Is but too apparent
that men place too much in being of such a party and Persuasion, and therefore
all Receeding, though done with a clear Conscience, and for the Churches Peace,
is nicknamed Apostasy: And though a man walks as closely with God, lives as
well as ever, loves more Saints, and Saints more than ever, yet because he is
not rigidly of such a way, he is censured, belyed, reproacht and shunned, as if
he were an Heathen man or Publican. Oh Love! why sleep thou? awake, awake!
wherever thou art planted, revive and flourish, and bring forth the fruits of
kindness, peaceableness, tenderness and moderation! All true Saints of all
Persuasions, are beloved of God, and purchased with his blood, and nothing
shall be able to separate them from the Love of God which is in Christ Jesus
their Lord, Romans 8. ult. Disaffections therefore and distances one from
another, are very unseemly, very sinful. Though God does love all his Children
freely, yet they are all worthy of one another love, and this love is a just
Debt which they owe one to another. If Saints are loved as Saints, all Saints
will be loved, a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia: And if we love not all,
it is but too plain that we love none at all truly.

2. Love is to be extended to the Jews, if they are beloved for their Fathers
sakes, Romans 11. 28. Christians should love them, and express that love by
Prayer, that they may not still abide in their Unbelief, but look unto Jesus
whom they have pierced, and obtain Mercy.

3. Love is to reach unto the uncalled Gentiles. The worlds blindness and
wickedness should move our Compassion; and since the Mercy of our God is so
unconceivably large, we should desire that more may partake of it, and since
Christ is a Propitiation sufficient for the sins of the whole World, 1 John 2.
22. We should pity the millions of Souls that never heard of him, and beg that
the sound of the Gospel may come to their ears, and that through this Jesus
they may be reconciled and saved.

4. Love is to be extended even to enemies and Persecutors. Christians must not
render evil for evil, reproach for reproach, cursing for cursing; but if they
are reviled, they are to bless, if they are defamed, they are to entreat; and
they must endeavor the Worlds benefit, though they are made the filth of the
World, and the offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4. 12, 13. A Saints Patience
should always be greater than the Passion of a Persecutor, a Saints love than
a Persecutors hatred. It Is an excellent Spirit, and the right Spirit of
Christian charity, to be meek and kind to those that are most bitter against
us; to speak the best of those, who speak the worst of us; to Pray that our
most spightful Enemies may be forgiven; and that the injuries which are done
us, being Pardoned, may not do an eternal harm unto the Injurers.

7. Love should never fail, but more and more increase. It must be a constant
fire never to be extinguished, nay, it should become stronger and purer
continually, Phil. 1. 9. And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more
and more in Knowledge and in all Judgment. The true reasons of Love must be
better and better understood, and the expressions of Love must be still with
more and more judgment and discretion, that the end aimed at may be attained.
After the Apostle had acknowledged the Thessalonians taught of God to love one
another; yet adds, We beseech you Brethren, that you increase more and more, 1
These. 4. 9. 10. And if where Love did so much abound, there was reason to press
an increase, Oh, how much need is there in such an angry and contentious Age as
this, to blow up this fire which is so near to going out: I have done with the
Properties of Love.

In the third place I am to demonstrate how Love is for the Churches
Edification. It Is for the Edification of Him that loves, and for the
Edification of those whom he loves. A Christian Edifies both himself and others
by Love. First, I shall demonstrate that he Edifies himself.

1. The more he Loves, there is the greater light in him. The understanding is
darkened by those sins which are contrary to Love, as Prejudice, Passion, Envy,
Hatred, so that what is Truth, is not easily discerned; what is Duty, is not
readily apprehended in many cases. The forementioned evil Affections do biass
the Judgment wrong. Though the eye be good, and the object not far off; yet the
eye cannot so plainly see the object, if there be a mist between them: Anger
and Malice raise such a mist before the eye of the Judgment, that it is very
prone to be mistaken; but this mist is scattered by Love, so that a Christian
sees his way plain, and is less subject to stumble; 1 John 2. 9, 10, 11. He
that says he is in the light, and hates his Brother, is in darkness even
until now: He that loves his Brother abides in the light, and there is none
occasion of stumbling in him; but he that hates his Brother, is in darkness,
and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because that
darkness has blinded his eyes.

2. The more a Christian Loves, there is the more of Gods Image in him; he is
the more transformed into the Divine Nature, 1 John 4. 7, 8. God is Love, and
every one that loves is born of God, and knows God. In Scripture God is said
to delight in Merccy, to rest in his love, to be good to all, to be kind to the
unthankful and evil. How does Love Edify a Child of God, making him resemble
his Heavenly Father in these excellent perfections; and how unlike to Satan
does love make us! Have we Knowledge? how great an understanding has the evil
one! have we Faith? The Devils also believe and tremble; but if we have Love,
Satan has nothing of this in him, he hates and tortures his own self, he hates
Gods Children, and all his own Children; he would destroy the former, he will,
unless they cease to be his Children, destroy the latter.

3. The more a Christian loves, he has the fir^er evidence that he is indeed a
Christian. The Apostle tells us, that the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace. The more love, the more peace and joy, Gal. 5. 22. We read Phil. 2. 1,
2. of Consolation in Christ and Comfort in love. Love builds us up in solid
Comfort; for we have the mark of Christ's Sheep upon us, if we love the whole
flock. That Religion has not truth that has not love in it: pretenses to light
and purity, without love, are all vain. But he that is full of love, in this
world; shall not be sent to Hell in the other World, where there is no love at
all, 1 John 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we
love the Brethren.

Secondly, I shall demonstrate that Christians edify not only themselves but
others by their love, and that it is exceedingly for the Churches Edification.

1. Love makes us concerned for the whole Church of Christ, and enlarged in our
supplications and intercessions for it. This public Spirit which is the effect
of Catholic love, is very pleasing unto God, and mightily prevails with him.
God encourages us to an importunity for Zion. He does not say as he did to
Moses, Let me alone that I may destroy: but give me no rest until I save, Isa.
62. 6, 7. I have set watchmen upon thy Walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never
hold their peace day nor night: ye that make mention of the Lord, keep not
silence, and give him no rest till he establish, and make Jerusalem a praise in
the earth. Love takes this encouragement, and makes the Christian thus to
resolve: For Zions sake I will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalems sake I
will not rest, until the Righteousness thereof goes forth as brightness, and
the Salvation thereof as a lamp that burns. The Churches Reformation and
Righteousness is to be prayed for, as well as it is Deliverance and Salvation.
The Apostle tells us, if we will pray to purpose, we must lift up holy hands
without wrath and doubting, 1 Timothy 2. 8. Wrath defiles him that prays, and
fills the censer with strange fire, mixing a sinful fervency and heat with
prayer; and so hinders its prevalency and acceptance. But Love empties the
heart of wrath, and fills it with an holy fervor; and how much does the
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man prevail! Jam. 5. 16. One Moses full
of love to Israel, and to the God of Israel, zealous for Gods Honor, desirous
of Isreal's welfare; he stands in the gap, and by prayer turns away that Wrath
that was breaking in and ready to destroy all the people, Psalm. 106. 23.
Therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood in
the breach before him, to turn away his wrath lest he should destroy them.

2. Love strongly inclines us unto peaceableness, and what is for the Churches
peace is for her edification, Romans 14. 19. Let us follow after the things that
make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another. I grant when we
are pursuing peace, we must have a special regard to truth and holiness, Zach.
8. 19. Love the truth and peace, Heb. 12. 14. Follow after Peace with all Men,
and Holiness. But the Scripture must determine what is Truth, and we must
distinguish between the great Truths of the Gospel and those that are less
important. It was a truth which the Apostle was persuaded of by the Lord Jesus
Christ, that there was no meat unclean of it self; and yet those who were
otherwise persuaded, he looked upon as tolerable, and not to be despised: Nay,
he expressly forbids those of different Sentiments in this matter to judge one
another, Romans 14. The Scripture likewise must inform us wherein purity and
holiness lies; for a mistake here may quickly draw forth such a furious zeal,
as may set the Church in a flame. Some place Purity and all Religion in being
for the Liturgy established, as if the Compilers of it had been tantum non
divinely inspired, and all other Prayer were but mere Enthusiasm and
contemptible babbling. On the other hand, some place purity and all Religion in
declaiming against the Liturgy, as Mass-english, the mark of the Beast, and the
very voice of the Whore of Babylon. But neither the one nor the other place
purity and Religion right. The Scripture no where commands that we should only
pray by a form, neither does it forbid a form to be used. But it requires that
our very Hearts and Souls should be in our prayers, and faith and holy desires
and other graces exercised in our duties; and here lies the purity of them.
Love therefore refuses to be quarrelsome about smaller matters: for it knows
that peaceableness cements the Church, and closes her breaches; and it justly
fears lest while men are so contentious about ceremonies, the substance of
Religion be lost in the quarrel.

3. Love makes Christians condescending and yielding one to another, that
hereby edification may be promoted. To be Magisterial and selfwilled is not to
be the Servants of Christ, who are employed in building of his Church. We are
not to be Dictators; but all alike to hearken to the voice and command of
Christ our Lord, and to be mild and gentle one toward another. The Apostle
Peter charges the Younger to submit themselves to the Elder, but withal adds,
yea all of you be subject one to another, 1 Pet. 5. 5. and hereby intimates,
that to be Lordly and imposing is contrary to the Spirit of Christianity. It
was love that made the Apostle Paul a Servant to all, that he might gain the
more, 1 Cor. 9. 19. To the Jews he became as a Jew, that he might gain the
Jews, to the weak he became as weak that he might gain the weak: he did not
hereby manifest a carnal compliance through fear, but a condescension of love.
He was not to be charged with Levity or Apostasy, he was not to be censured as
a Turn-coat, as an Hypocrite, as a Mungrel minister; or a Linsey Wolsey
Brother, nor to be called Doughbaked; a Cake not turned. No, no, the Apostle
loved the Gospel, and had a mind to spread it, he loved Souls and was desirous
to save them, and understood how far he might yield in indifferent things for
the Churches peace and edification. Love makes us patient and self-denying,
hinders us from pursuing petty designs, or private revenges; The pleasing of
God and profiting his Church, swallow up such things as these. Love will hinder
us from minding high things, and move us to condescend to men of low estate,
Romans 12. 16. Indeed to apply our selves to all the best and most probable ways
for their benefit; we shall endeavor to help the weak, we shall pity the
fallen, we shall labor to reduce the straying, we shall encourage the
diligent, and honor the stronger Saints, and all this is hugely for
Edification.

4. Love makes Christians highly to esteem the Pastors and Builders of the
Church for their works sake, and hereby Edification is promoted. The Ministry
of the Gospel is a special gift which Christ bestowed upon his Church, for her
unconceivable advantage; Ephesians. 4. 8, 11, 12, 13. Wherefore he says, when he
ascended up on high he led captivity captive and gave gifts unto men. And he
gave some Prophets, and some Apostles, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the Body of Christ; till we all come in the unity of the
Faith and of the Knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man. And since the
Ministry is such a gift and token of the Royal bounty of Christ who is ascended
far above all Heavens, certainly the flock of Christ are to love and encourage
their Pastors; and the more they do this, the more likely it is, that the end
of the Ministry's institution should be attained, namely the edifying and
perfecting of the Church of Christ. The Apostle, though he might have commanded
yet uses entreaties for Ministers sake, 1 These. 5. 12, 13. He had bid them just
before, v. 11. to edify one another, but knowing the work of Edification would
go on but lamely without a Gospel Ministry, he therefore adds; And we beseech
you Brethren to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord,
and admonish you, and to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake,
and b^ at peace among your selves.

6. Love will constrain the Pastors and builders of the Church to mind their
work to purpose. A Minister that is full of love to Christ and Souls, cannot be
a Loyterer. If indeed he does design preferment, and to fill his baggs with
wealth be his great aim, then he will grudge Souls his pains: He will not be
concerned though Hell fill never so fast, and though himself be going apace
thither. But if holy love to the Church of Christ does rule in his heart, it
will constrain him to be a Labourer, and to do his work diligently; he will
watch and pray, he will search and study, and abo^^ all books the Bible: He
will take heed to himself, and to all his flock, that he may save himself and
them that hear him. Nay love will make a Minister labor, and suffer also for
the Churches Edification. Abundant love to the Corinthians made the Apostle
say, I will very gladly spend and be spent for you, 2 Cor. 12, 15. And it is
very plain that he did not think much of suffering, Phil. 2. 17. Yea, and if I
be offered upon the Sacrifice and Service of your faith, I joy and rejoice with
you all. These reasons plainly demonstrate how much Love tends to edify.

But a great many reasons more I find all together; even a whole cluster of
them, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. which I shall enlarge upon, because they are both
a trial of our love, and a demonstration most evident that love is for
Edification. The Apostles words are very searching, very piercing; he reads a
kind of Anatomy-Lecture upon this grace of Love and Charity; and lays the
inside of it open to the view of others: He seems to speak a strange word,
Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and have not Charity, it
profits me nothing, v. 3. What is Charity and Love, may some say, if feeding
the poor be not? These outward acts a Pharisee may do merely out of
oftentation, Mat. 6. a Papist may do, ignorantly hoping hereby to satisfy for
his sins, and merit Heaven. I grant that love without these outward acts of
mercy, is vain and useless (...) is (...), Love in deed, is love in truth, 1 John 3. 18. But though love produce such deeds, many outward acts of mercy may
be where love is not. The Apostle in a great many particulars discovers true
love and Charity, and I shall make it evident how in every particular it is much
for edification.

1. Love suffers long, and is kind. God is long suffering, and so is Love: It
enables us to rule our own spirits, which argues true greatness and strength of
Soul. Prove. 16. 32. He that is slow to anger, is better than the mighty, and he
that rules his spirit, than he that takes a City. Love is so far from
revenging injuries already done, that it will bear new ones: and that is the
meaning of our Lords Injunction, Mat. 5. 39. I say unto you, that ye resist not
evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other
also. Nay, Love though it suffers long, is kind notwithstanding. It Is much to
put up an injury, but much more to be kind to the Injurer. This love in
Churches, how would it unite them? and the more they are united, the more they
are strengthened. Provocations to wrath would be turned into provocations to
love; and evil would be overcome by goodness; and the World hereby is likely to
be convinced and converted. The Proto-Martyr Stephen was kind to those that
stoned him: How does he pray that their sin might not be laid to their charge,
but that their Souls might be saved, though they thirsted after his blood, and
took away his life from him! This Prayer was heard, and Saul at length is
converted, and proves a Master Builder of the Church of God.

2. Love envies not: It is not grieved and troubled at another excellency;
neither does it grudge at the comfort or prosperity of another. How much of
Hell is there in the temper of an envious man! The happiness of another is his
misery, the good of another is his affliction: He looks upon the virtue of
another with an evil eye, and is as sorry at the praise of another, as if that
praise were taken away from himself. Envy makes him an hater of his Neighbor,
and his own Tormenter. Love flies from Envy as extremely diabolical; for the
root of it is pride, and ill will is its Concomitant. What sad work has Envy
made in Churches! (not to speak of the mischief it has done all the World
over.) When Christians have been desirous of vainglory, provoking one another,
envying one another, which the Apostle so much dehorts from, Gal. 5. ult. When
Pastors have been envious at one another Parts, Gifts, Preferments, Success
and Estimation, the poor Church has suffered, and its Edification has gone on
like Paul's work, but very slowly. Envy makes the builders to fall out, to
weaken one another hands; to hinder one another in the work of God. Where
envying and strife is, is there Edification? No such matter, but there is
confusion, and every evil work, Jam. 3. 16. Love instead of being troubled at
the grace, or usefulness, or esteem of another, rejoices therein; and the more
there are that honor God, and adorn the Gospel, and benefit the Church, it
rejoices the more.

3. Love vaunteth not it self, neither is it puffed up. The word which the Holy
Ghost uses for vaunting, is (...), a Greek word of a Latin derivation, coming
from perperan, which signifies amiss. An ancient Greek Father, St. Basil,
propounds this question, What is (...)? and returns this answer, (...). Love is
against doing things for show and ostentation, and excludes vainglorious
boasting. Puffing up relates to the Heart, vaunting to the words and actions:
Love refuses to do either. It makes a man not to think more highly of himself
than he ought to think, but to think soberly, Romans 12. 3. those Precepts are
much minded, Romans 12. 10. Be kindly affectioned one to another, with brotherly
love, in honor preferring one another. and Phil. 2. 3. Let each esteem other
better than themselves. And as Love hinders the heart from being puffed up, so
the tongue from vaunting it self, or debasing another: It will not defame or
disparage others, as if its own reputation were to be built upon the ruin of
theirs. Now this kind of temper is very subservient to the Churches interest.
For while Christians are thus low in their own eyes, and are ready both in word
and deed to honor and encourage one another, great grace, a shining luster is
upon them all; and God himself delights in them to make them flourish and
increase.

4. Love does not behave it self unseemly. What more unseemly than a lofty
look, than an haughty carriage! as if others were not good enough to unloose
the latchet of our shoes? but Love does banish pride and scornfulness, and
makes us humble in our converse, which is the most seemly behavior in the
world. The Greek word (...), signifies any unseemly behavior. So that Love
studies exactness of carriage, that Religion may be the more commended unto
all. When Professors do that which is unseemly, the Church and Religion suffer
by it; but a conversation without rebuke, which manifests a love both to God
and Man, is the way to win many a man to God, that before was estranged from
him. An unseemly behavior opens many a mouth against the Gospel, creates new
prejudices, and confirms the World in their natural enmity against it: But a
seemly conversation makes Religion amiable; well-doing puts ill tongues to
silence, and forces them to give glory to God. 1 Pet. 2. 12. Having your
conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as
evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God in
the day of visitation.

5. Love seeks not her own, and consequently inclines us to edify and to seek
the good of others. The Apostles meaning is not, that Love causes us to cast
off all care and regard of our selves, but only that which is immoderate, and
which proceeding from a blind self-love, makes us disregard what becomes of
others. Christ himself is a pattern to Love in this respect, and Love follows
him: He was humbled, that we might be exalted; He was condemned, that we might
be justified; He became poor, that we through his poverty might be rich; He was
made a curse, that we might receive the blessing, even life for evermore, Love
will make a Christian seek the wealth of another, the reputation, and
especially the Salvation of another. Nay, Charity will prevail with us to
suffer reproach, loss, imprisonment, nay death it self, when God calls us to it
for the Churches good. 1 John 3. 16. Hereby perceive we the love of God,
because he laid down his life for us; and we ought to lay down our lives for
the brethren. And Col. 1. 24. Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and
fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his
bodies sake which is the Church. Hence it is apparent, says Calvin, Quam non
sit ingenita nobis a natura charieas; that true Charity is not in us by nature,
but a grace from above, really of divine original.

6. Love is not easily provoked. Before it was said, it suffers long; but here
something further is intimated, charitatem etiam in gravissimis causis non
facile iram effundere; that though the cause and occasion be very great, yet
love is not ready to be incensed. I grant, that notwithstanding love, a
Christian may be angry at Sin; but love makes him fly from causeless sinful
anger. The Scripture prohibitions are very strict and severe, Eccles. 7. 9. Be
not hasty in thy Spirit to be angry; for anger rests in the bosom of fools.
Psalm. 37. 8. Cease from anger and forsake wrath; fret not thy self in any wise
to do evil. Anger and wrath, what harm has it done in the Christian World! what
rents, what divisions has it made! bitter fruit has grown from this root of
bitterness. The wrath of man works not the Righteousness of God, nor his
Churches good: and therefore Love, which moderates anger, and mortifies what is
sinful and hurtful in it, must needs do the Church a kindness. Alas! poor
England! and compassionable Church in it! how many parties are there, and how
high their exasperations! but their fury one against another is a perfect
frenzy; which has a certain and speedy tendency unto an universal destruction.
Want of love is one of the clearest demonstrations that there is want of Wisdom.

7. Love thinks no evil, (...), it is not apt to impute evil to another; but
to aconstrue the words and actions of others in the best sense which they can
bear. It Is very far from imagining and contriving evil and mischief against
another. To ruin men in their Estates; to blast their Names; to wound their
Consciences; to rid the World of them; these are none of Loves contrivances.
And as Love carries on no evil designs; so it is not suspicious that others do.
These suspicions are very bad; for if the mind be full of them, it will be apt
to meditate revenge, upon barely fancyed and supposed injuries; though the
Christian Religion forbids revenging reel ones. Want of love makes us imagine
that others have contrivances against us, to undermine our interest and repute,
and to do us some great harm; when indeed the just contrary may be true: and
when we think so ill of them, our carriage toward them may be as ill as our
thoughts. But love is too full of candor to give way to groundless jealousies.
And if this candor did but more prevail; how would Edification be promoted!
Suspicions keep the several parties that are among us at a greater distance.
Difference in opinions makes the distance; suspicions widen it. Several
Dissenters are apt to suspect Episcop^^ Men inclined to Popery. Diverse
Episcopal Men, are apt to think that if ever Popery come in, 'twil be brought
in upon the back of the Puritans. Different parties are all full of jealousies:
as if they were all false unto, and designed to ruin utterly one another, and
only to set up every one themselves. Now these suspicions unless there be most
apparent ground for them, should be abandoned, and Love will not cherish them,
for they weaken the Protestant Religion, and divide the Church against it self.

8. Love rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth. Though our
Neighbor is to be loved, yet we are not to love his iniquity, but endeavor by
Prayer to God, by Reproofs and Entreaties, and other ways to reclaim him from
his evil and destructive way: Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in
thy heart, but shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin to
^ye upon him. And though our Neighbor has showed himself an Enemy to us; and
after fall into some scandalous iniquity whereby he is endammaged, and
disgraced; love will hinder us from being secretly glad of it; nay 'twill make
us really to pity him, and to mourn for him. What Solomon says is much to our
present purpose, Prove. 24. 17. Rejoice not when thine Enemy falls, neither
let thy heart be glad when he stumbleth. (...) to rejoice in the sins of
others, how hellish is it! this is so far from edifying, that it makes a man
exactly to resemble the evil one who is the Churches great Destroyer. This very
bad temper, how does it prevail at this day among many persons of different
persuasions! When they hear of the scandalous falls of others who are not of
their Way, they are pufft up, as the Corinthians were, and but too much
pleased. 1 Cor. 5. 2. They hope that the repute of their party will be
advanced, by the exclamation that is made against those of another Party. And
hereby they show, that they value their own Reputation above the Salvation of a
Soul, the Honor of God himself, and the general Credit of Christianity. But
where Persons are thus glad at the scandalous sins of others, there is
certainly a most scandalous want of Charity, which shows it self in proclaiming
on the house-tops, what love should make them to cover. Love rejoiceth not in
iniquity, but it rejoices in the truth, and theref^^e is truly for
Edification. Truth may be put by an Hebraism for true goodness, for sincere
Righteousness, as the Antithesis in the words manifests; or truth may respect
the reality of love it self. Love rejoiceth in the truth, because it is an enemy
to shows and dissimulation. I might also add another gloss; We must not love
any man, or any party, so as to reject Truth, but that must be owned with
gladness, on which side, or where soever found. The Philosopher did say, Amicus
Socrates, amicus Plato; sed magis amica Veritas. Socrates is my Friend, and so
is Plato, but Truth is more my Friend than either.

9. Love is for the Churches Edification, for it hopes and believes all things.
It believes the best of others, until that which is bad is so visible and
apparent, that if it does not believe, it must be blind. Though one that is
truly charitable, is unwilling to be imposed upon, yet of the two he rather
chooses to be deceived through his candor and facility, than to wrong his
Brother by a sinister suspicion. And where love for the present cannot believe,
yet twill hope. If it sees others to be never so bad, yet it hopes they may
come to a better mind, and how earnestly does it pray for their amendment! The
Greek Tragedian Euripides tells us, He is the best man (...), who hopes
always. The Roman Dictator Fabius Maximus, did a great kindness to the
Commonwealth almost ruined by Hannibal, quia nihil desperavit, he did not quite
despair in Romes extremity. Love to the Church will hinder us from giving over
all as lost; and hope being kept alive, that the Church in time may become more
pure and more united, will put vigor into our endeavors, to promote the
Churches Union and Holiness.

10. Love Edifies, for it bears and endures all things. It bears the
greatest injuries from the World, and yet wishes the World well; and it endures
unkindness from Brethren, still remaining kind to them; it is not transported
by the fancied intolerableness of any injury, so as to render evil for evil; it
minds that of the Apostle, 1 These. 5. 15. See that none render evil for evil
unto any man, but ever follow that which is good both among your selves and
toward all men.

Oh Love! How much want is there of thee in the Church of Christ! and how much
does this Church feel for this want! it groans, it languishes, it dies daily,
because of thy absence. Return O Love, return! Repair breaches, restore paths
to dwell in, edify the old waste places, and raise up the Foundations of many
Generations, for after all the most politic contrivances, Thou will be found
the Master Builder.

Having done with the reasons which demonstrate that Love is for the Churches
Edification; I am in the fourth place to show the vanity of those excuses that
are made for the want of Love.

1. Some say, they are bound to contend earnestly for the Faith, and therefore
Mildness and Love in this case are but urged unseasonably; strive they ought,
and strive they will.

I Answer, That sincere Protestants of all persuasions, agree in the same
Faith, and their disagreeing among themselves, is the way not to uphold that
Faith but to destroy it. The Controversies between them is about
Circumstantials, and external modes of Worship; they all own the same Doctrine
of the Gospel, in opposition to the Corruptions and Heresies of Rome. That Is a
bad Contention that does exclude Love. He that believes the Gospel of Christ to
be the Gospel of Peace, cannot but follow after Peace; Fides and Amor, quam
been convenient? How well do Faith and Love agree? both together make the
Breastplate of a Christian, 1 These. 5. 8. Whereby his Heart is armed and
secured.

2. Others say, they will not halt between two Opinions, they will follow God
and not Baal, they are for Christ and not for Antichrist, and are resolved to
have no Charity for the Beasts Worshippers, nor any Communion with them.

I Answer, Do not call that Idolatry and Antichristianism, which Christ calls
not by such a Name. To charge all Conformists with Idolatry, is an ^eavy
Charge, as bold as heavy, and as unreasonable and uncharitable as either. I am
sure the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, though Conformists, were enabled to
suffer the rage of Rome, and loved not their Lives unto the Death, that they
might bear their. Testimony against the Idolatry of Antichrist. Those that
affirm a Form of Prayer to be a Spiritual Image, and consequently a breach of
the second Commandment, seem to me to discover a greater strength of Fancy
than of Judgment. I grant, the Second Commandment forbids the Worship of the
true God by a false medium or means, and such a false means is an Image, for by
this means the Glory of the incorruptible God is changed into the similitude of
a corruptible Creature, which we are forbidden to fall down to and Worship; so
that the medium or means forbidden in this Law, is an object as well as means:
Now those who are most for Forms of Prayer, will deny them to be the objects of
their Worship; their Worship is directed to God alone, and only in the Name of
Christ the Mediator. That Reverend Author who asserts a Form of Prayer to be an
Image forbidden in the Second Commandment, yet does grant, That a Christian
Man, whether Minister or of private place, may by the Gift of Prayer which he
has received, compile to himself a set Form of Prayer, and may use the same
for his Prayer whether in public or in private according to his place: But if
a Form were indeed forbidden, by no means (...) a man make such a Form of
Prayer for himself.

Further, Let me add, that all who cry out against Antichristianism, should
beware of Incharitableness, which is a great part of it. Rome is full of
Cruelty, censures and condemns all that are not of her way, and affirms it is
impossible that they should be Saved. Those in whom Christian love does most
abound, I am sure are come furthest out of Babylon, and are likeliest to hinder
a return thither; what animosities and divisions will do, I wish that time may
not too soon manifest.

3. Others plead, that they are for a thorough Reformation, and the purging of
all impuritie out of the Church of Christ; and they cannot endure such as do
things by halves only.

I Answer, That it is the Glory of the Protestant Churches that they are
Reformed ones; and none of them are so pure, but Reformation may be advanced to
an higher degree. The Compilers of the Common Prayer in the Commination,
acknowledge that in the Primitive Church there was a godly Discipline, which is
wanting among us, and they wish that it may be restored. So that a need of
Reformation in Discipline is here plainly confessed, and the thing desired: But
a Reformation is regularly to be endeavored, no man using unwarrantable means,
nor transgressing the bounds of his vocation. And while we are talking against
Impurity in adminis^^^^ions, (which the more exactly according to the Word of
God, the purer, and the purer the better and more effectual) let us not
overlook some of the worst impurities of all; Pride, and Envy, and Hatred, and
Wrath are the Impurities of the Devil himself; other sins may have more of the
Bruit or of the Child; but these have more of Beelzebub; 'till thou art
reconciled to thy Brother, 'think not that thy Offering will be accepted, Mat.
5. 24. while thy Heart is full of bitterness, and Self-conceit, and Strife, do
not imagine thou can be a pure Worshipper.

4. Others say, What, shall we Love a Company of Apostates, that are for
returning to the Onions and Garlic of Egypt, and will receive the mark of the
Beast it self?

I Answer, That the Scripture should be Studied and understood, or else it may
easily be misapplyed. 'Twould better become men solidly to prove a thing to be
Antichristian, than loudly and boldly to call it so. Shall he be branded as an
Apostate, who manifests in his whole Conversation a fear of God, that loves the
Lord Jesus in sincerity, that owns the great fundamental truths of the Gospel,
and is willing, if called to it, to seal them with his blood; shall he, I say,
be branded as an Apostate, because to give a legal satisfaction and show he is
no Papist, he sometimes hears the Prayers of the Church, and Scriptures read in
a known Tongue? Certainly the Censurer i^^ greater Apostate from Love, than
this man is from Truth. Though the well-meaning of Persons is to be well taken,
and whatever of God is in them is to be loved and encouraged; yet this is to be
disliked, that differences between Protestants are made to seem greater than
they are. It does not argue an healing Spirit to call every thing we dislike,
Egyptian and Babylonish. This uncharitable Censuring, if it be not the mark of
the Beast, it is the mark of one as bad; you know who is styled (...), the
Accuser of the Brethren.

5. Others say, That many who pretend to Religion and Conscience, are
Schismatical and Rebellious, and Love and Countenance does but harden and
encourage them in their pernicious ways, to the Prejudice both of Church and
State.

I Answer, Particular persons who are culpable, let them hear the blame; but
why should all Dissenters be judged Rebels? how peaceably have they carried
themselves for these many Years? how fervently do they Pray for the Kings Life
and Prosperity? To Assassinate his Majesty or the Duke of York, they look upon
as an action most abominable, and are persuaded that every one that names the
Name of Christ, should utterly abhor such a Villainous Iniquity. They look upon
Solomon not as speaking like a politic Prince, but as declaring the mind of
the Holy Ghost, when he says, My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with them that are given to change, Prove. 24. 21. They are sensible
that the false Teachers in the latter days have this Character, that they
despise Government, that They are presumptuous and self-willed, and are not
afraid to speak evil of Dignities, 2 Pet. 2. 10. Let those who are full of
bitter Invectives against Dissenters, as if they were Enemies to Government,
consider what the Assembly of Divines at Wesiminster have declared; and the
Congregational Divines at the Savoy say the same; Confession of Faith, Chap. of
the Civil Magistrate: It is the Duty of People to Pray for Magistrates, to
honor their Persons, to pay them Tribute and other Dues, to obey their lawful
Commands, and to be subject to their Authority for Conscience sake. Infidelity
or Difference in Religion, does not make void the Magistrates just and legal
Authority, nor free the People from their due Obedience to him, from which
Ecclesiastical persons are not exempted; much less has the Pope any power or
jurisdiction over them in their Dominions, or over any of their People, and
least of all to deprive them of their Dominions or Lives, if he shall judge
them to be Heretics, or upon any other pretense whatsoever.

And as for the Charge of Schism, the Dissenters wish there were no such thing
in the Churches of Christ; that Terms of Communion might be only Scriptural,
and that all occasions of Division might be taken away. They Pray for the peace
of Jerusalem, and that she may have more True Lovers, and That all may prosper
who Love her.

I come in the last place to the Application.

USE I. Of Information: If Love be for the Churches Edification, then,

1. Hence we may be informed, that Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wraths,
Strifes, and such works of the Flesh, tend to the Churches Ruin: they that
harbor such sins as these, and are not concerned about the mortification of
them, they are frantic Christians, who cast Firebrarnds, and Arrows, and
Death, doing much mischief to others, but most to themselves.

2. No wonder that Satan who labors to destroy Churches, endeavors to kill
Love. He is the envious one that sows ill Weeds, he is the Father of Lies and
Errors, he knows Error tends to Division, he sets an Edge on the Passions of
men, and makes them more sharp and keen, he is the grand incendia^y in
Churches, setting all in a flame, and he hopes this flame will consume all
before it, nay, burn at last to the lowest Hell.

3. Those Principles are truest and best, that tend to the begetting and
increasing of Love. The Church of Christ is little beholding to those who are
of narrow Principles, that mind only a part, but not the whole. The Apostle
blamed the Corinthians for being of such a narrow Spirit, 1 Cor. 1. 12. Now
this I say, that every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I
of Cephas; whereas all true Believers should reckon themselves one in God and
Christ, and consequently should be for one another.

4. Hence we may be informed, that Love is the more excellent way. Rigor and
Fury may force men to a dissembled Compliance, but Love is the way indeed to
win them. I don't think it a Credit to the Alcoran, that it must be seconded
with the knocking argument of an iron Mace; the Spanish Inquisition shows the
weakness of that Religion, which cannot stand unless it has the help of such
Cruelty to support it. Certainly that Church which is fullest of Love is the
truest and wisest, and most likely to be enlarged. The Apostle preferrs Charity
before the Faith of Miracles, though these Miracles mightily confirmed the
Authority and Verity of the Gospel; nay, he preferrs it before the Gift of
Prophecy, though Prophecy was the most Edifying of all the Gifts of the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 14. 1. He was indeed a Prince among Preachers, and supposes
himself better than he was, and to speak with the Tongue of an Angel; yet says
he, Without Charity, I am become as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal; nay,
If I have not Charity, I am nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2.

USE II. Of Caution, in several particulars.

1. Take heed of what is contrary to Love, as that which is contrary to
Edification. Unmercifulness, Cruelty, Rage, Revenge, Bitterness, are so far
from becoming Christianity, that they are against Humanity it self. When first
sinful Passion begins to stir in thy Heart, obsta principiis, quench the spark;
for behold how great a matter a little fire kindles! Jam. 3. 5. What is
contrary to Love, is contrary to thy own Peace, and may make thee a Disturber
of the Churches Peace.

2. Take heed of sinful Self-love. This causes perilous times to overtake the
Church of Christ, 2 Timothy 3. 182. This know also, that in the last days
perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers of their own selves.
Self-love turns Godliness into a Form, argues a want of the Power, it makes
Religion to be subservient unto base and selfish designs; and hereby the Gospel
comes to be suspected, Atheism grows rampant, and the Church must needs
languish. Self-love will make you unconcerned for the Honor of God, for the
good of man; it will produce a carelessness in you of others welfare, and hinder
you from truly minding your own. He that loves no body but himself, and matters
not what harms befall others, so himself can but escape, is a pest of the World,
unfit for Christian, nay, for humane Society. Antiquity has censured that
Speech as infamous, (...); If I were dead, no matter though the World were all
a fire. The Self-lover is of the same temper, if he can but keep what he has,
and sleep in a whole Skin, he is not at all affected with others Calamities and
Afflictions.

3. Take heed of scandalizing any. It Is the great work of Satan to cause
Scandals and Offenses; and he shows the depth of his subtilty and malice in the
management of this pernicious Engine. He represents God as too rigorous in his
Commands, Christ as too much thwarting the glorying of the flesh: He represents
Self-denial, and the Cross, as unreasonable and intolerable; and all this is,
that man may be offended, and his Conversion to God, and Faith in Jesus may be
hindered. Our Lord and Savior who is the great lover of Souls, saw the mischief
of Scandal, and speaks much to prevent it; He pronounces the woeful misery of
the World, because of offenses; but especially binds and fixes the Woe upon
that man by whom the offense comes, Mat. 18. 7. At the reading of this,
methinks every man's heart should ache, and he should cry out, as the Disciples
every one of them did in another ease, Lord, Is it I? Am I the man that thou
say woe unto? does the offense come by Me? It Is our duty to love others, but
to scandalize them, is to be greatly injurious to them; and that is not an act,
a sign of love. Much talk there is of Scandal, and there is much more of
Scandal than is talked of: It Is a sore evil that spits its venom every way: It
strikes at Jew, at Gentile, and at the Church of God. Therefore the Apostle
cautions us against giving offense to any of these, 1 Cor. 10. 32. True Love to
our Neighbor will make us avoid Scandal as carefully as a Mariner would a
dangerous Rock that may cause a shipwreck. Here I shall lay down some Positions
concerning Scandal, that you may have the truer notion of it, and may flee from
it, and the woe denounced upon it.

1. Every displeasing of another is not Scandal. It Is one thing to offend a
man, and another thing to make him offend. Barely to displease and grieve
another, is not to scandalize him; for if it were, then those Professors that
are most ignorant and peevish, must be perpetually humoured; they must have
their wills, else they will be angry and grieved; and the weakest (as one
observes) must bear sway in the Church, which they are very unfit to do; and
the strongest, even Pastors themselves, must be subject to them; for they are
hugely troubled if they are in the least crossed. Besides, Professors are of
different minds; some may be angry and grieved at my doing of a thing, others
as much displeased and troubled at my not doing it: Now, if barely to offend
another, were Scandal, in this case both Scandal and the Woe belonging to it,
might be impossible to be avoided. A man may be offended because I am not of
his mind; because of my peaceable temper, because I think not that stiffness
and strangeness is the way to unity, but mutual yielding and condescension;
forbearing one another in love, Ephesians. 4, 3. 4. receiving one another, as Christ
has received both the one and the other. Here indeed I may be said to
displease, but Scandal cannot be laid to my charge.

2. Scandal is a putting a stumbling block, or an occasion of falling into sin
in another way. This is the Apostles definition of Scandal: And withal he
cautions against Christians judging and censuring one another, Romans 14. 13. Let
us not therefore (though of different sentiments and practices in some things)
judge one another any more; but judge this rather, that no men put a stumbling
block, or an occasion to fall in his Brothers way. When Professors of Religion
are loose in their lives, and hereby not only confirm the World in their
resolution to be unjust, and proud, and covetous, and prodigal of time, and
filthy still; but also convey into the Hearts of other Professors, that such
strictness as the Scripture requires is needless; and that men may be saved
without such circumspect walking; here is Scandal with a witness, and 'twill be
with a vengeance. And as the blinding and stupifying the Conscience of another
is Scandal; so the wounding of the weak conscience of another by drawing him to
that which he doubts whether lawful to be done, is Scandal likewise. Love here
should make us very tender. Those who are for rigorous imposing upon others,
should consider that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8. 12. But when ye sin so against
the Brethren, and wound their weak Conscience, ye sin against Christ.

3. Examples of the best are not to be followed with a doubting Conscience.
Every man must be fully persuaded in his own mind concerning the lawfulness of
a thing, before he does it; for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin; and he that
doubts is damned, if he eat, Romans 14. 5. 23. I grant the word for doubts, (...)
may be translated, He that puts a difference between meats, and so eats against
his Conscience, is damned; but if you consider what follows, because he eats
not of faith, it is truly rendered doubts; for doubting is opposed to faith, as
well as doing that which undoubtedly is judged unlawful. Thus we find our Lord
making an opposition between Doubting and Faith: And the word (...) is used to
express this doubting, Mar. 11. 23. Whosoever shall say unto this Mountain, be
thou removed, and cast into the Sea, (...) and shall not doubt in his heart,
but shall believe that which he says shall come to pass, he shall have
whatsoever he says. Certainly as nothing is to be done against Conscience, so
nothing with a doubting Conscience; for he that does a thing doubting, cannot
do that thing of Faith. We should not urge others to follow our example, nor to
do as we do, till they are fully satisfied as we are; nay we should press the
contrary, lest we wound their weak Consciences, Romans 14. 15. If thy Brother be
grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not Charitably; destroy not him with
thy meat, for whom Christ died. By grieved, cannot be understood, sorrow,
because another does that which the Brother thinks sinful; for this will not
destroy the Brother: but being grieved, implies having ones Conscience wounded,
and ones Peace broken, by following the example of another with a doubting
mind. The Apostle exhorts all to have faith concerning the lawfulness of a
thing before they do it; cautions against judging and despising one another,
though some could do what others could not. And this is the way to prevent
Scandal, which is so great a piece of uncharitableness. But here I must add,
that groundless doubts are signs of weakness, and he is an happy man that is
got above them; and information in order to this happiness is very desirable.

4. Pleasing another so as to occasion his sinning, is Scandal. The Apostle
Peter was a Tempter to Christ, when he thought to please him, and prevent his
suffereings; but Christ repelled the temptation presently, and rebuked Peter
sharply; Get thee behind me Satan; (...), thou art my Scandal, thou savourest
not the things that be of God, but those things which be of men, Mat. 16. 22,
23. The same Apostle (as one observes) scandalized the Jews by pleasing them:
For fear of offending the weak Judaizing Christians, he separated from familiar
communion with the Gentiles; by which he laid a stumbling block before them, to
harden them in the sinful opinion of Separation. A dangerous Scandal it was,
whereby Barnabas himself was carried away. Love will make us please our
Neighbor for his good to Edification, Romans 15. 2. But to please him by doing
as he does, saying as he says, and so to harden him in his too high thoughts of
himself, in his error and uncharitableness, in his dividing Principles, which
have a tendency to hinder the lasting settlement and peace of any Church in the
World; I say, thus to please him, is to scandalize him by not crossing and
offending him. A meek and faithful instructing him, though it does anger him,
would be a true expression of love to him.

5. In shunning scandal, special regard must be had to the weak who are in
greatest danger. He that is weak falls more easily; and therefore stumbling
blocks should not be laid, but removed out of his way. Those that suppose
themselves higher than others in light and grace, should be the more
condescending to them whom they think much below themselves, and hear with
their infirmities. We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak, and not to please our selves, Romans 15. 1. Those that differ from us in
judgment have precious Souls, as well as those of our own way; therefore we
must take heed of scandalizing them, especiaily if they are very numerous; We
should be wary how we utterly disown a vast Body of Christians, as if they were
a company of Heathen men and Publicans, this will confirm them in their
exasperations and severities against us, as highly reasonable, and they will so
fix their eyes upon that in us, which we cannot justify: (...) that they will
the less regard what we speak against those things which may strongly be proved
to need a Reformation. The more general a scandal is; the more fatal are the
effects of it, and the more it proves detrimental to the Church of God.

6. All should pray against proneness to be offended. Others actions should not
make us forward to stumble and fall. As the providence of God toward us,
though at present never so dark and intricate and unaccountable, should not
make us weary of him, or of his service; because he is a Lord the most
gracious, and his service is really the best beyond all comparison: So neither
should the carriage of men though never so strange and odd, and unexpected,
occasion our sinning nor discourage us in weldoing. Upright men may be
astonished at the dispensations of divine Providence, they may be amazed to see
the world so full of wickedness, and to behold faith failing, love dying, and
practical Religion so much ceasing in the Church of Christ; yet they stir up
themselves against the hypocrites, they get over the stumbling blocks that are
laid before them, they hold on their way and wax stronger and stronger, Job 17.
8, 9. Foolisn men! that are glad of scandal! that run eagerly up and down,
inquiring who will show us any thing that may offend us? They rejoice at any
plea for a sinful course, and greedily catch at any thing that may prejudice
them against others that are not of their way; nay they are forward to suck in
prejudices against Ministry, Ordinances, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ. A man
that is swift to hear what may scandalize him; that is joyful upon occasions,
that make him angry and uncharitable, or any other way to sin; he is like unto
one that in a time of war does voluntarily run upon the Swords point, or up to
the Canons mouth; or like one that in a time of Pestilence, does not strive to
avoid, but to catch the contagion. A man that should thus be fond of Plague or
Sword, you will judge frantic, and he is in a worse sense frantic that is
fond of scandal. That Is the third Caution, Take heed of scandalizing any.

4. Take heed of an unbridled Tongue. How mighty an hinderance of love has this
little member been! Both Church and State have felt the Smarting and dangerous
wounds, which a lawless tongue has given. The tongue of a Serpent, of a Viper;
the tongue that is all sting, and carries Poison and Death in it, is nothing
near so hurtful, as the Tongue of a Liar, of a Slanderer. The Apostle plainly
intimates, and the Prophet had done it long before, that the Sins of the Tongue
are the great cause of the badness of the times, 1 Pet. 3. 10, 11. He that will
love life and see good days, let him refrain his Tongue from evil, and his
Lips that they speak no guile, let him eschew evil and do good, let him seek
peace and pursue it.

Four things are observable in these words.

1. That an evil Tongue is the disturber of Peace.

2. That it is a great indication of guile and hypocrisy.

3. That it very often shortens the Life.

4. That it is a grand Impediment unto our seeing good days.

It Is a vain thing to expect that times should grow better, when tongues grow
daily worse and worse; and neither Scripture, Reason, nor Conscience can keep
them to the words of truth and soberness.

When there is so much evil in the tongue, how little of love, how little of
good can there be in the heart? Would you have the Church of Christ edified?
let not your tongues wound any of her members, though of a different persuasion
from you. Do you love your Neighbors as your selves? be as backward to speak
evil of your Neighbors as of your selves. What our Lord speaks concerning
doing, may be applied to saying; whatsoever ye would that men should say
concerning you, say you even so of them. He that knew what was in man, tells
us, Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Bitterness in the
language argues a root of bitterness within, which the sooner it is plucked up
the better.

Take heed of speaking lies to the prejudice of others. Satan the Accuser has
hardly a more exact picture in this world, than a Malicious liar. Invent not
lies, believe not lies, report not lies. He that spreads a lie to his Brothers
harm, is an hater of his Brother; he may talk of love, but is he a stranger to
it, Prove. 26. 28. A lying tongue hates those that are afflicted by it, and a
flattering mouth works ruin. Spreading of slanders is a sign of hatred. Nay,
you are not to speak truth with an evil design; Clamor and railing at the
faults of others, makes you faulty as well as they. 'Twere well if instead of
public defamations, there were more friendly, brotherly and private
admonitions. That injunction of Christ, Tell thy Brother his fault between thee
and him alone, if he hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother, Mat. 18. 15. is
neglected at this day, as if it were not in the Bible.

Be not forward to pronounce judgment rashly concerning others. Christ the
Judge says to Christians, Judge not, Mat. 7. 1. You that speak so much of
standing up for the Kingly office of Christ, do not usurp his place and office
by becoming Judges of your Brethren; do not cast that great command of this
King of Kings behind your backs, Love one another.

Avoid partiality in speaking of others; if you extenuate greater crimes in
those of your own party, and endeavor to conceal them, and aggravate lesser
things in those of another party, and blaze them abroad; you respect persons,
and are convinced of the law as transgressors, Jam. 2. 9. and so far as there
is partiality, so far there is hypocrisy, Jam. 3. 17.

O Tongues of Professors! How long will it be e're you be quiet? How long shall
your breath be li^^ the East Wind, blasting all about you? When shall all your
words be agreeable to the Word of God? when shall your lips feed many, and hurt
none? your reproachful, backbiting, railing language, your lies and falsehoods
have been your sin and shame, and the shame of Religion; repentance and
amendment is absolutely necessary, else Salvation still will stand at a
distance. Isa. 63. 8. For he said, Surely they are my people, Children that
will not lie, so he was their Savior.

USE III. Of Exhortation, to abound in Love, which is so much for the Churches
Edification. My Exhortation I second with these Arguments.

1. God is Love; his love is unconceivably great toward his whole Church, and
every true member of it. There is not the meanest or most mistaking Christian
in the World, but if sincere, God sets his love and an high pric^ upon. Ungodly
men are but like common stones; but Believers are Gods Jewels, and peculiar
treasure above all people, Exodus 19. 5. And if God thus loves them all, surely
they ought to love one another, 1 John 4. 11. And they that dwell in love,
dwell in God; now to dwell in God is to dwell safely, for he is the Rock of
Ages; and in Him Mercy and Grace, and light and peace and joy are to be found.

2. Christ the Head is full of love to all the Members, among these therefore
there should be a most ardent affection one to another, and a great and sweet
agreement. Comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height; and know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.
18, 19. And how will you be able to slander or injure, or be bitter against any
whom Christ loves with a love that passes all understanding?

3. Love is preferred before Faith and Hope, 1 Cor. 13. ult. And now abides
Faith, Hope, Charity, but the greatest of these is Charity. Faith and Hope
cease when we come to see and enjoy; but Love never falls or ends. Faith
receives, and Hope expects, but Love gives the Heart to God, and for his sake
it gives liberally to its Neighbor. Love is the bond of perfectness, Col. 3.
14. Charitas multos, and multa unit; Love ties all other virtues together, and
makes them more perfect and acceptable, and it unites the members of the Church
together, which Church is the Worlds perfection, Psalm. 50. 2. Out of Sion the
perfection of beauty God has shined.

4. Love is a debt, Romans 13. 8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another.
You are not just to your Neighbor unless you love him, and love to show mercy
to him. He that loves not another, defrauds him of what is due to him; nay, he
is not only a Thief but a Murderer, 1 John 3. 15. Whosoever hates his Brother
is a Murderer, and ye know that no Murderer has eternal life abiding in him.
And if he that wants love, is a Murderer, it is less to say that he is a
Schismatic; but he may truly be called the greatest Schismatic that is most
void of love. Haeresis fidei opponitur, Schis^a Charitati; Heresy is opposed
to Faith, and Schism to Charity: and if so, then they are furthest from Schism
that are fullest of love; and they are most Schismatical, who are fullest of
bitterness and rancour against their Brethren.

5. The greater your love is, and the more Catholic it is, it makes every one
of you the more common good, the more Catholic blessing. The Church is
beholding to you, and so is the world: God himself is pleased to see your
Charity so diffusive and active; and your labor of love shall not be
forgotten, shall not miss of a reward.

USE IV. Of Direction, How love may be revived, and increased.

1. Observe the great defects of love in you, and be very much ashamed and
abased before God. How few of your actions and speeches have favored of Love!
what workings have there been in your hearts contrary to it! Judge not want of
love a small offense, since it is so much called for both in Law and Gospel.

2. Seriously lay to heart how much Christ himself is concerned in and for all
his Members, though their opinions may be different from yours. This good
Shepherd loves all his flock, and he gave his life a ransom for every one of
them. Backbite not, discourage not, persecute not, and especially destroy not
any one for whom Christ died, 1 Cor. 8. 11. Every particular believer should
love the Universal Church; and should have an interest in the Universal
Churches love.

3. Search the Scriptures that light may be increased. The more true knowledge,
the more unity, Ephesians. 4. 13. All sincere hearts have a strong disposition to
agree together in the truths of God, when once they are revealed to them. Pray
against Errors; for as Errors are contrary to truth (which in all the parts
of it agrees with it self) so they often contradict one another, and naturally
tend to make divisions.

4. Be very bumble and self-denying. There must be great yielding on all sides,
putting up many things, or love will not be revived. Humbleness of mind and
meekness are the Companions of Charity, and cherish it exceedingly, Col. 3. 12,
13, 14. Put on as the elect of God bowels of mercyes, kindness, humbleness of
mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, if any man have a quarrel against any. Even as Christ forgave you so
also do ye, and above all these things put on Charity. Abhor pride which is the
cause of contention. That is good counsel which I find in those Rabbinical
Rhythins, which if followed would increase love.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Thus in English:

Let Wisdom above all possessions be;
Before Preferment choose Humility.
Every ill property be sure depresse,
But principally stiff tenaciousnesse.
5. Mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses, and avoid them. They that
agree in Doctrine, and in the main things of Christianity, should not easily be
divided: They should think more of those things wherein they agree, than of
those wherein they differ: And be sure to deafen your ears to Tale-bearers,
whose business is to destroy Love, and sow Discord. The words of a Talebearer
are as Wounds; and how deep do they go? Where no Wood is, the Fire goes out;
and where there is no Talebearer, the Strife cease, Prove. 26. 20.

6. Let this be your frequent Petition, That you may be taught of God to love
one another. Pray that the Word, which commands Love, may be more deeply
engraven in your Hearts, and rule there at all times; and that all exasperating
thoughts and surmises, all unruly passions which are contrary to Love, as
enemies to you, to the Church, to God himself, may be brought into Captivity
unto Christ the Prince of Peace.

USE. V. Of Consolation to the distracted, drooping, desponding Church of
Christ, and all the sincere Members of it. The grounds of Comfort are these.

1. The Church of Christ shall be upheld, no^withstanding all her Divisions.
What heats, what Heresies in the Primitive times! If one reads the Catalogue of
Errors in Epiphantus, and St. Augustine, which men professing Christianity
embraced, and what rents these Errors made; it will be just matter of wonder
that the Church was not torn to pieces by her own Members. Satan has been
striking at Faith and Charity; and yet still there is a Church, and when he has
done his worst, there will be one.

2. The Love of Christ toward his Church is unchangeable. The Members may fail
in their duty one toward another; but the Faithfulness of the Head never
fails. His care is constant: he is the same yesterday, and to day, and for
ever, Heb. 13. 8. It Is said, Joh. 13. 1. That Jesus having loved his own that
were in the World, he loved them to the end. And this love secured them to the
end.

3. There will be no want of love in Heaven. Though Christians may not fancy to
travel in one another company, yet they are all going toward the same
Country, and place of eternal rest; and when they are once come thither, they
shall rest from sin and contention, as well as from trouble and affliction. In
that glorious place and state, there will be no error, no culpable ignorance
remaining; both light and love will be in their perfection; and because perfect
love is there, perfect peace and joy will be there also. Jerusalem above is a
City indeed that is compact together, strongly founded, for its builder and
maker is God; Heb. 11. 10. and it is to last for ever, and is built accordingly.
The triumphant Saints that inhabit there, how near are they brought unto God
who is all in all! How closely and inseparably are they knit together in love!
St. Paul and Barnabas will no more fall out, being both in Heaven; and Luther
and Zuinglius are perfectly agreed.

When St. Augustine, as he tells us in his Confessions, had been discoursing
with his Mother concerning Heaven, the Crown, the Joys, the Peace, the
Pleasures there, his Mothers heart grew warm with Sacred Fire; and that warmth
at length was heightened into an Heavenly Rapture; making her cry out, Quid hic
faciam? What shall I do here below! How shall I with patience stay in a vale of
fears, who have had such a sight of the glory, such a taste of the joys of the
New Jerusalem! Certainly it should make sincere Christians long to be above;
and it should comfort them that it will not be long ere they are above; when
they behold the Church on Earth so rent and torn by Pride and Ignorance, and
unruly Lusts and Passions; and when withal they remember, that among the
innumerable Company of Angels, and all the glorified Saints, there is not the
least discord, but a complete and everlasting Harmony.

I have finished my Discourse concerning Love, and the Churches Edification. I
shall add a few Verses which I made when Prisoner in the Marshalsed. I find
that Music relieved Saul when the Evil Spirit came upon him, and composed the
Spirit of a Prophet when it was ruffled and out of order; and perhaps Poetry
may have an effect of the like nature. The Vers^s are these.

Now use thy liberty, my Mind,
Who art not in the least confined.
The whole Earth over thou may go,
And view the All that it can show:
And that great All which thou can see
Is not enough to satiate Thee.
From Gades to Ganges thou may run,
(Thy thought's much swister than the Sun)
And in thy travel nothing spy
But what is vexing Vanity.
The greedy Worldling spares no pains;
The more he has, the less he gains:
To profit others does refuse;
Nay, locks up all from his own use.
Sensual pleasures mixed be
With an inward Anxiety:
The brutish part they only please,
But are the Mind's snare and disease.
The Ambitious Man strives to climb high,
That he may stand more slippery.
The glist'ring Crowns which Monarchs wear
Have less of Honor than of Care.
Vain World! produce even all thy store,
Thou art indeed a thing but poor.
Nay, Heavens Heirs have felt thy rage
In this, as every former Age.
If not by an excessive love
An Idol made of, thou do prove
A Hell, or Shambles unto them
Who dare thee with thy all contemn.
The Church is too much like the World,
Into a strange confusion hurled:
Envy, and Wrath, and Pride, and Strife,
Imbittering this present life.
By all is plain enough expressed;
Arise, depart, here is not thy Rest.
Trample on Earth, then take thy flight,
Immortal Soul! Things out of sight,
Above the Sun, or any Star,
Are worthy'st of thy thoughts by far.
Let not thy Senses Jaylors be,
Nor what suits them infatuate thee.
Open thy eyes, behold thy God;
Rise with thy Lord, that thy abode.
May be with him that is Light and Love
Nay, All in all that are above.
The Persecution most fierce
Can no way hinder thy Converse
With Heaven: Though in a Dungeon deep
As the Earth's Center, Foes should keep
The Body close, yet thou art free;
And thy best Friend to visit Thee;
The joyful tokens of his Love,
Prisons are Palaces, do prove;
Nay, Paradises of Delight,
Although they silly Nature fright.
Sorrow is Joy, and Pain is Pleasure;
Disgrace is Honor, Loss a Treasure.
The World when worst, is best of all
To those God does to suffer call.
The New Jerusalem comes down,
Is clearly'st seen when Men most frown;
And with the sharpest Thorns thee Crown.
Take up thy Cross, which is thy Trial,
And taste the Sweets of Self-denial.
God is thy Father, and thy Rest;
Abide with him, and thou art blessed.
The Following Poem was more lately Composed.

A Welcome to Disesteem.
I.
THe World's a Siren, and its sweetest Song The greatest Wrong.
The Applause of Men the Praised endangereth Like poisonous breath.
The Wings of Fame like those of Icarus, Pernicious.
He that Ambitious is of Estimation,
Shows himself fond of Peril and Temptation.
II.
In The most of Men a change is seen as soon As him in the Moon.
A word, a look can quench the hottest Love, And anger move.
The fondest Friend often turns the worst of Foes, And fury blows.
Whosoever does think to make men always kind,
He may as well attempt to hold the Wind.
III.
On Mountains high the Tempests fiercest are, And nothing spare.
The tops of loftiest Buildings in a Town Are soonest down.
He that is Above, is envied to Death By those beneath.
Ambition does prove a fatal Charm,
And makes a man expose himself to harm.
IV.
Unconstant World! how low should wise men deem Thy high esteem!
To better bad men, Honor has no force, Makes good men worse.
Honor is fitly styled the Foolish Fire That flies desire;
But fondly follows such as scorn and fly it,
That they may be misled and ruined by it.
V.
What peace and safety is in being low, The Prudent know.
Christ's Head did fly the Circle of a Crown And great Renown;
The whole World offered He did refuse, And Meanness choose.
To follow Wisdoms Pattern cannot be folly;
Dishonour's no just ground of Melancholy.
VI.
False World! thy ill report I Will not deserve, It shall me serve.
Thy frowns and slanders shall a kindness do, Not make me rue.
When Friends turn Foes, and Foes more Foes I see, It weaneth me
From things below, and kills excessive Love,
Where doting my destruction might prove.
VII.
I will the Rage of Froward Men, and Spite, With Love requite.
It troubles me to see Professors Ire Burning like Fire.
I wish I were all Tears to check the Flame, And quench the same.
If Wrath shut ears against my Ministry,
I will to God for all the louder cry.
N. V.

THE END.

