THE True Christians Love OF THE UNSEEN CHRIST: OR A Discourse chiefly tending
to excite and promote the decaying Love of Christ in the hearts of Christians.

With an Appendix concerning Christ's Manifestation of himself to them that Love
him.

1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man Love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha. By Thomas Vincent, Minister sometime of Maudlins Milkstreet, London.

London, Printed by I. R. for Samuel (...), at the Blew-Bell in
Little-Brittain, 1677.

To the Reader.
Our Savior sent an Epistle from heaven to the Church of Ephesus, wherein he
reproveeth her because she had left her first love, and threatens the Removal
of her Candlestick, that he would take away her light, if she did not recover
her Love. By the same hand at the same time he sent another Epistle to the
Church of Laodicea, wherein he reproves her Lukewarmness, and threatens,
because she was neither hot nor cold, he would spue her out of his mouth, Rev.
2. 4, 5. and 3. 15, 16. And are Christians in England under no such sin, in no
such danger? when some scoff at the flames of love to Christ, like dogs that
bark at the Moon so far above them; when the most nominal Christians are wholly
strangers to this Love, whatever their notional knowledge be; the former
looking upon it as but a fancy, the latter having it only in the Theory: and
when amongst those Christians who love Christ in sincerity, there are so few
that know what it is to Love Christ with fervor and ardency: when there is so
General a decay of Love to Christ in the Land, Lord what is like to become of
England? Have we not provoked the Lord to take away our Candlestick, to suffer
the worse than Egyptian darkness to over spread us again, and cover our Light,
because it shines with such cold beams, because the Light of Knowledge in the
head is accompanied with so little warmth of Love to Christ in the hearts of
most Christians? Every one will fetch water to quench fire in a general
confl^gration; and surely there is need in a day of such General decay of Love
to Christ, that some should fetch fire, fire from heaven, and use bellows too,
Arguments I mean, to enkindle and blow up the spark of Love to Christ, which
seems so ready to expire. Reader, The following discourse concerning the True
Christians Love of the unseen Christ, is not finely spun, and curiously woven
with neatnesses of wit and language; it is not flourished and set off with
variety of Metaphors, Hyperbolies, Rhetorical Elegancies, or Poetical Fancies
and fragments; it is not adorned and fringed with the specious show of many
Marginal Quotations, excerpted out of diverse Authors; The discourse is plain,
but the Author has endeavored that it might be warm, his design being more to
advance his Master than Himself in thy esteem; and if he have less of thy
praise, so his Lord may have more of thy love, his great end is attained. The
chief part of this discourse concerning the love of Christ is Application, and
about two thirds of it Exhortation (there being generally in this knowing age
more need of excitation than information) where thou have variety of arguments
and motives to stir up and provoke unto the love of Christ, together with
diverse directions how to attain this love in the truth and strength of it, and
wherein the strength of love to Christ should evidence it self. There is also
an appendix added for further encouragement unto the love of Christ, concerning
Christ's manifestation of himself unto such as love him. The whole discourse is
practical, nothing in it controversal; not only Protestants, but Papists too
will verbally acknowledge the obligation which Christians have to love Christ,
and none will oppose this that are true Christians, none but Turks, Infidels
and Devils are professedly against it. That this little Book may be blessed by
the Lord to be a means to warm and inflame thine heart with love to the unseen
Christ, is the earnest prayer of

A hearty well-wisher to thy soul. Thomas Vincent.

The True Christians Love of the Unseen CHRIST:
1 Pet. 1. 8. Whom having not Seen, ye Love, in whom, though now ye see him
not, yet Believing, ye Rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory.
THE Life of Christianity does consi^t very much in our love unto Christ.
Without Love unto Christ, we are as much without Spiritual Life, as a Carcass
when the Soul is fled from it, is without Natural Life. Faith without Love to
Christ, is a dead Faith; and a Christian without Love to Christ, is a dead
Christian; dead in Sins and Trespasses. Without Love to Christ, we may have the
Name of Christians, but we are wholly without the Nature: we may have the Form
of Godliness, but are wholly without the Power. Give me thine Heart, is the
language of God to all the Chrildren of Men, Prove. 23. 26. And Give me thy
Love, is the language of Christ unto all his Disciples.

Christ knows the command and influence which Love to him, in the Truth and
Strength of it, has: How it will Engage all the other Affections of his
Disciples for Him; that if he have their Love, their Desires will be chiefly
after Him; their Delights will be chiefly in Him, their Hopes and Expectations
will be chiefly from Him; their Hatred, Fear, Grief, Anger, will be carried
forth chiefly unto Sin, as it is Offensive unto Him. He knows that Love will
Engage and Employ, for him all the Powers and Faculties of their Souls; their
Thoughts will be brought into Captivity and Obedience unto Him; their
Understandings will be employed in Seeking and Finding out his Truths; their
Memories will be Receptacles to retain them; their Conscience will be ready to
Accuse and Excuse as his Faithful Deputies; their Wills will Choose and Refuse
according to his Direction and Revealed Pleasure. All their Senses and the
Members of their Bodies, will be his Servants: their Eyes will See for him,
their Ears will Hear for him, their Tongues will Speak for him, their Hands
will Work for him, their Feet will Walk for him: All their Gifts and T^lents
will be at his Devotion and Service. If he have their Love, they will be ready
to Do for him what he requires; they will be ready to Suffer for him, whatever
he calls them unto: If they have much Love to him, they will not think much
of Denying themselves; taking up his Cross and following him wherever he
leads them, love to Christ then being so Essential unto true Christianity, so
earnestly looked for by our Lord and Master, so Powerfully Commanding in the
Soul and over the whole Man, so Greatly Influential on Duty; I have made choice
of this subject of Love to Christ, to Treat on; and my chief Endeavor herein
shall be to Excite and Provoke Christians unto the Lively and Vigorous Exercise
of this Grace of Love unto the Lord Jesus Christ; of which Incentives, there is
a Great and Universal need.

The Epistle wherein my Text lies, was written by Peter the Apostle of the
Circumcision, and is directed to the Strangers scattered throughout Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and B^thynia, as in the first v. of this Chapter. By
these Strangers we are to understand the scattered Jews, who were Strangers in
these several Countries where they did Inhabit. We read in the 2d of the Acts
that there came up many of these Jews, from these and other Countries, unto
Jerusalem to Worship* and in the temple hearing the Apostles speak with diverse
Tongues, which were of use in the diverse places where they did live, and that
without Instruction from Man, but as the Spirit gave them utterance; they were
Amazed and Confounded: and afterward hearing Peter preach, through the
Wonderful Power of the Spirit, three thousand of them were Converted by one
Sermon unto the Christian Faith, and added to the Christian Church. When the
Feast of Pentecost was over, these Converted Jews returned into their Countries
where their several Dwellings, Families and Callings were: which Countries
being Heathenish and Idolatrous, no doubt but there they met with Opposition
and Suffering upon the account of the Christian Religion which they became
Zealous Professors of, besides what they endured from their own Countrymen, or
Unconverted I^ws who hated Christianity more than the Heathens did. The Apostle
does seem to have a respect unto these in this Epistle, wherein he does
encourage them under their sufferings for the sake of Christ by many
Consolatory Arguments. In the 2d v. he wishes that Grace and Peace might be
multiplied in them and toward them, and then though their Sufferings did
abound, their Consolations would abound much more. In the 3d 4th and 5th ver.
He blesses God for his abundant Mercy toward them in begetting them unto a
lively Hope of the glorious and never fading Heavenly Inheritance which was
reserved for them through Gods Infinite Grace, and unto which they were
reserved and kept through Faith by Gods infinite power. In the 6th and 7th
verses, he tells them, however they were in heaviness through manifold
Temptations, that is Afflictions, which are the Worlds left hand Temptations;
yet he gives them to understand that these afflictions they were but for a
season; weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning; they
were but needful to humble them, to purify them, to crucify them to the
world, to make them conformable to their head the Lord Jesus Christ, and that
they were for the trial of their faith, that the truth of it might appear both
to themselves and others, and that the worth of it might appear how much more
precious than Gold when it is tried in the Fire, which carrying them through
their sufferings, might be found both to their own praise and their Masters
honor, at the appearing of Jesus Christ: and then the Apostle does take
occasion in the text to speak of their Love which they did bear unto this Jesus
Christ, and of that unspeakable and glorious joy, which does result from
believing in him although they had no sight of him, which no trouble or
affliction could overwhelm or hinder. Whom having not seen ye love, in whom
though now ye see him not, yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and
full of Glory. Hence observe,

Doct. 1. That it is the Property and duty of true Christians to Love Jesus
Christ whom they have never seen. Whom having not seen ye Love.

Doct. 2. That true Christians do Believe in an unseen Christ. In whom though
now ye see Him not, yet believing.

Doct. 3. That true Christians do or may rejoice in Believing with unspeakable
and glorious joy. In whom, though now ye see him not, yet Believing ye rejoice
with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

Here are three great points to be treated of. 1. Concerning the Love of
Christians unto Christ. 2. Concerning the faith of Christians in Christ. 3.
Concerning the Joy of Christians in Believing* For the present I shall speak
only of the Love of Christians unto Christ under the first Doctrine, the other
two I may have opportunity to treat of afterward.

Section. I.
Doct. THat it is the Property and duty of true Christians to love the Lord
Jesus Christ, whom they have never seen.

In handling of this point I shall speak. 1. Concerning true Christians who do
love Jesus Christ. 2. Concerning Jesus Christ whom they have never seen, the
Object of their Love. 3. Concerning the Love which they bare unto this unseen
Christ. 4. Show that it is the Property of true Christians to Love Jesus Christ
whom they have never seen. 5. That it is their Duty to love him. 6. How they
ought to love Him. 7. Why they do love Him, where I shall give the reasons of
the point. 8. Make some Use and Application.

1. Concerning true Christians whose property it is to love Jesus Christ whom
they have never seen, whom having not seen ye love, ye love, that is, ye who
are true Christians, who are so in reality as well as profession; and of these
true Christians that do love Christ, the Apostle does give a description in the
2d. ver. where he calls them, Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the
Father, through Sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of
the blood of Jesus Christ. True Christians are Elect according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father, they are such whom God according to the
Council of his own will, according to his own purpose and grace, did choose
from all Eternity to be a holy and peculiar people to himself, to glorify him
here on Earth, and that they might be glorified by him hereafter in heaven. And
this election does evidence it self in the Sanctification of the Spirit, true
Christians are sanctified being separated and set apart from the rest of the
world, for Gods use and service: God has sealed them for himself, and hereby
distinguished them from all others, the Motto of which seal is this, Holiness
unto the Lord. See a description of them in this respect, 2 Timothy 2. 21. If any
man purge^ himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto Honor, sanctified and
meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good work: they are purged
from the defilement of sin, which does pollute and dishonor them, they are
vessels unto honor, like those of Silver and Gold in a great house, which are
adorned with Pearls and precious stones; they are adorned with all sanctifying
graces, which are of more worth than the richest Jewels; and hereby they are
both beautiful in Gods eye, and they are made meet for Gods use, being hereby
prepared and enabled unto every good work. This the Apostle prays for in the
behalf of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. And the very God of peace
sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body be
preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. True Christians
are sanctified wholly, in their whole man, though they be not sanctified
thoroughly: they are sanctified in every part, though they are not sanctified in
the highest degree. Their whole Spirit is sanctified that is the higher
faculties of the soul, namely the understanding and the will* their
understandings are enlightened by the Spirit unto a Spiritual discerning both of
good and evil, beyond what any natural man does o^ can atta^n unto; their wills
are bowed, or rather rectified, and made straight, being inclined unto God and
his Law. Their Souls are sanctified in the inferior faculties, in all the
affections belonging both to the concupiscible and the irrascible appetite;
their liking affections of love, desire, delight and hope are toward God and
Christ and things above; their disliking affections of hatred, fear, grief and
anger are toward sin. Their bodies also are sanctified being made members of
Christ, and instruments of Righteousness; their eyes, ears, tongues, hands,
feet and every part being devoted to God and made use of for his glory; Thus
true Christians are sanctified by the spirit. And they are sanctified unto
obedience, the graces which are wrought by the spirit in their hearts, do
appear in the obedience of their lives; the course of their lives in a course
of obedience unto the laws of Christ: they are sanctified unto obedience and
they are sanctified unto sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ; God has set
them apart to be sprinkled with the blood of the immac^late Lamb, who takes
away sin that they might be pardoned and saved, such are true Christians who
love Christ whom they have not seen.

Section. II.
Secondly COncerning the object of true Christians Love, and that is Jesus
Christ whom they have never seen. This Jesus Christ whom they love is the
Eternal Son of God, the second Person in the glorious Trinity, who in time
assumed our Humane Nature, clothed himself with our mortal Flesh, lived like a
servant in a mean condition, died like a malefactor the cursed Death of the
Cross, and all for our sakes, for our sins, rose again the third day for our
Justification, ascended up into heaven after forty days, and there is set down
at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty on high, to make intercession
for us, and to make preparation there for our reception, into the glorious
Mansions and Eternal Habitations, which are in the Fathers house. He is called
Jesus from the Hebrew word (...) which signifies to save because he saves his
people from their sins, Matthew. 1. 21. He is called Christ from the Greek word
(...) which signifies to anoint, he being anointed by the Father with the
Spirit and with Power, to be Mediator between God and Man, to be the great
Prophet, and Priest, and King, of the Church. This Jesus Christ Christians have
not seen with the eye of sense; indeed some Christians in the primitive times,
as the Apostles who were of his family and other disciples who conversed with
him frequently, did see Christ with the eye of sense, but it was in his state
of Humiliation, when he was here upon the Earth, not in his state of
Exaltation, now he is in Heaven; yet some have seen Christ after his Ascension
namely Paul at his conversion, and Stephen the Proto Martyr before he dyed; but
none have had a perfect sight with bodily eyes of the Glory which is upon
Christ's body, the luster of which is so great that none can behold it in this
state of weakness and imperfection, and live. But whatever sight some
Christians have had formerly, no Christians now have a sight of Christ's
Person; they have heard of him with the hearing of the Ear, but they have not
seen him with the seeing of the Eye; they have seen Representations of Christ
in the Sacrament, but they have never seen his Person that is represented; they
have seen his Image upon their Fellow Christians, but they have not seen the
original from whom this Image has been drawn. Some Christians have been in
Judea, and seen the place where the Lord lived; and at Jerusalem and seen the
place where the Lord dyed; and Visited the place of his Sepulcher where the
Lord for a time did lie: and they have seen the Mount whence the Lord Ascended;
but no Christians now alive have been in Jerusalem, and on Mount Sion, which is
above, to see where the Lord now is in his Glory. It is this Jesus Christ whom
Christians have not seen, that is the Object of their Love.

Section III.
Thirdly, Concerning the Love which True Christians do bear unto this unseen
Christ. Love is the going forth of the Heart unto the Object Beloved; and the
Love which True Christians do bear unto Jesus Christ, is a Grace wrought by the
Spirit in their hearts, whereby upon discovery and believing Apprehensions of
Christ's infinite Loveliness and Excellency, his Matchless Love Grace and Mercy;
their Hearts do go forth toward him in Earnest desires after Union to him, and
Communion with him, wherein they take chief Complacency; and this accompanied
with a yiedling and dedication of themselves unto his will and service.

1. The Love of Christians unto Christ, is a Grace wrought in their Hearts by
the Spirit. It is a Flower most Sweet and Fragrant, but there is no Seed of it
in the Nature of any Man since the Fall, it is planted in the Soul by the
Spirit of God. Love to Christ is a Divine Spark, that comes down from above; a
fire which is kindled by the breath of the Lord, whose Ess^nce is Love.

2. The Ground of this Love to Christ, is the discovery and believing
Apprehensions of Christ's Loveliness and Love. There must be first a discovery
of Christ as a suitable Object for Love, and not a bare Notion of this, but
believing apprehensions of it, that Christ is Infinitely lovely, Superlatively
Excellent; and that his love is Matchless and Transcendent toward the Children
of Men, that there is a Treasury in him, and a Storehouse of all Graces, and
the most Needful and Rich Supplies; otherwise there will be no going forth of
the Heart in love unto him.

3. The Actings of Christians love to Christ, is in their desires after Union
unto, and Communion with Christ. It is the Nature of love to desire Union to
the Object beloved; especially of this love to Christ: and this Union being
attained, the desires are after Communion with Christ, Converse and Fellowship
with him; no Converse is so desirable as with the Persons whom we most dearly
love: and this Communion being attained, there is chief Complacency therein,
the Soul does sweetly rest and repose it self in Christ, and rejoices in his
presence and love.

4. The Concomitant of this Love which True Christians have unto Christ, is a
yielding and dedication of themselves unto his will and Service. Lovers do give
themselves unto those whom they love; this accompanies the Marriage Union: and
such as love Christ, they are Espoused and joined unto Christ; and they give
themselves unto Christ to be his, and wholly at his dispose, as the Wife gives
her self unto the dispose of her Husband.

Section IV.
Fourthly, THe Fourth thing is to show, that it is the Property of all true
Christians, to Love this unseen Christ. True Christians are differenced and
distinguished, not only from all Heathens and Infidels, but also from all bare
Nominall Christians, by their Love to Jesus Christ. It is the Property of
Covetous Persons to love Worldly Wealth and Riches: It is the Property of
Ambitious Persons, to love Worldly Honor and Dignities: It is the Property of
Voluptuous Persons, to love Sensual Pleasures and Delights: And it is the
Property of True Christians to Love Jesus Christ whom they have never seen.
None but such as are True Christians do Love Christ, and all those that are
True Christians do love him. The Loveliness of Christ does appear not to the
Eye of Sense, but to the Eye of Faith; they that do not see him with this Eye,
they cannot love him; and they that do see him with this Eye, they cannot
choose but love him. Such as do not love Christ, it is not because Christ wants
Beauty, but because they are blind. Now all true Christians have this Eye of
Faith, to discern Christ's Excellencies; and none but True Christians have this
Eye; the Essence of Christianity does consist in Believing* Reason makes us
Men, but Faith makes us True Christians. It being therefore the property of
True Christians to believe, it is their property also to love this Unseen
Christ.

Section V.
Fifthly, THe Fifth thing is to show, that it is the Duty of all True
Christians to love this unseen Christ. This will appear if you look into John
21. 15. 16, 17. Peter was one of the boldest and forwardest of all Christ's
disciples, but he had been withal too self-confident, which was the
introduction unto and laid the foundation for his fall and thrice shameful
denial of his Master; a look from his Lord put him in remembrance, and brought
him to Repentance with bitter weeping for his sin so soon as it was committed.
After our Savior was risen from the dead, he appears unto Peter with other of
his disciples and in this place he asks the same question in the same words
three times, Simon Son of Jonas, love thou me? Whereby as he does tacitly
upbraid him for his great sin in his three times denial of him (which had there
not been a defect in his love, he would never have done) so he does also give a
signification that love to himself is the great duty, and the great thing which
he does look for in all his disciples.

Section. VI.
THe 6th. thing is to show how Christians ought to Love this unseen Christ.

1. Christians ought to love Christ with Sincerity of Love, Ephesians. 6. 24. Grace
be with all them that Love our Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity. It was the great
sin of Judah, Ier. 3. 10. That she turned not to the Lord with her whole heart,
but feignedly: so it is a great sin to love Christ with a feigned and
hypocritical love; the love of Christians to Christ ought to be sincere in
regard of the habit and inward workings of it, they must love him not only in
show, word, and outward profession, but their love must be cordial in the heart
and so a love indeed and in truth: and the love of Christians to Christ must be
sincere in regard of the object of it, they must love Christ for himself and
not chiefly for what they get by him; to love Christ only for Temporal gain is
hypocritical love, to love Christ chiefly for other gain is not so spiritual,
but to love Christ for his own excellencies and perfections is most sincere and
generous, this sincerity of love to Christ is every ones duty.

2. Christians ought to love Christ with Supremacy of love, they must place him
in the highest seat of their hearts; he is a Great King, and he looks for the
Throne, and that all Creatures should be placed beneath him, and stand at his
Footstool: Math. 10. 37. He that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not
worthy of Me; he that loves Son or Daughter more than Me, is not Worthy of Me.
They are the words of our Savior: Christians may love Father and Mother, the
Law of God and Nature does require it; they may love Husband and Wife, the Word
of God enjoyneth the Husband to love his Wife as his own Body, and as Christ
loved the Church; they may love Sons, Daughters, Brethren, Sisters, Kindred,
Friends, yea Enemies, and they ought to do it; yet all must be with a
Subordinate love, but they must love Christ with their chief love; otherwise
they are not worthy to stand in the Relation of Disciples.

3. Christians ought to love Christ with Ardency of Love: Luke 24. 32. And they
said one to another, did not our Hearts burn within us, while he talked with us
by the Way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures? This burning love Christ
enkindled in the heart of his Disciples, and this burning love Christ requires
of all Christians; Can^. 8. 6, 7. Love is strong as Death, the coals thereof
are coals of Fir^ which has a vehement Flame. Many Waters cannot quench Love,
neither can the Floods drown it. Such a strong vehement ardent flaming love
Christians should have unto Jesus Christ, which all the waters of Affliction
may not be able to quench, which no Floods of Temptations or Persecution may be
able to drown and ove^whelm. Therefore

4. Christians ought to love Christ with Constancy of Love. Having begun to
love him, they ought to continue to love him, and to love him unto the end; as
they ought to be constant in their Obedience, and to persevere in their other
Graces; so they ought to be constant and to persevere in this Grace of love to
Christ.

SECT. VII.
Seventhly, THE Seventh thing is to show, why true Christians do Love Christ,
whom they have never seen.

Rea. 1. True Christians do love Christ because of the Need which they have of
him. Men do love their Necessary Food, without which their Bodies would starve
with Hunger: Men do love their Necessary Raiment and Habitations, without which
in Winter Seasons their Bodies would starve with Cold. Men do love their
Necessary Friends, upon whom (under God) they have their Dependence, and from
whom they have all their Subsistence: But no Thing in the World, or Friend in
the World, is so Needful to the Body, as the Lord Jesus Christ is unto the
Soul: and as the Excellencies of the Soul, are far beyond the Excellencies of
the Body; so the Necessities of the Soul, are far beyond the Necessities of the
Body: which Necessities can be answered by none but Jesus Christ; and therefore
True Christians do love him. At first Conversion when they were convinced of
Sin, awakened out of their carnal security, O what Need had they, and did they
see they had of Christ! they perceived themselves to be lost, and that it was
Christ only that could save them; they felt the Wounds of Conscience, and it
was Christ only that could Heal them; they feared the Wrath of a Sin-revenging
God, and it was Christ only that could Deliver them. The Remission,
Reconciliation and Salvation, which they had by Christ, did lay the first
Foundation of a most endeared love unto Christ; And st^ll they perceive a
continual need of Christ, to procure daily pardon for them, and to convey daily
supplies of Grace unto them. They have Need of Christ, when they are Dark to
Enlighten them; when they are Dead to Quicken them; when they are Straightened,
to Enlarge them; when they are Weak, to Strengthen them; when they are Sad, to
Comfort them; when they are Tempted, to Succor them; when they are Fallen, to
Raise them; when they are in Doubts, to Resolve them; when they are under
Fears, to Encourage them; when they Stagger, to Establish them; when they
Wander, to Restore them. Christ, and None but Christ, can do all this, and more
than this for them: and therefore because of the need and usefulness of Christ,
true Christians do love him.

Rea. 2, True Christians do love an unseen Christ, because of the Loveliness of
Christ; which Loveliness though it be not and cannot here be seen by the Eye of
the Body, yet it is evident unto the Eye of Faith: see the Description which is
given of Christ the Beloved, by his Spouse the Church, Cant. 5. 9. The
Daughters of Jerusalem there enquire of the lovesick Spouse, What is thy
Beloved more than another Beloved, O thou fairest amongst Women? what is thy
Beloved more than another Beloved, that thou do so charge us? Hereupon the
Spouse gives a Description, ver. 10. My Beloved is White and Ruddy, the
chiefest among ten thousand; and after she had set forth his Graces. Beauties,
and Excellent Accomplishments, in Metaphors taken from beauties in the several
parts of man's body, in the 11, 12, 13, and 14, verses, she concludes in the 15
and 16 verses, His Countenance is as Lebanon, Excellent as the Cedars. His
Mouth is most sweet, yea he is altogether Lovely. This is my Beloved, and this
is my Friend O Daughters of Jerusalem. The Spouse is here acknowledged to be
the Fairest amongst Women, and not only by the Daughters of Jerusalem, but her
Beloved, who had a more curious eye, does both commend her loveliness and
admire it: chapter 6. 4, 5. Thou art beautiful O my Love as Tirzah, comely as
Jerusalem: Turn away thine ^yes from me, for they have overcome me, and ver.
10. Who is this that looks forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon, clear as
the Sun, and Terrible as an Army with Banners? But what beauty is there then in
the Beloved? if the Church be beautiful beyond all other of the Children of
men, how beautiful is Jesus Christ from whom the Church does derive all its
comeliness? He is said to be White and Ruddy, that shows the beauty of his
Face; and his Countenance is said to be as Lebanon, and like the lofty Cedars
thereof, that shows the Majesty of his Face. His Mouth is said to be most
Sweet; and sweet it is indeed, in regard of the Gracious words which proceed
from it; no Doctrine so sweet as Christ's Doctrine, no Precepts so sweet as
Christ's Precepts, no Promises so sweet as Christ's Promises. But to sum up all
Excellencies and Perfections in a word he is said to be altogether Lovely,
there is no Person or Thing in the World that is most lovely, which can
properly be called altogether lovely: Many defects may be found in the most
amiable persons, and much insufficiency may be found in the most desirable
things; but Christ is altogether lovely; unlovely in no respect, there being no
Spot or Blemish, no Defect or Imperfection to be found in him: and he is lovely
in every respect, there is an incomparable and Transcendent amiableness in
Christ's person in every regard. In the person of Christ the Humane Nature and
the Divine Nature are in Conjunction, he is most lovely in regard of both. His
Humane Nature is compounded of Body and Soul. His Body is most Beautiful, a
most Glorious Beauty and luster is put upon it: whatever it were in his state
of humiliation, be sure it has a Glorious Beauty now in his state of
Exaltation. It is called (...) a Glorious Body, Phil. 3. 21. If the Face of
Moses did shine with resplendent Glory, after his conversing Forty days with
God in Mount Sinai which was Below; how does the Body of Christ shine, which
has been above Sixteen hundred years in Mount Sion which is Above? I am
persuaded that Christ's Body is the most Beautiful of all Visible Creatures.
But the Beauty of Christ's Soul does Excel: No creature whatever, has such
shining Excellencies as are in the Soul of Christ, All the Excellencies that
are, or ever were in any creature, are like a Feather laid in the Balance with
the exceeding weight of his Glorious Excellencies and Perfections. Christ
Excelled the most Excellent Men that ever lived, as to Spiritual Endowments,
when he was here upon the Earth: He Excelled Moses in Meekness, Solomon in
Wisdom, Job in Patience; and how much does he Excel now he is in Heaven? He
Excels not only the Spirits of just men made Perfect, but also the most
glorious and Holy Angels that never sinned. If any creatures have Wisdom, it is
but a Beam, Christ is the Sun; If they have Goodness, it is but a drop, in
Christ is the Ocean; If they have Holiness, it is but a Spark or dark shadow,
Christ is the Brightness of his Fathers Glory: If they have the Spirit, they
have it but In some measure, the Spirit is given to Christ without Measure Ioh.
3. 34. Christ is most lovely in his Manhood, so nearly united unto his Godhead;
and how lovely is he in his Godhead? as God he is Equal in all Glorious
Excellencies with the Father. Christ's Godhead implies Excellency of Being, he
calls himself I am, Ioh. 8. 28. Excellency of Glory, therefore called the
Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8. and King of Glory, Psalm. 24. 7. Lift up your heads
O ye Gates, and be ye lift up, ye Everlasting Doors, and the King of Glory
shall come in. This is Interpreted by some, to be spoken of Christ's Ascension,
and the Angels and Saints making way for his Triumphant Entrance, and
Possession of his Heavenly Palace. Many Descriptions are given in the new
Testament, of this lovely Person; I shall mention only one, Col. 1. 15, 16, 17,
18, 19. Who is the Image of the invisible God, the Firstborn of every
creature; For by him were all things created that are in Heaven, and that are
in Earth, Visible and Invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers: all things were made by him and for him. And he is
before all things, and by him all things consist. And he is the Head of the
Body, the Church: who is the beginning, the Firstborn from the Dead, that in
all things he might have the Preeminence. For it pleased the Father, that in
him all fullness should dwell. If we read, believe and consider this great
Description of Christ, we must needs see and say, that Christ is most Excellent
and Amiable, and that no beloved is like to the Beloved of true Christians:
therefore it is that true Christians do love Christ, because of his loveliness.

Rea. 3. True Christians do love Christ, because of His love. His love which he
does bear to them. He loves them with a First love, and with a Free love; He
loves them with a tender and compassionate love, with an active or doing love,
with a passive or suffering love: His love is Infinite without Bounds or
Limits; it is Superlative without comparison; Transcendent beyond
comprehension; Everlasting without change, and which will have no end or
conclusion. He loved them when they were polluted in their sins, and washed them
with his own blood; he loved them when they were Naked in their Souls, and
clothed them with the Robes of his Righteousness; He loves them in their
sickness and sorrows, and is their Comforter; He loves them in their wants and
Straits, and is their Benefactor, He loves them in Life, and is the Life of
their Souls; He loves them at Death, and is the Stay of their Hearts; And he
loves them after Death, and will be their Portion for ever. There is great
Reason that true Christians should love Christ, because of his loveliness; and
there is further reason that they should love him, because of his love,
especially when both are incomparable, both are incomprehensible. I shall
further speak (God willing) unto both these with other reasons, under the
motives in the Exhortation to excite Christians to the love of Christ.

SECT. VIII.
Use 1. FOR Information hence learn, that there are but few true Christians in
the world, because there are so few that love this unseen Christ. There are
many Christians in Name, few Christians in deed and in truth. The time has
been when openly to profess the Name of a Christian, did argue true love unto
Jesus Christ; I mean in the Primitive times, when Christians were Persecuted by
the Heathens, as in the Ten first dreadful Persecutions under the Heathen
Emperors; when the world was watered with Christian blood, then especially at
some times and in some yea most places, whoever openly acknowledged themselves
to be Christians they exposed themselves unto Imprisonments, Racks, Tortures,
Burnings and the most cruel deaths; It was the Truth and Strength of Love unto
Jesus Christ, which carried them through such great sufferings, as many did in
those days undergo for the sake of Jesus Christ: But now there are Multitudes
of bare nominal Christians, they call themselves Christians being baptized in
Christ's name, but they are altogether without love to Christ, whose Name they
bare: Surely there are but few, not only in the Christian World, but even in
England (where Christianity is to be found in as great purity as in any place)
that love Jesus Christ in sincerity. No grossly ignorant persons do truly love
Christ; such as don't know Christ, they cannot love him; ignoti nulla cupido,
there is no desire after, nor love unto an unknown thing: An unknown evil
cannot be hated, and an unknown good cannot be loved. No grossly Erroneous
persons, do truly love Christ; such as do not receive Christ's Truths, they
cannot love Christ's Person: Joh. 14. 23. If any man love me he will keep my
words. The words of Christ do include, not only the words of his Precepts, but
also the words of his Doctrine; Such as err grossly, I mean in the
Fundamental Truths of Christianity, they are no friends to Christ, but his
Enemies, so far are they from true love unto him. No grossly wicked persons,
do truly love Christ; such as profane persons, who Blaspheme the name of God in
their hideous Oaths; the love of Christ does teach an Holy Awe and Reverence of
Gods Name; such are Persecuters of Gods people for Righteousness sake. How can
they love the Head, that hate the Members? Christ accounts himself to be
persecuted, in the perseution of his Members; Act. 9. 4. Saul, Saul, why
persecut est thou me, and v. 5. I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: and surely
persecutors of Christ do not love Christ. Such are Scoffers at Religion, who
deride Holiness and mock at the name of a Saint or Godly person, whereby they
evidently show their contempt of the Holiness of Christ, from whom the Saints
derive all theirs; and how can they love Christ that do contemn him and his
Image. No unrighteous persons do truly love Christ, whether they be so in
regard of distributative justice, or in regard of commutative justice; whether
they be unrighteous in Execution of judgment, in distribution of Rewards or
Punishments, and whether they be unrighteous in their Traffic and Dealing^;
Christ strictly requires justice and Righteousness, and how can they love him,
that do not keep this Commandment? No Covetous persons do truly love Christ;
the Apostle says, 1 John 2. 15. If any man love the world, the love of the
Father is not in him. And I may say that if any man love the world, (that is,
with his chief love) the love of the Son is not in him; the love cannot be
chiefly set upon things below here on Earth, and upon Christ who is above in
Heaven. No Licentious persons do truly love Christ: no Drunkards, Adulterers,
or any that indulge themselves in unlawful delights; the love of Christ does
teach us to deny such Lusts, and to Mortify them. No mere civil persons that
are unconverted, no Hypocrites that have a form of Godliness, but are without
the power of it, do truly love Christ: the former may be loving and courteous
unto men, but they have no love to Christ; the latter may Profess love to
Christ, and Seem to love him, but they do not really love him. In a word none
who are under the reigning power of any sin, do truly love Christ: The Reign of
sin is in the heart, and this is inconsistent with the love of Christ in the
Heart. Now let us separate all these forementioned persons, from the rest;
Grossly Ignorant persons, grossly erroneous persons, grossly wicked persons,
the Profane, the Persecutors of Gods people, the Scoffers at Religion, all
Unrighteous persons, all Covetous Persons, Drunkards, Adulterers, and all
Licentious Persons; mere Civil persons, Hypocrites, and all that are under the
reigning power of sin, and how few will there be left that do truly love
Christ! and by Consequence there will appear but very few that are true
Christians.

SECT. IX.
Use. 2. FOR Examination. Here you may know whether you are true Christians by
the Trial of your love unto Jesus Christ. Examine your selves therefore,
whether you love Jesus Christ whom you have never seen; the most in the world
do love truly those persons and things only which they have seen; but can you
say that you sincerely and chiefly, do love Jesus Christ whom you have not
seen? the love of the most does arise from the notice which the Eye does give
of the Objects beloved; but does your love arise from the notice which the Ear
has given by the word, of the Amiableness which here is in Christ?

Qu. How may we know whether we have true love to Jesus Christ?

Ans. You may know the truth of your love to Jesus Christ, 1 By your desires
after Christ's presence. 2 By your prizing and frequenting those ways wherein
Christ is to be found, and seeking him therein. 3 By your love of Christ's
image. 4 By your Obedience to Christ's Commandments.

First, By your desires after Christ's Presence; wherever there is a great love
to any person, there is a desire after the presence of that person: do you
sincerely and earnestly desire Christ's presence? there is a twofold presence of
Christ, His gracious presence here, and his Glorious presence at the last day.

1. There is Christ's Gracious presence here, Joh. 14. 18. I will not leave you
comfortless, I will come unto you. You desire that such Friends and Relations
would come unto you, but do you desire chiefly that Christ would come unto you?
Christ comes to his Disciples in a way of gracious communication, in a way of
Gracious Manifestation, and in a way of sweet Consolation which does result
from both.

1 Do you desire that Christ would come unto you in a way of Gracious
communication? are your desires after communication of Spiritual Light from
Christ to teach and guide you; of Spiritual Life from Christ to quicken and
encourage you, of Spiritual Strength from Christ, to support you under Burdens,
and Enable you unto Duties? do you earnestly desire communications of all
kinds, and further degrees of grace out of that fullness of Grace which is in
Christ? do you Hunger and Thirst after Christ's Righteousness, not only that it
may be imputed to you for your Justification, but also that it may be more and
more imparted unto you for your further Sanctification, that you might be
brought and hereby wrought into a more perfect conformity and likeness unto
Jesus Christ: this is an Evidence of true love.

2 Do you desire that Christ would come unto you in a way of Gracious
Manifestation? Joh. 14. 21. He that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and
I will love him, and will manifest my self unto him. Do you Earnestly desire
the fulfilling of this promise? that Christ would discover to you more of the
loveliness of his person, and of the love of his Heart? are you grieved when
your beloved does withdraw himself? when the curtain is drawn, and a cloud does
interpose between you and this Sun of Righteousness; when he Hides and Veileth
his Face from you? and do you long after Christ's returns, and the Discoveries
of himself unto you? Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly; Be as a Roe or young Heart,
upon the Mountains of Spices; Leap over the Mountains, and Skip over the Hills,
and make haste unto my Soul, which is sick of Love for thee in thy Absence from
me: O that I might see thy Face which is so Fair! that I might hear thy Voice
which is so Sweet! that I might feel thy Presence which is so Refreshing! O
that I might behold thy Heart-ravishing Smiles! Say Lord that I am thine, and
thou art mine; that thou have loved me, and given thy self for me; that thy
love to me was from Everlasting, and that it is Unchangeable. Are these or such
like, the breathings of your Souls? Such are the breathings of love to Christ.

3 Do you desire that Christ would come unto you in a way of sweet consolation*
which does result from this communication and Manifestation? are you desirous
after the Oil of Gladness, which Christ is Anointed withal? that he would give
you of the Unction of the Spirit, not only to Sanctify you, but also to
comfort you? do you desire that your Hearts might be filled with Spiritual
joys, the joys of the Holy Ghost, which are unspeakable and full of Glory? do
you desire the comforts which Christ does give, beyond all the comforts which
the World and the Flesh can give? the comforts which come in at the door of
Faith, beyond all the comforts that come in at the door of Sense; those joys
which are in Christ, beyond all joys that can be found in the most sweet and
desirable creature-enjoyment? this evidenceth true love to Christ. Thus do you
desire Christ's Gracious presence.

2. And do you desire also Christ's glorious presence at the Last day? When he
promises, Surely I come quickly, can your hearts make answer as Rev. 22. 20.
Amen, even so come Lord Jesus? are you glad you live so near the End of the
World, that the Lord is at hand, that the coming of the Lord draws nearer and
nearer every day? can you lift up your heads with joy, when you look toward
the place where the Lord Jesus Christ is, at the right hand of the Throne of
the Majesty on High; and think with comfort, that yet a little while, and he
that shall come will come, and will not now tarry much longer; that within a
while Christ will descend from Heaven with a shout, the Lord with the Sound of
the Trumpet, and that your Eyes shall see him in the brightness of his Glory
and Majesty? Do you look and long for the day of Christ's glorious appearance
from heaven, when you shall be awakened out of your Graves (where you may take
a short sleep before) and be gathered together by the Angels, and be caught up
in the clouds, and there (in shining Garments of Immortality on your Bodies and
of Christ's unspotted Righteousness in your Souls) be brought with Shoutings and
Acclamations of Joy and Triumph into his Presence, who will then acquit you
Graciously from all Sin and Punishment, own you openly for his Faithful
Servants, crown you Gloriously before the whole World, and receive you to Live
and Reign with him to all Eternity? Have you such desires as these? If some of
you say, you are afraid of Christ's Glorious appearance, lest then you should be
rejected because you fear you are not ready and prepared; yet can you say also
from your Hearts, that you Desire above all things that you may be ready, that
you Endeavor to make ready, that it is your Grief you are no more ready, and
that if you were ready, and were assured of your Interest in Christ, you could
desire that Christ would come immediately; and that you desire no greater
Happiness and Felicity, than to live with Christ in Glory; and that you account
the Presence of Christ in Heaven to be the Happiness of Heaven? These are
Evidences of true desires after Christ's Glorious presence, and of sincere love
to Christ.

Secondly, You may know your love to Christ, by your Prizing and Frequenting
those ways wherein Christ is to be found, and seeking him therein. Such are
the ways of his Ordinances both public and private. Christ's way is in his
Sanctuary, and in his Ordinances he may be found; do you give your attendance
unto Ordinances, Public prayer, the Preaching of the word, the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper? and do you prize these Ordinances because of the Stamp of
Christ's Institution upon them, because of Christ's presence in them, and
because they are a means of bringing you and Christ together? and when you are
under Ordinances, do you diligently seek after Christ in Ordinances? Don't you
rest in the outside and carnal part of Ordinances, in meeting with Gods People
there? or do you design, desire and endeavor after something more inward and
Spiritual and incomparably sweet, that you meet with Christ there, that you may
have Fellowship with the Father and the Son therein? and upon this account can
you say as David, How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord! and A day in thy
Courts is better than a Thousand, Psalm. 84. 1, And, One thing have I desired of
the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all
the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his
Temple; Psalm. 27. 4. Do you also seek after Christ in your Families, and in
your Closets? do you seek him in secret prayer and meditation? your love to
Christ does express it self in your desires; your desires do show themselves in
your seeking after Christ in his ways.

Thirdly, you may know your love to Christ, by your love of Christ's Image:
there is the Image of Christ on his Word, and there is the Image of Christ on
his People.

1. Do you love the Image of Christ on his Word? as Caesar's Coin did bear
Caesar's Image and Superscription, so the Word of the Scriptures, which is the
Word of Christ, does bear Christ's Image and Superscription. Do you love the
Scriptures because of Christ's Image which is upon them? do you love the Word
of Doctrine in the Scripture, because of the Image of Christ's Truth and Wisdom
upon it? do you love the Word of Precepts in the Scriptures, because of the
Image of Christ's Holiness upon it? do you love the Word of Threatenings in the
Scriptures, because of the Image of Christ's Righteousness upon it? do you love
the Word of Promises in the Scriptures, because of the Image of Christ's
Goodness, Grace and Love upon it? You have Christ's Word in your Bibles, and
sometimes sounding in your Ears, but does the Word of Christ dwell in your
Hearts? you receive Christ's word in the Light of it, do you receive his Word in
the Love of it?

2. Do you love Christ's Image on his People? If you love not your Brother whom
you have seen, how can you love your Lord whom you have not seen? All Christ's
Disciples do bear Christ's Image; if you love the Original you will love the
Picture, although it be but imperfectly drawn; If you love the perfect Goodness
and Holiness which is in Christ, you will love the Goodness and Holiness which
you see in the Saints, although they have it but in an imperfect Measure: do
you love Christ's Disciples ^ and that because of Christ's Image, although they
differ from you in some opinions which are circumstantial?

Fourthly, You may know your love to Christ, by your Obedience unto his
Commandments, Joh. 14. 15. If you love me keep my Commandments; and ver. 21.
He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me. You
Have Christ's Commandments, do you Keep them? you Know them, do you Practice
them? your Love to Christ is known by your Obedience unto Christ. If Christ be
your Beloved, he is also your Lord; if you have true affection for him, you
yield Subjection unto him: If you Love Christ, you are careful to Please
Christ; you are not the Servants of the Flesh, to take care to please the
Flesh; but you are the servants of Christ, to take care above all persons and
all thing to please Christ; if you love Christ you are fearful of giving just
occasion of offense unto men, but above all you are fearful of displeasing and
offending your Lord. Do you labor so to walk that you may please Christ in the
way of sincere and universal obedience? are you hearty in your obedience unto
Christ? have you a respect to all his Commandments? is it your grief that you
fall short in your obedience unto Christ? if you can say in the presence of the
Lord, and your hearts do not give your tongues the lie, that you don't live and
allow your selves in the practice of any known sin which Christ forbids, nor
in the neglect of any known duty which Christ commands, this is a sure
evidence of true love to Jesus Christ. Thus for the trial of your love unto
Christ.

Section III.
Use 3. FOr reproof.

1. Of all such as have no love at all unto this unseen Christ; and will not
the use of Information, together with the use of trial leave a conviction upon
many of you that you are without this love? Suffer then the word of reproof;
what, are you Creatures made By Christ, and made For Christ, and yet have no
love to him? are you Rational Creatures, have you souls capable of knowing him
and loving him, and yet have no love? are you Christians and not love Christ?
baptized in Christ's Name, and yet have you no love to Christ's person? are
some of you Professors, and yet not love Christ? make a show of devotion, and
yet without any true affection to the object of your worship? Sinners though
you have not seen Christ, yet have you not heard of him? and have you not heard
enough to engage and draw forth your love unto Christ. What do you think? is
there such a person as Jesus Christ, or is there not? have you no Bibles? and
if you have, have you not read therein the History concerning Jesus Christ? and
what do you think of that History, is it true or is it false? do you think the
Gospel to be a cunningly devised fable? are not the Scriptures which contain
this Gospel, the very word of the true God who cannot lie? are there not such
characters of Divinity upon them, as are sufficient to evince their divine
original to any that search into them, and do not wilfully shut their eyes
against the light which there does shine? And if it be so that there is indeed
such a person as Jesus Christ (as there is nothing more true) how is it that
you have no love unto him? do not the Scriptures reveal and set forth Christ,
as the most excellent and amiable person? and yet do you not love him? can you
love persons and things that are but Imperfectly lovely, and not love Jesus
Christ who is Altogether lovely? can you love one of great honor that has but
some inferior power and authority, and not love Jesus Christ, who is the Lord
of Glory, who has All power and authority both in Heaven and Earth? can you
love such as have Wisdom and Learning though it be terrene, and not love Jesus
Christ who is the wisdom of the Father, who knows all things, and whose
wisdom is divine? can you love such as are liberal and bountiful, and not love
Christ whose bounty is superlative, and whose gifts are most rich and
transcendent? can you love friends that are kind, and not love Jesus Christ who
is the best friend that ever the children of men had? can you love a Benefactor
that feeds you, and clothes you, and gives money to you, and yet not love
Christ who offers to feed your hunger-starved souls with the bread of life,
to cloth your naked souls with the robes of His Righteousness, and to give the
spiritual Riches of Grace to you, the least dram of which is of more worth than
all the riches of the Earth? can you love Riches and not love Christ in whom
there are treasures, and by whom you may have not only spiritual riches here,
but also the heavenly inheritance hereafter? can you love honors, and not love
Christ by whom you may have the highest dignities, the honor of children to
the King of Heaven now, and a Crown of Glory in the other world? can you love
liberty and not love Christ by whom you may be made free from the Slavery of
the Devil and your own lusts? can you love safety and not love Christ who is
the only Savior of mankind, and who alone puts you in safety from the reach of
the worst of Enemies, and the worst of Evils? can you love peace and not love
Christ by whom you may have peace with God, and peace in your own conscience?
can you love pleasures and delights, and not love Christ by whom you may have
joys unspeakable and full of glory, besides those everlasting pleasures which
are to come? without love to Christ you are under the guilt of all your sins;
neither your orginal sin, nor any of your actual sins are pardoned, they all
lie upon your own score, and you must answer for all your selves, and how
fearful is your account like to be! without love to Christ you are under the
curse, not only under the curse of the Law for your breach of the Law, but also
under the curse of the Gospel for disobedience to this command of the Gospel
which requires you to love the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man
love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathama Maranatha, that is, let him
be cursed, till the Lord come, and when the Lord comes will he take off the
curse from you? no, he will come in flaming fire to take vengeance upon you,
having threatened then to punish all such with everlasting destruction, as shall
be ^ound to have disobeyed the Gospel; and what then is like to become of you?
Sodom and Gomorrha those wicked Cities will then be punished dreadfully, with a
worse fire than that which was rained down from heaven, and consumed their
persons and habitations together; I mean, with the fire of Hell, which will be
kindled and kept alive unto Eternity by the breath of the Almighty; but you who
do not love the Lord Jesus Christ notwithstanding all discoveries of him,
invitations to him, and proffers of kindnesses by him, you will be punished
more dreadfully than the wicked Sodomites. it will be more tolerable in the
day of Judgment for them than for you; the torments of Hell will be
intolerable by any, but they will be most intolerable by Gospel-sinners; the
fire of Hell will burn upon you the most fiercely, and the scourge of
Conscience will lash you the most furiously. Consider this all ye that have no
love to Christ, otherwise when he comes to judgment he will tear you to pieces
and there will be none to deliver you: if you have not the sweet fire of love
to Christ enkindled in your hearts here, you will be thrown into the dreadful
fire of Hell which will burn you Everlastingly.

2. This reproves such of you as have some love, but it is very little love to
Jesus Christ; you that love Christ, is not your love very small, not only in
comparison with the love to you, but also in comparison with the love which
some Christians have attained unto? how strong was the love of the Apostles
unto Christ when they left all and followed him! especially after the
resurrection of Christ and his Ascension into Heaven, when the Holy Ghost was
sent down and sat in the likeness of fiery tongues upon them: O! what a fire of
love unto Christ was there then enkindled within them. Hence that bold
profession which they make of Christ before the chief Priests and Elders, Act.
4. Hence their rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the
name of Christ, when they were beaten for their owning and preaching of him.
Act. 5. 41. The love of Peter and John was great unto Christ, and the love of
Paul was not inferior unto the love of the chiefest Apostles; hence it was
that he took such pains to preach the Gospel in so many parts of the world even
from Jerusalem and round about unto Illyricum, Romans 15. 19. See also how he
approves himself to be a Minister of Christ, and gives evidences of his strong
love to his Master, 2 Cor. 11. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. Are they Ministers
of Christ? I speak as a fool, I am more; in labors more abundant, in stripes
above measure, in prisons more frequent, in Deaths often: of the Jews five times
received I forty stripes save one: Thrice was I beaten with rods; once was I
stoned, thrice I suffered Shipwreck, a Night and a Day I have been in the deep,
in journeying often, in perils of Waters, in perils of Robbers, in perils by
mine own Countrymen, in perils by the Heathen, in perils in the City, in
perils in the Wilderness, in perils in the Sea, in perils among false brethren:
in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness. Besides those things which are without,
that which comes upon me daily, the care of all the Churches; who is weak and
I am not weak? who is offended and I burn not? and chap. 12. 10. I take
pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
distresses for Christ's sake. The ground of all which was the love of Christ
which did constrain him, as 1 Cor. 5. 14. he had such a love to Christ that he
professes, Phillip. 1. 21. To me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain. Christ
was his life, and his life was wholly at Christ's devotion.

But where is such love now to be found? I might speak also of the love of some
ancient Fathers, Ignatius, Polycarp, Jerome and others: take one instance in
Jerome, who thus expresses his love unto Christ, If my Father were weeping on
his Knees before me, my Mother Hanging on my Neck behind me, my Brethren
Sisters and Kinsfolk Howling on every side, to retain me in a Sinful course; I
would sling my Mother to the Ground, run over my Father, despise all my
Kindred, and tread them under my Feet, that I might run unto Christ. How little
is your love in comparison with the love of those Famous Hero's, I mean those
eminent Martyrs, who have despised the Flames, and endured such Racking and
Torturing Deaths, for the love which they have born unto Jesus Christ; the fire
of their Love burning stronger within them, than the fire without them in which
their Bodies were consumed? Is not your love also small in comparison with the
love of our late Reformers, which fired them with such courage and resolution,
as to withstand a whole world of Antichristian Fury and Opposition? Is your
love comparable to that of many Eminent Divines, and private Christians of our
own Nation, of the Age immediately going before, who are now asleep in their
Graves; but how few are there come up in their Rooms? It is observed, and it is
greatly to be Lamented, that there is of late years, a great decay in the Power
of Godliness, amongst those that are Sincere; and is it not evident in the
great Decay of love, even in true Christians unto Jesus Christ? are not you
Dwarfs in comparison with others? are not you Babes in Christ, and Weaklings in
your love to Christ? Is it not evident, that you have but little love to
Christ, when he is but little in your Thoughts and Meditations? the Thoughts
are the Handmaids of the Love; where the Love is strong and ardent, there many
thoughts will be attending upon it: but will not your Hearts tell you, that
your Thoughts of Christ are very few? you can think often of your Food, but how
little do your Thoughts seed upon Christ, who is the Bread of Life? You can
often think of your Raiment, but how little do you think of the Robes of
Christ's Righteousness? You can think often of your Earthly Friends, but how
little do you think of Jesus Christ, your Friend in Heaven? Objects of Sense
are often not only in your Eyes, but also in your Thoughts; but how little is
Christ entertained in your Thoughts, who is the Object of Faith? Moreover, does
it not argue little Love to Christ, that you speak so little of him and for
him, in your converse one with another? If you had much Love to Christ, would
not this Love breath forth more in your Discourses? You can readily speak of
your selves, and do often either Directly or Obliquely commend your selves,
which discovers your great Self-love; how little do you commend your Lord and
Master, and Extol his excellencies with your lips? and does not this evidence
that you have but little love to him in your hearts? You can readily discourse
of News and Public Occurrences (which is lawful and needful, so that due
limits be observed) but when you leave Christ quite out of your Discourse, it
shows that you have not abundance of Love to him, because out of the abundance
of the Heart the Mouth will speak. Such as have much love to the World, will
speak of their Riches; such as have much love to Pleasures, will be often
speaking of that subject; such as love their Friends much, will be often
speaking and commending of them, when they are in company; and when you speak
but little of Christ, it is a sign that you love him but little. Does not the
little Zeal which you have for Christ's Honor in the World, argue that you have
but little Love to him? where is your activity for Christ to promote his
Interest amongst those Relations and Friends, that you have acquaintance with?
do you labor all you can, to bring others into the ways of God, and into
acquaintance with Christ? Besides, will not your little secret Devotion, argue
your little Affection unto Christ? will not your closets or other retiring
places witness how little you are in secret prayer and converse with Christ
there? Brief and Straightened prayer in secret, does argue a Heart Straightened in
love to Jesus Christ. Does not your Backwardness to the Exercise of this Love
to Christ, show the weakness of your love? how slow of Heart are you to the
Love of Christ? how hard to be persuaded? you need not be persuaded to Love
your Wives, if they be Kind and Helpful; you need not be persuaded to Love your
children, if they be Pretty and Hopeful; you need not be persuaded to Love
your Friends, if they be Friendly and Faithful: and yet whatever attractives of
Love, the most strong of any, be in Jesus Christ, you are backward to this Love.

Need I say more to convince you, that you have but little Love to Christ? will
not your own Conscience from these clear Evidences sufficiently witness the
thing? And now Christians think what a Sin, what a Shame, what a Folly it is,
that you should have so little Love unto Jesus Christ: If it be so great a Sin
for such as are Strangers unto Christ, to have no Love at all to him, that it
brings them under the most Dreadful curse; surely it cannot be a small Sin,
that you (who are his true Disciples) should have but little Love unto him; is
it not very displeasing to the Father, that you should have but little Love to
his Son? if he do not hate you because of your Relation unto Christ; yet, is he
not angry with you, for the Lukewarmness of your Affection unto Christ? which
Sin is Aggravated by the nearness of your Relation. Is it not Dishonorable
unto Christ, that you should have so little Love to him? don't you in Effect
say, there is no great worth or Amiableness in him, when you have no great Love
unto him? are you not hereby ungrateful unto Christ, beyond what can be
perallell'd by any ingratitude unto the most obliging Earthly Friend? Is it not
your shame, that you should have so little Love to Christ, when he does so much
deserve your Love? Besides the Infinite Excellencies and Perfections which are
in his person; does not his Infinite Kindness unto you, call for (not only the
Truth, but also) the Strength of your Love? Think what he has Done for you;
think what he has Suffered for you; think what he has Purchased for you;
think what he has Promised to you; think what he has Laid out for you; think
what he has Laid up for you; and yet to have but little Love to Christ? yet to
make such poor Returns! Moreover, is it not your Folly to have but little Love
to Christ? Don't you hereby bereave your selves, or debar your selves of such
peace as passes all understanding; of such sweetness and comfort both in the
strength of your love, and in the sense of His Love, as is inconceivable? is
not Injury and Mischief unto your selves, the consequent of your little Love
unto Christ? must you not draw on Heavily in the ways of God, as Pharaoh when
his chariot-wheels were taken off? Love to Christ is like wheels, in your
motion for Christ, and like Oil to the wheels, which makes you ready unto any
good work which he does call you unto; but when you have but little Love unto
Christ, you must needs be more slow in your motions, more sluggish in Christ's
service; you will not, you cannot take that pains in the work of the Lord, and
be so Zealous as you might and should be for your Master's Glory.

To Conclude, if you have but little love to Christ, you will be apt to faint
in the day of Adversity, to shrink when you are called to take up his Cross and
suffer for his sake: lesser sufferings will discompose you, greater sufferings
will affrighten and amaze you, and you will be in danger of turning fearful
Apostates in time of great Trials; there is need of great Love to christ, as
well as great Faith, to carry you through sufferings with courage that you may
persevere unto the end.

SECT. XI.
Use 4. FOR Exhortation unto the love of Jesus Christ, whom you have never
seen, this is the Use chiefly designed in the choice of this subject, and which
I shall most largely insist upon. In the Prosecution of it, I shall give some
Motives, and then some Directions.

The Motives to Induce and Excite you unto the Love of this unseen Christ, may
be drawn 1. From the consideration of what Christ is. 2. From the consideration
of Christ's Love. 3. From the consideration of Christ's Benefits. 4. From the
consideration of that Love which Christians have, and should have unto Christ.

The first sort of Motives may be drawn from the consideration of what Christ
is, and that 1 What he is in Himself. 2 What he is to the Father. 3 What he is
unto true Christians.

First, Consider What Christ is in Himself.

In general, He is the most amiable person and the most suitable Object for
your Love. If you ask of the days which are past, which were before you, since
the day that God created Man upon the Earth; if you seek from one side of
Heaven unto the other; if you make enquiry into all the parts of the Earth, you
will never find that either there ever was or is to be found any person so
lovely, so beautiful and so every way deserving your Love, as the Lord Jesus
Christ: there is a Matchless, Transcendent, and Incomparable Beauty and
Excellency in him. How passionately are some Foolish Men in Love with the
external beauty which they see in some Women: the exact Symetry of parts, and
comely Proportion of the body; the Amiable Features and Lovely Mixtures of
colors in the Face, the Beauty of the Eyes, in their Spirit their Quick and
Graceful motions, and Amorous Glances; How does this Ravish the Hearts of some
fond Lovers! although the most Beautiful body in the World, is no better than
painted clay, dirt and corruption, enclosed in a Fair Skin, which sickness will
cause to look pale and Wan, Death will quite Mar and Spoil. But the
Amiableness and Beauty of Christ is more Transcendent and Permanent, and
therefore a more fit Object for your Love. Christ is Fairer than the Children
of Men; he is all Fair without any Spot, altogether Lovely without any Blemish
or Deformity. I have already spoken of the Glorious Beauty which is in Christ's
Glorified Body, the most Lovely of any Visible creature which God has made;
and also of the Shining Excellencies which are in Christ's Glorified Soul, so
nearly joined to the Divinity; could we suppose all the Loveliness that ever
was seen, or found in the most lovely persons that ever lived, to meet in one
person; how Lovely would that person be! yet such, though never so resplendent,
Beauty, would be but a dark Shadow, compared with the Brightness of Christ's
most Beautiful Person. Can you Love the imperfect Beauty which you see in
Creatures, and will you not Love the perfect Beauty which there is in Christ?
can you Love a Fading Beauty which soon Withers like the Flower, and will you
not Love Christ, whose Beauty never Decays, but always does abide more Fresh
than Beauty in the Flower of Youth? can you be soon Affected with Beautiful
Objects which are before the Eye of your Sense, and will you not be Affected
with this far more Beautiful Object, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is so clearly
discernable by the Eye of Faith? If the Eye of your Faith were open and clear,
to look upon the Transcendent Amiableness which is in Christ, you could not
choose but Love him: could you see the Glances of his Eye, and the Sweet Smiles
of his Lovely Face, as some have seen, your Hearts would be Overcome and
Ravished with Love, and filled with Extacies of Joy and Ineffable Delight.

More Particularly, There are the most Amiable Qualifications in Christ's
Person, to attract and draw forth your Love; I shall instance in these six. 1.
His Greatness and Authority. 2. His Holiness and Purity. 3. His Wisdom and
Omnisciency. 4. His Truth and Fidelity. 5. His Fullness and All Sufficiency. 6.
His Kindness and Mercy.

1. Consider Christ's Greatness and Authority, Aquila non capit muscas, The
Eagle does not pursue after Flies: Great Souls are not Affected, except it be
with Great Things; there is none so Great as Jesus Christ; He is most Great in
Honor and Dignity, He is most Great in Power and Authority. Excellency of
Majesty, does greatly engage the Love, and command the Hearts as well as the
Obedience of Subjects: and those Princes that have the greatest Power and
Authority, are the Darlings of the people, when they don't abuse their place by
Unrighteousness and Cruelty, by Usurpation and Tyranny. If Power be managed
with Clemency, and Authority with Kindness toward those that are under
command; so highly do Princes advance themselves hereby in the Esteem and Love
of their people, that they will be ready to spend their Estates, and venture
their Lives in their Service. Christ is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth,
he is clothed with the Highest Honor, Arrayed with the most Excellent Majesty,
Decked with the largest Power, and invested with the Greatest Authority. He is
the King and Lord of Glory, He is Exalted to Higher Dignity than the greatest
Potentate that ever lived upon the Earth; yea he is advanced above all Thrones
and Dominions, and Principalities and Powers, of the Glorious Angels which are
in Heaven; All Power is given to him in Heaven and Earth, Mat. 28. 18. He does
what he will in Heaven the Angels are at his Beck, and Execute his Will, go and
come at his Command; and he has Power on Earth; He is the Head of the Church,
and Head over all unto the Church; he can Restrain his Enemies, and conquer
them, and bring them under his Feet at his Pleasure; And whatever severity he
does show sometimes in Executing his Judgments, and taking Vengeance on the
Wicked, he does never abuse his Power by Unrighteousness: He is most Just
toward the worst, and punishes them here less than their iniquities do
deserve. But what kindness and clemency does he show to his own subjects and
people? and will not you have a great love to so great a Person? should not the
consideration of the high dignity of your Lord, raise your love of him unto a
great height? when Christ has such Authority, shall he not command your
hearts? when Christ is invested with such power that he can defend you against
the rage and cruelty of your most powerful and malicious adversaries, will you
not love greatly such a Person, as well as trust confidently under the shadow
of his Government?

2. Consider Christ's Holiness and Purity, some great Persons who abound in
Wealth and Honor, who have some kind of amiable natural qualities, and
acquired accomplishments which might render them very useful in their
Countries, yet through their wickedness and debauchery, their filthiness and
impurity, their impious and vicious lives, they stain all their other
excellencies, and render themselves the objects of contempt and scorn, unto
those who otherwise would bear great respect and love to them.

But Christ is most amiable for his Holiness and Purity; he was holy in his
birth; although born of a sinful woman, yet he was born without sin; when he
lived amongst impure sinners he kept his garments from all stains and spots,
his heart and life were free from all pollutions, and never was he guilty of
the least transgression either in action or the least inclination. O what an
excellent Person was Christ when here upon the Earth! how glorious in holiness,
what bright beams of perfect purity and exact innocence did Christ scatter in
those dark places of the Earth where he lived, and amongst those dark sullied
sinners with whom he did converse! how then does Christ shine in holiness, now
he is entered into the Holy of Holies, which is above; and there does coverse
with none but such as are Holy? I know because of Christ's Holiness and Purity,
he is the object of the hatred and enmity of the wicked and ungodly; because
Christ is an enemy unto their darling and beloved lusts, they have an enmity
against Christ's Person: when he was here below he tells his brethren, John 7.
7. The World hates me, because I testify of it, that the works thereof are
evil, and the hatred of the world does still abide upon the same account;
Christ does reprove the world of sin, and this the world cannot endure and away
with; the beams of Christ's Holiness do offend their Sore Eyes, his holy
precepts do offend their carnal hearts; yet notwithstanding this, he is a most
suitable object for the love of Saints upon the account of his Holiness: such as
are truly judicious will love them most who are best, and such are really the
best Men and Women in the world, as are most holy; if you are Christ's
disciples indeed, you love holiness where ever you see it, and can you love the
imperfect holiness which is in Gods people, and will you not love Christ who is
perfectly, Infinitely holy himself, and the spring of all that holiness, which
is to be found in any of the Children of Men? if there be such a wonderful
luster in the derived holiness of some, that it makes them to shine as lights
in a dark World, what a wonderful transcendent luster is there in the
origiginal holiness which is in Christ! which as it is matter of great
admiration, so it calls for great affection, Psalm. 119. 140. Thy word is very
pure, therefore thy Servant loves it. Christ is the Word, not the written
Word, but the Essential Word, and he is very pure, therefore you should love
him.

3. Consider Christ's Wisdom and Omnisciency. Wisdom does make the face to
shine; Learning does advance some very highly in esteem; such as know most, if
their morals be suitable to their intellectuals, are most admired by those that
understand what true worth is; especially if there be spiritual Wisdom in
conjunction with natural and acquired, if there be much Grace in the heart as
well as much Knowledge in the head, how worthy are such to be beloved? Daniel
was a man of great learning and wisdom, skilled in all the learning of the
Chaldeans which was not sinful and di^bolical; and besides this he was endued
with divine wisdom by the teachings of the Holy Spirit; the Angel told this
Daniel more than once or twice, that he was a Man greatly beloved; he was
greatly beloved by the Lord of Heaven, greatly beloved by his Prince on Earth,
and greatly beloved by his people, and by all, except some few that envied his
prosperity and favor Daniels Wisdom did render him so universally amiable; How
then should Christ be beloved because of his Wisdom and Knowledge! the wisdom
of Christ is far beyond the Wisdom of Daniel, or the Wisdom of Solomon who was
wiser than Daniel; these men had Wisdom which made them famous and esteemed in
their day, but Christ is Wisdom, the Wisdom of the Father; they were children
of wisdom, but Christ is the Father and Fountain of wisdom; they had some
jewels of wisdom, but the treasures of wisdom are hid and laid up in Christ,
Col. 2. 3. they had learning and knowledge, but their knowledge was Ignorance
compared with the knowledge of Christ, the greatest part of the things which
they knew, being but the least part of the things which they knew not; they
knew some things, but Christ is omniscient and knows all things; they knew
many secrets of nature, but Christ knows the secrets of Heaven, the mind of
God, and nothing is hid from him. How greatly beloved then should Christ belif
you are wise you will, if you would be wise you must love Christ who is so
Infinitely wise himself, and who alone can make you truly wise.

4. Consider Christ's Truth and Fidelity, Truth and Faithfulness are very rare
in our days, when Falsehood and Deceit do so much abound; what was said of old,
Isa. 59. 14. 15. Truth fails and falls in the Street, the same may be said
now; and therefore such as are True without Guile, Faithful without Deceit, are
worthy of great esteem and Love. But what Love should you give unto Christ, who
is not only True, but Truth it self; who is most Faithful in all his
undertakings and promises, and never deceived any that put their trust in him,
who is often better than his word, never worse? you will love a true and
faithful Friend, and will you not love a true and faithful Christ, the best
Friend of the children of Men? as Christ's faithfulness should encourage your
confidence in him, so it should endear your love unto him.

5. Consider Christ's fullness and All sufficiency. Such as have large and
plentiful Estates, are greatly beloved by the poor and indigent, if they find
them also to have large Hearts and open Hands ready to distribute unto their
wants and necessities; none have such fullness and plenty as the Lord Jesus
Christ, and none so willing to communicate of his fullness unto the wants of
such as are poor in Spirit, and sensible of their need, Col. 1. 19. It has
pleased the Father that in him all fullness should dwell. There is not only
Plenty in him, but fullness: not the fullness of the cistern, but the fullness of
the Fountain; not the fullness only of sufficiency for himself, but the fullness
of redundancy for his people; not some fullness for some things, but all fullness
for all things that are good; not fullness for some time and to continue but for
a while, but all fullness does dwell in him, and abide for all his people
throughout all Generations; and this not to depend upon the pleasure of men
whose minds may alter, but it has pleased the Father, it depends upon the
pleasure of the Father who is always the same, and whose good will to his
people is unchangeable. There is a twofold fullness in Christ for his people
here; besides his fullness of Glory which has a reference to Eternity. There is
a fullness of Merit, and a fullness of Spirit, 1. A fullness of Merit, in that
full and perfect Righteousness which he has wrought out for them, and which he
does impute unto them for their Justification. 2. There is a fullness of Spirit
in Christ, the Spirit being given unto him without measure, which he does
impart and communicate unto them, for their Sanctification and Consolation.
Christians you are empty, Christ is full; you are poor, Christ is rich; you are
indigent, Christ is All-sufficient; and will not you love Christ, who is able
to do for you, beyond what you are able to ask or think, and is as willing as
he is able to supply all your Spiritual necessities? will you not love Christ
who is an Overflowing and Everflowing ^ountain of Good, who has inexhaustible
treasures of Graces and Comforts in him, which are set open before you, and
unto you, and every day you may freely come and fetch such jewels out of this
Treasury, as are of higher worth and greater use than any Earthly Riches in the
greatest Plenty and abundance?

6. Consider Christ's kindness and mercy. All the kindness of Men is unkindness
compared with the kindness of Christ, all the Mercies of Men are Cruelty,
compared with the Mercies of Christ. He is all kindness, all bowels, all
compassion, all pity, all grace, all mercy to miserable lost mankind; I shall
not enlarge here because this will fall under the second head of Arguments,
taken from the consideration of Christ's Love. And if you add the kindness and
mercy of Christ to all his other excellencies and perfections, surely he will
appear to have incomparably the greatest attractives in him for Love, unto any
that have not a very thick veil of unbelief before their Eyes to hide him from
their view.

Secondly, Consider what Christ is to the Father. 1. He is most nearly related
to him. 2. He is most dearly beloved by him.

1. Christ is most nearly Related, and with all most perfectly like unto the
Father. All the Creatures are related to God as their Maker, but Gods Children
are more nearly related; the Saints are nearly related to God, who are his
Children by Adoption and Regeneration; the Angels are more nearly related to
God who are his Sons by Creation, and never were separated from him by sin; but
the Lord Jesus Christ is most nearly related unto God who is his Son by Eternal
Generation: thus Christ is the only Begotten Son of God, and does bear his
Image most perfectly, being the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the
express Image of his Person. This near Relation of Christ, and his likeness to
the Father does call for your strongest love; if you have reason to honor the
Father, on the same account you have reason to honor the Son; if you have
reason to love the Father, you have the same reason to love the Son. You will
love the Sons of Princes, and will you not love the Son of God? you will love
your own Children who bear your Own Image, and will not you love Christ who is
the express Image of God? we read of Christ, Phil. 2. 6. Who being in the form
of God, thought it no Robbery to be equal with God. Christ (without Robbery or
Derogation unto God) is equal with God in all Glorious Excellencies and
Perfections, and therefore your highest and strongest love is his due, and
without robbery you cannot withhold it from him.

2. Christ is most dearly beloved by the Father, 2 Pet. 1. 17. For he received
from God the Father, Honor and Glory, when there came such a voice to him,
from the Excellent Glory: This is my beloved Son in Whom I am well pleased, he
then that is wort^y of the Fathers love, surely is worthy of yours; he that is
chiefly beloved by the Father should chiefly be beloved by you.

Thirdly, Consider what Christ is unto all true Christians; if you be such,
Christ is your Shepherd, he feeds you in green Pastures, he has laid down
his life for his Sheep, and will you not love such a Shepherd? he is your
Captain who has conquered all your Enemies for you, and leads you on to take
the spoils, and will you not love such a leader? He is your Prophet, who
teaches you the most excellent things that ever were taught, the highest
mysteries, the most Glorious Truths, which are of the greatest concernment to
know and believe; and he teaches you in the most excellent way by his word and
Spirit, opening your understandings as well as his Truths, giving you light and
an eye to discern this light; and will you not love such a teacher? He is your
High Priest who has made satisfaction for you, and withal makes intercession
for you, to reconcile ^ou unto God and his intercession is incessant and
prevalent, and will you not love such an Advocate? He is your King who rules
you most powerfully and righteously, most Wisely and Graciously, and will you
not love such a Sovereign. He is your Benefactor the most kind and bountiful,
and no gifts are comparable unto his gifts, and will you not love such a
friend? He is your Brother, and if he be not a shamed to own you for his
Brethren and Sisters, will it not be a shame if you should withhold from him
your hearts? He is your Husband, and you are joined to him by the Spirit and
Faith in such Bonds as cannot be broken, and will not you embrace him in the
arms of your dearest love? He is your Redeemer who rescued and delivered you
from Sin and Satan, from Death and Wrath: He has redeemed you by price, the
price of his blood, and has he not then given the greatest price for your
Love? he has redeemed you also by conquest, and shall he not make a conquest
of your hearts? Surely you are altogether unworthy of these relations if you do
not present Christ with your most endeared and choicest Affections. Thus far
the Motives drawn from the Consideration of what Christ is.

SECT. XII.
THe 2d. sort of Motives to excite your Love to Christ, may be drawn from the
consideration of Christ's love unto true Christians. If you are Christians
indeed, Christ loves you, 1. with the Freeest Love. 2. With the Truest Love.
3. With the Strongest Love. 4. With the surest Love.

1. Consider that Christ Loves you with the Freest Love: There are many
motives and attractives for your Love to Christ, but Christ's love to you is
most free; nothing in your selves to draw and engage his love, except deformity
and enmity to him, except filthiness which he loatheth, and wickedness which
his soul hates be motives. There is no man in the world that loves you but he
find^th or fancyeth some loveliness in you, something to be a motive to draw
his love to you; wit is a motive to some, wealth to others, beauty to some,
strength to others, near Relation to some, dear love to others, liberality to
some, service to others; greatness to some, goodness to others; likeness
whether it be in good or evil is a motive to the love of the most; But Christ's
first love to you, is altogether free, that which is a motive to men and
induces their love to you is no motive to incline the Love of Christ: the sin
which you brought into the world with you, and the many sins which since you
came into the world have been committed by you, are enough to shut out all
motives of Love in Christ, unto whom all sin is so odious and abominable.
Whatever motive induced Christ to love you, it was not drawn from your selves,
but it was drawn from his own bowels. And will not this free love of Christ
incline you to love him? Does he love you most freely, and will not you love
him most dearly? Did Christ love you without any motive to draw his love? and
will not you love Christ in whom there are so many motives to draw your love?
Did Christ begin to love, and will not you make a return? Did Christ love you
under your deformity, and will not you love him in whom there is such perfect
beauty? If you now have any spiritual beauty, it is through the comeliness
which Christ has put upon you, but Christ's first love was free, which is
Matter of the greatest admiration, and should be a Motive unto the greatest
Affection.

2. Consider that Christ loves you with the Truest love: There is little true
love in the world, you have many that truly hate you, few that truly love you:
and there is much dissimulation in the pretended love and affection of some;
all that Flatter you do not truly love you; love in show and outward
appearance, in good words and fair speeches is common, but love in deed and in
truth, that evidenceth it self in real offices of Love, where there is the
greatest need, this is rarely to be found. Job complains, Job 6. 15, 16, 17.
My brethren have dealt deceitfully like a brook, and as the stream of brooks
they pass away; which are blackish by reason of the ice, and wherein the snow
is hid; what time they wax warm they vanish, when it is hot they are consumed
out of their place. In the prosperity of Job he had many friends, and their
love and friendship did seem to have some strength and consistency, like the
ice upon the brook; but when heat of trouble and calamity came upon Job, then
the love of his friends did melt and vanish away like ice and snow before the
warm beams of the Sun: the Love of the most is selfish, for their own ends, and
therefore when their love is not like to be beneficial, but rather create
trouble and prejudice to themselves, it comes to nothing. True Christianity
does teach another kind of Love, and those that are powerfully Religious have a
true love, which is ready to show it self most in an Adverse estate. But none
do or can love you with such a true love as Jesus Christ; there is no flattery
or dissimulation in his Love, his love is not in the least counterfeit, it is
not in the least selfish and for his own ends; he does not love you to Receive
good from you, but that he might Do good unto you: He loveeth you not only in
Prosperity, but chiefly He does evidence his love in Affliction and adversity.
He is a present help in the time of trouble, and then does give the most tender
demonstrations of his Love; he is touched with the feeling of your infirmities
when you are tempted, and sympathizeth with you in your sorrows when you are
afflicted; He shows his Love in visiting you under your troubles, in
supporting you, in relieving you, and in delivering you, Oh! what Love should
you have unto the Lord Jesus Christ, who Loves you with such a True love?

3. Consider that Christ Loves you with the Strongest Love. His love is more
strong than* Death, more ardent than the Fire, which has a most vehement
Flame. The strength of Christ's Love to you does show it self in the activity of
his Love, in his Doing for you; and this will appear in three things, 1. In
what he has done for you, 2. In what he is doing for you. 3. In what he will
do for you.

1. The strength and activity of Christ's Love to you, does show it self in what
Christ has done for you; I shall briefly name some particulars. 1. It was the
strong Love of Christ which brought him down from heaven for you, to assume
your Nature, what manner of love was this that God should become man! that
Spirit should become flesh, that he who made the world should be born of a mean
Virgin, and all for your sakes! 2. It was the love of Christ which made him to
fulfill all righteousness for you; He yielded perfect obedience to the Law both
Moral and Ceremonial, that you might have the benefit of it. It was the Love of
Christ which made him submit himself to the temptations of the Devil for you,
that he, suffering being tempted, might be able to succor you when you are
tempted. 4. It was the Love of Christ which made him endure the contradictions
of sinners for you; he bore many affronts, contumelies, envyings and
blasphemies of wicked men, that he might give you an example how to carry your
selves under the like circumstances. 5. It was the Love of Christ which made
him lay down his Life for you, Ioh. 15. 13, 14. Greater love has no man than
this, that a man lay down his life for his friend: ye are my friends. That such
a person as Christ, so excellent, so innocent, should undergo death, and such a
death as that of the Cross, so disgraceful, so painful; that he should submit
to such Ignominy, and endure such Agony, such tearings in his flesh, such
pressures in his spirit, and that with such resolution and willingness, with
such submission and patience, and that for such as you, although now his
friends, yet whilst in a state of Nature strangers and enemies; here was Love
stronger than death! Oh the height! Oh the depth of this Love! There are such
dimensions in this love of Christ, as the longest line of your most extended
thoughts and imaginations can never be able to reach and measure. 6. It was the
Love of Christ which raised him again from the dead for you, Romans 4. 25. Who
was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification. 7. It
was the Love of Christ which carried him up from earth to heaven, where he was
before for you, Ioh. 16. 7. Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expedient
for you that I go away; for if I go not away the Comforter will not come unto
you; but if I depart I will send him unto you.

2. The strength and activity of Christ's Love to you does show it self in what
he is Doing for you. 1. He is interceding for you at the right hand of God;
Romans 8. 34. Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us. It is through Love that Christ does plead for you in
Heaven, that your persons may be accepted, your sins pardoned, your prayers
answered, and that the Holy Ghost may be sent down to you to teach sanctify
and comfort you. 2. He is preparing a place for you, Ioh. 14. 2. In my fathers
house there are many Mansions, if it were not so I would have told you, I go to
prepare a place for you. It is through love that Christ as your forerunner is
for you entered into the glorious Palace that is above, to take possession of it
for you, and to prepare places there for your reception.

3. The strength and activity of Christ's love to you does show it self in what
he will do for you. 1. He will keep you in his hand that none shall pluck you
thence, Ioh. 10. 28. They shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them
out of my hand. Because you are received into the arms of his love, therefore
you shall be kept by the hand of his power, and therefore you shall never
either finally or totally fall away. 2. Christ will make all things work
together for your good, Romans 8. 28. And we know that All things work together
for good to them that love God. Christ has an endeared love to all you that
love God, your love being the fruit of his; and when Men and Devils conspire
together to do you mischief, Christ's love will turn it unto your spiritual
advantage. 3. Christ will stand by you in trouble and at death, John 14. 18. I
will not leave you comfortless, I will come unto you. When affliction does
arise, especially if it be for his sake and you are bereaved of all outward
Comforts, Christ will not leave you comfortless, when friends fail, and flesh
fails, and Heart fail, yea and life fails, Christ will not fail, but will stand
by and strengthen you, and be a light to you in your darkest hours, a stay to
your Spirits when they are ready to sink within you. 4. After death Christ will
take care of your Souls, he will not suf^er them to wander they know not
whither, he will not suffer the Devil to seize on them as his prey, but he will
send his Angels to conduct and convey them into the heavenly paradise, that
where he is there they may be also, Luke 16. 22. And it came to pass that the
Beggar died and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, 2 Cor. 5. 8. We
are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body and present
with the Lord. 5. Christ will raise up your Bodies at the last day, if your
Bodies should be consumed by Fire, or drowned in the Water, or rot in the
Earth, whatever becomes of them, the Lord Jesus at his second glorious
appearance will find them and raise them, and transform them into the likeness
of his most glorious body, John 6. 40. And this is the Fathers will which has
sent me, that every one which sees the Son and Believes on him may have
Everlasting Life; and I will raise him up at the last day, Phillip. 3. 20. 21.
For our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for the Savior, the
Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious Body. 6. Christ will send forth his Angels to gather you
into the society of the Elect that have lived in all Ages and all Parts of the
World, and to convey you into his presence, to meet him in the Air when he
comes to Judge the World, Math. 24. 31. And he shall send his Angels with a
great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the
four Winds, from one end of Heaven unto the other, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. 17. For the
Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first;
then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the
Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air. 7. Christ will own you, and crown you, and
admit you into the Kingdom of Heaven, which he has prepared for you. Math. 25.
34. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye Blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World.
Here is strong and active love indeed! and shall not the consideration of this
love of Christ raise and highten your love unto him? shall it not provoke and
excite you unto activity of love, unto the lively and most vigorous exercise
thereof? has Christ united himself to your nature? and shall not your Hearts
be united to his Person? has he fulfilled all Righteousness for you? and will
not you fulfill his command of Love? has he endured such temptations
contradictions and sufferings upon your account and given himself to dye for
you? and will not you give your Hearts unto him? has he risen from the dead,
and Ascended into Heaven for you? and will not your Affections arise from the
Earth and Ascend into Heaven, where Jesus Christ is? Does he plead in Heaven
with the Father for you? and will not you hearken to his pleadings, by his Word
and Spirit with you for your love? is he preparing a glorious Mansion for you
in his Fathers house? and will not you prepare a place for him and entertain
him in the inner room of your chiefest Affections? does and will he keep you in
his hand? and will not you embrace him in your bosoms? will he make all things
work together for your good? and will not your Affections work toward him?
will he stand by you in trouble and at Death? and will not this put life into
your love? will he send his Angels to convey your souls into his presence, when
separated from our Bodies? and shall not your Hearts get to him and lodge with
him before? will he raise up your Bodies at the last day? and will not the
hopes of this raise up your Affections? shall you be caught up in the clouds to
meet the Lord in the Air, and will Christ there own and crown you? and will not
the believing fore-thoughts of this ravish your Hearts with love to Christ, and
transport you with unspeakable joy? the strength of Christ's love to you
methinks should engage your love for him, not only in the the Truth of it, but
also in the strength of it.

4. Consider that Christ loves you with the surest love. Some Friends may love
you a while with some kind of strength and ardency, but such differences may
arise between you, as shall soon weaken and cool their love, and of Friends
they shall prove strangers, yea become Enemies unto you: or if their love does
abide, it is not sure, because they may not abide; if their Love dye not whilst
they live, They may soon dye, and then their love is at an end: but the love of
the Lord Jesus Christ unto you is the most Sure love: if he begin to love you
he will continue to love you; if he love you once he will love you to the end
or rather without end; the love of Christ is not subject to mutations and
changes like unto ours; if you (...) in your love, he will not fail in his
love, and though you offend him, he is not irreconcilable; he may indeed upon
unkindness on your side withdraw the manifestations of his love for a while,
but he will never wholly remove his love from you, the love of Christ admits of
no changing, knows no ending. Christians, what motives can you find in any
person, or any thing in the world which you have seen, comparable to those
which you have in this Lord Jesus Christ, though you have never seen him; He is
a Person most amiable in himself, his Greatness, his Holiness, his Wisdom, his
Faithfulness, his Fullness, his Kindness do make him shine with an admirable
luster; his Relation to the Father, and the love which the Father does bear to
him, his Relation unto you, being your Shepherd, your Captain, your Teacher,
your Advocate, your Sovereign, your Benefactor, your Brother, your Husband,
your Redeemer, all these do commend him to your love, but when matchless
beauty and lovliness do meet in a person that does bear matchless love to you,
when this most amiable Lord Jesus does love you with such a free love, such a
cordial love, such a strong and active love, such a sure and constant love;
when his love is incomparable, surpassing all other love, and incomprehensible
surpassing all knowledge. O with what activity ardour and constancy, should you
love so suitable an object!

SECT. XIII.
THe third sort of motives to excite your love unto Christ, may be drawn from
the consideration of Christ's Benefits. If you are true Christians you have 1.
Spiritual Light from Christ. 2. Spiritual Life from him. 3. The Pardon of sin
from him. 4. The Robes of Righteousness from him. 5. The Peace of Conscience
from him. 6. The Joys of the Holy Ghost from him. 7. The Riches of Grace from
him. 8. The Dignity of Children from him. 9. The Spirit of Prayer from him. 10.
Title to the Kingdom of Heaven, with the first Fruits and fore-tastes of it
from him here, and shall be put into the possession of it by him hereafter.

1. You have Spiritual light from Christ; Christ is the Sun from whom all the
beams of this light do come: time was when you were not only in the dark, but
darkness; but Jesus Christ did enlighten you, Ephesians. 5. 8. For ye were sometimes
darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord; walk as Children of the light: it
is Christ that has turned you from darkness to light, that has translated you
out of darkness into his mavelous light, he has caused a mavelous light to
shine into your minds, whereby he has discovered to you the wonderful things
of the Law, that thereby you might discern the odious nature of Sin; and
whereby he has discovered to you the wonderful mysteries of the Gospel, that
thereby you might discern the excellency of Gospel-priviledges, and the
exceeding Riches of Gods Grace and Kindness through Jesus Christ. Christ has
opened your Eyes to see the chiefest evil, that you might be delivered from it,
and the chiefest, good and happiness that you might attain unto it. And does
not this light which you have from Christ call for your love? If the man that
was born blind, and was cured of his natural darkness by Christ, did love
Christ for this favor, so as boldly to plead for him before the Pharisees,
though he were for it cast out of the Synagogues, as you may read in John 9.
How much more reason have you to love Christ, who has cured you of your
Spiritual darkness; which had it continued, you would have gone blindfold to
Hell, where there it blackness of darkness for ever?

2. You have Spiritual life from Christ; you were Spiritually dead, and Christ
has quickened you, Ephesians. 2. 1. You has he quickened who were dead in sins and
trespasses. We read that Christ raised Lazarus from the dead after he had been
buried four days, John 11. Lazarus did love Christ before, but no doubt this
Resurrection of him so wonderfully did endear his love to Christ exceedingly;
and shall not Christ's raising you up from your Spiritual death, raise your
Hearts unto a great height of love to Christ! you will greatly love one that is
instrumental to save your natural life, when in great hazard and danger,
especially if he should do it by venturing his own; and will you not greatly
love Christ who has given you Spiritual life, which is far more excellent than
the life of Nature; and when he dyed that you might live, and when if you had
not received this Spiritual life from him, you could not have escaped eternal
Death?

3. You have the pardon of sin from Christ; this Christ has purchased for you,
and the purchase has cost him dear, even his blood which was of more worth
than the treasures, were there so many, of ten thousand worlds; this Christ
has sued out for you by his intercession at the right hand of God. Whilst you
were under the guilt of sin you were bound over by the Justice of God to suffer
the vengeance of Eternal Fire; but being pardoned your obligation to future
punishment is taken off, and you are no more liable to wrath to come, and the
vengeance of Hell, than if you had never si^n'd. And will you not love the Lord
Jesus Christ, who has procured for you so great a privilege? we read of one
that had much forgiven her, and she loved much, Luke 7. 47. and have not you
had much forgiven? have not your sins been very numerous, and very heinous? and
has Christ obtained the pardon of them all? and will not you love Christ much?

4. You have the Robes of Righteousness from Christ: you are born naked of
Original Righteousness, and you could not work out any actual Righteousness for
your selves that might cover your nakedness, whatever you wrought your selves
it was rags that could not cover you, and it was filthy rags which did pollute
and defile you. Christ has given you the Robes of his perfect Righteousness to
cover and adorn you withal, and therein you are accepted as perfectly
Righteous in the sight of God. O how should we love the Lord Jesus for this
Garment; if your Bodies were naked and one should give you clothes to cover
you, especially if they were rich clothes, you would love such a person; and
will you not love the Lord Jesus Christ who has given you a garment to cover
your Souls, and that a very rich one, even the Robes of his most pure and
unspotted Righteousness which by Faith is put upon you?

5. You have peace of Conscience from Christ. This is that peace which the
Scripture tells us passes all understanding, Phil. 4. 7. It passes all
understanding to know the worth of it; such as have this peace would not leave
it upon any account, they would part with Estate or Liberty, or Life rather
than part with their peace; and those which have it no^, but now do slight and
neglect it, yet if they be awakened by the sides of the Grave, and when they
are come to the confines of Eternity, then they would value this peace, and
would give all the world (were it at their dispose) for it. Th^^ Jewel of peace
you have from Jesus Christ, he has purchased it for you, the chastisement of
your peace was upon him, and he has promised and bequeathed it in his last
will and Testament unto you, John 14. 27. My Peace I leave with you, my Peace I
give unto you. In his reconciling you unto God he has laid a Foundation for
this peace in all you that are true believers; and if he have moreover spoken
peace to you in giving you well grounded evidences of your Reconciliation; if
after raising a Storm, he has sent a calm into your Spirits, and given a sweet
f^renity unto you in the testimony of his Spirit to and with your Spirits that
your peace is made with God, O how should this draw sorth your love to Christ?

6. You have the Joys of the Holy Ghost from Christ. We read of the
Thessalonians, that they received the Word in much Affliction, with Joy of the
H^ly Ghost, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6. Such are those Joys spoken of in the Text, which are
unspeakable and full of Glory. These are not Carnal joys but Spir^tual, which
are of a higher nature and sweeter relish, that have a higher object, and are
the beginnings of Eternal Joys; if you have these joys in any measure, you have
them from Christ; he sends the Holy Ghost from heaven to be your Comforter, to
fill your Hearts with Spiritual joys, and shall not your hearts then be fil^ed
with love to the Lord Jesus who is the Author of them?

7. You have the riche^ of Grace from Christ: if any of you were poor and ready
to starve with hunger and cold, and a rich man should give or send to you a
chest full of Gold and S^lver or a C^binet full of Jewels worth many thousand
pounds; would you not love such a B^nefactor? the Lord Jesus has given you the
riches of Grace, the least measure of which is really of more worth than the
vastest treasures of Gold Silver and precious Stones, that ever was gathered
together and heaped up by the most wealthy man that ever lived upon the face of
the Earth; and will you not love Jesus Christ who has given you these
ine^timable riches?

8. You have the Dignity of Children from Christ; 1 John 3. 1. Behold (...)
manner of Love the Father has bestow^^ upon us, that we should be called the
Sons of God! this privilege of Adoption is bestowed upon you, not only by the
Father, but also by the Son; John 1. 12. But as many as received him, to them
gave he Power to be come the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his
name. We read of some raised from the dust, and lifted up from the dunghill to
sit with Princes, Psalm. 113. 7, 8. It is a far higher advancement to be lifted
up from the d^ng^ill of sin, and of slaves to lu^ts, and Children of the Devil,
to be made the So^s and Daughters of the Lord Almighty. This honor have all
the Saints, and it is Jesus Christ who has conferred this honor upon you; and
will not this endear your love to Christ?

8. You have the Spirit of Prayer from Christ; being Sons, the Spirit of the
Son is sent down into your Hearts whereby you are enabled to say Abba Father,
Gal. 4. 6. through Christ you have access unto God by the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 18.
It is the Spirit of Christ which helps your infirmities in Prayer; that
forms your Petitions, that enableth you to Pray with Faith and Life, and
Fervor. Through Christ you have free Admittance to the Throne of Grace,
through Christ you have Assi^^ance by his Spirit to Pray in Prayer; through
Christ you have Audience, and Gracious Returns; O how are you beholden unto
Christ? and how should you love him?

10. You have a Title to the Kingdom of Heaven from Christ. Through Christ you
are Children, and through Christ you are Heirs. It is Christ that gives the
first Fruits of the Heavenly Canaan, the earnest of the future Treasure and
Inheritance which he has promised, and the foretastes sometimes of those Soul
ravishing Pleasures, which the Saints shall have in Fullness, and to Eternity,
when they are received up into Glory. And it is Christ that hereafter will give
Possession unto you, of the Kingdom of Heaven. At the Day of His Glorious
Appearance, after he has owned you before the whole World of Angels and Men,
and Honored you to be His Assessors in His Judging and Condemning the Wicked;
he will receive you with Acclamations of Joy and Triumph, into the Glorious
Palace of the New Ierusal^m, where you shall have the Beatifical Vision and
Fruition of the Glorious Jehovah, and be made partakers of such Glorious
Felicity as has not now entered into your Hearts to conceive. And will not the
Consideration of all this set your hearts on fire with love to Christ?
Christi^^s, is there any Person like to Christ's Person? is there any love like
to Chri^^'s love? are there any benefits like to Christ's benefit^? No no he is
imcomparable in all; methinks then you should by this t^me ^eel your love to
Christ like Fire to burn within with (...) flame? or methinks your love to
Christ should be like water, I mean the waters of the Sanctuary spoken of Eze^
4. 7. 3 4, 5. which at en^^ance were but to ^he Ankles, a little further were
up to the Loins, a little further a deep River over the head, where a man might
swim; methinks you should perceive an increasing of your love under these
various motives, if your love were more shallow at first, methinks by this time
it should have got some depth; when such Winds do blow, the waters should flow
and overflow, methinks your love to Christ should be raised unto a high tide,
and run with a strong Stream. Thus for the motives drawn from the consideration
of Christ's Benefits, all which are so many Orators for your love.

SECT. XIV.
THe fourth and last sort of Motives to (...) your love to Christ may be drawn
from the consideration of that love which Christians have or should have unto
him; and here consider, 1. The Duty. 2. The Privilege. 3. The Honor. 4. The
Wisdom. 5. The Excellency. 6. The Necessity. 7. The Usefulness. 8. The
Delightfulness. 9. The Attainableness of this love to Jesus Christ.

1. Consider it is your Duty to love Christ; if it be your Duty to have a
Natural affection unto Parents and Children, it is much more your Duty to have
spiritual affections unto Christ; If it be your duty to have conjugal affection
unto your Earthly Husband and Wife; it is a greater duty to have conjugal love
unto this your heavenly Husband. If it be your Duty to love Brethren, Sisters
and Kindred, that love you, it is a greater Duty to love Jesus Christ, who
loves you above all Relations; if it be your Duty to love your Enemies, it is
much more your Duty to love Christ who is your best Friend. It is the will of
your Heavenly Father that you should love Christ; the Devil would have you ^ate
him, but God would have you love him, and whether it be most reason that you
should obey the Will of God or the Will of the Devil, judge ye. It is the Will
of Christ that you should love him; the will of the flesh is against this love,
but whose will ought you to comply withal? you are not debtors to the Flesh
that you should obey it is command, neither are you Debtors to any Creatures to
give them your choicest affections, but you are debtors unto Christ to give him
your chief love: Christ has most right to your love, and will you not give to
Christ his due? if you are bound to give men their due, are you not much more
bound to give unto Christ his due? Christ's due is your best, and have you any
thing better than your Hearts to present him withal? will Christ accept of any
thing at your hands, should you withhold from him your Hearts? had you
Thousands of Rams, and ten Thousand Rivers of Oil to offer to him, had you all
the Treasures of the Earth at your dispose, and should lay it down all at his
feet, it would be all slighted and disregarded by him, if you give away yours
Hearts from him.

2. Consider it is your Privilege that you may love Christ, that Christ will
give you leave to do it, and kindly accept of your Love. Should Beggars fall in
love with Princes in order to the Marriage Union, both their Persons and Love
would be rejected with scorn, anger and disdain: There is a far greater
distance between you and Jesus Christ, than there is between the highest Prince
and the meanest Beggar; and yet the Lord Jesus Christ does give you leave to
love him with a Spiritually conjugal love, in orde^ to the nearest Spiritual
Union and Conjunction; and notwithstanding his greatness and your meaness, he
is not ashamed to give entertainment unto your Love; although you are so mean
as Creatures, and have been so vile as Sinners, yet he doht not scorn and
disdain you, but both Persons and Love may find ready acceptance with him. It
is your duty to love Christ because he commands you, and it is your Privilege
that you may love Christ because he allows you to do it.

3. Consider it is your Honor to Love Christ. The real Honor of any is not
the Noble Blood which runs in their veins the high lineage from whence they are
descened, the great Titles with which they are Invested, or the most eminent
Earthly dignities unto which they are advanced: The Heathen could say, Et Genus
et Proavos, et quae non fecimus ipsi vix ea nostra voco; our stock and noble
Ancestors, and what we have not done or deserved our selves, we can hardly call
our own. And Virtus sola and unica Nobilitas: Virtue is the only true Nobility.
And the Scripture tells us, that the vilest Men are exalted, Psalm. 12. 8. and
that the most high rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will, and sette^h up over it the basest of Men, Dan. 4. 17. Princes and Nobles
by their Vices and Wickednesses may render themselves more vile then the Earth
under their Feet, more base than the mire in the Streets. The Word of God
accounts only them to be truly Honorable, that are truly Gracious; and this
Grace of Love to Jesus Christ does put a great Honor and luster upon all those
that have it. There is no greater and higher object for your love than the Lord
Jesus Christ, a person of so great eminency and excellency: the Love of Christ
does enoble the Heart, and none in the world have such truly great and
generous Souls, as those who have the graeatest love to him. According to the
Spirit, so is the Man, ^ither, B^se or honorable; and according to the chief
love, so is the Spirit; if your Heart do chiefly love any inferior things, as
all sublunary things are, hereby you are debased and dishonored; if your Heart
chiefly love Christ who is a Superior good and superlatively amiable, hereby
you are dignified and become truly honorable. We read of Hope (that is the
Grace of Hope) that it makes not ashamed, Romans 5. 5. And the same may be said
of this Grace of Love to Jesus Christ, it makes not ashamed. The most in the
World do love those things which one time or other will make them a shamed; the
covetous will be ashamed of their love of Riches, and the voluptuous will be
ashamed of their Love of Pleasures, and the Ambitious will be a shamed of their
love of Honors; disappointment of Happiness and true contentment will make all
ashamed of their inordinate Creature-love, especially when they come to reap
the bitter Fruit of their Sin in their Everlasting punishment. Romans 16. 21.
What ^ruit had you then in those things whereof you are now ashamed, for the
end of those things is Death. But the love of Christ makes not ashamed, it is
no matter of dishonor and therefore neither is nor will be matter of shame for
any to love Jesus Christ with the greatest Strength and Ardency: if the wicked
do despise and scorn Gods people, upon the account of this love, their scorns
are their real Glory, as on the contrary their esteem of any upon the account
of sin, is a real shame and dishonor.

4. Consider, It is your Wisdom to love Christ. Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Keep therefore and
Do them, for this is your Wisdom and Understanding in the sight of the Nations,
which shall hear these Statutes, and say surely this great Nation is a Wise and
Understanding People. None have such Wisdom and Understanding as those who have
and keep this Statute and Com^^ndment to love the Lord Jesus Christ, Psalm. 111.
10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, a good Understanding have
all they that do his Commandments The fear of the Lord and the love of Christ
are always in conjunction, or rather the former does include the latter; this
is the beginning and chief part of Wisdom, and those have the greatest
Understandings, who have the strongest Affections to the Lord Jesus Christ. The
love of Christ is the most reasonable and therefore the most wise love. That
love is most reasonable, which is chiefly carried forth toward that object
which is most suitable and really most Amiable; none so suitable and amiable an
object as the Lord Jesus Christ, as appears in what has been already said
concerning Christ's Person, Christ's Love, and Christ's Benefits. Such as love
other persons or things with a chief love, they are mistaken in the objects of
their love, they apprehend more excellency and desirableness in them, than
really is in them, and so their love is a foolish love and unreasonable, there
being nothing really worthy of it, nothing really amiable in the chief place
beneath and besides Christ. Such as make choice of Christ for the object of
their chief love, they make the wisest choice, there are really those
excellencies in him which they apprehend, and beyond what they can possibly
apprehend and conceive. They are fools that are slow of Heart to love Christ,
and they are most wise that are most forward unto this love. It is your Wisdom
to love Christ chiefly, and to love Christ ardently, such Wisdom as will make
your faces shine in the Eyes of good men, and which will put a luster upon your
Spirits in the Eyes of God? True Wisdom does not consist in the invention of
curious and quaint Notions, in the framing sound and rational Deductions, in
uttering the sense of the mind in neat and florid Expressions; but the chief
Wisdom does lie in the right placing of the Affections, and none have attained
so high a pitch of true Spiritual Wisdom, as those that have attained the
highest pitch of love to Jesus Christ. It is matter of great wonder, when there
is the greatest reason and the strongest arguments for the love of Christ, that
Men of the greatest Parts and Learning, who have heard of Christ, do not
readily fall in love with him, and attain higher degrees of this love, than
others of a more inferior capacity: But the Scripture must be fulfilled, Math.
11. 25. I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto babes. Such of
you as are but Babes in worldly Wisdom and humane Learning, as have but mean
natural parts, and no improvement by education, yet if you love the Lord Jesus
Christ above all persons and things in the World, you are far more Wise than
the greatest Scholars that are without this love.

5. Consider the excellency of this Love unto Jesus Christ; as the Knowledge of
Christ is the most excellent knowledge, Phillipians 3. 8. Yea doubtless I count
all things but loss, for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my
Lord: So the Love of Christ is the most excellent love. It is a love of the
most excellent object, the Lord Jesus who is so Excellent; it is a love of the
most Excellent original, it comes down from Heaven, it is wrought by the
Spirit of God; it is a love that renders them most excellent that have it. The
wicked that are without this love, are like dross; the Righteous that have it
are like Gold; the wicked that hate Christ, are like dirt; the Righteous that
love him are like Jewels; other loves do darken and defile, the love of Christ
does brighten the Spirit and renders Men truly illustrious, and the excellent
of the Earth.

6. Consider the Necessity of this love unto Jesus Christ.

1. The love of Christ is universally necessary: some of you have need to do
this thing, and others of you have need to do that; but all of you have the
greatest need to love Christ: some of you have need of this Friend, and to love
him, that you may keep him, and others of you have need of another Friend, one
Friend; cannot serve the necessities of all; but all of you have need of Christ
for your Friend: he is the only Friend that can serve all your necessities, and
you have need to love him above all Friends; it is necessary that you who are
poor should love Christ, who have but few or no Friends; and it is necessary
that you who are rich should love Christ who have many Friends; Christ being a
Friend instead of all to them that have none, and better than all to them that
have the most.

2. The love of Christ is absolutely and indispensably necessary: it is not
necessary that you should climb up into a high seat of dignity and honor; but
it is absolutely necessary that your Affections should climb up and ascend to
Jesus Christ who is above; it is not necessary that you should abound in
wealth, that you should have full bags, and full coffers, and much riches in
your houses, but it is absolutely necessary that you should have the Riches of
this Grace of love to Jesus Christ in your Hearts. Food is not so necessary to
satisfy your hunger, clothes are not so necessary to cover you^ nakedness,
houses are not so necessary to shelte^ you from the injury of the Weather; the
most needful thing is not so necessary to you^ bodies, as this love to Jesus
Christ is necessary to your Souls. You may be poor and in the lowest condition
here on Earth, and yet be truly happy whilst you live, and Eternally happy in
the other world, if you have this love, to Jesus Christ; but without this love
whatever your Riches, and Honors, and Friends, your Earthly delights and
enjoyments be though never so desirable, never so plentiful, yet you are
miserable, and shall be, miserable. You may love other Persons and Things in
the world subordinately, but you must love Jesus Christ chiefly, otherwise you
are under the curse both of the Law and Gospel, and you cannot escape the
vengeance of Hell.

7. Consider the Usefulness of this love unto Jesus Christ.

1. The love of Christ is useful in Prosperity to ballast the Heart, that it be
not overset with the full gales of a flourishing condition: it is of use to
moderate the Affections to lawful things; and it is of use to keep the Heart
from unlawful and sinful loves; if Christ have not your Hearts, some base and
foolish lusts will have them, which will wound your Consciences with guilt, and
pierce your Hearts through with many sorrows.

2. The love of Christ is useful in Adversity, to bear up the Heart from
sinking and being overwhelmed with the Winds and Waves of Trouble and
Affliction; it is of use to establish the Heart from being extraordinarily
moved in the most Stormy times: not only Faith but Love too is of a fixing
nature to keep from amazing fears of evil tidings, and the greatest perils; and
of a strengthening Nature to stay and support the Spirit and keep off pressing
Griefs and despondencies in the darkest and most doleful days.

3. The love of Christ is useful to quicken and excite unto duty, this makes
the yoke of Christ easy, and will enable you to draw cheerfully therein; this
makes the burden of du^y (so accounted by the most,) to be no burden in esteem;
if you have much love unto Christ you will account duty to be your privilege,
and the Service of Christ to be freedom, and none of his commands will be
grievous, but all of them joyous unto you; if you have much love unto Christ,
your Hearts will be ensiamed hereby with zeal for your Masters Glory, and you
will never think you can do too much for him.

4. The love of Christ is useful to arm you against Temptations. If Faith be a
Shield, Love to Christ is a Brea^-pla^e against the sharpest Darts which the
Devil can throw at you; love to Christ does Garrison your Hearts against this
Enemy, and is a strong defense against any overtures which the Devil may make
in his Temptations to draw you to sin: how can I do this evil and offend my
dear Lord, will be the answer of love to repel temptations to sin, whatever
alluring proffers they be accompanied withal. Temptations will have no force to
prevail over you, if this love of Christ be strong within you.

5. The love of Christ is useful to fit you for the cross and the greatest
sufferings which you may be called unto for the sake of Christ. If you have
great love to Christ, you will be ready to suffer for Christ with patience and
with (...); the heaviest cross will seem light, disgrace and shame will be
accounted honor, losses will be esteemed gains, pains, pleasures, or at least
privileges: prisons will seem Palaces, and death will be accounted life. O
how have some run to the stake and embraced the Flames of Fire kindled to burn
them, when they have felt the fire of love to Christ burning strongly within
them! thus this love is useful in Life.

6. The love of Christ is useful at death. This love in its strength will put a
beauty upon the Aspect of death, which seems so grim and terrible unto the
most. If you have much love to Christ, you will look upon death as Christ's
messenger sent for you to bring you out of the dark Prison of of the World and
the Body, and to convey you into the Mansions of Glory, where your dear Lord
is, and you will not be unwilling to leave the World that you may live with
Christ.

8. Consider the sweetness of this love unto Christ. If there be sweetness in
the love of the Members, there is much more sweetness in the love of the head;
if there be delight and comfort in the love of Christ's disciples for their
Masters sake, there is much more delight and comfort in the love of Christ
himself the Master for his own sake; the Apostle tells us of comfort in love,
Phillip. 2. 1. that is in the love one of another, but the consolations in the
love of Christ are far exceeding; there are no such sweet motions of Heart, as
those of the strong and fervent outgoings of it in its love to Christ,
especially when Christ does draw near and manifest his love unto the Soul.
Christ, does rejoice in his love unto his Disciples, and they may rejoice in
their love to him, and this joy in the love of Christ is a full joy: John 15.
11. These things have I spoken unto you that my joy may remain in you, and that
your joy may be full: in the former verse Christ speaks of his love to them,
and here of his joy in them they were the objects of his joy as they were the
objects of his love, and according to the measure and strength of their love to
Christ, so is the fullness of their joy in Christ. Cant. 4. 9. Thou have
ravished my heart, my Sister my Spouse, thou have ravished my Heart with one of
thine Eyes, with one chain of thy neck: they are the words of Christ the
Beloved, unto his Spouse the Church, expressing the ravishing delight which he
found in her Looks of Faith, or glances of Love, and the chain of Graces which
she was adorned withal. How then may your Hearts be ravished with unspeakable
delight in looking upon Christ's most amiable face, and in the fervent actings
of your love unto him? when a glance of his Eye, a smile, a beam from his
countenance does enkindle a fire in the breast, and this fire of love to Christ
does burn and flame; O how sweet is this flame, beyond what tongue is able to
express.

9 And lastly, Consider the Attainableness of this love to Chr^^t. B^u^ts are
not capable of this love to Christ, but you are capable: as your minds are
capable of knowing him, so your hearts are capable of loving him. Others have
attained this love who were as much without it, and as much averse unto it, as
any of you may be. Here you are capable, hereafter if you live and dye without
it, you will be utterly uncapab^e. You have now the means of Grace, and as of
other Graces, so of this Grace of love to Christ, in the diligent use of the
means you may attain there unto. Thus I have done with the Motives to excite
you unto the love of Christ.

SECT. XV.
THe second thing propounded in the Prosecution of the use of Exhortation was
to give Directions, and the directions will be of two sorts. 1. How to attain
this love to Christ. 2. Wherein to show this love to Christ. First, How to
attain this love to Christ, and here I shall, 1. Direct you how you may attain
this love to Christ in the truth of it, where you are wholly without it. 2.
Direct you how to attain much of this love to Christ, where you have it but in
a low degree and weak measure. The first directions then shall be, how you that
are Graceless, and Christless, and wholly witho^t this love to Christ, may
at-this love to Christ.

1. If you would attain this love unto Jesus Christ whom you have never seen,
you must get a through pe^swasion that there is such a Person a^ Jesus Christ,
and that he is such a Person indeed, as the Scriptures have revealed him to be.
The reason why Heathens and Infidels are without love to Christ is because they
have never heard of him, and the reason why many nominal Christians that have
heard of Christ are without love to him, is because they are not really
persuaded that there is or ever was such a person as Jesus Christ in the World.
If you would attain this love you must give firm assent to this Truth (which is
the greatest of all, and the very pillar and foundation of the whole Christian
Religion) that Christ really is, and that the History of him is no cunningly
devised Fable. If you have reason to believe that there was such a a Person as
Alexander the Great, that there was such person as Julius Caesar, both which
lived before Christ's time; you have more reason to believe that there was and
is such a Person as Jesus Christ: you have only Profane history for the
former, but you have Sacred history for the latter; you have only the writings
of men to testify the one, but you have the word of God in the Holy Scripture
to testify the other. You have as much reason to believe the history of the
Gospel as to believe any other history, and you have more reason to believe the
history of the Gospel than to believe any other history. I shall suggest one
reason amongst many that might be mentioned. The History of the Gospel was
written by unlearned Fishermen, and it was believed by as lea^ned men as any in
the world, in and near the time of their writing, which belief some of them
sealed with their blood, which they would never have done had they found any
reason to suspect the truth of this history, which (had there been any reason
of suspicion) they might easily have found out in those times when such a grand
Fable as this (had it been a Fable) could not possibly have gained credit*
amongst wise and inquisitive men; especially when it would have been their
greatest worldly Interest, the preservation of their Estates and Lives, to have
disbelieved and disowned it. If, beside the Apostles, all the learned Fathers
(whose Works are extant amongst us, who lived near the Apostles times, and some
of whom* suffered Martyrdom for Christ's sake) did see reason to believe that
there was such a Person as Christ, surely you have reason to believe, and no
solid reason to discredit the report of him in the History of the Gospel. And
when you have attained a firm Assent unto this, get a full persuasion that
Jesus Christ is such a person as the Scriptures do record and testify him to
be. Be persuaded of his Amiableness, his Greatness, his Holiness, his Wisdom,
his Faithfulness, his Fullness, his Kindness, the Relation he stands in to the
Father, his only begotten and dearly beloved Son; the Relation he stands in
to his People, especially in his Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King, as I
have set him forth in the Motives to stir up Love; acquaint your selves with
the History of his Birth so Wonderf^ll, of his Life so Holy, of his Works so
Powerful, of his Doctrine so Heavenly, of his Sufferings so Great, of his
Death so Painful and yet so Voluntary, of his Resurrection, Ascension, Session
and Intercession at the right hand of God, so needful for us, as you have this
History upon record in the New Testament: the assent to this in your Minds,
will be a preparative for the attaining of true Love to Jesus Christ in your
Hearts.

2. If you would attain true Love unto Jesus Christ, you must get Conviction of
Sin, and a sense of your Need of Christ. The prevailing love and liking of Sin
is inconsistent with true love unto Jesus Christ; such as love Christ do hate
Sin, and such as love sin have an Enmity against Christ: Whilst your hearts
go after your Covetousness, or your Voluptuousness, or are set upon any other
Wickedness, your hearts cannot be set upon Christ; Before you can love Christ,
your hearts must be taken off from sin. Get therefore a conviction of Sin as
the greatest Evil in the world. Be persuaded what an evil thing and a bitter it
is, to transgress Gods Law, and thereby to affront the highest Majesty, the
great King of Glory. Look into the Word and Law of God, and see what is there
required, what is there forbidden, and then look back upon your Lives, or look
into the Register of your Consciences, that you may find out what your sins of
Omission and Commission have been. Take a view of your transgressions of the
Law, and of your disobedience also unto the Gospel; and as you are guilty
before God, so labor for a clear sight and deep sense of your Guilt, how you
are under the Curse for your Disobedience, how you are liable to ruin and
eternal destruction for your sins. Look upon sin as the most mischievous thing
in the world; if there be any evil in any temporal calamities which ever did
befall any of the children of men, yea if there be any evil in future miseries,
in the extremity and eternity of Hells Plagues and Punishments, be persuaded
that there is far more evil in sin which is the cause of all. Think how
miserable you are whilst under the Guilt and Reigning power of sin, that the
Worm is not so vile, that the Toad is not so full of deadly Poison, that the
filth of the Earth is not comparable unto the filth of your sins. Think how
base and disingenuous you have been, how monstrously ungrateful to your Maker
and Benefactor, what Traitors and Rebels you have been to your Supreme King and
Sovereign. Think what peril and danger continually you are in of Death and
Hell, how weak the thread of Life is which ties Soul and Body together, which
may be suddenly cut when you are least aware, when you are most secure; and
then if you be found in a Christless state, your Souls will be conveyed
immediately unto a place of remediless and eternal misery. Be persuaded that
you are undone irrecoverably, unless the Lord Jesus Christ do help you, that
you are lost for ever unless the Lord Jesus Christ do save you, that you cannot
escape the dreadful Vengeance of God, but must be tormented most horri^ly and
everlastingly, amongst the Devils and the damned in Hell, unless the Lord Jesus
Christ do deliver you from the Wrath which is to come. The sight and sense of
sin, your miserable condition thereby, and of your indispensable need of
Christ, will make way for your Love of him. If any of you were in debt many
thousand pounds unto a severe Creditor, and had not one penny to discharge it,
and you were threatened by him to be thrown into Prison, where you must lie and
^ot and starve and die, without hopes of relief or release, except you could
make payment of the debt: And if you should hear of such a Rich man that were
willing and did proffer to be your Surety, and to pay all for you; surely you
would have an ^ndeared Love to such a friend and Benefactor: Your sins are
Debts beyond the vastest sum of Money that ever was owed or paid, and you
are not able to pay one farthing, to give the least satisfaction unto God, unto
whom you are indebted; and God is severe, and strictly just, and without full
satisfaction to his Justice, he will throw you into a worse Prison than the
most nasty dolesom Prison on Earth, I mean into the Prison of Hell, where you
must lie without the least relief, or any hopes of release: The Lord Jesus
Christ proffers to be your Surety, to pay off all for you, and to give you a
full discharge; were you sensible what a Debt Sin is, and what a Prison Hell
is, surely it would work your hearts unto an endeared Love of such a Friend and
Surety, who alone can keep you out of this dolesome dreadful Prison, into
which without him you will certainly and may suddenly be thrown. If any of you
were sick of a Death-threatning distemper, and you had made use of many
Physicians, but none could do you good; and if you should hear of one Physician
who could assuredly and would readily and freely cure your Disease, and save
your Life; surely you would thankfully make use of this Physician, and his
kindness would exceedingly engage your Love: Sin is the Souls sickness, you are
sick unto death, Sin when it is finished will bring forth Death, not only
Temporal but Eternal; It is the Lord Jesus Christ only that can cure you of
this deadly Sickness, that can remove your Sin, and thereby deliver you from
this Death of Deaths; Get a sense of the dangerous sickness of Sin, and you
will prize and use and love the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the only Physician
of value in this case. If any of you were guilty of Murder, or Theft, or High
Treason, or any other heinous breach of the Law of the Land, for which you were
apprehended, arraigned, accused, and condemned to be Hanged or Burned, or to a
more tormenting Death than either; and if you should hear of a Prince at Court
that had begged the Pardon of such Crimes, for such Malefactors, and had
obtained, and he should send to you to signify his willingness to do the like
for you; surely you would thankfully accept of such a proffer, and would love
this Prince as your life, who should thus preserve you from Death: You are all
Guilty of high Treason and Rebellion against the King of Heaven, in your breach
of his Law, and you are condemned by this Law, not to be hanged for it, or
beheaded, but to be burned for it, to be burned in the Fire of Hell, which is
unquenchable; The Lord Jesus Christ is the Prince of Glory, a Friend in the
Court of Heaven, who has procured a Pardon for many such malefactors, and
sends to you to signify his willingness to procure your Pardon, if you will
make use of him; Surely, if you have a sense of your Crime and Danger, you will
apply your selves unto Christ to save you, and you will not withhold your Love
from such a one as should show you such unparalled Favor.

3. If you would attain true Love unto Christ, you must get an Interest in
Christ, you must lay hold on Christ by Faith, that you may be united to him,
and related to him; It is Faith that works Love, to them that believe Christ is
precious, but by Unbelievers he is slighted, and cannot be beloved; without
Union to Christ you will have no affection to Christ; the foundation of Love is
laid in the Relation to the Beloved, and this Union to and Interest in Christ,
it is only by Faith: If then you would embrace Christ in the arms of your Love,
you must first lay hold on Christ, and receive him by the hand of Faith.
Whatever Motives and Attractives of Love there be in Jesus Christ, they will be
none to you without this Interest and Relation; Christ is a Person most
beautiful, most lovely and amiable, but he will not be so in your eyes, so
long as you are without the eye of Faith; he is great and powerful, but so
much the worse for you, because without Interest in him, his power is engaged
against you: he is pure and holy, and whilst in your sins you are therefore
the more odious in his sight; he is wise and knows all things, therefore is
privy to all your sins; he is most true, and therefore will fulfill his
threatenings against such as go on still in their trespasses; he is full, but
you without interest in his Person have no share in his fullness; he is kind,
but it is to those that are related to him, but what is this to you that are
Unbelievers? he is a Shepherd to his Sheep, but you are Goats; he is a Captain
to his Soldiers, but you are Enemies; he is a Teacher to his Disciples, but
you are the Devils Scholars; he is a Gracious Soveragin, but it is to his
Subjects, you are rebels; He is a Priest to his People, having made
satisfaction and does make intercession for them; but you trample his blood
under his feet. He is a Friend and Benefactor to his People, but you are
Strangers; he is a Brother, and a Husband to his People, but you stand in none
of these Relations; he is a Redeemer to his People but your are Slaves and
Captives.

The light which he gives is most sweet, but you are darkness; the life which
he imparts is most excellent, but you are dead in sins and trespasses; he gives
pardon of sin, but you are under guilt; he gives Peace of Conscience, but your
Consciences are still wounded and ^eared; he gives the Joys of the Holy Ghost,
but you are in danger of Eternal woes; the Robes of his Righteousness are most
Rich, but you are naked; the Riches of his Grace are inestimable, but you are
still poor; the dignity of being made the Sons of God is most admirable, but
you are Children of the Devil; he gives access unto God in Prayer, but you are
still at a distance; he gives a Title to the Kingdom of Heaven, but if you
continue in your present state, you will be shut at last out of the Palace
which is above, and be thrust down into the Prison of Hell which is below. What
then are all these motives to draw forth love to Christ unto you, that have no
interest in Christ? it is Union and Relation unto Christ, and interest in him
by Faith, which puts life into these motives* that they may indeed attract
love; O then be persuaded without further delay to endeavor after this interest
in Christ; you must have it, or you are lost irrecoverably, you will be
miserable Eternally; and you may attain this interest, others have attained it,
as mean, and as vile as your selves; and you are called unto Christ, O be
persuaded then to come unto Christ, and join your selves by Faith unto him,
that you may have interest in Christ and in all his Benefits. If you ask me
what this Faith is that gives an interest in Christ, what it is to believe; I
answer out of John 1. 12. that it is to receive Christ. But to as many as
received him to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God, even to them that
Believe in his Name. Be persuaded then to receive Christ and accept of him upon
the terms of the Gospel. Receive and take hold of Christ by the hand of Faith.
And that you may do this, 1. You must let go your hold of sin, if your hugg sin
in your bosom, if you harbor base Lusts in your Hearts, you cannot receive and
give entertainment to Christ there: you must thrust sin out, if you would let
Christ in. 2. You must let go your hold on the World; I don't say you must let
it go out of your hands, and throw away the estates which God has given,
except it be to part with some proportion in a way of Mercy and Charity, and
except you be called to leave all rather than to forgo Christ or any of his
Truths; but you must let the World go out of your Hearts, the World must not
sit upon the Throne of your Hearts, that seat must be reserved for Christ,
chief love and inordinate love to the world and things in the world must be
taken off. 3. You must let go hold of self; your own Righteousness and all
self-confidences must be parted with, you must be humbled and emptied of your
selves, if you would be prepared for the receiving of Jesus Christ, and
receiving of that fullness which there is in him. And then, 1. Receive Jesus
Christ as your High Priest to reconcile you unto God, trusting alone in his
Merits and Mediation, 2. Receive Jesus Christ as your Prophet to instruct and
lead you in all Truth by his Word and Spirit. 3. Receive Jesus Christ as your
Sovereign Lord and King to Rule. you. 4. Receive Jesus Christ as your Captain
to tread down your Spiritual Enemies under your feet. 5. Receive Jesus Christ
in all his Relations of Shepherd, Friend, Brother, and especially in the
Relation of an Husband, and join your selves to him, and make over your selves
to him, dedicating and devoting your selves to him, and giving up your selves
to be guided, guarded, provided for, and governed by him. This is to receive
Christ, and this is to Believe, this gives Union and Relation, and interest in
the Lord Jesus, and if you do thus join your selves to Christ by Faith; you
will quickly feel love to Christ to spring forth, to work and act, and that
vigorously; and to bring forth such fruit in the life as shall evidently show,
that love to Christ is rooted in the Heart.

4. If you would attain Truth of love to Jesus Christ, be diligent in the use
of all those means which God has appointed for the working of it, I shall
instance only in two means.

1. Be diligent in Hearing the Word Preached; as Faith comes by Hearing, so
love to Christ is wrought by the same means, Hear and your Souls shall live,
says the Prophet, Isa. 55. 3. and I may say, hear that your Hearts may love,
that where the Eye cannot, the Ears may affect the Heart with love to the Lord
Jesus. Whilst Lydia was hearing Paul Preach, her Heart was opened, Act. 16. 14.
and whilst you are hearing Ministers Preach of Christ, your Hearts may be
opened to receive him, and to embrace him in the arms of your dearest love, See
Act. 11. 15. As I began to speak the Holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the
beginning; whilst Peter was Preaching and the Gentiles were hearing, the Holy
Ghost was sent down from Heaven and fell upon upon; and so whilst you are
hearing the Word, God may give forth of his Spirit to work this Grace of love
to Jesus Christ in your Hearts.

2. Be diligent and earnest in Prayer unto God for this love, confess and
bewail before him your want of this love, tell him you deserve a double
Anathema, because you do not love Christ* and withal tell him you cannot of
your selves love him, that you can as easily lift a Mountain to Heaven, as lift
up your hearts unto Christ; but desire that he would draw up your love to
Christ by his Spirit. Beg of him that he would put out the fire of Lust, and
all inordinate creature-love, and that be would enkindle a fire of love in you
to this most lovely Jesus, which no corruption in your Hearts may be able
extinguish. And in your Prayers present your Hearts to the Lord Jesus, offer
them up freely to him, and desire that he would accept of them, that he would
take hold of them, and take possession of them and erect his Throne in them,
and an Everlasting habitation for himself.

Section. XVI.
HAving given directions how you may attain the Truth of love to Christ where
you are without it, I come now to give directions how you may attain much of
this love to Christ, where you have it but in a low degree and weak measure.
Would you attain much love to Christ?

1. Be much in Contemplation of Christ; consider often what motives there are
of love in him, press them upon your Spirits and labor to awaken and rouse up
your Hearts unto the vigorous exercise of this love. Spend time in secret
retirement, and there think, and think again, of the Superlative Excellencies
and Perfections which are in Christ's Person, how wonderful and matchless his
love is, what heigths in it that cannot be reached, what depths in it that
cannot be fathomed, what other dimensions which cannot be comprehended:
Meditate often of his benefits, how incomparable his love tokens be: and whilst
you you are musing, you may feel the fire burning; whilst you are looking you
may feel your Hearts leaping; whilst you are taking a view of him, ere you are
aware, your Hearts like the Chariots of Aminadab, may run to him: O the
ravishments of love! the transports of Soul! which some Believers have found in
their retired thoughts and views of Christ. Get often into the Mount of Divine
Contemplation, and there look upwards unto Heaven, and think with your selves.
Yonder, Yonder above the shining Sun is the more Glorious Son of Righteousness;
there at the right hand of the Throne of God, is my beloved Jesus the Son of
God seated, and though he be so high above me both in place and dignity, yet he
thinks upon me, and pleads for me, and many a gift has he thence and sent
by his Spirit conveyed unto me, and I can ask nothing of the Father in his
name, but, if it be really for my good, I have it by his means. O dear Jesus,
how lovely art thou in thy self, the darling of heaven! the Delight of the
Father! the Admiration of Angels! O what brightness of Glory, what shining
luster art thou arrayed with! thou art clothed with most excellent Majesty and
Honor! thou art girded with infinite Might and Power! the beauty of thy face
is most wonderful! the smiles of thy countenance are most sweet and
delightful! and does this lovely fair One, this fairest of ten thousand, this
most excellent and altogether lovely Person bear a particular love to me? to
such a vile worm as me? to such a dead Dog as me? to such an undeserving,
illdeserving, hell-deserving sinner as me? O what mavelous kindness is this!
what infi^i^e Riches of Free Grace! does he know me by name? has he given
himself for me? and given himself to me? and shall not I give him my heart? am
I written in his book^ Redeemed with his blood, clothed with his Righteousness,
beautified with his Image? has he put the dignity of a Child of God upon me,
and prepared a place in the Fathers house for me? O wonderful! O admirable!
what shall I render? what returns shall I make? had I a thousand tongues,
should I not employ them all in speaking his praise? had I a thousand Hearts
should I not present them all as too mean to thank-offering unto him. And yet
am I slow, slow of Heart to love this dear and sweet Jesus? awake O my Soul!
awake from thy dullness and stupidity? shake off thy sleep which glues thine
eyelids so close together, shake out the dust of the Earth which has got into
thine eyes and keeps thee from the view of thy beloved. Arise O my Soul! and
lift up thy self, unfetter thy feet, un^log thy self, take the wing and mount
up above the sky and visible Heavens, even to the place where the lovely and
dear Jesus is. Take thy leave of the world, and all things therein. Bid farewell
to the flattering honors, the deceitful Riches, the glozing Pleasures, that
are here below: bid adieu to them, and leave them to those that place their
chiefest happiness in them: if Earth has thy body for a while, yet let it have
thy heart and chiefest affections no more; come O my Soul ascend and soar alo^t
unto the Heaven of Heavens, the way unto the Holy of Holies is accessible, the
vail is rent, the forerunner is entered, and thou may have entrance too with
thy Thoughts, and Desires, and Loves, and Hopes and Joys; there thou may see
and veiw, and admire, and embrace thy dearest Lord; there thy Heart may find a
fit object for it is Love, even thy dearest Lord Jesus, who will not reject and
despise thee, but give kind entertainment unto thy love, and withal give the
fullest and sweetest returns; there thy Heart may find a room to dispose of it
self, and not only a lodging like that of a wayfaring man for a night, but an
habitation wherein to dwell and to take up it is Eternal abode; let thy Heart be
thy forerunner, that when thy body drops off from thee thou may know where
to betake thy se^f and find ready entertainment there where thy Heart has been
long before. Why do thou hang downwards O my Soul? why do thou bend so much
to the Earth and Earthly things? what is there here below that is not beneath
thee, and altogether unworthy of thy Love? how empty, and vain, and thorny are
these things? don't wast thy time, weary thy self for very vanity, don't prick
and wound thy self with these things any more. What aileth thee O my Soul, that
thou art so backward to the Love of Christ? is it because thou can not see
Christ with the Eyes of thy Body? thou shall see him with those Eyes hereafter,
when he comes in his Glory, and thy body is raised and repaired, and sitted to
bear such a sight; thou can not see the Wind, but thou hear it is noise,
and feel it is blasts; and do thou not hear Christ's voice in his Word?
do thou not feel the breathings of his Spirit in his Ordinances. Thou art
invisible thy self O my Soul, and art thou so drenched in flesh, that visible
objects shall have more Power to draw down thy heart, than this most glorious
object (though now invisible) shall have power to draw up thy Heart? do thou
question and doubt of his love to thee? and does this damp and discourage thy
Affection? whose Image is this which is engraven upon thee? is it not the Image
of Christ? what writing is that upon thy Heart? is it not Gods Law written by
Christ's Spirit? whose deckings and adornings have thou got about thee? what
Beauty is this which is put upon thee? is it not Christ's comeliness? where
had thou those Bracelets, that Ring, those Jewels, that chain of Graces? are
they not Christ's love tokens which he has given thee? and yet will thou doubt
of his love? if thou feel corruption strong, yet do thou not perceive some
Grace? although it be weak? have thou not some love to Christ, although it be
low? are not thy desires chiefly after him, which evidence that thy chief love
is to him? and is it so with any but such whom Christ does love? does not
Christ love first? and yet will thou question his love? banish then thy fears,
silence thy doubts O my Soul, rouse up thy self and climb ^p by the Jacobs
ladder which is let down to thee from Heaven, and settle thy love upon Jesus
Christ and those things which are above, where Christ sits at the Right hand of
God. Such retired Contemplations of Christ, and Soliloquies and pleadings with
your own Souls when alone by your selves, will tend exceedingly to the
promotion of your love unto Christ.

2. Would you have much love to Christ? Be much in Reading and Studying the
Scriptures. The Scriptures are a Glass in which Christ may be seen, he cannot
be seen Face to Face in this World, this is the happiness of the Triumphant
Church in Heaven, not of the Militant Church upon the Earth; what may here be
discerned of Christ, it is in the glass of the Scriptures and
Gospel Ordinances: this is that glass spoken of, 2 Cor. 3. 18. We all with open
face beholding as ^n a glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
image from Glory to Glory. Christ is the Glory of the Lord, the brightness of
his Fathers Glory? would you have much love to him, be often looking, veiwing
and beholding of him in the glass of the Scriptures, by much beholding of him,
you may be transformed more and more into the likeness of his Holiness, and
into the likeness of his Love, which is Glory begun. The Scriptures have the
Image of Christ engraven upon them; the Image of the Father is upon the Son,
and the Image of the Son is upon the Scriptures; there you may see the Picture
of Christ, the Beauty of Christ, at least some lineaments are there drawn by
the hand of God, although not fully and to the life, I mean such you will see
in him when you come to behold him face to face in Heaven; yet his Beauty is
drawn in such proportions and with such shadows as you are now capable of
beholding. Would you have much love unto Christ whom you have never seen? look
much upon his Picture and Image in the Scriptures. The Scriptures are Christ's
Love letters. In the second and third Chapters of Revelations, Christ does send
Seven Epistles to the Seven Asian Churches; there are many Epistles and
Love Letters as it were in the Scriptures, especially in the New Testament,
wherein Christ does give most kind expressions of most endeared Love unto his
People. Read much and study Christ's Love letters, especially those parts of
the Scriptures wherein Christ does express most of his kindness and love. See
how kindly Christ does express himself, Ioh. 14. v. 1, 2, 3, 13, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 27. Chap. 1^. v. 9. 13, 14, 15, 16. Chap. 16. v. 7. 22, 24,
26, 27. 33. Chap. 17. v. 9, 10, 11, 15, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Chap. 20. v. 17.
Read often and consider such places. Let the Word of Christ dwell richly in
you, and his will feed and maintain your love to Christ, this is a means to
have Christ dwell in your hearts, not only by Faith, but also by most endeared
Love.

3. Would you have much Love to Christ? be much in Prayer unto God for this
Love. Ephesians. 6. 23. Peace be unto the Brethren and love with Faith from God the
Father. Not only Peace is from God, who is called the God of Peace, and Faith
from God, who works it by his Almighty power; but alos Love is from God, who is
the God of Love; he circumciseth the heart to love himself, and to love his
Son. This love of Christ is a Grace of the Spirit, which God does freely give
and powerfully work, the Beginnings of it, the Increase of it, all the Measures
and Degrees of it are from him; If you would attain high measures of love to
Christ, you must apply your selves unto God in Prayter, and therein diligently
seek to him for it. If you would have much love to Christ in your hearts, you
must be often at the Throne of Grace upon your Knees; and there humbly
acknowledge, if not the want, yet the weakness of your love to Christ, bewail
your Sins which do damp your Affections, and earnestly request that he would
work your hearts unto a strong love; be importunate in Prayer for this, follow
God day by day with the same requests, plead with him for it, fill your mouths
with Arguments, and fill your Arguments with Faith and ^ervent Desires. Tell
him, whatever loveliness and love there be in Christ, whatever attractives to
draw forth your love, yet of your selves you are utterly unable to put forth
the least motion of true affection unto Christ. Tell him, that this love to
Christ, though it be your Duty, yet it is his Gift, that you ought to act it,
but this you cannot do, unless he works it. Tell him how easily he can enkindle
this Fire of Love to Christ in your bosoms, and blow it up into a flame. Tell
him, he has bid you to ask and you shall have, and whatever you ask according
to his will he hears, and that it is his will you should love Christ not
only truly but also strongly. Tell him, you desire much love to Christ, and
that these desires do come from himself, and therefore earnestly desire the
fulfilling of them. Tell him, if you do not love Christ much, you shall be apt
to overlove the Creature, which will be displeasing to him, therefore request
that you may have such a love to Christ as may overpower all other love, and
keep your hearts from all Inordinacy of affections to any thing beneath and
besides the Lord Jesus Christ. Plead how much it will be for his Glory, that
you should have much love unto Christ, that hereby you shall be enabled to
honor him the more in the world. Plead how much it will be for your good; tell
him, if you asked Corn and Wine and Oil; if you asked Wealth and Honors, and
Creature-delights in abundance, they might be a snare to you, and for your
hurt; but a strong love to Christ is needful and useful, and be sure will be
for your good; urge his Promise of Circumcising the heart to love him, and
plead his Faithfulness; and if you be thus importunate in Prayer for much love
to Christ, and will not be denied, you shall not be denied.

4. Would you have much Love to Christ, get much Faith. Faith works Love both
to the Father and to the Son; According to the measure of your Faith, so will
the measure of your Love be: Such as are without any Faith, are without any
Love; such as have but a ^eeble faith, have but a weak love; and such as have
the strongest faith, have the strongest love. The strongest faith gives the
clearest discovery of Christ's infinite Excellencies and Perfections; It is not
the eye of Sense which does discern Christ, neither is it the eye of Reason
which does discern him; whatever discoveries we have of Christ, it is by
Revelation, and this is discernable only by Faith. Faith is the Evidence of
things not seen, and the unseen Christ is evident by Faith to be the most
excellent Person, and the most suitable Object of love, and the more evident the
Object of love is, the stronger will the love be. Moreover, Faith is not only
the Eye of the Soul to discern Christ, but also the Hand of the Soul, not only
to take hold on him, but also to receive from him of his Fullness Grace for
Grace, and by consequence more of this Grace of love to him. Our Communion with
Christ is by Faith; the more intimate acquaintance and fellowship we have with
those whom we love, the more endeared will be our love; the strongest Faith
brings us unto the greatest intimacy, fellowship and familiarity with Christ,
and therefore it is a means of the strongest Love. Endeavor then to get a
strong Faith, and to live daily in the powerful exercise thereof; the more you
live by Faith, the more you will dwell in the Love of Christ.

5. Would you have much Love unto Christ? labor for much of the Spirit; labor
for much of the Light of the Spirit; There must be not only the Glass of the
Scriptures, and the Eye of Faith, but also the Light of the Spirit, that you
may have a clear discerning of this lovely Lord Jesus; Labor for much of the
Operation of the Spirit; the Spirit is like Wind to blow up the Sparks of Love
in your hearts into a flame. Labor for the inhabitation of the Spirit, and
that the Promise may be made good to you which Christ gives to his Disciples.
Ioh. 14. 16, 17. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of Truth, whom
the World cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him; but ye
know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you.

6. Would you have much Love unto Christ? labor for clear Evidences of his
Love unto you; the apprehensions of Christ's Loveliness may excite to some
love, but the full well grounded persuasions of Christ's love to you, will above
all heighten your love to Christ. Doubts of Christ's love do cause fears, and
fears do contract the heart, and therefore are opposite to love, which is the
expansion and enlargement of the heart; perfect love casts out fear, the more
love, the less fear, and the more doubts and fears the less love. Such as doubt
much of Christ's love to them, they may love Christ truly, but they cannot love
Christ strongly. You will love a less lovely person that loves you, more than a
more lovely person that hates you; the love of the Person beloved is a most
amiable Qualification and strong attractive, yea one of the greatest Incentives
and Inducements unto love. Get then a persuasion of the infinite love to you of
this Infinitely lovely person, that you may be able to say with Paul, Gal. 2.
20. Who loved me, and gave himself for me. Look diligently into the Word of
God, and find out the Characters there of those that are Beloved by Christ; and
then look narrowly into your selves, and see whether your face will not answer
that face in the Looking glass of the Scriptures; see whether you cannot find
the lineaments of the New Man within you, whether you have not experienced a
gracious change; Is there not Light where there was Darkness? Is there not Life
where there was Death? Is there not Love where there was Hatred? Is there not
the Law of God written, where the Law of Sin did command all? Is not the Biass
of your Wills and Hearts Godward, and Christ-ward, and Heavenward? which
heretofore was only Sin-ward and Earth-ward and Hell-ward? Pray earnestly unto
God, that he would give you a full assurance, that if you are indeed
effectually called, if you are indeed united and related unto Jesus Christ, you
may know it, and no longer doubt thereof. In a word, seek diligently after the
Manifestations of Christ's Love in all the ways of his Ordinances; rest not in
the outside of Ordinances, but seek after Christ in Ordinances, follow him
from Sabbath to Sabbath, from Ordinance to Ordinance, and always be looking for
him, and looking toward him, till he turn about and look upon you, and give
you a gracious smile; seek and wait for that Manifestation of himself which he
has promised to hem that love him, Ioh. 14. 21. Wait for his Mission of the
Holy Ghost from Heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 12. to shed abroad the sense of his Love into
your hearts, Romans 5. 5. and if you did know assuredly and had a sense hereof
given unto you by the Spirit of Christ, O the Joys which then you would have
in him! O the love which then you would have to him! As your Joys would be
unspeakable, so your Love would be unspeakable too; such a warmth of heart and
burning of love to Christ you would feel within you, as is beyond the Rhetoric
of the Tongue to set forth.

7. Would you have much Love to Christ? get much hatred of Sin, and accordingly
watch and pray, and strive and fight against Sin, as the worst of Evils, as
that which does so much displease your Lord. Bewail sins of daily incursion,
and labor that your sins of Infirmity may be less every day than other; Take
heed of sins of sudden surprise, but chiefly of designed sins, and that you
comply not with any temptations unto grosser miscarriages, which like water
cast upon the Fire of your love to Christ, will put out the flame, and leave
only a few unperceivable sparks in the corner of your hearts. Suffer not Sin
to have any room in your hearts, or if it will abide and you cannot thrust it
quite out, let it not have a quiet habitation within you; disturb sin as much
as you can, wage war every day with your remaining Lusts, let no day pass over
your heads without giving some blows, some thrusts and wounds to Sin.
St^eighten the room of Sin in your hearts as much as may be; the more room Sin
has in your hearts, the less room Christ will have there. Particularly, take
heed of inordinate love to the world, and the things in the world, the
prevalency of which love will damp your love to Christ; by how much more the
world gets of your love, by so much the less Christ will have of it. A
subordinate love you may have to Persons and Things in the world, but let no
person or thing have your chief love but only Christ; love nothing for it self
with an abstracted love, but love all inferior things with inferior love,
love all under the Lord, and in the Lord, and for the Lord's sake; get all
inordinate affections to the world crucified by the Cross of Christ. You must
have dying affections to perishing things, if you would have a living and
active love to the ever-living Jesus.

8. Would you have much love unto Christ? associate your selves most with those
that have most love unto Christ; you may fetch light from their light, and you
may fetch warmth from their Fire; dead coals are enkindled by the living, and
your dead hearts may be enkindled with love to Christ by the warm discourse of
those that have warm hearts. Be ready to speak of Christ and for Christ in any
company as you have sit opportunity, and diligently watch for an Occasion; shut
your ears against and reprove profane and ^ilthy Communication; divert that
which is vain and frothy, and be ready to begin and promote that which is
serious and savoury, that which is gracious and may tend to your own and others
Edification: Study the Art, and practice it, of provoking all whom you converse
withal, not unto Strife and Contention, but unto this love and Affection unto
the Lord Jesus Christ, and whilst you are endeavoring to warm others with
this Love, you may be warmed your selves.

9. And lastly, Would you have much Love unto Christ? be much in the exercise
of this love, hereby it is increased and heightened; Use legs and have legs; and
if you act this love frequently, it will hereby get strength and Activity;
every day endeavor to put forth some vigorous acts of love unto Jesus Christ.
In your ordinary Callings and secular Business and Employment, you may send up
some looks of Love unto Jesus Christ in your Ejaculations. But especially in
the Duties of Gods immediate Worship, labor that your love may flow out unto
Christ most vigorously. In your daily secret Devotion and Family Worship, let
love to Christ draw forth tears from your eyes, at least cause grief and sorrow
in your hearts, in the acknowledgement of your sins, whereby he has been
dishonored and displeased. Let love to Christ draw forth earnest desires after
Christ, and those communications, manifestations, and consolations which he
does give to none but such as are his; let love to Christ put requests into
your mouths, arguments into your requests, and fervor into your arguments in
your pleadings with him at the Throne of Grace for further supplies of his
Grace, and that you may be brought into more intimacy of acquaintance with him.
Every day you should express your love to Christ, especially on the Lords day,
when almost the whole day is to be spent in public and private Exercises of
Religious Worship, in all your love to Christ should be in exercise; in your
attendances upon him in Ordinances you most bring not only your Bodies before
him, but present your Hearts unto him; this you should be careful to do in
public Prayer and Hearing of the Word, Preaching and Singing Psalms; often
should you endeavor in every Ordinance to lift up your hearts unto the Lord;
but above all when you approach the Lords Table, all your Graces should there
and then be in exercise, especially this Grace of love to Jesus Christ, your
Eye there should affect your Heart, when you see the representations of your
crucified Lord, and think what manner of Love he did bear to you, that he
should submit himself unto such a Death for you, how should this affect your
hearts! And if ever, then your Love to Christ should show it self, and act with
the greatest vigor and strength.

SECT. XVII.
HAving given Directions how to attain love to Christ in the truth and in the
strength of it, I come now to the last sort of Directions wherein you should
show your love to Jesus Christ.

More generally show your Love to Christ in your Obedience unto Christ, Ioh.
14. 15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments. Be faithful in the performance
of all known Du^ies which Christ does command, and be careful in the
forbearance of all known sins which Christ does forbid; let your great care be
to please Christ, whoever is displeased; and your great fear be of offending
Christ, whoever be offended with your strictness. Show your love, 1. In the
Sincerity of your Obedience, 2. In the Willingness of your Obedience, 3. In the
Universality of your Obedience, 4. In the Constancy of your Obedience.

1. Show your love to Christ, in the Sincerity of your Obedience. Hypocrites
will do some things which Christ commands, but it is from carnal Motives and
with carnal Designs; But let love to Christ be the Motive, and the Honor of
Christ the End of your Obedience; obey Christ because you love him, and with a
design to please him; what you do, do heartily unto the Lord, and above all
things desire and endeavor that what you do may find acceptance with him. 2
Cor. 5. 9. Wherefore we labor, that whether present or absent we may be
accepted of him.

2. Show your love to Christ in the Willingness. of your Obedience; some will
obey Christ, but it is with great Backwardness they will perform Duties, but
they are burdensome, a weariness, and toilsome, and the Commandments of Christ
are grievous unto them; they are scarce ready unto any Duty, but when they are
scourged unto it by the Rods of Affliction, or spurred and pricked forward by
the goads of Conscience; O the listlesness and indisposition in the most, unto
the most spiritual part of the Service of Christ! which is an evident proof of
the defect of love, either in the truth of it, or at least in the measure and
degree of it. Let your love show it self in the willingness of your Obedience,
serve the Lord with a willing and ready mind, with alacrity and cheerfulness of
spirit, looking upon the Service of Christ as your Honor, and esteeming every
Duty to be your Privilege: If you have any constraints unto Obedience, let
them be the constraints of love; as 2 Cor. 5. 14. If you be forced to obey
Christ, let there be no violence but the violence If love; if you be dragged to
Duty, let it oe with no other cords than the cords of bove; let love be the
Spur and Goad to prick you forward, that you may not only walk but run in the
ways of Christ's commandments with an enlarged heart.

3. Show your love to Christ in the Universality of your Obedience. Hypocrites
will perform some Duties which are for their turn, and will serve their carnal
designs; other duties they omit and totally neglect; let your love to Christ
discover it self in your respect to all his Commandments; though you cannot
here attain Perfection of Obedience, yet let your Obedience be universal; obey
Christ not only in open Duties, which men are witnesses of, but also in secret
Duties, and spiritual Duties, which depend upon the exercise of the Mind, such
as Meditation, Contemplation, Self-search, and Ejaculation, as also in the
spiritual part of all Duties, which no Eye can be witness unto but the Eye of
God; and hereby you may be distinguished from all Hypocrites in the world.

4. Show your love to Christ in the Constancy of your Obedience. Gal. 5. 7. Ye
did run well, who did hinder you, that ye should not obey the truth? Some
Hypocrites are zealous Professors for a while, and at first setting out seem to
outstrip many that are sincere, but they soon tire, and are weary not only in
well-doing but of it; they quickly s^umble and fall, and not only fall down,
but fall off; not only fall back, but fall away, and turn fearful Apostates.
Show your love to Christ not only in setting out well, but in continuing your
Christian course well unto the end of the course of your Lives; begin well, and
patiently continue in well-doing: Persevere in your Obedience; Be not weary in
well-doing, knowing that in due time ye shall reap if ye faint not, Gal. 6. 9.
And if you be faithful unto death, Christ has promised to give you the Crown
of Life, Rev. 2. 10.

More particularly, show your love to Christ, 1. In your learning, keeping,
asserting and maintaining of Christ's truths. 2. In your public spiritedness
and zeal for Christ's honor and interest. 3. In your vigorous resistance and
opposition of Christ's Enemies. 4. In your Following of Christ's example. 5. In
your readiness to take up and patiently to bear Christ's cross. 6. In your
desires after Christ's presence here, a longing for Christ's second appearance
at the last day.

1. Show your love to Christ in your learning, keeping, asserting and
maintaining Christ's Truths. 1. Learn Christ's Truths, acquaint your selves by
diligent reading of the Scriptures, and other books that may be a help
hereunto, with all fundamental truths of the Christian Religion in the first
place, and so go on and proceed further to learn those truths which are
superstructory; and whatever truths you find a Foundation for in the Scriptures
which are the word of Truth, receive them, not only in the light of them, but
also in the love of them; if the branches of truths be in your heads, and the
leaves of them in your profession, and the fruit of them in your actions, let
the root of them be in your Hearts. 2. Having learned the truths of Christ as
they are in Jesus, let them not hang loose in your understandings but get them
fastened and fixed, and close girt about the loins of your minds; hold the
truths of Christ fast, prize them above all jewels, don't part with them upon
any terms, let all go, estate, liberty and life it self, rather than any of
this rich treasure which Christ has entrusted you withal. 3. Assert the truths
of Christ; be not ashamed or afraid to own any truths of Christ in the most
adulterous and gainsaying generation, profess your belief of Christ and of the
truths of Christ, endeavor that the light of these truths may shine abroad,
and cast forth such bright beams in the dark world where you live, that others
may be brought hereby unto the knowledge of the Truth. 4. Endeavor to maintain
Christ's truths, earnestly contend for the Doctrine of Faith once delivered to
the Saints, endeavor to convince gainsayers, and to defend Christ's truths
against those corrupt and erroneous opinions and Doctrins, which like leaven is
very apt to spread and infect the minds of men.

2. Show your love to Christ in your public spiritedness, and zeal for
Christ's honor and interest: let your affections be public not private,
narrow, contracted and centring in self; let your love be a public and general
love, Love not only Relations, but love all Christ's disciples, though of
different Persuasions and interests, because of the image of Christ, and love
not only your Friends that love you, but also your Enemies that hate you,
because of the command of Christ. Let your desires be public desires, desire
the welfare of the univeral Church, and of all Gods people throughout the
world, and accordingly Pray for their Peace and Prosperity, and endeavor as
you have opportunity to promote the public good more than your own private
advantage; seek not your own things, but the things of Jesus Christ. Let your
griefs be public griefs, grieve not only for your own sins, but also for the
sins of others, whereby Christ is dishonored in the world; grieve not only for
your own afflictions, but also for the afflictions of Joseph, Heb. 13, 3.
Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them, and them which suffer
adversity, as being your selves also in the body. You are in the same mystical
body with all Christ's afflicted members, and when some members suffer, the
rest should suffer too, by way of sympathy. Bleeding in their wounds and
grieving in their sorrows, be ready also to relieve any, especially Christ's
disciples when they are in distress and want according to your capacity and as
you have opportunity. Employ all your Talents for your Masters glory, and
endeavor to promote the interest of the Lord Jesus unto the utmost of your
abilities. 1. In reference to those which are without. If you are called your
selves, labor to call others unto Christ, as Andrew called Peter, Phillip
called Nathaniel unto the Messiah, John 1. 40, 41. 44, 45. If you have found
the Messiah, or rather have been found of him, let your love to Christ, and
love to Souls prompt you, to endeavor the Conversion of others that are your
Relations, your Friends and Acquaintances. Put your unconverted Friends in mind
of their miserable Estates whilst under the guilt and reigning power of sin,
whilst slaves to the Devil and their own lusts; mind them of Death and the
fearful consequences thereof to all unpardoned sinners; tell them of Christ
that he is the only Savior and Redeemer of Mankind. How able and willing he is
to save them, if they seek after him and apply themselves unto him; tell them
that not long since you were in the same estate with themselves, living in the
practice of the same sins and going on in the same way to destruction; and that
the Lord has showed mercy unto you in your Conversion, and bringing you into a
state of Salvation: tell them that there is mercy also for them if they look
after it, that Gods Grace is most free, his mercy most plentiful, that Christ
is most Gracious and casts out none that come unto him: tell them of the
amiablenesse of Christ's Person, of the surpassing love which he has shown to
fallen mankind in his dying for them; and that though he were dead, yet he is
alive and lives for evermore to intercede for all them that make choice of him,
and make use of him for their Advocate. Therefore persuade them that they would
break off their sins by Repentance, which otherwise will be the ruin both of
their bodies and of their Souls in Hell, and without delay that they would come
unto Christ and accept of him upon Gospel-terms. If any of you cannot manage
these arguments well your selves persuade them, if you can, to hear such
Ministers and Sermons, as through Gods blessing have been effectual for your
Conversion, and thus you may be instrumental to augment the Kingdom of Christ,
which is one of the best ways of expressing your love unto Christ. 2. In
reference to them which are within; labor to promote the interest of Christ
amongst them that are truly Gracious, by vigorous endeavors to strengthen and
establish them, to quicken and encourage them in the ways of the Lord:
Communicate the experiences which you have had, as you see there is real need,
and it may tend not so much to your praise as your Masters honor. Labor in
your places to be both shineing and burning lights; be forward to every good
word and work. Look upon your selves as the devoted Servants of Christ, and
that you are not your own, and therefore lay out your selves to the utmost for
him, and give all diligence to glorify him with your bodies and spirits, with
your Estates and interests, with your gifts and talents, all which are his, and
ought to be at his devotion.

3. Show your love to Christ in your vigorous resistance and opposition of
Christ's Enemies. There are three grand Enemies of Christ which you are by your
Baptism engaged to fight against, namely the Devil, the Flesh, and the World
which war both against Christ, and against your Souls. This Trinity of
Adversaries agree in one, and combine together against his anointed, doing
their utmost endeavor to break his bands, to untye his cords, and to unhinge
his Government; they would pluck the Crown off of Christ's head could they
reach it, and the Scepter out of his hand, they would divest Christ if they
could of all his power here on Earth, and confine him to his territories in
Heaven; but all their attempts in this kind have been and will be in vain,
Christ has tried the strength of these Enemies; and has vanquished them, but
still some life and power is left with them to war against the holy seed; you
are Christ's Soldiers, listed under his banner, show your fidelity and your
love to your Captain and General, in manfully maintaining the spiritual combat
against his and your spiritual En^mies; fight the good fight of Faith, resist
unto blood, don't yield upon any account; disdainfully turn away the Eye and
Ear when these Enemies would entice and allure you, and stoutly make resolute
opposition against them, when they do most furiously assault you; hearken to no
suggestions of the Devil, temptations of the world or motions of the Flesh
which would induce and draw you into ways of sin, or which would force and
drive you out of the ways of Christ; resist and oppose, and labor to gain some
victories over these adversaries every day, especially get conquest over the
Flesh, and the other two will be soon vanquished; Christ showed his love to you
in submitting himself to be Crucified for you, do you show your love to Christ
in Crucifying your Flesh with its affections and lusts for his sake, in your
selfdenial and mortifying the deeds of the body, when you deny your Carnal
Reason your carnal Wisdom, your carnal will, your carnal Affections, your
carnal interest, all inordinacies of your sensual appetite for the sake of
Christ; when you crush pride, Envy, Revenge, Malice, inordidinate anger,
inordinate love, inordinate desire, inordinate grief, lustfullness and all evil
concupiscence for the sake and because of the command of Christ, all these are
acts and evidences of love to Christ, and herein you should exercise your
selves daily.

4. Show your love to Christ in your following of his example, discover your
affection unto him in your imitation of him, in writing after his copy, in
treading in his steps, in walking as Christ himself walked, when he was here
upon the Earth, show your love to Christ by laboring after likeness unto
Christ, that you may be like him both in your inward disposition and in your
outward conversation: Christ was lowly, be you humble and mean in your own
esteem: Christ was meek, be you gentle, easy to be entreated, and not easily
provoked: Christ loved God, let God be the object of your love: Christ hated
sin, let sin also be the object of your hatred: Christ contemned the world, do
you get crucified affections unto it. Christ was compassionate to those that
were in distress, do you labor for the like bowels. Christ used to Worship
publicly in the Synagogues, to pray with his Disciples, and to spend time also
in secret prayer, do you give your attendance in the public assemblies of Gods
people, worship God in your Families, and be often upon your knees at the
Throne of Grace in secret. Christ's mind was a heavenly mind, let the same mind
be in you as was in Christ. Christ's will was submissive to his Fathers will,
let the same will be in you as was in Christ. Christ's words were Gracious and
edifying* let your speech be always with Grace, s^oury and which may be for
edification. Christ's life was an active life, he was always doing good, and he
was exactly holy in all his actions, be you active and diligent in the service
of God in doing good to others, and be holy as Christ was holy in all manner of
conversation, thus should you show your love to Christ in following Christ's
example, and in imitating of him in every thing wherein you are capable of such
imitation.

5. show your love to Christ in your readiness to take up and patiently bear
Christ's cross: I don't say you should desire sufferings for Christ, but sure I
am that strong love to Christ will not permit you to decline them; don't go out
of God^s way for them, neither go out of God's way from them, if you meet with
the cross in the way of duty, don't either turn back, or start aside, but
cheerfully take it up, and when you have got it up, patiently bear it, and
don't throw it off, till God take it off; when it is your duty to suffer for
Christ, look upon it also to be your privilege and be glad of the opportunity,
rejoicing that you have any thing to part withal for the sake of Christ, if it
be good name, or good estate, or good Friends, if it be liberty or life it
self; such expressions of love are very honorable and very pleasing to your
Lord and Master.

6. And lastly, Show your love to Christ in your desires after Christ's
presence here, and in your longing for his second appearance at the last day.
1. Desire Christ's Gracious presence here, and the manifestations thereof, that
according to his promises he would come unto you, that he would draw near, and
that you might feel that he is near; desire that you might have clearer
discoveries of Christ, and more intimate communion and fellowship with Christ;
above all company and fellowship, desire the company fellowship and
acquaintance with Christ, that you might walk with him and converse with him,
and that there might be a daily intercourse between Christ and your souls, and
that all distances between you, and strangeness might be removed; let your love
express it self in desires after Christ when he is absent, and in delights when
he is present; rejoice in the Lord exceedingly when he does manifest himself
unto you graciously, admire his beauty and delight in his smiles, admire his
love and delight in the persuasions of his favor, let the actings of your
love, and the workings of it, be such to your beloved daily. 2. Desire also and
long for the second appearance of Christ at the last day; when he says, Surely
I come quickly, do you say, Amen, Even so come Lord Jesus. Look upon time as
slow of heel and wing, that it runs no faster, that it flies no swifter; look
to the End of (...), and long for it, because then with these Eyes you shall
see him whom your (...) loves, because then you shall see Christ come down
from the Throne of God with such Brightness of Majesty, and Brightness of
Beauty, as will transport you with Wonder and Joy. Say, When Lord Jesus will thou take to thy self thy great Power, and cloth thy self with thy Authority,
and come down to judge the World? when will thou open the everlasting gates of
Heaven which have been shut so long? When will thou descend from Heaven with a
shout, with the sound of the great Trumpet, and send thine Angels to gather all
thine Elect from the four Winds, that all who love thee may meet in one
Society? when shall we put on our Garments of Immortality, and be caught up in
the Clouds to meet thee in the day of thy Triumph? When shall the day of our
Coronation come, and of our admission into the Glorious Mansions which thou
have prepared for us in the Glorious Palace which is above? When will thou
show us thy self, and give us to behold thee face to face? When will thou show
us the Father, and give us to behold him immediately without a Glass? When will thou show us thy Glory which thou had^^^ with the Father before the World was
(...) and give us not only to see it, but also to share in it? When will thou
open the Trea^sures of thy Love, and receive us into the nearest, closest, and
sweetest embracements thereof, and give us to drink of those Rivers of
Pleasures which are with thee? O hasten Lord, hasten thy glorious appearance,
that thou may be Glorified before the whole World, and we be glorified with
thee, that we may be then taken to live with thee, and reign with thee, and be
made perfectly happy in the full and everlasting enjoyment of thee.

Thus I have done with these Directions, the last thing in this Use of
Exhortation.

And what do you now say after all Motives to excite and persuade you to the
Love of Christ, and Directions therein? shall all be in vain?

What do you say, Sinners? shall Christ have your hearts or no? will you
harbor base lusts in your hearts, that will damn you, and keep out the Lord
Jesus Christ who alone can save you? shall I gain no hearts for Christ by all
may Sermons which I have preached concerning the Love of Christ? My Lord and
Master has sent me to woe you, to win your hearts for him; may I speed or no?
shall my Message be accepted, and Jesus Christ the most lovely person find
entertainment with you? If any person or thing in the world which you do most
dearly love, do so well deserve your love, lock your ears still against all my
words, and let them perish like an empty sound in the Air; lock your hearts
against Christ, who stands knocking at the door, and give an absolute and
peremptory refusal to give him any room there; But if in the whole world you
cannot find out a suitable Beloved besides Christ, if there be nothing here
below but is unworthy of your hearts, if all inferior things whilst they have
your chief Love do debase you and defile you, and unless your hearts be taken
off from them, will certainly ruin and destroy you everlastingly; O then be
persuaded without any further delay to open the everlasting doors of your
hearts, to let Christ into them, and set Christ up in the highest seat of your
Affections; O be persuaded to give Christ your chief Love, to give him your
Heart, and your whole heart; with grief and hatred let go your hold of sin, and
embrace the Lord Jesus Christ in the Arms of your dearest Love. And then I
would say to you as our Savior did to Zacheus when he gave him entertainment
in his house, This day is Salvation come unto you. O happy day unto you! O
happy you that ever you were born, if this day Christ should be heartily
entertained by you! This then would be the day of your Conversion, in which the
Angels would rejoice; and though Grief and Trouble might invade you for a while
because of your sin, yet this would make way for your spiritual Joy; weeping
might endure for a Night, but joy would come in the Morning; but O the Joy
which you will then have in the day of your Coronation, when all tears shall be
wiped away from your Eyes, and when you shall have admission into the glorious
presence of the Lord, where there is Fullness of Joy and Pleasures for Evermore.

And what do you say, Believers? you that have some Love to Christ, shall this
Doctrine, and these Sermons which I have preached, be a means to raise and
heighten your Love? Your Love has been too much mixed, will you love Christ
more purely? your love has been very weak, will you love Christ more strongly?
Your Love to Christ has been but a spark, shall it now break forth into a
flame? after such blowings, shall there be no burnings? When you think of
Christ's Person so amiable, his Love so incomparable, his Benefits so
ine^timable, shall not this fire your hearts? and will you not now love him
more dearly and ardently than ever? will you be persuaded to get off your
hearts from Earth and Earthly things, and get up your hearts to your Lord which
is in Heaven, and to settle your Love there upon him, so as never to withdraw
it from him any more? Will you love the Lord Jesus much, whom you can never
love too much? will you now dwell in the Love of Christ, and be more frequent
and ^ervent in the actings of it? Then O what comfort would you find in your
Love! and what sweetness in the sense of Christ's Love! This would be the surest
Evidence that Christ loves you, because Christ loves first; and how would
this sweeten your passage through the Valley of Affliction, and through the
Valley of Death. This would sweeten a bitter cup, and make a sweet cup more
sweet. In Life, the sense of Christ's Love will be better than life; but at
Death this will be the only stay and support which you can have, nothing else
can give any well-grounded comfort in a dying hour. Death rages and plays
the Tyrant every where, shoots his Arrows hither and thither, sometimes he
smites those that are Elder than your selves, and sometimes those that are
Younger; sometimes those that are weaker than your selves, sometimes those that
are stronger; sometimes those that are better, sometimes those that are worse;
sometimes the righteous are smitten, sometimes the wicked; sometimes the
profane, and sometimes the Professors; that all might be awakened to prepare.
And what is it that can give you comfort when you come to the sides of the pit?
You may have the Love of your dear Yoke-fellowes, weeping and mourning at your
Bedside, Children Kindred and Friends wringing their hands, and looking with a
pitiful countenance upon you, grieving to part with you, but what comfort can
all their Love yield unto your departing Spirits? their Love may disturb you,
and make you the more unwilling to dye and leave them, because they are so
unwilling to part with you. But the Love of Christ and sense thereof, will be a
Comfort indeed, because he is a Friend whom you are not departing from, but
going unto, and O the delight which then you may have, when Friends look most
sad, and Death looks most grim, when the trembling Joints, the clammy Sweats,
the intermitting Pulse, the falling Jaws, the rat^ing Throat, and other
symptoms give notice of near approaching Death! then to think, I am now come
not only to the Door of Eternity, but also to the Gate of my Fathers House,
where many Saints are gone before me, and many Angels are attending for me, and
where my dearly beloved Jesus is, and has prepared for my Reception and
eternal Habitation: Here are Friends about my ^^d-side, who ere long will
convey (...) to the Grave, to be fed upon by (...) are Angels also by my
bedside (...) Soul, that so soon as it is loosned (...) Carkase, they may
convey me (...) Paradise: Within a few (...) and I shall be with my dearest
(...) Faith will be swallowed up (...) Hope in Fruition, and my (...) to
Perfection. O the Glorious (...) there and then will shine into every (...) of
my mind! O the Love and Joy and ^^effable Delight, when I come to see and enjoy
and live for ever with my most dearly Beloved! This, This only will make you
willing to Dye, and this sense of Christ's Love will effectually sweeten your
passage through the dark Entry of Death.

An APPENDIX Concerning Christ's Manifestation of Himself unto them that love
him.
Joh. XIV. latter part of verse. 21. -- And he that loves me, shall be loved of
my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self unto him.
WE read, Luke 4. 22. And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious
words which proceeded out of his mouth. Never did such gracious and sweet words
drop from the lips of any man that ever lived, as those from the lips of Christ
when he was here upon the Earth; and of all Christ's words, those which he
spoke to his Disciples in his last Sermon, before his last Suffering, in the
14, 15, and 16 Chapters of John, are superlatively sweet, and none more sweet
in this Sermon than the words of my Text read unto you, And he that loves me
shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self
unto him. In the former part of the verse we have the Character of one that
does truly love Christ: He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it
is that loves me. In the latter part of the verse which is my Text, we have
the Privilege of one that does truly love Christ, and that is in three
Promises which Christ does make unto him: 1. He that loves me shall be loved
of my Father. 2. And I will love him. 3. And will manifest my self unto him. It
is the last of these Promises which I shall speak unto by way of Appendix unto
my Treatise of the Love which true Christians have and ought to have unto
Christ, and that is the Promise of Christ's manifesting himself unto such as
love him. And the Doctrine is this.

Doct. That Christ will manifest himself unto such as love him.

In handli^g of this point I shall show, 1. What it is for Christ to manifest
himself. 2. That Christ will manifest himself to them that love him. 3. How
Christ does manifest himself unto such. 4. When Christ does manifest himself
unto such. 5. Where Christ does manifest himself unto such as love him. 6. And
lastly, make some Application.

Section I.
1. WHat it is for Christ to manifest Himself?

1. Christ does manifest himself when he makes a clearer discovery unto His
Disciples of the excellency of His Person, when he does further unveil himself,
and lets forth some beams and rays, with greater luster and brightness, to
discover more of the oriency and transcendency of his soul-ravishing beauty
unto them, which they had but a dimme^ sight and darker apprehensions of
before; and this is done when Christ does more fully impart of the spirit of
wisdom and revelation unto them. Upon this account the Apostle did pray in the
behalf of the believing Ephesians, that the Lord would give them the spirit of
wisdom and revelation to enlighten their understandings in the knowledge of
him, Ephesians. 1. 16, 17, 18. they had the spirit before and some knowledge of
Christ before, but he prays that God would give them fuller measures of the
spirit, to make a clearer discovery of Christ, that the eyes of their
understandings might be more and more enlightened unto a more spiritual
discerning of the surpassing Beauty and Excellency in Christ's person, in the
knowledge of whom the most enlightened Christians are capable of further growth
unto the end of their life, hence that Exhortation of the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet.
3. 18. But grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

2. Christ does manifest himself, when he makes a deep impression, and gives
a sweet sense to his Disciples of his presence; Christ is never really absent
from such as Love him, but he may Seem to be so sometimes, they may apprehend
him to be a far off, he may and often does withdraw the sense of his presence;
Cant. 5, 6. I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself and
was gone. Christ does manifest himself, when he does draw near to his people,
and makes them feel that he is near, giving them a sweet sense of his presence
through the powerful breathings of his Spirit upon them, whereby their hearts
are quickened and enlarged, and drawn forth toward himself, and their graces
excited unto powerful exercise.

3. And chiefly Christ does Manifest Himself, when He makes discovery of His
Love unto them that love him; when He gives them to see not only the beauty of
His face, but also the smiles of His face, when He gives them to behold the
amiableness of His countenance, and withal lifts up upon them the light of His
countenance, when he sheddeth abroad the sense of His Love into their hearts,
giving them a full persuasion of His special Love unto them, and also a sweet
sense thereof. Thus Christ does sometime look kindly, and speak kindly unto his
people, and this sweet Language is not spoken to the ear of the body, but
inwardly by His Spirit to to their souls, when he says to the soul, I am thy
salvation and thy Savior, I have loved thee with an everlasting Love, and my
Love is unchangeable; The Mountains shall depart and the hills be removed, but
my loving kindness shall never depart, and be removed from thee; I have given
my self for thee, and I have given my self unto thee, and I will never repent
of this gift; I have chosen thee for my self, called and joined thee unto my
self, and I will never repent of this choice, nor suffer thee to be disjoined
from me for ever; I have thee upon my heart, and keep thee in my hand, and no
powers of Earth or Hell shall be able to pluck thee thence; I have given thee
my grace, and I will show thee my glory, and ere long I will appear in the
world and receive thee to my self, that where I am there thou may be also.
Dry up then thy tears, clear up thy countenance, banish thy fears, droop no
longer, dispond no more, but be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, thy
name is written in my book which none can blot out, Thou have a true Love for
me, and my Father himself loves thee, and I love thee with a most endeared
Love, and therefore do not question or doubt of my Love any more. Thus Christ
does manifest himself and his Love sometimes unto drooping disponding souls.

Section II.
2. THat Christ will manifest himself unto them that love him, appears, in that
His Love does engage Him, and His word does engage Him hereunto. His Love does
^ngage Him, The Love of Christ is like fire, that cannot conceal it self long,
and no fire so strong, and has such a vehement flame as the Love of Christ to
His people. Joseph had a great love to his Brethren notwithstanding all their
unkindness, and although he concealed himself for a while, and spoke roughly
unto them, yet after they were sensible of their fault, and were filled with
perplexing fears, he could conceal himself no longer from them, as in Genesis 45.
1. Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all that stood by him, he wept
alou^, and said unto his brethren, I am Joseph, and ver. 4. Joseph said unto
his brethren, come near me, I am Joseph your brother whom ye sold into Egypt.
So Christ may conceal himself for a while from his people, whatever love he
has to them, and whatever they have to him; some unkindnesses they have shown
may be the cause of this hiding, but when they are sensible of their fault,
full of grief and perplexity for their offenses, his Love will not permit him
to hid himself much longer; His Love will engage Him to manifest and discover
himself, and say, I am Jesus your Savior, come near me my brethren, come near
me, that you may have a clearer view of me, that ye may know me and know that I
do love you. The Word also of Christ does engage him manifest Himself unto them
that Love Him: It is Christ's promise here in the Text, He that loves me shall
be loved of my Father, and I will Love him, and will manifest my self unto him.
Christ's word is sure, True and faithful is Christ's name; the ordinances of the
heaven may sooner fail, than Christ fail of His Word and Promise.

Section III.
3. HOw Christ does manifest Himself unto them that Love him.

1. Christ does here in this world manifest himself but in part and darkly. The
soul is not now capable of the fullest and clearest Manifestation of Christ's,
This is a happiness reserved for the other world, 1. Ioh. 3. 2. Beloved now are
we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know
that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is,
Ioh. 17. 24. Father I will that they also whom thou have given me be with me
where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me. It is
Hereafter that Christ's Disciples shall be perfectly like unto Christ, and shall
have a perfect manifestation of Christ, that they shall see him as he is: It is
Hereafter that they shall behold his glory; The luster and brightness of
Christ's glory is so great that should he now let forth the beams thereof upon
them, it would dazzle and amaze them, it would strike them blind, yea it would
strike them dead; there is need, because of their weakness, that Christ should
keep a veil on his face, when he makes discovery of himself, they cannot now
bear the full patefaction and manifestation of Christ; therefore Christ does
discover himself but in part. As the Queen of Sheba says concerning Solomon's
wisdom and prosperity, 1. King. 10. 6, 7. It was a true report that I heard in
mine own land of thy acts, and thy wisdom; howbeit I believed not the words,
until I came and mine eyes had seen it; and behold the one half was not told
me, thy wisdom and prosperity exceeds the fame thereof. It is not the one
half which Christ's Disciples do now hear or can discern of their masters
excellencies. It has not now entered into their hearts to conceive what
Beauties and Glories and most admirable perfections there are hid in their
Beloved; not only Christ's Love but also Christ's Loveliness does pass their
knowledge; there are such dimensions of most wonderful Glory in Christ's
person, as do infinitely transcend the capacity of the most elevated minds,
fully to comprehend. Christ does manifest himself truly to them that Love him,
yet it is but partly, and that but a little part, it is but darkly by the beams
of a more obscure light, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10, 11, 12. For we know in part, and
prophecy in part; But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is
in part shall be done away: When I was a child I spoke as a child, I understood
as a child, I thought as a child; but when I became a man I put away childish
things: For now we see through a glass darkly, but then Face to Face; Now I know
in part, then I shall know as I am known. We Ministers (...) part, we can tell
you but a little of what there really is in Christ, and both we and you know
but in part; our conceptions of Christ's excellencies and our expressions now
are childish, hereafter there will be a perfect manifestation of Christ, and
then all imperfections of knowledge will be removed. Now you may see Christ,
but it is through a glass darkly; hereafter face to face: Indeed it is said, 2
Cor. 3. 18. We all with open face beholding as in a glass the Glory of the Lord
are changed, etc. There is a comparative open discovery of Christ now in
Gospel Times, over what there was under the Law; the veil of Types and Figures,
which covered and in a great measure hid Christ from the view, is now removed,
our face is now open from that veil, but Christ's face is not fully open, there
is glass still between our eye and Christ's face (the glass of Ordinances which
though it does help us to see him, yet it keeps us from the clearest discovery
of him) we see but through a glass darkly; our eyes now need this glass to help
our weakness, and that we may see what we do see: there is a time coming when
we shall be above the need and use of the Ordinance-glasses, I mean when we
shall see Christ face to face, and know him in heaven as we are known by him.

2. Christ does now manifest himself gradually unto them that Love him, Christ
does not show at once and altogether what he means to discover of himself and
of his Love, but he does it by degrees, a little at one time, and a little at
another time, a little in this Ordinance, and a little in that; now he lets
down some comfortable beams of the light of his countenance into the soul, by
and by clouds do arise and obscure this light, and darkness is upon the spirit:
Sometimes Christ opens the curtain and looks upon the soul, gives gracious
smiles, by and by the curtain is drawn, and his face is hid; now he appears,
and then he disappears; he manifests himself at one time, withdraws himself
at another time, and so leads his people on from one discovery of himself unto
another, until he brings them at last unto the full discovery of himself in
Glory.

3. Christ does manifest himself most sweetly unto them that Love him,
especially after long absence. When the soul has been seeking and cannot find
him, wandering in the wilderness under amazing fears, perplexing doubts, doleful
despondencies, sinking and heart-overwhelming grief; after a black night of
deep desertion, Oh how sweet is the dayspring from on high! Oh how comfortable
are the bright beams of the morning light! when he shines upon their dark and
despised and sorrowful spirits, giving them to know assuredly that they are the
dearly beloved of his Soul, that he has not forgotten them, that he will not
forsake them, that he has a more tender Love unto them than the mother to her
sucking child! Oh the ravishments of spirit! Oh the transports of soul which do
arise from hence! O the songs which are then in their mouths. This is our
beloved, we have waited for him! this is our dear Redeemer we have trusted in
him! Tongue cannot express the delight, the joy and gladness of heart, which
does arise from the manifestation of Christ's presence and love; the joy of
harvest, the joy of the Bridegroom on the wedding day, the joy of victory and
taking great spoils, spoils from an Enemy, the joy of a poor man in finding
great treasures; and the greatest delight which ever was found in the sweetest
sensual enjoyment is not worthy to be compared with the joys and exaltings of
heart, in the manifestation of Christ unto the Soul.

SECT. IV.
4. WHen does Christ manifest himself unto them that love him?

1. Sometime Christ does quickly manifest himself, after a little seeking; some
young Converts have early and soon disscoveries of Christ and his love; they
are cast down for a little while, and Christ soon comes unto them and lifts
them up again; weeping endures but for a night, and that a short summer night,
and joy comes early in the morning; they have the spirit of bondage who
awakeneth them to fear, by and by the Spirit of Adoption does graciously visit
them, and make discovery of their relation to the Father, the love of their
Savior, and sheddeth abroad the sense of his love into their hearts.

2. Sometimes Christ is long before he manifest himself; it is long before some
do seek Christ, and it is long before such do find him: Christ waits long to
be gracious unto them, and Christ does often make them wait long before he
manifests to them his loving kindnesses; yea sometimes early seekers are not
early finders; Christ makes some wait a long time to try their faith and
patience, the^r love and obedience, and that he may prepare them for more than
ordinary comforts and sweetness which he intends to give in the discovery of
himself unto them.

3. Sometimes Christ does suddenly manifest himself unto them that love him,
Cant. 6. 12. Or ever I was aware my Soul made me like the Charets of Aminadab,
or ever they are aware they see the Chariots of Israel and the horsemen
thereof, and the Lord Jesus does come unto them in the Chariots of Salvation
with such Glory and Luster as does transport and amaze them. Some Christians
that truly love Christ, have sought him in this Ordinance, and have not found
him, and they have sought Christ in that Ordinance, and have not found him;
they have been looking and waiting and hoping that at this time Christ would
discover himself, or at that time he would discover himself, and still he has
hid himself, still they have come off with disappointment; this has been their
Grief, this they have complained of before God, and they have been under fears
lest they should never see him, never meet with him at all; hereupon their
Spirits have been ready to fail and sink within them, and in discouragement
they have been ready to say or think that all their labor would be in vain;
and yet they have resolved to seek him to their death, and though he should
kill them, to put their trust in him: And behold on a sudden, when they have
had the least expectation, and their hope has been ready to give up the Ghost,
they have met with Christ, and found him whom their Soul loves; on a sudden
the Veil of the Temple has been rent, and they have seen their Beloved in the
Holy of Holies; on a sudden the clouds have fled, their darkness has passed
away, and the light has shined; the North Wind of trouble has ceased, and the
sweet Southern Gales have blown upon them; I mean they have been under such
shinings and breathings of the Spirit, that they have seen and felt the
presence of Christ; and such a sweet sense of his Love, as has filled them
with Soul-revishing Joy.

4. Christ does manifest himself Seasonably unto them that Love him. Though he
does not always manifest himself when they most desire, yet he does manifest
himself when they have most need, and then they have most need when they are
most low, when they are most low in their Spirits, most poor and mean in their
own esteem, as well as most low in their condition through Affliction and
Trouble; Humility and Patience under Affliction, does make way for the
Experience of Christ's manifestation; Christ does many times reserve his
Cordials for the Fainting sits, and the sweetest Consolations in the
discoveries of his Love for the time of the greatest Adversity; especially,
when the trouble is for his sake, he is graciously present; John had his
Visions when he was Banished for the sake of Christ unto the Isle Patmos. And
when all men forsook Paul at his answer before Nero, then the Lord came to him,
stood by him and strengthened him.

Sect. V.
5. WHere does Christ manifest himself unto them that love him? This is in the
way of his Ordinances, there he does walk, there he does appear unto his
People; sometimes Christ does manifest himself in the way of private
Ordinances, when they seek him in their Families, or in their Closets, when
they speak of him in conference, or when they think of him in their Meditation
and Contemplation; sometimes Christ does manifest himself unto them that love
him in the way of Public Ordinances, in Public Prayer or Fasting, in hearing
of the Word, or when they are Feasting at his Table, especially in this ^ast
mentioned Ordinance Christ does frequently manifest himself unto his Disciples
most sweetly: At the Lords Table, the Lord does appear; in breaking of Bread he
discovers himself, as to the Disciples that went to Immaus; in his
Banqueting House he gives them to feast on his Love; There are many who can
say by experience, that if ever they met with Christ in their Lives, and in any
Ordinance, they have met with him at the Sacrament, there he has unveiled his
face, there he has revealed his Love, there he has breathed upon them by his
Spirit, there they have found and felt the Lord to be near.

SECT. VI.
I Come now to the Application: And here that I may to give to every one his
Portion, I shall speak, 1. To you that have no Love unto Christ: 2. To you that
have some Love to Christ, but are without these Manifestations. 3. To you that
both love Christ, and have Manifestations of his love unto you.

Use 1. The First Use does concern such as have no love at all unto Christ:
Christ will manifest himself unto them that love him, this is Childrens Bread,
and does not belong to you, because you do not belong unto Christ; this is a
choice and most rich Privilege, but you have nothing to do with it; Procul ite
Profani. Avaunt all ye profane ones, all ye unclean ones, all ye ungodly ones,
all Unbelievers whatsoever, who being without Faith, are also without Love to
Christ; see that you come not near to lay your unclean hands upon this most
excellent Promise; never look for any discovery of Christ's love unto you
whilst you go on in ways of Sin, whilst you are in your Natural Estate. I
believe some of you may be ready to say, What if Christ does not manifest
himself unto us? let us have our Honors and Dignity, let us have our Wealth
and Plenty, let us have our Friends and Delights, and let who will look after
those aerie and fancifull Satisfactions in Christ's Manifestations. Sinners, is
this your language either of tongue or heart? Let me tell you, one day you will
sing another tune, you will be of another mind; one day you will acknowledge,
that all the Happiness which you so eagerly pursued in the sweetest
creature-enjoyments, was but a Fancy, that it was thin, light and aerie; that
it was vain and empty, when all is fled away and left nothing behind but Stings
and bitter Grief, but inward wounds, gripes, and dreads, upon the sight of
approaching Death, and under apprehensions of approaching Wrath, and eternal
Torments in Hell. Then what would you give for an Interest in Jesus Christ, and
a well-grounded Persuasion of his special Love unto your Souls? Then the
Manifestations of Christ will appear to be no aerie thing, and that nothing
besides this can rationally support your Souls when you come to the Borders of
the Grave, and to the Confines of Eternity. And let me further tell you that
have no love to Christ, that although Christ whilst you are such will never
manifest himself unto you in a way of Love, yet there is a Day coming when he
will Manifest himself unto you, but this Manifestation will be with a
Vengeance, it will be in a way of most Furious anger; I mean, at the last day
of Judgment, when Christ will be revealed from Heaven, not only to those that
Love him, but also to those that Hate him, for every eye shall then see him,
and he will come in flaming Fire to take Vengeance upon you that have not
obeyed this Gospel-Precept, to Love him. The Consideration of this should
awaken you to fear and fly from Sin, which otherwise will be your ruin and
eternal Perdition; and O that withal you would be persuaded to apply your
selves unto the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith, that you may hereby have Interest
in him, and in that great Salvation which he has purchased for you, and which
in the Gospel in freely tendered unto you! and this Faith in Christ would work
Love to Christ, and put you in a capacity of these Manifestations of Christ's
Love unto your Souls.

Sect. VII.
Use 2. THe second Use concerns such of you as have some Love unto Christ,
but are without these Manifestations; and there are two sorts of such: 1. Some
of you never had these Manifestations. 2. Some of you have had these
Manifestations, but have lost them.

1. Some of you never had these Manifestations of Christ's Love. It may be you
are young and raw Christians, a little while ago you were forward Scholars in
the School of the Devil, and served diverse lu^ts with all your might and
strength; the Lord has lately hedged up your way with thorns, has opened your
eyes to see your sins, and made you sensible of your danger, but as yet your
eyes are not open as to any comfortable sight of your Savior; Indeed Christ
has been revealed unto you as able and willing to save you, and you have been
drawn by the Word and Spirit to take hold on him, and to give up your selves
unto him; but as yet you are in the da^k as to your Spiritual Estate; you are
under doubts and fears of unsoundness and rottenness at heart, that you are
Hypocrites, and shall fall away, as other Professors like your selves have
done; you fear you shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, that the Devil and
your own Lusts will be too hard for you, and prevail so far with you, as to
pull you back into ways of S^n, and thereby to pull yo^ down into the
bot^omless Pit of Hell: This causes a dread upon your spirits, and fearf^ll
apprehensions of Gods wrath and future Vengeance; this f^tcheth many a sad and
heavy sigh from your breasts, many a brinish tear from your eyes, you are
troubled, bowed down greatly, and go mourning all the day: Yet you are resolved
to give your attendance still unto Ordinances, and there to wait upon the Lord,
and for the Lord; you are resolved, notwithstanding all discouragements, that
you will be the Lords, though you know not whether he be yours; you are
resolved that Christ shall have your hearts, and you will venture your Souls
upon him, though you know not whether you are accepted by him. This may be a
Use of Encouragement unto you; certainly you are such as love Christ, and are
beloved by Christ, and Christ will manifest himself unto such as have such
Love; let me tell you, that Christ is not far from you, whatever you may
apprehend, though he be out of your sight, yet you are not out of his, his eye
is upon you, and his heart is toward you; he hears all your sighs, he sees all
your tears, he pities you, and sympathizeth with you in all your Griefs; he
loves you, and ere long will let you know it; he is now preparing you for sweet
discoveries of himself, and ere long he will give you those discoveries. If you
follow on to seek him, he will certainly and may suddenly be found of you: And
who knows but this may be the time of Christ's manifesting his Love? It may be
whilst you are Reading this Discourse, you may have a glimpse of his face, and
hear his Vo^ce saying unto you, Be of good cheer, your sins are forgiven you.
Lift up the Hands that hang down, lift up the Heart that is cast down; Look up
then dejected Soul, thy Savior is before thee, open thine Eyes and look, look
with the Eye of Faith, can thou not see a mavelous Beauty in his
countenance? do thou not perceive some smiles in his Face, some Smiles upon
thy Soul? Do thou not feel his Spirit sweetly breathing upon thine heart,
persuading thee, and giving thee a sweet sense of Christ's peculiar Love unto
thee? Do thou not perceive some inward knockings at the door of thine heart,
and hear some inward callings? Open to me, and I will come in and sup with
thee: This is the Voice of thy Beloved; make haste and open to him, open all
the Faculties of thy Soul, lift up the Everlasting Gates to this King of Glory;
send forth the Handmaids of thy Desires to invite the Lord in, let thy Faith
take hold on him and usher him into thy Soul, and then embrace him in the Arms
of thy dearest Love, and give him such entertainment that he may abide with
thee for ever.

2. There are others of you have had some manifestations of Christ unto you
formerly, but you have lost them: your beloved has withdrawn himself and is
gone, you call and he gives no answer, you seek him, but you cannot find him.
Time has been when your Lord was present, and gave you Gracious visits
frequently, many a secret smile you have seen in his face, many a comfortable
word you have had from his mouth, many a love-token you have received at his
hand: Time has been when you had your evidences written out fair and clean,
with the Seal of the Spirit set unto them, and how exceedingly did you then
rejoice in the sense of Christ's love? how did you feast your selves upon his
rich entertainment of Gospel-priviledges which through him you were invested
withal? And O the admirings which then you had of free Grace! O the sweet
meltings of heart in the kindly sense of sin! O the enlargements of desire
which you had in your Prayers! O the burnings of love to Christ which you have
often felt in your bosoms! O the lively hopes which you had, and ineffable
delight in hope of the Glory of God! But now there is a strange decay within
you of Grace, and Alteration as if you were not the same Men and Women as you
were before. You have withdrawn your selves from Christ, and he has withdrawn
himself from your Souls: you have let down your watch, and the Devil has got
advantage against you by his devices, he has watched his opportunity and
entangled you in the snares of some sins; whilst you have heedlesly gone to the
utmost confines of duty, and been upon the borders of sin, the Devil has sent
forth a ^quadron of temptations not with fiery darts, but with silken cords,
which have treated and parlyed with you to entice and persuade to go a little
further, they have told you what pleasant fru^t does grow within those borders
most sweet and delicious to the t^ste; that there are Silver and Golden Mines
which you might quickly dig up, and find precious substance; that there you
might have honor and esteem, and what would you turn your back upon all these?
would you be so nice and strict as not to despense with a little duty, as not
to step over the hedge a little way, where the delights and advantage would be
so great. And if you have hesitated, they have told you that it was very
disputable, whether the confines of duty did not reach beyond the place which
they would bring you unto, propounding the example of others of the same
Religious Profession, that have frequently gone so far, and why should you
scruple: or if it were a transgression it was but a little transgression, they
would not desire you to go far, and who is there that lives and does not
transgress those bounds? and you might easily repent and find mercy if God
were offended; you might quickly retire and return into your former limits;
then whilst you have been parlying with temptations, the silken cords have been
fastened about you, and e're you have been aware you have been drawn along,
partly willing and partly unwilling, and enticed unto some kind of sins, and
complied with some kind of lusts, indulging your selves to give them
satisfaction, whereby you have been beguiled, and befooled, whereby you have
been secretly wounded and inwardly defiled; and thus your evidences for Heaven
have been miserably blotted, so that now you are not able to read them. Time
has been when worldly Affections seemed to be mortified within you, to be dead
and buried, many a sore thrust and wound you had given unto them, and how did
they bleed and faint, and grew so weak that they seemed to be giving up the
Ghost, and you have thought sure^y they would never ^^ir much in you any more;
and then your love to Christ was strong and active, it did burn and flame
within you* and O the zeal which you then had for your Masters honor, and you
seemed to have no interest to carry on in the world but the interest of Christ,
and you minded not your own things upon your own account, but all your
interests were swallowed up in the interest of Jesus Christ, which you chiefly
minded and cared for, and made every thing else to truckle under it, and to be
subservient unto it; but now your affections to Christ are strangely cooled; if
there be the fire of love to Christ still within you, it is not fire in burning
coals, or in a vehement flame, but it is a fire in a few scattered sparks, and
those raked over that they give neither light nor heat, and are hardly, if at
all, discernable by you; and your wordly Affections which seemed to be dead,
they have gotten Spirit and Life and Vigor, and Strength: O the eager desire
which you have after the world, and the things in the world, and these
accompanied with eager prosecution of the world, now the world has your
thoughts in contrivements about it, and the world has your tongues in your
most frequent discourse of it, now the world has your hand and your time, but
that which is worst of all, the world has your heart too, the world has
justled Christ off of his Throne and for the present does usurp his seat. And
is it then a wonder if your beloved be offended that you should thus decline in
your love, that your hearts should go a whoring from him unto the Creature, in
your giving those affections unto any thing in the world which are his due?
Hence it is that Christ has shut up his count^nance from you, or if he looks,
it is with frowns upon you; you have lost your first love, and you have lost
your first sights, and your first tastes of the Love of Christ; now your
spiritual joys and comforts are fled out of sight, they are lost and gone, and
the bare remembrance of them only does remain, and whatever delights you have
they are only such as come in at the door of sense, you have none at all that
come in at the door of faith, and your sensual delights have expelled and
banished your spiritual; now the rich Gospel-priviledges have not that savor
and sweet relish with you as heretofore; your minding and savouring so much the
Earth and Earthly things, has disrelished your spiritual appetite. O the
mischief which indulged sin has done unto you! O the unfelt wounds, but so
much the more deep and dangerous, which sin has given you! O the defilements
of sin in your Consciences, and the stains and blots which sin has cast upon
your profession! O the havoc which sin has made amongst your graces, and
amongst your comforts! Leaves you have still of an outward profession, but
where is your fruit to be found? If you have some fruit, is it not withered
fruit, ^our and ill-rellished, not such ripe and mellow and sweet fruit as
heretofore in your flourishing estate? Surely the Lord is at a (...) distance
from such of you, and are there not too many such amongst you? And what need
have you to remember whence you are to fallen, to ransack your hearts to find
out your sins, to humble your selves deeply, to repent and grieve and mourn, to
turn your laughter into weeping, and your joy into heaviness, and to return
unto the Lord speedily and do your first works* otherwise some fearful
judgments are like to befall you, and the Lord may be even forced to awaken
you with a vengeance, and make you a terror unto your selves and unto all
about you: Don't provoke the Lord, by your thus running away from him, to
follow you with a storm as he did Jonas, and to devour you in the floods and
waves of dreadful afflictions, that hereby he may reduce and restore you, and
keep you from being drowned in utter perdition and eternal destruction. It may
be the Lord has scourged some of you for your faults with the rods of some
crosses and disappointments, some outward losses and troubles; it may be he
has put bitterness upon those breasts which you have been sucking, and
mingling gall in the cup of your pleasures which you have been drinking; and
you have begun to think of your evil ways, and seen what an evil thing and
bitter it is to backslide from the Lord; and you have thought it was best with
you when you were nearest unto Christ. It may be God has dealt with you as he
tells his backsliding people he would do with them, Hos. 2. 6, 7. Behold I
will hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a wall that she shall not find her
paths: And she shall follow after her Lovers, but she shall not overtake them,
and she shall seek them, but she shall not find them; Then shall she say, I
will go and return to my first husband, for then it was better with me than
now. And now you are seeking after your Beloved, but he has withdrawn himself
from you, and seems to take no notice of you; you call and cry, and sigh, and
weep, and lament, and complain, and seek, and wait, and yet he withholds from
you all special discoveries of his Love: Possibly doubts may hence arise, and
fears grow upon your spirits, and you are ready to sink, and sometimes are
almost overwhelmed with inward trouble. Let this Doctrine be an encouragement
to you still to seek diligently and wait patiently, for the Lord will manifest
himself again unto you in his own time, which is the best time: He may try you
for a while whether you will follow him in the dark, he may suffer you to wait
some time for him, who have made him to wait so long time for you; But if you
persevere to seek him diligently in his ways, you shall find that it will not
be in vain. And what would you say, ye backsliding souls, if the Lord should
manifest himself unto you at this time? would you not abuse his kindness? if he
should discover his Love to you again, would you not grow wanton and carnally
secure? if he should now renew your evidences and give them fair written, and
easy to be read by you, would you not blot them again by your sins? if he
should now speak peace unto your Consciences, would you not again return unto
folly? If he should now restore unto you the joys of his salvation, and send
down the Holy Ghost from Heaven to come unto you, to be your comforter and to
dwell with you, would you not griev and quench the Spirit and provoke him to
another retirement, and more dreadful withdrawings than before? It may be the
Lord will try you; it may be the Lord may draw near and make some discovery of
himself, and discovery of his Love unto you: it may be the Lord may look kindly
now upon you, and secretly by hi^ Spirit speak kindly unto you: you are now
looking and longing, and hoping, and waiting, possibly this may be the time of
your seeing his face, and the smiles that are there, of your feeling the sweet
sheddings abroad of his Love into your hearts by his Spirit, at least he may
give you a glimpse, a glance, a little taste, such as shall ravish your hearts.
However wait for him, and with earnest desires and importunate requests, plead
with him for his returns, and these manifestations, and that in such kind of
Language as this: Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly, make haste O my beloved, make
haste to my soul that thirsts for thee, as the parched land after the sweet
showers that fall from heaven, as the h^nted Heart after the cooling and
refreshing streams of the waterbrooks. O when shall I drink of those waters of
Life which thou have to give, who art the fountain and spring from whence they
flow? when shall I taste again how good thou art? when shall I see thee again,
and feed, and feast my soul again with thy love? when Lord, O when will thou
come unto me? will thou cast off for ever? will thou be favorable no more?
have thou in anger shut up thy bowels? shall this cloud always sit upon thy
brow? shall this curtain always be drawn before thy face? Truth Lord, I have
grievously sined, and greatly offended thee; but have I not, do I not truly
repent? is there any thing in the world so grievous unto me as the remembrance
of my miscariages? I acknowledge my offense, my folly and horrid ingratitude;
but shall my sins be always a wall of separation between me and my beloved?
are not thy bowels tender? are not thy mercies plentifu^l? is there not
forgiven^^s with thee that thou may be feared and the more dearly beloved?
do thou not forgive freely without upbraiding? have thou not promised to be
found of all them that diligently seek thee? and did thou ever fail in thy
word unto any? and shall I be the first? are ^ot the desires of my Soul after
thee, and that Chiefly, and that Earnestly? Is there not dearth and drought in
all things beneath thy self, nothing that can give me satisfaction? have I not
renounced the World for my Portion? Thou might send me to the World for help
and comfort, to the World which I have over-earnestly desired and loved, and
over-eagerly ^ought for contentment and happiness in; But is this thy wont, and
thy way, and the manner of thy dealing with them that are grieved for their
Sin, and ashamed of their Folly? Have thou not promised to manifest thy self
unto them that love thee? and do not I love thee? do not thou who know all
things, know that I love thee? though my Love be imperfect, yet is it not true?
though it be weak, yet is it not sincere? else whence are these desires after
Thee above all Persons and Things in the World? are not these the product of
true Love? and will thou not make good thy Promise then, to manifest thy self
unto me? and if I had the Manifestations of thy Love, would not my love grow
and increase hereby? Should I not love the more dearly and strongly, if I had
clear discoveries, and were persuaded assuredly of thy love unto me? Truth
Lord, I am altogether unworthy of such a favor; but did thou ever bestow
this favor upon any for their deserts? are not all thy Gifts free? and am not
I as capable as any of Free Grace? the more unworthy, the more I shall admire
thee; the more is forgiven, I shall love the more; And may I not now have a
taste of thy Loving kindness? Hasten my Beloved, O hasten unto me, and be as a
Roe upon the Mountains of Spices! Do not veil thy face from me any longer, do
not conceal thy love, but now, O now draw near, and make me exceeding glad in
the light of thy Countenance, and in the beauty of thy Face, and smiles
thereof. Such desires and pleadings as these might prevail with the Lord
forthwith to return again unto you, and to say, Well Soul, I have heard thy
Prayer, thy breathing, and thy cry; thy pleadings have prev^^ed with me, and I
am now come unto thee, and be it to thee according to thy Desires; Come Soul,
and look up, lift up thine eyes, and see, Here I am, Behold me, Behold me; this
day I am come to bring glad tidings of great Joy unto thee. I assure thee, that
I am thine, and all mine is thine, and thou art mine, and shall be mine for
ever. And what words can found so sweet and yield such comfort, as these or
such like, spoken by the Spirit unto the hearts of those from whom Christ is
withdrawn?

SECT. VIII.
Use 3. THe Third Use does concern you that do love Christ, and have the
Manifestations of his Love to your Souls: Three things be exhorted unto; 1.
Rejoice in the Lord. 2. Admire his Free Grace. 3. Labor to retain these
Manifestations.

1. You that have the Manifestations of the Love of Christ, Rejoice in the
Lord; of all Persons in the world, you have most reason to rejoice, you are the
happiest men and women alive. It is not Wealth in the greatest abundance which
can make men happy, the richest Persons have often thorns of the greatest
discontent to pierce their hearts, and Stings of the greatest guilt to wound
their Consciences: It is not the highest Honor and worldly Dignity which can
make men happy; the vilest men are often exalted, and those that are in the
Highest places, are in the most Slippery places, from whence they are soon cast
down into destruction, and whatever security they have in Life, yet they are
usually consumed utterly with Terrors when grim Death does appear and summon
them to depart. It is not the sweetest sensual Delight which can make men
happy; Vanity is the Attendant, and Vex^tion of Spirit is the Consequent of all
those pleasures that are sensual and sinful, which are the seed also of Pain
and Everlasting torment: Such only can be said to be happy in truth, as are
really united and related unto Jesus Christ, and through him reconciled unto
God, and entitled unto the Kingdom of Heaven; but you are the most happy, and
have reason to take the most comfort, who have not only Relation unto Christ,
but also the Manifestations of him; who know that Christ is yours, and you are
his, that Christ loves you, and that his Love, as it had no beginning, so it
is without changing, and will know no ending. If you know that Christ loves
you, you have reason to rejoice, because hereby you may know assuredly that you
are Elected, that God by an eternal and unchangeable Decree has chosen you,
when he has chosen so few of fallen Men, and none of the fallen Angels, and
when there was not the least foreseen Motive to induce him hereunto; the
assurance of this may yield unexpressible sweetness unto you. If you know that
Christ loves you, you may know assuredly your Effectual Calling, Conversion,
and wonderful Union unto Christ; and O what matter of Joy is it to think, how
God has called you out of Darkness into his mavelous Light! how he has
delivered you out of the Snare of the Devil, and the bonds of your own Lusts,
and set your Souls at liberty! how he has wrought a Miracle in your first
Resurrection from the Grave and spiritual death of Sin, and put forth the same
power in your New Creation and change of your Natures, as in his first Creation
of the World! how he has dissolved and made a divorce between your hearts and
your sins, and so wonderfully United and espoused you unto the Lord Jesus, and
by this Conjunction and Relation given you an Interest in all the Privileges
which Christ has purchased. If you know that Christ does love you, you may
know assuredly that you are Justified through his Merits and Mediation, and O
what matter of Joy is this, to think that all your sins Original and Actual,
are pardoned, that none can lay any sin to your charge, because God has
justified you! that there is none that shall condemn you, because Christ has
loved you, and out of Love has dyed for you, and is now making Intercession
for you at the right hand of God, Romans 8. 33, 34. to be acquitted from all
Guilt, and no more liable unto future wrath than if you had never offended; and
when you had no Righteousness of your own, to be accepted as perfectly
Righteous in the sight of God, through the Imputation of Christ's perfect
Righteousness! Who have reason to rejoice, if you have not reason? If you know
that Christ loves you, you may assuredly say, that you are the Sons and
Daughters of the Lord Almighty; and will you not rejoice, when of Children of
the Devil, Children of Disobedience, Children of Wrath, you are made the
Children of God, the Glorious Jehovah, that is the Supreme Sovereign and King
of the whole World, and when you have not an empty Name only, but are
entitled to all the Privileges of his Children? If you know that Christ does
love you, you may know assuredly that he will keep alive his Interest in you,
preserve his Grace in your hearts, and enable you to persevere in Faith and
Holiness, notwithstanding all the alluring Temptations which you may meet
withal in the World, notwithstanding all the Suggestions and Oppositions of
Satan, and notwithstanding all the powerful workings of your remaining lusts
and corruptions, all which do combine together, and use all their power and
policy (which is great) to extirpate your Grace, to draw you unto sin, to
entice or force you out of the ways of God; and O what matter of comfort is
it, that the Lord Jesus who loves you, has undertaken for you, to keep you in
his hand, and by his unseen but mighty power to enable you to resist and
overcome, to hold on in his ways, and hold out unto the end, so that you may
triumph with the Apostle, and say, as Romans 8. 35, 37. Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or disiress, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay, in all these things we are more
than conquerours through him that loved us. And you may be persuaded as Paul
was, and greatly rejoice therein, that, as v. 38, 39. Neither death, nor life,
nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate
you from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus your Lord. If you know that
Christ does love you, you may know assuredly that your Prayers have audience
with God, that whatever imperfections and sinful mixtures they have, yet that
they are mingled with the sweet Incense of Christ's Merits, through which they
are persumed and accepted; and what comfort is this, that whatever you ask of
the Father in the Name of your dear Lord Jesus, if it be for his Glory and your
good, he will certainly procure it for you. To conclude, If you know that
Christ does love you, you may know assuredly that you are Heirs of the Kingdom
of Heaven, and that as certainly as you are alive, you shall attain eternal
Felicity in the Beatifical Vision and Fruition of your Lord; as certainly as
you have the first Fruits, so certainly shall you have the Harvest; as
certainly as you have the Earnest, so certainly shall you have the Inheritance;
as certainly as you see Christ by Faith here, so certainly shall you have the
Beatifical Vision of his Person and Glory in Heaven, and be made perfectly
happy in the eternal and full Enjoyment of him; O how should you then rejoice
in the Lord, rejoice in his Person, rejoice in his Love, rejoice in his
Benefits, rejoice in what you have, and rejoice in what you hope to have by
him; rejoice in what you see now, and feel now, and taste now; and rejoice in
the foresights and foretastes of your Happiness to come. Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again I say Rejoice.

2. If you have Manifestations of Christ's Love unto you, Admire his Free Grace
in these Manifestations; as Ioh. 14. 22. when Christ had promised to manifest
himself unto such as love him, Judas (not Iscariot, he was the Traitor, and had
no true love to his Master, but Judas the Brother of James) says to him, Lord
how is it that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the World?
This Question is not a Question of Enquiry concerning the Way and Manner how
Christ would manifest himself unto them, but it is a Question of Admiration
concerning the Thing; (...). What is done? or What is come to pass? How is it?
or Whence is it? His Question did not expect an Answer, neither do we find any
to it, but only expressed his Wonder that Christ should manifest himself unto
them. And how should you wonder then that the Lord Jesus should manifest
himself unto you! That the Lord Jesus, whose Name is Wonderful, and has so
many Wonders in him, a Person of so great Eminency and Excellency, who has
such a Crown of Glory upon his Head, such Robes of Glory upon his Back, and on
the Vesture of his Garment and his Thigh a Name written, King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords; that this most excellent Person should manifest himself unto
You, such as You, when he conceals himself from the greatest Princes of the
Earth, who by their Interest, Authority and Influence might that highly promote
his Glory, he should manifest himself unto You, who for the most part are low
and mean, poor and despised in the World; that when he hides himself from most
of the Wise and Prudent, and great Scholars in the world, who by their Parts
and Learning might magnify his Name, and spread his Fame, he should manifest
himself unto you, who for the most part are persons of mean parts and
Education; that when Christ hides himself from many Moralists, who have
escaped the grosser Pollutions which are in the World, he should reveal and
manifest himself unto you, some of whom before Conversion were notoriously
guilty of most foul sins; that when Christ manifests himself unto so Few,
that you should be in the Number of those Few; how many wonders are here! That
this Glorious Person should send down another Glorious Person, I mean the Holy
Ghost, from Heaven, (which is more than if he had sent down all the Glorious
Angels which are in Heaven) to make this Discovery of himself unto you; That he
should make use of the Foolishness of Preaching as a Means to effect this
great thing, that while a man of like passions and infirmities with your selves
is opening and applying the Scriptures, the Lord by this means should unveil
himself and open the treasures of his Love unto you: that your humble fervent
and believing prayers here on Earth should ascend up to the throne of God that
is in Heaven, and move the Lord Jesus that is there to come down, thence,
though not in person, yet by his Spirit; that prayer should open heavens gate,
and have such a prevalency for this manifestation and discovery of Christ;
though the best prayers of the best men are not without mixture of sin: that
whilst you are sitting at the Lords table, the Lord himself should give you a
visit, and whilst you are eating bread and wine at the Sacrament, he should
give you to see and feel and taste himself and his Love by your spiritual
senses. It was wonderful humiliation in Christ that when he could have
commanded the most, stately Horses, yea Lions, Elephants, or Unicorns, he
should ride to Jerusalem upon an Ass, and when Christ has the Chariots of so
many thousand glorious Angels, which he could command and ride triumphantly in,
when he makes discovery of himself unto his people, that he should make use of
the Chariots of so mean Ordinances in the discovery of himself unto you; how
many wonders are here? how should you admire his wonderful Grace and Love, and
say, what is man that thou art thus mindful of him, or any of the sons of men,
that thou should thus visit them? what are we unworthy wretches? and why
should thou manifest thy self unto us? even so dear Jesus because it seemed
good in thy sight: especially you have reason to wonder and admire at the
manifestations which Christ has given of himself and love to you, when you
consider the excellency of these manifestations and discoveries beyond all
other discoveries. If you have seen the most rare works of Art and Human
Invention, the most curious Pictures, the most stately Edifices, or any other
works of the most ingenious contrivement: If you have viewed the works of
nature which do far exceed those of Art, the beautiful frame of the Heavens
over your heads, and the glorious Luminaries of Sun, Moon, and Stars, in their
wonderful light and motion; the Earth under your feet when it has got on its
best attire, when the fields are clothed with grass in the Spring, or enriched
with corn in the summer; If you have seen the most pleasant Brooks and Streams,
and Fountains of water, the most stately Groves with losty and broad shadowing
Trees; the most flourishing Orchards, most richly laden with variety of the
most delicious fruit; the most delightful Gardens with variety of the choicest
Flowers casting forth the most fragrant smell; If you have seen all sorts of
Birds, and fowls in the Air, All sorts of Beasts on the Earth, All sorts of
fish in the Sea; If you have seen the most goodly men that ever were born; the
fairest women, with the most sparkling beauty: What is the sight of all these
things, and the most lovely objects that ever were visible to the eye of the
body? the sight of all is but mean and contemptible and not worthy to be named
in comparison with the sight of the Lord Jesus by the eye of the Soul; Whatever
beauty and loveliness there is to be found in any, or in all visible Creatures,
there is infinitely more beauty and loveliness in Jesus Christ; all visible
beauty is but a shadow, in Christ there is substantial beauty; all visible
beauty is fading, like the flower that soon withers, like the leaf that soon
fades, but in Christ there is permanent beauty; all visible beauty is
inferior and mean, yea deformity compared with Christ's transcendent
loveliness. There is no discovery to the eye of the mind comparable to the
discovery of Christ unto the eye of Faith; the light of Nature in the greatest
improvement of it, is but a weak and dim light in comparison with the spiritual
light of the knowledge of Christ; no light so clear and bright, no light so
pure and sweet, as that which makes discovery of the Lord Jesus unto the Soul.
This discovery of Christ does dispel clouds from the Mind, and exhale lusts
from the Heart; it does brighten the understanding and cleanse the Affections;
it does warm the Heart with love, and fill the Heart with comfort; it quiets
the Conscience and purifies it; it gives a most sweet peace and tranquillity to
the spirit, and withal brings in such spiritual joy, as is unspeakable and
full of Glory. O how then should you admire the Riches of the Grace, and
Kindness of the Lord Jesus Christ unto you! that he should give unto you this
discovery of himself, when the discovery is so admirable, so excellent, so
desirable, so useful, and which does list you up into a far higher degree of
excellency, than the otherwise most accomplished persons in the world, that are
without this discovery.

3dly. To conclude, If you have these manifestations of Christ and his love
unto you, labor to retain these manifestations. In a word, take heed of
indulging your selves in any sins, which may provoke him to depart from you,
and withdraw the sweet and comfortable influences of his Spirit, and be
diligent in the use of all means and ordinances, public, private and secret,
whereby you may maintain daily Communion and Fellowship with him.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Samuel S^int at the Bell in Little Britain.
THe vanity of Man's Present state proved and applied in a Sermon on Psalm. 39.
5. with diverse Sermons of the Saints Communion with God, and safety under his
protection, in order to their future Glory, on Psalm. 73. 23, 24, 25, 26, By the
late painful Minister of the Word Mr. John Wilson.

A Treatise concerning the Lords Supper, with Three Dialogues, for the more
full information of the weak, in the Nature and Use of this Sacrament, by
Thomas Dolittle* from 1 Cor. 11. 24. This do in Remembrance of me, the ninth
Edition.

Time, and the end of Time, in two Discourses, The first about the Redemption
of Time, the second about consideration of our lat^r end, by John Fox.

Godly Fear, or the Nature and Necessity of Fear, and its usefullne^^^ both to
the driving Sinners to Christ and to the provoking Christians on in a Godly
Life, through the several parts and Duties of it, till they come to
Blessedness, Heb. 12. 20. Let us have Grace whereby we may serve God acceptably
with reverence and Godly Fear.

The Door of Heaven opened and shut; opened to the Ready and Prepared, shut
against the unready and unprepared; or Discourse concerning the absolute
necessity of a timely Preparation for a happy Eternity, by John Fox Minister of
the Gospel, and Author of the Discourse concerning Time and the end of Time.


