(...).

THE True TOVCHSTONE Which shows both GRACE and NATVRE.

OR, A Discourse concerning Self-Examination, by which both Saints and Sinners
may come to know themselves.

WHEREUNTO Are added sundry MEDITATIONS relating to the LORDS SUPPER.

By Nathanael Vincent, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

Psalm. 26. 2. Examine me O Lord, prove me, try my Reins and my Heart. E coelo
descendit (...). London, Printed by J. Richardson, for Tho. Parkhur^^ at the
Bible and 3 Crowns in Cheapside, 1681.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir THOMAS PLAYER, Knight, and Chamberlain of the City
of LONDON.
Much Honored Sir!
GReatness and Goodness, though more rarely joined, are not inconsistent. God
himself is Optimus Maximus, the Highest and the Best of Beings. Magistrates
that are good, do best deserve the Name of Gods on Earth. Psalm. 82. 6. I said
ye are Gods, but ye shall dye like Men. And when Death seizes on them, their
Greatness is buried with them, but their goodness accompanies them into another
World, and in this World perpetuates their Names, and makes their Memory
Blessed. Rich men ought not to be High minded, nor trust in uncertain Riches.
Wealth is but as it were a Castle in the Air; and a High Wall in the conceit
and fancy of him that has it. The Rich man therefore is to rejoice that he is
made low, because as the flower of the Grass he shall pass away, Jam. 1. 10.

Good Sir,

Weigh this World but in the right Scales, and it will be found a Drop, a Small
Dust, as the Prophets phrase is.

Goodness is the most real Grandeur, Holiness the highest Honor, Godliness the
greatest Gain; and Purity has the most solid and exquisite Delight and Pleasure
for its concomitant.

In this degenerate Age, wherein Sin is so much in fashion, and become the Mode
of the Times; it is matter of rejoicing, to see some Great men striving against
the stream, and manifesting to all that they are not afraid or ashamed of being
Religious. I wish more Great Men were good, and that all good men were a great
deal better! Times would quickly alter with Manners, and if more would lead
good Lives, more would see good days.

Go on I beseech you Sir! To stand up for God, and for your Country. God and
your Country will stand by you. It is your Glory that you are a firm Protestant
against Popery, and against Atheism also and Profaneness; and that both in
Word and Conversation.

Go on to be Faithful, in that great Trust which most deservedly is reposed in
you; and to be a greater Treasure to your beloved City, then that you are
keeper of; Go on to a Father to Orphans, a Patron to Apprentices, a Friend to
Masters, and one of the Darlings of London. May you live long to be (...) a
public Good, and may your Name outlive you many Ages!

Stapleton the Jesuit put forth a Book Entitled Tres Thomae, the Three
Thomas's. St. Thomas the Apostle, Thomas of Becket, and Sir Thomas More. Every
Christian will readily grant the preeminence to an Apostle; but for the other
two, the Archbishop and the Statesman; The Thomas I address to, does much
outvy them, and in saying this, I cannot justly be charged with Flattery.

The proud Prelate Becket, and the Unhappy Wit Sir Thomas More, were for the
Pope against their Kings. But Sir Thomas Player is, and will be for the King
against the Pope and all his Adherents.

Many Trials of the Papists have of late been Printed, in this Treatise is the
greatest Trial of all, and that is the Trial of our selves. May your Conscience
upon the perusal of it acquit you at present; and pronounce you upright; and
may you be absolved and crowned at the great approaching day of Trial, this is
the Prayer of

Sir, Your most Humble Servant, Nathanael Vincent.

TO THE READER.
Reader!
IT IS an Argument of sufficient strength, to prove that Man has lost his
understanding by his sin, that he is so unconcerned about Himself, so fearlesse
of Eternal Ruin, so negligent of Everlasting Salvation; though prudent in
secular and smaller matters, yet he is perfectly phrantick in the greatest and
most weighty concerns of another World. If a man have a trial at Law is he
thoughtful of the issue. The Malefactor who is to be tried for his Life, is
sollicitous about the Judges sentence. But though All must be tried and judged
at the great Tribunal of the Lord of Heaven and Earth, yet few, very few regard
it, or think before hand what is like to be their unalterable Doom.

How truly lamentable is it, that Souls should be thus drowned in flesh and
sensuallity! So blinded by the Prince of Darkness, as not to consider what is
likely to become of themselves: What must be their next Home, when once they
leave their present Tabernacle which is continually decaying, and must fall
down quickly, may fall down suddenly.

To prove thy self is certainly thy Wisdom. Ignorance of sins evil, makes sin
damnable; ignorance of Satan's wiles and devices makes them successful to
destruction; ignorance of a bad estate makes it so much the worse because it is
not probable it should be changed; and not discerning the Grace that is in us
keeps the Conscience, and Heart upon the Rack: Satan is gratified, and the
Comfort of the Spirit is refused.

Reader!

Converse with thy self will be very advantageous. Why should Thou and thy self
be perfect Strangers any longer? Commune often with thy own Heart, and reflect
more upon thy Life, this would be an excellent means to make both better.

I did not think when first I began to Preach upon this subject, to have been
so large upon it, much less had I thoughts to make the discourse public; but
the concurrent desire of a considerable number made me hope it had been already
profitable unto many, and might be useful unto more.

Reader! Whether thou art to be reckoned among the Righteous or the Wicked, be
not unwilling to examine thy felf: For if thou art serious in this matter, the
effect will be either a profitable fear and sorrow; or good Hope, and Peace,
and Joy.

Nathanael Vincent.

The CONTENTS.
THE Text Opened. Page2 The Doctrine raised, It highly concerns all to examine
and prove themselves. p. 3 self-Examination opened. Six propositions premised.
p. 4 Seven things implied in Self-Examination. p. 7. What of our selves is to
be proved, showed in eleven particulars. p. 12 Eight signs of our being in the
Faith. p. 19 Eight Evidences of Christ his being in us. p. 27 The right manner
of proving our selves, in nine particulars p. 33 By what Rule and Touchstone
this proof of our selves is to be made. seven cautionary rules laid down to
prevent mistaking. p. 40 The right rule of judging. p. 45 Nine signs of being
in a state of Nature. p. 46 Nine signs of being in a state of Grace. p. 53 The
special seasons when we are to prove our selves. p. 62 Arguments persuading to
Self-Examination. p. 70 Several Cases propounded. Some Cases relating to sin
and a state of Nature. 1 Case. Is it not better for sinners to continue
ignorant of themselves then by searching to fill themselves with horror?
Answered. p. 78 2 Case. Is it not time enough hereafter to look into
themselves? Answered. p. 81 3 Case. How shall utter strangers to themselves
begin this work of self-proving? Answered. p. 83 4 Case. When sinners have
found out the badness of their state is there any reason to despair? Answered.
p. 85 5 Case. What course must they take to have their state bettered? p. 87 6
Case. How far may sinners go and yet fall short of grace and Heaven? answered.
p. 92 Several Cases relating to a state of Grace. 1 Case. How shall we know
whether we are savingly enlightened? Answered. p. 103 2 Case. When may
Humiliation be said to be True? Answered. p. 108 3 Case. How may we be sure our
desires after God and grace are sincere? answered. p. 113 4 Case. How may we be
able to discern whether in Religion we are acted merely by slavish fear?
Answered. p. 117 5 Case. How may we know that we have indeed accepted Christ?
Answered. p. 125 6 Case. When may conversion be said to be sincere and true?
Answered p. 130 7 Case. What are the lower degrees of true grace? Answered.
several particulars premised. p. 133 Which are the lower degrees of grace that
is true. p. 138 8 Case. How may Grace be discovered under spiritual desertion?
Answered. p. 144 9 Case. How grace may be discerned under the prevalency of
MELANCHOLY? Answered. p. 148 10 Case. How may repentance be known to be true
when it is a deathbed repentance, or just before a Malefactors execution?
Answered. p. 154 11 Case. How may grace be discovered in Saints that are
fallen? Answered. p. 158 12 Case. How may we know whether we grow in grace?
Answered. p. 164 13 Case. How may we know when our joys are true and well
grounded? Answered. p. 171 Application. Several inferences drawn from the
Doctrine. p. 174 The error of the Romish Church in reference to assurance. p.
179 A lamentation that this duty of self-examination is so much neglected. p.
181 The fatal consequence of this neglect. p. 182 Directions how to prove our
selves so as to attain assurance of the love of God. p. 186 Nine arguments to
persuade Saints to labor after assurance. p. 187 Nine directions to attain it.
p. 194 The right course to keep assurance. p. 202 Directions how to prove your
selves before you engage in that Ordinance of the LORDS SUPPER. p. 205 Ten
Principles of Religion that the Communicant must be acquainted with. p. 208
What besides he must examine himself about p. 214 Directions how to prove your
selves every day, so as to walk with greater circumspection? p. 234 Let Wicked
men prove themselves p. 253 Directed what to do p. 254 Let merely moral men
prove themselves. p. 257 Merely moral men discovered p. 258 Counsel given unto
such p. 261 Let unsound professors prove themselves. p. 263 Such discovered.
ibid. And being convicted advised. p. 265 Sincere Saints counseled, in four
particulars. p. 267 The Conclusion of the discourse. p. 269 MEDITATIONS on the
LORDS SVPPER. p. 273
A DISCOURSE Concerning Self-Examination, by which both Saints and Sinners may
come to know themselves.
2 Cor. 13. 5. Prove your own selves. (...).
THe sum of true Wisdom, as One observes does consist in two things, Dei
cognitione, and nostri, in the knowledge of God, and of our selves: now to make
us wise in both these respects, is one great design of the holy Scriptures. He
that is a stranger unto God, must needs be a stranger unto Rest and
Satisfaction, and is ignorant of Him who is the Highest and Chiefest good of
all. He that is a stranger to Himself, must needs remain both sinful and
miserable, and yet both sin and misery are unperceived; and ignorance how Bad
he is, fixes him in a state that is not good; and makes it the more unlikely,
that ever it should be bettered. No wonder therefore that the Apostle does put
all upon the Examination and proving of themselves.

Which Counsel is very proper both to Sinners and to Saints. First it is proper
to Sinners: for if they come to understand aright their own deplorable and
wretched case; this would be one large step from sin to Grace. Secondly, it is
proper also to Saints; for proving of themselves will be the way to evidence
the saving change that has been wrought in them, and will be a large step from
Grace to Comfort.

In the words we have,

1. A duty and that is to prove; the Greek word is (...); which is used by
Authors for the proving of Gold in the fire, (...) Isocrat. Now Gold is proved
in the fire in order to its discovery that it is true Gold, and that the dross
may be separated from it. So the proving in the Text must be in order unto a
discovery; and in order unto greater sanctification and purity.

2. Whom is it our duty to prove? Our own selves. In reference to others we are
to hope and believe all things, as far as is consistent with the apparent
fruits they bring forth, and the faithfulness which we owe them. But in
reference to our selves: the greater severity, commonly the greater sincerity.
We must watch and be jealous over our selves, lest we be mistaken and deceived
in, and by our selves. And if you ask me. What we are to prove our selves
about? The context informs us. Whether we are in the Faith? Whether Christ be
in us yea, or no?

Doct. The Doctrine I raise from the words is this. It highly concerns all to
examine and prove themselves: this duty is very much urged in the verse where
the Text lies. Examine your selves, says the Apostle, Prove your own selves,
the Counsel is doubled; which shows the great concernment of it, together with
the difficulty and backwardness in us all to follow it: therefore he adds, as
if he did half chide; What! Know you not your own selves? q. d. To be ignorant
of your selves, your actions, and your state, for want of self-trial, is your
Sin and shame; and argues prodigious carlesness to be in you, and you to be in
unexpressible danger.

In the handling of this Doctrine I shall First tell you, what is implied in
this proving of our selves. Secondly, what of our selves is to be proved.
Thirdly, concerning what we are to prove our selves. Fourthly, the Manner how
we are to do it. Fifthly, by what Rule and Touchstone this proof of our selves
is to be made. Sixthly, the special times and seasons when this duty is to be
done. Seventhly, lay down the reasons persuading to the practice of it.
Eighthly, resolve several Cases of Conscience relating to this subject. Lastly,
close with the Application.

In the first place I am to tell you, What is implied in this proving of our
selves, and here several propositions are to be premised.

1. The Children of men do owe obedience unto God as their rightful Lord and
Governor; and consequently it concerns them to examine, whether the Lord has
been obeyed, or other Lords have had, and still have the dominion over them.
Man did not make himself, neither is he able to perserve himself; and he is
farthest off from being able to redeem and save himself: therefore man is not
his own, it is impious in him to speak that language. Psalm. 12. 4. Who is Lord
over me? But that God who gave him his being, who holds his soul in life, and
alone can redeem and save his soul from wrath, does justly lay claim to him as
his subject, and require obedience from him.

2. The Sons of men are under a law, which they are obliged to keep as a rule
of righteousness. God himself has given them a law, which is holy just and
good, they are therefore to examine what respect they have had to this law.
Whether it has been kept as it ought, like the apple of the eye? Or whether it
has been hated and broken and cast behind the back? For sincere obedience and
life, and death and disobedience are joined together. Deuteronomy. 30. 19, 20.

3. We are all of us not only under a law, but under the eye of our Lord and
Lawgiver continually. He compasses our path and our lying down, and is
acquainted with all our ways. Psalm. 139. 3. And shall we be ignorant of our own
ways? His eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of men. Psalm. 11. 4. When
we would look more intently, our eyelids are more contracted. Gods eyelids
are mentioned, to signify how intently he eyes, when he tries the Children of
men; and shall not they prove and try themselves?

4. Naturally we are prone to nothing but what is contrary to that Law and Rule
we should walk by. The Apostle sticks not to say, that the carnal mind is
enmity against God, and is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can it
be. Romans 8. 7. And as the heart of man is desperately wicked, so it is deceitful
above all things, and it manifests its deceitfulness in concealing and hiding,
that it may hold fast its wickedness. Those that have such hearts, how jealous
should they be of them? How careful to prove, and to pry into them? And suppose
there be a new nature given, yet upon proof 'twill be found that there is too
too much of the old remaining.

5. We are endued with a power of self-reflection; and may take notice both of
our hearts and actions. There is a law written in our hearts by nature, which
does in part discover what we should do, and be; but the Word of God much more
fully informs us of our duty. We may erect a Bar or Tribunal in our own souls,
and call our selves before it. Conscience can first be Witness, and afterward
a Judge. And truly a right judging of our selves is one way to escape, being
condemned with the world. 1 Cor. 11. 31.

6. All must be Summoned to give an account of themselves unto God at last.
Romans 14. 12. So then every one of us must give accout of himself unto God. 2
Cor. 5. 10. We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every
one may receive the things done in his body, whether it be good or evil. Should
we not then try and prove our selves before hand, repent of our evil deeds,
believe in the Mediator, and thoroughly amend our doings, that we may be found
of our Lord and Judge, in peace?

These propositions premised, I shall open the nature of this duty of
self-proving.

1. Self-proving implies a serious Inquisition, and Search into our selves.
Psalm. 77. 6. I communed with my own heart, and my spirit made diligent search.
And truly a diligent search is but needful; for as Augustine observes. Grande
profundum est homo. Man is a great deep, and therefore it is difficult for a man
to sound himself, and to come to the bottom of his own heart. Job speaks of the
secrets of nature, and says, there is a path which no fowl knows, and which
the Vultures eye, though it be so piercing has not seen. Job. 28. 7. But the
secrets of the heart are more abstruse, and hard to be found out. The Heathen
Poet advised Tecum habita. Dwell with thy self; our thoughts should dwell much
upon our selves, that we may find out the utmost of our selves. Our whole man
is to fall under our inspection, our ways, our words, our senses, our souls,
are all to be looked over.

2. Self-proving implies, a fear of self-deceit. The Apostle cautions against
being deceived by man, Ephesians. 5. 6. Let no man deceive you with vain words;
against being beguiled by Satan, 2 Cor. 11. 3. But I fear lest by any means as
the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so your minds should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. He cautions also against
self-deceit, 1 Cor. 3. 18. Let no man deceive himself. He that is not jealous
over himself will easily mistake, and may go out of the World mistaken, and
after death the mistake will be impossible to be corrected; we must therefore
take heed to our selves that our spirits deal not treacherously.

3. Self proving implies, using the Light of the Word of God. This Word is
quick and powerful; and as the Anatomists Knife, dissects all the parts of the
Body, and lays even the inmost of them open unto view: so the Word like a sharp
and two edged Sword, does pierce through all, and divides between Soul and
Spirit, i. e. between Nature and Grace, for the natural man is called (...); or
the meaning may be, that the Word discovers not only the corruption in the
Affections, and the inferior faculties of the Soul; but also that depravation
and sin, which is in the faculties which are Superior, and discerns what the
intents and thoughts and reasonings of the heart are, Heb. 4. 12. Unless we
make use of the light of the Word we shall be lost in the dark, while searching
our selves. The Word makes manifest the very secrets of the heart, and hereby
it is plain that God who searches the heart is the Author of this Word, and does
accompany it, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. We find an Hearer convinced of all, and judged
of all; the secrets of his heart are made manifest, and worshipping God, he
acknowledges God is in the Preachers of a Truth.

4. Self-proving implies, comparing our selves with that Rule whereunto we
ought to be conformed. The Commands of God lay an obligation upon the whole
man. We are required to cleanse our hands, and purify our hearts, Jam. 4. 8.
We must be holy in all manner of Conversation, and our affections must be set
on things above, not on Earthly things; our Minds also and Consciences must be
purged from their defilements. Now a comparison is to be made between, what we
should be, and what we are. This bringing our selves to the right Rule, will
discover our obliquities, and cause us the better to understand our selves. The
Apostle in another case condemns the folly of them; Who measure themselves by
themselves, and compare themselves among themselves. Let us remember Vivendum
est regulis, we must walk by Rule and that is the Word, and by the Word we must
at last be judged, therefore it is our wisdom to see whether heart, and life are
agreeable to it.

5. Self-proving implies, Self-accusing and self-condemning for what is evil.
Upon examination having found out our iniquities, we must hold up our guilty
hands at Gods Bar, and acknowledge all we know: all that Satan can justly lay
to our charge; Nay, all that is down in the Book of Gods own remembrance, Psalm.
51. 3. I acknowledge my iniquity and my sin is ever before me. And as upon the
discovery of sin we are to be our own Accusers, so also to judge and condemn
our selves. We must readily justify the Lord in the greatest severities at
present; nay, we must acquit him upon supposition of eternal severity, if he
should make us to feel his wrath, and greatest indignation for ever.

6. Self-proving implies, approving and taking comfort in that grace and
goodness that has been wrought in us by the Spirit. As we are to be strict in
the search after sin, so grace is in no wise to be overlookt. The least degree
of true grace, is great matter of praise, nay, will occasion eternal
thanksgiving, God does not despise the day of small things, neither should we,
but must own the good things, though but some good things, which are in us in
Christ Jesus, Philem. 6. Breathings after God, prizing of Christ, weariness of
sin, and longing to be holy: must in no wise be unobserved in this work of
Self-examination.

7. Self-proving will never be to any purpose, unless there be a crying unto
the Lord himself, to search us; that we may not pass a wrong judgment upon our
selves. What depth is there that He cannot fathom? What can be concealed from
him who knows all things? Jer. 17. 10. I the Lord search the heart: though it is
deceitful above all things, it cannot deceive me, I try the Reins. David
therefore prays, Examine me O Lord, and prove me, try my Reins and my Heart,
Psalm. 26. 2. and Psalm. 139. 23, 24. Search me O God and know my heart, try me
and know my thoughts and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in
the way ever lasting.

In the second place I am to show what of our selves is to be proved.

1. We are to examine and prove, what is our common and allowed practice. A
Sanguine man is not denominated Pale as Aristotle observes, when he is Pale
through fear; nor a Pale man Sanguine, when he blushes through shame. A good
man may sometimes fall into that which is evil, and a bad man may sometimes hit
upon an action that is good. The Tree is to be judged by the ordinary Fruit it
bears. The Apostle speaks of his manner of life that it was godly in Christ
Jesus, 2 Timothy 3. 10, 12. But if it be our manner to be workers of iniquity, our
doom will be at last to be excluded the Kingdom, Luke 13. 26, 27.

2. We are to examine what course we are resolved still to take; If the wicked
man will forsake his way and turn to God, mercy is promised and abundant
pardon, Esa. 55. 7. If the prodigal come home to his Fathers House, he shall be
received with joy, his former riot being forgotten and forgiven; so that the
door of hope is open even to the ungodly man, if he will but deny his
ungodliness. But if the enemies of God will not lay down their Weapons, but
refuse and rebel still, this argues the state to be bad and destruction to be
near: the Lord may quickly come to a resolution to ease himself of such
Adversaries, Esa. 1. 24.

3. We must examine what company is most acceptable to us. If we we love the
ungodly who hate the Lord: if the wickedness of others whereby God is
dishonored, is not the matter of our dislike, as long as they thwart not, but
promote our secular and carnal interest; if we like the company of Fools, (and
Sinners are the worst Fools) well enough, it is a sign we are Fools our selves;
Fools indeed who venture to be destroyed, and to go to Hell for company, Prove.
13. 20. But if the Saints are looked upon as the most excellent ones, and
delighted in as the best Society, Psalm. 16. 3. if we love them that are born of
God, it shows that we our selves are born of him.

4. We must examine of what nature our Communication is. The Tongue is the
index of the heart and shows what is in it. As evil Communications corrupt good
manners, so they are a sign of a corrupt heart from whence they proceed. A
Tongue that is not bridled, but rails, lies, backbites, and is obscene, impious
and profane, is an argument that Religion is but vain, Jam. 1. 26. But when
the Tongue, not out of any carnal design, but delightfully talks of the Word of
God, when we sit in the house, when we walk by the way, when we lie down and
when we rise up: it is a sign the Word is in the Heart, and that the Heart is
renewed and changed by the Word, Deuteronomy. 4. 6, 7.

5. We must examine what thoughts as welcome guests are suffered to lodge
within us. It Is said of wicked men that God is not in all their thoughts, Psalm.
10. 4. but wicked and vain thoughts are delightful and abide in them. Proud,
revengeful, covetous, filthy, and all sinful thoughts, are vain thoughts,
because they are to no good end or purpose, nay, to very bad purpose; Now if
such thoughts as these lodge in the heart, the heart is not washed from its
wickedness, and they will hinder salvation, Jer. 4. 14. But if holy thoughts
are cherished, and there is a complacency in them, more of them are desired,
and sinful thoughts are a burden, which the heart is weary of, and does
conflict with, and wishes their expulsion: This does speak a gracious frame of
spirit.

6. We must examine what power we have of Spiritual discerning. The Gospel is
hid from the natural man which proves him in a lost state, 2 Cor. 4. 3. The
things of the spirit of God are foolishness to him; and he counts it the
greatest wisdom to secure things visible. That Rich man, Luke 12. thought he
had been mighty provident and prudent, in laying up goods for many years. But
if we are Saints indeed, we have a faculty of Spiritual discerning and judge
quite otherwise: and our judgment is this, and that judgment is true; namely,
That all are fools, and poor and miserable, that are not rich in Grace, rich
toward God, and that have made no provision for Eternity. God called the
forementioned Rich man a Fool, upon this score. And as the Lord calls the
worldly-minded, Fools, so after death they will call themselves by that name,
and curse their folly everlastingly.

7. We must examine what we elect and make choice of as our chief Good, and
take up with us the best Portion. The men of the World are contented with a
Portion here in this Life, here they receive all their Consolation; they live
as they think very well, without God in the World, and do not care to know, to
serve, or to enjoy him. But if we are Saints we follow other Counsels, we choose
the Lord for our Portion and resolve to obey him, Psalm. 119. 57. Thou art my
Portion O Lord, I have said that I would keep thy Word, we are persuaded of his
all-sufficient goodness, which is abundantly communicative of it self, and
desire him above all. And the Lord himself being our Portion, we are pleased we
are satisfied, we rejoice and conclude the lines are fallen to us in pleasant
places, and that we have a very goodly heritage, Psalm. 16. 5, 6.

8. We must examine whether our naturally beloved sin be now loathed. They that
are sincere are made so wise as to find out their dilectum delictum, darling
iniquity, or if more than one have been their darlings they take special notice
of them; and though they are alienated from the whole kind of Sin, yet with
more than ordinary vehemence they desire the mortification of the lust or lusts
which were formerly most beloved, because these have so loaded them with guilt,
have most of all defiled them, and provoked the Lord most bitterly against
them. David proves his uprightness this way, Psalm. 18. 23. I was also upright
before thee and I kept my self from mine iniquity. But as for those who resolve
to spare their darling corruptions, they are unsound; these lusts will cost
them the life of their Souls. And are not those prodigies of folly who love sin
so well, as to be contented to be damned for the sake of it! If Herod will keep
his Herodias still against the admonition of John the Baptist, it plainly
argues that he is void of Grace, though he hears gladly and in part practices
the Word he hears.

9. We must examine what pre-eminence Heaven has above Earth in our affections.
A wicked man when he comes to dye, will prefer Heaven before Hell; but a Saint
prefers Heaven before Earth; and when his heart treacherously hankers after
earthly things he checks and chides it; he goes unto God and complains of this,
and prays to be made more heavenly minded. He is convinced of the vanity and
fading nature of earthly things, and chooses the better and enduring substance.
It Is a sign we are enlightened and renewed by the same Spirit, the Apostle was,
when we speak his Language, 2 Cor. 4. 18. We look not at the things that are
seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things that are seen, are
Temporal: but the things which are not seen are Eternal.

10. We must examine what is our great End and Design. The wicked man is swayed
by carnal, sinful, and worldly self: Worldly honor, pleasure, and advantage,
are the highest, indeed the only things he seeks. If our Ends are not right, we
cannot possibly be upright our selves. Now our End ought to be the glorifying
of God and the enjoyment of Him. Whatever ye do says the Apostle, do all to the
glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. This should still be in the Christians eye and
aim; And truly the designing of Gods glory is the way to the enjoyment of him,
wherein our own glory and happiness does consist. Those that honor God he will
honor; whatever thwarts this highest, greatest End, is to be avoided with the
greatest care: for we cannot dishonor or despise the Lord, but ipso facto we
degrade and prejudice our selves.

11. We must examine, whether we are not grieved at all discovered defects and
miscarriages, and desirous to have every thing amiss rectified and amended.
Though upon search we find much out of order, nay nothing in such order, every
way as it should be; if this be our serious trouble, and we long indeed to be
turned: long to be savingly changed; long to be thoroughly healed: it is a sign
of some hopeful beginnings if they do but hold. Ephraim bemoaned himself that
he was as a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke, he found a great reluctance in
corrupted nature, and loathness to submit to the Yoke of God; he is troubled at
it, and falls a praying for converting grace: Turn thou me and I shall be
turned, his prayer is heard, he is turned, he is instructed, he repented, he is
adopted, and assured at last of mercy; Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant
Child? For since I spoke against him I do earnestly remember him still,
therefore my bowels are troubled for him and I will surely have mercy on him
says the Lord, Jer. 31. 18, 19, 21.

In the third place I am to inform you concerning what we are to prove our
selves. And at present I shall only insist on those two things which the
Apostle mentions in the Context. We are to prove whether we are in the Faith,
and whether Christ be in us, yea or no?

1. We are to prove whether we are in the Faith. Sometimes Faith is said to be
in us, because it is a grace infused by the Spirit of God into our hearts; With
the heart man believes unto Righteousness, Romans 10. 10. Sometimes we are said
to be in Faith, in opposition to others that are unregenerate, who are affirmed
to be in the flesh, and to be in their sins. And there is good reason for this
phrase, that the Saints are in Faith, because Faith does cloth them with a
justifying Righteousness, and is a Shield to cover them, and to quench all the
fiery Darts of the evil one. Now whether we are in the Faith, may be thus
proved;

1. If we are in the Faith, Truths being firmly believed will be particularly
applied, our assent will be firm unto the truth of the Gospel, as being of
Divine Authority. And as we shall believe that God himself does speak in his
Word, so we shall believe that he speaks to us in particular. This particular
application of the Word, we read of, Job. 5. ult. Lo this we have searched it,
so it is, see it and know it for thy good. A Medicine if not applied will not
heal, and the Word if not applied by Faith will not profit, Heb. 4. 2. But the
Word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that
heard it. When Divine Commands are particularly applied, we shall look upon our
selves as obliged to obey them, and submit to the Authority of our great
Lawgiver who has power to save and to destroy. When comminations and
threatenings are applied unto our Sins in particular, we shall be afraid to
allow of those Sins which bring us under the lash of threatenings so very
dreadful. And as for the promises of God, being particularly applied, how
certainly will they be accomplished!

2. Our Faith will be joined with Godly sorrow and repentance, Act. 20. 21.
Testifying both to Jews and Greeks Repentance toward God, and Faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ. The Hypocrites Faith is usually without Repentance; he
is stranger to godly sorrow, and yet he is full of confidence; or his
repentance is without Faith, he lies down like Cain or Judas under the burden
of his guilt and utterly despairs of mercy. I grant that weak believers have
strong temptations to despair. But the God of hope bears up their hearts by an
unseen hand, so that they neither desperately destroy themselves, nor come to
this resolution; since there is no hope but they must be damned, they will be
damned for something, and so run out to all excess of riot. If our Faith be
true, Sin will be our grief and detestation, and there will be (...), a change
in our minds and rendering our hearts unto God.

3. If we are in the Faith, Christ is no longer a stone of stumbling, but
exceeding precious in our esteem, 1 Pet. 2. 6, 7. He is looked upon as the power
of God and the wisdom of God. The wisdom of God in contriving such a way of
salvation is admired, and the power of Christ to save to the uttermost is
believed. The Apostle counted all things but loss and dung for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord, Phil. 3. 8. It Is impossible a man
should be a true Believer and not have an high value for the Lord Jesus. His
Person is precious, He is the Fathers equal, his Darling, and the Brightness of
his Glory. He is the Angels wonder, and they all are commanded to worship him,
Heb. 1. 3. 6. He is the Churches Head, and supplies the whole Body with his
fullness, Ephesians. 1. ult. And gave him to be Head over all things to the Church
which is his Body the fullness of him that fills all in all. And as the Person
of Christ so the Blood of Christ is said to be precious, 1 Pet. 1. 19. Ye were
redeemed with the precious blood of Christ as of a Lamb without blemish and
without spot. His benefits are precious. True Faith counts Him altogether
lovely, and hinders any offense from being taken at him, Matthew. 11. 6.

4. Our Faith will purify our hearts, Act. 15. 9. And put no difference
between us and them purifying their hearts by faith. Faith is persuaded of the
holiness of God, and that he searches the heart, and tries and weighs the
spirits of the children of men: it is also persuaded that only the pare in heart
shall see God, or are fit to see him, Mat. 5. 8. No wonder therefore if the
consequent of Faith be a following after holiness without which no man shall
see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. Faith moreover takes notice of the End of Christ's
dying, which was that he might sanctify and cleanse his Church, and present it
unto himself a glorious Church not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing;
but that it might be holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. and hence we
have a plae for holiness which is very effectual to obtain it. Finally, Faith
applies the promises of sanctification, the promises of a new heart and of a
new spirit, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye
shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse
you, A new heart also will I give you and a new spirit will I put within you,
and I will take away the heart of stone out of your flesh, and I will give you
an heart of flesh. And by such promises as these, Believers who account them
exceeding great and precious, are made partakers of the Divine nature, and
escape the corruption that is in the World through lust, 2 Pet. 1. 4.

5. If we are in the Faith our faith will work, and work by love. Ephesians. 5. 6.
For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. The Apostle tells us that
faith without works is dead, as the body is dead without the spirit. Jam. 2.
ult. Faith derives strength from Christ, whereby we yield obedience to the will
of God, as well as relies upon his justifying righteousness. But all works will
not prove the truth of faith: but such works as proceed from love. We must pray
because we love God, we must hear because we love him; we must live to him
because we love him. There is a threefold love to God, of Desire, of
Benevolence and Complacency: now though all that have true faith may not arrive
so high, as to delight in God; yet all true believers do desire after God above
all; and they bear such good will to him, as to wish him glorified more by
themselves and others, and this shows the sincerity of their love.

6. Our Faith will be weary of its contrary: and we shall cry with earnestness,
that the Lord would help our unbelief. The man in the Gospel was very much
troubled at his infidelity, and therefore cried out with tears to Christ. Lord
I believe, i. e. I believe in part, and desire to believe more strongly, help
thou my unbelief. Mat. 9. 24. Unbelieving injections against God, against
Christ, against the Spirit of grace, against the Word of truth: are felt as so
many buffets and blows upon an heart that truly believes. The believer desires
to have his Assent to the Word of God more strong, that it may have the
stronger influence; and that his affections and actions may be such, as may
suit his believing every syllable of the Bible to be true. He desires his
reliance upon God, upon Christ, and upon the promises, may be more firm and
steady. And oh what a value does he put a well-grounded assurance of the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord! Romans 8. ult.

7. If we are in the Faith, our faith will give us victory over this present
world. 1 John 5. 4. 5. Whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world, and this
is the victory that overcomes the world, even your faith. The believer is so
wise as nihil admirari, to admire nothing in this world. Our Lord Jesus himself
had but little of this world: and cared not for it when Satan offered him all
the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, he despised the offer. The
Apostles were poor in the world; and yet the special favorites of heaven:
certainly the world is not a matter of extraordinary value. Most Saints have
had but little of it, and those who have had much of it, have lived above it.
Moses by Faith despised the pleasures of sin, and the treasures of Egypt, and
preferred even reproaches for Christ, and afflictions with the people of God
before them. Though David was a King, and wore a Crown of pure gold on his
head; yet his faith made him look upon himself as a stranger upon the earth.
Psalm. 39. 12. I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner as all my fathers were.

8. If we are indeed in the Faith, our faith will make the next world evident
and desirable. 'Twil prove the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence
of things not seen. Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the good and true Spy which searches
the heavenly Country which is promised: and brings back word. That that
Celestial Canaan is very glorious, that an innumerable company of Angels are
there, and the Spirits of just men, and all made perfect, that God the Judge of
all is there seen face to face: and there is Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant, crowned with and in his Fathers throne; that there is no need of the
Sun or of the Moon to shine: for the glory of God does enlighten it, and the
Lamb is the light thereof. Rev. 21. 23. finally, that sin and sorrow are
eternal strangers, but there is fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore. And
Faith giving such a report of the world to come, no wonder that it is judged
worth seeking, and that with an holy violence. Mat. 11. 12. The Kingdom of
heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.

2. We are to prove our selves, whether Christ be in us, yea or no? Christ and
Satan divide the world, all that have not Christ in them, Satan has possession
of, he is the Spirit that works in the children of disobedience. Now whether
Christ be really in us, may be thus proved and discerned.

1. If Christ be in us, he has entered by the door of the understanding, we
cannot be totally ignorant of him. True Faith cannot be without knowledge. Romans
10. 14. How shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard? We must know
who and what he was, that undertook the work of our redemption; how else can we
rely upon him? He is near a kin to us as Man, and is a merciful and faithful
high Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of
the people. Heb. 2. 17. and surely he was able to finish that work which he
undertook, for he is over all God blessed for ever, Amen. Romans 9. 5. We must
also know the benefits of Christ, that we may know what to rely upon him for,
now these benefits are most necessary suitable and excellent, as pardon of Sin,
adoption to be the Sons of God; sanctifying grace, and endless glory. Nay
Christ is all in all, and Christ being given, nothing will be denied. Romans 8.
32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall
he not with him also freely give us all things.

2. If Christ be in us, our very hearts have been opened to receive him. When
Christ has knocked at the door we have given him admission; it has been our
souls language, Come in thou blessed Lord, wherefore stand thou without. And
this receiving of Christ is indeed believing in him. Joh. 1. 12. To as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God even to them that
believe on his Name. The heart has been convinced that it is most highly
rational to give entertainment to this Lord of life and glory. He uses the
strongest arguments for admission, makes the greatest offers; delivers all out
of the depths of misery, and advances them, to be Saints, Sons, Priests, Kings,
who shall Reign most gloriously and happily to Eternity, that do indeed embrace
him.

3. ^f Christ be in us, the dominion of Sin and our Idols have been thrown
down. When Darius the Persian Emperor offered half his Empire to the
Conquering Alexander: Alexander gave this Answer, That in the Firmament there
was but one Sun, and there must be but one Emperor in Persia: and therefore
continued his Wars, till Darius had lost both Life and Kingdom. In like manner
there cannot be two Rulers in one heart. If Christ be there, no iniquity has
the dominion any longer. Where Christ is he works a change, so that persons are
no longer foolish, disobedient and deceived; they no longer serve diverse lusts
and pleasures, Tit. 3. 3. And whatsoever has been idolized, be it profit,
pleasure, applause: now it is disesteemed that Christ alone may be exalted.

4. If Christ be in us, we approve and value his Kingdom, as well as his
Priesthood. We shall like and love the Lord. Jesus, as a Prince upon the
Throne; consenting that that Throne should be our hearts, as well as a Priest
upon the Cross, and shall be very desirous to be more fully subdued to him. His
Yoke is judged easy and his burden light, Mat. 11. ult. Christ is really no
hard Master, though the World think him to be so. They that are in Christ, and
experience what kind of Ruler he is, and that he rules by a Law of Faith, and
Love, and Liberty, are very glad of his Kingly Office. It was matter of praise
and thanksgiving to the Apostle that he and other Believers had been made meet
to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light: and also that God
had delivered them from the power of darkness, and had translated them into the
Kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1. 12, 13.

5. If Christ be in us, his Word is entertained and abides in us also. We
cannot slight that Word which discovers Christ and was the great means to bring
us to Him. Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly, says the Apostle, Col.
3. 16. And hearken what Christ himself speaks, Joh. 15. 7. If ye abide in me
and my Words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will and it shall be done to
you. Oh with what gladness do Believers give entertainment to the Word, since
they may have what they will if the Word abide in them! and this Word will
rectify their judgments, and regulate their wills, so that they shall will
nothing but what is truly for their good; and what is really for their good
shall most readily be granted. Now Christ and his Word abide together. But
Christ is rejected if his Word be not received. Joh. 12. 48. He that rejects
me and receives not my Word, has one that judges him; the Word that I have
spoken the same shall judge him at the last day.

6. If Christ be in us, we have the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9. The Apostle
does so plainly intimate this truth that he asserts, the want of Christ's Spirit
undoubtedly shows there is no interest in him. If any man have not the Spirit
of Christ he is none of his. As all the Members of the Natural Body, are
animated and acted by the same Soul, which in a special manner shows it self in
the Head: so the same Spirit which is without measure in Christ the Head, does
animate and act all the true Members of his Body mystical. Now where the Spirit
of Christ is he enlightens the mind, opens the eyes of the understanding, he
makes a new Creature. 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ he is a new
creature, old things are past away, and all things become new. The old Adam and
deceitful lusts are put off, and the new man put on, which after God is created
in righteousness and true holiness. This Spirit of Christ mortifies the deeds
of the Body, Romans 8. 13. and causes those who are led by him, to walk in the
Lords Statutes, and he fills them with the fruits of righteousness which are by
Jesus Christ unto the praise and glory of God.

7. If we are in Christ and he in us, we shall endeavor to walk as he walked.
He is the unerring Pattern; to be followers of Christ is certainly to go right.
It Is in vain to say that we abide in him unless in some measure we resemble
him: and long to be more and more conformable to the Image of the Son of God.
The Apostle tells us, 1 John 2. 6. He that says he abides in him ought
himself also so to walk even as he walked. When we go about doing good; when
it is our meat and drink to do the work and business of our heavenly Father;
when we walk in meekness and humility not rendering evil for evil, or railing
for railing, but overcome evil with good, then the same mind that was in Christ
our Lord, is also in us, and it is evident that Christ is in us of a truth.

8. If Christ be in us, we shall account it our happiness to be where he is and
to behold his glory. As long as we are upon Earth we are in a vale of Tears:
Sin remaining we cannot be free from trouble; the remainders of flesh and
corruption will make us sigh and cry, O wretched! Romans 7. 24. But when we are
absent from the Body we shall be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 8. and then
we shall be completely freed from whatever is matter of complaint and sorrow.
Believers value Heaven though the hypocritical and carnal are earthly minded.
The Apostle propounds it as the highest comfort, that Believers shall certainly
be with the Lord, and shall be ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4. ult. And Christ
himself prays for this, as the top of his Disciples happiness, Joh. 17. 24.
Father I will that they also whom thou have given me may be with me where I am,
that they may behold my glory. This he promises to his Disciples, to bear up
their hearts, and arm them against all fears and troubles whatsoever, Joh. 14.
3. If I go and prepare a place for you I will come again and receive you to my
self, that where I am there ye may be also.

In the fourth place follows the Manner how we are to prove our selves.

1. In Self-proving, Self-love and Self-flattery must be banished. Wicked men
are said to flatter themselves in their own eyes until their iniquity be found
to be hateful, Psalm. 36. 2. that is, till punishment overtake them and
thoroughly convince them, how hateful sin is in the eyes of an holy and
Righteous God. Self-flattery has undone thousands; rather than have bad
thoughts of themselves, and their own condition, they will frame a strange
conception of God, and think him like themselves; and it is ordinary to cry
peace and promise safety to themselves till sudden destruction come upon them,
Psalm. 50. 21, 22. These things have thou done and I kept silence, and thou
thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thy self: but I will reprove thee
and set them in order before thine eyes. Now consider this ye that forget God,
lest I tear you in pieces and there be none to deliver. We must therefore deal
plainly with our selves and pass a true judgment.

2. A sufficient time must be allotted and allowed for this matter. What is our
time given us for, but that we may make provision and sure work for Eternity.
Qui cito pronunciat, ad pauca respicit. He that judges hastily, commonly
judges amiss. We must sequester our selves from other business, that we may
have a full conference with our selves; Commune with your own heart upon your
Bed, says David, and be still, Psalm. 4. 4. that is, when you are retired do
this, and be at leisure to understand what your hearts have to say for, or
against themselves. If we commune but little, but seldom with our hearts we may
live and die ignorant of them.

3. Self-proving ought to be managed with all possible seriousness and
concernedness of spirit. Matters which relate to our Estates and Livelihood are
minded seriously: and especially we do not trifle in matters of Life and Death.
But how much more serious should we be in a business upon which our eternal
welfare does so very much depend? A Mistake about our selves and our Spiritual
Estate would be an undoing mistake indeed, and after Death 'twill be perceived
and lamented, but 'twill be too late to rectify and amend it. And how much
will it increase our woe, to go out of the World with confidence that all is
Well, and find our selves in Hell immediately after our dissolution, where our
condition will be so very ill and never, never to be altered! Our fear
therefore must be the greater of being deceived, and our care the more diligent
to prevent it.

4. We must be willing to Examine and Ransack our selves to the very bottom: to
know the worst, to know the best, to know the whole of our selves. Travelers
have taken a great deal of pains and gone many a weary step to view the greater
World. Man is a Microcosm, little World. And as in the greater World, there is
Terra Incognita, much Land unknown: so it is in this lesser World, much of it
remains undiscovered. Curiosity acts the Travelers, in the viewing of Cities
and Nations; but truly Necessity should make us to take a view of our selves,
because Self-ignorance is so dangerous and damnable. We are endued with a great
many powers and faculties: we have various affections, desires, and
inclinations; many imaginations, reasonings and designs. All these are
corrupted by nature, and need be renewed by the grace of God. We should
therefore be the more strict in searching, that Sin wherever it lurks may not
escape our knowledge, and that grace also may be made manifest.

5. All along, the aid of the Spirit of God is to be called in. David says,
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? and whether shall I flee from thy presence?
Psalm. 139. 7. The Spirit searches all things even the deep things of God, 1
Cor. 2. 10. Surely then the Spirit can discover the deepest things in Man. It Is
the work of the Spirit to reprove the World of Sin. He takes away the Fig
leaves of excuses, and presents Sin naked and bare. He wipes off the paint that
is upon Sin, and shows the exceeding sinfulness of it; that it may be lamented
and abhorred; He discovers also the truth of Grace: and he does both
infallibly; His light and help therefore is the more to be desired.

6. Self-proving must be presently. Delays are dangerous, life is uncertain:
it is sad to be at uncertainties, in reference to a future, a better life. Now
is the time to obey the call of the Gospel, and now is the time to make our
calling sure; it concerns us to be speedy and to give diligence to do it, 2
Pet. 1. 10. Sinners had need to make haste and to find out their sores quickly
and their lost Estate, while a Physician and a Savior is near them. Saints
have reason to be speedy in Self-trial for perhaps it may be long before a
wellgrounded assurance be attained.

7. Self-proving must frequently be renewed. We must not take one, or the first
report of our own hearts; but must call them to Task and bring them to the
Touchstone again and again. We must observe our selves, what we are before Men,
and what we are in secret; when only God takes Cognizance of us. We must
observe what we are in good Company, and what in bad. And if we are good only
for Company, truly we shall be bad also for Company sake. We must try and see
how we carry it in prosperity, and how under affliction: what we are in duty,
and what we prove in the hour of temptation. A Painter if he will give an exact
Description of a City or a Palace, will draw a prospect of it Eastward,
Westward, Northward, Southward. So we should often view our selves in several
conditions, in several actions, in several trials and temptations that we may
be able to judge the more truly.

8. In Self-proving we must never give over till we have brought the matter to
an issue. If we cannot sound our selves, the first or second, or tenth or
twentieth time; yet we should not cease, but hold on the rather in
Self-examination. The Woman in the Gospel which had lost the piece of Silver
did light a Candle and sought diligently till she found it, Luke 15. 8. In like
manner we should take the Candle of the Word of God, and seek diligently till
we find whether we have grace or no. Christ asked concerning the Tribute Money,
whose Image and Superscription it had? So we should ask, Whose Image we bear?
If the Image of God be upon us, his Superscription is upon us, and we really
belong to him. But if the Image of Satan be upon us, he lays claim to us as his
Children; because in regard of evil, we resemble that Evil One. Well let us not
give over in searching till we know whose we are: Both Sin and Grace are worth
finding out; Sin, that it may be dealt with as an Enemy and subdued; Grace,
that it may be owned with thankfulness and consolation. 9. After we have done
all, we must look unto the Holy Ghost for his sealing and witness. As the
Spirit by discovering Sin and Hell and Wrath, works bondage and fear; so the
Spirit infuses Grace, shines upon that grace, discovers the truth of it and
works assurance. The Holy Spirit of God dwells in the Saints and seals them to
the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. His work is to witness their Adoption, so
that with confidence they cry Abba Father, Gal. 4. 6. The Apostle speaks of a
twofold testimony concerning the Saints Adoption, the testimony of their
Spirits, the testimony of Gods Spirit, Romans 8. 16. The Spirit it self bears
witness with our Spirits that we are the Children of God. The Spirit of
Believers comparing their Hearts and the Word together, may give a testimony
that they are the Children of God; But if this testimony be single, it is not so
valid: as one Witness under the old Law was not a full Evidence: This Testimony
when alone, will be cavel'd at and contradicted by the Accuser of the Brethren,
and will be questioned by the heart it self. But when the Spirit of the Lord
superadds his Testimony, then there is Light and Liberty; then Adoption is
apparent; God is confidently called Father, peace and joy follows: the State is
now cleared, Grace is evidenced, and future Glory is upon good ground expected.
In the fifth place, I am to inform you by what Rule and Touchstone, this proof
of our selves is to be made. If our Rule be false or insufficient, our
judgments of our selves must needs be wrong. Before I discourse concerning the
right Touchstone, I shall lay down some cautionary Rules in this matter.

1. We must not try our selves so as to judge of our Spiritual and Eternal
State, by the Moral Law taken in its utmost latitude and extent. By the Law
indeed is the knowledge of Sin: and having discovered Sin it leaves the Sinner
under the curse and condemnation. Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the Law to do
them. If therefore we were to try our selves by the Law and the exceeding
breadth of it, all, even the best must conclude themselves accursed: because in
many things all do transgress and offend, Jam. 3. 2. David prays against a
strict sentence according to the just Law of God; for according to this he knew
it would go ill with him and all flesh besides. Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into
judgment with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.
And the Apostle affirms, By the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be
justified in his sight, Romans 3. 20. Blessed be God! that through Jesus Christ
is preached unto us the forgiveness of sins, and by Him all that believe are
justified from all things from which they could not be justified by the Law of
Moses, Act. 13. 38, 39.

2. When looking into the truth of our Graces, we must not prove our selves by
the characters of Grace in the higher actings of it. Some are but Lambs and yet
are truly of Christ's Fold, though they cannot keep pace with the stronger of
the Flock: Such therefore the great Shepherd has promised to carry in his
bosom, Esa. 40. 11. Some are but babes in Christ, and yet are truly the
Children of God as well as those who are strong men. If we look upon Abraham we
find him strong in Faith; believing against hope, and thereby giving glory to
God, Rom 4. 18, 20. We find David rejoicing, and professing that God was the
gladness of his joy; and his Soul is satisfied and ravished with a sense of his
excellent loving kindness, Psalm. 43. 4. The Apostle Paul is fully persuaded of
the love of God, is got above all doubts and fears, and insults over all, as
being confident that nothing shall be able to separate him, from the love of
God in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8. ult. He is not terrified at Death, but
desires to depart and to be with Christ which is best of all, Phil. 1. 23. But
now these which I have mentioned are the higher actings of Grace. And if weak
Believers should try themselves by such examples as these, Satan would get
advantage, and their doubts and discouragements would but increase upon them.

3. In proving our selves we must take heed of making an ill use of the falls
of Saints, which are recorded in Scripture. David's uncleanness, Lots
drunkenness are no arguments to prove, that any may allow themselves in
filthiness and intemperance and yet go to Heaven. Nay the Scripture expressly
says the contrary, Ephesians. 5. 5. For this ye know that no Whoremonger, nor unclean
person, nor covetous man who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the
Kingdom of Christ, of God: and all words that would persuade otherwise, are but
deceitful and vain, v. 6. The falls of Saints are mentioned not to encourage
unto sin, but to prevent despair, and to encourage to repentance and returning
unto God, when there has been a departing from him. And truly they are in a
state quite different from the Saints, who are only like them in their falls,
but not like them in their rising again, Righteousness and Repentance.

4. We must beware of thinking it sufficient to have escaped the more gross
pollutions of the World. When we compare our selves with the vilest of men, and
find our selves unlike them, this is not enough to prove our selves, or our
state truly good. It was not enough to justify the Pharisee before God, that
others were extortioners, unjust and adulterers, but he was free from such
gross and scandalous crimes as these, Luke 18. 11. There are degrees of Sin as
well as Grace. It Is but a small commendation, Pessimis esse meliorem to be
better than the very worst of all: we may be bad enough to ruin us for all
that. The Pharisees were righteous and blameless in the eyes of men, but Christ
saw how proud and how unsanctified their hearts were; therefore he says, Except
your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees ye
shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 20.

5. The providence of God must not be our Rule of Trial: We must not judge of
our spiritual condition by present external dispensations. You find a wicked
man in purple and fine linen, faring sumptuously every day, and a godly man a
beggar laid at his gate full of Sores, desirous to be fed with the Crumbs that
fell from the rich man's Table, Luke 16. The righteous are plagued all the day
long and chastened every morning: when the wicked prosper in the World, and
increase in riches and have more than heart could wish, Psalm. 73. 12, 14. If
thriving in this World be all thou have to show as an evidence of the love of
God; thou have indeed nothing at all to show as an argument he loves thee with
a special love; for Solomon says, No man knows either love or hatred by all
that is before them; but all things fall alike to all, and there is one event
to the righteous and to the wicked, Eccles 9. 1, 2.

6. We must take heed of a wrong notion of the Grace of God in Christ; which
may encourage licentiousness and presumption. We must not look upon him as all
Justice, Jealousy, Fury; neither must we imagine him all Grace and Mercy. We
must not look upon our Lord Jesus as the Minister of sin. Gal. 2. 17. for he
was manifested to destroy the works of the Devil. 1 John 3. 8. it is
unreasonable therefore to continue in sin that grace may abound. Romans 6. 1. We
must be fully persuaded that without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Heb.
12. 14. for if the necessity of holiness be not apprehended, we shall entertain
a presumptuous confidence in the grace of God, and indulge our lusts at the
same time.

7. We must take heed of putting our selves upon the Trial, farther than the
Scripture ever does. As whether we can be contented to be damned that God may
be glorified? Whether we would be so strict and circumspect as the word
requires, if there were no future reward or punishment? It Is not good to make
suppositions, which God in his word never makes. As whether if we might live
here in this world for ever, we could be very well contented? Whether if God
were to be enjoyed but for a time, we should prefer that enjoyment, before an
everlasting fruition of the creature? Such suppositions as they have no
Scripture warrant, so they but perplex them that make them. We must take things
as they are, and not suppose them to be what they are not. And if things
visible which are but temporal, are despised in comparison of invisible things
which are eternal, it argues the heart is wise to make a right choice.

Having laid down these cautionary Rules, I come now to speak of the Right
Touchstone, by which this Trial of our selves is to be made; and that is the
Written word of God. Saints cannot ascend into heaven at present, and
immediately search the Book of life, to know whether their names are there
registered. Neither must they expect that an Angel should come to them as to
Daniel of old, to inform them that they are greatly beloved. Neither shall the
wicked and the hypocritical ones have an hand appearing as once to Belshazzer,
signifying how bad their state is, and how sad their is like to be. But to the
written word all must repair, that they may know what to conclude concerning
themselves. Now the word of God gives us a description and characters both of a
state of nature, and of a state of Grace. The Prisoner at the bar which is
tried for his life, with what trembling does he expect the verdict of the Jury.
When we are trying our selves in reference to Eternity: Oh with what fear and
trembling should we attend what sentence the word of God will pass upon us.

1. I begin with a description of a State of Nature. Now the Scripture
pronounces those in a state of nature,

1. Who have a vail of gross and black ignorance upon their hearts. As it is
life eternal to know, so it must needs be granted to be no less than eternal
death, to be grossly ignorant of the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he
has sent. How can we obey that great Command of the Law, to love the Lord with
all our hearts, or that great Command of the Gospel, to believe in Jesus
Christ: if concerning both God and Christ there be a very gross ignorance?
Ignorance is commonly rejoiced in as an excuse for sin: but it proves
destructive where it is thus liked. Hos. 4. 6. My people are destroyed for lack
of knowledge. 2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
lost. And Isa. 27. 11. It is a people that have no understanding, therefore he
that made them will not save them, and he that formed them will show them no
favor.

2. They are in a state of Nature, who believe not the report of the Gospel.
The word speaks terribly against such as esteem the Gospel no more, than if it
were a cunningly devised Fable, who stand no more in awe of it than if it were
not of Divine Original, and Authority; but merely of humane invention. Joh. 3.
ult. He that believes not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him. Mar. 16. 16. He that believes not shall be damned. Joh. 8. 24.
If ye believe not that I am He, the true Messiah, the only Savior: ye shall
die in your sins. Hell is in a special manner called the portion of the
unbelievers. If Jesus Christ the only expiatory sacrifice for sins be despised;
there remains no other, besides: but a certain fearful looking for of
vengeance, and of fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries. Heb. 10.

3. They are in a state of Nature, that are resolved workers of iniquity. Let
the Lord be never so angry, and threaten what he pleases, they dare to sin
notwithstanding. Children of disobedience must needs be the children of wrath.
Col. 3. 6. The wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience. Those
whose hearts speak that language. Jer. 44. 16. As for the word which thou have
spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken to thee: but are
bewitched by the pleasure and gain of sin still to continue the servants of it;
these are the persons which shall at last receive the wages of sin, death
eternal. It Is a mad resolution to be proud, and filthy, and unjust, and
profane, whatever the Gospel commands to the contrary: it is in effect to give
consent to be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power. 2. These 1. 8. 9.

4. They are in a state of Nature, who under a profession of Religion practice
wickedness secretly, or at least regard iniquity in their hearts. How many woes
does our Lord thunder out against Hypocrites in one Chapter! and at last
concludes with a terrible vehemence! Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how
can ye escape the damnation of hell? Mat. 23. 33. Hell is especially prepared
for the Hypocrites; as well as for the unbelievers. If our hearts and hands are
full of wickedness, malice, filthiness, and secret dishonesty; if we can commit
sin delightfully and securely as long as it is done closely, what do all our
duties signify? The Lord abhors both us and them. Hark how he speaks to such
Hypocrites; Bring no more vain oblations, Sabbaths and calling of Assemblies I
cannot away with; it is iniquity even the solemn Meeting: they are a trouble to
me I am weary to bear them. And when you spread forth your hands I will hide
mine eyes from you, and though you make many prayers yet I will not hear you,
Esa. 1. 13, 14, 15.

5. They are in a state of Nature who are lovers of this present World. 1 John
2. 15. Love not the World neither the things that are in the World; if any man
love the World the love of the Father is not in him. The love of the Father may
be taken actively and passively. The lover of this World, has no sincere love
to the Father, nor any interest in the Fathers special love. How plainly and
severely does the Apostle James speak, Jam. 4. 4. Ye Adulterers and
Adulteresses know ye not that the friendship of the World is enmity with God,
whoever therefore will be a friend of the World is the enemy of God. Then we
may be said to be friends and lovers of the World, when we conform to the
sinful customs and manners and fashions of the World: living by sense as the
World does: and when in our hearts and eager pursuits we prefer the World and
the gain, delights and preferments of it before God, before Christ, before
Grace, before Glory. Thou that in thy heart despisest a Treasure in Heaven, and
really esteemest Silver and Gold of far greater value: it is as impossible for
thee while of this mind, to go to Heaven, as for a Camel to go through the eye
of a Needle. The young man in the Gospel was of an unblameable conversation:
but he wanted one thing and indeed the principal to make him a real Saint, a
true Disciple; because he valued his great possessions above Christ and a
treasure in Heaven, that was offered to him, Mat. 19. 20, 24. Of this mind was
that worldly-minded Papist, who said, He would not leave his part in Paris for
a part in Paradise.

6. They are in a state of Nature, who go about to establish their own
Righteousness: this was the fault and the ruin of the Jews of old, they
thought their own righteousness sufficient, and the establishing of their own
righteousness, was their own downfall; a proud conceit of their own
righteousness hindered them from submitting to the righteousness of God, Romans
10. 3. Trusting in our righteousness will prove as destructive to us, as
continuance in our iniquities. If we think by our prayers and duties and deeds
of righteousness to satisfy for the sins which we have committed against the
Lord of Heaven: it is a sign we do not understand the Holiness and Justice of
God, nor the nature and demerit of Sin, nor the imperfection of our very best
services. It Is a sign of great pride, and that Jesus Christ and our need of
him, are not rightly understood; and thus being whole in our own conceit, or
thinking we can make our selves whole, we shall fall short of the only
Savior, who came to seek and to save that which is lost, Luke 9. 10. Who is a
Physician not to the well, but to the sick; Who came to call not the Righteous,
but Sinners to repentance, Mat. 9. 12, 13.

7. They are in a state of Nature, who are haters of their Brethern. God is
love, but malice is one great part of the Devils Image. 1 John 3. 15. Whosoever
hates his Brother is a Murderer; and ye know that no Murderer has eternal
life abiding in him. The malicious man, Cain is his Brother, Beelzebub is his
Father; but he is certainly a stranger and enemy to the God of love and peace.
Let a man speak never so confidently that he is in the light, yet if he hate
his Brother he is in darkness even until now, 1 John 2. 9. so 1 John 3. 10. In
this the Children of God are manifested, and the Children of the Devil:
whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his
Brother. True love will suffer long and be kind, it will not envy or be easily
provoked, it will bear and believe all things: it will forgive and cover a
multitude of sins. But they that will not forgive others, it is expressly said
themselves shall not be forgiven, Mat. 6. 15. If ye forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. Hatred of the
Brethren is a black mark indeed; especially if the Brethren are hated because
they faithfully reprove, and for their holiness sake.

8. They are in a state of Nature, who embrace damnable Heresies; being given
up to strong delusions to believe a lie: This the Apostle tells us will end in
damnation, 2 These. 2. 11, 12. I grant that true Saints may fall into Error, but
the Elect of God, shall not finally be deceived in those doctrines which are
fundamental and of absolute necessity to be believed in order to Salvation.
True Saints do still hold the Head, and build upon the Rock Christ, though some
of their building may be wood and hay and stubble. Those therefore, who deny
the Lord that bought them, and make light of the blood of Jesus, the price of
the Churches redemption, are none of the Sheep of Christ, and will bring upon
themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2.

9. They never were but in a state of Nature, who are total and final
Apostates. Such are compared to the stony ground and in time of temptation
falling away, Christ says, they had not root in themselves, Mat. 13. 21. so 1.
Joh. 2. 19. If they had been of us they would no doubt have continued with us,
but they went out that they might be made manifest they were not all of us. The
utter Apostate shall be filled with his own ways, and ripen himself apace for
ruin; Gods Soul shall have no pleasure in him, his drawing back will be to
perdition, Heb. 10. 38, 39. and his last state worse than his beginning. Thus
the Word describes a State of Nature.

2. In the second place I am to describe out of the same Word of God, and give
the signs of a State of Grace: and to show you what are those things which
accompany Salvation. Now the Scripture pronounces them in a safe and good
estate.

1. Who come to the light and are willing to be searched. True Gold does not
fear the Touchstone, and true Grace can abide the trial, sincere Souls upon
this very account like that preaching best which searches most; whereas unsound
Israel could not bear the words of the Prophet, Amos 7. 10. There is a kind of
Spiritual instinct in true Believers which inclines them both to a jealousy of
themselves, and a desire to have their hearts laid open: whereas Hypocrites
love the dark, and are contentedly, nay gladly ignorant of themselves. Our Lord
speaks very plain: Joh. 3. 20, 21. Every one that does evil hates the light,
neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be discovered; but every one
that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest that
they are wrought in God. Do thou like the Word when it is most quick and
powerful? When it is most sharp and piercing? Do thou bring thy heart to the
Lord, and say, Search it O God? Even throughout, and look into every corner and
let no corruption lie concealed: let not so much as one lust be hid or spared?
This willingness to be thus examined and proved, and to have the reins and
heart tried, argues truth of grace.

2. They are in a State of Grace, who are truly contrite and broken because of
Sin. Psalm. 34. 18. The Lord is nigh to them that are of a broken heart, and
saves such as be of a contrite spirit. He that is indeed contrite has been
convinced of Sin by the Spirit of God, and has been made to see the evil in it,
and the evil that will follow upon it: His sin and his misery have been
perceived. He is grieved because he has sinned against the Lord, and wishes
that his sorrow might be more abundant, because his sin has so much abounded,
and he laments over a corrupted heart and nature which inclines him to nothing
else but sin. His heart troubles him which is so hard, as well as wicked. He
accuses himself, he judges himself before God: he loathes himself in his own
sight. And now all sin is hated, he will divorce the Herodias, and consent that
the Benjamin should go. Nay the sin which was like Benjamin the darling, is a
Benoni, matter of the greatest sorrow. This hatred of all sin argues spiritual
and saving understanding. Psalm. 119. 104. Through thy Precepts I get
understanding, therefore I hate every false way. Sin ruins none but those that
love it. Those that hate it generally, implacably and to the death, shall never
dye and be destroyed by it. Certainly thou art sincere if thou hate thy lusts
that formerly were thy Lords, and if thou can truly cry with David; Psalm.
119. 133. Order my steps in thy Word and let no iniquity have the dominion over
me.

3. Those are in a State of Grace, who receive Jesus Christ the Son of God. To
reject Christ, binds all our guilt upon us, and fixes us under wrath, and it is
in effect to refuse Salvation. But to as many as receive him to them he gives
power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his name, Joh. 1.
12. If Christ be rightly and indeed received; he is received just as God offers
him, as a Prince to Rule, as well as a Savior from Wrath: to give Repentance,
as well as remission of Sins, Act. 5. 31. Christ must be received as an able
Savior, as a willing Savior, as the only Savior; and the whole of that
Salvation whereof he is the Author must be valued. When he is received, there
is a consent to cast all that offends him out of the heart to make room for
him: and truly all of Christ is welcome; His strictest commands, his mortifying
and sanctifying Spirit, his Yoke, his Burden, his Reproach, his Cross, are
welcome for his sake, as well as his Crown. If we do not sit down and count the
cost, and first of all well understand, and then fully agree to the Articles
and Terms on which Christ is to be received, we may easily deceive our selves.

4. Those are in a State of Grace, who desire after God above all, and yield
and give themselves unto the Lord. The Psalmist was a sincere Saint who said,
Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none on Earth that I desire
besides thee, i. e. none as my great help, as my chief happiness besides thee.
And notice is taken of the grace of God bestowed upon the Churches of
Macedonia, because they gave their own selves to the Lord, 2 Cor. 8. 5. If thy
eyes have been opened to see that God is a far greater good than the Creature,
and a greater good to thee; and thou desire and chusest the Lord himself who
is so gracious and alsufficient, as incomparably the best portion, and art as
willing to be his portion as to have him thine; this willingness shows thou art
of the number of his people, and that his powerful grace, has been at work in
thee. Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. God is
called the portion of Jacob, and Israel is styled the rod of his inheritance,
Jer. 10. 16. God and his people choose each other.

5. They are in a State of Grace, who hunger and thirst after righteousness.
Our Lord pronounces such blessed; and if he blesses them they shall be blessed,
and promises they shall be filled, Mat. 5. 6. Righteousness imputed, is, and
that with very good reason prized by Believers, and Righteousness inherent is
earnestly desired, they long to be made more holy; more holy in heart, more
holy in all manner of conversation: to have cleaner hands, hearts purer; they
groan earnestly to be sanctified throughout in Body, Soul, and Spirit, and to
be established unblameable in holiness to the end. Do thou vehemently desire
to be bettered by every mercy? To be refined more and more every time thou art
cast into the furnace of affliction? And to become more holy by every Ordinance
thou engagest in? This Sacra Fames, holy hunger is in thee, and thou art
blessed.

6. Those are in a State of Grace, who prize the Word of God at an high rate.
All that are born again desire as new born Babes the sincere milk of the Word
that they may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Hark to our Lord. Joh. 8. 47. He that
is of God hears Gods words, ye therefore hear them not because ye are not of
God. With good reason do gracious Souls value the Word of God, for it is the
incorruptible seed whereof they are born again: it is the Food whereby they are
nourished, it is the Physic whereby they are healed, it is the Cordial whereby
they are revived, it is the Weapon wherewith they defend themselves against
their spiritual Enemies; Finally it is the main Deed they have to show, for the
heavenly inheritance. If this Word of God be understood, believed and received
by thee, in the love of it; if thou desire to be cast into the mould of the
Word, and in all things to conform to it; if David's language be thine. Psalm.
119. 33, 34, 35. Teach me O Lord the way of thy Statutes, and I shall keep it
to the end. Give me understanding and I shall keep thy Law, yea, I shall
observe it with my whole heart. Make me to go in the path of thy commandments
for therein do I delight. This will argue that thou have a good and honest
heart indeed.

7. Those are in a state of grace, who have the Spirit of Prayer. The Apostle
Paul as soon as ever translated into this state, has this Character, Behold he
prays, Act. 9. 11. it is more than probable, he had spoken the words of prayer
many a time before, while he was a zealous Son of the Jewish Church: but now he
prayed in Gods account, now he prayed in the holy Ghost. They that are
hypocrites may excel in the gift of Prayer, God may be much in their mouths,
and their expressions may be fluent and seemingly affectionate; when yet he is
far from their reins. But the Spirit of grace and supplication is peculiar to
the Saints. Now such as have the Spirit of prayer, their desires are drawn
forth with greatest strength and fervor after Spiritual and eternal blessings.
They entreat the favor of God and fellowship with him, with their whole heart:
they beg for the increase of Faith, Fear, and Love, and every other grace, and
that they may be filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus
Christ unto the glory and praise of God, and that being delivered from every
evil work, they may be preserved to his heavenly Kingdom. Thus the Spirit makes
intercession for them, according to the will of God. Romans 8. 26, 27.

8. They are in a state of Grace, who love the brethren. 1 John 3. 14. Hereby
we know we are passed from death to life, because we love the brethren. Now
right love to the brethren, is love with a pure heart, and a good conscience,
it is a fervent love; it is love to all the Saints, though but poor in the world,
though of a different persuasion. The image of God is loved wherever it is
found, and the more of it is found, it is looked upon as more lovely. It Is one
thing to love the Saints, because they are good natured, because they are
beautiful, because they are bountiful, because they are wise and discreet: and
it is another thing to love them because they are holy. And truly if the more
holy they are, the more we love them, and the more plainly they deal with us by
reprehension and advice in order unto our progress in sanctification and
holiness: the more and better we like them, this is a clear and solid evidence
of our being Saints our selves. Moreover, true Saints are of a public Spirit,
they are concerned for the whole Church Militant, and cry aloud that she may be
preserved in purity, unity, and love, and may more than conquer all enemies,
and come at last to be Triumphant.

9. They are in a state of Grace, who endure to the end, and are not weary of
welldoing. He that endures to the end shall be saved says Christ, and If ye
continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed, Joh. 8. 31. The sincerely
Righteous ones, not withstanding all difficulties, oppositions, trials,
tribulations, hold on their way, and they that have clean hands do wax stronger
and stronger. Job. 17. 9. They fight the good fight of Faith to the last
breath, and by patient continuance in well-doing they seek for glory, honor,
and immortality, and at last lay hold on eternal life. Romans 2. 7.

Thus you have the Touchstone of the Word to prove your selves by. And what
this Word binds on earth, is bound in heaven; what this Word looses on earth,
is loosed in heaven. If you continue in a state which this Word pronounces bad,
you will certainly be condemned; but if your state be such as this Word
declares good, you will as certainly be acquitted, rewarded, and crowned at the
great approaching Day.

In the sixth place, I am to inform you of the special seasons, when this duty
of selfproving is to be performed, and the seasons are these.

1. We ought to prove our selves, before we engage in the ordinance of the
Lords Supper. There must be a Spiritual life, or else there cannot be a fitness
to be a guest at the Lords Table. A dead Corpse set at a Feast, would be a
frightful Spectacle to all there, neither could a dead body eat any of the
dainties prepared. He that is dead in trespasses and sins, is not a worthy
Communicant, for he wants the grace of Faith, which is as the eye to discern,
the hand to receive, and the mouth to eat the Lord Jesus, who is the bread of
life. The Lords Supper is not an Ordinance designed to work the first grace,
for if 'twere, then none ought to be excluded; the greatest Sinners are to be
admitted to converting Ordinances: and there would be no such thing as
Excommunication in the Church of Christ. But the design of it is to increase,
and strengthen, and make more and more evident that grace which is already
wrought. Therefore we must prove what we are before we engage. 1 Cor. 11. 28,
29. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink
of that cup. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
judgment to himself, not discerning the Lords body.

We ought to prove our Spiritual state, and examine our proficiency, and eye
the present frame of our hearts. And though upon trial we cannot absolutely say
we have grace, yet if there be no black and apparent marks of unregeneracy, and
only probable signs of our being sanctified, yet we ought to come to the Table,
that our Faith may be strengthened, the work of sanctification carried on, and
our selves in that sealing Ordinance, sealed unto the day of redemption. Are we
willing that every sin should die? Are we willing that the world should be
thrown out of the highest room in our hearts? Are we willing to receive Christ,
and all the benefits he gives forth in this Ordinance? Are we willing to resign
and render our souls, and all that is within us; even our whole man to him? If
we can answer in the affirmative to all; upon our coming to the Table we shall
be made welcome; whatever an unbelieving heart may fear and suggest to the
contrary.

2. We ought to prove our selves before solemn prayer and humiliation. In
solemn supplication Solomon speaks of it as necessary, that every one should
understand the plague of his own heart, when he spreads forth his hands toward
the house of God, 1 King. 8. 38. Now the heart must be examined what it ayls,
that the plague of it may be found out. The Priest under the law was to look
again and again upon the person suspected of leprosy. The plagues of the heart
lie deep many times, and are not easily discerned, there must be the more
heedful examination. And as we are to find out the plagues of our hearts, so
all our wants and weaknesses: and all are to be spread before the God of all
grace, who can, because most high, perform all things for us, and cure every
malady, and supply all our needs according to his riches in glory by Christ
Jesus.

3. We ought to prove our selves after falls, though believers shall never fall
from a state of grace, yet they may fall into several acts of sin. And when
their falls are more foul and scandalous; their peace is broken: The holy
Spirit their Comforter being grieved, their comfort and joy takes wings and
flies away. The guilt they contract fills them with fear, and brings them under
great bondage, their evidences are blotted, and their state seemsto be very
questionable. Now therefore it concerns them to prove themselves, that they may
find out the lurking corruption that betrayed them: and that they may be
sensible of the heinous nature, and high aggravations of the sins they have
committed: that being truly humbled they may cry with fervency for pardon and
cleansing, and that the joy of Gods salvation may be restored.

David after he had defiled Bathsheba the Wife, and murdered Vriah the Husband:
he renews the Search into himself, he traces these filthy streams till he came
to the fountain, the original corruption of his nature; he is sensible what an
impure and deceitful heart he had, and therefore cries out, Create in me a
clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Psalm. 51. 10. he found
that his fall had filled him with anguish, and very much enfeebled him;
therefore he prays; Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me
with thy free Spirit. v. 12. His sin stared him in the face, and he begs that
God would hide his face from it, and withal he offers the acceptable sacrifice
of a broken and contrite heart to him.

4. We ought to prove our selves in the time of Spiritual desertion. When God
had withdrawn from the Psalmist, and so far withdrawn, as that he almost
questioned whether ever he would return again; and therefore cries out, Will
the Lord cast off for ever, and will he be favorable no more? then he communed
with his own heart, and his Spirit made diligent search. Psalm. 77. 6, 7. David
enquires, why his God had forsaken him, and why he was so far from helping him,
and from the words of his roaring. Psalm. 22. 1. and Job under desertion cries
out, why have thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my
self? Job. 7. 20.

Spiritual desertions are very uncomfortable, these are the hours wherein the
powers of darkness buffet believers, and unbelief, and deadness, and
corruptions prevail. Saints therefore should question themselves severely, what
they have been, and done, which has grieved and quenched the Blessed Spirit,
that they may lament their sin, and loss; and lament after God: they are also
to reflect upon former experiences of special kindness, and call to remembrance
their Songs in the night, and the years of the right hand of the Most High: and
the consideration of Gods unchangeable love, and his sure and everlasting
Covenant, should keep them from sinking into despondency. Finally they are to
observe the design of God in withdrawing, and be the more humble, distrustful
of themselves, depending on their beloved Lord, and the more thankful and
fruitful prizing the presence of God the more highly ever after.

5. We ought to prove our selves in the time of affliction. So says the
Prophet, Lam. 3. 39, 40. Wherefore does a living man complain a man for the
punishment of his sins? Let us search and try our ways and turn unto the Lord
our God. Conscience is many times awakened by affliction; we should not hinder
it from being busy and prying, but hearken to it whatever it speaks to us.
Joseph's Brethren made light of their cruelty toward their Brother for many
years together. But when they were in distress in Egypt, then they looked into
themselves, and they had a smart and stinging sense of their own
unmercifulness; and they cry out, We are verily guilty concerning our Brother.
Affliction should cause us to consider our ways, and though sins were palliated
and excused before, yet then we should acknowledge, we are verily guilty. When
our sin has found us out, we should find that out: and our Souls should be
humbled within us, and turn to him that smites us.

6. We ought to prove our selves after our engaging in Ordinances. It Is good to
examine before, what we want; and after, what we have gained. Ordinances are
Talents and a vast improvement may be made of them, if we are not wanting to
our own interest. Merchants that drive a Trade beyond the Seas when the Ships
return, they are careful to examine, what is the produce of the ventures they
send. So should we in this Spiritual Trade, we should ask our selves, what we
have gained? And what is the produce of all our praying, hearing, fasting,
praising? Whether we are such wise Merchants as to gain the Pearl of price?
Whether we thrive in grace, and grow rich in faith, rich in good works, for
this is to grow rich toward God? And truly all the Silver and Gold that ever
was created is but dross in comparison of these riches. To go to Ordinances and
from them, as the Door turns upon the Hinges, and to remain just as we were:
will turn to no account, nay to an ill account. We are not to rest therefore in
opere operato, the work done; but examine what light, what heat, what strength,
what grace, what peace we gain by attending upon God: or else we may live and
dye like lukewarm and mistaken Laodicea: who said she was rich and increased
with Goods, and had need of nothing: and knew not that she was wretched and
miserable and poor and blind and naked, Rev. 3. 17.

7. It Is not amiss if there be some Selfproving every day; that keeping of the
heart with all diligence, Prove. 4. 23. implies a daily watching and calling it
to an account; and that pondering the path of our feet required, verse. 26.
implies both wariness before, and a tracing our Steps afterward to see whether
they have been right or wrong, step toward God or from him. Pythagoras an
Heathen, advises, every night to ask our selves such Questions as these;

(...);
(...),
(...).
Where have I sinned? What have I done?
What duty have I let alone?
Thus bad and good deeds every night,
Will be thy chiding or delight.
In the seventh place, I come to the Arguments, persuading all to this
examination and proving of themselves.

1. Satan is very subtle, he does endeavor to conceal and hide both Sin and
Grace; Sin in the wicked that they may not perceive the evil nature and
tendency of it, till it has actually and utterly ruined them; and Grace in them
that do believe, that their hearts may be tormented with doubts and fears, and
straightened in thanksgiving unto God. Satan is a lying Spirit, and upholds his
Kingdom by deceit and falsehood; His work is to fill Gods Children with false
fears, and his own with false hopes: and he has many wiles and stratagems to do
both; It Is good therefore to be aware of him, and to be the stricter in
searching of our selves that he may not impose upon us nor make us call evil
good and good evil. Let us take great heed, for Satan is the Accuser of the
Brethren, Rev. 12. 10. and will accuse them to themselves as well as accuse
them before God: he will transform a true Saint and make him look in his own
apprehension like a mere reprobate. And as he is the Accuser of the Brethren,
so he is the Excuser of the wicked, and makes them say they shall have peace
till the anger of the Lord and his jealousy smokes against them, and eternal
Vengeance overtakes them.

2. The heart is deceitful above all things, Jer. 17. 9. as it is unknown to
others, so it hides it self from the view of the man himself: Need there is
then of Self-examination. The heart of man will represent Sin as profitable, as
pleasant, as creditable and in fashion, and that there is no such danger in the
commission of it, but that it is time enough hereafter, and easy enough to
repent and obtain a pardon. The heart will extenuate sin after it is done, and
take notice of the mercy of the Lord, but shut its eyes against his justice and
holiness; 'twill call any thing almost by the name of savinggrace, and from
very weak and insufficient premises, conclude the State is safe; Such cheats
therefore must be more narrowly eyed, and we must bring them to the
Heart-searcher that they may be discovered.

3. There is no Grace but has its counterfeit; When abundance of Brass and bad
Money is abroad, there is the greater care to try before we take. There is a
world of counterfeit Grace at this day. Many take themselves to be something
when they are nothing, and so deceive themselves: every one therefore should
prove his own work, that he may have rejoicing in himself alone and not in
another, Gal. 6. 3. 4. that is, that he may have not only the good word of
others, but the joyful approbation of his own Conscience, that his work is good
and wrought in God. There is a precious faith that ends in the salvation of the
Soul, and there is a counterfeit faith, that dures only for a while, and in
time of temptation fails. There is a saving knowledge, which is life eternal;
and there is a notional knowledge, which only puffs up him that has it, and
makes sorrow and stripes at last to be the more. There is a sincere love to
Christ that has a vehement flame which many Waters cannot quench, which no
Floods can drown: and there is a love which is only a painted Fire; a love in
word and show and not in heart and deed and truth. There is a Zeal which God is
mightily pleased with, as that Zeal in Phineas: and there is a Zeal not
according to knowledge. There is a true Humility, which makes us like to Christ
and gives the Soul rest; and there is a show of Wisdom and Humility to be found
even in the Synagogues of Satan and Antichrist. All grace therefore, whether in
pretense or true, must be tried by the Word, which if rightly applied, is
infallible in its decision.

4. Many do actually go out of the World mistaken in themselves, surely then we
should be serious in Self-trial. The foolish Virgins because their Lamps were
burning and neatly trimmed, that is, they professed and talked high, and made a
glistering show: came with full expectation of admission into the Kingdom.
Therefore with confidence they knock and with confidence they speak; Lord,
Lord, open unto us, Mat. 25. 11. But the answer is, I know you not; The Door
contrary to their expectation is shut for ever against them, and they are
sentenced to burn too in Hell: though their Lamps on Earth did burn and blaze
in a glorious profession of Religion. Some are brought in pleading with the
Lord Jesus, when He says, He knew them not; We have eat and drank in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our Streets, Luke 13. 26. As if they should
say, Lord! it is very strange thou should not know us, None more flocked after
thee than we did: none were more forward to hear thy Word; we were Guests at
thy Table many a time; and yet do thou not know us? Hear their pleas, see
their confidence of being let in: and yet behold them thrust out unto Eternity.

5. Hypocrites may go very far and yet remain but Hypocrites and miscarry;
Therefore we should examine and see that we go farther. An Hypocrite may have a
name that he is alive: he may bend his Knee and lift up his Eye, and speak as
it were with the tongue of an Angel: he may pray and prophecy so as to gain
man's approbation; but yet that which is highly esteemed among men is
abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16. 15. How far did the Apostle Paul go
before his Conversion, he was of the straitest Sect, and touching the
righteousness of the Law blameless: and yet though his life was without blame,
his heart was without grace. Hypocrites how far soever they go, do either allow
themselves in sin, or place a confidence in their own righteousness. If we
would therefore go beyond them, we must grieve for all sin and hate it; We must
worship God in the Spirit and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
in the Flesh, Phil. 3. 3.

6. To be unwilling to Try and Prove our selves is a very bad symptom. The
decayed Tradesman cares not to be at home for fear of being dunn'd by his
Creditors; neither does he like to look into his Books because he suspects that
he owes more than he is worth: So unsound Professors like not to dwell with
themselves for fear Conscience should fill their Ears with a dreadful sound,
and reproach them with their offenses; and they are loath to study the volume
of their own hearts because they suspect they shall find little but what is
stark naught there. Sin is a work of darkness where the light is feared and
shunned, it is a sign that sin bears sway, and where it reigns it will ruin.
Joh. 3. 19. This is the condemnation that light is come into the World, and men
love darkness rather than light because their deeds are evil.

7. Though it be very bad with us, yet it is really good to know the very worst
of our selves. Hardness of heart and unsensibleness of sin is a very great
plague, the infliction of which argues God to be very angry: but conviction of
sin is the work of Gods Spirit. When the Comforter is come he shall convince
the World of Sin, Joh. 16. 8. Indeed if a bad condition were unchangeable, and
there were no difference between an unregenerate Sinner and an Apostate Angel,
'twere another matter. But the truth is, though our state and hearts are both
bad, yet both may be altered for the better. And if we are sensible that we are
under the power of darkness, we shall be the more importunate that God would
deliver us, and translate us into the Kingdom of his dear Son. If we perceive
that our hearts are old and evil, 'twill make us to cry with more fervency,
that the Lord would give us the new heart and the new spirit promised in his
new Covenant.

8. There may be great disconsolateness where there is truth of grace, if it be
unknown. The children of light may walk in darkness; the heirs of salvation may
complain, as if they were near lost: and the friends and favorites of Heaven,
may think and speak as if God accounted them his Enemies. Hark unto Heman:
Psalm. 88. 7. Thy wrath lies hard upon me, and thou bast afflicted me with all
thy waves. And verse. 15. 16. Thy fierce wrath goes over me, and while I suffer
thy terrors I am distracted. Believers being made alive, are also endued with
Spiritual Sense, and cannot be indifferent as to Gods love and hatred as others
are; If they have not some assurance of the one, they cannot but have some
dread of the other: they should therefore prove themselves, that they may know
the love that God has to them, and that they may joy in God through Jesus
Christ, by whom they have received the atonement, Romans 5. 11.

9. There is a day of Trial and Judgment appointed, and very near at hand. God
has appointed a day in which he will judge the World in Righteousness, Act. 17.
31. and truly the Judge stands before the Door, Jam. 5. 9. The coming of the
Lord draws nigh. And if we cannot abide the Trial of our own Consciences now,
how shall we abide the Trial of him who is greater than our Consciences and
knows all things? It concerns us to call our selves to a severe account, and
believe in Jesus that we may be justified, and then at that day we shall not be
condemned. Let us watch and work, that our Lord when he comes, may find us so
doing. Let us store up Scripture evidences that we are his Children, and then
we shall have boldness in the day of Judgment, and not be ashamed before him at
his coming. Gods Judgment hereafter will be according to truth: names and shows
how insignificant will they be at the great day. Therefore let us look to it
that our graces be true, that as such they may be found and owned at last.

10. A well grounded assurance is possible to be obtained. Let us never give
over Trying our selves till we have it. We are commanded to give all diligence
to make our calling, and by our calling, our Election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. We
must not cast away our confidence, when once we have gotten it, but hold the
beginning of it firm unto the end. Assurance of the love of God, of what value
is it? What a relish does it give to every Mercy! What sweetness does it put
into the bitterest Cup of Affliction! How undaunted does it make us at the
approach of the last Enemy! And with what courage and confidence to commend our
departing Souls into the hands of him that has redeemed them.

Before I come to the Application, I am to resolve several Cases of Conscience
concerning the Subject I am upon. Now the Cases will be of two sorts, some
relate to Sir and a State of Nature; and others relate unto a State of Grace.

I begin with those Cases relating to Sin and a State of Nature.

Case 1. And the first is this; Is it not better for Sinners to continue
ignorant of themselves than by an overstrict search to fill their souls with
trouble and horror? Is it not a wiser part to keep themselves quiet while they
are so, than to raise a storm and tempest that may not be laid in have? Now
they receive their good things, now they receive their consolations; now they
can take their ease, eat, drink and be merry: they can feast and laugh and
sing, and time runs very swift being spent in carnal jollity. Why then should
they look into the state of their Souls, and put an end to all their peace and
joy and comfort?

Ans. 1. Sinners ignorance of themselves and the wretched condition they are
in, does but add to their misery: Secure indeed they are in a sense, but
farther off from safety. It was the misery of Ephraim, that Strangers had
devoured his strength and gray hairs were here and there upon him, and yet he
knew it not, Hos. 7. 9. Self-ignorance and carnal security makes the hearts of
the Sons of Men fully set in them to do evil, and causes their state to be
nearer a kin to desperate. Such will fearlesly add Sin to Sin, and draw
iniquity with cords of vanity, and treasure up more and more wrath unto
themselves against the day of wrath.

2. Their peace and joy can be but short at longest. Pleasures for evermore can
be found alone in Gods Prefence: The pleasures of sin and sense are but for a
season. Job. 20. 5, 8. Know thou not this of old, since man was placed upon
Earth, that the triumphing of the Wicked is short, and the joy of the Hypocrite
but for a moment? Though his excellency mount up to the Heavens, and his head
reaches to the Clouds; yet he shall perish for ever like his own dung; they
which have seen him, shall say, Where is he? He shall fly away as a dream and
shall not be found; yea, he shall be chased away as a night vision.

3. Better their false peace which must quickly end, should be disturbed by
Self-trial, than that it should cease by their Trial at Gods Bar. The ungodly
cannot carry a false peace along with them into another World. The rich man in
the Gospel that fared sumptuously every day, carried none of his good things
with him when he died: his pleasure then came to a full stop; and we read of
nothing he met with but evil things, torments, flames, endless and
unquenchable, Luke 16. and then the rich man saw, it had been better before to
have broken off his sinful pleasure by Self-reflection and Repentance.

4. Though a false peace upon Self-examination be banished, yet there may a
true peace be obtained in the room of it. Be not unwilling to look into your
selves, though you find matter of sorrow; for godly sorrow works repentance
unto salvation; They that sow in tears shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126. 5. And
Christ pronounces the mourners blessed for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5. 4.

Case 2. The second Case is this; Is it not time enough hereafter for Sinners
to search and look into themselves? Then when prosperity and youth are gone,
and affliction and old age are come? What necessity is there to put themselves
upon the rack presently?

Ans. 1. The longer they defer, the more afraid they will be to begin, and so
it may never be done in this World: especially considering, that delay will
make the work more difficult and grievous. The larger the scores are, the more
loath they will be to look them over; and the more peccant and wicked the heart
has been, the more unwilling it will be to be called to account: therefore it is
best to begin this very instant, and 'twould have been better to have begun
before.

2. Sin is so great an evil that none can be too soon convinced of it, nor too
soon converted from it: as on the other hand, Grace is so excellent that we can
never be too early enriched with it; and assurance of the love of God so
desirable and delightful, that it can never be too soon obtained. Why should
there be a delay in the search after Sin? This Enemy should speedily be
inquired after; since if let alone, it may ruin us suddenly before we are
aware.

3. If Sinners refuse to mind the Lord and themselves in the time of youth and
prosperity, God may refuse to have any regard to them in the time of their
distress. Now is the accepted time, now they may seek the Lord and search
themselves to good purpose, but whether the time of affliction may be an
accepted time or no, is questionable. The Lord threatens to laugh at the
calamity of some and to mack when their fear comes, and that he will not be
found of them, Prove. 1. 26, 28. They that refused to hearken, and stopped their
Ears and made their hearts like an Adamant Stone, see what came to pass at
last, great wrath came upon them, they were scattered with a whirlwind; and as
he cried, and they would not hear, so they cried, and I would not hear, says
the Lord of Hosts, Zach. 7. 13.

4. Why should such a short lived creature as Man delay to examine himself?
What is his life? It Is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then
vanishes away, Jam. 4. 14. How quickly may Death arrest him, and summon him
before the Lords Tribunal? Some are well in one hour, sick the next and dead
the third; nay, some are well and sick and dead the same hour, if not the same
minute. Defer not then to look into thy state and heart speedily, since upon
the sudden it may be said to thee. Render an account of thy Stewardship for
thou shall be no longer Steward, Luke 16. 2.

Case 3. The third Case follows, which is this; How shall Sinners that all
their days have been careless of, and utter Strangers to themselves manage this
business of Self-examination?

Ans. 1. Let them get alone; not to be speculatively wanton, or project for the
World, or to please themselves with vain and proud and towering imaginations;
but that they may seriously bethink themselves what is likely to become of them
for ever. Let them get out of the crowd and hurry of worldly business, and
shake off carnal company and be at leisure to understand their Souls condition.
Certainly a Soul that is of greater value than all the World is worth minding,
is worth saving.

2. Let the thoughts of God and of Eternity make them serious, especially
considering how much God has been provoked, and how near they may be unto
Eternity. Time is posting away from them, and Death is making great haste
toward them: and immediately after Death, they enter upon Eternal state, and
how sad will it be if it be a state of eternal woe.

3. Let them cry unto God for his Convincing Spirit. When the Spirit is given,
(and truly the Lord is ready to give his Spirit unto all that ask him) he does
discover that in Sin that before was not perceived: he makes Hell to become
naked, and takes off that covering that was upon destruction; He holds before
Sinners the Glass of Gods holy Law, that in that Glass they may behold their
hearts and lives; shows unto them that the characters of Gods Enemies agree to
them, and that their spot is not the spot of his Children, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. Then
Sin will revive and Sinners die; that is, become sensible they are the sons of
death and wrath and in great danger of Eternal ruin. Now they are to hold up
their hands and cry, Guilty, Guilty, and to lament and bemoan themselves as
Ephraim did, to see themselves in such a lost condition.

4. Let them be very inquisitive what they shall do that they might be saved.
Thus were those Jews that were pricked at the heart, Act. 2. and thus was the
trembling Jaylour, Act. 16. A lost estate being perceived is not to be rested
in; none ought to be contented to be damned, but they must inquire what they
must do to escape the wrath to come, and they must give themselves to prayer in
good earnest, and use the other means of grace: and the sense of their sin and
misery should make them the more servent in crying for that mercy and grace
which they so highly stand in need of.

Case 4. The fourth Case this; When Sinners upon Self-trial have found out the
badness of their State, is there any reason they should despair of mercy?

Ans. 1. Despair is one of the greatest sins that can be committed,
dishonouring the grace of God, making light of the blood of Christ, and very
opposite to the Spitit of Grace. It is good, says the Prophet, that a man
should hope, Lam. 3. 26. Surely, then it is bad that a man should despair. This
sin thwarts the very design of the Gospel. And Satan being hopeless himself,
would fain hinder sensible Sinners from hoping, though he cherishes vain hopes
in such as are presumptuous.

2. There is a despair that is a Duty; that is a despair of help from self: and
a despair of help from God, if there be a resolution to continue in Sin. Thou
may as well hope to get no harm by the fall in throwing thy self off from
the top of Londons Monument. Thou may as well cast thy self into the Fire,
and hope not to be burnt, as go on still in thy Sins and hope to escape
everlasting Flames.

3. But yet the door of hope is really open to the greatest Sinners, that are
willing to return to God and become Saints. Blasphemous persecuting Saul was
let in at this door. And 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. you read of a sad Crew, that if
Hell were to be raked, worse could hardly be found. Fornicators, Idolaters,
Adulterers, effeminate abusers of themselves with Mankind, Thieves, Covetous,
Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners, and yet these were washed and sanctified and
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus and by the spirit of our God. Such
instances of the rich and free grace of God, should hinder the worst from
despairing when they come to themselves, and are minded to come home to the
Lord.

4. That conviction of sin and misery which sensible Souls have, is the common
road to Christ and grace and comfort. He gives rest to the weary and heavy
laden, he gives liberty to the captives, and binds up the broken hearted, Mat.
11. 28. Luke 4. 18. When Sinners are brought to the brink of Hell in their own
apprehension, this is an hopeful sign, they shall be delivered from that place
of woe and sorrow, and that they shall not feel what they fear.

Case 5. The fifth Case is this; What course must Sinners take after they have
proved themselves, and found how bad they are, to be brought into a better and
safe Estate?

Ans. 1. They must not oppose conviction: but be willing, nay, earnestly
desirous that it may be through, that their humiliation may be the deeper; they
must not only be sensible that their actions have been bad, but that their
hearts are a great deal worse: that their very nature is corrupted, and their
state most miserable. Slight convictions soon wear off, and a little sense of
Sin is followed only with such goodness that is as the morning cloud, and as
the early dew it goes away, Hos. 6. 4. The deeper the humiliation, commonly
the stricter the holiness afterward. Piscator ictus sapit, the burnt Child
dreads the Fire. And he that has tasted the Wormwood and the Gall that is in
Sin, will be the more alienated from it, and afraid of contracting new guilt
and defilement. Let not the pangs of contrition go off too soon, for fear there
be an abortive instead of the new birth: the more you are burdened with Sin,
the more sincere Conversion will be, and Christ is the readier to give you rest.

2. They must consent to cast away every transgression, and cease to be the
companions of Transgressors. Let not any Sin be kept, and rolled as a swee
morsel under the Tongue, for 'twill prove as bitter and deadly as the very gall
of Asps at last. That promise, Iniquity shall not be your ruin, is annexed to
a command; Cast away from you all your transgressions, Ezekiel. 18. 30, 31. The
wicked man is required to forsake his way, which intimates the reformation of
his life, and also to forsake his thoughts: which shows his very heart must be
renewed, else there cannot be a returning unto God indeed, nor mercy and pardon
obtained, Esa. 55. 7. It is reported concerning Agrippina the Mother of Nero
Caesar, that it was foretold her, That her Son should be Emperor of Rome, but
afterward kill his own Mother. She said, Occidat modo imperet, Let him kill me
so he may but Reign. Oh let not any Sinner say so concerning any gainful,
delightful darling Sin. Let it damn me so it may but Reign. Let me die by it,
so I may but live in it. And as sinful courses must be abandoned, so also
sinful company. Save your selves from an untoward generation, Act. 2. 40. was
the advice of Peter to those awakned Souls that asked him, what they should do.
If you would turn to God and go to Heaven, you must leave that company that are
resolved to go on in Sin, and unto Hell.

3. They must attend upon prophecy and beg that the Spirit would accompany it.
The Word of God is the incorruptible seed, of which Sinners are born again, 1
Pet. 1. 23. and the Word is made effectual by the Spirit. It Is a very
encouraging asseveration of Christ. Joh. 5. 25. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God and live. A mere man might have cried long enough and to no purpose at
Lazarus his grave. But when our Lord says, Lazarus come forth, there went out a
power along with his word that raised him. Let Sinners attend upon the Word of
Christ. Christ himself may speak to them, as well as man, and then the Spirit
of Life will enter into them; and the dead in sin shall live.

4. They must look unto Jesus for righteousness and strength, Esa. 45. 24. The
righteousness of Christ is necessary unto Sinners reconciliation, therefore God
does not impute their own sins to them upon their believing in Christ, because
he does impute the righteousness of his Son: That Is a notable place, Romans 4. 6.
Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man to whom the Lord
imputes righteousness without works. Here is an imputed righteousness, and
lest any should think it a putative or imaginary righteousness, it is called a
righteousness of the Lords own imputing: Further, it is a righteousness that
does not consist in any works or obedience of ours. Finally, this Doctrine of
the imputed righteousness of Christ is asserted by David under the Old
Testament, as by Paul under the New. In Sinners Approach unto God, this
righteousness is to be relied on for pardon and justification. And as his
Righteousness is necessary unto Reconciliation, so is his strength and the
power of his Spirit unto Conversion. None will be made free from the power of
Sin and Satan, none will be delivered from the power of darkness, till the Son
of God does make them free indeed, and translate them into his own Kingdom.

5. They must cry unto God to be thoroughly turned: So did Ephraim, Jer. 31. 18.
Turn thou me and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God. Ephraim had
the seal of the Covenant administered to him in infancy, which was Circumcision;
and therefore he calls the Lord his God, and has the greater encouragement to
cry to him to circumcise and turn his heart unto himself. And surely under the
New Testament the Covenant is not made more narrow, nor our arguments and
encouragements fewer to plead for converting grace. Let Sinners therefore beg,
that as they have been baptized with Water in the Lords name, so they may be
justified by the blood of Christ, sanctified by his Spirit, and effectually
turned unto God. Till the Lord does turn you, you must needs remain
unconverted. And when once you are made earnest that you may be sincere
Converts, you are earnest for that which is most agreeable to the will of God,
and it is a sign that the work is already begun. There could never be strong
desires to be turned, if the heart were not in some degree turned to desire it.
Case 6. The sixth Case is this; How far may Sinners go and yet fall short of
Grace and Heaven? This is of great concernment to be fully resolved, that we
may not be mistaken in our selves, therefore I shall be the larger upon it.
Many with Agrippa are almost persuaded to be Christians, that are not
Christians altogegether; Many with him in the Gospel are not far from the
Kingdom of Heaven, who yet never come thither: the case such is sad, for they
are miserable after they were near to happiness: they are like a Merchant that
is Shipwrackt, and loses all, and himself too, within sight of shore: they sail
as it were by Heaven to Hell, and their being once so near Heaven, will make
Hell the more doleful and intolerable. Now how far Sinners may go, and yet
still remain but in a State of Nature, I shall show in these particulars.

1. They that have no true grace may own and acknowledge the Christian Faith to
be true. It Is affirmed of Simon Magus, that he believed, Act. 8. 13. The
miracles that were wrought by Philip for the confirmation of the Gospel gained
his assent, that it was the Gospel of God and of undoubted truth. In like
manner Nicodemus while a Stranger to Regeneration was convinced, and did
confess that Christ was a Teacher sent from God, Joh. 3. 1, 2. Now as I go
along, I shall show wherein such as have no grace do fail, that the unsound may
be convinced of their hypocrisy, and the truly gracious may be the better
able to discern their sincerity. Though the forementioned persons believe the
truth of the Gospel, they do not apply it to themselves, nor heartily embrace
the goodness of the Gospel, but prefer their lusts, their pleasures and their
profits, before Gods Kingdom; their assent is weak and does not influence their
Consciences affections and conversations, and so proves ineffectual to
Salvation. Jam. 2. 14. What does it profit if a man say he has Faith and have
not Works? Can Faith save him? And v. 26. As the Body without the Spitit is
dead, so Faith without Works is dead also.

2. They that have no grace may solemnly be admitted into the visible Church:
Simon the Sorcerer was baptized, and yet Peter tells him afterward, that he
was in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity, Act. 8. 13, 23.
Multitudes of the Jews of old were circumcised in their flesh, whose hearts
were never circumcised. Jer. 9. 25, 26. Behold the days come, says the Lord,
that I will punish all them that are circumcised with the uncircumcised; Egypt
and Judah and Edom, and the Children of Ammon, and Moab: for all these Nations
are uncircumcised: and all the House of Israel are uncircumcised in their
hearts. How many by Baptism are admitted into the Church of Christ, and rest
herein, not caring to partake of the Blood of Christ, and least of all to
partake of the Spirit of Grace and Holiness which are signified by the Water in
that institution. What did it profit the Jews that they were circumcised in
their flesh, if after they did not answer their infant Cirumcision, by a
circumcised ear and heart, and an holy and obedient Conversation? And in like
manner, what will the being baptized with Water avail, if the filthiness of Sin
be not purged, but loved, and there be not an answer afterward of a good
Conscience toward God? 1 Pet. 3. 21.

3. They that have no true grace, may be forward in profession: and by talking
at an high rate, attain unto some reputation for Godliness; thus Sardis had a
name and fame that she lived, and yet was dead, Rev. 3. 1. But these forward
Professors when unsound, drive on some carnal design, as the ravenous Birds
when they soar never so much alo^at, have their eyes downward, and are looking
after something that they may prey upon. Under all their profession, their
hearts they neglect, and suffer them to be full of pride and passion and love
of the World: they have no desire after inward purity, and besides they
wilfully and woefully fail many times in their dealings with men, and in regard
of those duties which in their capacities and relations are incumbent upon them.

4. They that have no true grace, may engage in all the public Ordinances that
Christ has instituted: they may pray and hear, and be admitted unto Communion
and Churchfellowship, and yet not be the real Members of Christ, and be shut
out of the Kingdom. Those persons had eat and drank in our Lords presence, and
had heard him teaching many a time, unto whom he speaks after this terrible
manner. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth when ye shall see Abraham
and Isaac and Jacob and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of Heaven, and you your
selves thrust out, Luke 13. 26, 28. These hypocritical engagers in Ordinances,
seek not the Lord himself in his Ordinances; His favor, and the communications
of his sanctifying Spirit they prize not, they desire not: and though
Ordinances leave them as proud, and wanton, and unbelieving, and
earthly-minded, as they found them; they are unconcerned; for to have better
hearts than they had, is not any piece of their design. 5. They that have no
true grace, may attain to a great measure of notional knowledge. That Servant
who was beaten with many stripes did know the will of his Master, Luke 12. 47.
We all have knowledge, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8. 1. unsound as well as
sincere. An Hypocrite may have great light in his understanding, but that light
makes him high-minded, his knowledge is without affection to Spiritual things,
his head is very clear, but his heart is very cold. He is acquainted with the
truth, but he holds it in unrighteousness. Is it not a sad sight to see
Children that have the Rickets, with great Heads, but Arms weak and unable to
do any thing, and Legs small and feeble and unable to go? Here is the Emblem of
one that knows the Word of God, but neither loves nor obeys it. A great head he
has, but his actions and steps bear no proportion to to the knowledge he has
received.

6. They that have no true grace, may attain unto excellent gifts. Judas and
Demas were both Preachers of the Gospel, and called upon others to turn to God,
and yet were not real Converts themselves. Our Lord tells us, that many will
say to him in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? And yet
they shall be bid to depart from him, Mat. 7. 22, 23. Many Ministers miscarry.
Many fall into Hell from under the Pulpit, and our of the Pulpit; they are able
to preach to others, and yet themselves are castaways. These unsound ones aim
at their own applause in the exercise of their gifts, they hunt after honor,
they prefer gifts before grace, and many times use their gifts amiss, to divide
and destroy, and not to edfie the Church of Christ.

7. They that have no true grace, may have their Consciences exceedingly
awakened, and may be filled with the terrors of the Lord because of Sin. Pashur
had the name of Magormissabib because of those terrors where with he was
surrounded. Oh what an agony was Judas in when he saw that Christ was indeed
condemned: and under these terrors there may be a confession of Sin; I have
sinned, says Judas, in that I have betrayed innocent blood. I have sinned
against the Lord and against you, says Pharaoh to Moses. But it is to be
observed, concerning them that are unsound, that their troubles do either drive
them to carnal means to remove them, or to desperate courses: or if they do
seek unto God, it is but for a while, and they are glad when their trouble is
gone, that they may sin with greater freedom. When he slew them, then they
sought him, they returned and enquired early after God, but yet their heart was
not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant, Psalm. 78. 34-38.

8. They that have no true grace, may have some inclination toward, and wishes
after grace and holiness. Agrippa his heart was somewhat inclined toward
Christianity. The young man in the Gospel had done something, and was inclined
to do more good that he might inherit Eternal Life, Mat. 19. 16. But these
wishes as they are weak and inconstant, so they are inconsiderate. When they
hear that holiness is necessary to happiness, they say, Oh that we might be
holy! But when they understand, that holiness is to hate every pleasing and
gainful sin to keep unspotted from the World, and to yield up their whole man
unto God that he may dwell and rule in them, and command all, and make what use
he pleases of them in his service to his glory, then their ignorant, and lazy
wishes to be holy, cool and vanish. They are not for present and through
Sanctification: If they could have grace upon a Deathbed, just sufficient to
keep them out of Hell, they look upon that as the best time of having it: which
shows they are of Balaams mind, and that they desire not to live the life, but
only to die the death of the Righteous. 9. They that have no true grace, may
resolve upon a reformation, nay, actually reform in many things. The Israelites
of old, when terrified by the voice of the Lord out of the midst of the Fire,
they speak thus to Moses, Deuteronomy. 5. 27. Go thou near and hear all that the Lord
our God shall say, and speak unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto
thee, and we will hear it and do it. Here was a good resolutin, but when the
Lord adds v. 29. Oh that there were an heart in them to fear me and keep all my
Commandments always, that it might be well with them forever! It shows how
unlikely 'twas to be kept. Such resolutions are made in distress and fear, to
stop the mouth of a clamorous Conscience, and in their own strength; and when
the distress is over, they break them as quickly and easily as Sampsons bands
were snapt asunder. And suppose there be an actual reformation, as in Herod who
heard John, and observed him, and did many things, Mar. 6. 20. Yet the
obedience is but partial, there is not a following the Lord and his Word fully.
Herod forsook several of his iniquities, but his incestuous love to Herodias
his Brother Philips Wife, he could not endure to be told of, rather than pluck
out this right eye, he cuts off the Head of the Baptist, who told him 'twas
unlawful for him to have her. 10. They that have no true grace, may not only
lead an unblameable life, but may suffer much upon the account of Religion. The
lives of the Pharisees were free from scandalous and notorious Crimes, and yet
their righteousness was insufficient, according to our Lords sentence. Nay, as
external active obedience may be yielded, by them that are graceless in heart,
so some passive obedience also. Judas was one of those twelve that forsook all
and followed Christ, but it is likely 'twas in hope of a greater gain, for he
kept the Bag and bare what was put therein: and probably thought he should be a
great man in the Kingdom of Messiah, which he deemed a Temporal Kingdom.
Unsound ones are acted by vain glory in their sufferings, not influenced by
love to Christ and Truth; And though they give their Bodies to be burned, and
have not this love, what does it profit them? 1 Cor. 13. 3. Some may undergo
much, but it is to promote a Party not Christianity, and though very stiff and
stubborn in their sufferings, yet much of the express Word of God they cast
behind their backs.

11. They that have no true grace, may yet be very zealous in defending the
Truths of the Gospel. I grant Conversion to an Opinion is many times taken and
mistaken for Conversion unto God, though that Opinion is erroneous; and such
Zealots for erroneous Opinions, care to talk of nothing else hardly: the most
warm and spiritual discourses are not savoury to them, they are apt to judge
all that are not of their way, though never so holy: but connive at Sin in
those that side with them, and while their heads are busy about their
Opinions, their spirits, hearts and lives are not looked after. But I go
farther, and affirm, that Graceless ones may espouse the quarrel of Truth and
stand up for the defense of the Gospel. The Apostle tells us of some that did
preach Christ not sincerely, not of good will, but even of envy and strife, yet
he rejoiced that Christ was preached, and the truth of the Gospel published and
maintained, Phil. 1. 15, 16, 18. Many may speak for that which is really truth,
and defend Tenants that are sound and Orthodox, but these Opinions are
entertained only as Opinions, they float in their heads but sink not down into
their hearts, neither do they care practically to improve them to the bettering
of their actions.

12. They who have no true grace, may arise so high as to have some kind of
joy: This joy was in the hearers compared unto the stony ground, Mat. 13. 20.
Ezekiels hearers flockt to him with rejoicing because of his most pleasant
utterance, and taking gifts wherewith God had enriched him: and it is very
likely that their attendance upon the Prophets Ministry did yield some quiet
to their Consciences which else would have been very troublesome, if the
Ordinances of God had been wholly neglected. Besides, the great and glorious
things of the Gospel, may cause some kind of joy at the hearing of them, as
other glad tidings do affect us, especially of some good that is possible to be
obtained. When the love of God in Christ is set forth, his abundant Grace, the
sureness of his Covenant, and the glorious and eternal rest which remains for
his People, the Hearers that are not savingly wrought on, may have some little
taste of the good Word of God, and of the powers of the World to come, as well
as be made partakers of the common gifts of the Holy Ghost: And all this may
cause some kind of joy. But their joy is without precedent sorrow for Sin; and
though the interest of the Flesh and World prevails, yet this joy remains: the
truth is, it has no solid foundation, no sanctifying effect, and will last but
for a moment.

To conclude this, since the confines of unregeneracy extend so far, since
there may be so much, where there is not saving grace: Oh pray that you may not
rest here. Be unsatisfied in the proving of your selves, till you find that you
outstrip all the Hypocrites that ever were. It Is necessary to exceed them, it is
not enough to equal them; but Oh how sad will it be to fall short of those who
fall short of the Heavenly Kingdom!

In the second place, I proceed unto those Cases that relate unto a State of
Grace, the resolution of which will be very helpful in the examination and
proving of your selves.

Case 1. The first Case is this; How shall we know when we are savingly
Enlightened? Those that are saved are made light in the Lord, the eyes of their
understandings are enlightened by the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, and yet
there is an illumination which Hypocrites have; How then shall saving
illumination be distinguished?

1. Where saving illumination is, the light is mavelous, 1 Pet. 2. 9. That ye
should show forth the praises of him who has called you out of darkness into
mavelous light. When God by a word of power says, Let there be light in a
dark mind, that light makes a mavelous discovery, and the Soul is filled with
wonder, for what was concealed is now manifested; and indeed the Apostle says,
Whatsoever does make manifest is light, Ephesians. 5. 13. He that is enlightened sees
his danger, and marvels, that before he should be so fearless and secure. He
sees the vanity and emptiness of the Creature, and marvels, that he should so
idolize and dote upon it. He sees the sinfuless of sin, and marvels, that he
should be so eager to serve it, and love that which is so abominable and
hateful. He sees the Lords al-sufficiency, and marvels, that he could live so
long without Christ and without God in the World, and for so doing, calls
himself foolish and ignorant, and a beast before him. And that the scales
should at last be made to fall off from his eyes, that he might know the things
of his peace, this is mavelous kindness and grace indeed.

2. Saving illumination humbles. Job says, Mine eye sees thee, wherefore I
abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes, Job. 42. 5, 6. To know and be
proud, is not to know as we ought to know. He that understands God and himself
aright will have high thoughts of God, but he will be low in his own eyes. If
we are acquainted with the glorious holiness and spotless purity of the Lord,
we shall be abased because of our own pollutions, the discovery of his
perfections will humble us because of our infirmities. David upon this
discovery cries out, he is a worm, and Abraham, that he is but dust, and Job,
behold I am vile what shall I answer thee.

3. Saving illumination determines the heart, and prevails with it to come to
Jesus Christ. Joh. 6. 45. It is written in the Prophets, and they shall be all
taught of God, every one therefore that has heard and learned of the Father
comes unto me. When God does shine into the hearts of any, he gives the light
of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
Christ is the Image of the invisible God, and most of God is to be seen in
Christ, here is the most glorious display of his abundant Wisdom, Justice,
Power and Love; hereupon the Lord Jesus cannot but be looked upon as desirable,
and all things are accounted dung and loss that he may be gained.

4. Saving illumination removes prejudices. As Soon as ever the Psalmist came
into the Sanctuary, and understood the different ends of the righteous and the
wicked, his envy at the ungodly their prosperity, and his prejudices against
purity and innocence, as if it were in vain, ceased, Psalm. 73. The carnal mind
disputes as it thinks with strong reasons before, against Religion, but when
the Word makes any truly wise, presently, presently these imaginations are
cast down, and the high thoughts against the knowledge of God are brought into
captivity, 2 Cor. 10. 5. The Lord of Rochester that was a great Disputer
against God and Christ and Godliness, when once enlightened, he made this
notable acknowledgment; That all the seeming contradictions and absurdities of
the Word of God, fancied by men of corrupt minds and judgments were now
vanished, and the excellency and beauty of it appeared to him, being come to
receive the truth in the love of it. Then also he cried out, That that absurd
and foolish Philosophy which was so much admired by some, and propagated by
Hobs, had undone him, and many more of the best Parts in the Nation.

5. Saving illumination does not rest in speculation, but effectually urges
unto practical godliness. They who know the truth as it is in Jesus, do put off
concerning the former conversation, the old man which is corrupt according to
the deceitful lusts; They that are renewed in the spitit of their mind, do put
on that new man which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness,
Ephesians. 4. 21. 24. When the grace of God does bring Salvation, it teaches us to
deny ungodliness and worldly lust, and to live soberly, righteously and godly
in this present World, Tit. 2. 11, 12. And indeed, if rightly instructed we
shall obey with a willing mind; for we shall see plainly, that Sin is the
worst, that God is the best Master: that Christ's Yoke is easy, his ways
pleasantness, his paths peace, and at the end there is glory and immortality.

6. Where there is Saving illumination, there will be a following on to know
the Lord, and a desire to be enlightened further, and an application unto God
himself to be the Teacher. Ministers and means are to be made use of, but we
must look beyond both to Heaven, to the Father of Lights and Mercies. David
often prays to have his eyes more fully opened, and to be taught to better
purpose, Psalm. 119. Moses cries out, Teach us so to number our days that we may
apply our hearts to Wisdom, Psalm. 90. 12. Who knows not that man's days are few?
And yet this ordinary lesson, God must teach, else none will learn it right, so
as to be indeed the wiser, and all have need to learn this lesson more
perfectly. The truly enlightened long to be enlightened more, because wisdom is
so principal a thing. Psalm. 119. 130. The entrance of thy Words gives light,
it gives understanding to the simple, and then presently it follows, verse.
131. I opened my mouth and panted, for I longed for thy Commandments.

Cas 2. The second Case is this; When may Humiliation be said to be true? As
humiliation in Christ went before his exaltation, so must his followers first
be humbled in the sight of the Lord, and he has promised to lift them up. Now
thus true humiliation may be known.

1. Humiliation implies a conviction of Sin. The humbled Soul sees his Sin, and
feels it, sees the heinousness, feels the weight of it. Those humbled ones,
Esa. 59. 12. speak thus, Our transgressions are multiplied before, and our
iniquities testify against us; for our trangressions are with us, and as for
our iniquities we know them. They know their iniquities too well to make light
of them, they do indeed know and see that it is an evil thing and a bitter that
they have sinned against the Lord, and were once void of his fear, Jer. 2. 19.
Being afflicted, mourning, weeping, turning our laughter to mourning, our joy
to heaviness'; the Apostle makes to be humbling of our selves, Jam. 4. 9, 10.

2. True Humiliation implies, Shame and Self-abhorrency. Unhumbled Israel are
charged with the want of this. Jer. 8. 12. Were they ashamed when they had
committed abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed neither could they
blush: therefore they shall fall among them that fall, in the time that I
visit, they shall be cast down, says the Lord. But humbled ones are made to
remember their evil ways and their doings that have not been good, so as to
loath themselves for their iniquities, Ezekiel. 36. 31. They see ground for shame
and blushing, considering the great guilt that lies upon them, the odious and
filthy spots and stains, that Sin has left upon their Souls: together with the
monstrous ingratitude where with they are chargeable. All their transgressions
have struck at that God who gave them their Being, keeps them alive, and out of
Hell, and they have not one mercy or comfort but is of his giving. And this God
is al-seeing, knows the secretest abominations, is acquainted even with all
their heart-impurity: no wonder therefore that they are ashamed, and lie down
and are covered with confusion, Jer. 3. 25.

3. True humiliation implies, a taking shame to our selves by confession of
Sin, and as we take shame to our selves, so hereby we give glory unto God.
David did thus; Ps. 51. 3. I acknowledge my iniquity and my sin is ever before
me. An humbled Sinner, Est fidelis Dei Orator contra seipsum, brings in black
Bills of Indictment against himself, and in his Confession lays open all,
especially the worst of all: conceals nothing that is evil out of any regard
thereto, or unwillingness to forsake it. And as covering of Sin shall not
prosper, so they that thus confess and forsake Sin shall have mercy, Prove. 28.
13. Confession is by One called Vomitus Spiritualis, a Spiritual Vomiting; they
that are indeed humbled, make conscience of abstaining from the iniquities they
have acknowledged: they dare not return with the Dog to his own vomit again,
and with the Swine that is washed to her wallowing in the Mire, 2 Pet. 2. ult.

4. True humiliation implies, Self-diffidence. Humbled ones, it is very apparent
to them that they have no reason at all to place any confidence in themselves:
they see that their own wisdom is folly, and that true wisdom is from above,
they see that their own righteousness is as filthy rags, Esa. 64. 6. Therefore
they rely not upon their own righteousness, but upon the greatness of Divine
mercy. Dan. 9. 18. They are sensible also that their own strength is weakness,
and here upon that promise belongs to them. Esa. 40. 29. He gives power to the
saint, and to them that have no might he increafeth strength. And as the truly
humbled Soul dares not trust in it self, so neither does it rely upon the
creature for help, and though it makes use of the means of grace, yet it looks
beyond them, trusts not, rests not in them, but is sensible that Ordinances
themselves without the Merit and Spirit of Christ, are nothing. The Spirit of
Christ must make them profitable, and the Merit of Christ must make the
engaging in them acceptable.

5. True Humiliation implies, a submission unto God: This is required, Jam. 4.
6, 7. He resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. Submit your
selves therefore unto God. God is taken by humbled Sinners for a Lord, his Will
is taken for a Law. Other Lords have had the dominion over them, but now they
are willing to make mention of Gods name, and own his Authority, Esa. 26. 13.
They are unwilling that any Sin should have the dominion. Psalm. 119. 133. Order
my steps in thy Word, and let not any iniquity have the dominion over me. The
Throne of Sin is in the Heart, and the strength of Sin lies in the love of it.
They desire that their very hearts may be cleansed and that God may dwell and
rule there, and their love to Sin, is turned into hatred. And as they submit to
the Will and Law of God, so they are patient and humble under his mighty hand.
They do not condemn the Lord for afflicting, but themselves for deserving to be
afflicted. How submissive is the Church, though Gods anger and hand pressed her
sore. Mic. 7. 9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord because I have sinned
against him.

6. True Humiliation implies, a sense of unworthiness of the least, especially
of any saving grace and mercy. The humbled prodigal when he came home to his
Fathers house, what low thoughts he had, you may perceive by the words he is
resolved to speak. Luke 15. 18, 19. Father I have sinned against Heaven and
before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy
hired Servants; As if he had said, Father I have not behaved my self like a
Son, neither do I expect to be dealt with as a Son, 'twill be great favor to
be received as a Servaat, who deserve to be punished and excluded as an Enemy.
Humbled Sinners do very much consider their ill deserts, and how are they
filled with admiration at the free grace of God in his Son Jesus, which is the
ground of their hope and encouragement. By the grace of God they are, what they
are; they have, what they have; they hope, what they hope for.

Case 3. The third Case follows; How may we be sure that our desires after God
and grace are sincere? It Is a Maxim in practical Divinity, That the desires
after Grace, are Grace, but they must be true desires. Now these may thus be
known.

1. Sincere desires spring from knowledge and serious consideration. The Lord
is not (...), an unknown God to them that indeed desire after him: he has
caused his goodness which is his glory to pass before them, and the
desirableness of that goodness has been perceived. Jer. 24. 7. I will give them
an heart to know me: and then it follows, they shall return to me with their
whole heart. The eyes must be anointed with eye salve, the judgment must be
enlightened and informed concerning the Lords perfections, and fullness and
riches of grace and mercy, and willingness to communicate of these riches: then
desires after him will be real and well-grounded.

2. Sincere desires are prevailing; my meaning is, that God and Grace are
desired more than any thing the World, than all the World besides. An Author
tells us, that Tepidit as est parvus amor boni. Lukewarmness implies some
little love to that which is good, but there is a greater love to that which is
evil and vain: And what does the little love then signify? If God be not
desired above all, he is not truly at all desired. That was a sincere desire,
Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none on Earth that I
desire besides thee. That is, All things comparatively to thee are undesirable
in my esteem. In the Roman State 'twas said; Nec far potest Caesarve priorem,
Pompeiusve parem.


Caesar could not endure a superior, and Pompey could not brook an equal. God
will have neither superior nor equal in our hearts, they that love him truly
give him the highest room of all.

3. Sincere desires bear up against opposition. Though the Flesh does lust, and
Mammon and Satan join with it, yet the Spirit does lust against it, Gal. 5. 17.
There is a longing to be delivered from the body of Sin, to be rid of that evil
which is present, when good is about to be done, Romans 7. Where there are
desires after Grace indeed, the remainders of Sin are irkfom; and we shall sigh
and wish, that the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus may make us free
from the law of Sin and Death.

4. Sincere desires are great enemies to delays. David's Soul made haste to God
and to do his duty. Psalm. 119. 60. I made haste and delayed not to keep thy
commandments, and he desires that God would make haste to him. Psalm. 101. 2. I
will behave my self wisely in a perfect way, Oh when will thou come to me! So
Psalm. 70. 1. Make haste O God to deliver, make haste to help me O Lord. And
when God did withdraw from him, he cries out, How long will thou forget me O
Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide thy face from me? Ps. 13. 1. Every day
does seem a year, and every year does seem an age to longing Souls, when the
Lord withholds his quickening and comforting presence from them.

5. Sincere desires are extended to every thing which God propounds in his Word
as desirable. Not some only, but all the benefits of Christ are longed after,
all his Offices are prized. Sincere ones see a necessity of Christ a Priest
upon the Cross, they love to hear him as a Prophet in the Pulpit, and are very
desirous to submit to him as a Prince upon the Throne; Nay, they yield their
hearts to be his Throne. The Laws of God are dear to them, they desire to keep
them all: to be filled with all the fullness of God: to stand perfect and
complete in all the will of God: Nay, they aspire so high, as to beg that they
may do his will on Earth as it is done in Heaven, Mat. 6. 10.

6. Sincere desires are industrious. Solomon speaks of a desire of the
slothful, which kills him because his hands refuse to labor, Prove. 21. 25. He
perishes for want of the good desired, because he will not take pains to obtain
it. True desires are accompanied with a fear of missing what is desired, not so
as to make unbelieving conclusions, but to quicken unto diligence. Psalm. 27. 4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after. Then we desire
really, when we seek diligently. And where is diligence and pains better
employed, than when seeking the Lord, who has told us as certainly as he is, so
certainly he will be a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6.

7. Sincere desires are never quite satisfied here in this World. What is said
concerning earthly riches, Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit.
may be applied to the true riches, Crescit amor, quantum divitiae, love to
them, and covetousness after more, increases as they increase. He that has most
grace is most desirous to have more. It Is true indeed, our Lord tells us, Joh.
6. 35. He that comes unto me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me
shall never thirst. But if this be referred to Spiritual things, the meaning
is, he shall not so hunger and thirst as to despair and be tormented with
despair of satisfaction, or else the passage may be referred to the things of
this World, that impia fames, that sinful and eager hunger and thirst after
them shall cease. Sincere Souls never can in this World, and they think they
never can, prize their Lord Jesus, love and fear, and serve their God
sufficiently, and therefore desire still to do all this more and better: they
forget the things behind, and are still reaching forward, and if you ask when
they will be satisfied, David shall answer, Psalm. 17. ult. and what he speaks
of himself is applicable to others; As for me I shall behold thy face in
righteousness, and be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness.

Case 4. A fourth Case may be this; How may we be able to discern, whether in
Religion we are acted merely by slavish fear, yea or no? Though carnal security
is that which ruins the most of men, yet a slavish fear, yea or no? Though
carnal security is that which ruins the most of men, yet a slavish fear is to
be found also in the ungodly. Such a fear there was in those we read of, Psalm.
78. 34. When the hand of the Lord was stretched out, and slew many of them, the
rest feared, and sought him: and yet the hearts of these who thus out of
slavish fear sought the Lord were not right with him. This kind of fear invades
the Sinners and Hypocrites. Esa. 33. 14. The Sinners in Sion are afraid;
fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites, who among us shall dwell with
devouring Fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

Aquinas 22. q. 19. art. 2. tells us of a fourfold fear: there is a Timor
mundanus, a worldly fear, when for fear of the Worlds frowns and hatred, we
turn away from God. There is Timor servilis, a flavish fear, when merely for
fear of punishment there is some seeking unto God. There is Timor filialis, a
childlike fear, when we fear offending God, and so follow and cleave unto him.
Finally there is Timor initialis, an initial fear, which is partly a fear of
Sin and partly a fear of Punishment. Such a fear was in the trembling. Jaylour
at first Conversion, who certainly enquited after the way to be saved both from
sin and wrath, Act. 16. and a mixture of both we read of in the Saints: there
is a childlike fear. Psalm. 112. 1. Blessed is every one that fears the Lord
and that delights greatly in his Commands; And there is likewise a fear of
punishment. Psalm. 119. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am
afraid of thy judgments. This Slavish fear I am discoursing of, which is
certainly bad, and when alone, only in those that are bad. Now because doubting
Souls harp much upon this string, that they are acted merely by slavish fear,
and it is one of the difficultest doubts to remove, therefore. I shall describe
more largely those that in Religion are acted by this servile fear, that by
proving of your selves you may know whether you are of the number.

1. They that are acted merely by Slavish fear, dislike nothing in Sin but the
punishment: Their eyes were never opened to see Sin as the Apostle looked upon
it, out of measure sinful; they never beheld the excellency of righteousness
nor the evil of iniquity, but still Sin is as high as ever, in their
affections, though fear restrain them from the acts of it. It Is said of a
wicked man, that he abhors not evil, Psalm. 36. 4. he does not abhor it when
he fears to commit it. The Merchant in a Storm loves his Goods, and is sorry
that he is reduced to that strait, that he must either throw his Goods
overboard or lose his Life, and after the Tempest is at an end, he would be
glad if his Goods might be recovered; just thus are they affected toward Sin,
that are merely acted by Slavish fear. Sin it self is liked, but Affliction,
Death, and Hell fright them. They are unconcerned that God by their Sin is
dishonored, his goodness abused, his Law broken, and themselves enslaved and
defiled and rendered hateful in his eyes, only they are dismayed at the
punishment unto which their Sin exposes them.

2. They that are acted merely by Slavish fear, are afraid of coming to the
light, which may discover their Sin and themselves more fully to them: they see
but too much already, they are unwilling to see more. Our Lord speaks generally
concerning all evil men, That they hate the light, neither come to the light
lest their deeds should be reproved, Joh. 3. 20. They that are lovers of sin
must needs be also lovers of darkness, and enemies to plain dealing. Ahab
humbled himself through fear of punishment, and yet cannot endure the faithful
reproving Prophet Micaiah. There is one Micaiah but I hate him, for he
prophesies not good concerning me but evil, 1 King. 22. 8. If thou approvest
of a searching Ministry, and art willing to have thy sin and the plague of thy
heart made more fully manifest: if thou art willing to hear all that evil which
God speaks of thy Sin, in his Word, it argues thy heart is really alienated
from it, and there is something more than Slavish fear.

3. Slavish fear has but an unconstant effect: This fear (...), has torment, as
the Apostle speaks, and no wonder if persons are weary of it, and endeavor to
have their Consciences stupefied, that they may have no remorse for sin past,
and serve it for the future without disturbance. The will remaining
unregenerate and corrupted, must needs be really desirous of a false peace, and
to have the wound healed, though it be but slightly. The language therefore of
such is, Prophesy not unto us right things, prophesy unto us smooth things,
prophesy deceits, Esa. 30. 10. Pharaoh while the hand of God was upon him, was
full of fear, he felt that the Lord Jehovah the God of Israel was above his
match; and then he seems resolved to comply with the will of God, to let his
people go to serve him: but the effect of this fear is but unconstant, though
fear thawed his heart a little, like the shining of the Sun in a winters day,
as soon as ever he had respite, he hardened his heart again and refused to let
Israel go, Exodus 8. 15. If therefore we are desirous of a lasting change, and
are willing to have our Consciences more thoroughly awakened, and more
faithfully to perform their Office, it is a sign the will it self begins to be
renewed by the special grace of God.

4. Slavish fear is accompanied with hatred of God and of his Law. The Slave
fears his Master and hates him, and is sorry he must be subject to him. And the
Apostle tells us, That the carnal mind is enmity against God, and is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can it be, Romans 8. 7. Whilst any
remain carnal, they are estranged from God, they desire not any fellowship with
him, they like not his Yoke, but look upon his commands as grievous, and upon
himself as an hard and austere Master, they are far from esteeming Gods
commandments concerning all things to be right, and wishing that their ways
were directed to keep his Statutes. Those therefore who like the Law of God,
and consent unto it as good, and bless the Lord that he has given them such a
Law, and account it their privilege and liberty that he will vouchsafe to rule
them, and are troubled at the reluctance that is in their Natures against the
yoke of God, and cry as Ephraim did; I am as a Bullock unaccustomed to the
Yoke, turn thou me and I shall be turned, Jer. 31. 18. In such there is
something beyond servile fear.

5. They that are acted merely by Slavish fear do not desire to be acted by
love. Sin and the Creature have their love without grudging, and they have no
longings to have their hearts directed into the love of God. That promise, The
Lord thy God shall circumcise thy heart to love him with all thy heart and soul
that thou may live, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. is not prized, is not pleaded. If once
therefore we begin to grudge our lusts, and the world, our affections, and
desire they may be placed upon things above, Slavish fear does not act us, but
the Sanctifying Spirit. Slavish fear cannot make us desire to be acted not by
Slavish fear but it must needs be some other Principle that is put within us.
Augustine compares Childlike and Slavish fear unto two Women that are married:
the one is Chaste, the other desires to be an Harlot, but is not one, through
fear of her Husbands anger. The chaste one fears her Husbands displeasure, but
loves his company; the wanton one fears her Husbands displeasure, but wishes
his absence. Now suppose this wanton Wife should begin to grudge her heart to
others, and should desire to love and delight in her Husband, she would then be
no longer acted by a Slavish fear, but it would argue, her mind changed, and
that there were some beginning of conjugal affection, and sense of her duty. A
desire to love the Lord above all, can never be the product of mere fear, but
manifests a sense that he is indeed most desirable.

6. They that are acted merely by Slavish fear, though they are affrighted at
the thoughts of Hell, yet Spiritual things are not suitable to them, they do
not mind and savor the things of the Spirit, but only the things of the Flesh,
which shows an unchanged heart though there be an awakened Conscience. The
heart of such is all for the earth and carthly things, and these things are
really preferred before grace and glory: The World unto such unrenewed ones is
looked upon as a better and more proper portion, than God himself. If therefore
the World is become low in our esteem, and the vanity of it evident, and we had
rather have the Lord to be our God and Father and portion, than to have the
greatest abundance of earthly enjoyments without him: this speaks a real love
and not a servile fear only, it is a good sign when the greatest outward
felicity and prosperity is judged inferior to that happiness of having the Lord
to be our God, Psalm. 144. ult.

7. They that are acted merely by Slavish fear, are not jealous of themselves
and afraid lest they should be acted by nothing else. This very concernedness
and godly jealousy argues gracious desires and principles. In a word, Slavish
fear will never carry us so far as to make us consent unto a true and lasting
Conversion unto God. False motives can never make us desire to be truly sincere
and upright Christians, and to be acted only by motives that are right. If
therefore in Religion, we are willing that our Principles should be pure and
good, our ends right, and our actions and the manner of doing them according to
the will of God, it may serve to satisfy us that we are of David's mind, who
prayed, (and such a prayer never meets with a deaf ear) Psalm. 119. 80. Let my
heart be sound in thy Statutes that I be not ashamed.

Case 5. The fifth Case is this; How may we know that we have indeed accepted
Christ? He is offered unto all, received by few. He stands at the door and
knocks, but few hear his voice and open the door to him. We may call our selves
by his Name, and profess to be his, and receive his Ordinances and engage in
them, and yet not receive himself: and yet this Reception must be, else there
can be no Reconciliation, no Adoption, no Salvation. Thus therefore we may
prove our selves and know whether we have indeed received Christ.

1. If we have accepted Christ, we have seen so as to be affected with our need
of him. The prodigal was ready to perish in the far Country, necessity drove
him home to his Fathers house. The Israelites in the Wilderness were stung and
ready to die by the fiery Serpents, and then they looked up unto the Brazen
Serpent for cure. We shall never upon right terms receive our Lord and Savior,
till we perceive we are lost and ruined and must needs be everlastingly
miserable without him. Oh then we shall subscribe to any Articles of agreement,
that Jesus may be ours, who can justify us by his blood, and deliver us from
the wrath to come, 1 These. 1. ult.

2. If we have accepted Christ, we have been made dead to the Law. Romans 7. 4.
Wherefore my Brethren ye are become dead to the Law by the body of Christ, that
ye should be married to another: even to him that is raised from the dead, that
we should bring forth fruit unto God. So Gal. 2. 19. I am dead to the Law, that
I might live unto God. You must not imagine by deadness to the Law, is meant
such a disobligation from it, that we have no tie upon us to obey it; for the
Apostle hear speaks of living unto God, and bringing forth fruit to him: Now
living unto God, and bringing forth the fruits of righteousness is what the law
requires. Then therefore we are dead to the Law, when we are not irritated and
provoked to transgress, because the Law forbids transgression: and when we
expect no justification before God by our obedience to the Law. By the deeds of
the Law shall no Flesh be justified in his sight, Romans 3. 20. There is not any
Law given which can give life to the Sinner: for then righteousness and
justification should have been by the Law, Gal. 3. 21. Those therefore that
receive Christ receive him, as The Lord their Righteousness, and dare not
expect justification before God upon the account of any obedience or
righteousness of their own.

3. If we have accepted Christ, we are reconciled to the Cross: we shall rely
upon Christ crucified being persuaded that the blood shed upon the Cross for
Sin, was the blood of him that was truly God as well as man, and consequently
sufficient to make an atonement for us, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness, 1 John 1. 7. We shall also conform to the crucifixion of
Christ, by crucifying the Flesh with the affections and lusts of it, Gal. 5.
24. The World also will be crucified to us, Gal. 6. 14. Sin has laid it under a
Curse, and we shall look upon the World, as the Jews did on Christ when they
crucified him, as having no form, nor comeliness, no such beauty in it, that we
should so eagerly desire it. Finally we shall be willing to take up the Cross,
and deny our selves, and suffer persecution, and go through any tribulation
which lies in our way to the Kingdom of Heaven. They that are offended at
persecution, and in such times of temptation fall away, never received Christ
or his Word into their hearts indeed.

4. If we have accepted Christ, we submit unto his Scepter, entertain his Word
and are willing to obey him. God has exalted him to be a Prince and a Savior,
and Believers must gladly consent that this Savior, should be exalted into the
throne of their hearts and rule as Prince there. They who will not have this
Lord to reign over them are Enemies, and shall be dealt with and destroyed as
Enemies at last. But he is the Author of Eternal Salvation unto all that obey
him, Heb. 5. 9. Whom he saves, he makes by his power willing and obedient.
'Twas said unto the Lord, Messiah; Thy people shall be willing in the day of
thy power, Psalm. 110. 3.

5. If we have accepted Christ, we are born again and made new Creatures. 2
Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ he is a new Creature. And Joh. 1. 12, 13.
They that receive and believe in Christ, are said to be born not of blood, nor
of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Grace does not
come by natural descent: the flesh has no will or desire after it, man though
never so eminent is not able to work it, but it is alone from God. And all true
Believers are born of God, they have a new heart, a new nature, new desires and
affections, new designs are carried on, and they walk in newness of life. The
old man indeed remains in part, but they are burdened with it, and desire more
fully to put on the new, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness.

6. If we have accepted Christ, we do, and we see cause, to admire the Fathers
love in sending him: we look upon him as the greatest gift that ever was given
or could be given to the sons of men. He is all in all, Col. 3. 11. He fills
all in all, Ephesians. 1. ult. If Christ be ours God is ours, Heaven is ours, all is
ours. Here Is a height that none can reach, a depth that none can fathom, a
length that none can measure, a breadth that none can comprehend. How do
Believers admire Jesus and the love of the Father that gave him. They know that
gift of God, and wonder at the Donors kindness, 1 John 4. 9, 10. In this, i. e.
in this above all, was manifested the love of God toward us because that God
sent his only begotten Son into the World that we might live through him. If ye
talk of love herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his Son to be the propitiation for our Sins.

7. If we have accepted Christ, we live upon him by faith, we are strong in the
grace that is in Christ Jesus. I live, says the Apostle, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of
the Son of God who loved me and gave himself for me, Gal. 2. 20. And thus
relying upon the sufficient grace and strength of our Lord Jesus, which is made
perfect in our weakness, we shall resolve to follow the Lamb without standing
still, without turning aside, without drawing back from him, we shall not
cowardly fly, nor treacherously revolt from him, but follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes.

Case 6. The sixth Case is this; When may Conversion be judged to be sincere
and true? Man is departed from the Lord, and he is brought to this strait,
either he must turn to God, or he must burn in Hell, and every turning will not
serve our turn. The Scripture speaks of a feigned Conversion, such a Convert
was treacherous Judah, Jer. 3. 10. It concerns us to prove our selves, whether
we are Converts in reality: which may be thus known.

1. Sincere Converts have been made to consider their own ways, and the evil
and destructiveness of them. David tells us, he thought on his ways and turned,
Psalm. 119. 59. They have looked to the end of the broad road in which they once
went, and seen that burning Lake at the end of it: destruction and misery is in
that way, and so they dare not proceed. He never turns from Sin indeed that
sees no harm or danger in it. Those Scriptures, The Soul that sins shall die,
and The wages of Sin is death, are deeply engraven upon the Converts heart.

2. Sincere Converts are really grieved that they turned no sooner, they
reflect with sorrow and shame upon that time, wherein they were foolish and
disobedient and deceived, and served diverse lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3. 3.
and wish they had been so wise as to have served another, a better Master. How
are they afflicted that Sin and Satan and Mammon, have stolen away so many of
their few days, and that their lusts should devour the cream and prime of all
their time. They think with themselves, how much Sin might have been prevented,
how much Grace might have been gotten, how much might have been done for God,
if they had turned sooner: and this makes them to live the remainder of their
time in the flesh, not to the lusts of men, but to the will of God, 1 Pet. 4. 2.

3. Sincere Converts turn unto God himself, they own him as a Lord, and eye him
as their happiness in their Conversion to him. Jer. 4. 1. If thou will return,
O Israel, says the Lord, return unto Me. They seek the Lord himself, and his
strength and his face evermore; the mercies of God indeed they do and may
desire: but principally the Father of them, they see that God has all, is all,
and can be infinitely more than all things unto them, they come to him that
they may enjoy him here and for ever. Lord, be my God, my Father, my
Inheritance, give thy self to me, and then thou will deal most bountifully with
me! That Is the Converts language.

4. Sincere Converts turn with their whole heart. This is called for, Joel. 2.
12. Turn ye even unto me with all your heart: And the want of this is
complained of, Jer. 3. 10. Her treacherous Sister Judah has not turned to me
with her whole heart, but feignedly, says the Lord. When the whole heart is
turned, no iniquity is regarded there, but all is disliked; no creature is
suffered to have the highest room, the whole heart is resigned and given unto
God. As the Besieged render up the Castle to the Conqueror, that he may dispose
of it as he pleases, so the Convert renders himself: all the powers and
faculties of his Soul he yields, and consents to have all renewed, all
sanctified, which is a perfection of parts, and a perfection of degrees is
desired and aspired unto: he longs to be turned more and more, and to be kept
from returning again to folly.

5. Sincere Converts turn their feet unto Gods testimonies. Psalm. 119. 59. I
turned my feet unto thy testimonies: They conform to the Word which God has
spoken as their Rule. This declares best of all, Quid pulchrum, quid turpe,
quid utile, quid non, what is fair and what is filthy, what is profitable and
what is destructive. By this Word they order their hearts and conversations. He
that despises the Word of God and the Commands of it, is not sincerely
converted, but damnably deluded. True Converts keep close to Scriptures and
Ordinances, and never fancy themselves above them: but with David, desire to
dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of their lives, (for in his House
Ordinances are administered) that they may behold the beauty of the Lord and
enquire in his Temple, Ps. 27. 4.

Case 7. The seventh Case follows; What are the lower degrees of true Grace?
Grace in Scripture being compared to a grain of Mustard seed, which is indeed
the least of all seeds that are sown in the field, Mat. 13. 31, 32. Hereby
there is an intimation given us, that Grace is but little in the first
beginnings of it, and because small, it is not so easy to be discerned; Yet the
least measure of true Grace being of far greater value and more precious than
Gold that perishes, it is worth our while to bring it to the Touchstone that it
may be proved and known. Before I resolve the Case, wherein I must be very
wary, lest the unsound presume, and lest the sincere be discouraged: I shall
premise these particulars.

1. True Grace has different degrees, and the higher and lower degrees are
vastly different from each other; Such a difference as there is between a grain
of Mustard Seed, and the Plant grown up so that the Birds of the air may lodge
in the branches of it; Such a difference as there is between a new born infant,
and a man grown: truly such a difference there is between weak and strong
Grace; and yet as the infant has all the parts which the man has, and is of
the same kind with him: so weak grace and strong grace are of the same kind:
and the weak is true and saving as well as the strong. That there is a
difference in the degrees of Grace is evident. Some are babes, and some are
strong men, Heb. 5. 13, 14. Some are styled little children, some young men,
and some are called Fathers, 1 John 2. 12, 13.

2. True Grace is consistent with little knowledge in the things of God. There
may be a great measure of notional knowledge, where there is no true Grace at
all; and there may be true Grace, where there is a great weakness as to
understanding. The Disciples when first they were chosen out of the World and
regenerated by the Spirit, understood but little of the Gospel: Peter himself
would have dissuaded Christ from dying, not knowing that his blood was to be
the price of the Churches Redemption, Mat. 16. 21, 22. The very Apostles
themselves wondered what the Resurrection of Christ from the dead should mean.
Surely they had not then much light, and yet they had true Grace. And though
these and such like great Articles of the Christian Faith are more fully
revealed, so that it is necessary to salvation to know them: yet in some heads
the knowledge is but little, where yet the heart is truly turned unto God, and
prizes Christ above all.

3. Where there is true Grace, there may be many doubts and fears. Our Lord
says unto Peter: O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? Mat. 14.
31. And unto all his Disciples he speaks thus; Why are ye fearful, O ye of
little faith? Mat. 8. 26. Faith they had, and yet 'twas little, and this faith
is owned, though accompanied with doubts and fears. Doubting believers for
ought I know are the far major part of them. Sincere Souls are prone to be
jealous of themselves, and they apprehend how much it stands them upon to make
sure work for Eternity. Hereupon Satan and the remainders of unbelief take the
advantage, and they are still questioning their state, and are full of fears
that nothing is wrought in them, but what is common unto Hypocrites.

4. Where there is true Grace, there may be much corruption. I grant that Grace
reigns wherever it is in truth, and yet much Sin may remain though it be an
underling: thus the Oil is at the top of the Vessel, though the Water which is
under it be a far greater quantity. Grace is compared unto smoking Flax: now
in the smoking Flax there is much of stench and cloudiness and but little heat;
and yet this heat is taken notice of, and cherisht, and the promise is; Mat.
12. 20. A bruised Reed shall he not break, and smoking Flax shall he not
quench till he send forth judgment unto victory.

5. Those that have true Grace, may fall into Sins that are foul and
scandalous, and by such falls they break their bones, disturb their peace, and
wound their Consciences, and weaken themselves exceedingly, so that they are
the apter to stumble and fall again upon the next temptation. When notorious
Sins are thus committed by Believers, Grace is at a very low ebb, and yet the
living Water which springs up to everlasting life, (so Grace is called) is not
quite dried up. It is strange, yet not so strange as true, that righteous Lot
who vexed his soul from day to day because of the Sodomites unlawful deeds,
should give way to drunkenness first; though it is not so strange that he should
commit incest afterward, for he that is drunken knows not what he does. Though
he was delivered out of Sodom, yet he carried but too much of Sodom within him
in his heart. David a man after Gods own heart, yet in his heart there did
kindle an impure and hellish flame of lust whereby Bathsheba was scorched and
hurt as well as himself, and which was the occasion of the death of poor
Vrijah. Now though David's joy was quite gone, yet the Sanctifying Spirit was
not clean departed, though his operation was for a while suspended: therefore
he prays for the restoring of joy, but that the holy Spirit might not be taken
away, Psalm. 51. 11, 12.

6. Those that have true Grace may send forth such sad complaints as speak a
nearness to despair. Job cries out, The arrows of the Almighty are within me,
the poison whereof drinks up my Spirit, the terrors of God do set themselves
in array against me, Job. 6. 4. The Church complains, Lam. 3. God has set, me
in dark place as those that have been dead of old: he has hedged me about that
I cannot get out, and made my chain heavy: he has filled me with bitterness
and made me drunken with Wormwood; also when I cry and shout he shuts out my
prayer. This was worst of all to be in a deplorable case, and not to be
regarded when crying for relief and pity. Eminent Saints have sometimes
concluded themselves forsaken and forgotten: no wonder if they that have weak
Grace, confidently affirm they have none at all, and as peremptorily conclude
they never shall have any.

These things being premised, I am to tell you which are the lower degrees of
true grace.

1. A sense and weariness of hardness of heart, argues some measure of true
Grace: it shows some life and softness when deadness and hardness is felt as a
burden. Though hardness of heart was incomparably the worst of all the plagues
of Egypt, yet this, Pharaoh and the Egyptians were never sensible of, nor
desirous to be delivered from it, though other plagues they cry to have
removed. That Is true sorrow, when the heart is grieved, it is so hard, and can
sorrow no more for Sin: Such an heart will carefully shun whatever has an
hardening effect; and oh, how is that promise prized, and the accomplishment of
it longed for, Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new heart will I give you and a new spirit will
I put within you, and I will take away the heart of stone out of your flesh,
and I will give you an heart of flesh. And when once Sinners are sensible so as
to inquire and seek unto the God of Israel to do this for them, here is a good
work begun in them. I grant such may fear sometimes they are judicially
hardened, but that very fear plainly shows the contrary; if they were under such
a judgment, they would cease to be afraid of it.

2. It argues a beginning of a work of Grace, when a Sinner is troubled to see
such an opposition in his corrupted nature against God, and desires to be
turned indeed; Thus Ephraim bemoans himself, that he was as a Bullock
unaccustomed to the Yoke, and he cries to be instructed, and that God would
show his power and grace in the turning of him, Jer. 31. 18. and verse. 20. we
find the Lord owns Ephraim as his dear Son, as a pleasant Child, and says, he
does earnestly remember him, and will surely have mercy upon him. It argues a
new nature, when we are weary of the old, and that the bent and inclination of
the heart is really changed: when backwardness unto what is good begins to be
burthensom.

3. There is a work of Grace, where there is a resolution to go unto God and
confess all Sin unto him without hiding any through a desire to keep it. When
David thus without guile does resolve upon Confession, God resolves upon
Remission, and forgives him presently. Psalm. 32. 5. I acknowledged my sin unto
thee, and my iniquity have I not hid, I said I will confess my transgressions
to the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin Selah. Hark what Solomon
says, He that covers his Sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses and
forsakes them shall have mercy. And the Apostle speaks a great word; 1 John 1.
9. If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. O thou sensible and drooping and
trembling Soul, who come unto God with black Bills of Indictment against thy
self! Is all thy wickedness down there that thou know? Have thou not left
out one or other that is a darling? Oh no here are all down, and the darling
sins in a special manner acknowledged and aggravated, and I am willing to
forsake all, as well as to have the pardon of all. If it be so cheer up; for
Confess and be saved, is the Gospel language. When David said, I have sinned
against the Lord, Nathan answers, The Lord has put away thy Sin thou shall not
die, 2 Samuel 12. 13.

4. There is a work of grace, where there is a desire to believe. He that
searches the heart takes notice of the desires which are there; and as a
desire to kill is Murder, as a lusting after a Woman is Adultery, so a desire
after that which is good is accepted. A desire to repent is repenting, and a
desire to believe is believing. Abraham is said again and again to have offered
up Isaac, because he had a will to do it at Gods Command, though actually he
never did it, Heb. 11. 17. which shows the truth of that passage of Augustine,
Coronat Deus intus bonam voluntatem ubi non invenit facultatem. Where there is
a defect of ability, God does own and crown a real willingness. Such desires
must needs be very pleasing unto God, who wills that his grace should be
earnestly desired, and therefore says the same Father, Desiderare auxilium
gratiae, est initium gratiae. Grace is begun, when Grace is desired. When once
a Sinner desires with his heart to believe, and cries out with the man in the
Gospel, Lord help my unbelief, Mar. 9. 24. When he desires that his heart may
be set wide open, that Christ who knocks there may enter in; when he desires to
receive Christ, just so as Christ is willing to be received, and to rely upon
him as the only Mediator and Savior, renouncing all other Confidences. Here
is saving faith most certainly.

5. There is a work of Grace, where there is a weariness of other Lords, and a
willingness to submit unto Christ the Lord of Glory. It Is a good sign when
there is a consent to cast off the yoke of Sin, and to take on us the easy
yoke of Christ: for none but they that are truly gracious are willing to be
delivered from the power of darkness, and to be translated into the Kingdom of
the Son of God, Col. 1. 13. If we dislike the bondage of corruption, and are
unwilling to be led captive by Satan at his will; if we look upon our selves as
foolish and deceived, while we were disobedient, and served diverse lusts and
pleasures, Tit. 3. 3. If we count the Service of our Lord Jesus freedom, and
freedom indeed: and lust against the Flesh which counts his Commands grievous;
certainly the Spirit of the Lord has begun to set us at liberty, our eyes have
been opened, our hearts changed, Voluntas non esset libera, nisi liberata. The
will would not be thus free to be subject unto Christ, unless it had been made
free by Him.

6. There is a work of Grace, where there is a desire to fear the name of God.
Neh. 1. 11. Let thine ear be attentive, and so it was, unto the prayer of thy
Servants who desire to fear thy Name. That Soul is renewed that would fain
stand in awe of God, and of his Word, and has a will to do good, though evil is
present, and the Flesh is weak. The weakness of the Flesh, Christ excuses, as
long as he saw the Spirit of the Disciples was willing to have done their duty,
Mat. 26. 41. That which was Gods wish concerning Israel of old, is it thy wish
concerning thy self? Oh that there were an heart in me to fear the Lord, and to
keep all his Commandments always, that it may be well with me for ever? Deuteronomy.
5. 29. This is certainly the breathing of the new creature. In such there is a
consent to be the Lords, and to serve him, and a trouble when they are
overpowr'd by sin and temptation, and a jealousy lest they should be deceived;
which shows that their desire to fear and obey the Lord is the more honest and
sincere.

7. There is a work of Grace, where there is an uncontentedness without God:
before, the Sinner was without Christ, and lived without God in the World, as
he thought well enough, Ephesians. 2. 12. but the heart being savingly changed cannot
be put off with the World, or any thing therein for its portion; as the Needle
being touched by the Loadstone never ceases trembling, till it is turned toward
the Northern Pole: so the heart of one that has grace cannot be quieted or
satisfied without the God of Heaven. Pliny in his Natural History, l. 36. c. 4.
tells us, that the Diamond, which is a Stone of far greater value, being put
near the Loadstone, ferrum non patitur abstrahi, does not suffer the Loadstone
to draw the Iron to it. The World will lose its magnetic and drawing virtue,
when once the Lord has touched the heart, and manifested himself. Gracious Souls
had rather have God theirs, than all the World theirs: they see the Creatures
unsuitableness and insufficiency, and that their Souls do then return unto
their rest when they return unto their God.

Case 8. The eight Case follows, which is this; How may Grace be discovered
under Spiritual Desertion? Although the Lord never quite leaves his people, yet
he may withdraw the sense of his Presence, suspending the quickening and
comforting influences of his Spirit: and then they that before were like Eden
or Sharon, are become like unto the Desert, before, they resembled a Tree whose
leaves are fair, and the fruit plentiful and good; But under desertion, they
are like a Tree in the Winter season, the Sun being withdrawn, when neither
Fruit nor Leaves appear. Now, how shall the Saints be known to be Children of
Light, when they thus walk in darkness? I answer;

1. Saints under Desertion are troubled at Gods absence. What perplexity was
there in the Spouses Spirit, when her Beloved had withdrawn himself? Cant. 5.
6. I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself and was gone;
my Soul failed when he spoke, I sought him but I could not find him, I called
him, but he gave me no answer. It Is as real a sign of true love to mourn at the
Lords absence, as to rejoice in his presence; for they who grieve when he
withdraws, will be glad when he returns. Thou did hide thy face, says David,
and I was troubled, Psalm. 30. 7. God may hide his face from a true Believer,
but a Believer shows himself to be so, by being troubled when God hides his
face.

2. Saints under Desertion justify the Lord in deserting of them, though holy
Job stands stiffly in the vindication of his Uprightness, against his Friends
who charged him with Hypocrisy; yet withal he consesses his Sins unto God. Job
7. 20. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? And
chap. 13. 26. Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess
the iniquities of my youth. Deserted Saints dare not charge God foolishly, but
lay the blame of what they endure at their own door; they have been proud of
enlargements, therefore God has justly left them to be straightened; they were
unthankful for comforts, therefore just it is their sorrows should return; they
were not so watchful against Sin; 'twas righteous in God to hide his face, nay,
they confess, he would be righteous, if he should be favorable no more, but
cast them off for ever.

3. Saints under Desertion endeavor to find out the cause of Gods deserting
them, that it may be removed. Hark what Job prays for; Job 13. 23, 24. Make me
to know my transgression, and my sin, wherefore hidest thou thy face and
countest me for thy enemy? As the Seamen were willing that failed with Jonah,
to know for whose sake the Tempest was so furious upon them: and as Joshua was
desirous to find out the man that had taken of the accursed thing, and proved
the troubler of Israel: So Deserted Souls cry unto God to discover what has
offended him, and grieved his holy Spirit; And as Jonah that raised the Tempest
was thrown overboard, as Achan that troubled Israel was stoned unto death, so
having found out their Sins, that have disturbed their peace, and provoked
their God, they consent to have them thoroughly mortified: that which is meet
they say unto God, I have born thy displeasure, I will not offend any more,
that which I see not, teach thou me, if I have done iniquity, I will do no
more, Job 34. 31, 32.

4. Saints under Desertion, though the actings of faith may not, yet fear is
more evident in them. Esa. 50. 10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, and
obeys the voice of his Servant, that walks in darkness and has no light.
Deserted Believers though they cannot with confidence call God their Father,
which is their trouble, yet they are resolved to obey him as their Lord: when
he seems to fly from them, they are afraid of losing him, therefore they lament
and follow after him. No wonder that Gods withdrawing raises fear in his
people: for ordinarily Desertion, speaks Divine displeasure, and is so very
sore a trial and distress, that the continuance of it may very well be feared.

5. Saints under Desertion, are troubled for want of quickening as well as want
of comfort: therefore they cry for the return of the Spirit that he may revive
their graces, and make them lively and vigorous, and active in the Service of
God, as well as restore peace and consolation. Deadness certainly was David's
burden, when he prayed so often that the Lord would quicken him. Deserted
Saints do feel the prevalency of the body of death, therefore they do look, and
they have reason to look unto Him, who came that we might have life, and that
we might have it more abundantly, Joh. 10. 10.

6. Saints under Desertion are unsatisfied till God return, that is their
language; Psalm. 90. 13, 14. Return, O Lord how long? And let it repent thee
concerning thy Servants: O satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may
rejoice and be glad all our days. Their life lies in his favor, weeping
continues while his face is hid: when their God comes, their joy comes to them
again. And as they are desirous that God should turn to them, so also that
themselves may be healed and turned unto God. The Church had revolted, and God
was angry; angry not only at their Sins, but also at their prayers; in this sad
case, the Church is earnest for her own recovery and return to God, as well as
for the shining of Gods face upon her: therefore she cries once, twice, thrice,
Turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts, cause thy face to shine and we shall be
saved, Psalm. 80. 3, 7, 19.

Case 9. The ninth Case is this; How Grace may be discerned under the
prevalency of that sad and black distemper of Melancholy. The torture of this
malady strangers to it cannot conceive; but they that are afflicted with it do
know their own bitterness. And the advantage which Satan has hereby is
unconceivably great. It Is ordinary for him to represent the Lord unto
Melancholic ones, as furious and revenging and implacable, and irreconcilable:
as hating them from everlasting to everlasting. Oh whath dismal thoughts have
they of themselves! The darkness and confusion of their heads, they call
judicial blindness; the deadness of their hearts, they call judicial hardness;
and when the black vapors ascend, and seize upon their spirits, and torment
and affright them, as if Nature were just ready to be dissolved: this they are
apt to think the hellish agonies of Cain and Judas, and to conclude them the
foretastes and certain forerunners of eternal Wrath and Vengeance.

Satan represents the grace they have, as no grace, that he may discourage them
from duty, if he does not persuade them to act desperately against their own
lives. Then a thought comes in, that God is an hard Lord, who will not give
grace, though they desire it above all the World, but is resolved to destroy
them. Again Satan represents the Truth they have embraced, and which the
generality of the Generation of the Righteous do embrace, as no truth: and
violently hurries them, and bears it in upon their spirits, (especially in duty
to distract and dead their hearts) that they ought to turn to this or that or
the other erroneous way, else they will never know peace. Whatever comforts and
encouragements the Gospel hands forth to them, they with a strange obstinacy
reject as too good for them, and not belonging at all to them. And though the
hand and hatred of Satan be in all this, yet he is so subtle as to hide himself
under the dark shades of Melancholy, so that he is unperceived. Now for the
relief of such, I shall show how the truth of Grace may be discerned under the
prevalency of Melancholy.

1. Melancholic ones that are gracious have usually very low thoughts of
themselves: they have not confidence in the flesh, but are convinced, that
their own righteousness is rags, their wisdom folly, their strength weakness:
they see that no flesh has reason to glory in the Lords presence, and being
thus humble, God has promised to have respect to them. Psalm. 138. 6. Though the
Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly; And Psalm. 10. 17. Lord thou
have heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare their heart: an heart
prepared to pray they desire, thou will cause thine ear to hear.

2. Melancholic ones, who have grace, though they are full of fears, yet their
fears are without Scripture ground, they are apt to conclude themselves
Hypocrites, but not from Scripture premises. Satan in a violent way does inject
such thoughts, that God hates them, never was indeed near them, or has quite
left them, and never any Saints were in the like condition, and hereupon
follows a stinging perplexity, but not one word of God is produced to prove all
this. Though Satan's injections are direful and doleful, yet the Word speaks
hopefully concerning them, because they are weary of Sin, willing to close with
Christ, and hunger after righteousness and true holiness, and had rather have
an assurance of the love of God, and the light of his countenance, than Corn
and Wine, and all the things of the World in the greatest plenty and abundance.

3. Melancholic ones, who have grace, though they are filled with a great many
fancies and fears, yet the fear of God is predominant, and they are afraid of
Sin as the greatest evil. The favor of God is most desirable, his anger most
formidable in their esteem: therefore they dare not use sinful or suspected
means for their relief and help. They are not like Saul, who in his distress
and sadness ran to the Witch of Endor: they dare not turn Gluttons and
Drunkards, nor attempt to drown their sorrows in sensuality, but had rather
remain Melancholic Saints, than become boon Companions and jolly Sinners. They
do indeed imagine and fear a thousand things without reason; but truly with a
great deal of reason, the fear of God rules in their hearts, and they eschew
what is evil in his sight.

4. Melancholic ones, who have grace, endeavor to improve their melancholy
after a gracious manner. Now the World appears vain, Creatures are miserable
comforters; delights have lost their relish, and are become undelightful; They
take hold of the advantage, to get more loose from the World, and more above
it. If one perplexing fume turns all the World into an empty bubble, into an
insignificant cipher; Why, says the gracious Soul, should I ever dote upon this
World more? Under Melancholy, Death seems very near: and as they are going to
bed, or at other times, they have very strong and startling impressions of
Eternity: Gracious Souls take hold of this advantage the more seriously to
prepare for Death, and to provide for Eternity, and this argues they are indeed
the Children of Wisdom, Psalm. 90. 12.

5. Melancholic ones, who have grace, have a great care of the Gospels credit:
nay, truly sometimes this lies nearer their hearts, than their own lives. They
are afraid of madness and frenzy, lest Religion which they are professors of,
should suffer by it: they resist temptations to Self-murder, because if they
who have heard and talked so much of the Gospel should lay violent hands upon
themselves, profane Sinners would speak evil of the way of Truth, and be more
strongly prejudiced and hardened against the Gospel, as a Doctrine that has but
a bad tendency: this shows that they love the Gospel in truth, and consequently
are of God, Joh. 8. 47. This care of the Gospel farther appears, in that when
their melancholy abates, their seriousness remains. Indeed the better their
heads are, their hearts are in a better frame; because then their Souls and
their Grace can act with greater freedom. They long for clean hearts, and
desire clear heads, that with heads and hearts they may be more serviceable
unto God.

6. Melancholic ones, who have grace, in all their distress and trouble desire
to look unto God; though they fear he is an enemy, yet they cannot but look to
him for help; though they do but chatter as a Crane, and mourn as a Dove, yet
they cannot refrain speaking Hezekiahs and Jobs language: O Lord I am
oppressed, undertake for me, Esa. 38. 14. I am full of confusion, see thou my
affliction, Job 10. 15.

Case 10. The tenth Case is this; How may Repentance be known to be true, when
it is a Deathbed Repentance? Or just before a Malefactors Execution? It must
needs be granted that Repentance at last is possible, and that is all; probable
or usual it is not. One instance we have in Scripture to hinder despair, and but
one, to hinder presumption. To dally and to delay in Religion, how dangerous is
it? It Is perfect madness, willingly to lie under the wrath of God, under the
Devils power, under the guilt and dominion of Sin, and upon the brink of Hell
one minute longer. The longer you delay, Sin grows stronger, evil habits are
more rooted, Satan entangles you faster in his snare, the heart grows harder,
the Spirit of the Lord is more grieved, and Repentance becomes more difficult
and unlikely. We have cause to fear, that many thousands who talked of
Repentance hereafter, have been surprised by Death, and have suddenly dropped
into Hell before that Hereafter came. Well, but some at last have seemed very
penitent; and, How shall the truth of Repentance be discerned? Unto this I
answer;

1. Such who repent truly at last, are very ready to accuse, and very severe
in judging of themselves: they give glory to God, and take shame to themselves,
they justify the Lord in putting a period to their days; and acknowledge that
he might justly laugh at their calamity, and mock at their fear, and distress,
and anguish, and refuse to pity and pardon, and kill the Body and damn the
Soul together. This judging of themselves is a very good sign, and there is a
promise of escaping judgment; that is, condemnation; annexed thereunto, 1 Cor.
11. 31. For if we should judge our selves, we should not be judged.

2. Such who repent truly at last, are very jealous over their own Spirits,
lest the distress they are in, and the nearness unto death, be the only motive
unto Repentance, therefore their cries are the more earnest to be sincere
Converts. They prize new hearts, and beg that God would deliver them from their
natural guile and wickedness, and make them indeed new creatures. Oh, how do
they long, not only for a pardon: but that they may feel the power of the
renewing and sanctifying Spirit of Christ. Heal me and I shall be healed, turn
me and I shall be turned, save me and I shall be saved, Jer. 17. 14. are their
strong cries; and oh with what vehement desires are they accompanied!

3. Such who repent at last truly, are filled with an holy indignation, that
all their time and strength has been wasted in serving Sin and Satan, and
dishonouring that God that made them, and to whom they owe themselves. How
angry are they and displeased at themselves, that when they should have been
laboring in the Lords Vineyard, they either were standing idle in the Market,
or wrought iniquity with both hands earnestly. Now this holy indignation is by
the Apostle made an argument of sorrowing after a godly manner, of repentance
unto salvation, 2 Cor. 7. 11.

4. Such who repent truly at last, do look unto Jesus; Thus did the Thief upon
the Cross, Lord remember me, Luke 23. 42. Christ is their hope, and the grace
of God in him, which does superabound, though Sin has never so much abounded.
They look upon his Blood as the Blood of God, and able to do away the greatest
guilt, the foulest spot and stain, the most monstrous defilements. They
perceive that the Blood of Jesus speaks better things than the Blood of Abel,
Heb. 12. 24. Cries louder for Mercy and Salvation, than Abels did for
Vengeance: Hereupon they are encouraged and enabled to act the faith of
reliance: and believing on Jesus they shall not be confounded, 1 Pet. 2. 6. Oh,
how is this Savior now prized! How are they grieved at their former and so
long continued neglect of him. And though the Lord forgets their Sins, they
cannot but remember them; though he justifies them, they cannot cease
condemning themselves, the truth is, they are ashamed and confounded, and open
not their mouths because of their shame, though the Lord is pacified toward
them for all that they have done, Ezekiel. 16. 3.

5. They who repent truly at last, have a care of Gods honor, and are willing
to prevent others delaying their repentance. Their mouths therefore are full of
cautions, they blame their own folly, and exhort others to grow wiser, and
while it is called to day, to harden their hearts no longer. The Earl of
Rochesters dying care was to have his profane and lewd Writings burnt, as
being only fit to promote Vice and immorality, by which he had so highly
offended God, and shamed and blasphemed that holy Religion into which he was
baptized, and all his obscene and filthy pictures which were so notoriously
scandalous. He wished his Son might never be one of those wretched creatures who
pride themselves in abusing God and Religion; adding, That no Fortunes or
Honors were comparable to the love and favor of God. To a Friend of some Note
that came to see him, he thus expressed himself; Oh remember that you contemn
God no more: We have been all mistaken in our conceits and opinions, our
persuasions have been false and groundless, therefore God grant you repentance.
And in his dying Remonstrance signed before Witness, having bewailed his
pernicious opinions and vile practices, he thus speaks to all whom he had drawn
into Sin. I warn them in the name of God, and as they regard the welfare of
their immortal Souls, no more to deny his Being, or his Providence, or despise
his goodness; no more to make a mock of Sin, or contemn the pure and excellent
Religion of my ever blessed Redeemer, though whose merits alone, I, one of the
greatest of Sinners do yet hope for mercy and forgiveness.

Case 11. The eleventh Case follows, which is this; How may Grace be discovered
in Saints that are fallen? When I speak of the falls of Saints, I mean not
their Sins quotidianae incursionis, of daily incursion: for there is not a day,
nor a duty wherein the best do not in some respect offend; but faults that are
more gross and offensive, that approach nearer unto the nature of presumptuous
transgressions. That Saints do sometimes thus fall is evident from Scripture
and Experience, therefore all of them should be the more watchful, and humble,
and cry to be upheld, living by faith on that God who is of power to establish
them, Romans 16. 25. and Romans 11. 20. Well, because of unbelief they were broken
off, and thou stand by faith; be not highminded but fear. But when they do
fall, there is a difference between the manner of theirs and others
transgressing: it is said of such as are born of God, that they cannot sin
because they are born of God, 1 John 3. 9. i. e. they cannot sin in such a
manner as the unregenerate do. I am to present to you a Child of Light under an
Eclipse, and yet even now there is a great difference between him and them that
are under the power of darkness.

1. A Saint when he falls, sins not with the full consent of his will: not only
his Conscience does declare against Sin, but even his Will so far as sanctified
and renewed is also against it. His purpose is to take heed to his ways, that
he may not offend, Psalm. 39. 1. therefore when he falls he is surprised, and in
the hurry of a temptation: and though in this hurry Conscience is not heard,
and corruption like a torrent carries him away, yet there is a secret dislike
of Sin which arises from the Spirits lusting against the Flesh: Hence it is
that Saints cannot take that delight in Sin which others do, because their
wills do not fully close with the temptation. Though in David's transgression
there was too much of deliberation and contrivance, especially in his carriage
toward Vriah, yet if you consider the matter, you may find he was in a hurry
all along; first, he was hurried by a sinful and inordinate affection, and
afterward by fear of shame, in case what he had done should be discovered. 2.
A Saint though he may fall, yet does not ordinarily allow himself in Sin,
neither does he make use of the falls of Believers which the Scripture records,
as a plea for such an allowance, as wicked men commonly do. He looks upon the
works of darkness as unfruitful, and desires to have no fellowship with them,
because these will hinder his fellowship and communion with God. He cannot be
called a Worker of iniquity, because he prays with David, and that sincerely:
Deliver me from all my transgressions, Ps. 39. 8. and, Oh that my ways were
directed to keep thy Statutes, Ps. 119. 5.

3. A Saint never falls so far as to choose a new Lord and Master, he never
wholly casts off the yoke of Christ, nor resolves to be willingly subject to
the law of sin. Acts of disobedience indeed he may be guilty of; but when Satan
propounds it to him, and persuades him to renounce the Lords service, and to
give up himself to the service of diverse lusts and pleasures: he cannot bear
the thought of it, for he knows the wages of sin is death, and Christ is
incomparably the best Master. He never consents to be wholly under the bondage
of corruption as once he was, but often prays, that no iniquity may have the
dominion over him, Psalm. 119. 133. and especially that he may be kept back from
presumptuous sins, which are such great transgressions, Psalm. 19. 13. 4. A
Saint never falls so far as to take up with any portion beneath God himself.
His Soul has said, The Lord is my portion, Lam. 3. 24. and he will never go
back from it, or change his mind so as to become contented without God, and to
have all his portion here in this life. Oh no, though he may go away from his
Fathers house a while, and feed upon the husks that are abroad, yet he cannot
be satisfied with these, for they are not bread: and as he is unsafe, so truly
he is restless till he return to his Father again. His Soul remains empty till
the Lord fills it; weary till the Lord satiates it; sorrowful till God himself
replenish it.

5. A Saint when he falls, is quickly brought to himself, and to his God by
affliction, his heart shows its tenderness in yielding to the stroke and
impression of the Rod. Before I was afflicted, says the Psalmist, I went
astray, but now have I kept thy Word, Ps. 119. 67. And truly though there may
be great fears of death when affliction overtakes a Saint in his falls, yet the
new nature is secretly glad of affliction, whereby the flesh may be tamed and
corruption purged away. The backsliding Saint when he is stricken does not like
those. Esa. 1. 5. Revolt more and more, but accepts the punishment of his
iniquity, and desires to be thoroughly turned unto God who smites him: and with
his Soul he wishes the sanctification of what he feels, and that the affliction
may yield the peaceable and lasting fruits of righteousness, Heb. 12. 11.

6. A Saint after he has fallen, is very much afraid of Spiritual Judgments: he
is afraid lest the Lord should utterly leave him, and say concerning him; He is
proud, let him be proud still, he is filthy, let him be filthy still, he is
fallen, let him alone. David after his Sin, dreaded being cast away, and left
to himself, and being given up to his own hearts lusts. Psalm. 51. 11. Cast me
not away from thy presence, take not thy holy Spirit from me. The holy Spirit
had been exceedingly resisted and grieved, and had been highly and justly
provoked to depart, and that for ever. But David could not bear the thoughts of
being deprived of the quickening, sanctifying, comforting Spirit of God,
therefore with such concernedness he deprecates his departure.

7. If the Saints falls have been foul, he is troubled at Gods dishonor, and
that he has caused his blessed name to be blasphemed: it is his trouble that he
has wounded his own Conscience, and this very much adds to his trouble, that
he has wounded Religion, and caused the way of Truth to be evil spoken of. To
see fellow Saints grieving for his miscarriages, is the grief of his Soul, to
hear profane ones scoffing at Religion, is his shame and confusion; and to
perceive them hardened and strengthened in their wickedness by the Sins he has
fallen into, this makes his Repentance to be the greater. This was laid before
David as the aggravation of his Sin, and certainly it made a deep wound in his
Spirit, that by the deed he had done, he had given great occasion to the
enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12. 14.

8. The Saint after his fall rises again, and begs that he may stand faster.
The Sun sometimes is Eclipsed a greater part, sometimes half; and suppose it
should be a total Eclipse, yet tarry a while till the Moon that interposed
between the Sun and the Earth be gone, and the Sun will shine as it did before;
the Saints will recover after their backslidings, and shine as light again,
though Sin may darken them for a season. And when they do recover, Oh how do
they cry not only for pardon, but also for cleansing and establishment. Hark
unto David, Psalm. 51. 10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right
or a constant Spirit within me. And verse. 12. Uphold me with thy free Spirit.
They are importunate with God to keep them from falling any more, and to
present them faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy,
Jude v. 24. To be upheld will be their joy, their exceeding joy, as their fall
was their grief and trouble.

Case 12. The twelfth Case is this; How may we know whether we grow in grace?
The Saints in Scripture are compared to Trees, because of their growth and
fruitfulness: to the Cedar because they are so firmly rooted: to the Palm Tree,
because depressi resurgunt, the weights of affliction upon them, make them grow
the higher: to the Vine, because the fruits of righteousness which they bring
forth are so exceeding pleasant: to the Willows by the water courses, because
there is an aptness in the new creature to grow apace, if there be not some
impediment. But alas these impediments are too common: and where there is
life, yet there may be a languishing and withering. Growing Christians are more
rare, especially in this degenerate age. Now growth in Grace may thus be known.

1. Then we grow in Grace, when our belief of the Gospel has a stronger
impression: when things invisible are looked upon as the greatest realities in
the World, and we are affected and swayed by the view of them: When we can say
with the Apostle, that we walk by faith and not by sight, 2 Cor. 5. 7. If
things sensible do less work upon us, if we are less troubled at sensible
evils, because they are light, for a moment, and work for good: if we are less
taken with sensible good things, and enjoy them as if we enjoyed and possessed
them not; but things Spiritual and Eternal awaken our care and diligence
indeed, because we believe that these are infinitely of the nearest and
greatest concernment; it is a sign that our grace and faith has some strength,
and that we resemble those Worthies, who saw the invisible God, and declared
plainly, that they sought a better Country, than was to be found in this
present World, Heb. 11.

2. Then we grow in Grace, when our senses are exercised to discern both good
and evil: This will prove us to be of a fuller age, and that we are
distinguished from such as are but Babes, Heb. 5. 14. This discerning both good
and evil, does not only imply soundness of judgment to perceive what is truth
and what is error, that truth may be held fast, and error under what form or
disguise soever it comes may be rejected: but seems to have some relation to
the will and affections, and the good that is to be chosen, the evil that is to
be refused. When good things have a greater relish with us than formerly, and
Sin grows more and more distasteful, this shows our Spiritual senses are
improved. David's grace was much increased, when he said, How sweet are thy
words to my taste, yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth, Psalm. 119. 103. And v.
104. Through thy precepts I get understanding, therefore I hate every false way.

3. Then we grow in Grace, when heart Sins are quickly observed at the very
first rising of them, and in a greater measure mortified. When we are able to
keep our hearts under our eye, and to check them in their very first outleaps
from God, and reduce them presently; When pride and hatred and passion, and
envy cannot stir but they are instantly espied and beat down; when lust and
evil concupiscence are taken notice of at the first kindling, and while in the
spark, without delay quenched; this plainly shows the Spirit to be strong,
because it does prevail against the Flesh so quickly: Grace is certainly grown,
when Sin is nipt in the bud, and the Cockatrice in the Egg is crushed.

4. Then we grow in Grace, when we are more weaned from the World. The
Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were grown Believers, and they confessed
that they were strangers and pilgrims upon Earth, Heb. 11. 13. David also was
thus got above the World, when he said, Surely every man walks in a vain
show, surely they are disquieted in vain, he heapeth up riches and knows not
who shall gather them, Psalm. 39. 6. And v. 12. I am a stranger with thee and a
sojourner as all my fathers were. The World was so little and low in Moses's
esteem, that he prefers even affliction with the people of God, before those
pleasures which was but for a season, Heb. 11. 25. And v. 26. he esteemed the
reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt. When the World
is thus gotten under foot, that the worst of Christ is preferred before the best
of the World, it argues strength of faith whereby our victory over it, is so
far advanced. When we are undisturbed at changes we meet with here below,
because our treasure is in Heaven and out of reach; when with the Apostle we
know how to want and how to abound; when we are not so much concerned about
earthly things, because they are not our portion: this plainly speaks an
increase of grace.

5. Then we grow in Grace, when we can readily deny our selves. When we are not
wedded to our own wills, but are yielding and subject unto others, being
clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5. 5. and especially we submit unto God, though
his commands never so much cross our natural and carnal inclination: when we
can lay our Honor, our Ease, our Wealth, our Liberty, our Lives, at the foot
of Christ, to be disposed of in such a way as He may be most magnified: now
certainly there is much of the Spirit of glory and of Gods resting upon us. How
self-denying, how bold and venturous was the Apostle, desiring that Christ
might be magnified, whether it were by life or by death, Phil. 1. 20. It argues
much Grace, when the glory of God the Father and of Christ are dearer to us
than our dearest earthly comforts, and we count it gain to lose any thing for
Christ's sake. Oh brave Hebrews, who took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods,
knowing that they had in Heaven a better and an enduring substance, Heb. 10. 34.

6. Then we grow in Grace, when we trust in God, though outward and visible
helps do fail. The Lord who made all the creatures, though he uses means is not
tied to them, but can work without, and against them: therefore though outward
props fail, faith should not fail, and if it be strong, it does not. Hab. 3.
17. 18. Although the Fig Trees shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the
Vines: though fields do yield no food, and flocks are cut off from the fold,
yet will I joy in the Lord, and rejoice in the God of my Salvation. The
Creatures are insufficient altogether. God alsufficient though alone, and a
strong faith dares trust him by himself. Nay a strong faith will rely upon him
and follow him, notwithstanding repulses, denials, and discouragements. Thus
the Woman of Canaan, holds on in petitioning our Lord, though at first he was
silent, and answered not a word, though he seemed not to regard the Disciples
intercession, though when he speaks to her, he compares her to a Dog, and not
fit to eat the Childrens Bread; yet she gives not over, but retorts this
discouragement; and turns it into an argument. The Dogs eat the crumbs which
fall from their Masters Table, hereupon her petition is granted, and her faith
highly commended; O Woman great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will, Mat. 15. 28.

7. Then we grow in Grace, when the thoughts of God are more abiding and
delightful, and our affections toward him are stronger: the more our hearts
are the Lords, the more they must needs be enriched with grace, and in a
greater measure sanctified. When David was able to say, that the meditation of
God was sweet to him, Psalm. 104. 34. That his Soul followed hard after God,
Psalm. 63. 8. and that he thirsted for God, for the living God, as the chased
Heart pants after the Brooks of Water, Psalm. 42. 1, 2. This certainly did argue
not only the truth of grace, but strength also.

8. Then we grow in Grace, when we are not prone to be offended; Stumbling
argues weakness; but stumbling blocks will be got over by those whose grace is
strengthened: When we hold fast the truth, though many being led away with the
error of the wicked, fall from their own stedfastness, as Athanasius, contra
mundum, stood up for the Deity and Godhead of Jesus Christ, though the World
seemed to be turned Arrian; when persecutions cannot affright us from our Duty:
nor others Apostasies make us dislike Religion, but we are the more steadfast,
and walk more closely with the Lord: this shows that grace is much increased.

9. Then we grow in Grace, when our fruit is really better than formerly for
quality, and more for quantity. If we bring forth more fruit than in times
past, it argues us more fruit than in times past, it argues us more purged.
Joh. 15. 2. Every branch that bears fruit, he purges it that it may bring
forth more fruit. When we are filled with the fruits of righteousness, as this
is to the praise and glory of God, so it declares, that he has made all grace
to abound toward us, that we might abound unto every good work, 2 Cor. 9. 8.

Case 13. The last Case is this; How may we understand when our joy is true and
well grounded? There is a joy of the Hypocrite: the Hearers compared unto the
stony ground received the Word with joy: the Jews rejoiced in John, that
burning and shining light for a season; so that there is a great deal of false
joy, which whoever entertain, they will lie down in sorrow, Esa. 50. 11. How
then shall true joy be known? To this I answer;

1. True joy follows after true sorrow: they who reap in joy, do first sow in
tears, Ps. 126. 5. Our Lord tells us, that the mourners are blessed for they
shall be comforted, Mat. 5. 4. Rest is given to the weary and the heavy laden.
That joy is sinful and utterly unseasonable, where Sin is made light of and
never was looked upon as a burden. But if we are humble and broken, and weary
of all Sin, and of all that is in Sin, desiring to be delivered from the force
and filth, as well as from the guilt of it, and then are revived: we may
conclude our peace is from the God of peace and comfort; for though he be the
high and the lofty one who inhabits Eternity, yet he dwells with him that is of
an humble and contrite Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the humble and to revive
the heart of the contrite ones, Eze. 57. 15.

2. True joy has ever the Lord Jesus for the foundation of it. Phil. 3. 3. We
rejoice in Christ Jesus, says the Apostle: And Romans 5. 11. If we joy in God,
it is through our Lord Jesus Christ by whom we have received the atonement. The
Comforter does ever glorify Christ, so as to make us understand that all
grace, mercy, and peace is given to us through a Mediator. His sorrows have
purchased pardon and salvation, and the joy of that Salvation. The Churches joy
is built upon the same Rock on which the Church her self is built, and that
Rock is Christ, therefore her consolation is the stronger.

3. True joy is never without true holiness. The Spirits sanctification always
goes before, and ever accompanies his consolations. Peace and righteousness do
kiss each other, where peace is of the right kind. Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of
God is righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. A true Saint if he
makes bold with Sin, his joy will be lessened, perhaps lost; his peace which
has been spoken to him will be broken, if he return to folly.

4. True joy is Spiritually rational, not an Enthusiastical business: my
meaning is, there can be good Scripture-reason produced for it. The Spirit of
God works sanctifying grace in the heart, increases that grace, and acts that
grace, so that there is a powerful exercise of it, and then he does bear
witness to the truth of it. The Spirit discovers unto the Soul, that he has
made it willing to receive Christ, and to hunger after holiness, and willing to
be the Lords and to serve him in sincerity, and to escape the corruption that
is in the World through lust: and now his testimony of adoption is rational,
and may be received as indeed the witness of the Spirit. Whereas when joys are
but the fruits of stubborn and irrational impulses: and the comforts of the
Gospel are applied without any Scripture ground; comfortable Scriptures are not
brought by the True and Good, but by the Bad and lying Spirit.

5. True joy is not a seal unto error and delusion: Some have fallen away from
the truths of Christ, and got above his Ordinances, and cast his Word behind
their backs, and despised his Blood, and yet have bragged of Joy. Oh the
subtlety of the Evil One! As he makes use of false Teachers, false Opinions,
and false Hopes: so of false joys, to ruin Souls.

6. True joy is strength to them that have it. Nehem. 8. 10. The joy of the
Lord is your strength. Spiritual joy affords great ability to do the work of
God, to bear Afflictions and Tribulations: and to resist and overcome the
Tempter, and the World, and the lusts thereof. The joyful Christian is a man of
might, he wrestles with the principalities and powers of darkness, and is too
hard for them: he is discouraged at no difficulty in Religion, he mounts up
with wings as an Eagle, he runs and is not weary, he walks without fainting,
Esa. 40. ult. he is faithful unto death and at last is rewarded with a Crown of
life, Rev. 2. 10. Thus have I resolved all the Cases I propounded: I come now
to the Application.

I begin with some inferences that may be drawn from this Doctrine, If this be
true, that it highly concerns all to Examine and Prove themselves; then,

1. Hence I infer the misery of Man by nature who is in darkness; so that till
he is enlightened from above, he is not capable of understanding himself, his
condition, or his interest. Man by nature is under the power of darkness: of
this power you read, Col. 1. 13. and how deliverance from it is to be valued.
Darkness has a great power to keep men under Sin, to make them careless,
stupid, and utterly unconcerned what becomes of them to Eternity: therefore
evil Angels are stayled, the Rulers of the Darkness of this World. Nay the
Natural Man is in the abstract, called darkness it self. Ephesians. 5. 8. For ye were
sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord. Now, how can he that is
in darkness look into himself, or look into the Lord? Oh the misery of dark
Souls! What unspeakable danger are they in, and their not seeing their own
peril does but the more increase it. We pity a man that has sustained a
breaking loss, and does not know it: a Beggar that being blind is near a
precipice, and does not perceive it; but much more compassionable is the case
of the Natural Man, who neither knows himself nor the things which concern his
peace.

2. Hence we may infer the folly of the Natural Man who is so prone to cry
peace unto, and to deceive himself. He loves to go upon sure grounds in other
matters, and is very serious about trifles, but woefully trifles in the weighty
concerns of another World. Any thing satisfies him, and makes him securely to
say, all is well. If Satan tell him as he did our first Parents, that he shall
not surely dye. Satan is believed, the God of Truth and the Word of Truth being
disregarded. How many when they hear the Words Curse, do bless themselves in
their hearts, and say they shall have peace, though they walk on after the
imagination of their evil heart: therefore the Lord threatens, that his anger
and jealousy shall smoke against such, and he will blot out their names from
under Heaven, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20.

Are they reproved for Sin? They say, All are Sinners: whereas Penitents
forsake presumptuous Sins, and are willing to forsake all; but these
Selfdeluders, are hardly willing to forsake any. They bear up upon this, that
God is merciful; and yet they slight and abuse his mercy, preferring their
vanities and lusts before it, and go on to injure his Justice and provoke him
to Jealousy. They are full of hope, because Christ died: and yet they thwart
one great end of his Death, and will not be the better for it, for they refuse
to dye to Sin, and live to Righteousness.

3. If it highly concerns all to prove themselves, hence we may infer, what an
advantage it is to enjoy the light of the Word of God. This is a Glass that
flatters none. It discovers what Sin is, and where it is. It calls Grace,
Grace: and will speak peace to them that are the Sons of peace; but on the
contrary, it will tell the Sinner, though he be never so high in the World,
never so high in his vain hopes; Thou art the man, that love and live in
thy iniquity, therefore thou art under wrath, a Son of Death and in danger of
eternal damnation. This word convinces of Sin, shows the necessity of turning
unto God, and is a great means of Conversion; and afterward by discovering of
Grace, it proves the joy and rejoicing of the heart. The Unbelievers and
Ungodly need this Word, and ought to prize it, for it shows them their guilt
and a Mediator, their sore and also a Physician, and faith is wrought by the
hearing of it, Romans 10. 17. The Saints have loved this Word exceedingly; Hark
how the Psalmist cries out: Psalm. 89. 15. Blessed is the people that know the
joyful sound, they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance.

4. Hence we may also infer the benefit of a searching Ministry. Seers that
will see vain visions, are not worth hearing: and Prophets that prophesy only
smooth things, had better prophesy nothing at all, for they prophesy nothing
but deceit. Such Prophets are guilty of the blood of Souls, and utterly ruin
them while they heal them slightly, crying peace, peace, when there is no
peace, Jer. 6. 14. Such Pastors destroy the Lords Vineyard; such Dawbers are
not Builders of the House of God. How sad is it when the blind lead the blind;
both they that are led, and they that are the leaders fall into the bottomless
pit of perdition. But a plain dealing Minister, that rebukes Sin sharply, that
gives warning in time, to flee from eternal wrath: that commends himself to
every man's conscience in the sight of God: that speaks as if he knew men's
hearts, and discovers their secret thoughts to them; that is a Son of thunder
to the wicked, and a Son of consolation to the broken hearted, and has the
tongue of the learned to speak a word in season to the weary, and heavy laden.
Such a Shepherd is a great blessing to the Flock, ought highly to be esteemed
in love for his work sake, and may be an happy instrument to save himself and
them that hear him.

5. Hence we may further infer the great necessity of the Spirits aid. Unless
he enlighten the eyes of our understandings we shall pass a wrong judgment upon
our selves, and every thing else also. A subtle Serpent, and a deceitful heart
will be too hard for the most powerful Preacher breathing: if the Spirit of the
Lord does not second and set home the word preached. The Spirit as I said
before, takes the Glass of the Law, and holds it before the Sinner, that he may
see therein both his heart and life; and then, and truly not till then, he
will cry out. Alas, alas! What have I been? What have I done? Where am I? And
whither will my Sins at last bring me? The Spirit can charge Sin so home, that
there is no denial, no excuse made. The Sinner trembles, confesses, laments,
begs pardon, consents to forsake his wickedness. Thus Ephraim after he was
instructed, is ashamed and confounded because of his abominations. The Publican
being made sensible he was a Sinner, cries out, God be merciful! And as the
Spirit convinces the Sinner, so he discovers to the Saint, what God has given
him: not only the things themselves which are great and glorious, but also the
Saints interest in those things. 1 Cor. 2. 12. Now we have received not the
Spirit of this World, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know those
things. which are freely given to us of God.

6. If it highly concerns all to prove themselves; learn hence the hatred and
subtlety of Satan in Staving men off from this duty. All his subjects are a
company of inconsiderate fools, if they would but bethink themselves, they
would become wiser than to serve such a Master. This Enemy cannot endure that
wicked men should look downward to Hell, for fear they should be awakened and
affrighted: nor that they should look inward into themselves, for fear they
should see themselves lost, and look out for a Savior: nor that they should
look upwards unto God, for fear they should be converted and healed. The Devil
hates Souls, therefore is unwilling that any care should be taken about them:
he cannot abide that any should inquire into their Spiritual state, therefore
he endeavors to divert them: he allures some with wealth, bewitches others
with pleasures, intoxicates others with applause and honor; he represents
Self-examination to be Self-tormenting, and holiness a mere Hell upon Earth.
But in all this he shows his falsehood as well as enmity. What madness is it to
listen to him as a Leader and Counselor who is both a Liar and a Murderer!

7. Hence we may learn the great Error of the Church of Rome, in crying down
Assurance, and consequently discouraging Self-examination. The Council of
Trent, Sess. 6. has impiously determined and declared, Certitudo remissionis
peccatorum, est vana, and omni pietate remota fiducia. The Saints assurance of
the pardon of Sin, is a vain and ungodly confidence. How have they here
blasphemed against the Comforter, in making all his joys and consolations,
which suppose Sin to be pardoned, altogether vain. The Scripture speaks after
another manner, Gal. 4. 6. And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. 1 John 4. 16. We have
known and believed the love that God has to us. 1 John 3. 14. We know that we
have passed from death to life; And v. 19. Hereby we know that we are of the
Truth, and shall assure our hearts before him. This assurance was not the
effect of a particular and extraordinary revelation peculiar to that first age
of Christianity: but was the result of those charcters of Grace which are to be
found even in the Saints now, as well as then. The consolations of the Spirit
were not confined to the Primitive times, but as a Comforter he is to abide
with the Church for ever, Joh. 14. 16. And indeed those who walk in the fear of
God may expect the comforts of the Holy Ghost without any presumption. The
Apostle bids us to draw nigh with a true heart in full assurance of faith, Heb.
10. 22. And 2 Pet. 2. 10. We are commanded to give diligence to make our
calling and election sure. What impiety is it then to say, that Assurance is an
impious confidence. What is it that the Church of Rome does not strike at? She
strikes at our Liberties, at our Lives, would clasp the Book of the Gospel, and
lock it up in an unknown Tongue; She would baffle our very senses, and lord it
over our Consciences, and exercise dominion over our Faith, and rob us of our
peace and comfort, and joy in Gods Salvation.

Use 2. It may serve for a great and just lamentation, that this duty of
Self-proving is so exceedingly neglected by the generality, even of those unto
whom the Gospel is preached. Multitudes are as unconcerned what is likely to
become of them in another World, as if there were not a pin to choose between
Heaven and Hell: as if eternal Life did not deserve to be desired, and eternal
Death were not worthy of their fear. Men are willing to know whether they
thrive in the World; there is anxious enquiring what the Parliament does, and
what the times are likely to prove, whether peaceable and prosperous, or full
of tumult and confusion. But alas, alas! it is no part of the enquiry of the
most among us; What Eternity is likely to prove to them, whether an Eternity of
horror and woe; or an Eternity of joy and blessedness. A great number live in
the profane and total neglect of God and godliness, and will not give the
Gospel so much as the hearing; but truly there are also many who will pray,
attend upon the Word preached, and profess high, and talk religiously, who
never talk with themselves, nor call their hearts to task, nor speak such
language as this to themselves. O animula vagula, blandula!
Quae nunc abibis in loca?


O my Soul in what state art thou? And where art thou likely to be lodged, when
once thou have left this earthly Tabernacle? The consequences of this neglect
of Self-examination are fatal and truly lamentable.

1. These careless Sinners that prove not themselves, know not themselves; they
know neither their Sore not the way of Cure, their Sins are hid from them, and
so they must needs be strangers to Repentance and godly Sorrow: they remember
not their own wickedness, so as to mourn and condemn themselves, therefore God
will remember it so to condemn and punish them. He that is ignorant of himself
must needs remain impenitent and hard-hearted, and such do treasure up unto
themselves wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2. 5.

2. The not proving themselves is the ground of Sinners presumptuous
confidence. False hope cannot bear a serious Trial; but they that try not
themselves are full of such hopes: and such hopes the stronger, they are the
more destructive. The hope of them that are Hypocrites and forget God, is
compared to a Spiders Web, it is spun out of themselves, but it is easily cut
off; and they and their Hope shall perish together, Job 8. 13, 14. They that
prove not themselves, in how certain danger are they of building their house
upon the sand; And when the Rain descends and the floods come and beat upon
their house, 'twill fall and great will be the fall of it, Mat. 7. 27.

3. They that prove not themselves, hide their faces and esteem not the Lord of
Life and Glory: they feel not their sickness, they sancy they are whole, and
value not Physician; they are more afraid to be cured of their Disease than to
die of it. They have no hunger, and so they slight the bread of life: they
never were weary and heavy laden, and so they mind not him that alone can give
them rest; they never were thirsty in a Spiritual sense, and so the invitation
is not hearkened to, to come and drink of the Water of Life freely; for want of
proving themselves, they know not in what a most wretched and lost condition
they are; no wonder then if they neglect great Salvation, and how shall such
escape? Heb. 2. 3. When the Apostle says, How shall we escape? He does not say
what, to intimate that the punishment which will follow upon neglecting the
great Salvation whereof Christ is the Author, is much sorer than tongue can
utter, or heart is able to conceive or reach.

4. They that prove not themselves, know not what they are doing, they are
breaking a Law most worthy to be kept with as great chariness as the Apple of
our Eyes: they are engaged in the service of Sin whose wages is Death and Hell:
they are the Devils Vassals, who hates and strives to ruin those who serve him
with the greatest labor; they are provoking the Lord more and more to anger,
and provoking themselves to the confusion of their own faces. It Is very bad and
sad work they are employed about, and because they neither prove their work nor
themselves, they do not in a penitential way cry out, What have we done? But
what they have done, they will do still, whatever comes on it: therefore the
Lord complains, Jer. 8. 6. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright; no
man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? Every one turned
to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle.

5. They that prove not themselves, know not whither they are going: these
careless Sinners consider not that their most pleasant Sins will be as bitter
and as deadly as the very gall of Asps at last: that of Solomon is verified in
them, Prove. 14. 12. There is a way that seems right unto a man, but the end
thereof are the ways of death. The end of that broad way our Lord speaks of his
hid from the multitude which go in it. They are blind, and do not see afar off;
nay, though Death is near at hand, and Hell follows immediately upon Death, yet
they do not see it. Woe unto them, they fly from God, and they run post haste
toward ruin, and do not understand what dreadful and everlasting destruction
they are near, till they have actually and utterly destroyed themselves, and
that beyond remedy. Thus the rich man in the Gospel thought of nothing but
taking his ease, eating, drinking, and making merry, till his Soul was required
and lost: and he was made to feel the torment and vengeance of eternal Fire.

6. These careless Sinners who will not prove themselves, their destruction
will be sudden, unexpected, nay contrary to expectation, and so will be the
more terrible. At present they mind not what they do, but God remembers all
their wickedness, Hos. 7. 2. And when he shall call them to an account for all,
what horror and confusion will seize upon them! They thought the Lord as
little regarded their Sins, as they did themselves, and never expected after
reckonings. What all their good things shall be taken away, which can last but
for a short time, and eternal evils shall come in their room, when they shall
find and feel themselves most miserable in the hottest lowest Hell, and
that'tis utterly impossible that ever their wretched condition should be
altered. Oh then they will curse their folly and madness, who before did bless
themselves: and their foregoing presumption and security will make their pain
and anguish, and despair to be the more intolerable.

Use 3. Of Direction. And there are three great things which I shall give you
directions concerning.

First, How to prove your selves so as to attain unto an assurance of the love
of God.

Secondly, How to prove your selves before you engage in that Ordinance of the
Lords Supper.

Thirdly, How to prove and call your selves to an account every day, that you
may walk with the greater circumspection.

In the first place I am to direct you, how to prove your selves so as to
attain unto an assurance of the love of God. Before I come to the directions
themselves, I shall lay down some Arguments to persuade all Saints to labor
after this Assurance, it is pity and Saint should be without it, it is pity any
of Gods Children should be ignorant of that most near, and blessed, and
everlasting Relation, in which they stand to him. Now to make you prize
assurance at an high rate, and to give all diligence to get it. Consider,

1. Assurance of the love of God, will inflame your hearts with greater love to
him. What the Apostle says in remarkable, 1 John 4. 19. We love him because he
first loved us. When you know that all your Debts are remitted freely, and that
very much is forgiven you, you cannot choose but have much love unto him that
forgave you. Cos amoris amor, Love is the whetstone of love: Pray therefore for
the manifestation of Gods love to you, that the light of his countenance may
warm your hearts, and your Souls may love him with the greater strength and
ardency. Unbelieving doubts and fears have a natural tendency to chill and damp
affection, whereas when you know that you are the Children of God, you cannot
but love him as incomparably the best of all Fathers.

2. Assurance of the love of God will fill you with joy and wonder. The Apostle
tells us, that having received the atonement, there followed joy in God, Romans
5. 11. And not only so, but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom we have now received the atonement. Well may the assured Believer
rejoice, for his name is written in Heaven: And there are no Errata in the Book
of Life, no blots there made, no name ever razed out which is down there. And
how may such an one wonder, that the free grace of God should make such a
difference between him and others, between him and his former self! When he was
first loved, he was worthy to be loathed he was loved freely; for he was found
lying polluted in his blood.

3. Assurance of the love of God will take away the difficulty of Religion.
When once you know that God is yours, Christ yours, the Promises yours, things
present, and to come yours, you will not think much of any thing you are
required to do, or part with. Apprehension that you are dear Children will make
you follow God indeed, Ephesians. 5. 1. and follow hard after him. Apprehension, that
you are pleasant to him, will cause you to take the more pleasure in him and in
his service. An assurance, that God is ready to assist you in every piece of
work he enjoins you, ready to meet you in his Ordinances, and to be found of
you when you seek him, and that he will not forget your labor of love, Heb. 6.
10. This will make you to love your labor, for your labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58.

4. Assurance of the love of God will make earthly things contemptible in your
eyes. When you know your interest in the Fountain of living Waters, how little
will you value the broken Cisterns! When the Psalmist had been assured that God
was his portion for ever, things on Earth became undesirable, Psalm. 73. 25, 26.
The Apostle being persuaded of his title to things invisible and eternal, he
counts the things that are seen which are temporal, not worth a look from him,
2 Cor. 4. 18. And David is so far from fancying them, that he prays he may
never cast an eye or hanker after them any more. Psalm. 119. 37. Turn away my
eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way. They that know and
believe the love which God has to them, are satisfied, that his love has
provided far better things than the World can boast of, or the men of the World
know of. Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of man, what God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Those
believing Souls that were in assured expectation of a better Country than any
in this World, to wit, an Heavenly Country, they confessed they were Strangers
and Pilgrims upon Earth, Heb. 11. 13. Earth, and the things of the Earth, were
very mean and inconsiderable in their eyes.

5. Assurance of the love of God will be a mighty antidote and preservative
against temptation: with what confidence will it make you to look unto your
Lord and Father for help against the Tempter, and his grace will be sufficient
for you, 2 Cor. 12. 9. so that you shall be strong enough to resist the Devil,
and make him flee from you. The Assured Believer can more easily silence Satan
than others can, because he has tasted and seen how good and gracious the Lord
is: he has experienced that peace, in the God of love and peace, which the
World can neither give, nor take away; therefore he does the more contemn all
the offers which Satan can make to him in the hour of temptation. The assured
Believer may cry out, (...) Now I have found real contentment; now I have
tasted true joy, Earth cannot yield it, Sin is the sure hindrance of it, in God
alone it is to be found. Temptation upon such an one is likely to have but small
success.

6. Assurance of the love of God will lift you up above the fear of evil
tidings. Psalm. 112. 7. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is
fixed trusting in the Lord. Why should those be afraid, who dwell in the secret
place of the most High, and abide under the shadow of the Almighty? Psalm. 91.
1. The Saint has the Almighty on his side, who surely is able to protect him.
He is under the shadow of the Almighty, the Lord with his wings does cover him,
that violence may not be offered to him; nay, he abides under this Shadow, so
that he is safe at all times. He dwells in the Most High, and who then can
reach him? Nay, he dwells in the secret place of the most High, which shows how
precious he is in Gods account, and how far out of harms way. Single David
supposes an whole Host encamped against him, yet says, his heart shall not
fear, Psalm. 27. 3. and knowledge of his interest in God is the ground of his
confidence; verse. 1. The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom shall I fear?
The Lord is the strength of my Life, of whom shall I be afraid?

7. Assurance of the love of God will make you very holy and heavenly. The
Grace of God is but presumed upon and abused when'tis made an encouragement
unto licentiousness. Hark to the Apostle, Romans 6. 1, 2. What shall we say then,
shall we continue in Sin that grace may abound? God forbid, how shall we that
are dead to Sin, live any longer therein? Those who know they are under Grace
do most abhor the dominion of Sin, v. 14. they live most to God, and are most
forward to be the Servants of Righteousness. The Conversation of such will be
much in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. The Heir in his minority does often think of the
Estate he is to enjoy. Those who know they are the Children of God will often
think of what they are to partake of hereafter: for they are Heirs of God and
joint Hiers with Christ, they are begotten again to a lively hope by the
resurrection of Christ from the dead, unto an inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fades not away, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. No contemplation will be
so delightful to us, as that of Heaven, when once we know, that our Lord is
gone to prepare a place for us, and will come again and receive us to himself,
that where he is we may be for ever also.

8. Assurance of the love of God will make you to abound in praises. He has
made you new creatures to this very end, that you should show forth the praises
of him who has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.
9. How does the Apostle Peter break out into thanksgiving upon this account, 1
Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again. The Apostle Paul speaks
to the same purpose, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Blessed be the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly things in Christ. He has chosen us in him before the Foundation of
the World, that we should be Holy, and without blame before him in Love: He
has predestined us unto the Adoption of Children. He has made us accepted
in the beloved, in whom we have Redemption through his Blood, the Forgiveness
of sins according to the Riches of his Grace. How much has the Lord wrought
both in, and for those he has made Believers! He has abounded toward them in
Wisdom, in Grace, in Power, in Love; Praise is a debt, Praise is expected; and
Praise is comely: Though all his Works praise the Lord, yet Saints look upon
themselves as under a more special and peculiar obligation, to magnify and
bless his Name.

9. Assurance of the Love of God, will make Afflictions tolerable, nay Death it
self desirable. The bitterest Cup will down more easily when you see, it is
reached forth to you by the hand of a Father. The curse of the Cross is gone,
and it may be the better born, and the Sting of Death is taken out, and now
Death and the Grave may be triumphed over. What was Death to old Simeon when
his Eyes had seen Gods Salvation, it was but a peaceable departure out of a
troublesome World, Luke 1. 29. 30. What was Death to the Apostle Paul who knew,
that as soon as ever he was absent from the Body he should be present with the
Lord? It was not dreadful, but desirable, Phil. 1. 23. I desire to depart and
to be with Christ which is far better. These are the Arguments (and are they
not strong ones?) to persuade you to labor after Assurance.

The Directions how to prove your selves, so as to attain this Assurance
follow.

1. Set selves as in the presence of the All-Seeing and Heart searching God.
Who knows you, who will judge you, and who alone can make you to know your
selves. You cannot possibly deceive him, for every Creature is manifest in his
sight, all things are naked and open to his veiw. Heb. 4. 13. Your Spirits will
be apt both to trifle and to juggle, unless they are awed with a sense of the
Lords Omniscience. Let Conscience in the searching of you act as Gods Officer,
and as Gods Officer in Gods presence, and then it will deal the more faithfully.

2. Pray that your Spirits may give a true Testimony concerning you. And that
they may do so; you must be well acquainted with Scripture-signs and characters
of true Grace, and then with great intention reflect upon your selves, to see
whether you have the marks of Christ's sheep upon you, whether you have the
characters of Gods Children. A wrong judgment of your selves how extremely
prejudicial would it be to you: Adjure your Spirits therefore in the name of
the Lord to tell you the very Truth; and cry unto the Lord himself, that he
would not suffer you to fancy or call your selves his Children, if you are
really but hypocrites and strangers to him, that you may not cry peace and
safety; when God speaks just the contrary.

2. Be willing to find out every thing that's evil in you, in order to your more
complete purging. David prays, see if there be any evil way in me, and lead me
in the way Everlasting, Psalm. 139. 24. And Psalm. 19. 12. He desires to be
cleansed from secret sins, that nothing wicked might borrow the shape of lawful
and good, and thereby abide in him.

The more corruption is found our and mortified, the more fruitful you will be,
John 15. 2. Every branch that bears fruit he purges it that it, may bring
forth more fruit. And the more fruitful you are, the more evident it will be
that you are really the living branches of the true Vine, which is Christ Jesus.

4. Pray hard, That if you have any Grace, the Lord would increase it, and
bring it into exercise, that it may be the more apparent. Little Grace is
nearest unto no Grace, much Grace is nearer unto Glory. When Grace lies dormant
as it were and asleep in the Habit, it may be doubted of, but when it is
vigorously acted, the Truth of it will more easily be granted. Thus the Hare
when she sits close is not perceived, but when she is started then she is
visible to all. Pray therefore to resemble the Thessalonians whose Faith did
grow exceedingly, and whose Love abounded. 2 These. 1. 3. And that your Faith
may work, and your Love put you upon labor, this is the way to have your
spiritual estate cleared up to you.

5. Find out and avoid what really nourishes and keeps up your Doubts and
Fears. Entertain not high Thoughts of your selves, your gifts, your parts, your
seize; for deadness, and darkness, and doubting will follow upon
spiritual pride. Check the spirit in you which lusts unto Envy, Jam. 4. 5.
Abhor all lascivious thoughts and motions at the first rising of them. Let not
any Earthly enjoyment get too high a room in your Heart, nor too large a share
in your Affections. Suffer not your Spirits to be ruffled and disordered by
passion and peevishness. In short connive at no corruption, but mortify all
your members upon Earth, Col. 3. 5. Not sparing the right Hand, or right Eye.
For if you deal gently with any of your lusts, and suffer them ever an anon to
prevail, they will render your condition doubtful, and will be a strong
impediment unto Assurance and Consolation.

6. When you are proving your selves heed not Satan in his unreasonable
injections. You need not doubt but this Accuser of the Brethren will be very
busy, and use many wiles to hinder you from attaining peace of Conscience. The
Christians comfort which is the Christians Heaven upon Earth, is the Hell and
Torment of this envious Spirit; therefore he does what he can to hinder it.

He starts a great many captious questions, in the minds of Humbled and
Awakened ones. How do you know but that you are of the number of the not
Elected? Is not the day of Grace past, and the Spirit quite gone? Are you not
judicially blinded and hardened? Can you ever hope for an interest in, and
sense of the Love of God, who have been such rebels heretofore, and such
revolters and back-slinders, since a profession of Religion? Sometimes this
Enemy of souls will charge those that are sincere with hypocrisy in a most
peremptory manner; he tells them that all their duties are a mere Abomination,
that they have not one jot of saving Faith, that they are mere strangers unto
godly sorrow and repentance; that they have nothing at all of the Love of God
in them. [Calumniare audacter aliquid haerebit,] Satan charges boldly, and
thereby hopes something will stick, whereby the soul will be disquieted. But
such injections as these are not to be regarded; because they come from him
that is called a Liar; and it may be known they proceed from him, because he
proves not what he injects by Scripture; nay he overlooks all that the
Scripture speaks for the souls encouragement: And his design in these
injections is to make duty neglected, to drive souls to despair; and to lay
aside the profession and practice of Religion. Be altogether deaf to Satan
perceiving his evil design, and pray that the God of peace would bruise Satan
under your feet, Romans 16. 20.

7. Add not unto the Word of God, Prove. 30. 6. My meaning is this, believe
nothing either for or against your selves but accoring to the written Word of
God, rightly understood and applied. Many question their state, because their
Hearts are so dead in Prayer; because they find so much hardness and
unaffectedness under Ordinances, Mercies, Afflictions; because they fall so
exceeding short of what they would fain both be and do. But where does the Word
tell you, that where there is true Grace all deadness and hardness of Heart is
removed? Or that none are real Saints but who are absolutely perfect in
Holiness? The Apostle Paul found evil present with him when about to do that
which is good, Romans 7. 21. And the beleiving Galatians, had flesh as well as
spirit, and this flesh was very active, and lusted against the spirit so that
they could not do the things which they would have done, Gal. 5. 17. You have
spiritual life, else you would not have spiritual sense to feel and be weary of
remainders of corruption; you would not have a will to be, and do good; and
still to be and do better; if God had not wrought will this in you.

8. Be sure not to thrust away that consolation, which the Word of God hands
forth to you, but humbly and thankfully accept it. Though the Heart be
naturally deceitful above all things, yet so far as it is renewed it deals truly
and sincerely, and Conscience being enlightened by the Word of God, is to be
credittd in its Testimony, 1 John 3. 21. Beloved if our Heart condemn us not,
then have we confidence toward God. If therefore upon the strictest search
your Hearts do witness for you that there are good things in you toward God,
as it was said concerning Ahijah the Son of Jeroboam, 1 King. 14. 13. If you
find that God is preferred before the World; that you are willing to receive
the Son as the way to the Father, and that you consent, nay earnestly desire to
be sanctified throughout by the Spirit. You should not dispute against your
comfort, but gladly accept of the peace of the Gospel, for you are the Sons of
peace. You will grieve the Spirit of God, and add to your own grief, if you
will not heed the Scripture speaking plainly for you, and for your relief, and
if your Souls refuse to be comforted, Ps. 77. 2. Take heed of rash answers of
your selves that you are rank Hypocrites, and that all the grace you have is
but common or counterfeit; unbeleif is not to decide, but the Word is to judge
concerning the sincerity of Grace, and if the Word speak peace you are not to
keep your selves under trouble.

9. Hold on in self-proving and praying, and resolve never to give over trying
and crying tell you know you are the Lords, and have the light of his
Countenance. Tell him that his favor is better then life: and that you know
not how to live, much less do you know how to dye, without the sense of his
Love.

Be thankful for hopes and probabilities, but rest not there, till you can
speak as the Spouse in the Canticles, Chap. 6. 4. I am my Beloveds and my
Beloved is mine, And as the Apostle Paul does, Gal. 2. 20. The Son of God loved
me, and gave himself for me. Beg that the Spirit may put all out of question,
and seal you to the day of Redemption. The Spirits Testimony is of absolute
necessity, to bring us to an Assurance that we are the Children of God. Now
this Testimony of the Spirit supposes that we are convinced of Sin and
Righteousness; it also supposes, that we are sanctified in Heart and Life, in a
degree; and long for perfect Holiness. The Spirit then heightens the actings of
Grace, and evidences the Change he has wrought, and makes us plainly to
perceive, and feel that we hate our sin, prize our Redeemer, and Love, and
Fear, and Desire after our God: And this real change in our Heart being
evidenced, then our relation unto God is also shown; that we are the Children
and Heirs of the Lord Almighty, that his love to us is Everlasting, and his
kindness shall never depart from us. Satan's mouth is now stopped, and the Spirit
causes the Conscience from the Word to be quieted and satisfied; clouds are
scattered, doubts and fears are removed, consolation is strong, and joy
unspeakable and glorious. Thanks! millions of Thanks be unto God, for the
Mighty Comforter! Who gives a check to Hell, and says, Let their be Light and
Joy, where before there was darkness and doubtting, and sorrow: Who evidences
Electing Love from Everlasting, and causes Triumph and Rapture of Spirit, in
assured expectation of glory to Everlasting!

10. Let me add one Word more, having attained Assurance of the Love of God,
Take the right course to keep what you have gotten.

Here I shall name a few particulars.

1. Be low in your own Thoughts, if you continue humble, God will continue to
re vive and comfort you, Esa. 57. 15.

2. Offer unto your God and Father Thanksgiving. If you are thankful for the
light of his countenance, that's the way to have his face still to shine upon
you.

3. Take heed of presumptuous sins, David lost his joy when he ventured to be
unclean and bloody, nay take heed of lesser sins, for these will dead the
Heart, grieve the Holy Ghost, and dispose to greater.

4. Be very serious in the Ordinances of Christ; if the House, if the Table of
the Lord be neglected, you will kill your comfort; frequent the Lords Temple,
if you would see his Beauty, that is, his glorious holiness, and have a
continued sense of his Love, Ps. 27. 4.

5. Study the unchangeableness of Gods Love in Christ, and the sureness of his
Covenant: This will be matter of perpetual gladness, to see your selves in the
Heart, and hands of the Father, and of Christ; from whose love none can
separate you, Romans 8. ult. out of whose hands none can pluck you, Joh. 10. 28,
29.

6. Walk continually in the fear of God. This is the way to have the Spirits
Consolations, Acts 9. 31. Then had the Churches rest throughout Judea, and
Samaria, and Gallilee, and were edified, and walking in the Fear of God and in
the comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied.

7. Use this World as not abusing it, 1 Cor. 7. 31. If you are too much taken
with worldly comforts, your spiritual ones will abate; but if in reference to
earthly things you rejoice as if you rejoiced not, your joy in the Lord will be
the greater. Look upon your selves as strangers, and that this present World is
but the House of your Pilgrimage, then Gods statutes will be your Songs, and
fill you with the greater joy, Psalm. 119. 54.

8. Husband your time to the best advantage, and have the end of time in your
eye, Dye daily, 1 Cor. 15. 31. If you think much of your dissolution, it will
make you so wise as to keep your Evidence for Heaven clear, and to take heed of
blotting them, that you may have them to show when stepping into Eternity.

In the second place, I am to direct you how to prove your selves before you
engage in that Ordinance of the Lords Supper.

To come to the Lords Table is a duty which Christ commanded when he was dying.
And if the words of a Dying Father, or of adying Friend, are remarked and
remembered, how much more the command of a dying Redeemer! The circumstance of
time is very observable, which the Apostle mentions, 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24. The
same night in which he was betrayed the Lord Jesus took the Bread and break it,
to set forth his own being bruised and wounded, killed for the Transgressions
of his People. He bids his Church Do this that they might remember what He
their Head had suffered for them. When the Passover was instituted, and was
eaten at Evening, and the Children of Israel were brought out of the Land of
Egypt, out of the House of Bondage. Moses says, It was a Night much to be
observed unto the Lord, Exodus 12. 42. Oh! How much more is that time to be
observed when Our Lord Jesus wrought a far greater and more glori-Redemption
and Deliverance, when being himself delivered for our offenses and raised again
for our Justification, he saved his Church from the Wrath of God, the Devils
power, the Dominion of sin, the sting of Death, and the vengeance of Eternal
Fire. Upon the first day of the week Christ ceased from his own works, as God
did from his, upon the seventh day of the week: There remains therefore (the
Greek Word is (...) a Sabbath or rest unto the People of God, Heb. 4. 9, 10.

This Ordinance of the Supper is in no wise to be Administered unto all, though
they be never so ungodly. We are indeed to Preach the Gospel to every Creature,
but there must be at least a professed subjection to the Gospel; or else
persons are not to be admitted to this Holy and Heavenly Banquet. Those who are
for Railing in the Communion Table, I wish they were for a Spiritual Rail of
Scripture Discipline; and that in the Administration of these sacred.
Mysteries, there were a separation made between the Precious and the Vile. In
the more pure and ancient times, two sorts of Persons were debarred from the
Lords Table, the Catechumeni and the Lapsi, the ignorant and not well
instructed in the Faith; and those who had fallen into scandalous sins. And why
should either of these be admitted now, to eat and drink Judgment to themselves?

To prevent the incurring of the guilt instead of receiving the benefits of the
Blood of Christ, the Apostle prescribes self-examination.

Now, That he who would be a welcome Guest at the Lords Table, may prove himself
thoroughly and to purpose; let him seriously and as in the Presence of God
propose unto himself these following Questions.

1. Am I acquainted with or a stranger to the great things of the Gospel? Do I
know the Mystery of God, and of the Father and of christ? Or is the black vail
of ignorance still upon my Heart? The Apostle speaks of some who have need to
be taught which are the first principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5. 12. And
am not I one of that number? How can I pretend to Faith in Christ or Love to
God, if I have not so much as a notional knowledge of either? The Communicant
must have some Knowledge of the fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Faith.
Here for his better Information I shall lay down Ten Principles, which it is
highly requisite he should be acquainted with.

1. The Communicant must know, That there is a God who is from Everlasting to
Everlasting and every where present, a Spirit of incomprehensible Wisdom,
Power, Righteousness and Goodness, the Maker and Governor of Heaven and Earth,
and all the creatures which are therein, Heb. 11. Psalm. 90. 1. Jer. 13. 23.
Joh. 4. 24. Romans 16. ult. Ps. 147. 5. Psalm. 116. 5. Genesis 2. 1. Dan. 4. 34, 35.

2. This God is but One, and yet he is distinguished into the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, which have the same Godhead, Power, and Eternity, 1 John 5.
7. Matthew. 28. 19. 1 John 5. 20. Heb. 9. 14. Act. 5. 4. This Doctrine of the
Trinity is revealed, that we may have right conceptions of the True God when we
Worship him. Excellent is that passage of Nazianzen, Orat. 40. (...), I am not
able to understand One, but I am presently struck with the brightness of Three:
I am not able to distinguish Three, but I am presently brought back to One
again. We are also further to take notice how all these Three Persons in the
glorious Godhead do concur in that great Salvation, which is brought to light
and offered in the Gospel. The Father sends the Son to become Man and Man's
Savior; the Son is made Flesh, and puts away sin by the Sacrifice of himself.
The Spirit is sent to convince men of sin, and of their need of this Savior,
and to draw them to him, that beleiving in him they may not perish but have
Everlasting Life.

3. The Communicant must know; That Man was at first made upright. The first
Man Adam had his Makers Image when first he was made, which Image did consist
in Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness, and in having Dominion over the
Creatures. A Covenant was made with Adam of Life and Immortality, upon
condition of perfect Obeaience, which then he had Power if he would to yield;
and he was threatened with Death if he did Eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good
and Evil, Eccles. 7. ult. Genesis 1. 26. Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10. Romans 10. 5.
Genesis 2. 17.

4. The first man Adam being a public person, and representing his whole
Posterity, did sin against God in Eating the forbidden Fruit; and all his
posterity, (Immanuel excepted, who being conceived by the Holy Ghost was Born
of a Virgin) sinned in him, and are Fallen short of the Glory of God, so that
all are Born the Children of Wrath, all have corrupted Natures, so that they
are Reprobate to every thing that is Good, and strongly inclined unto Evil, in
Thought, Word, and Deed, and every sin being a Transgression of the Holy Law of
the great God, the Desert and Wages of it is no less then Death and Hell. Romans
5. 14. Genesis 3. 6. Romans 5. 12. Romans 3. 23. Luke 1. 35. Ephesians. 2. 3. Genesis 6. 5. 1 John 3. 4. Romans 6. ult.

5. Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of God did take man's Nature upon him, but was
perfectly free from Sin; and suffered in that Nature becoming Obedient unto
Death, even the Death of the Cross, and his Blood is sufficient being the Blood
of him that is God and Man, to cleanse from sin, and to make peace, and he is
able to save unto the utter most all that come unto God by him, neither is
there Salvation in any other, Heb. 2. 16. Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. Act. 20. 28. 1 John
1. 7. Col. 1. 20. Heb. 7. 25. Acts 4. 12.

6. The Communicant must know, That Christ after his Death and Eurial, did rise
again the third day, which showed that the price he paid for his Churches
Redemption was sufficient; and having Forty days conversed upon Earth, with his
Disciples, and been seen of several other Witnesses, even Five Hundred Brethren
at once, at length he did Ascend into Heaven, and is at the Right Hand of God,
to make Intercession for them that Believe in him; and from Heaven where he now
is, He shall be at last revealed with Power and great Glory, to Judge the World
in Righteousness, Romans 4. ult. 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4, 5, 6. Luke 24. 51. Romans 8. 34.
2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. Matthew. 25. 31. Acts 17. 31.

7. Christ has three Offices Prophetical, Preistly, and Kingly; As a Prophet he
does Teach his Church; and who teaches like him? As a Priest he has made
satisfaction, and does intercede for them: And as a King he does Govern and
Defend them. And this Church of his are Called, Justified, Sanctified, and
shall be Saved: And though Earth and Hell hate them, yet there shall be
somewhere or other, a Church of Christ always unto the end of the World. Acts
3. 22. Heb. 4. 14. Heb. 10. 14. Rev. 19. 16. Ps. 3. ult. Romans 8. 30. 1 Cor. 6.
11. Matthew. 28. ult.

8. The Communicant must know, That the Holy Ghost did move and inspire the
Penman of the Holy Scripture, so that it is of Divine Authority, and contanis
all things needful to be known, believed, and done; in order to Salvation: The
Books of the Old and New Testament are to be received as the Word of God. Those
therefore that lived under the Old Testament had some Knowledge of Christ and
the Gospel; and were saved no other way but by him: But under the New
Testament, Christ and the things of our peace are much more fully revealed, 2
Pet. 1. ult. 2 Timothy 3. 16. Ps. 19. 7. 2 Timothy 3. 17. Ephesians. 2. 20. Acts 26. 22,
23. Matthew. 13. 17. 2 Cor. 3. 18.

9. There is a New Covenant which God has made with his people who Repent and
Believe, into which Covenant he has also taken their Infant Seed, and therein
he has promised to be their God, to pardon Sin, to give Grace; after Death to
raise them up at the Last day; and to bestow upon them Life Everlasting, and
this Covenant as it was under the Old Testament confirmed by Circumcision and
the Passover, so under the New, it is confirmed by Baptism and the Lords Supper,
which two Sacraments are the Seals of it, Heb. 8. 8. 10. 12. Acts 3. 19. Acts
16. 31. Acts 2. 39. Joh. 6. 39. 40. Romans 6. ult. Romans 4. 11. 1 Cor. 5. 7.
Matthew. 28. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25. 1 Cor. 10. 16.

10. The Communicant must know, That the Law of God is not Abolished but
Established by Faith as a Rule of Righteousness for Christians to walk by. And
sincere Obedience to the Law and Gospel through Christ shall be Accepted and
Rewarded; but those who live and dye Vnbeleiving, Impenitent, and Disobedient,
shall suffer the Vengeance of Eternal Fire; and their Condemnation will be
sorest, who have been often offered, but have neglected great Salvation, Romans
3. ult. 1 John 2. 1. 1 Cor. 15. 58. 1 Pet. 2. 5. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. 9. Heb. 2. 3.

These are the Ten Principles of the Christian Religion which the Communicant
is to Catechize himself about. There must be Light in the Head, that is of
absolute necessity, though it be not sufficient; for there must be also Grace
in the Heart, to qualify a man for the Lords Supper.

2. The Communicant should further examine and ask himself this question. Do I
apprehend the danger of unworthy Receiving? Is not the guilt of Blood heavy?
And what is it then to be guilty of the Blood of God? But if I Eat and Drink
unworthily I am guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 27. What a
fearful thing is it to Crucify the Son of God afresh? To trample him under
Foot, and to esteem his Blood a common and an unholy thing? My Heart rises
against the Jews because they Mocked, Scourged, Buffeted, Crucified the Lord of
Life and Glory; but this they did in his Humiliation here upon Earth. And shall
I dare to put an affront upon him, now he is at the right Hand of the Almighty
Majesty on High? If I Eat and Drink unworthily I pull the Blood of Christ upon
my Head instead of having my sin pardoned, and my Heart cleansed and sanctified
by it, and I Eat and Drink my own damnation.

3. Another question the Communicant should propound to himself is this; Have I
a right conception of Gospel Worthiness? The Worthiness spoken of in the
Gospel, does not imply any Merit or Desert, for Christ the Son is given out of
the Transcendent Love of God, and with him freely all things, Romans 8. 32. The
Patriarch Jacob Acknowledged he could not lay claim to the least of all
Mercies, as a due debt. Our daily Bread is a Gift, and how much more the Bread
of Life? Worthiness therefore is as much as being disposed and made meet to
Receive what the Lord in the Supper is willing to bestow. When we are sensible
of our own unworthiness, and guilt, and vileness, then we are made meet to be
accepted; looking unto the Beloved, and to be Justified by his Meritorious
Righteousness: When we are sensible how weak and empty and distempered our
Hearts are, then we are Worthy, that is to say, made meet to be strengthened
and filled, and healed by the great Physician of Souls, in whom it has pleased
the Father all fullness should dwell.

4. The Communicant should ask himself. Do I look upon admission to the Table
of the Lord as a mighty privilege? He was no less then a King of Israel, who
thought it a great favor to be a doorkeeper in the House of God, and what is
it then to be a welcome guest at his Table? What is it to be brought into his
Banqueting House where the Banner over his People is love, Cant. 2. 4. Our
Lord in this Ordinance deals forth Light and Grace, and Comfort bountifully.
Here Tears have been dried up, fainting Souls have been revived, and Faith
ready to fail has been strengthened, and languishing Hope has been made
lively. The Blood of Jesus Christ being applied, has proved a (...) medicine
for every malady, and has sent away the sin distressed Soul, both clean and
calm, both pure and also peaceable. Is it not a mighty advantage, and an Heart
effecting and endearing sight, to see the Blood and the Love of Christ
streaming forth together? Here is (...) Love that passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.
19. Oh with what confidence may humble and hungry souls go to this Jesus who is
so full of Love, and so full of all besides which they Hunger after, he would
have none to content themselves with a little; but his language is, Eat O
Friends, Drink yea, Drink abundantly O Beloved. Cant. 5. 1.

5. The Communicant should ask himself, Do I know what it is to discern the
Lords Body? 1 Cor. 11. 29. My bodily Eye beholds the Sacramental Bread and
Wine, but have I an Eye to behold something further and better? If the
Israelites in the Wilderness, did behold an Healer and a Savior when Moses
lifted up the Brazen Serpent; if the Beleivers under the Old Testament, did see
a Messiah in the legal sacrifices; though as yet he was not manifested in the
Flesh; surely since the Son of God is come, and has been actually offered up to
bear the sins of many; shall I not behold this Jesus in the Bread and Wine
broken and poured out; where he is so evidently set forth as Crucified?

What is it to discern the Lords Body? Verily it is to look beyond the outward
Elements to the Body and Blood of Christ which thereby are represented; and to
rely upon that very Jesus who was Crucified without the Gates at Jerusalem,
for the Pardon and Mortification of our iniquities in particular; and that our
wants of Grace and Strength, and Comfort, may be supplied out of his
superabundant fullness. Moreover the Beleiver should grow confident, and be
persuaded, that as really as the Bread and Wine are given him; so really Christ
bestows himself, and his benefits upon him, in this Blessed Ordinance. Hark to
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 16, The cup of Blessing which we bless is it not the
Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we brake, is it not the
communion of the Body of Christ? The Communicant should ask himself, Do I see
my self lost in my self, and do I perceive it is in vain to hope for Redemption
any other way but by the Lord Jesus? The Apostle has a notable expression when
he speaks of being shut up unto Faith, Gal. 3. 23. Intimating that all other
doors are shut against the Sinner; only the door of Faith in Jesus Christ is
open. We cannot reasonably hope for the Forgiveness of sin, or Justification
before God any other way but by him, who is sufficient to be a propitiation for
the sins of the whole World. There were multitudes of sacrifices under the old
Law, which were appointed by the Lord him self: and yet the sins of the
Sacrificers could be done away by none of them: The Apostle tells us plainly,
that it is impossible the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin, Heb.
10. 4. And if the sacrifices that were of Divine institution could not do it;
surely those of humane invention could do it less, though never so costly,
though we should give our first Born for our Transgression, the Fruit of our
Body for the sin of our Soul, Mic. 6. 7.

No active Obedience that we can yield, can justify us before God, for the
Apostle peremptorily asserts that there is no Law given, which can give Life
unto him that obeys it, Gal. 3. 21. Nay further our greatest sufferings for
Righteousness sake, are insufficient to be our justifying Righteousness.
Therefore those who come out of great Tribulation, are said to have washed
their Robes, not in their own Blood, though that was spilt for the Word of God,
and the Testimony of Jesus Christ, but in the Blood of the Lamb, Rev. 7. 14.

7. The Communicant should examine and ask himself, Am I persuaded that Jesus
who dyed upon the Cross, is able to save to the uttermost and willing to save
all that come to him? Jesus is the man who is Gods Fellow, he thought it no
Robbery to be equal with God, Psalm. 2. 6. He is indeed the true God and Eternal
Life, 1 John 5. 20. Certainly then Help is laid upon One that is mighty and
that has sufficient power to save. Jesus is he who was foreordained before the
Foundation of the World, 1 Pet. 1. 20. And pitched upon in Gods purpose and
decree to be the Redeemer of lost Man, and at last he was made manifest; having
been Typified and Believed in long before. He undertook to be Man's Surety, and
to pay the price for his Redemption. And just when he was dying he cries out
(...), It is finished, and then gave up the Ghost, John 19. 30. As if he had
said, I undertook to satisfy Divine Justice that had been wronged, and to
appease the Anger of God which had been provoked by the sin of man; I undertook
to remove the Curse of the Law, to conquer and Redeem from Death and Hell; and
quite to spoil the Principalities and Powers of Darkness, I undertook to Ransom
precious Souls that were lost; and Purchase a Church, that may come at last to
live with me and my Father, and shout forth Hallelujahs unto Him that sits upon
the Throne, and unto the Lamb forever! And this great work which I undertook I
have now finished.

Doubtless the Lord Jesus is able to save, and his willingness he declares
abundantly. The Communicant should thus argue with himself. O! My soul! Is not
Jesus a Merciful High Priest as well as a Mighty Savior? Behold him Weeping
over Jerusalem, the Inhabitants whereof were Enemies to him, and would not be
gathered: And wishing they had known the things of their Peace; and will he not
with Joy receive those that come to him, and put their Trust under the shadow
of his Wings? Hark does he not say, I will give rest to the weary and heavy
laden? Does he not assure thee, that those that come to him, he will in no wise
cast out? What though thou art utterly unworthy; Christ saves none but such,
for it is his design that they may cry, Grace, Grace, forevermore.

8. The Communicant should ask himself, Do I look upon the New Testament and
Covenant, whereof Jesus is the Mediator as sure and Everlasting? David speaks
excellently concerning this, 2 samuel 23. 5. God has made with me an Everlasting
Covenant ordered in all things and sure; this is all my Salvation and all my
desire. This Covenant is ordered in all things, because the Promises of it are
so admirably suited unto the necessities of poor sinners. The Lord here
Promises Mercy to the Miserable; Pardon to the Guilty; Cleansing to the
Defiled; Healing to the Distempered Soul; Liberty to the Captives; Light to the
Blind; Rest to the Weary; Satisfaction to Empty; Strength to the Weak;
Establishment to the Wavering; and Salvation to the Lost: And because all
things else are insufficient to make them happy, the Lord Promises that he
himself will be their God, their Father, their Portion, and that forever and
ever. And what more can be desired? Now this Covenant is as sure as the Word,
the Oath, the Seal, the Truth, the Power, the Love, the Blood of God can make
it.

This Covenant is sometimes styled a Testament, and in this Testament Christ
has bequeathed the greatest things unto Beleivers, here we find the richest
Legacies that ever were left. The favor of God, the Sanctifying Spirit, a New
Heart, Peace of Conscience, Joy unspeakable, the good things of this present
World, Grace to persevere to the end, and a far more exceeding and Eternal
weight of Glory hereafter, are the things bequeathed by our dying Lord. And the
Testatour having dyed, the Testament is of force, and stands firm and fast
forever, Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17. O my Soul! should the Communicant then say, Set
thy self to Study the Covenant of thy Lord. Consider how great things are made
over, and how firm the settlement is! Be pacified, O! My conscience with the
promises of Pordon. Embrace O my very Heart, the Promises of purity, that by
these I may be made a partaker of the Divine Nature, and escape the Corruption
that is in the World through lust: Rejoice, O! My Soul, in this highest
Happiness that God in Christ is Thine! And Triumph, O! My Spirit in hope of
that Glory that most certainly and very shortly is to be Revealed!

9. The Communicant should examine and ask himself. Am I willing to break the
League Eternally between my Heart and my Lusts? Do I consent to have all the
deeds of the Body mortified without exception? Under the Law the Inticerto
Idolatry was to be destroyed how near soever. If thy Brother or thy Son, or
Daughter or the Wife of thy Bosom, or thy Friend which is as thy own Soul,
entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go after other Gods and serve them, thou
shall not consent nor hearken to him, but thou shall surely kill him, thy hand
shall be first upon him to put him to Death, and after the Hand of all his
People, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. 8, 9. And the reason is assigned, v. 10. Because he sought
to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God. There is never a sin or lust which
thou can indulge, but the tendency of it is to thrust thee away from the Lord
thy God. No sin therefore upon any account is to be spared. Search thy self
therefore for corruption is a lurking thing. Unfeignedly desire to have all
this old Leaven purged out, that thou may be fit to feed on Christ the
Passover.

Speak thus: O! My Heart! At last lay aside thy deceitful dealing, and tell me
truly as thou will answer it another day, whether love to sin is turned into
hatred? Do thou give consent that thy pride, thy passion, thy unclean
affections, thy love of the World, and all other sins should be Crucified? Do
thou slight sinful delights, that thou may taste the pleasantness and peace,
which is in Wisdoms ways? Do thou esteem Godliness to be greater gain; then
any wickedness can yield? Oh! cherish none of thy iniquities, for one sin
allowed, will make the Supper, and all other Ordinances ineffectual to
Salvation, and prove thy utter and Eternal Ruin. Just as one Dagger thrust
into the Heart, will dispatch a man as certainly, as if he had as many wounds
given him as Caesar in the Senate, or Attilius Regulus in the nailed Barrel.

10. The Communicant should ask himself, Have I a Spiritual Appetite, do I
hunger and thirst after Righteousness? Mat. 5. 6. Do I count Holiness the Glory
of God, and the truest Glory of Man? Do I see a deformity in wickedness, and an
excellency in being Righteous? Do I desire to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
that New man which after God is created in Righteousness, and true Holiness?
Ephesians. 4. 24. Are my prejudice against Holiness removed, as if 'iwere unwise,
uneasy, needless, and a thraldom to be Holy? O my Soul, what do thou long
for, when thou come unto thy Lords Banquet? Is it not that thy Faith may be
strengthened? that thy love to God may be more hot and flaming? Is it not that
thy fear may be greater, and more filial? and that thou may be enabled to
follow thy heavenly Father more fully as a dear Child? Is not sanctifying Grace
preferred before Gold that perishes? do thou not long that the new Creature
may be more lively in all the actings of it? and that thou may become
stronger in Spirit. If it be thus, it is a sign thy Spiritual Appetite is sharp
and keen; and as the Supper is an ordinance proper and suitable to thee; so
there is enough, and enough to fill thee, and thou shall not be sent away empty
for the promise is open thy Mouth wide, and I will All it. Psalm. 82. 10.

11. The Communicant should examine and ask himself. Do I count the World but
loss that I may gain Christ,? Has he the preeminence in my affections above all
things visible, above all persons breathing? Where Faith is true, Christ is
precious, 1 Pet. 2. 7. And Christ is not truly prized at all, unless he be
prized above all. The young man in the Gospel lacked one thing, and that was
the main; Love to Christ above his possessions. Those were not fit to taste of
the Marriage Supper, who preferred their Oxen and their Farms, and their
Merchandise before it. Mat. 22. Our Lord expressly requires us to undervalue
what is dearest in this World in comparison of him. Luke 14. 26. If any man
come to me and hate not i. e. less Love, his Father and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own life also, and what can
be named dearer? he cannot be my Disciple.

Speak therefore thus to thy self. O my Soul! has thy Savior and Lord indeed
the highest room in thee? Corruptible things as Silver and Gold are unsuitable
to thy nature, which is spiritual; and were insufficient to be the price for
thy Redemption. The world has often proved a snare to thee, but Christ is a
Savior; the World is vanity, and less then nothing, but Christ is all in all:
the World has often disappointed and vexed thee; but Christ can ease and
satiate and replenish thee. The World, after thou had ruined thy self? was
ready to help forward thy destruction. But Christ has the key of Hell, and can
keep thee out of it; and the key of Heaven, and can give thee an abundant
entrance into that everlasting Kingdom. If Christ can do more then the World
can; nay if Christ can do all for a Soul, and the world can do just nothing at
all: it is but reason that Christ should infinitely be preferred before it.

12. The Communicant should ask himself. Am I reconciled to the Commands of
God? Am I willing that my Heart should be Tables for the Spirit to write his
Laws upon? that I may delight to do the will of God. Do I esteem not only some
but all the Lords precepts, concerning, not only somethings, but concerning all
things to be right? and do I hate every false way? Ps. 119. 128. O my Soul
speak, Art thou irritated by the Law of God as formerly? are the motions to sin
stronger and more vehement because the law forbids Sin? Or is the Law of God
dear to thee? and art thou ready to say at the hearing of every Command, Oh
that my ways were directed that I might keep this Statute? The stronger Grace
is, the commands of God are farther off from being grievous. You may perceive
how David was affected toward them, when he said Psalm. 19. 10. More are they
to be desired then Gold, yea then much fine Gold. sweeter also then Honey, and
the droppings of the Honeycomb. And where Grace is weak, though there be an
untoward backwardness remaining to yield obedience to the Law: that
backwardness is lamented, and a Burden, and the heart longs to be enlarged,
that it may run the ways of Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. 32.

13. The Communicant should examine himself. Am I willing to receive whatever
Christ has purchased, and is willing to give in this ordinance of the Supper?
Is every benefit of Christ looked upon as worthy of all acceptance? All the
benefits of Christ are dear; surely all of them are of great value. And there
is not one of them that we can be well without, for these benefits are
excellently suited unto our necessities. O my Soul! should the Communicant say,
thou likest the Lord Jesus as he is made unto thee Righteousness, as he skreens
thee from the Wrath of God, and interposes between thee and everlasting
vengeance; But do thou see thy need of his Wisdom to direct thee in the way
of Truth, and to make all the wiles of the subtle Serpent of none effect? And
to make thee wise to Salvation, and for Eternity? Do thou value Chrict as
made Sanctification and Redemption? 1 Cor. 1. 30. Do thou count deliverance
from all Iniquity a great and desirable part of Redemption? and Sanctification
a great and desirable part of Salvation, because hereby thou art saved from thy
pollutions and defilements? Certainly as there is no sin which should be loved,
so there is nothing in sin to be liked; and there is no thing in Christ but
what is highly worthy to be esteemed.

14. The Communicant should examine and ask himself. Am I grieved when I
remember what I have done against God and the Lord Jesus? Is it indeed the
trouble and Affliction of my Soul, that I have so naturally and forwardly, and
so long rebelled against the best Lord; and been disobedient to the best
Father? Do I mourn and would I mourn a great deal more because I have dared the
power of God, slighted his presence, contemned his favor and fellowship; hated
his holiness, abused the riches of his Grace and Mercy? O my Soul how foolish
and unwise have thou been thus to requite the Lord that made and bought thee.
How great an evil has it been in it self, and how evil has it been for thee,
that thou have forsaken the Fountain of Living waters? Mourn that thou have
left such a God, and mourn the more kindly because still he is willing to
receive thee. See O My Soul, how thy sin has peirced the only Savior. Behold
him in an Agony, behold him sweating drops of Blood first; and after shedding
all upon the Cross: See a sorrowful Life ending in a Death more lamentable.
Harken to thy Redeemer, crying out, My God my God, Why have thou forsaken me.
Behold the son of Righteousness setting in a Cloud, and sin, thy sin the cause
of all this. Break, break hard Heart! Let his Blood and Love together melt thee
into Godly sorrow.

15. The Communicant should Examine himself, Am I willing to give to Christ
whatever he is willing to have? Can I lay all that I have and my self too at
his feet? And not complement or dissemble with him, when I say, I and all is at
his service? Do I yield my whole Heart, my whole Man unto my Lord without any
reserve? As Christ gave himself for me, and gave himself to me, so am I
persuaded that I cannot dispose of my self better or so well, as to give up my
self to Him? O My Soul is any thing too much, too good, or good enough for
Jesus? Behold God in the Flesh, in the Manger, upon the Cross, and in the
Grave, and if he condescendded, obeyed, and suffered, and purchased so much for
thee, O Be perfect and entire in the resignation of thy self to him. Thou
read of a Nonsuch Convert, 2 King. 23. 25. And that was Josiah. Like unto
him there was no King before him, that turned unto the Lord with all his heart
and with all his Soul, and with all his might, neither after him arose there
any like him. Surely it is thy duty and Interest to write after this excellent
pattern.

16. The Communicant should ask himself. Am I desirous to be faithful in Gods
Covenant to the last Breath? Do I count I obtain great mercy when I am made
thus faithful? Have I counted the cost of being a Disciple? And is my love of
the Lord and of Godliness greater then my fear of persecution? Do I distrust my
corrupt and timorous Nature, and beg that my Lords Grace may be sufficient?
Look, O My Soul as thy Head did unto the Joy that is set before thee, and start
not at the Cross which is the way to the Crown. Persecution will sit thee for
Heaven, and may speed thee thither. Fear not men since the worst is the best
they can do; that is, set thee by Death out of their reach, and send thee to
thy Fathers house and bosom. Faint not at Troubles, for these light afflictions
which are but for a moment do work for persevering Saints a far more exceeding
and Eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

17. The Communicant should Examine himself, Am I taught of God to love my
Brethren? 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9. Bitterness and Wrath and Anger and all kind of Malice
is leaven that is to be purged out. All that come to the Table should put on as
the Elect of God Holy and Beloved, Bowels of Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of
mind, Meekness, Long-Suffering: Forbearing one another, and Forgiving one
another; if any man have a quarrel against any, as Christ forgave them, so also
should they do: And above all these things, they should put on Charity which is
the Bond of Perfectness, and the Peace of God should rule in their Hearts
whereunto they are also called in one Body, Col. 3. 12, 13, 14. 15. As there is
a representation of the Body of Christ in this Ordinance of the Supper, so
there is some signification of the Love and Unity that ought to be in the Body
Mystical, that is to say, the Church of Christ, the Apostles Words are plain, 1
Cor. 10. 17. For we being many are one Bread and one Body, for we are all
partakers of that one Bread.

You see how you are to prove your selves, and what questions to propound to
your own souls, before you come to the Lords Table. And if your Consciences can
answer for you before God in the affirmative unto such questions as these: You
may without presumption conclude that you are the Children of God, that you
have a right to come to your Fathers Table, and that the Bread of Life belongs
to you.

In the Third place, I am to direct you how you may prove and call your selves
to an account every day, that you may walk with the greater circumspection.

The God of Heaven is the Lord of Time, he observes how our Time is husbanded
whether well or ill; and he can put a period to it when he pleases. And if we
did seriously observe what fills up our time, so many days would not be spent
and lost in sin and vanity. It was an Heathen who said, he had lost a day, when
a day passed without doing of good; which shows he used to reflect upon the
actions of every day, whether they were Good or Evil. I would advise you much
to observe your selves. Never any more spend a day as if you were never to
account for that day, but remember what the Apostle Paul says, Ephesians. 5. 16. See
then that ye walk circumspectly not as fools but as wise Redeeming the Time.
And the Apostle Peter gives the like charge, 1 Pet. 1. 17. Pass the time of
your sojourning here in fear.

Toward the Evening of the day, it will not be amiss to retire, and laying
aside other business to converse with thy self, and ask thy self these or such
like questions.

1. Did I wake with God in the Morning, and in his strength resolve to walk
with God all this day long? Every one of us should resemble David, who said,
How precious are thy thoughts unto me O God! When I awake I am still with thee,
Psalm. 139. 17, 18. The first Fruits of our Thoughts should be offered up unto
God; and if the first Fruit be Holy, all the rest of our Thoughts are the more
likely to be free from wickedness and vanity. And as the soul should be lifted
up to the Lord at the very first unlocking of the senses; so there should be a
resolving and forecasting how to please and glorify him. Every day we live,
the main end of our living should be minded; and that is to honor that God who
is our Maker, Benefactour, Savior, for off him and through him, and to him are
all things, and to him belongs the Glory for ever, Romans 11. ult.

2. Ask thy self, Did I willingly leave my Bed that I might go to Prayer and
search the Word of God? And did I long for and enjoy Communion with God in
these duties? Many will leave their Beds most readily, when they are to go a
pleasant Journey; or when they hope to drive on an advantageous bargain; or
when they are to put on their finest Clothes. But how few do shake off sleep in
a morning, that they may go to the Throne of Grace, where the truest, both
pleasure and profit is to be found. David looked up to Heaven, as soon as his
Eyes were open, Psalm. 5. 3. My Voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord in
the morning will I direct my prayer unto Thee, and will look up. Nay he says,
Psalm. 119. 147. I prevented the dawning of the Morning, and cried, I hoped in
thy Word. Early Prayer and Searching of the Scripture is the way to obtain a
blessing at the beginning of the day, the influence of which may be perceived
all the day after. Communion with God in the morning may knit the Heart so fast
to him as that no Temptation may be able to draw it away from him afterward.

It was a pretty passage of Herbert. Who read a Chapter when they rise,
Shall never be troubled with ill Eyes.


Indeed Prayer and looking seriously into the Word of God at first, is the way
to keep Eyes and Heart, and Hands and Tongue, and feet, and all in order.

3. Ask thy self, Have I walked within my House with a perfect Heart? Praying
with them, Edifying of them, and giving no occasion of offense and stumbling to
them? There will be the practice of Godliness in the House, where there is
really the power of Godliness in the Heart. Every Christian Family should be
like Philemons, a Church, Philem. 2. 3. To the Church in thy House, Grace and
Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. A Church implies a
joining together in that Worship and Service which God has commanded. Christian
Families being Churches there ought to be an assembling of the Family together
to pour out joint Prayers unto God. I and my House we will serve the Lord, says
good old Joshua, Josh. 24. 15. I know Abraham, says God, that he will command
his Children, and his Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the
Lord, Genesis 18. 19. Family Prayer is enjoined in the Lords Prayer; Give us this
day our daily Bread, shows plainly that those who ordinarily and daily eat
together, ought ordinarily and daily to pray together. The Master of a Family
has a great trust committed to him, even all the Souls under his roof, and
therefore by Praying with them and for them, by reading of the Holy Scripture,
by Counsel and Instruction, and by an Holy and excellent example he should
endeavor to be beneficial to them, and all the members of the Family should do
the duties of their place and relation.

4. Ask thy self, Have I kept my Heart this day with all diligence? The wise
man gives that precept, Prove. 4. 23. Keep thy Heart with all diligence: And
every one that is wise will follow it. The Heart is to be kept for God and
Christ; there should be a most joyful consent, that the Father and the Son
should make their abode there: That the Word of God should be hid there. And
the Heart should be kept from Sin and Satan, and this present evil World. Keep
thy Heart, for without diligent keeping it will be like the sluggards Field,
nothing but what is stinking and noysom will grow in it. Examine, Have the
Thoughts of thy Heart been Holy? Has God been frequently, awfully, and
delightfully thought on? Have thy Affections been Spiritual, and most strongly
inclined and carried forth, after Heavenly and Spiritual things? Has Pride,
Envy, Anger, and Evil Concupiscence, and every other Heart Sin been hated? Upon
the first appearance of such Corruption, have thou presently cried to Heaven
for help, and never ceased, till they were gotten under? The difficulty and
also the excellency of the Christian Religion lies in keeping the Heart pure;
the Heart then is in no wise at any time to be neglected.

5. Ask thy self, Have I walked and prayed that I might not enter into
Temptation? And especially have I been vigilant against my Bosom sin? It Is
easier by far to keep out of Temptation, then being once entangled to recover
out of Temptation. It Is easier to continue standing then after a fall to rise
again; and the reason is because a fall weakens us and disposes unto further
falling. Therefore the temper is to be resisted at first, there should be no
parlying with him, but he should meet with an obstinate deafness, an Holy
inflexibility and stiffness; and an utter detestation and abhorrency of all his
motions.

When we are thus like iron pillars, and like brazen Walls, Hell is confounded,
the Devil flies. He fights indeed but he does not prevail against us, for the
Lord is with us to deliver us, to allude to that, Jer. 1. 18, 19. Especially we
should place the strongest guard where we are weakest: And take heed lest the
sins of our complexions, and constitutions, and the sins of our Callings and
the sins of the Times prevail; and bring us under guilt and defilement.

6. Ask thy self. Have I done Justly and acted as if I loved Mercy? The false
Balance, diverse measures, and the bag with deceitful weights, are an
Abomination to God. And every good man will hate them. That we ought to be
exactly Just and Righteous in our dealings; is deeply engraven on the Heart of
man by Nature.

Excellent is that passage of an Heathen Poet. Persius Satyr. 2.

Compositum ius fasque animo, sanctosque recessus
Mentis: et incoctum generoso pectus honesto.
Haec cedo ut admoveam templis and far litabo.
The meaning of which verses, is,

That the meanest Sacrifices are acceptable unto God, when the Sacrificer is
Just and Righteous. But the Word of Grace, does abound in precepts of this kind.

The Gospel teaches that men should live Soberly and Righteously, as well as
Godly in this present World, Tit. 2. 11, 12. And 1 These. 4. 6. That no man go
beyond and desraud his Brother in any matter because the Lord is the avenger of
all such. If thou wrongest another thou do thy self a far greater injury.
Dishonest gain will be thy own Eternal loss without Repentance and Restitution
according to thy ability.

And as thou should be a practiser of Justice so a lover of Mercy. The Lord
delights in showing mercy and so should thou. Thou ought to be merciful to
thy Beast, and how much more to thy Brother? And if thou must Feed and Clothe
the Hungry and naked Bodies of others, according to thy power: Certainly their
precious souls should share in thy compassions, and by wise reproofs, faithful
advice and frequent Prayer, thou should endeavor to prevent their perishing
Everlastingly.

7. Ask thy self, Have I bridled my tongue? If there be not a care to do this
all Religion is but vain, Jam. 1. 26. The Apostle uses two excellent
similitudes relating to the Tongue, Jam. 3. 3. 4. We put bits in the Horses
Mouths that they may obey us, And Certainly we should set a Watch before the
door of our Lips that we may not offend in the words we speak. Behold also the
Ships which though they are so great and are driven of fierce Winds, yet are
they turned about with a very small Helm whither soever the Governor lists.
The Helm of a Ship had need have a skilful hand, and the Tongue of a man had
need be wisely managed. How few make Conscience of Tongue sins, who pretend
highly to conscienciousness in other matters? If by our Words we are to be
Justified and Condemned. Good Lord! How few will be Justified, how many will be
Condemned at the great day!

Oh Watch over this little member thy Tongue which boasts great things. If
thy Communication be good to the use of Edifying, and which administers Grace
to the Hearers; as it ought to be, Ephesians. 4. 29. Then thy Tongue will be thy
Glory, and 'twill be as a Tree of Life to Feed others. But if thy discourse be
wicked and vain, thy Glory is turned into shame, and thy Tongue is set on fire
of Hell.

Examine thy self strictly, whether thou do abhor lying Words? As one that
beleives all liars shall have their portion in the Lake that burns with Fire
and Brimstone which is the second Death, Rev. 21. 8.

Examine whether thou do make Conscience of Backbiting thy Neighbor, of
Receiving and spreading a reproach against him? If thou art a backbiter, a
slanderer, a railer, where is thy love to thy Brother, and how can thou call
thy self a Citizen of Sion? Psalm. 15. 1, 2, 3. Filthy and foolish talking, and
Jesting, is unbecoming a Christians mouth, this is to be avoided as well as
Oaths and Cursing. And ever remember that in multitude of Words there wants
not sin, and therefore what Job speaks unto his Friends. turn it into a
petition unto God, Job 6. 24. Teach me and I will hold my Tongue, unless my
duty oblige to speak to thy Glory.

8. Ask thy self, Have I been spiritual in my civil Employments? Was my
conversation at all in Heaven, or did I only mind Earthly things all the day
long? It Is the duty of Christians to have the things of this World, as though
they had none of them; to Buy as though they possessed not, to use this World
as not abusing it, because the fashion of this World passes away, 1 Cor. 7.
30, 31.

The work of the Calling is to be minded, and to be idle therein is to walk
very disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11, 12. But yet the working out of our Salvation
is to be looked upon as the main business of our lives, unto which we should
make our other actions to become subservient. As the Grace of God makes a
difference between the Christian and another man; so the Christian should not
only Pray and Hear, but also Buy and Sell, and Trade, and deal in the matters
of the World after a different manner: He should always be in the Fear of God,
always eying his Rule, and act conscientiously: He should be wise unto that
which is Good, but simple concerning Evil: He should not be over eager after,
nor trust in uncertain Riches, nor be highminded because of them: But remember
his time on Earth is short, and as he must quickly leave the World, so he must
also give an account whether he has improved the World to the Glory of God; and
by doing of Good with what he has, he has made unto himself, a friend of the
Mammon of Unrighteousness, Luke 16. 9.

9. Ask thy self, Have I been careful to Redeem Time? I count my Jewels, my
Gold, my Silver too precious to throw about the Streets, but have I not been
prodigal and lavish of time, which is of greater value? and which no price can
purchase when once it is past and gone? Those who are in Heaven, how glad are
they that they improved Time, and made good provision for Eternity! And they
who are in Hell, how do they Curse their Folly in wasting such a Treasure, and
wish they had never had either any time or any being, since the time which was
given them to repent in, was spent inmaking themselves for ever miserable!

Mark O man how thy time passes! How fast, how constantly thy glass runs.

Examine what becomes of all thy time, and unto what account it turns? If the
filings of Gold are saved, surely every parcel of time is highly worth
Redeeming. Let things that must be done have time sufficient; let things that
may be done have time convenient, and for those things which ought not to be
done, le them have no time at all. In a word so number thy days as to apply
thy Heart unto Wisdom, Psalm. 90. 12. Every day think of Death which will end
all thy days.

10. Ask thy self, Have I received Mercies thankfully, and born Crosses
patiently? A Christians Pilgrimage is chequer-work a mixture of black and white
together, sometimes he may want, sometimes he may abound: He should know how to
do both, as the Apostle did, Phil. 4. 12. Mercies are designed to be as cords
to draw thee, and Afflictions as rods to drive thee nearer unto God; let both
attain their end. What high ingratitude is it against Heaven and what an
injurious disservice to thy self, to take the Mercies of God and serve thy
Lusts and Satan with them? Let every days kindness overcome thee, and be sure
to glorify that God in whose hand thy Breath and Life is, and from whose hand
thou do receive every benefit, and in whom is all thy hope of future
happiness. And if he does afflict thee do not murmur, for whom the Lord Loves
he chastens, whom he chastens he does design their profit, and can there be
truer profit then to be made in a greater measure partakers of the Lords
Holiness? Heb. 12. 6. 10. If thou do but wait a while, thou will see a light
some lamp, to follow a smoking Furnace, Genesis 15. 17. An happy issue of all thy
troubles. Affliction will be a means so to clear thy sight, and cleanse thy
Soul, that thou will grant there is reason to kiss the rod, and to acknowledge
the faithfulness and care of him that used it.

11. Ask thy self, How much am I advanced in Heavens way, farther to day then I
was yesterday? How many new steps have I taken toward the New Jerusalem? Have
I indeed gone forward in the narrow path which leads to Life, or have I stood
still, or gone backward? It Is our duty to grow in Grace, 2 Pet. 3. ult. To
follow on to know the Lord, and to follow still harder after him. Our Salvation
grows nearer and nearer every day, and therefore our motions should be more
strong and sprightly toward our home and center.

Examine every day what Grace thou have strengthened, what corruption thou have
weakened that day? Have thou lower thoughts of thy self? And higher thoughts of
the Grace of God? Is thy Faith more firm and operative? Is thy love more ardent
and constraining? Art thou more fit for thy Masters use, and prepared unto
every good work, and more meet to be a partaker of the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light? That day is certainly lost in which more Grace is not gained,
and in which never a step is taken in the way Everlasting. Oh! Be such Just and
Righteous ones as Solomon speaks of, and let your path be as the shining Light,
which shines more and more unto the perfect day.

12. Ask thy self, Have I waited on God all this day long? Has my dependence
been upon him? My expectation of all good from him? And my care to do what is
good in his sight? It Is both our duty and our honor to wait on our God
continually; as a Servant waits upon his Master, as a Son upon his Father. Hark
unto David Psalm. 25. Lead me in thy truth, and teach me for thou art the God of
my Salvation, on thee do I wait all the day. We ought to be sensible that all
our springs are in God, and that it is the great interest and business of us all
to please him.

Though others live without God in the World, and forget him days without
number; yet we should be under the powerful impressions of those great Truths.
That God is All-Seeing, that God is All-sufficient, and we should walk before
him and be perfect, for the Eyes of the Lord run too and fro through the whole
Earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose Heart is perfect
toward him, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.

13. Ask thy self, What care have I had to adorn the Gospel this day, and to
win those who are without to a love and liking of Religion? The wicked hate
instruction and cast the Word behind them, they will not be at the pains to
look into the Book of the Gospel; and therefore let them be able to read the
excellency and the efficacy of the Gospel, in the lives of those that are
Professors. With well doing we should put to silence the ignorance of foolish
men. We should be Blameless and Harmless, the Sons of God without Rebuke, in
the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation, among whom we should shine as
Lights in the World, Phil. 2. 15.

Calling your selves to an Account thus every day, will make the Authority of
Conscience to be more owned and reveverenced: The Heart will be the better kept
within bounds when it knows it must be Catechized at Evening, and severely
chidden for every Transgression. By this course the practice of Repentance will
be promoted, if there be a falling into sin, and we shall rise and recover the
sooner; and if we are enabled to walk before God in Truth from day to day, and
keep a Conscience void of offense, we shall the more thankfully and comfortably
take notice of the Grace of God in us and with us, by which we are what we are,
and which is not bestowed upon us in vain, 1 Cor. 15. 10.

And if every day we should thus prove ourselves, Upon the Lords Day we should
do it much more. We should not be so Sacrilegious as to wast any of that
hallowed Time. We should examine whether our Hearts took their flight to Heaven
at first waking and continued there without descending all the Day? We should
examine whether God had our thoughts and the very cream and strength of our
Affections; and the World and the concernments of it were made to stand by,
while our Hearts did Worship? We should examine, whether our discourse was
altogether spiritual, whether Earthly Employments and Recreations were laid
aside, and whether our Souls did indeed rest in God and Jesus Christ? And
resist Satan, and disallow of every thing which might be a Distraction,
Deading, and Disturbance?

We should seriously reflect upon our secret Duties, and our manner of engaging
in public Ordinances, and see whether God was pleased and manifested his
Gracious Presence, Power, and Love: And whether our Souls were indeed profited
and delighted in the Closet, in the Family, in the Sanctuary? Every Sabbath is
indeed a Golden season of Grace, which it much concerns us to improve; and we
should be unsatified unless we endeavor to spend it after such a manner, in
the Affectionate and delightful admiration and Worship of the Lord, as the
Saints in Heaven do celebrate an Eternal Sabbath.

USE. IV.

Shall be of Exhortation unto the duty in in the Text, be persuaded all of you
to examine and prove your selves. And that the Word of Exhortation may be the
more prevalent, it shall be particularly directed unto several sorts of Persons.

First,

Let Wicked men that are notoriously ungodly prove themselves. And truly such
at the first view of themselves may presently perceive whose they are: Satan
works more openly in these scandalous Children of Disobedience, and leads them
Captive in the sight of all. Their Cursing and Swearing their hating of Gods
Word, and Sabbath, and Messengers; their Fornication and Adultery; their
Stealing, Injustice and Lying; their Covetousness and Drunkenness, and Railing
at Religion, and Abhorring all that are serious. These things are the Devils
Badg and Livery, and plainly declare that such person are in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of Iniquity. Oh you that declare your sin as Sodom
and hide it not. You cannot deny your wickedness pray be at last convinced of
it, and think what will be the end of the course you are taking.

Let these five words of advice be acceptable.

1. Look about you and see innumerable Evils compassing you about, Psalm. 40.
12. How vast is the number, how heinous the nature, and how high and horrid the
aggravations of your inquities! Your sins are as Scarlet and Crimson, indeed
your Trespasses are grown up to the very Heavens, and notwithstanding your
great Abominations, you have been impudent and hardhearted: Your Necks have
been like an Iron sinew, and your Brows Brass, and your Hearts like an
Adamant-stone, you have refused to be ashamed and to return: The least of all
your sins is enough to damn you, and should not the consideration of so many,
and such great ones, daunt and fright you? That God who is to judge you, knows
what you have done. He has compassed your Paths, has heard your words, has
looked into your Hearts, is acquainted with all your ways, Psalm. 139. 1, 2, 3.
And has not forgotten any of your evil works and wickedness. Let all this fill
you with trouble and make you tremble.

2. Look within you, and take notice of a Fountain of sin there. The Lord that
searches the Heart of man gives it a very bad report, Genesis 6. 5. God saw that
the Wickedness of man was great upon the Earth, and every Imagination of the
Thoughts of his Heart was only Evil continually. And Christ who knew what was
in man, expressly tells us that out of the Heart of man proceed all the Evils
whereby he is defiled, Matthew. 15. 19, 20. Satan indeed is your Enemy and he
shows himself so in Tempting you to Evil; but all your sins are properly your
own Hearts Offspring, the principal blame is to be laid at your own door. Your
corrupted natures make you Devils, Tempters, Enemies to your selves, destroyers
of your selves, Jam. 1. 14, 15. Every man is Tempted when he is drawn away of
his own lust, and enticed; then when lust has conceived, it brings forth
Sin, and Sin when finished brings forth Death.

3. Look above you, and behold an angry God, a God angry particularly with you,
and can you stand before his indignation? Take notice of the Mountains quaking,
the Hills melting, the Rocks overturned, the Heavens Astonished; the Devils
trembling, when the Lord is Wrath, and do you think that you can prosper if you
harden you selves against him? His Wrath is revealed from Heaven against all
Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of men, Romans 1. 18. When that Wrath is felt;
how heavy will it be found?

4. Look beneath you, and see a flaming Furnace: That's a dreadful fire indeed
which never shall be quenched, which will always Torment, but never quite
consume, and make an end of those that are burning in it. We read that sinners
must dwell with Everlasting Burnings. Our Lord tells you that in Hell, the Worm
dies not and the Fire is not quenched, and he says this thrice, nay, six times
together, that man may believe and fear, Mar. 9. 43. 48. And into this Hell the
wicked shall be turned, and all the Nations that forget God, Psalm. 9. 17. This
is as certain, as it is certain God is true and Powerful and Just, and Holy.

5. Look the very worst of you into the Gospel, and behold the Lord Jesus
stretching forth his hand all the day long even to them that are Disobedient
and Gainsaying, Romans 10. 21. Stretching forth the hand, is as much as inviting
sinners to come to him, and offering Salvation to them. He has Justified and
washed and sanctified, and saved as bad as you. And if you will at length
consent to be sanctified as well as saved, and come to him; he will do both for
the most guilty and defiled among you. Oh! Look to Jesus whom you have
slighted, and cry to be drawn to him!

Secondly,

Let merely Moral men prove themselves. These have very great need to search
themselves that they may not be undon for ever by self-confidence. When I speak
of Morality, I do not mean an universal respect unto the precepts of the Moral
Law, for such a kind of respect, only those who are truly Regenerate and
Religious, yield unto the Lords Commands. But by Morality I understand an
external Righteousness, and freedom from more gross and notorious iniquities;
such a Moralist was the Pharisee, who said, God I thank thee I am not as other
men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, Luke 18. 11. And such Morality was
to be found in the Apostle Paul, while he was Graceless before his Conversion,
Touching the Righteousness of the Law I was blameless, says he, Phil. 3. 6.
Now Persons upon Examination may know themselves to be but merely moral, by
these following signs.

1. Merely moral men are great strangers to the Corruption of their own
Natures. Hereupon they think, themselves to be whole, and do not apprehend any
necessity of a new Birth, of having a New Heart given to them. When Nicodemus
the Pharisee came to Christ, Christ told him of the Corruption of Nature, That
which is Born of the Flesh is Flesh, and except a man be Born again he cannot
see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 3. 6. The Apostle Paul while a Pharisee was
alive in his own Thoughts, though really dead in Trespasses and sins. Moral men
not knowing what they are by Nature, continue securely in a state of Nature;
and suppose they have no need of the Blood and Spirit of Christ, whereby alone
they might be Justified and Renewed in order to Salvation.

2. Merely moral men, though blameless in their Lives, yet their Hearts are
allowed to be wicked. The Pharisees of old were against actual Murder, but
allowed of Malice, Envy and Revenge, they were free from gross Adultery, but
made nothing of Evil Concupiscence. Therefore our Lord. Matt. 5. does at large
show the spirituality and extent of the Law of God, and how it lays an
obligation upon the very Heart, unto Purity and Meekness and Love, as well as
requires external Conformity to the Letter of it in the Life and Conversation.
What kind of Hearts have these Moral men? What Pride and high Thoughts of
themselves, what hatred is allowed to lodge in them? What Ignorance and
Contempt of Communion with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ? How exceeding
suitable and desirable are the Wealth, Preferments, and Delights of this World,
but their Hearts are mere strangers unto the Love of God, and delight in him,
and rejoicing in Christ Jesus: And which is worst of all, they think this is
needless, and that their Hearts are so good they need not be changed and made
better.

3. Merely Moral men do rest in their own External Righteousness, and rest upon
it. They are confident that good living, and giving every man his due, is
enough; though the mean while the World, and the God of this World fill their
Hearts. They act as if that Precept were not in the Bible, My Son give me thy
Heart, Prove. 23. 26. As if they had never read of David's practice, Psalm. 25. 1.
Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my Soul. And as they rest in their own external
Righteousness, as if inward Holiness were not required; so they rest and rely
upon it, as if this were enough to justify them before God and to purchase
their acceptance and Salvation: But this ruins them, and cuts them short of
the Righteousness of the Son of God, Romans 10. 3, 4. For they being Ignorant of
Gods Righteousness, and going about to establish their own Righteousness, have
not submitted themselves to the Righteousness of God, for Christ is the end of
the Law for Righteousness to every one that Beleiveth.

Thus you merely moral men may know your selves. And oh! That you would be
advised,

1. To Consider that Morality can neither justify it self nor you; It cannot
justify it self because it is merely external, a piece of Pageantry and
Hypocrisy for want of inward purity, and how then can it justify you before
that God who is so glorious in Righteousness and Holiness; You certainly stand
in need of Christ as well as the greatest sinners in the World, and must needs
to Hell without Him. The Apostle Paul was a great Moralist before he was a
Christian, but when his Eyes were open, Christ was valued as the only
Justifier and Savior of sinful and lost man, and says he, I desire to be found
in Him not having my own Righteousness, Phil. 3. 9.

2. Pray that the Commandment may come with Power, and show your sins even
those that lie hid in your very Hearts, and make you sensible of your damned
and lost Estate, Romans 7. 9. I was alive without the Law once but when the
Commandment came sin revived and I died. Notwithstanding all my confidence of
my Goodness and good Estate before I saw my self by Law a condemned and dead
man, and no hope of life without Jesus a Mediator.

3. Be sensible of the necessity of the New Birth, and cry for the Spirit.
Those that are born again are born of the Spirit of God, Joh. 3. 6. That which
is born of the Spirit is Spirit. This Spirit God is willing to give to all that
ask him, seeing indeed their need of him. Beg hard for the Spirit that by him
you may be enlightened, convinced of sin, and set at Liberty from it, that you
may be drawn to Christ, and changed into the glorious image of God, which does
consist not in Righteousness merely external, but in Righteousness and true
Holiness.

Thirdly,

Let unsound Professors prove themselves. Why should such entertain a
confidence which the Lord will reject? Why should they join with a subtle
Serpent to deceive themselves? Oh! that they would bring their base metal to
the Touchstone, that they may perceive how vastly it differs from pure and
tried Gold. And that they would weigh themselves in the balance of the
Sanctuary, that their Consciences may perceive what reason there is that Tekel,
should be written upon them, they are weighed in the balance and are found
utterly wanting. Now unsound Professors may come this way to a Conviction of
their own unsoundness.

1. They cannot endure plain dealing. Our Lord tells us that this is the Worlds
fault and Condemnation, that they love darkness rather then light because their
Deeds are Evil. Joh. 3. 19. And unsound Professors being not really come out of
the World, no wonder if the Word be disgusted, that discovers and reproves
them. Sharp reproof makes us sound in the Faith, Tit. 1. 13. But such rebukes
the unsound cannot bear. Deal gently said David with the Young Man Absalont,
And this is the Hypocrites Language. Deal gently with my Pride, and
selfishness, and darling lusts, and sinful compliance for safety, and profit,
and preferment sake. It shows they are brutish and void of true understanding
because reproof is hated, Prove. 12. 1. He that hates reproof is brutish.

2. Unsound Professors regard iniquity in their Hearts. Shame and Fear, and
hope of repute among men, may curb and restrain them from running into the act
of sin, but the inward Love to it is not indeed mortified. It may truly be said
concerning the Hypocrite, he abhors not evil, Psalm. 36. 4. He may upon some
accounts be afraid and ashamed to commit sin, but he does not hate and abhor to
Commit sin. He secretly loves some sin or other, though he hides, both his sin
and his love to it, he does not long for the Death of all.

3. Unsound Professors carry on Carnal designs in their profession of
Religion, Religion by such is made sometime a cloak to Covetousness, or to
Concupiscence, or to Maliciousness; they do not design the pleasing and
glorifying of God; this end sways not with the Heart till Grace is wrought
there. But they profess Godliness, that they may sin the more plausibly and
unsuspectedly, and that they may bring about their selfish projects the more
cleverly.

4. Unsound Professors do relish only the things of the Flesh, which shows
that they are after the Flesh. Romans 8. 5. They that are after the Flesh do mind
the things of the Flesh, and they that are after the Spirit the things of the
Spirit. They savor not Spiritual things, neither are they troubled at the
Carnality of their minds and affections, nor do they desire to be made
spiritually minded:

Now you who are thus convicted to be Hypocritical and unsound Professors, I
beseech you remember.

1. God looks into you, He that hates sin most perfectly and will punish it
most severely, knows how sinful you are. If all things are open and naked to
his view, surely he looks into the painted and whited sepulcher, and beholds,
all the filthiness and rottenness that is within it.

2. Hypocrisy is very hateful to God, His Eye and Knowledge is disregarded by
the Hypocrite; his hand is not feared, his Grace and Goodness horribly
contemned and abused. And all this the Hypocrite does to Gods very face, in his
very House, while he is bowing the knee before him, and giving a great many
good words to him, and seems very devout in his service.

3. Hypocrisy will be at last detected. When thou art distracted by a Disease,
or wounded in thy Conscience thou may be forced to confess, thy Injustice,
Impurity, and other Abominations: But if this be not at the last day all will
come out to thy Everlasting Contempt and Confusion. For God will bring every
work into Judgment with every secret thing whether it be good or whether it be
evil, Eccles. 12. 14. Be wise therefore O unsound Professors! Dissemble not
with God, deceive not your selves, consent at last to be searched and
sanctified, and being humbled and ashamed because of your deceitful dealing
with the Lord, and Religion; pray to be made Israelites indeed in whom there is
no guile.

Fourthly,

Let sincere Saints prove themselves. I have at large given you before the
Characters of them who are Saints in sincerity. They may know themselves by
their coming out from the World, by their preferring the living true and
Everlasting God, in their choice, before all Lying and Dying Vanities, by their
thankful acceptance of the Lord Jesus as a Savior, and Redeemer from all
iniquity, as well as from the wrath that is to come. Finally they may be known
by their desires after the Grace of God in Truth, and to be cleansed from all
filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit; and to perfect Holiness in the Fear of
God. Now you who are thus really sanctified I would counsel in three
particulars.

1. Acknowledge that the Grace of God has made you what you are, that you are
Called, Justified, Adopted, changed into the Image of your heavenly Father, is
owing to the rich and glorious Grace of God. This makes the difference between
the Children of God, and the Children of Disobedience. What have you that you
have not received? 1 Cor. 4. 7. And what have you received but what you were in
your selves utterly unworthy to receive?

2. Be sensible that that Grace which has begun must perfect that which does
concern you. That picture which was begun by Apelles could not be perfected by
the hand of any other. Look therefore unto the Author to be the finisher of
your Faith, Heb. 12. 2. And truly you are encouraged to a more firm relyance,
by what the Apostle speaks, Phil. 1. 6. Being confident of this very thing that
he which has begun a good work in you, will perform it unto the day of Jesus
Christ.

3. Do nothing unbecoming your present State and Relation, and future hopes.
You are highly favored, the Lord is with you. You are advanced to be the
Children of the Lord Almighty, to be the Heirs of Life and Glory, and
Joint-heirs with Christ himself, to be Kings and Priests unto God. Let there be
an Holy Majesty in your Conversations, rejoice and work Righteousness. Count it
below you to be proud and highminded; below you to mind Earthly things, or to
do any thing that looks like serving Sin and Satan.

4. Having attained unto peace take heed of breaking it. Assurance may much
more easily be lost then gained. There must be all diligence to get it; but
negligence may lose it. After the Prince of Peace has spoken to thy Heart, and
said Peace, be still. Oh! do nothing to raise a new storm and tempest in thy
Conscience. But walk very humbly and closely with God. That you may live in the
truest sense pleasant lives. And may come at last to Heaven, which is indeed
the fair Haven in a blessed Calm; and that of the Psalmist may be verified in
you, Psalm. 37. 37. Mark the perfect man and behold the upright, for the end of
that man is peace.

Thus have I finished this Subject of Self-Examination, a Duty which the
Ungodly mind not, which Hypocrites are afraid and do not care to meddle with,
and which if Saints would more frequently and thoroughly engage in, there would
be less unbelief and fear, more joy and Faith in the Church of Christ. You that
are Saints, In this discourse I have been helping of your Joy. Let it not be
hindered by your selves. Some clusters of Canaan might be brought to the
Wilderness, and more of Heavens joys might be tasted in the Vale of Tears, if
the Heirs of Heaven would but take more pains in self-trial, to clear up their
Title. And as for you that are Hypocrites and Vnbeleivers, I have don you a
kindness in telling you what you are, and what you may expect hereafter. If
after all, you will put a cheat upon your own souls; you must be blamed and
your selves must smart for it. If you will cry peace and safety, till Christ
himself does thunder that sentence in your ears; Go ye Cursed into Everlasting
fire; Who can help it? Alas! Alas! 'Twill be too late to look up to Heaven, and
to look into your selves, when the Gulf is fixed between Heaven and you. Let
every sinner therefore try his own ways, and cry to the Lord, to search, and
change, and turn his Heart. For it is the greatest Wisdom to prevent those
mistakes, which will be the mistakers Eternal ruin, and which after death will
be found impossible to be corrected.

Herbert. page 105.

Can he idle? Can thou play,
Foolish soul, who sinned to day?
Rivers run, and springs each one
Know their home, and get them gone:
Have thou tears, or have thou none?
If, poor soul, thou have no tears,
Would thou had no faults or fears!
Who has these, those ills forbears.
But if yet thou idle be,
Foolish Soul who di'd for thee?
Who did leave his Fathers Throne,
To assume thy Flesh and Bone?
Had he life, or had he none?
If he had not lived for thee,
Thou had di'd most wretchedly;
And two deaths had been thy fee.
He so far thy good did plot,
That his own self he forgot.
Did he die, or did he not?
If he had not di'd for thee,
Thou had lived in misery;
Two lives worse than ten deaths be.
He that loses Gold, though dross,
Tells to all he meets his cross:
He that sins, has he no loss?
He that finds a silver vein,
Thinks on it, and thinks again;
Brings thy Saviors death no gain?
Who in Heart not ever kneels,
Neither sin nor Savior feels.
Meditations ON THE LORDS SUPPER.
MEDITATIONS. I.
WHerefore do I spend my money for that which is not Bread? And my labor for
that which can never satisfy? Many a time have I made trial of the things that
are visible, but the higher my expectations have been raised, the greater has
been my disappointment. I have sought that among the Creatures which is not to
be found. Sin has turned this World into a Country, far from God; and truly
Husks are the best fare that ever this World has yielded me. It Is high time to
come out from the World and to be separate, left my Soul perish for hunger
there. Meat that perishes is improper for a Soul that is of an immortal nature,
and of an Everlasting duration. I will arise and go unto my God and Father: He
has promised to satiate and replenish the weary and sorrowful Soul. In his
House I am sure there is Bread enough and to spare.

MEDITATION. II.
Boast not O Mammon of thy Treasures! Unless thou have that which is of
sufficient value to be a ransom for me. Can all the Wealth of both the Indies
pay the debt which by sin I have contracted? Can Riches satisfy for the wrong
I have done to the justice of God by my Transgression? Oh no I was not Redeemed
with corruptible things as Silver and Gold, but with the precious Blood of
Christ as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot. Pardon, Grace, and Glory
are such gifts of God as are not to be purchased with money; for if they were
so many Rich men would not be lost for ever. Wealth cannot buy any out of the
Devils possession, but rather brings them more under his power, it cannot save
any from Hell, but rather proves a means to send them thither: For they that
will be Rich fall into Tempttaion, and a Snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts, which drown men in Destruction and Perdition.

MEDITATION. III.
O my Soul strive not to load thy self with the thick clay of this present
World, this will debase thee exceedingly, and defile and burden thee. Thou
need that which is of more value then Gold that perishes to enrich thee, and
that is precious Faith. Thou need a garment to cover thy nakedness, which no
Shop on Earth can furnish thee withal, and that is the Robe of Christ's
Righteousness: Thou need Food to satisfy thy hunger, which cannot be got
for money or price, but may be had without it, and that is the Bread of God
which came down from Heaven to give Life unto the World. Thou art of Heavenly
original, and therefore mind not Earthly things, for it can never be well with
thee, until thou return to that All-sufficient Lord, who is the Father of
Spirits and alone can fill them out of his own fullness.

MEDITATION. IV.
Lord! Thou who art full of Love, nay love it self, and art jealous of my love
lest it should be misplaced; Turn away my Eyes that they may not be set upon
that which is not, If Riches take to themselves wings and fly away as an Eagle
toward Heaven; let my Heart be so wise, as to get the start of them, and fly
away first from such transitory and fading vanities, and fly toward the
highest Heaven of all. How great a gain will it be to lose my love to the
World! And though it be no gain at all to thee for me to love thee, who art so
self-sufficient from Everlasting to Everlasting; yet I shall hereby be an
Eternal gainer, and shall be interested in that love which is Everlasting and
unchangeable. Oh! Love me freely in the Son of thy love; and inflame my Heart
with love to Thee! It Is my Honor that I have leave to love thee who art so
high and glorious, and it is thy first and great Command that I should love thee
with my whole Heart, and Soul and Strength. Let this Command be kept, and let
not the biggest offer the World can make me, ever tempt me to break it, so as
to prevail with me!

MEDITATION. V.
Pleasures of sin and sense have often charmed and deceived me. Those things
which have gratified the Eye, the Ear, the Touch, the Taste, have had a kind of
an enchanting Force and Power. Sensual Delights have been some of the finest
and strongest cords of vanity, to draw me a way from God and Duty. But now I
see what madness it is, to please my self, and displease my Lord, whose favor
affords the fullest joy, and whose frowns can cause an Hell on Earth.

Carnal Pleasures are but brutish! The Beasts enjoy those as well as men, and
several of them excelling us in sense, their pleasures also may be greater;
They are worse then Beasts who can be contented with such delights, because
they are capable of delights much higher, which capacity the Beasts have not.
How unfit is he for Christ and for the Kingdom of God, who esteems Earthly
pleasure as the most desirable paradise: He woefully forgets both Himself and
Eternity, who admires those delights and joys which can last but for a moment.

MEDITATION. VI.
O my Soul! Art thou indeed fond of Pleasure? The highest of all are not
grudged thee. Oh taste and see that the Lord is Gracious. What is pleasing to
the Flesh cannot reach thee, but God is a Spirit, has enough, is enough for
thee. The Angels have no Flesh and yet enjoy the greatest delight; and God
himself, who is the most spiritual is the most blessed and happy Being of all.

Solomon enjoyed as much as the most voluptuous can wish for. He says whatever
his Eyes desired he kept not from them, neither did he withhold from his Heart
any joy. Though sensual delight was in its highest Exaltation, yet it was
woefully mixed; the sting was much sharper then the Honey was sweet: Therefore
he cries out, all was vanity and vexation of Spirit. Be not eager, O my Soul,
after that which will prove a vexation to thee. Return unto God, look unto
Jesus, here thou may find exceeding joy, here a Soul may find rest. And being
once interested in that meat which endures to Everlasting Life, and in the
unsearchable Riches of christ, thou may speak to thy self upon good ground,
Soul take thine ease, Eat, Drink, and after an holy manner be Merry, for thou
have Goods laid up which will never be spent, but last unto Eternity.

MEDITATION. VII.
Lord! How far is that Man from knowing Thee, who is a Lover of Pleasure more
then a Lover of God! How excellent is thy Loving kindness! How sweet the
Meditation of Thee! When my heart is enlarged, and my Affections for Thee are
vehement and strong, here is a joy indeed which the World is a stranger to, and
cannot equal. David called Thee the gladness of his Joy, no other joy can make
me truly glad besides. How All-sufficient is thy fullness! How Rich is thy
Mercy! How superabundant is thy Grace! And even thy justice which is so
affrighting unto guilty man is fully satisfied by the Obedience and Sufferings
of Jesus Christ. Thou art just when thou justifiest him that Believes in
Jesus. Unbeleiving Doubts and Fears are groundless; but joy and peace are
highly reasonable.

The Saints which are now Triumphant, who see thee face to face, and are in the
Lambs Presence and Throne, are far from admiring the pleasures of sin and sense.

Away, away, thou deceitful Tempter! Offer such poor, such low things no more;
I am to prefer Affliction with the People of God before such Pleasures; and
certainly then Heaven and the foretastes of it, are of infinitely greater value.
From henceforth Lord it shall be my pleasure to study thee and thy will, to
love thee, to serve thee, to please thee, to praise thee, and to enjoy thee
will be my highest Happiness.

MEDITATION. VIII.
What is the Applause and esteem of Men! How vain and poor a thing is Worldly
Honor! Why should I Envy this to others, or be eager after it, or proud of it
my self? Man does judge according to outward appearance. and therefore may more
easily mistake. When man commends, Conscience may condemn, and God much more.
That which is highly esteemed among men, is an Abomination in the sight of God.

To be spoken well of by sinners is rather a bad sign; they were false Prophets
who had the good word of all men. And the good Word of Saints, is rather an
argument of their Charity, then of our sincerity. The Jew that is one inwardly,
his Heart is Circumcised, and his praise not of men but of God.

How poor a thing is it to be praised for Beauty, which is so great a snare to
them that have it, and to others also; and which Death may so quickly turn into
paleness and rottenness!

And to be praised for Worldly Greatness, does yield but a sorry satisfaction
for Death is a sure and terrible Leveller, and the Worms will make as bold with
the Catkass of the Prince as of the Peasant.

What will it advantage one to be commended for Gifts, or Parts, or Grace, if
Conscience at the same time do justly Reproach, and call one Proud and
Hypocritical!

How little did Christ value Honor in the days of his Humiliation, he was
despised, rejected, reproached and at last most ignominiously Crucified. Lord!
They are truly Honorable, that Honor Thee, and are honored by thee, and to
whom thou will say at last, Well done good and faithful Servants.

MEDITATION. IX.
When I look into my self, my Sins appear by great multitudes! But a
Righteousness of my own I cannot find, which does deserve to be called by the
name of Righteousness. If the Elect Angels do cover their faces in the presence
of a God glorious in Holiness, how shall sinful man appear without a Mediator!
They that are ignorant may be Proud and Self-conceited, and may trust to
themselves that they are Righteous, but one view of Gods unspotted purity and
exact justice, is enough to cause in any mortal man self-distrust, nay
self-abhorrency. The Sun is confounded, and the Moon ashamed, the Heavens are
not clean in the sight of Him that made them; the Angels themselves are charged
with folly, what is man that he should be Righteous!

MEDITATION. X.
My evil deeds do far exceed my good ones, how great is the number of those,
how small comparatively the number of these! How many more are the vain words
which I speak, then those that are serious! And when I keep the strictest watch
over my Heart, the bad thoughts (though intruders) will be ten, for one that is
pure and holy, if the odds be not far greater. And can I stand then if the
Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss? Who in the World has more
reason then I to cry out, Lord enter not into judgment with thy Servant. That
little good which I do what mixtures of evil are there with it. The Flesh is
still lusting against the Spirit and makes every duty I perform imperfect, and
upon its own account impossible to be accepted. The best of my works cannot
merit the acceptance of themselves, how then can they make satisfaction for my
iniquities. I see plainly when I have done all, I must call my self
unprofitable, and look unto Christ who became obedient unto Death, and desire
that both I and my works the most perfect of them all may be found in him.

MEDITATION. XI.
To whom can I look but unto Jesus! Here the Angels look and wonder at the
manifold wisdom, and amazing kindness and love of God. The Father himself looks
here, and is delighted in the Obedience and Sufferings of his Son, through whom
without any prejudice to his Justice and Holiness, his Grace and Mercy have a
full vent, and a free course, to be glorified among the Sons of men.

The Beleivers under the Old Testament looked unto Jesus, though he was more
darkly represented to them, Moses and the Prophets spoke of him, and Abraham
himself rejoiced to see his day. And under the New Testament he is more fully
revealed. Here therefore I will fix my eye. and living and dying, Behold this
Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the World.

MEDITATION. XII.
I am in my self a lost Creature. My sins, my sins have ruined me, the sins
which I have loved and pleaded for, and taken so much pleasure in have done me
the greatest harm. Woe, woe is me, that I have sinned. I have broken the best
Law, and rebelled against the best Lord. I have sided with the Enemies of my
Salvation to destroy my self. It Is an endless task to number the Stars in the
Firmament, or the Sand upon the Sea shore or the days of Eternity; and I may as
well do all this, as number my iniquities, Innumerable Evils have compassed me
about, my iniquities have taken hold upon me so that I am not able to look up,
they are more then the hairs of my Head, therefore my heart fails me. And if
the wages of the least sin be Death and Hell, what large wages, and what a low
place in Hell have I deserved? Gods anger is just, his power is terrible, his
patience is wonderful, his mercy is utterly undeserved; I should be all
despair, were it not for the Grace of God, and the Blood of God, but these are
sufficient grounds of hope and Everlasting Consolation.

MEDITATION. XIII.
I plainly perceive that all mankind have suffered shipwreck. The first man
Adam had the steering of the Vessel, and he run it upon the Rocks, and lost
himself and his whole progeny. All have sinned and come, short of the Glory of
God. The calamity is general, the whole World is become guilty before God,
there is none that understands or seeks after God, there is none that does
good no not one. It Is truly lamentable that the humane nature should be so
infected, so corrupted, as that every mind should be carnal and enmity against
God, that every Heart should be like an adamant stone, that every neck should
be like an iron sinew. All are born the Children of wrath, and with strong
inclinations to be the Children of Disobedience. So that when the Son of God
came into the World to dye and save it: He found the World lying in wickedness,
secure in sin, and hastening toward Everlasting misery.

MEDITATION. XIV.
Whence is this to Man that a Savior should be provided for him! Were there no
Creatures fell besides? Yes an innumerable Host of Angels kept not their first
estate but left their own Habitation.

The Angels that sinned were excellent and glorious in their first Creation,
but they grew proud and Enemies to Truth; and voluntarily departed, and were
justly banished from the Lord that made them. And when these Angels sinned, no
mercy that we read of was extended to them. The Scripture expressly says, that
God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell. That was a
dreadful fall indeed from the highest Heaven to the lowest Hell, those mighty
Spirits are fettered in Chains of darkness, and are reserved unto the judgment
of the great day, they never that we find, had a Redeemer provided, nor a
pardon offered, nor after they had made themselves miserable, were they ever
brought within the reach and possibility of Mercy. The Son of God took not on
him the nature of Angels, or, he took not hold of the Angels, but he took on
him the seed of Abraham.

MEDITATION. XV.
Lord! What was man that thou were thus mindful of him! Or the Son of man, that
the Son of God should come and visit him! Admirable condescension! That thou
whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, should rejoice in the habitable
parts of the Earth, and that thy delights should be with the Sons of men. Can
man be profitable unto God? Is it any gain to the Almighty that any make their
ways perfect? Lord! Man has the benefit of Salvation, it is but reason that thou
should have entirely all the Glory. Man is therefore subservient to thine
honor because his meanness makes thy condescension, and his guilt and vileness
does render thy Grace the more wonderful. When (...) Creature so undeserving,
nay that deserves so ill, is so highly advanced, as to be saved; the power and
grace which does advance and save him is matter of the greater admiration.

MEDITATION. XVI.
Who is this Lord Jesus that undertakes the work of man's Redemption? He is the
express Image of his Fathers Person, the Brightness of his Glory; He is to be
Worshipped with the same Worship, and has the same Eternal Power and Godhead,
with the Father and the Spirit. He it is who created all things in Heaven and
Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities and Powers; all things were created by him and for him, and he
is before all things, and by him all things consist.

The Elect Angels adore him, the Reprobate ones he has spoiled and triumphed
over, he has all power in Heaven and Earth, and Commands the Keys of Hell and
Death. He is Wonderful in Counsel, the Mighty God, the Prince of Peace. How
safe is it then to trust in this Lord Jesus, it is the highest reason to believe
in him, that is so mighty, that is Almighty, for the must needs be able to save
to the uttermost them that come unto God by him. Whosoever Believes in him
shall not be confounded.

MEDITATION. XVII.
O my Soul let thy Faith be fixed and settled on the Godhead of thy Lord and
Savior, were he not God 'twere both sin and folly to rely upon him, Faith in
him would be altogether vain; but since he is the true God and Eternal Life:
They shall not perish but have Everlasting Life that do indeed believe in him.
Christ thy Righteousness is the Lord Jehovah, in him therefore thou may
confidently expect to be justified, and thou may Glory and rejoice for ever.
The Blood of Christ is called Gods own Blood, because it is the Blood of him
that is truly God and over all God blessed forever, as well as truly man. And
surely the sufferings of him that was God, can make satisfaction for the sins
that thou have been guilty of against God.

Thou art amazed to see thy iniquities increased, and thy Trespass grown up to
the Heavens: Thou art astonished and desolate and horribly afraid to see how
high thy sin strikes, even at God himself. But withal take notice how Christ
who is God does stoop and humble himself. He that thought it no Robbery to be
equal with God the Father, takes upon him the form of a Servant and becomes
obedient to death even the Death of the Cross, and he is sufficient to make
peace.

MEDITATION. XVIII.
Christ as he was God could not die, but he took man's nature upon him, that he
might be in a capacity to dye for sinful and lost Man. He suffered in the same
Nature that had sinned, that he might make Atonement.

Sacrifices and Burnt-offerings could never take away the guilt of sin, nor
quiet the Conscience of the sinner, nor cleanse and sanctify a defiled soul,
therefore Christ had a Body prepared for him, that by one Offering he might
perfect his Church for ever.

Wonderful mystery of Godliness! That God should be manifested in the Flesh,
and suffer upon the Cross to make peace! Here is a wonderful contrivance,
Christ is the Sacrifice, Christ is the Altar, and Christ is the Priest. Through
the Eternal Spirit he offered up himself without spot to God, to purge our
Consciences from dead works that we might serve the Living God.

MEDITATION. XXI.
Christ is God, and has so effectually don the work of a Mediator, that God is
forward to be at Peace, and entreats sinners to be reconciled. Christ is Man,
and therefore Man may go with boldness to him. O my Soul! Thy Lord is near a
kin to thee, he bears good will to thy whole kind. He is the Savior of all men
especially of them that Believe.

Being so nearly related to thee, he has a right to Redeem thee, nay, he has
actually paid the price of thy Redemption already; so that nothing remains but
that thou come to him and be made free indeed. His Arms were not folded or
hanging down, but stretched out upon the Cross. And oh! How forward is this
Savior who died to embrace all that come to him.

When he says he will in No wise cast them out, methinks it speaks the greatest
readiness and gladness imaginable to entertain them.

Venture, O venture to look to Jesus, to come to Jesus, and venture thy all
with him: Never any miscarried in this bottom, and all must needs miscarry in
any other. He knows thy Sins, thy Wants, thy Foes, thy Fears, he knows how to
Pity, Protect, and Succor thee. He was in all things made like unto his
Brethren, that he might be a Merciful and Faithful High Priest in things
pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation for the sins of the People, for in
that he himself has suffered being tempted, he knows how to succor them that
are tempted.

MEDITATION. XX.
How excellent is the Knowledge of Christ Crucified? Look, O my Soul upon thy
Lord, who loved thee at such a rate as to dye for thee! Behold him Arrested,
Arraigned, and Condemned. Thou wast guilty of the crime, and thy Lord did bear
the punishment. Behold him going to execution, going unto Golgotha, and if he
had not gone thither, whither, Oh! Whither must thou needs have gone for ever!

The Law had condemned Thee, not only the first but also the second Death, was
the just desert of thy Transgressions. But here thy Surety stepped in, and
Redeemed thee from the Curse of the Law being made a Curse for thee. Look upon
the Wrath of God revealed against thee because of thy ungodliness and
unrighteousness, look upon the glittering Sword of Justice drawn, look upon
devouring Fire and Everlasting Burnings prepared for thee, and thy self just
ready to be thrown into those unquenchable Flames. And then behold and wonder
at the kindness and love of Jesus, who was willing to be made sin for thee, and
to bear the Wrath of God himself, that he might appease it, which was too heavy
for thee to bear, and which would have sunk thee into the lowest Hell, and have
kept thee there unto Eternity!

In what a deplorable and desperate case had the Sheep been, if this good
Shepherd had not stood in their room and laid down his Life for them.

MEDITATION. XXI.
History tells us of Codrus the last Athenian King, who was a great Lover of
his People, as appears by the manner of his Dying. When the Grecians of Doris
sought Counsel from the Oracle, concerning the success of their Wars which they
waged with the Athenians: It was answered, that undoubtedly they should prevail
and become Lords of that State, when they could obtain any victory against the
Nation, and yet preserve the Athenian King himself alive.

Codrus the King by some intelligence being informed of this answer withdrew
himself from his own Forces, and putting on the habit of a common Soldier, he
entered alone, the Camp of the Dorians his Enemies; and killing the first he met
with, was himself forthwith cut in pieces. Thus he was willing to lose his own
life rather then his Country should be ruined. The Lord Jesus the Prince of
Life and Glory did vail his Majesty, appeared in the form of a Servant, was
contented to be counted a deceiver, and to be numbered among Transgressors,
that his Life might be taken away and hereby Eternal Redemption be procured.

Codrus was deservedly honored among the Athenians; and certainly the Lord
Jesus should be the higher in our esteem and love, the lower he humbled and
abased himself for our sakes: The offense of the Cross should cease, since his
Crucifixion was so necessary to our Eternal Salvation.

MEDITATION. XXII.
Greater Love has no man then this that a man lay down his Life for his
Friends. But Lord! Thou did dye for Rebels and for Enemies, thou did dye
unsought to, undesired, therefore thy love is greater then the greatest love
besides. Thy love was stronger then Death no Water could quench it, no Floods
could drown it. Hell it self could not discourage it. 'Twas a bitter Cup the
Father put into thy hand, but thou did drink it, and drink it off too; the
very dreggs of the Cup are gone; Oh what a load did lie upon thee! All the sins
of all that ever were or shall be saved did meet on thee together.

How many stings had thy Death, and yet thy Godhead and thy love did carry thee
through all thy sufferings. Oh! That I could comprehend with all Saints what is
the height, and length, and depth, and breadth, and know the Love of Christ
which passes Knowledge that I may be filled with all the fullness of God!

MEDITATION. XXIII.
My Lord did know what was to come upon him. Man's sin had been shameful,
Christ's Death was most Reproachful and Accursed; Man had taken Pleasure in sin,
Christ's Death was painful. Man had been wilful in Transgression, and Christ's
Death was voluntary, though 'twas violent. Man had sinned against knowledge and
with great contrivance and deliberation, and Christ perfectly understood all
that he was to endure. He was well aware what he was to feel from Earth, from
Hell, and from his heavenly Father, and yet he makes no demur, but endures the
Cross, and despises the shame, and gives his Life a Ransom for many.

How was he straightened till his bloody Baptism was accomplished. And when his
Disciple Peter through an ignorant and carnal Affection would have hindered him
from dying for his Church; how sharply does he rebuke him, Get thee behind me
Satan, for thou art an offense to me, thou savourest not the things that be of
God, but the things that be of men.

MEDITATION. XXIV.
Dearest Lord! Were thou thus forward to dye, and art thou not forward to reap
the fruit of thy Death, and to receive and save the Souls that come to thee? If
a Woman in Travel be willing to be delivered; I need not question, but thou art
willing to see of the Travel of thy Soul, since it is so much for thy own
satisfaction, so much for thy Fathers Glory. Certainly thou will not reject
sinners that come to thee, since thou have done and suffered so much for their
Salvation.

If thou had been really unwilling to save, (as sometimes Satan misrepresents
thee) that unwillingness would have showed it self when thou wast in thy
terrible Agony, when thy Soul was amazed and full of heaviness, and exceeding
sorrowful unto Death; when the Heaven was black over thee, and thy Fathers Face
hid from thee; and thou did cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me. But all this thou did willingly undergo to save lost Man, and therefore
thy willingness to bestow the Salvation thou have purchased, is not to be
questioned: For surely thou art not willing that such a Death as thine, so
sharp, so bitter, and of so great value should be in vain.

MEDITATION. XXV.
I do not wonder that the Apostle Paul does magnify the knowledge of Christ
Crucified above all other knowledge, compared with this, all the Philosophy of
the Greeks was but vain, legal prerogatives, and indeed all the Ceremonies of
the Law were but insignificant. Christ Crucified! Though he be a stumbling
block to the Jews and to the Greeks foolishness, yet he is the Power of God and
the Wisdom of God, and the greatest demonstration of his love.

I do not wonder that the Lords Supper should be instituted on purpose, that
the Crucifixion of Christ should be remembered, for the Death of Christ is the
sinners life; the Foundation of his hope, and his security against Eternal
Death. The Gospel is styled the Preaching of the Cross, and the Apostle is
resolved to Glory in nothing else, the Truth is we can take comfort in no other
knowledge, unless we have some respect and relation to Christ and him Crucified.

The Papists foolishly adore the sign of the Cross, but true Beleivers do prize
the Doctrine, the Blood, and the Virtue of Christ Crucified.

MEDITATION. XXVI.
What sights may I see in my Lord Crucified? Peace is made by the Blood of the
Cross and all things Reconciled both in Heaven and Earth. The Saints who lived
and dyed before Christ was born, were reconciled to God by the Blood of his Son
which was to be shed in time; as well as Believers since his being manifested
in the Flesh.

In Christ Crucified, the Anger of God is appeased, his Justice fully
satisfied, and though the Christians debt amounts unto millions of Talents; yet
justice acknowledges that Christ his surety has paid it all. Look upon God in
Christ, and you will see that Fury is not in him, through the Lord Jesus you
may see his very Bowels, he does earnestly remember sinners, his Bowels are
troubled for them, and he will surely have mercy upon them.

Oh certain and comfortable Truths! That the Lord is the God of Love and Peace,
that he waits to be Gracious, that he delights in showing mercy, and takes
pleasure in them that hope in his mercy, if that hope be accompanied with a
fear and careful eschewing of what is evil in his sight.

MEDITATION. XXVII.
In Christ Crucified I may see a New Covenant of Grace and Life and Peace,
established, so that it is most sure and Everlasting. Jesus is the Mediator of
this Covenant, and every time I come to the Table this Covenant is sealed and
confirmed to me, that I may with the greater confidence expect the
accomplishment of the promises which are contained in it. These Promises are
exceeding great and precious. Temporal blessings in such a measure as the Wise
God sees convenient are here made over to me, for he that is a Son and Heir of
God, is the Heir of the World, the Heir of all things.

Spiritual blessings which are of greater value, are more absolutely promised,
and may with greater vehemence be desired, and with greater confidence
expected. And as the Lord has engaged to give me Grace, so to give me Glory, he
has said he will give me himself and be my God and Guide, my Shield, and my
exceeding great Reward. And truly the Ordinances of Heaven are not so immutable
and unchangeable, as the Covenant of Redemption and Reconciliation; Heaven and
Earth shall pass away but one joy or tittle shall in no wise pass from the
Covenant till all be fulfilled.

MEDITATION. XXVIII.
In Christ Crucified I may see the Curse of the Law removed, the sentence of
condemnation reversed, the sting of Death taken out, the Principallities and
Powers of darkness triumphed over. I may see Hell fast locked and shut up for
ever, and Heaven opened, a way made plain in to the Holiest of all, an abundant
entrance administered into the Everlasting Kingdom. Who would not study the
Cross of Christ? Who would not Glory and rejoice in it? Who would not desire
conformity to it, and to feel the power and virtue of it. They that are Enmies
to the Cross of Christ, are Enemies to their own Souls. They that are offended
at the Cross, it is a sign they are blind and do no understand the benefits
which comes by it.

MEDITATION. XXIX.
Do this in remembrance of me, said my dying Lord and Redeemer. Lord! Can I put
my memory to a better use then to remember Thee? Thy Tears, thy strong Cries,
thy being cruelly Mocked and Scourged, thy dreadful Agonies and Desertion, the
peircing of thy Hands and Feet, and Side, thy Wounds and Bruises, and giving up
the Ghost, and making thy Soul an Offering for sin and sinners! Shall all or
any this be forgotten?

The sufferings of such an One, such sufferings, so great, so beneficial to me,
should always be kept in most affectionate remembrance. Thy Death and Burial
should never be buried in oblivion. A dying Lord should always live in a
Christians memory. If the poor Captives in Babylon, could not forget Jerusalem,
shall I ever forget Jesus? Or my obligation to him, or the Love and service
which I owe him? I desire to grieve for sin which made thee sorrowful, and to
be pricked at the Heart for my iniquities, whereby thy Heart was pierced. And as
I wish that sin may be more my grief, so I would prefer Jesus before my chief
Joy.

MEDITATION. XXX.
My Lord at the Table says, Take and eat this is my Body. This is infinitely
more and better then if a Rich man should say to me, take my estate, or then if
an Emperor should bid me take his Crown and Diadem, or then if all the
Kingdoms of the World, and all the Glory of them were offered me. When Christ
offered up himself a Sacrifice unto God, that he might put sin away; how great
was the Offering? If all the Beasts in Earth, the Fowls of the Air, had been
offered this offering could not have made Atonement for the sinner or for one
sin. Nay if all the Angels in Heaven, had proffered themselves to be
annihilated in case fallen man might be pardoned. Neither would this have been
sufficient satisfaction. So that when Christ offered himself to God, he offered
more, then all the World, then millions of Worlds would amount unto. And when
the Lord Jesus bids me take him, and feed upon this meat indeed, this Bread of
Life; shall I refuse? He that receives Christ how much does he recieve? He does
indeed receive all: For Christ is all in all, and fills all in all.

MEDITATION. XXXI.
Lift up your Heads O ye Gates, and be ye lift up ye Everlasting Doors, that
the King of Glory may come in. Who is this King of Glory? The Lord Jesus is the
Prince of Life, the King and Lord of Glory. Behold he stands at the door and
knocks, if any man hear his voice and open the door, he will come into him and
sup with him. And when he comes and is admitted, what entertainment does he
bring! Meat that perishes is contemptible in comparison. Christ will give that
Meat which endures to Everlasting Life. His Love is better then Wine, Nay, his
favor is better then life it self. The Manna in the Wilderness was excellent
food, but many that Eat it perished. But whoever by Faith do feed upon our Lord
Jesus in reference to the second Death they become immortal; This is the Bread
which comes down from Heaven, that a Man may Eat thereof and not die. I am the
Bread of Life which came down from Heaven, if any man Eat of this Bread he
shall live for ever, and the Bread that I will give is my Flesh, which I will
give for the Life of the World.

MEDITATION. XXXII.
When an inheritance is conveyed to me by a sealed Deed, the Nature of the wax
is not changed, but the use of it. The Bread and Wine after the Sacramental
blessing of them remain Bread and Wine still, and so in Scripture they are
called; but their use is very much altered, and they become Christ's broad seal
to convey to me, and to assure me of the Remission of sin, of the Renewing of
my Nature, and of Life and Immortality. Let the Papists contend for a gross and
carnal presence of the Body of Christ at his Table. I am persuaded that as
Circumcision is called the Covenant, and the Lamb the Lords Passover. So the
bread and wine are called the Body and Blood of the Lord Jesus. And yet I am
also fully persuaded, that though the Body of Christ is in Heaven, yet he is
most really present at the Table with them that do believe, and such are
nourished and strengthened in this Ordinance. I learn from Scripture that
Spiritual things are most firm, most real, most substantial, most durable; and
if so, then Christ's spiritual presence is the most real presence. Christ is
absent where Transsubstantiation is believed, and Romish Devotion and Adoration
of the Host is turned into abominable Idolatry.

MEDITATION. XXXIII.
Lord! Thou art my Hope, my Help, my Savior, my Life, my All; Thou would
have me put thee on to cover my nakedness. Thou would have me take sanctuary
under thy wings in all my dangers, thou would have me use thee as a Physician
to cure all my spiritual maladies; and when I am hungry and thirsty, and my
Soul faints within me, thou have enough to satisfy and fill me. What one said
concerning the Scripture I may apply to my blessed Lord. Adoro Christi
plenitudinem. I adore the fullness that is in Christ Jesus. Draw nearer, nearer
O thou only Savior, thou deservest the highest, the best, nay, all the room in
my Heart; thou ought to be the most welcome guest. Let me have a clearer
sight of thy transcendent loveliness, a larger taste of thy incomparable
sweetness, let me clasp about thee and hold thee in more strict embraces. Why
should I be empty since in thee there is a fullness of the Spirit without stint
or measure? I would be poor in Spirit, but why should I be poor in Grace, since
in thee there are unsearchable Riches!

MEDITATION. XXXIV.
Bread is the staff of Life, Lord I come to thy Table for support and strength.
Oh! Let the Bread of God strengthen me with strength in my Soul. Let me find
and feel the admirable virtue of the Broken Body, that I may say from plentiful
experience, I, this is meat indeed. Let sin grow weaker and weaker, and Mammons
interest in me decline and languish, but make me strong in Spirit, and carry on
the work of Faith with Power. I have need of strength who have such a way to
go, and all up Hill, who have so much work to do, and such mighty Enemies to
encounter and overcome. My Life lies in believing in thee, I stand no longer
then Thou upholdest me. Without thee I can do nothing or what is worse then
nothing, I can do nothing but sin and fall; but if thou do strengthen me I
shall be able to do all things. If thou withdraw from me, I shall be weak as a
Child, unstable as the very Water, but if thou do confirm me by thy Grace, I
shall be like David, nay, like unto an Angel. I shall fight the good fight of
Faith, and go on conquering, and to conquer till I get the Crown.

MEDITATION. XXXV.
How great was the breach which sin had made between God and Man, that my Lord
must be broken to make it up. Could not something less have served the turn? If
Christ must die or sin must not be pardoned, judge of the greatness of the
fault, by the greatness of the Sacrifice and Satisfaction. What has sin done?
It has filled Earth with troubles, it has filled Hell with Souls, it has turned
Angels into Devils; it has provoked the God of Heaven to great and Righteous
indignation, add unto all this, It has killed Christ the Lord of Life. He was
wounded for our Transgression, he was bruised for our iniquities. Who would
love who would like such an evil! If my Father had been stabbed, should I
embrace the Murderer, or like the Dagger besmeared with his blood? Oh hateful
sin! i will be revenged upon thee. I will make no provision for thee, I will
lament because of thee, I will detest and abhor thee, I will be dead to thee,
and endeavor to mortify and kill thee. My Lord was not spared for thy sake,
and thou shall not be spared. Lord! Away with these lusts, all of them;
Crucify them, Crucify them, since Christ himself did bear my sins in his own
Body on the Tree, Oh let me be dead to sin and live to Righteousness!

MEDITATION. XXXVI.
Is the Cup of blessing at the Table the Communion of the Blood of Christ
indeed? How should my Soul and all that is within me bless the Lords Name when
I take it into my hand? My Lord does in effect say to me, Here is the New
Testament sealed, and confirmed, there is remission of all thy sins, Here is
sanctifying Grace, here is an assurance of mine and my Fathers love, here is a
pledge and earnest of Glory and Immortality. This Blood of Jesus is deservedly
styled precious, it is the Blood of the Lamb without spot, nay, it is the Blood
of the Lord Jehovah. To make light of this Blood as if it were an unholy or
common thing, is to deny the Lord that bought us, and to bring upon our selves
certain and swift destruction. But whosoever by Faith applies this Blood of
Jesus, shall find it sufficient to cleanse them from all unrighteousness.

MEDITATION. XXXVII.
Dearest Lord! How great is the virtue of that blood of thine which was shed
upon the Cross without the gates of Jerusalem! It can appease thy Fathers anger
though provoked unto great fierceness; it can remove the greatest guilt, it can
cure and cleanse the most leprous and defiled Soul, it can heal the most
wounded and enraged Conscience. Oh blessed Laver! where I may wash and be
clean, where I may bath and be eased. Effectual medicine! which heals every
spiritual malady. How wonderful was thy love which made thee shed thy blood,
how happy is thy Church for whom thy blood is shed. Lord I love thee, I rest
upon thee, I rejoice in thee, who have loved thy People and washed them from
their sins in thy own Blood, and have made them Kings and Priests unto God and
thy Father; who gave thy self for thy Church, that thou might sanctify
and cleanse it, and present it to thy self a glorious Church, not having spot
or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish.

MEDITATION. XXXVIII.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies. Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed. This is my
Answer unto the Accuser of the Brethren, when he tells me of my manifold
Transgressions. All that he can truly lay to my charge, I am ready to lay to my
own; nay I subscribe guilty to all that is down in the book of the Omniscient
Gods remembrance, but then I add, Christ dyed, Christ shed his Blood, that sin
might be pardoned and purged, and I am willing to be cleansed as well as
pardoned. And if the Blood of Christ be enough to satisfy divine justice,
surely it is sufficient to satisfy and quiet the most awakened Conscience. I
have indeed like a Sheep gone astray, and turned to my own way, but the Lord has
laid on Christ all my iniquities, he endured the chastisement of my peace, he
felt the stripes that I might be healed. Hereby Satan is silenced, my own
desponding Spirit revived and encouraged, and in the Name and Mediation of
Jesus, I can go unto God himself, though he is so glorious in Righteousness and
Holiness, as a Child unto a Father.

MEDITATION. XXXIX.
The Blood of Christ does speak, and speaks better things then the Blood of
Abel. No voice more loud then that of Blood, no blood does cry like that of
God. This blood does speak both to God and Me; it speaks to God, and what ever
I pray for which I really need, this blood cries that I may obtain. Blessings
of all sorts were purchased by the shedding of it, and it is continually
pleading that what it purchased may be bestowed. Hence is the efficacy of
Prayer, because what the belieuer prays for, the blood of Christ speaks for.
How loud does it cry in Gods ears, Lord pity and pardon the humbled and
Believing Soul! Heal and Comfort the Contrite and Broken hearted! Oh give
converting and Renewing Grace to all that do desire it! Those that fear thy
Wrath let them escape it! Those that prize thy love, love them freely and for
ever! Receive all returning sinners and take away all their iniquities! Give
Grace, give Glory, and no good thing withhold from them that seek thee in
sincerity. Thus the blood of Christ does intercede with God. And the Lord
having contrived the shedding of it on purpose, that without any derogation
from his Righteousness, he might show mercy to the Children of men, certainly
its intercession for mercy shall not be in vain.

MEDITATIONS. XL.
The blood of Christ does speak also to Me. And how good and comfortable are
the words of it! Soul be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, thou have
destroyed thy self but in me is thy help and Salvation found. God was angry
with thee, but I have appeased his Wrath. He whom thou wast ready to find a
consuming Fire, is become a God in Covenant, nay a Father to thee. That blood
which was shed upon the Cross has made thy Peace, though heretofore never so
much a stranger, never so great an Enemy. Behold Hell locked up, thou shall
never fall into that place of Woe; behold the way into the Holiest of all is
open. Thou have liberty to come with boldness to the Throne of Grace, and
within a little while thou shall have an abundant entrance into Glory! Dear
Lord! What am I, that blood, and such blood as thine, should be shed for me!
Why wast thou at such expense and cost for the Redemption, and Salvation of
such a Wretch, such a Rebel! Thou have mercy because thou will have mercy, thy
exceeding rich and glorious Grace must be matter of a delightful transport and
sweet astonishment to Eternity.

MEDITATION. XLI.
My Lords love and kindness should thaw and melt my heart! That God, whom for
so long a time I neither loved nor feared, nor cared to be acquainted with, but
dishonored and sinned against with so high an hand, had he indeed purposes of
Grace toward me from Eternity! That Jesus, whom I shut and barred the door of
my Heart so fast against, whose word I was deaf unto, and whose Spirit I
resisted for so long a time, has He indeed born my sins and carried my sorrows!
Oh that my head were Waters, and my eyes Fountains of Tears! Oh stony Heart for
shame now, become like wax and be melted in the midst of my Bowels! I am a
prodigy of unkindness, woe is me that I have sinned! Woe is me that I who have
sinned so much do grieve no more! Surely all my days I will walk softly in the
bitterness of my Soul. I will be vile in my own eyes and wonder that the Lord
should have respect to such an one as I, My own sin and my Lords Love shall be
my Study, I will compare them together, that sin may be lamented and loathed
according to the desert of it and that my Repentance may be indeed Evangelical
and after a godly manner.

MEDITATION. XLII.
O my Soul, if thy sin deserves thy hatred, does not thy Lord deserve thy love?
What and where had thou been if he had not loved thee and given himself for
thee! Thy Lord is every way excellent, the chiefest among ten thousand,
altogether lovely, the most admired among the visible Creatures, the finest
Gold, the richest Jewels; nay, the shining Sun in the Firmament, are but poor
similitudes, and faint shaddows to set forth his incomparable perfections. The
Heavens are not clean, Angels themselves are black when compared with Jesus who
is the image of the invisible God! This high this glorious and beautiful One,
became flesh and sin, and a Curse for thee, so that his love is incomparable as
well as his loveliness! O my soul set open all the floodgates, let thy love
even all of it run in a strong and undivided stream toward him. Love this Lord
Jesus in sincerity, love him with greater ardency, love him with the greatest
constancy! Here is no danger of excess, no danger of defilement or a snare in
thy loving Christ, as there is in loving of the Creatures. Study him better and
thou will see new beauties in him daily, grow in knowledge that thou may grow
in grace and love. Let thy desires grow stronger and stronger, his fullness can
easily satisfy them. Rejoice in Him with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory,
and cry out with an affectionate and holy impatiency, Come Lord Jesus come
quickly. Appear the second time without sin unto Salvation.

MEDITATION. XLIII.
How much is mine, if Christ my beloved is mine! What unsearchable riches have
I an interest in! No match comparable to that with Christ either for the
excellencies of the person, or the largeness of the estate. What poor offers
does the World, and the God of the World make me. They talk much of honor and
wealth, and mirth and pleasure, but these afford no true contentment for that
short time they are enjoyed; and they perish in the very using. Death does
quickly come with a convincing demonstration, and proves the richest man a mere
beggar, the greatest Prince a contemptible clod of the Earth, the fairest and
most admired beauty a skinful of dirt. Can Satan offer any thing that is
Everlasting? No good thing I am sure that is so. Indeed Everlasting pains,
Eververlasting burnings, Everlasting wrath, he will bring all unto that are led
Captive by him at his pleasure, but these Eternal evils he does most studiously
conceal and hide. But this is the commendation of My Lords Benefits that they
are permanent and durable. The Treasures wax not old, the one thing needful
cannot be taken away, the inheritance is incorruptible, and the Kingdom he will
give his followers cannot be moved.

MEDITATION. XLIV.
If Christ is mine, the Father is mine. How sweet were those words which come
out of my Lords mouth quickly after he came out of the Grave. Go tell my
Brethren I ascend to my Father and your Father, unto my God and your God. All
the Attributes of God are engaged on my side. His wisdom will be my guide, his
power and truth my guard and shield. His presence will be with me wherever I
am, and his Grace sufficient for me in all my troubles and Temptations. All my
desire will be before him, and my groaning will not be hid from him, and he can
easily furnish me with the good things I desire, and deliver me from those
evils which make me groan before him. I shall not want while the Allsufficient
God is my Shepherd, my state is secure and safe, for my God is unchangeable, He
will never turn away from me to do me good, and his Grace will establish me,
and hinder my departing, he will uphold me with the right hand of his
Righteousness, and guide me with his Counsel, and afterward receive me to his
Glory. Be not thou cast down or discouraged, O my Soul, be not disquieted
within me. Hope thou in God, and continually praise Him who is the health of my
countenance and my God.

MEDITATION. XLV.
If Christ is mine, the Spirit is mine. The same soul does animate, and Act the
Head and the Body; the same Spirit is in Christ and in all his true and living
Members. The Spirit of Wisdom and Illumination will enlighten me, and make me
able to judge all things after a right manner. The Spirit of truth will lead me
into all necessary truth, so that I shall be ignorant or mistaken in nothing
which is needful to be understood and known in order unto Salvation. This
Spirit will make me hold the Head, and from him I shall derive not only a
directing light, but a vital influx, which will quicken me, and make me alive
more and more abundantly. Glorious Spirit! Thou art the Lord and Giver of Life,
without thee the Word of Life is dead, and proves a savor of Death unto Death.
Without thee Ordinances are without efficacy, without thee my Heart is cold and
comfortless. I grieve that I have grieved thee. Oh let me be thy Habitation and
thy Temple! let me see thy blessed light, let me feel thy glorious power, and
know by more abundant experience what thy peace and joy means. The lusts of the
flesh which defile thy Temple let them be destroyed, mortify the deeds of the
Body, fill me with Grace and make me fit for Glory. Let the least check of
thine restrain me, every motion of thine let it be obeyed. Let me perpetually
have an ear to Hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

MEDITATION. XLVI.
If Christ is mine, the Creatures are also mine. The Sun was created to give me
light, and to make me admire the God that made it: The Stars observe their
courses for my good, The Ordinances of the Heavens which alter not at man's
pleasure, may serve as an instruction to me, that Gods Covenant, when Earth and
Hell have done their worst, shall be kept and stand fast for ever; the Earth is
Fruitful, the Sea does Ebb and Flow, the Rain descends, the Beasts and Fish and
Fowl do multiply, to do me a kindness. The Ground was made for me to tread on,
the Air for me to breath in; and though such mercies as these are vouchsafed to
wicked men, yet they are given to me in another way. My Lord has bought them
for me with his blood, for with him they are given to me, they are not a trap,
a snare to me as they are to others, but they are truly blessed to me as well
as given. The higher Creatures are also mine, Paul and Apollo and Cephas, nay,
the very Angels are said to be ministering Spirits, and are ready to Minister to
me, and to guard me. Those loving humble Spirits have a charge given them
concerning the Members of Christ, and willingly look after them that are the
Heirs of Salvation.

MEDITATION. XLVII.
If Christ be mine Death is also mine as well as Life. Death is terrible indeed
to Nature, and causes the frame thereof to be dissolved; but my Lord has
reconciled this last Enemy. It Is really mine to serve me, too much mine to do
me any real harm. Christ by dying has taken out the sting of Death, so that I
need not any longer be under bondage through the Fear of Death. O Death! Thou
have left thy sting in the side of Christ, and there have lost it. O Grave! My
Lord has broke thy gates open, and because he is risen, I may joyfully conclude
my own Resurrection. My body must lie in darkness for a while, but it shall not
always be Death's Prisoner. This corruptible shall put on incorruption, this
mortal shall put on immortality, and as the Corn cast into the ground does rise
with advantage, every single grain yiedling sometimes an hundred fold, so my
flesh shall come up out of the Earth with an hundred fold better qualities then
now it has. It Is sown in weakness, it is raised in power, it is sown in dishonor
it is raised in glory. But O my Soul! Death will not be able at all to seize on
thee. Thou will be delivered out of a dungeon when thou leavest thine Earthly
Tabernacle, and go unto a glorious Palace, as soon as ever thou art absent from
the Body thou will be present with the Lord, as soon as thou art departed, thou
will be with Christ, and how much better that is thou will find to thy full and
Everlasting joy.

MEDITATION. XLVIII.
If my Beloved is mine, and all things, mine is there not reason I should be
His? His I am and His I will be to eternity. Lord! I am Thine for thou have
made me and not I my self. I am thine by the right of purchase as well as
Creation, for thou have bought me with a price. Nay, thou have new made me on
purpose for thine own use, and that I should show forth thy praises. And I do
willingly resign and yield my self to thee; if I am thy Servant make use of me,
if I am thy Treasure, keep me; if I am a child, let me be employed in my
Fathers business; if I am Betrothed to thee, let thy love and jealousy secure
me from other Lovers. Oh let me be wholly, only, always Thine! Turn away my
eyes from beholding vanity! Let my tongue be like an Angels, continually
sounding forth thy Name, Let my hands be holy, the path of my feet pondered;
let all my members be yielded as instruments of Righteousness, and let my soul
with all its powers love and serve thee. Lord sanctify and satisfy, and save
me, and honor me, by employing me; for I lift up my soul, and give my very
heart to thee.

MEDITATION. XLIX.
Ten thousand times ten thousand praises to the God of love and peace! Who
would not worship thee and give thee glory, O thou King of Saints! Let thy
Church on Earth, as well as Heaven, ring aloud with Hallelujah's! Who is God
save the Lord, who is a Rock save our God! Who in Heaven above or in Earth
beneath is to be compared to Thee, a God glorious in holiness, terrible in
Majesty rich in mercy, abounding in Grace, wonderful in working, and keeping
truth for ever! Who can by searching find out God! who can find out the
Almighty to perfection! It is high as Heaven what can we do? Deeper then Hell
what can we know? Who is a God like unto thee, abundant in loving kindness,
goodness and truth! Delighting in mercy! Forgiving iniquity Transgression and
sin, and reconciling the world to himself in Christ! Glory be to God in the
highest for such good will toward men! Let the Heavens rejoice, and let the
Earth be glad, let the Sea roar and the fullness thereof. Let the floods clap
their hands, and the hills be joyful together. Let all the creatures join in
magnifying that God which made them! And let all Saints shout aloud for joy
unto Him who has visited and redeemed them!

MEDITATION. L.
Lord! How much art thou above thy Creatures reach! Who, besides thy self, can
conceive thy excellency! Who can show forth all thy praise! Thou art exalted
above the blessing and the thoughts of Angels, above the songs of Seraphims.
Everlasting thanksgivings are thy due; Oh let me live with thee to Eternity,
that I may ever be paying this debt of praises! Bless the Lord ye innumerable
company of Angels, which excel in strength who see the Glory of your Maker and
Lord! Praise him O ye Thrones, Dominions, Principallities and Powers. Exalt
that mighty and gracious God, who elected and confirmed you, when so many other
Angels sinned, and are eternally left, and miserable, in their Apostasy! O all
ye Triumphant Saints that are with the Lamb upon the heavenly Mount Sion.
Strike up with your Harps, and if it be possible let your strains be still
higher and higher! Ascribe blessing and honor and glory, and power unto Him
that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever! O thou Militant Church!
Begin this heavenly work of praising here on Earth. Thy Redemption and
deliverance is begun, and will most certainly be completed. The Captain of thy
Salvation will stand by thee in thy spiritual warfare, and having made thee
more then victorious over all thy Enemies will bestow upon thee the promised
Crown of life and glory!

MEDITATION. LI.
Bless the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name! What
have thou breath for, but that it should be spent in his praises! Wherefore
have thou a tongue at command, but that it should be employed in glorifying thy
Lord, and hereby become thy glory. Should not a slave that has been in very
hard and cruel bondage, be thankful to him that redeemed him? Should not a
Malefactor condemned to dye be thankful unto Him that pardoned him? Should not
the patient that has labored under a Death threatening distemper, be thankful
to the Physician that has cured him? And how much greater reason is there O my
Soul, that thou should abound in thanksgivings unto thy God and Savior! Thou
wast in the worst sense enslaved, and he has made thee free indeed! Thou wast
condemned to the second Death, to be separated for ever from the Lord, and to
be thrown into the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, and he by dying
himself has purchased a pardon for thee. Thou wast sick of spiritual, which are
the worst kind of plagues, and He is the Lord that heals thee, Awake! Awake! Oh
my soul, Awake! Awake! And utter a song of praise! Rejoice in Christ Jesus!
Glory in the Father of mercies! Who forgiveth all thy iniquities, who heals
all thy Diseases, who redeemeth thy life from destruction, who crowns thee
with loving kindness, and tender mercies!

MEDITATION. LII.
Shall I not magnify and advance my Lord who am so highly advanced my self? I
was once in darkness and securely went on toward the blackness of darkness
forever, but I am called out of darkness into mavelous light ^. I was once a
stranger and a forreiner, but now I am a fellow Citizen with the Saints, and of
the household of God. I am become a child of God, who was once a Child of Wrath
and Disobedience. I am become an Heir of God and a Joint-Heir with Christ, unto
that inheritance which is incorruptible and undefiled, and which fades not
away. Nay, my Lord who has loved me, and washed me from my sins in his own
blood, has made me a King and a Priest unto God and his Father, and I must
reign for ever, for of this Kingdom which I have now a Title to, and a sure
promise of, there shall be no end! Oh rich! Oh free! Oh glorious Grace! I am at
a loss for an expression high enough to set forth the thousandth part (...) my
Lords incomparable kindness; my shallow Conceptions cannot reach what is
incomprehensible: Therefore I must be silent in a joyful admiration!

MEDITATION. LIII.
What shall I render unto the Lord? My All is due, my All is too little, and by
rendering my All, I secure my All, and so am still more benefited, and I become
more my Lords debtor! I find my self most happily puzzled with my Lords
goodness. He gives himself to me, and requires that I should give my self to
him, but in so doing not He but I receive the benefit. All the retributions
thou requirest, O my God and Father, are but to do my self more kindnesses.
Duties are my privileges! All thy precepts are for my profit and my peace and
pleasure to obey them. Thou art beyond all compare the very best Master! Oh let
my ear be boared, for I will serve thee for ever; let my Heart be circumcised
that I may love thee Eternally! There is a sweetness in the acting of every
Grace. There is great peace in keeping of thy law, there is an amiableness in
thy Tabernacles, thy power and thy glory are seen in thy sanctuary! and though
that word Suffering may sound harsh, yet upon experience, suffering will be
found the most delightful pa^^ of Christian obedience.

MEDITATION. LIVE.
My Lord did not stick at suffering and why should I? Why should the Cross
daunt me? If I will be indeed Godly, Persecution is to be expected. The old
Serpent is full of hatred, and so are his seed, and their hatred is implacable.
But when I consider my Lords love, and power, and presence. Hells Malice and
the Worlds Rage become contemptible; times of suffering are times of the
sweetest solace. Those are not unreasonable injunctions, Count it all joy when
ye fall into diverse Temptations, and Blessed are ye when men shall revile you
and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake,
rejoice and be exceeding glad for great is your reward in Heaven. The Spirit of
glory and of God does rest upon his suffering Saints, so that they glory in
tribulation, they rejoice in it as a dignity when they suffer shame for the
name of Jesus, they are gainers by their losses, they gain an hundred fold in
this World, besides the Kingdom in the other World.

MEDITATION. LV.
O my soul follow thy Lord, though he lead thee in rough ways and paths of
great affliction. If sufferings abound, consolation shall abound, and grace
shall be sufficient. The Cross of Christ though the outside of it be
affrighting, yet it is lined with love, and easily born. And if it should come
to pass that Life must be taken away; What better use can Life be put to then
to lay it down for the Testimony of Jesus? The painfullest deaths have proved
many times most pleasant. What raptures of joy have the Martyrs had, at the
stake and in the flames! Prudentius of old observed, Mors Christianis ludus
est; That Death was but a sport unto the Christians! Remarkable is that passage
of Bainham the Martyr, when his arms and legs were half consumed by the fire,
he spoke these words, O ye Papists you look for miracles, and here now you may
see a miracle, for in this fire I feel no more pain, then if I were in a bed of
Down, it is to me a bed of Roses! Resolve therefore O my soul, undauntedly to
undergo whatever tribulaon thou meetest for the sake of Righteousness. Rely
upon thy faithful God who will not suffer thee to be tempted above what his
Grace shall enable thee to bear, with joy as well as patience!

MEDITATION. LVI.
Thy death O Lord, is to be shown forth till thou come, it is proper for me to
think of thy coming, and to rejoice at the thoughts of it. My Lord and
Redeemer, will certainly appear the second time without sin to Salvation. And
when he shall appear I shall be like him, and appear with him in glory. Time
and days do fly away apace, and the coming of my Lord draws nigh. That will
be the day of my open absolution, of my full and complete Redemption, of my
joyful and triumphant Coronation. How full of glory and of love, will be the
face of Jesus then! Ah! where shall the ungodly and sinners then appear! How
will the greatest and the stoutest of them, even the Kings and Chief Captains,
and mighty men, tremble; and call to the Rocks and Mountains to fall on them
and cover them, from the face of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the
Wrath of the Lamb! But though most of mankind be full of horror, I if I am a
true Believer shall be full of joy, and after I have been openly acquitted,
owned and crowned, before Men and Angels: Whither, Oh whither will my Lord
carry me! Into those Mansions he is gone to prepare; into the presence Chamber
of the King of Glory. Where God himself will be All in All.

MEDITATION. LVII.
I find some sweetness in the way and means of grace, what shall I find in the
end! if in vale of Tears such joy be found, what will be enjoyed in a paradise
of delight! if in the midst of labors and fightings, and temptations I find so
much satisfaction, what contentment will an Everlasting rest afford me!
Augustine speaks excellently, Soliloq. cap. 35. Intra in gaudium sine
tristitia; ubi erit omne bonum, et non erit aliquod malum; ubi erit quicquid
voles, et non erit quicquid noles: O gaudium vincens omne gaudium! laetitia
sine dolor, lux sine tenebris, vita sine morte, ubi juventus nunquam senescit,
ubi decor nunquam pallescit, ubi amor nunquam tepescit, gaudium nunquam
decrescit, ubi dolor nunquam sentitur, gemitus nunquam auditur, ubi triste
nihil videtur, ubi malum nullum timetur, quia summum bonum possidetur. Enter O
my soul into joy without sadness! Where there shall be a presence of all good
an absence of all evil, where there shall be every thing which thou desire,
nothing at all that thou dislikest. O joy surpassing all other joys! Gladness
without Grief, Light without Darkness, Life without Death! There Youth shall
never grow old, Beauty shall never fade, Love shall never wax cold, and Joy
shall never be diminished; there sorrow shall never be felt, one sigh shall
never be heard; nothing sad shall be seen, nothing evil shall be feared,
because the chiefest good shall be possessed.

MEDITATION. LVIII.
Lord! I am thine save me, save me or I shall surely perish, bring me safe to
the Haven, preserve me to thy heavenly Kingdom, that neither Faith nor
Conscience, nor my soul may suffer shipwreck. Thou have made an Everlasting
Covenant with me, and at thy Table this Covenant has been sealed, Oh never turn
away from me to do me good, and let thy power and love, and the fear of thy
name secure me from Apostasy! I am not sufficient to be my own keeper, but who
shall be able to pluck me out of the hand of Christ and of the Father who is
greater then all? Thou art of power to establish me, and can easily keep me
from falling, and present me faultless before the presence of thy glory with
exceeding great joy. Oh let not my faith fail, nor my love cool, nor my
watchfulness abate; let Satan's wiles and devices be unsuccessful, help me to
slight the worlds frowns, and to be deaf and dead, to the flatteries and smiles
of it. Let me obtain mercy to be faithful in thy Covenant, let my spirit be
cured of its natural fickleness and treachery, let resolutions to be the Lords,
and to serve the Lord be peremptory, being made and kept with a strength beyond
my own! And let me at last be able to say. O God my Heart is fixed, my Heart is
fixed, I will sing and give praise.

Herbert. page 140.

KIng of Glory, King of Peace,
I will love thee:
And that love may never cease,
I will move thee.
Thou have granted my request,
Thou have heard me:
Thou did note my working breast,
Thou have spared me.
Wherefore with my utmost art
I will sing thee,
And the cream of all my heart
I will bring thee.
Though my sins against me cried,
Thou did clear me;
And alone, when they replied,
Thou did hear me.
Seven whole days, not one in seven,
I will praise thee:
In my Heart though not in Heaven,
I can raise thee.
Thou grew'st soft and moist with Tears,
Thou relentedst:
And when Justice called for fears,
Thou dissentedst.
Small it is in this poor sort
To enroll thee:
Even Eternity is too short
To extol thee.
FINIS.
Books to be Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside.
A Hundred select Sermons on several Texts, by Tho Horton, D. D. Sermons on 4
select Psalms, viz. 4th 42, 51, 63. by Tho. Horton, D. D. Mr. Baxters Christian
Directory. Sermons on the whole Epistle of Saint Paul to the Collossians, by
Mr. J. Daille, translated into English by F. S. with Dr. Tho. Goodwins, and Dr.
John Owens Epistles Recommendatory. An Exposition of Christ's Temptation on
Matthew. 4. and Peter's Sermon to Cornelius; and circumspect walking, By Dr. Tho
Tailor. A Practical Exposition on the 3d. Chapter of the first Epistle of Saint
Paul to the Corinthians, with the Godly man's choice, on Psalm 4. v. 6, 7, 8. by
Anthony Burgess. Dr. Donns 40 Sermons, being his 3 Volumes. Pareus Exposition
on the Revelations. General Martyrlogia, with the Lives of 32 English Divines,
by Sam. Clark. A Narrative of the Horrid Popish Plot. -- A Narrative of Knox
and Lane. -- The Witch of Endor. -- Popes Warehouse. All four Published by Dr.
Titus Oats. Robert Jenneson Esquire His narrative. Dugdales Narrative. Mr. Tho.
Dangerfields of the Sham Presbyterian Plot. Smiths Account of the 14 Popish
Malefactors in Newgate. Animadversions on the 5 Jesuits Speeches. -- The
Excommunicated Price, a Tragedy as it was acted by his Holinesses Servants, By
Captain William Bedlow. Protestant Conformist plea for moderation. A Conference
between a Bensalian Bishop, and an English Doctor concerning Church Government.
A Caution to all English Protestants. A Lenetive for the Clergy. Broughtons,
Works published by Dr. Light-foot.
Books 4to.
The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, By George Swinnock.
M. A. An Antidote against Quakerism, by Stephen Scandret. An Exposition of the
five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations thereupon, by William
Greenhil. The Gospel Covenant opened, by Pet. Bulkley. Gods holy Mind, touching
matters Moral, which he uttered in ten Commandments: Also an Exposition on the
Lords Prayer, by Edward Eston, B. D. The fiery Jesuit, or an Historical
Collection of the rise, increase, doctrines and deeds of the Jesuits, exposed
to view for the sake of London. Horologiographia optica; Dyaling, universal and
particular, speculative and practical; together with a Description of the Court
of Arts, by a new Method, by Sylvanus Morgan. Regimen sanitatis-salemi, or the
Regiment of Health, containing Directions and instructions for the guide and
government of man's life. A seasonable Apology for Religion, by Matthew Pool.
Separation no Schism, in answer to a Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor, by
J. S. The Practical Divinity of the Papist discovered, to be destructive to
true Religion, and men's Souls, by J. Clark son. A Case of Conscience, viz.
whether it be lawful for any person to act contrary to the opinion of his own
Conscience, formed from arguments that to him appear very probable, though not
necessary or demonstrative, by Dr. Collings. The Creatures goodness as they
came out of Gods hand, and the good-mans mercy to the bruit-Creatures, in two
Sermons, by Tho. Hodges. B. D. Certain Considerations tending to promote Peace
and Unity among Protestants. Mediocria, or the most plain and natural
apprehensions which the Scripture offers, concerning the great Doctrines of the
Christian Religiion: of Election, Redemption, the Covenant, the Law and Gospel,
and Perfection. Sermons, at the Funeral of Mr. James Janeway, by Nath. Vincent.
The Vanity of man in his best estate, in a discourse on Psalm. 39. 5. at the
Funeral of the Lady Susanna Keate, by Richard Kidder, M. A. Mr. Cautons, by Mr.
Henry Hurst, and Mr. Nath. Vincent. Mr. Sorrels, by Mr. Benj. Smith. Mr.
Wadsworth, by Mr. R. Bragg. Mr. Newcomens, by Mr. Fairson. Mr. Thomas Vincents,
by Mr. Slater. Mr. Corbets, by Mr. Richard Baxter. Mr. Bakers, by Mr. Nath.
Vincent. Mr. Marshalls, by Mr. Tomlins. Mr. Johnsons, by Mr. Loid. Mrs.
Fishers, by Mr. Scot. Dr. Whittakers, by Dr. Annesly. Mr. Wells, by Mr. Thomas
Watson. Mr. Stubs, by Mr. Watson. Mr. Stubs, by Mr. Richard Baxter. Hodges
Vanity of man as mortal. Mrs. Lies, by Mr. Lamb. Virtuous Daughter by Brion.
Sir Thomas Viners by Dr. Spurslow. Mr. Perns, by Ainsworth. Work and Reward of
a Christian, by R. Raworth. Mr. Wests Funeral Sermon, by Mr. Cole, Mr. Webbs,
by Mr. David Burges. Baeuters which is the true Church; Hodges Creatures
goodness. Naked Truth. Doolitles Protestants Answer. Mr. Kidders Charity
directed. Scholars address; Dr. Crossmans Sermon. Humphrys peaceable
disquisitions. Hodges considerations to promote peace. An Endeavor for Peace;
A conference between a Papist and a Jew; and a Protestant and a Jew. An Essay
for the Education of Gentlewomen. A warning for Servants or the Case of
Margaret Clark. An Answer to Dr. Stilling fleets Sermon by the peaceable
design. A Discourse of Pluralities. A Discourse of Excommunication. The middle
way of Predetermination; Popery an Enemy to Truth by Mr. Sheldreck. Dr.
Dumoulins conformity of Independent Government to the Ancient Primitive
Christians. Excommunication Excommunicated in a Dialogue between a Doctor of
both Laws. The Case of the Protestants in England under a Popish Prince. A
rebuke to Informers. A modest Inquiry into Dr. Stilling fleet Historical
mistakes. The State of Blessedness. An Answer to Dr. Stilling fleets Book. by
J. H. Liberty of Conscience in order to universal peace. The Lords voice crying
to England. Life of Herod the Great. A Manifesto, or an Account of the State,
and differences between the King of Denmark and Norway and the Duke of
Slesmick. Phelps Innocencies reward. Materials for Union. A sheet of Union.
Rosses Mestogogus Poaeticus. Phelps on the Revelations. Gilaspys Ark of the
Covenant. Present State of New England. Dr. Collings of Providence. Froysells
Sermons of Grace and Temptations. Yarringtons Englands Improvement, First part.
-- Idem second part. Meaning of the Revelation, by John Hayter. The
Morning-Lecture against Popery, or the principal errors of the Church of Rome
detected and confuted in a Morning-Lecture, preached by several Ministers of
the Gospel in or near London. Four useful discourses: (1) The art of improving
a full and prosperous condition for the glory of God; being an appendix to the
art of Contentment in three Sermons, on Philip. 4. 12. (2) Christian
submission, on 1 Samuel 3. 18. Philip. 1. 21. (4) The Gospel of peace sent to the
sons of peace, in six Sermons, on Luke 10. 5, 6. by Jeremiah Burroughts. Dr.
Wilds Letter of Thanks and Poems. A new Copy-Book of all sorts of useful hands.
The new World; or new-reformed Church, by Doctor Homes. The Virtuous Daughter,
a Funeral Sermon, by Mr. Brian. The Miracle of Miracles, or Christ in our
Nature: by Dr. Rich. Sibbs. The unity and essence of the Catholic Church
visible, by Mr. Hudson. Brightman on Revelations, Canticles and Daniel. Canaans
Calamity. The intercourse of Divine Love between Christ and the Church, or the
particular Beleiving soul: in several Lectures on the whole second Chap. of
Cant. by John Collins, D. D.
Large 8 vo.
The sure mercies of David by Nath. Heywood. Heaven or Hell here in a Good or
Bad Conscience, by Nath. Vincent. Closet-Prayer a Christians duty; all three by
O. Heywood. A Practical discourse of Prayer; wherein is handled the nature and
duty of Prayer, by Tho. Cobbet. Of quenching the Sprit; the evil of it, in
respect both of its causes and effects, discovered; by Theophilus Polwheile.
The sure way to Salvation; or a Treatise of the Saints mystical Union with
Christ; by Richard Stedman. M. A. Sober Singularity, by the same Author. Heaven
taken by Storm. by Tho. Watson. The Child's Delight; together with an English
Grammar. Reading and Spelling made easy; both by Tho. Lie. Aesops Fables, with
morals thereupon in English Verse. The Young-mans Instructor, and the Old-mans
remembrancer; being an Explanation of the Assemblies Catechism. Captives bound
in Chains, made free by Christ their Surety; both by Tho. Doolittle. Eighteen
Sermons preached upon several Texts of Scripture, by William Whitaker. The
Saints care for Church Communion; declared in sundry Sermons, preached at St.
James Dukes-place, by Zech. Crofton. The life and death of Edmund Stanton D. D.
To which is added a Treatise of Christian-conference; and a Dialogue between a
Minister and a Stranger. Sin the Plague of plagues, or sinful sin the worst of
Evils; by Ralph Venning. M. A. Cases of Conscience practically resolved; by J.
Norman. The faithfulness of God considered and cleared in the great Events of
his Word; or a second part of the fulfilling of the Scripture. The immortality
of the Soul explained and proved by Scripture and Reason; to which is added
Faiths-triumph over the fears of death; by Tho. Wedsworth. A Treatise of the
incomparableness of God, in his Being, Attributes, Works, and Word; by George
Swinnock, M. A. A discourse of the original, etc. of the Cossacks. The
generation of Seekers; or the right manner of the Saints addresses to the
throne of Grace, with an Exposition on the Lords-Prayer. The administration of
Cardinal Ximones. An Essay to facilitate the Education of Youth, by bringing
down the rudiments of Grammar to the sense of seeing, which ought to be
improved by Syncrisis; by Lewis of Totenham. An Artificial Vestibulum; wherein
the sense of Janua Linguarum is contained, compiled into plain and short
sentences in English, for the great ease of Masters, and Expeditious progress
of Scholars, by M. Lewis. Speculum Sherlockianum, or a Looking glass, in which
the admirers of Mr. Sherlock, may behold the man, as to his Acuracy, Judgment,
Orthodoxy. A discourse of Sins of Omission; wherein is discovered their Nature,
Causes, and Cure; by George Swinnock. His Majesty's Propriety in the British
Seas vindicated. Quakerism no Christianity; or a through-Quaker no Christian,
proved by their Principles, and confirmed by Scripture; by J. Faldo.
Differences about Water Baptism no bar to Communion; by Jo. Bunian. The
Dutch-dispensatory; showing the virtues, qualities and properties of Simples;
the virtue and use of Compounds; whereto is added the Complete Herbalist. Judge
Dodaridge's laws of Nobility and Peerage. Dinglys Spiritual Feast. Solitude
improved by Divine Meditation; by Matthew. Ranew. A Murderer punished and
pardoned, or Tho. Savage his life and death; with his Funeral sermon. Hurst
Revival Grace. Buryes Husbandmans Companion. -- help to holy walking; Hanmers
view of Antiquity, Nomenclaturas. Wases Grammar. Vincent of Conscience. Gouges
Principles of Christian Religion. -- Christian Direction. -- Word to Saints and
Sinners. -- Young man's guide. -- Christian Householder. Perrots Englands duty.
The Nonconformists vindicated. Wadsworths remains. Shepherdy Spiritualized.
Calamys Art of divine Meditation. Faldos Quakerism no Christianity. --
vindication of 21 Divines.
Small 8vo.
A defense against the fear of death; by Zach. Crofton. Gods Sovereignty
displayed, by William Gearing. The Godly man's Ark, or a City of Refuge in the
day of his distress, in five Sermons; with Mrs. Moors evidences for Heaven: by
Edmund Calamy. The Almost-Christian discovered, or the false-Professor tried
and cast, by M. Mead. The true bounds of Christian-freedom: or a discourse
showing the extent and restraints of Christian-liberty, by S. Bolton, D. D. The
sinfulness of Sin and fullness of Christ, in two Sermons; by Will. Bridge. A Plea
for the godly, or the Righteous man's Excellency. The holy Eucharist, or the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. A Treatise of self-denial. All three by Tho.
Watson. The life and death of Tho. Wilson. of Maidstone in Kent. The Life and
Death of Dr. Samuel VVinter. A Covert from the Storm, or the fearful encouraged
in the day of Trouble. Worthy-walking pressed upon all that have heard the Call
of the Gospel. The Spirit of Prayer. All three by Nath. Vincent. The
inseparable union between Christ and a Believer, by Tho. Peck. A discourse of
Excuses, setting forth the variety and vanity of them, the sin and misery
brought in by them, by John Sheffield. Invisible reality, demonstrated in the
holy life and triumphant death of Mr. J. Janeway. The Saints encouragement to
diligence in Christ's service: both by Mr. James Janeway. A discourse concerning
the Education of Children. Convivium Caeleste; a plain and familiar discourse
concerning the Lords Supper; both by R. Kidder. The Saints perseverance
asserted in its Positive-ground against Mr. Ives, by Tho. Danson. A
Wedding-ring fit for the Finger; by Will. Secker. An Explanation of the
shorter-Catechism of the Assembly of Divines; by Tho. Lie. The life and death
of Tho. Hall. A Plea for the Non-Conformists, tending to vindicate them from
Schism, by a Doctor in Divinity. The flat opposition of Popery to Scripture; by
J. N. Chaplain to a Person of Honor. The Weavers Pocket book, or Weaving
spiritualized by J. C. D. D. Two disputations of Original sin; by Richard
Baxter. The History of Moderation. The welcome Communicant. The
little-peace-maker discovering foolish Pride, the Makebate. Philadelphia; or a
Treatise of Brotherly love; by Mr. Gearing. Reformation or Ruin, being certain
Sermons on Levit. 26. 23, 23. by Tho. Hotchkis. The Riches of Grace displayed;
to which is added the privilege of Passive obedience; and 52 proposals in
order to help on Heart-humiliation; by Will. Bagshaw. The parable of the great
Supper opened in 17 Sermons, by John Crump. A present for Teeming-women, by J.
Oliver. Nonconformity without Controversy; by Benj. Baxter. A Treatise of
Closet-Prayer; by Richard Mayo. The Religious Family; by Philip Lamb. A
discourse of the prodigious Abstinence of Martha Tailor. Index biblicus
multi-jugus, or a Table of the holy Scripture; wherein each of its Books,
Chapters and particular matters are distinguished and Epitomized. The day of
Grace, with the Conversion of a Sinner; by Nathanael Vincent. An easy and
useful Grammar for the learning of the French Tongue, by Mr. Gosthead,
Gentleman. The Miners Monitor, or advice to those that are employed about the
Mines. A Protestant Catechism for litte Children. A Scripture Catechism, by
Samuel Petto. A Catechism according to the Church of England. Nero Tragidea.
Cornelianum dolium. Wilsons Catechism. Elenchuus motuum nuperorum in Anglia.
Cackaines Poems. Croftons Foelix Scelus; or prospering-profaneness provoking
holy conference, by Zach. Crofton. Gramaticus Analyticus, by the same Author.
Alexanders advice to his Son. H. Excellency of Christ set forth. Phelps Caveat
against Drunkenness. -- Lamentation for the loss of a good man. -- Antidote
against desperation. Bury against Drunkenness. Wadsworths last warning to
Sinners. Dr. Wilkinsons Counsels and Comforts to afflicted Consciences.
Cappello and Bianco, a Romance. Calys Glimpse of Eternity. Period of humane
Life. Defense of Period of humane Life, both written by the Author of the whole
Duty of man, etc. An Answer to the period of humane Life. Survey Quakerism.
Tho. Vincents Explication of the Assemblies Catechism. Vincent on Prayer. -- On
Convertion and daily Grace. -- Covert from storm. -- Worthy Walking. Parsons
Letter to VVem. Adams Catechism. Lambs New Years Gift. Perks way to mend the
World. Burys Antidote against the fear of Death. Mr. Corbets Kingdom, God among
men, with a Tract of Schism. Self-imployment in Secret, by John Corbet.
Solomon's Proverbs. Traughtons Popery, the grand Apostasy. Heywoods Christ
displayed. Bishop Reignolds Meditations. Mr. Edward Wests Legacy. Gerhard on
Death. Whole Duty of Youth. Welcome Communicant. Ames Marrow Divinity. Tho.
Vincent against the Quakers, being the sandy Foundation shaken. A warning to
young men, or Brinkhursts Narrative. Mr. Kiddars help to smallest Children in
their understanding of the Church-Catechism. Thomas Vincents Himns. Bartlet on
the Sacrament. Greens needful preparatory to the Lords Supper. Dr. Collings of
ordinary matter of Prayer. Wilsons Child's Trade. Scandrets Catechism.
Sheffields Catechism. Much in a little, or an abstract of Mr. Baxters plain
Scripture Proof for Infants Baptism. Some brief Directions for the improvement
of Infants Baptism.
Books Twelves.
Drexellius Repository. Meads Spiritual Wisdom. Nathanael Vincents little
Child's Catechism. The duty of Parents toward their Children. A little book for
little Children. A method and instruction for the Art of divine Meditation. All
three by Tho. White. The considerations of Drexelius on Eternity. The shadow
of the Tree of Life, by M. M. The Psalms of David newly translated: more plain,
smooth and agreeable to the Text than any heretofore. Mr. Henry Lukin's Life of
Faith.
FINIS.

