FIRE AND BRIMSTONE From Heaven. From Earth. In Hell.

OR, Three Discourses I. Concerning the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah formerly,
II. Concerning the burning of Aetna, or Mount Gibel more lately, III.
Concerning the burning of the Wicked Eternally,
with Fire and Brimstone.

By Thomas Vincent, sometime Minister of Maudlins Milk-street, London.

Rev. 21. 8. But the fearful and unbelieving, and Abominable, and Murderers,
and Whore-mongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars shall have their
part in the Lake, which burns with Fire and Brimstone; which is the second
Death. London, Printed for George Calvert, and Samuel Sprint, and are to be
sold at the Golden Ball in Duck-Lane. 1670.

To the Reader.
THe occasion of my Writting these few Sheets concerning these three great
Burnings, was the breaking forth of such Flames and Streams of Fire the last
Year at the Mouth and sides of Aetna, or Mount Gibel; being willing to take
hold of any occasion, especially so suitable as this, to awaken Sinners, that
they might endeavor their escape from the future and everlasting burnings of
Hell; and this I thought the rather to do, because in the Relation given us of
those stupendous burnings of Aetna, the hand of the Lord was not in the least
minded, his Name not once mentioned, and no improvement thereof at all
attempted by him, or them that drew up the Narrative; which to me seemed a
shame, and quickened me (when others who might have done it better were silent)
in my endeavors to make some advantage of this Providence for the good of
Souls. The chief of what I had drawn up was several Months since, which I
purposed to Preach upon in the course of my Ministry, as an Appendix unto the
Doctrine of Contrition; but being diverted from that Subject by some sevearer
and threatening Providence, I looked upon my self as called at that time rather
to Preach upon such Subjects might tend to the support of Gods people under
those sufferings which they were like to undergo, if they would perseveer in
his ways. Thus my Papers were laid aside and laid asleep, and I did think to
bury them in my Closet, and never to suffer them to come forth into the light;
But since the Fires which have broken forth of late in the City, and Suburbs,
and Southwark; and the general impression of fear of Fire upon the Sptrits of
London's Inhabitants, I thought it might be seasonable at this time to treat of
Burnings; that so I might prevail with all in danger, especially the
Inhabitants in and about London, that if they should not escape the burnings of
their Houses here (for the preventing of which all diligence should be used)
yet that they would above all things endeavor to escape the burning of their
Persons in the everlasting flames of Hell; If this little Book be made use of,
by the Lord to keep any of you out of Hell give God all the praise, and be
mindful at the Throne of Grace of him who prays for the Salvation of all your
Souls.

Thomas Vincent.

Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, in the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah.
Psalm 11. 6. Upon the wicked he shall rain Snare Fire and Brimstone, and an
horrible Tempest; this shall be the portion of their Cup.
CHAP. I. The Text opened, and a general Doctrine observed.
THe Lord is known by the judgments which He executes, whereby he gives
Sinners to understand even in this World, that, as he is patient and
longsuffering, merciful and gracious, and ready to be reconciled: so that he is
Holy and jealous, just and righteous, and that he can be angry, and express
his anger in furious rebukes, when by sin he is exceedingly provoked hereunto.
And as the anger of the Lord, in the height and feirenesse of it, is compared
unto Fire, unto a flaming Fire, which devoureth round about, Lam. 2. 3. So his
most dreadful judgments, the expressions of his anger are by Fire, especially
by Fire mingled with Brimstone. Such showers of Fire and Brimstone God does
threaten to rain upon the wicked in the Text: Upon the wicked he shall rain
Snares, Fire, and Brimstone and an horrible Tempest, this shall be the portion
of their Cup.

In this Psalm is set forth first (the ^hatred and indignation of the wicked
toward the righteous, which is expressed both in their scoffing at them, and
their preparing the bow, and arrow to shoot and destroy them. Ver. 1. 2. 2. the
hatred and indignation of God toward the wicked, which is expressed in his
threatening to rain Snares, Fire, and ^mstone, and an horrible Tempest upon them
to devour them. Ver. 5. 6. Upon the wicked,) that is, upon all the wicked who
go on still in their trespasses, especially such as are haters and persecutors
of the righteous. He shall rain Snares, that is, God will entangle and hold
them so fast, even like Birds under the snares and nets of the Fowler, that
they shall not be able to fie from and escape the destruction which he will
bring upon them. Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest. No Tempest is
more horrible, than a tempest of Fire and Brimstone, which God will rain on the
wicked; this has an allusion unto the real Fire and Brimstone, miraculously
Created by God, and rained down from Heaven upon the wicked Cities of Sodom and
Gemorrah: something like unto this God threatens in his destructions of other
places. Isa. 13. 19. And Babylon, the glory of Kingdoms, the beauty of the
Caldees excellency, shall be, as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. Amos 4.
11. I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. And if
the wicked do escape real Fire and Brimstone, and any temporal judgment, like
it, on Earth; be sure the Lord will rain an horrible Tempest of fire and
brimstone upon them in Hell. This shall be the portion of their Cup. The Lord
has received a portion, and prepared a Cup for all the children of Men; he
has a portion of good things for the righteous, and he will give them the Cup
of blessing and Salvation; but he has laid up a portion of evil things for the
wicked, and will put into their hands the Cup of his Wrath and Curse, he has
reserved ruin and destruction for them by Fire and Brimstone.

Hence observe:

Doct. That an horrible Tempest of Fire and Brimstone God threatens to rain on
the wicked, as their deserved portion. I shall not here speak concerning all
the dreadful temporal judgments of God upon the wicked, which may have some
similitude unto destruction by Fire and Brimstone. But treat concerning fire
and brimstone it self, and the destructions of it, both what has been, and
what shall be.

My chief design is as the Lord shall enable, to set forth Gods vengeance on
the wicked, which shall be hereafter by Eternal fire and brimstone in Hell, in
order to the awakening of sleepy sinners out of their carnal security, there
being no greater awakening consideration in the whole Christian Religion, than
this of the certain danger, which all unbelieving sinners are in of Hell Fire;
and because such as are most concerned in the danger are hardly brought to
conceive, but most hardly induced to consider this Fire, it being so far
removed at present from sense; therefore by way of introduction unto the
discourse concerning the burning of Hell; I shall treat first of the fire and
brimstone which formerly was rained from Heaven, upon the wicked Cities of
Sodom and Gomorrah; Secondly, of the fire and brimstone, which more lately
issued forth of the bowels of the Earth, in the last years eruption of Mount
Aetna; that hereby I may both facilitate the conception, and entice unto the
consideration of the fire and brimstone in Hell^, which eternally shall burn
the wicked, whose portion that dreadful place is appointed to be.

CHAP. II. The Historical Introduction unto the Judgment of Sodom.
DReadful were the showers of fire and brimstone, which came down from Heaven
upon the wicked Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, the History
whereof we have recorded in the Scriptures (the most ancient, and most certain
of all Histories,) where only this record is originally to be found. But before
I speak of this judgment, I shall give the Historical Introduction to it,
showing what the Scripture relates concerning the places, and people, and some
transactions before it is last ruin and desolation by Fire from Heaven.

The first notice we have of Sodom is in the 13th. Chapter of Genesis. It was
in the early years of the World that Sodom flourished; the sinners of Sodom
were co^emporary with Abraham the Father (...) the Faithful; none was like
Abraham upon the Earth for goodness, and none were like the Sodomites ^on the
Earth for wickedness, the Text says* they ^re sinners before the Lord
exceedingly, (...). (...). We read that Abraham (had upon the (...) of (...),
^r saken his Fathers House and Kindred, ^d cam^ i^ Canaan with Let, his Brother
(...) Son, who so journed together for a while in (...) Land, which God
promised to give unto t^ P^sterity of Abraham for a possession; here the wealth
and substance, the Flocks and Herds ^th of Abraham and Lot through God's
blessings were increased greatly, insomuch as they could not longer live well
together, because of the abundance of their Cattle, and some strife which did
arise between their Herdmen; therefore Abraham, that all occasions of
contention might be avoided, desires Lot to devide and separate himself with
his Cattle, and choose either the right hand or the left, and himself would take
that way which he should refuse: Lot complyeth with this motion and reasonable
proposition; and* lifting up his eyes, beholds the Plains of Jordan that they
were well watered, even as the Garden of the Lord, and therefore, making choice
of these Plains for his Cattle, he journeyeth Eastward toward Sodom, one of
the Cities of the Plains, where himself did take up his habitation.

It was not long after Lot's sojourning in the wicked City of Sodom, that Wars
break forth, and they are invaded by four great Kings: namely, Amraphel,
Arioch, Chedarlaomer, and Tidal, because of their Rebellion against
Chedarlaomer, whom they had served twelve years before. The history of which
Wars with the event thereof, we have in the 14th. Chapter of Genesis. Against
which Army of the four Kings were gathered together the five Kings of the
Cities of the Plain and their people, who joined together in battle with their
enemies in the Vale of Siddim: But the four Kings were too mighty for the five,
and smiting them, obtained Victory over them: Whether the Army of the four
Kings were too numerous, or more Warlike and expert in battle; or whether the
guilt of the people under the five Kings weakened their hands, and enfeebled
their Spirits, it is not said: but this we may reasonably judge that their sins
were the cause of their overthrow, and that God did hereby warn them to repent
and turn from the evil of their doings, lest a worse evil should overtake and
utterly destroy them.

The four Kings having conquered and dispersed the Army of the five Kings, they
sack the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, and amongst other captives they take Lot
with his goods and depart.

Abraham has notice quickly by one that had escaped of these sad tidings, and
what had befallen Lot; and though he could not muster up so great force as to
match these four great Kings in number; yet because of the great love which he
did bare unto Lot, who for his sake had come forth from amongst their own
Kindred into Canaan with him, and being filled with courage, having as little
black guilt within to appale his spirit, as any man alive, he armeth his three
hundred and eighteen trained servants, and without any other help, only Aner,
Escol, and Mamre, which were confederate with him, he pursues these Kings
laden with their rich booty, and in the night when they were drowned (it may
be) with sleep and security, he devideth his little company and assaulteth
them; which being so sudden and unexpected, and at such time, when the Host of
these Kings were unready and unprepared, they are struck with dread and
amazement, and without any great resistance which we read of, they confusedly
flee before Abraham, who makes a great slaughter amongst them, and pursues
them to Hoba. Thus Abraham rescueth Lot, and the other captives out of their
Enemies hand, and recovereth all the goods which they had taken away.

In Abraham's return with the spoils of these great Kings, the King of Sodom,
who had escaped in the battle, comes forth to meet him, who makes proffer
unto him of all the goods which he had recovered, the persons only excepted;
but Abraham, what ever he had deserved, yet would not accept of so much as the
worth of a thread or shoelatchet, of what had before belonged unto so wicked a
people as the Sodomits were; fearing possibly that such goods mingled with his
own might prove like a Moth unto them; however, he would not give the King
occasion to say, or any to think that Sodom's goods had made Abraham rich.

This bringing back of the Sodomits from captivity and reinstalling the King of
Sodom beyond what he could have looked for, by such unlikely means, was a
wonderful work of God, and laid a great obligation upon the Sodomites, not only
to respect Lot, upon whose account Abraham had thus ventured himself, but (...)
of their sins against God, who (...) Abraham for this work, and delivere^ (...)
^ their enemies into his hands, as (...) King of Salem, and Priest of the High
God, who came forth to meet Abraham, acknowledges with praise and
thanksgiving: how little the Sodomites did answer their obligation either unto
God or Man, will appear in the 19th. Chapter of Genesis; where their sin and
punishment is set forth.

But before this in the 18th. Chapter we read that Abraham having entertained
three Angels, he afterward brings them forward on their way which lay
toward Sodom: the Chief and most honorable of these Angels, being the Son of
God, the Angel of the New Covenant, staying behind the other two Angels who
went onwards toward Sodom, reveals unto Abraham what he was about to do unto
Sodom, giving him to understand that the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah was great,
and their sins exceeding grievous, and that now he was going down to visit them
for their sins: whether he revealed to him what manner of destruction he
intended to bring upon them we have no mention; but whatever it were Abraham is
full of fears because of Lot, and therefore interceeds with the Lord in the
behalf of the place, as wicked as it was, to prevent (if possible) the ruin
and destruction thereof, which was threatened.

Abraham knew of one righteous person, namely Lot, which was there, and he
hoped that there might have been others besides him, if not of the City yet in
Lot's Family; and therefore he makes bold to plead with the Lord, that he
would not destroy the righteous with the wicked, because this would (...) ^eem
just and right for the Judge of all the Earth to do; and first he prays, that
if fifty righteous persons were found in Sodom, the place might be spared for
their sakes, the Lord being very gracious, readily promises it should be
according to his request; Abraham having enco^ragement from one grant, and
fearing what the number of righteous persons in Sodom might be, entreats
further, that if five were wanting of the fifty the place might not be
destroyed; and having obtained his request herein, he does not rest but
proceeds to beg with expressions of low humility, that if but forty, and then
if but thirty, and then if but twenty, and last of all if but ten righteous
persons were found there, that the Lord would spare the place for their sakes.
Abraham speeds in his whole desire, the Lord assuring him, that he would not
destroy the place, if he found so many as ten righteous persons therein; and
Abraham leaves off asking, before the Lord gives any denial unto his suit; and
though Abraham did not request it, yet the Lord himself did resolve it, that
not one righteous person should be consumed in the iniquity of the City, and
therefore as he sent Angels thither to destroy the place: so they had a
commission to save righteous Lot and his Family, as we may see in the 19th.
Chapter.

The two Angels were now come in the evening unto Sodom, whilst Lot
providentially was sitting in the gate, who seeing them enter, rises up from
his seat and meets them, and bowing himself toward the ground, entreats the
favor of them that they would be his guests that night, through his
importunate request (they refusing at first) he prevails with them, and so
brings them home to his house, where he entertaineth them with a feast. They
had not been long in Lot's House, before the House was beset by the Men of the
City, upon notice of two extraordinary persons that were there; possibly the
bodies which those Angels had assumed were very beautiful to the eye, and full
of sparkling luster, being informed by such glorious spirits; and this might
entice the beastly, or rather worse than beastly lusts of the Sodomits, and
inflame them with burning desires of committing that filthy sin with them,
which is not fit to be named; these desires bring the chief part of the City,
old and young from every quarter unto Lot's house, who when they were come,
they require him to bring forth those Men (as they supposed them to be) that
they might satisfy their lusts upon them. Lot looking upon this as a piece of
inhumanity and abominable wickedness, to offer such injury unto strangers,
that he got forth of his door, and with fair words endeavors to persuade
them the forbearance of this wickedness; yea, he is so far transported with
desire of saving his guests from the filthy lusts of the Sodomits, that
inconsiderately he endeavors to divert them, by making proffer of both his
Virgin-daughters to them to be used, or mis-used by them as they pleased, so
that his guests might be spared.

But the Sodomits are fully bent upon their wickedness, and deafning their ears
against his proposal, they press in upon Lot; and threatening to deal worse with
him than with them, they attempt to break open his door. The Angels seeing what
danger Lot was in amongst the furious and lustful multitude, put forth their
hands and pull Lot into his house; and withal, putting forth the power the
Lord had given them, they smite the Sodomits with blindness, so that they could
not find the door, which notwithstanding that judgment of blindness upon their
bodies, being pricked forward by their blind and impetuous lusts, they still
seek after.

And now the ruin of Sodom is not far off, the Angels reveal unto Lot who they
were, and that they were sent by the Lord to destroy Sodom, and the
Neighboring Cities, because of the crying wickedness which was in them:
therefore inquiring concerning his relations in that City, they bid him bring
forth all that belonged to him; accordingly Lot goes forth and calls upon
his Sons in Law, and gives them to understand what he had heard of the Angels,
concerning the near destruction of the City, and therefore warns them with
all expedition to hasten out of the place; but Lot seems unto his Sons in Law
as if he had mocked, and they give heed to none of his words.

The day being come that Sodom and Gomorrah must be destroyed, the Angels in
the top of the morning hasten Lot to come forth, and whilst he lingereth they
lay hold on his hands, and the hands of his Wife and Daughters, and (the Lord
being merciful unto them) bring them forth, bidding him flee to the Mountain,
and escape for his life, and not look back, lest he should be destroyed, which
his Wife offering (notwithstanding the warning) to do, was turned into a Pillar
of Salt; Lot being full of fears entreats for Zoar, and for his sake the Lord
spared that City that Lot might retire unto it, whilst he brought destruction
upon Sodom and Gomorrah, and the other Cities of the Plain.

CHAP. III. A general description of Sodoms Judgment, together with the
efficient cause which was God, and the meritorious cause, Sodoms sins.
BEing thus led by the clew or (...) story, we are at length come to (...) most
tremendous and dreadful Judg^ment, (...) God executed upon Sodom and Gomorrah;
namely, that horrible tempest of Fire and Brimstone, which the Lord rained upon
those wicked Cities for their sins, the relation and description whereof we
have Genesis 19. from the 23d. Ver. to the 30th. The Sun was risen upon the Earth,
when Lot entered into Zoar. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah
Brimstone and Fire from the Lord out of Heaven: And he overthrew those Cities,
and all the Plain, and all the Inhabitants of the Cities, and that which grew
upon the ground. And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he
stood before the Lord; and he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all
the Land of the Plain, and beheld, and lo the ^ke of the Country went up, as
the smoke of a ^urnace. And it came to pass when God destroyed the Cities of
the Plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the
overthrow, when he overthrew the Cities wherein Lot dwelled.

In treating of this subject concerning the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah with
fire and brimstone, I shall speak:

First, Of the cause of this Judgment. Secondly, Of the Judgment it self.
Thirdly, Of persons on whom it was inflicted, and how they were aff^cted.
Fourthly, Of the persons that escaped. Fifthly, Of the Spectators. Lastly, Of
the use and improvement which we may make of it.
Concerning the cause of this Judgment; The efficient cause was God; The
meritorious cause was Sodoms sins.
First, The efficient cause of the judgment of Sodom and Gomorrah was the
Lord. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah Brimstone and Fire from the
Lord out of Heaven. Every judgment, whereof there are second causes in nature,
is from the Lord; but this judgment was miraculous and therefore the hand of
the Lord was in it more immediately; It was beyond the power of any second
causes to effect this great thing, and therefore the Lord does put forth his
own great power, and stretches forth his mighty arm, that he might take
vengeance on the wicked Sodomits, who had so highly provoked him by their sins.
It is said Deuteronomy. 29. 23. The Lord overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and
Zeboim in his anger and in his wrath.

The Lord heard the cry of Sodom's sins, and was wrath; a fire of anger was
kindled in his breast, and fury came up into his face, therefore girding
himself with his irresistible power, and clothing himself with flaming
vengeance, as with a garment he came done, to plead with this ungodly and
wicked people for their sins, rendering his rebukes in such a way as never
before was heard of. It was the day of the Lords recompense, the day of his
wrath and fierce anger, a day of trouble and distress, of wasting and
desolation: It was a day in which the Lord was revealed from Heaven in flaming
Fire, to take vengeance upon the Sodomits, whom he punished with a most fearful
destruction, devouring those wicked Cities by the fire of his jealousy, that
he might make a speedy riddance of all the sinners which dwelled in them. The
Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah Brimstone and Fire from the Lord out of
Heaven. By the Lord on Earth we are to understand the Son of God, the second
most glorious Person in the Trinity; by the Lord in Heaven, we are to
understand the Father, the first Person, who has committed all Judgment unto
the Son, Ioh. 5. 22. From whom he received power to execute the appointed
vengeance on wicked Sodom.

Secondly, The miritorious cause of the Judgment upon Sodom and Gomorrah was
the sins of those wicked Cities, when the Lord arises from his place to take
vengeance upon a Nation, especially in some notable and remarkable judgment,
he is first exceedingly provoked hereunto by the sins of that people. It is
said Genesis 13. 13. that the men of Sodom were wicked, and sinners before the
Lord exceedingly. They exceeded all other Nations in their sins, and therefore
they exceeded all other Nations in their punishment. And Chap. 18. 20. We read
the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah was great, and their sin was very grievous. It
was not their prayers which sent up such a cry unto Heaven, no they were wholly
irreligious and Ungodly: but it was their sins, like the blood of Abel which
cried from the ground for vengeance on him that shed it; the cry of Sodoms sins
was so loud, that it came up into Gods ears, and would give him no rest until
he came down to punish: Their sin was very grievous; not only grievous unto
righteous Lot, who was vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked, 2 Pet.
2. 7. But it was most grievous unto the most Holy and Righteous God, it was as
a heavy load upon him grievous and hard to be boarn; it grieved God as it were
to the heart, and therefore he does ease himself of the burden of their Sin, by
suffering it to fall down with a heavy weight upon themselves, so as to crush
and destroy them together.

There are five sins of Sodom spoken of together, Ezekiel. 16. 49, 50. Behold this
was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, Pride, fullness of Bread, and abundance
of Idleness was in her, and in her Daughters; that is her neighbor inferior
Cities, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. And they
were haughty, and committed abomination before me, therefore I took them away
as I saw good. The Sins were:

First, Pride and Haughtiness. Secondly, Fullness of Bread. Thirdly, Abundance
of Idelness. Fourthly, Unmercifulness to the Poor. Fifthly, Abomination.
The first Sin of Sodom was Pride and Haughtiness, Prove. 16. 18. Pride goes
before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall. The Pride and
haughtiness of the Sodomits did discover it self in their carriage toward Lot,
Genesis 19. 7, 9. Lot is meek and humble, he speaks fairly and kindly: I pray
you Brethren do not so wickedly: But they are high rough and very haughty in
their answer. And they said stand back, and they said again, this one fellow
came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a Judge. As if they should have said:
Pray who are you that take upon you to speak thus unto us? do you know whom you
speak to? you are a bold and saucy fellow to tell us of wickedness; Will you
needs be our Judge? shall we indeed be judged by such a fellow as you? pray
stay until we make choice of you and place you in that office: shall we submit
our selves to be judged by one so contemptible? No, no, we will never endure
it; it is below our birth and breeding to be curbed by any one, especially by
you, who are a stranger, and of such a low spirit as dare not join with us in
the way and practice of our City: We will deal worse with you than with them,
we will make you know that we are your betters, and that we have power in our
bands to bring you to your knees, and to tread you under our feet, that we can
do both with you and yours what we please: we have been often provoked by you
before, now we will forbear no longer, but make you to feel as well as to see
in what disdain we have taken all your reproofs of our conversation. Pride was
grown to a great height in Sodom, it was monstrously great and big-bellied,
conceiving and bringing forth many Daughters, such as Hatred, Malice, Envy,
Revenge, Wrath, Strife, Contention, Bitterness, evil speaking, Slanders,
Backbiting, Whisperings, Tumults, Brawls, Blood, and the like; these and many
other ^ins are the product of Pride and haughtiness, all which we have reason
to think did exceedingly abound in these exceeding wicked Cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah.

The second sin of Sodom was Fullness of Bread. By Bread we are to understand
all sort of food, and not only meat, but drink too, as Math. 6. 11. Give us
this day our daily Bread: By fullness of bread is not meant plenty of food, this
being Gods gift, and none of man's sin to have it, and to make use of it
moderately; but hereby we are to understand the Sodomits excessive filling
themselves, their excessive eating unto gluttony, and excessive drinking unto
drunkenness: They pampered the flesh, and nourished themselves as the Ox is
nourished against the day of slaughter, some resemblance of their Sin was in
the Israelites spoken of, ^m, 6. 4, 5, 6. That lay upon Beds of Ivory, and
stretched themselves on their Couches, and eat the Lambs out of the Flock, and
Calves out of the midst of the Stall: That chanted to the sound of the Viol,
that drank Wine in Bowls, and Anointed themselves with the chief Ointments,

They were such as those against whom the woe is pronounced, Isa. 5. 11, 12. Woe
unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink,
and continue until night, till Wine inflame them: And the Harp and the Viol,
the Tabret and Pipe are in their Feasts; but they regard not the work of the
Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands. It is likely the Sodomits
had been Feasting and Revelling, drinking and carowsing that day which the
Angels came into their City, and their lusts being enflamed with their
excesses, they gather in troops unto the House of Lot, to commit their intended
outrage. But God is provoked, to cut off all provisions for their flesh, which
they had so much abused, and to cut them off too for their intemperance.

The third Sin of Sodom was Abundance of Idleness. Idle persons did abound in
that City, and there was abundance of idleness in those persons: they sat down
to eat and drink, and rose up to play; they were busy and active indeed in the
service of the Devil, but either they lived without any particular Calling many
of them, or were very slothful and negligent therein. Had they been diligently
employed in their Callings that day as the Angels visited Lot, they would have
had more mind to rest themselves in their own houses, than to disturb
strangers in another House; but they being so generally idle, and an idle crew
of them got together, upon notice of the strangers entertainment in Lot's
house, for want of better emploiment, they attempt this wickedness. The
Sodomits did not only wast their wealth and strength, but also their precious
time in Luxury, and this provoked the Lord to put an end to their time, which
they made so little account of.

The fourth Sin of Sodom was Unmercifulness to the Poor. They strengthened not
the hands of the poor and needy; they had poor and needy persons amongst them,
but they did neither strengthen their hands, nor comfort their hearts by
distributing relief unto them; they consumed so much upon their lust, that they
had nothing to spare for the poor, at least they had no heart to give anything
for the supply of their necessities; the cry of the poor, it is likely, with
their other sins came up into Gods ears, and the Lord has threatened, Iam. 2.
13. He shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy.

The fifth and chief Sin of Sodom was Abomination. And they committed
Abomination before me, therefore I took them away as I saw good. This word
Abomination is a general word, and may be attributed to the fore mentioned
Sins, which are an abomination in the sight of God; but ordinarily it is
attributed in Scripture unto the greatest and most heinous Sins, and amongst
others, yea above others to the sin of Idolatry: this Sin no doubt the Sodomits
were guilty of, however it is not made mention of, neither do I think that Sin
is employed in the word Abomination here, insomuch as then the Earth was full of
Idolatry, and the Sodomits were not worse herein (as we read of) than other
Nations, but (I conceive) by Abomination we are to understand the abominable
Filthiness of the Sodomits, for which they are branded by the Apostle Iud. ver,
7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, in like manner giving
themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth
for an example, etc. They gave themselves over unto fornication, even as the
Gentiles are said to do. Ephesians. 4. 19. Who being past feeling, have given
themselves over unto Lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness.
God had given them up, and they had given up themselves unto the service of
their Lusts, they were generally addicted unto uncleanness, and that not only
to Fornication and Adultry, but it is said, they lusted after strange Flesh,
such was their lust and uncleanness as we have described, Romans 1. 24, 26, 27.
Wherein they did dishonor their own bodies between themselves, the men through
vile affections, leaving the natural use of the Woman, burned in their lusts
one toward another, men with men working that which is not only unseemly to be
practiced, but also unseemly to be named, or more particularly described. The
Sin since that time has obtained the name of Sodomy* it being so general in
that place, insomuch as when the Angels came to Sodom, they would have been
uncleen with the very Angels, this provoked the Lord to render to them the
recompense for such abominable Filthiness as was meet.

Besides these Sins of the Sodomits, we may collect from the History several
aggrevations of their Sins, which did exceedingly ripen them for ruin.

The first aggravation of the Sodomits Sins, was their Impenitency. Although
Nineveh was threatened with ruin, and that within forty days, yet upon their
repentance at the Preaching of Jonah, God repented of the evil threatened, and
destroyed them not, as in the Book of Jonah. And if Sodom had repented of their
Sins, and turned from their evil ways, if they had washed and made themselves
clean, and put away the evil of their doings from before Gods eyes, God would
have turned from the feirceness of his displeasure, and though their Sins were
of a Scarlet and Crimson die, yet they should have been blotted out and washed
away, and made like Snow or Wool: but this was the aggravation of all their
other wickedness, that they were insensible and hard-hearted, their consciences
were seared as with a hot Iron, so that they had no feeling nor remorse. There
was a Preacher of righteousness amongst them, namely righteous Lot, who
reproved them so plainly and roundly for their Ungodly practices, and filthy
conversation, that they tell him he would needs make himself a Judge; unto
which he added his own blameless conversation, and forbearance from such
intemperance and riot as they did run into; But the Sodomits slight all Lot's
sayings, they deafen their ears against his reproofs, and will be led by none
of his example; nothing prevails with them to repent.

The second aggravation of the Sodomits Sins was their Incorrigibleness; As it
was said of the Jews aft^rward, Ier. 5. 3. So it might have been said of the
Sodomits then, Though God had stricken them, yet they did not grieve, though
God had consumed them, yet they refused to receive correction. They did not
take warning by lesser judgments, so as to be corrected and amended thereby;
They were smitten before their enemies, their City not long before had been
sacked, their goods taken away, and themselves were led into Captivity, with
their Wives and Children; and yet they were insensible of their Sins, the cause
of all this evil that came upon them, and were so far from being bettered
hereby, that they grew worse than they were before.

The third aggravation of the Sodomits Sins was their Ingratitude. They were
not only ungrateful unto Lot, upon whose account Abraham did deliver them out
of the hands of their enemies, which not only laid an obligation of respect to
Lot upon them as long as they lived: but chiefly they were ungrateful unto God,
the Author of this deliverance by Abraham, and who moreover had been very
bountiful unto them, in giving them such a place of plenty and pleasure for
their habitation, that it was like unto the Garden of the Lord for
fruitfulness, the greater Gods Mercy and Bounty to them, the greater was their
ingratitude, and the more highly aggravated were their Sins.

The fourth aggravation of the Sodomits Sins was the Universality of their
Sins. There were no righteous persons amongst them, except it were Lot and his
Family; they were generally corrupt, they were all dross and no Gold, all Water
and no Wine * all wicked when Lot was departed; As the Earth of old was filled
with violence; so Sodom then was filled with Filthiness, which was very
offensive unto the pure and Holy Eyes of God, and provoked him to destroy them.

The fifth aggravation of the Sodomits Sins, was their Shamlesness. What was
spoken of Israel, Ier. 6. 5. Might have been said of Sodom, were they ashamed,
when they had committed abomination! nay they were not at all ashamed, neither
could they blush. When the Prophet would set forth the shamlesness of Judah's
Sins, he compares them unto Sodom, Isa. 3. 9. The show of their countenance
does witness against them, they declare their Sin like Sodom they hide it not.
None had more reason to blush and be ashamed than such filthy Sinners as they,
and yet none were so little ashamed: instead of being ashamed of their Sins,
they gloried in their shame.

The sixth aggravation of the Sodomits Sins was their Security. They eat, they
drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded, until the the
judgment did overtake them, Luke 17. 28. They were generally secure, though
they had so greatly sinned, and by their Sins so highly provoked the Lord to
take vengeance upon them. They put the evil day far from them; Lot's Sons in
Law although foretold and forewarned by their Father, would not believe it was
so near, much less did the rest of the Sodomits believe any such thing, who
had no intimation thereof given unto them; they little thought what a day would
bring forth; their impunity for a while did increase their security, and their
security under the guilt of such Heaven-dareing Sins, did aggravate their Sins
exceedingly.

And now the lusts of the Sodomits having conceived and brought forth such
Sins, and their Sins so aggravated, do arrive unto perfection, and they bring
forth death; Their iniquities now are full, and the Viols of Gods wrath also
are full, and he pours them down upon their heads* which leads unto the
next particular, to speak of the judgment it self inflicted upon Sodom and
Gomorrah.

CHAP. IV. A particular description of Sodom and Gomorrah's burning by Fire and
Brimstone from Heaven.
COncerning the judgment it self which was inflicted on Sodom and Gomorrah. It
was Fire and Brimstone which was rained down from Heaven upon those Cities. The
morning was clear when Lot went forth of Sodom, and the Sun was risen upon the
Earth when he entered into Zoar: But then a strange darkness did quickly fill
the face of the Heavens, and hide the Sun from the view we may conceive that
the fashion of the Heaven: was altered, and that the clouds, which carried this
horrible Tempest of Fire and Brimstone in their Bowels, were of another shape,
than those which carry in them ordinary storms of Rain or Hail, of Thunder and
Lightning. It was over Sodom and Gomorrah that these dreadful clouds were
gathered, which upon the command of the Lord brake asunder, and it is likely
with fearful lightening, accompained with great cracks and amazing noise, as if
Heaven and Earth, and Hell had been coming together, let down these flaming
showers, which strangely turned the Air into Fire, and with such irresistible
violence beat upon the Houses of the Sodomits, that they were foreed to yield
unto the fury of these devouring flames.

This Rain probably was not in small drops, like that which falling upon the
tender Grass, causes it to spring forth and flourish; but in great flakes of
of scalding Sulphurious matter enkindled by the breath of God: great sheets of
Fire, it is likely, came down from Heaven, like the Flying Roll spoken of Zach.
5. 2, 3, 4. the length whereof was twenty Cubits, and the breadth thereof ten
Cubits, which entered into the House of the Thief and Falseswearer, and
consumed the Timber thereof, and the stones thereof. So did these sheets and
rolls of fire fly about the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, and entered into the
houses of the unjust and profane, the filthy and unclean, smiting and consuming
Inhabitants with their Habitations. This storm of Fire and Brimstone, coming
down with a commission from God, to destroy the whole Place, does arm it self
with unexpressible rage and fury, and first smiting the heads and tops of all
the houses in the City, sets them on fire together, which mounting a great
flame upward, and that mingling with the sulphurious fire which came downward
was exceedingly the more enraged, and we may conceive that from thence came
such horrid blazes to the eye, and such dreadful roarings to the ear, as
awakened all the wicked Inhabitans of the City out of their sleep and security,
and filled them with unconceiveable horror and perplexity, when they saw
inevitable ruin so near unto them.

Then the streets of the City were filled with flames, and the Rain from
Heaven, likely did raise Floods and Streams of burning Brimstone, which poured
into the houses on every side such fire as no Water could quench, no Stone
Walls, nor Iron Bars or Gates could resist or defend any of the Inhabitans from
being devoured thereby; thus Gods hand did find out all his enemies in these
wicked Cities together, his right hand did lay hold on them that hated him, and
took no heed to his Laws; and making Sodom and Gomorrah as a fiery Oven in the
time of his anger, he swallowed up all the Sinners of those Places in his
Wrath, and devoured them with this unquenchable fire; the Place now is like a
fiery Oven, or like a great fiery Furnace, the smoke of whofe flame was so
great, that far and near it might be seen; concerning the horror of the
Sodomits when compassed about with Flames, I shall speak more under the third
particular, only here add these things, which were remarkable in in this
judgment.

First, The strangeness of it. Secondly, The suddenness and unexpectedness of
it. Thirdly, The dreadfulness of it.
First, This Judgment was very Strange. It is the nature of Fire to ascend
toward Heaven, but here Fire and Brimstone together do descend from Heaven,
this is very strange; the Sodomits had an unnatural Fire within them, and they
have an unnatural Fire sent upon them; they lust after strange Flesh, Iud. 7.
And God punished them with strange Fire, Job 31. 3. Is not destruction to the
wicked, and a strange punishment unto the workers of Iniquity? But of all
strange punishments, this is one of the most strange, never such a thing was
heard of before, or has been known since; as I may apply what Moses speaks
on another occasion, Deuteronomy. 4. 32. Ask now of the days which are past which
were before, since God Created Man upon the Earth, and ask from one side of
Heaven unto the other, whether there has been such a thing as this great
thing, or has been like it, that God should Rain Fire and Brimstone from
Heaven, to punish wicked Cities. We read of Fire sent down from Heaven by the
Lord, upon the request of Elijah, which consumed his Sacrifice; although he had
drenched it often, and surrounded it with Water, all which was licked up by the
fire, unto the wonder and astonishment of the People, whereby the Lord
discovered his power beyond Baal, whose Priests could not by all their prayers
and cutting themselves prevail with their God to effect any such thing, 1 Kings
18. 26, 28, 37, 38. And we read of Fire sent down from Heaven, which destroyed
two Captains and their fifty's, upon the request of the same Prophet: these
things were exceeding strange; but the rain of Fire and Brimstone from Heaven,
which consumed several Cities, and all their Inbitants together was far more
strange: Fire has come from Heaven, but never so great Fire; Fire has come
down from Heaven, but never Fire mingled with Brimstone; Fire and Brimstone
has come forth of the bowels of the Earth (of which in the second discourse)
but never did Fire and Brimstone come down from Heaven, either before or since.

Secondly, This judgment was sudden and unexpected: It was like the Flood to
the old World, which was drowned, or like the coming of Christ to the Sinners
on Earth, which shall be damned: when the greatest judgments are most near,
the Sinners which shall be destroyed thereby are most secure; and thus it was
with the Sinners of Sodom: the day before there was no appearance of any such
destruction near, there was no sign in the Earth or in the Heavens of any such
thing; the night before also was like other nights, no fire beginning in any
place, only the fire of lust which burned and raged in the hearts of that
wicked people, but they had no apprehension of danger from those flames: when
the morning was come it was like other mornings, there were no fiery dews, or
fore-drops* of the fiery rain, to give them warning of what would follow. The
shaddows of the night were chased away by the beams of the morning Sun, there
was no appearance of the shaddows of the night of Death, ready to stretch forth
themselves upon all the Inhabitants of Sodom and Neighbor Cities together. But
so soon as Lot was entered into Zear, the Lord rained Fire and Brimstone on
Sodom and Gomorrah, and brought such a sudden destruction upon them as they
could not escape. Even as it will be ere long with Babylon, Rev. 18. 7, 8. So
it was with Sodom; she lived deliciously and securely, and in one day death and
mourning came upon her, and she was utterly burnt with Fire. Could the Sodomits
have foreseen, and certainly foreknown, what destruction would have befallen
their City that day, they would have hastened out of the place the day before,
at furthest they would have delayed no longer than that morning; when Lot did
depart, they would have flocked about him old and young from every quarter, and
have departed with him; they would not have vallued houses of goods, so that
they might have but saved their lives: But the Sodomits did not in the least
apprehend their destruction to be so near. The Angels knew it, but they
discover the thing unto Lot only; if they had made it know unto the Sodomits,
it is most likely they would not have believed it any more than Lot's Sons in
Law did believe Lot, when from their mouth he did declare it. The Sodomits are
jovial and secure, as if their life and mirth should continue many a year, when
neither of them were a days standing longer.

Thirdly, This judgment was most dreadful; we read in the Scriptures and have
seen with our eyes very great judgments, but none so dreadful, all things
considered, as this of Fire and Brimstone from Heaven. Indeed the Flood which
devoured the whole old World together, Noah and his Family excepted did strike
the most universal dread upon the children of men, of any judgment that ever
has been since the Worlds Creation: yet the Fire and Brimstone from Heaven,
which devoured Sodom and Gomorrah with all their Inhabitants, Lot only and his
Family excepted had more of particular dread in it, in as much as death by Fire
is more painful than death by Water; especially such Fire as came down from
Heaven. It was a terrible day to the old World, when they saw the Windows of
Heaven opened, and Water to come forth from thence in such great abundance, as
to swell into a Flood, and that so great a Flood as drowned all Mankind which
were not found in the Ark: But it was a more terrible day to the Sodomits, when
they saw the Windows of Heaven opened, and Fire to come forth from thence, Fire
mingled with Brimstone, and Gods fiery indignation, which falling upon their
Houses and heads, put all into flames; this last judgment as it had more
strangeness in it; so it did strike more terror into the hearts of those which
did endure it.

When the ground clave asunder, and the Earth opening her mouth swallowed up
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with all that appertained to them, when they went
thus down alive into the pit, and the Earth closing upon them again, they
perished from the Congregation, Number. 16. verse. 32. 33. This was a very feaful
judgment; but the opening of the Heavens, and it is showring down Fire and
Brimstone, which swallowed up Sodom and Gomorrah with all the Sinners therein,
this judgment was far more fearful. Death by the Sword, and death by the
Pestilence, or by any other disease has nothing of that dread in it, as death
by Fire, especially by Fire from Heaven, by Fire mingled with Brimstone.

No Fire have we ever seen that carried so much dread in it, as the Fire that
burnt down our City of London; but London's Fire was nothing in comparison with
Sodoms Fire: this will appear if we compare them together.

First, The Fire of London began only in one place, which awakened all the
Inhabitants about to prepare, and secure themselves and their goods: but the
Fire of Sodom began in all piaces together; there was fire without the City,
and fire within, fire in every street, and in every house at the same time the
Sodomits were compassed about with fire on all sides.

Secondly, The Fire of London consumed but a part, although it were the
greatest part of the City within the Walls: but the Fire of Sodom consumed the
whole City, turned all into ashes, and not one house therein did escape the
fury of the flames.

Thirdly, The Fire of London, though it devoured the houses, yet much of the
wealth and the best goods of the City were preserved; but Sodoms fire consumed
all their Wealth, their Gold and Silver was melted, all their apparel and rich
household furniture was burnt, and what ever provisions they had made for their
flesh, what ever fuel they had laid up for their lusts became fuel for this
Fire.

Fourthly, The Fire of London, though it burnt much of the goods as well as
houses, which could not so easily and quickly be removed, yet few, very few of
the Inhabitants perished; they had time and warning to withdraw themselves
before the fire, reached so far as their habitations: but Sodom's Fire burnt
persons as well as houses, and not one person in the whole City escaped after
the Fire was begun; such as went forth of doors were consumed by the Fire from
Heaven; such as remained within were consumed by the Fire of their houses.

Fifthly, The Fire of London, was an Earthly fire, although the contrivement of
it might be first in Hell, and hellish Instruments made use of in the beginning
and carrying of it on: but the Fire of Sodom and Gomorrah was from Heaven, and
if the one did express more of the wrath of the Devil and Devilish men, the
other did express more of the wrath of the Sin-revenging God, which is ten
thousand times more dreadful.

Sixthly, The Fire of London at length was extinguished, since which time the
City is like to be rebuilt, and does now lift up it is head with more beauty and
luster than before it was turned into ashes: but Sodom's Fire did make an
desolation of that place; and since the Conflagration of that City Sodom never
was, and never will be again rebuilt; neither is the place capable now of
having any building erected upon it, inasmuch as the Mare mortuum, the dead Sea
does now cover the place where once the Sodomits had their habitation.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Persons that were consumed and how they were affected.
3 COncerning the Persons on which this judgment was inflicted, and how they
were affected. The persons were all the wicked Inhabitants of the Cities of
Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, Great was the horror (hinted before) which
we may imagine these persons were in when the Fire and Brimstone came down from
Heaven upon them, and there was no way for them to escape.

The noise and scorching heat of this dreadful Fire, we may conclude did
quickly awaken some out of their sleep of Intemperance, and all out of their
sleep of security. What tongue can utter the horrible perplexity of the
Sodomits on this day! when they opened their doors and windows in the morning,
and looking up to Heaven saw them open, and fire coming down thence to devour
them; when the Tempest of Fire and Brimstone beat upon them so sorely, and
suddenly, when there was such a dreadful burning heat by the Fire, and such a
stinking noisome suffocating smoke by the Brimstone; when there was a little
kind of Hell in that place both for torment and Sin. O the dread of the
Sodomits! O the confusion they were in! when such an unthought of, such an
unheard of* and such an unavoidable ruin was come upon them; how were they
amazed! how were they distressed! some it may be cursed the day of their birth,
wishing that they had been abortive issues, that they had never lived to see
the light of the Sun, that so they might not have lived to see and feel the
fire of this day: others it may be cursed themselves and the Sinners of the
place, who had provoked God to send this dreadful judgment upon them; others
it may be cursed God, because of the Fire and great heat, like those, Rev. 16.
8, 9. Who being scorched with great heat blasphemed the name of God, who had
sent down the Fire upon them.

O what a horrible outcry was there in Sodo when the City began to be in
flames: O what weeping and wailing, and wringing of hands!

The men roar, the woman shreek, the children weep and cry and cling about
their Parents, yea all of them weep and cry out most hideously. The Sodomits
have tears now in abundance; but none of their tears could quench the Flames
about them, or aswage the sorrow and anguish within them; tears before for
their Sins might have prevented these flames, and their fruitless mourning in
the midst of them: but none more impenitent than they in the time of their
prosperity, and therefore their cries and tears are to no purpose in the time
of their adversity; they weep and God laughs at their calamity; they are
grieved and afflicted, and God is comforted in the execution of his vengeance
upon them for their Sins. In this extremty, the Sodomits know not what to do,
nor which way to turn* they dare not go forth, that they might consult one
another, because the air is all in a light fire abroad, and there are streams
of Fire and Brimstone, which overflow in the streets; all the shelter they have
is for a little while in their houses, but the Fire invadeth them there, and
hemmeth them in on all sides, and very quickly the Fire creeps in at their
windows, and breaks through their doors, nothing being able to withstand it is
force. We may conceive how the poor Sodomits, when the Fire was coming into
their houses, did run from room to room, being pursued where ever they went by
the devouring flames; and when the fire was come at their persons, and the
flames began to seize on them, then they sweat and fry, their hair is singed,
their cloths are set on fire about them, their Sinneves shrink, their hands and
feet loose their use and they are in horrible pain all over without any help or
relief, refuge fails them, and there is no escaping, no enduring of this
pain, and yet they must endure it until extremity of pain does take away all
sense of pain.

The terror of the Sodomits through apprehensions of their present and
unavoidable death before them was great, but surely the way and manner of it,
namely* by Fire from Heaven did cause greater terror: If it had been an
ordinary Fire, of which some natural cause might have been assigned, it had not
been so much; but when it was a miraculous fire from Heaven, created on purpose
by the Lord to destroy those Cities, surely their dread was extraordinary: they
could not choose but see the more immediate hand of God in it, and withal his
frown and dreadful displeasure: with the Fire ^ Brimstone which fell down from
Heaven upon their houses and bodies, they had scalding drops of Gods wrath, ^ch
fell down upon their consciences: we may think what impressions they had of the
wrath of the Sin-revenging God on their spirits, which caused a great^ horror
within, than the bare apprehension of death in any shape could of it self
effect; when the guilt of so great Sins, and the apprehensions of so great
wrath did meet together in their consciences, and they had no time nor way to
get the guilt of Sin removed, and the wrath of God appeased; when conscience
before asleep, was awakened in the midst of flames; when there was a Fire above
the Sodomits, the Fire of Gods anger; Fire about and upon the Sodomits, the
fire which came down from Heaven; Fire beneath the Sodomits, the fire of Hell;
and fire within the Sodomits, the fire kindled in their consciences, O the
horror! when Hell was already begun within them in the flashes and sparks of
it; words cannot utter the horrible anguish which then they had upon them.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Persons that escaped.
4 THe persons that escaped this dreadful judgment were Lot and his Family.
Like as it was in the Old World, Noah was an upright man in his generation,
when the whole world besides were wicked; and God provided an Ark wherein he
saved Noah and his Family, when all the kindreds and Nations of the world
besides were drowned in the Deluge of Waters, which was brought upon the Earth:
so also Lot being the only upright and righteous man in Sodom, when all the
City together with the neighboring Cities were wicked, God provided a Zoar for
Lot, whilst he brought a Deluge of fire upon those wicked Cities, which
consumed them and all the wicked together which dwelt in them. 2 Pet. 2. 5, 6,
7, 8. When the destroying Angels were sent unto Sodom, God remembered righteous
Lot, and a mark for preservation was set upon his forehead, because he did sigh
and cry out for the abominations which were committed in the midst of the City:
And God remembered Abraham his Friend, who had made intercession for Lot,
therefore he sent him out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the
City wherein Lot dwelt.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the Spectators of Sodom's burnings.
5 COncerning the Spectators of this Judgment. Abraham, however remote his
habitation was, had a plain prospect of this Fire and burning of Sodom. We read
Genesis 19. 27, 28. And Abraham gat up early in the morning unto the place where
he stood before the Lord; and he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward
all the Land of the Plain, and beheld, and lo the smoke of the Country went up
as the smoke of a Furnace. Abraham's heart did misgive him that those wicked
Cities would not escape destruction, what ever conditional promise the Lord had
made unto him of their preservation; therefore, it is likely, he arose and came
to this place, that he might see what became of the Cities, and quickly he
(...) them to be all in flames, by the great smoke which mounted up from them;
what his thoughts were is not mentioned, but it is likely he was more than
ordinarily affected with this more than ordinary Judgment; such an appearance
of God in the World, clothed with such wrath and vengeance, might well make
even Abraham himself, whatever Interest he had in God, to quake and be
astonished: When he looked up to Heaven, he saw God all in flames of anger,
when he looked down to the Earth, he saw Sodom and Gomorrah all in flames of
Fire: He knew that Lot did dwell there, and he did not know (it may be) but
that Lot with his Family might be burning there, and this might cause him to
lift up his voice and weep: be sure he knew that the wickedness of the Sodomits
was very great, and that the righteous of the place were very few, if any, when
the Lord had promised him to spare the whole City for the sake of Ten righteous
persons, could they there have been found. Ah Lord! thought he, what a wicked
place is Sodom, that it should not yield Ten righteous persons? O what an evil
thing and a bitter is it to Sin against God, and hereby to provoke him unto
anger? and what a fearful thing is it to fall into the hands of the living God,
when his anger is stirred up! and does burn thus like fire. And if Abraham
could so clearly discern the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah, the Inhabitants of
Zoar, who dwelt so near, might more clearly discern it.

An allarm they have in the morning, which does startle and awaken them; they
are called forth out of their houses to see this dreadful and tremendous sight.
The noise of Fire, Fire, Fire, does sound in their ear, Fire from Heaven, Fire
in the Air, Fire on the Earth, Sodom on Fire, Gomorrah on Fire, Admah and
Zeboim on Fire, every place near them on Fire, this they hear, this they see;
the flames all about are very visible, and very terrible: O with what ruful
countenances do they look upwards toward Heaven, from whence the Fire did
come! and forwards toward Sodom and Gomorrah, where the Fire was kindled! they
see all the Cities together in flames, which being all cituated upon the Plain,
without any Mountain or Hill between, they might in the Fields, or on the tops
of their houses have an easy prospect of. And surely the Sinners of Zoar are
now afraid, and fearfulness does exceedingly surprise the guilt^; surely their
consciences now are awakened, and do cause a trembling within them, when they
see God's vengeance executed in flaming fire upon their fellow-sinners before
them: Alas! woe be to us! who can endure such devouring fire? who can bear such
horrible burnings? Has Sodom and Gomorrah provoked God to destroy them with
Fire from Heaven? what then will become of us, who have shared with them in the
same guilt, and have deserved the same punishment? O whether can we flee to
hide us from the wrath of God, and shelter us from his fiery indignation?

Lot also, who though he did not look back, as his Wife did, before he got into
Zoar, yet from thence no doubt but he looked with a sorrowful countenance, and
more sorrowful heart upon the wretched Cities as they burned, especially on
Sodom the chief City, and where his habitation had been. O the tears that now
run down his Cheeks! O the grief that does fill his heart! when he sees such a
strange shower of Fire and Brimstone rained down from Heaven upon that sinful,
and now woeful place: he was vexed at the Sins of the Sodomits before, and now
he is grieved at their misery; he thinks of his Sons-in-Law, and laments their
folly that notwithstanding his warning would stay there to be burned* which he
knew that now they lamented much more; he thinks of this Neighbor, and that
Neighbor, how they are weeping and crying, whilst they are melting and frying
in the flames. But Lot does not abide long in Zoar, for such fear as well as
grief did possess him, that he did not think himself safe there, and therefore
flees to the Mountain* whither he was warned at first to go by the Angels, and
there dwells in a Cave with his two Daughters, Genesis 19. 30.

CHAP. VIII. Application to the Ungodly.
WE have here set before us an example, and that both of the Sodomits burning,
and of Lot's escaping. These things are recorded for our example.

The former is an example to the Ungodly; the later is an example to the
Righteous.

I. The Sodomits burning is an example to the Ungodly, 2 Pet. 2. 6. And turning
the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow,
making them an example unto those that after should live Ungodly.

This example is set forth both to reprove the Ungodly, and to warn the Ungodly.

1. It reproves the Udgodly, and that for the practice of such Sins as were the
cause of Sodom's ruin. Such as

First, Pride and Haughtiness; I believe many in our age and Nation will vye
with any of the Sodomits of old for* Devilish Pride and haughty spirits* (if we
may guess at the pride of the heart by the garbs, the look and the speech,)
there are some and those not a few, who seem to have outgone all former
generations, and may well be styled the Firstborn of the Devil for this Sin,
although they have been brought forth at the later end of the World.

What shall we say, when men of the higher rank do so generally* without need
disguise and hide their heads in others hair, and that of the womanish length,
and for the most part of another color than their own; and when woman disguise
and hide the natural color of their faces with pain^ and patches? what shall
we think of the flanting apparel, the Antique and Apish fashions, of the
ruffling Gallants in our Nation? not to speak of the excessive cost bestowed in
their changeable raiment, more being spent upon one suit worn by some but a few
days, then would be sufficient to cloth the backs and fill the bellies of some
scores of poor Christians, nor to insist upon the excessive time spent* or
rather misspent in dressing, wherein some do consume near half the time, which
they spare from the bed and sleep. What shall we say of the taunting language,
the scornful and reproachful speeches, which some do fill their mouths withal,
and which they spit forth upon the people of God, and that because of their
holiness and likeness unto God, whereby they despise not only them, but also
him whose image they bear? what shall we think of the stately building, the
excessive shows and flourishes without, and expensive furniture within, and
that when those houses are newly risen out of their ashes* and when the Church
lies wast, and so many poor Families are brought to a morsel of Bread? what do
these things with many more, which I might mention; signify, but that pride
does compass such persons about like a chain, whereby they are enthralled and
captivated; and let me say this, that the Devil has hold of the end of this
chain, and is thereby dragging them downwards, (as high as they look) toward
the lowest Hell.

And here I could wish that professors of Religion themselves, and many that in
other regards do fear God, could acquit themselves from the guilt of many gross
outward demonstrations of inward prevailing Pride; I will not say that all who
have false hair, have false hearts, (some I know are true-hearted, and want a
covering there,) and that all who are very curious in decking their outside
according to the fashion, are wholly untrim'd and unadorned within* yet I could
wish that the art of Periwig-making had never been found out, and that the
French modes had never been brought into our Nation; and this I will say that
plain apparel and dresses do very well become persons of great honor,
especially professors of Religion; that it is very unsuitable to the times for
any to bestow much cost on ornaments, when many of Christ members want
necessaries, and it is very unsuitable to the Christian profession, to bestow
much time in adorning the body, when the soul has more need, in the washing
and adorning of which the time and pains will be best bestowed. But I retire to
the reproof of the Ungodly, for other of their Sodoms Sins.

Secondly, Fullness of Bread or intemperance in eating and drinking, was another
sin which Sodom was charged withal: And how many are there in our days, which
may be charged with the same, who come behind none in this Sin? we read of the
Prodigal, Luke 15. 13. who wasted his substance with riotons living: If we look
abroad we may find too, too many of these every where, whose belly is their
God, who pamper the flesh, indulge and enslave themselves unto their appetite,
and give themselves leave to exceed all bounds in their riotous practices,
spending their whole time and substance in their profuse living. See how the
Apostle sets forth riotous persons, 2 Pet. 2. 12, 13. This reprove the
excess in drinking, a Sin more in use amongst us then that of excess in
eating. What is more common than this Sin of drunkenness both in City and
Country? how many are there that guzzle, and swill in drink without measure?
that drench and soak themselves with Ale, and other strong liquors, besot and
drown their natural parts and gift, wastes their time in rambling up and down
to Taverns and Alehouses, consume their wealth, distemper their bodies, and
provoke God to destroy their souls. Woe be to such persons, Isa. 5. 11, 12, 13.
Prove. 23. 29, 30.

Thirdly, Abundance of Idleness was the third Sin of Sodom, and when did this
Sin more prevail then in our licentious age? Idleness is a constant companion
of intemperance, yea rather the Mother that brings it forth, at least the Nurse
that brings it up; How many golden sands of time do the most suffer to run
waste? how many golden seasons do they let slip, wherein they might make
provision for eternity? did but they know the worth of time, especially of the
harvest the, the Summer-day of the Gospel, they would not lavish their time as
they do, they would not sleep in the Harvest, and waste the whole day in
Idleness, and Sin until the night of death did overtake, and suddenly surprise
them, when the least minute of time cannot be recalled; though they could and
would give ten thousand Worlds for it.

Fourthly, Unmercifulness to the poor was another of Sodoms sins, which the
Ungodly are chargeable with here, and shall be charged with and condemned for,
at the day of Christ's appearance, Math. 25. 41, 42. It is no wonder that those
who have no pity on their own souls, should have their bowels shut up against
the poor; that those who spend so much on their lusts, should not spare any
thing for the relief of other's wants. None have more mar^le bowels, than those
who have the hardest hearts; and none more unmerciful than those which are most
Ungodly and Sinful.

Fifthly, Abominable Filthiness is the last and chief Sin of the Sodomits. And
if the skirts of England were turned up, what filthiness would there appear
under them? It is a shame to speak what is done of some in secreet, yea too
many declare their uncleanness like Sodom, and are not ashamed to practice it
in the sight of the Sun. Whoredom and Adultrey, what more common in this
debauched generation? Yea, I wish that too many in England, as well as Italy be
not guilty of the Sin of Sodom, properly so called, I mean the lusting after
strange flesh, such vile affections some are given up unto, through the just
Judgment of God.

I might here further reprove the Ungodly of this generation, for some Sins
which the Sodomits did fall short in; namely, the hideous Oaths and blasphemy
of some profane wretches, who hereby b^lch out their professed enmity against
the God of Heaven, and offer so open indignity unto him, that we may wonder he
is not provoked to rain down Fire and Brimstone upon them, or to cause the
Earth to open its mouth to devour them, unto which I might add the aggravation,
which the Sins of nominal Christians receive from the Gospel light, which
shines about them, beyond what the Sodomits Sins were capable of, which
rendereth their Sins the more inexcusable and abominable in the sight of God:
but I hasten

II. This example of Sodom's burning does warn the ungodly to repent. Repent O
all the ungodly ones, and turn from your evil ways, otherwise your iniquities
like the Sodomits will be your ruin; otherwise Gods Judgment will overtake
you, and surprise you, and you shall not be able to escape; otherwise you shall
be destroyed suddenly, and that without remedy. You se^ in this instance the
fruit of ungodliness, the wages of Sin, the bitter issue and effect of
flesh-pleasing and sensuality, you see that God can be angry, and that his
anger does burn worse than fire, when it is kindled.

If you repent not, God may bring some dreadful temporal judgments upon you,
you have seen much in your days, Plague, Fire, Sword; you have heard of more in
former days. You know not what further calamities may be brought upon this City
and Nation; God may bring Plague and Famine together, so that such who do not
fall suddenly by the Plague, shall be consumed more leasurely by the Famine; he
may bring a Famine of Bread, and Famine of hearing the Word together, wherein
the Body shall starve and dye, and the Soul starve and be damned, and perish
everlastingly; he may bring Fire and the Sword together, your houses may be set
on Fire, and your persons Massacred at the same time. And alas^ what will you
(that are Ungodly) do in a time of general calamity? if the Pestilence should
walk about your streets, if the evil Arrows of Famine should fly about your
ears, if fire should consume your houses, if the Sword should be made drunk
with your Blood, if Death should sit in your Windows, if all things should be
turned into uproar and confusion; you that drink in iniquity like Water, and
lade your selves with guilt daily* you that are profane and ungodly* and spend
your time in idleness, and all kind of luxury, sleeping in the Harvest, and
shutting your ears against all the tenders of grace and mercy, which are made
unto you; what will become of you in the Winter of affliction? what comfort can
you have upon a Bed of Sickness? what refuge in a time of trouble? A Godly Man
has his* God to fly to, in times of greatest danger and distress, and there he
shall find entertainment and welcome; But whether will you fly? God is your
enemy, who will laugh at your calamity, Prove. 1. 26. Sinners! what will you do
in the evil day, which may overtake you here on Earth, when all refuge and
support shall fail you, when your comforts and enjoyments shall be taken from
you, or taking leave of you; when God shall smite you, and conscience bite you*
and Friends forsake you; when the black Catalogue of your Sins shall be spread
before you* and grimm Death shall appear unto you, bidding you come down into
the Grave, and the Devil shall wait for you, to drag you down into Hell; O the
confusion that then you will be in! when you perceive that you cannot live, and
you dare not dye; when you feel your eye strings crack, and your heart strings
break, and your souls are now coming forth of their ruinous habitation, where
they will become a prey to Devils, and be immediately conveyed to a place of
torments; think, O think what your horror is like to be here if awakened in
the evil day* through the apprehension of future Judgments? what then will
your horror ^e, if you do not repent, when the future and last Judgment is
come, and Christ is come in flaming Fire, to take vengeance upon you, and he
shall rain on you Fire and Brimstone, and a horrible Tempest: but of this more,
when I come to treat of the everlasting burnings of Hell, which the Lord Jesus
will condemn all the Ungodly unto at the last day.

I shall only say, that the burnings of Hell will not only exceed the burnings
of Sodom and Gomorrah in feirceness and duration (as through Gods help I shall
show in the third discourse) but also the Fire of Hell will be more
intolerable by you, than by the Sodomits themselves, (however vile Sinners
they were) Math. 11. 24. But I say unto you that it shall be more tolerable for
the Land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, than for thee. As your
Sins, who have enjoyed the means of Grace, are aggravated beyond the Sins of
the Sodomits in this respect: so your condemnation will be the greater, and
your punishment the sorer and more intolerable, if you do not now take warning
to repent.

CHAP. IX. Application to the Righteous.
2 LOt's escaping out of the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, is an example for
the encouragement of the Righteous: what ever judgment the Lord brings upon
the wicked and ungodly here, you that are righteous shall escape, God will hide
you in the day of his anger; when a Deluge of Judgments shall break in upon
the ungodly, God will provide an Ark for you; when God raineth a horrible
Tempest of Fire and Brimstone upon the wicked, he will provide a Zoar for you.
God will either keep you from the judgment it self which befalls others, or
else he will keep you in it, and from that fiery indignation, which is mingled
with it; be sure you shall be kept from the horrible Tempest of Fire and
Brimstone, which shall beat upon the head of the wicked at last, when the
Heavens shall be on Fire, and pass away with a great noise, and the Elements
shall be on Fire, and melt with fervent h^at, and the Earth shall be on Fire,
and all things here below in flames; when the wrath of the Sin-revenging God
shall break forth like a Deluge upon the Ungodly World, and they shall be cast
together into the Lake, which burns with Fire and Brimstone; Heaven shall be
you^ Ark, your Zoar, where you shall be in safety, and made happy in the full
enjoyment of God unto (...) eternity.

Away then with fear and dread, whatever the f^owns and threatenings of men be,
though (...) o^ the Ungodly may inveron you, though the wrath of wicked men
like fire be kindled against you, yet being righteous you are safe, since God
is for you, neither men nor Devils shall be permitted to do you real hurt: God
is your dwelling place, and God is your hiding place, you are under his wing
whilst you remain here, and you shall hereafter lie in his bosom for ever.

Fire and Brimstone from Earth, in the burning of Aetna, or Mount Gibel.
CHAP. I* The Introduction.
THe History of Sodom and Gomorrah's flames and destruction by Fire and
Brimstone from Heaven may seem incredible unto some, who either are ignorant of
the Infinite Power of God, whereby he can do whatever he pleases, as evidently
appears in the mighty works thereof, which could not be effected without the
hand of Omnipotency; and know not how feirce and hot his anger is, which
burns in his breast against Sinners, especially such Sinners as the Sodomits
were, which would quickly put the whole world into flames, did not his infinite
Patience restrain it for a while from breaking forth in it is rage and fury: or
wh^ give no credit unto the Divine Authority of the Scriptures* (of whom there
are too many in our age and Nation,) which does relate this judgment on those
wicked Cities; which however, being indeed the Word of God, (as might be proved
by many unaswerable Arguments,) the record of them is undoubtedly true, and may
as firmly be believed, as any thing may certainly be known, which is the object
of sense, or demonstrable by reason: Even as the future flames of Fire and
Brimstone in Hell are discredited by such Atheists, and Antiscripturists, and
little effectually believed of the most, as appears by their secure walking
in the broad way of Sin, which leads to this place of most dreadful and
eternal burning:

Therefore by way of Appendix unto Sodom's burning, and by way of Introduction
unto the burning of Hell, I shall treat of Aetna, or Mount Gibel's burning with
Fire and Brimstone out of the bowels of the Earth; especially in the eruption
of it the last year; which being a thing so late, and so n^ar, and so attested
by eye-witniss, and so easily disproved, yet not disproved, as it would have
been by this time, had it been false; I suppose will find credit with the most,
and may be of greater use than has as yet been made of it, from the relation
we have had so barely of the thing without any mention made of the name of God,
or his hand, or the end which he may have in such wonderful and stupendous
burnings.

It is from the soul that the body has it is life and motion, it is beauty and
luster, when the soul is separated, the body becomes a carcass breathless,
lifeless, gha^y, and subject to putrefaction: The whole world is full of God:
Praesentemque refert quaelibet herba Deum, every pile of Grass, yea the
meanest thing which is the object of our eye, or any (...) does carry an
Impr^sse of God; especially the greater works of Creation and Providence do
bare large characters of the Deity, and have Praise unto the Lord, written more
legibly upon them: and although God be not the Soul of the World as some have
affirmed; yet the whole Creation has it is beauty from him, and so far are any
work truly admirable and great, as God is taken notice of in them. The Sun,
Moon, and Stars, and the whole frame of the Heavens, are most great and
illustrious, as by their brightness and motion they declare the glory of the
Lord their maker and ruler. The Earth and Sea, and all things in both, as they
set forth Gods infinite power and wisdom and goodness, so far they are most
worthy our observation and admiration. All the good things we receive, are
only so far truly good, to us, as we perceive them handed to us by God; and
Gods hand in afflictions also does sweeten them to us, when we are persuaded of
the Author, and God's love and design for our good in them. To leave out God
therefore in the consideration of any work, is to leave out that which is
chiefly remarkable; without him we see but the carcass without the Soul,
without the the life and beauty.

The design therefore of this Treatise concerning Aetna's late burning is to
turn our eye upward toward God, that we take notice of him, and give him the
glory of this work, which is the wonder of all, unto whom the notice thereof
has come.

There are six things under this subject, which ^. shall briefly creat of.

First, Concerning the Mountain of Aetna or Gibel in the general. Secondly,
Concerning the Antecedents of the late Eruption of this Mountain. Thirdly,
Corcerning the eruption of Fire and Brimstone it self from the Mountain.
Fourthly, Concerning the concomitants of this eruption. Fifthly, Concerning the
cause of this eruption. Sixthly, And lastly, concerning the use and
improvement, which we should make of it.
CHAP. II. Concerning the Mountain of Aetna or Gibel in the general.
AETna is a Mountain in the Island of Sicily, which Island is environed round
by the Tyr^ Sea, but a small distance from Italy, in one part of it, up to
which ancient Writers think it was joined by an (...) or neck of Land, (like as
Pelep^sus to Greece) unto the continent of Italy, but by the violent beating of
the Sea upon that neck was divided asunder (...) i^, so Justin. lib. 4. cap. 1.
and others are of the some mind. The height and bigness of this Aetna or Mount
G^b. is very great: some (...) it to be ten (...), others fifteen m^les distant
from the head and top above, to the foot and plain (...) and perpendicular in a
strait line to be three or four miles. Toward it is head it is rocky and steep,
and some part of it is always covered with Snow; toward the middle it is
beautifyed with Trees and Woods, toward the bottom it is enriched with Corn
and Vines, and exceeding fruitful. The Hill has two shoulders Eastward, and
between both an eminent head in the middle, which may be seen at the distance
of fifty leagues (as some affirm) by Sailors on the Sea. But that which has
rendered this Mountain most famous, has not been so much the height and
bigness of it, as the smoking head and flaming mouth thereof, of which both
ancient and modern Authors have written. I shall instance in some few.

D^genes Laertius in his 8th. Book de viris Philosephorum makes mention of
Mount Aetna; into the (...) mouth of which Em^edocles the Philosopher (he sai^)
was ^am'd to have thrown himself, that not (...) found by his companions, they
might think he was translated to Heaven, and made an immortal God; but the Fire
of the Hill casting forth one of his br^zen San^ls, the d^ceit was discovered,
and so instea^ of purchasing to himself the repute of a God, he discovered
himself in that respect to be beneath a man.

Hora^e also records the same, lib. de Art l'^etica.

-- Deus immortalis hal eri
Dum cupit Empedocles ardentem frigidus Aetnam
Insiluit. --
Empedocles, himself into the mouth does thr^w
Of burning Aetna, that not being found below
He might be famed a God immortal. --
Pliny in his second Book of natural History does discourse of this Hill. In
montium (...) Aetna noctibus semper, tantoque aevo ignium materiae sufficit.
Amongst the miracles of Mountains Aetna does flame always by night, and does
afford matter for perpetual fire.

Iustins in his 4th. Book of History Chap. 1st. gives the reason why Aetnae
Montis per tot secula durat incendium, the burning of Mount Aetna has lasted
for so many ages.

Strabo in his sixth Book of Geography tells us of Aetna's open mouth,
whereby it does breath forth flames, and cast forth fiery stones.

Ovid concerning Aetna says:

Flammam fero vomit ore.
It vomits fire out of it is feirce mouth.
Seneca in his Thyestes describes Aetna
Ignis aeternis res^nans caminis. Resounding with eternal tunnels, or breathing
holes of fire. Claudian de raptu Proserpinae lib. 1.
Aetnaeos api^s sols cognoscere visu
Non aditu tentare licet --
Quae tanta cavernas
Vis glomerat, quo fonteruat Vulcanius igni^.
None may approach Mount Aetna's head to know
With foot, it is only reached with the eye below.
Great force within round caverns makes
From whence rush forth Vulcanian flakes
Of fire, as from a Fountain --
But Virgil gives the most notable decription of
Aetna's burning in his third Book of Aeneids.
-- Sed horrificis juxta tonat Aetna ruinis;
Int^rdumque atram prorumpit ad ether a nubem,
Turbine fumantem piceo, and candente favilla:
Attollitque globos slammarum, and sidera lambit.
Interdum scopulos, avulsaque viscera montis
Erigit eructans, liquefactaque saxa per aur as
Cum gemitu glomer at, fundoque exaestuat imo.
Fama est, Enceladi semustum ful^ine corpus
Urgeri mole hac, ingentemque insuper Aetnam
Impositam, ruptis flammam expirare caminis;
Et fessum quoties mutat latus intremere omnem
Murmr Trinacriam, and caelum subtexere fumo.
In English thus:

Through horrid falls within, like noise of thunde^,
Mount Aetna sounds as if 'twould break asunder.
Thence first a cloud break forth as black as night,
With pitchy curls, with sparks like stars to sight.
Then follow globes of flames, which mount a loft,
As if to kiss the Orbs of Heaven they sought.
The bottom-fire like boiling furnace glowes,
Which melts the hardest stones, and upward throws
Great Rocks through the air with groans. The fame does go
That great Enceladus do lie below
Who being thunderstruck, and on him thrown
Huge Aetna Mount, with weight to keep him down;
When weary he shifts sides, and turns about.
He shakes the Mount, his breath in flames goes out
As at a Furnace mouth, the Heavens above
Are clothed with smoke. Trinacria trembles --
I shall add but one Author more, and that is of a late Geographer, namely
Varenius, who in his first Book of Geography, page 105. does both describe this
Mount, and gives relation of one no^able eruption of fire not much above a
hundred years since.

Celeberrimus est Aetna Siciliae Mons, hodie Gibel, e cujus vertice flammae and
fumi longissima distantia in Mari Mediterraneo cernuntur. Etsi continua sit
flammarum and fumor^m ejaculatio, tamen interdum majori impetu furit* Anno
1537* a primo die Maii ad duodecimum tremuit (...) Sicilia; deinde ingens and
horrendus (...) and fragor auditus est, quasi magna tormenta bellica
exploder^tur, (...) est multorum aedificiorum per totam insul^m (...). Hae^
sae^itia per undecim dies cum conti^nasset, (...) fuit, vel hiatu se ap^ruit
hic ind^ terra, un^ magna vis s^amma and ig^is pr^rupit, qu^ intra quatuor dies
omnia absumpta sunt and (...), quae (...) ultra quinque leucarum distantia^ ab
Aetna aberant. P^lo p^st crater qui est in vertice montis per tres int^gros
dies ingentem copiam Fa^illae and ^inerum ejecit, quae non tantum per totam
in^ulam aispersa fuit, sed etiam trans Mare in Italiam dela^: and Naves in Mari
cum ducentis leucis a Sicilia abessent, and Venetias tenderent damnum passae
sunt. That is

Aetna in Sicily, now called Mount Gibel is most famous, from whose top the
flames and smoke may be seen at a very great distance on the Mediterranean Sea;
and although the casting forth of fire and smoke be continual, yet sometimes it
breaths forth with more force and fury. In the year 1537. from the first day
of May until the 12th. the whole Island of Sicily trembled, and then was heard
a great roaring and cracking noise, as if great pieces of Ordinance had been
discharged; after this followed the ruin and overthrow of many buildings
thorowout the whole Island. This raging continued for eleven whole days
together, in which time the Earth [on the side of the Mount] was rent, and
opened it self in wide clefts; from whence did issue forth flames of fire with
such force and strength that all things within 15. miles of Aetna were thereby
consumed and burnt up. A little after the Cup which is on the top of the Mount
for three whole days together did cast forth such a large quantity of burning
coals and ashes, that they were dispersed not only throughout the whole Island,
but they were also carried over Sea into Italy, yea some Ships two hundred
leagues from Sicily received damage hereby in their voyage to Venice. Thus
Varenius.

There have been other great eruptions of fire from this Mountain besides what
is ordinary, which Writters record, but none that I ever read of like unto this
last, of which the account follows.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Antecedents of the late eruption of Mount Aetna.
IT was on Friday night the eight of March 166^. that a great noise and roaring
was heard from the bowels and mouth of Mount Aetna, which sounded far and near,
more loud and dreadful than that of great Guns, in the Camps or Ships of
enemies; the roaring of the Sea in a storm when it lifts up its Waves on
high, and dasheth them with violence upon great Rocks, and lofty Shoars was
nothing in comparison; and it may be questioned whether the loud cracks of
thunder, when with the greatest fierceness it breaks through the thickest
cloud, did ever sound so terribly (although this has some time caused great
men full of guilt to run under their beds for fear) as this roaring and
bellowing of Mount Aetna did that night: which, being in the silent night, when
all things were hush, and other noises asleep, was heard with the greater
plainness and astonishment.

This awakened the Inhabitants of Catania, a City fifteen miles distant from
the Mount, especially those who lived upon the Borders and sides thereof,
whereby they were surprised with great fear, possibly much as the wicked world
shall be, when they shall hear the sound of the last Trumpet, summoning them to
Judgment.

The roaring of the Mountain was accompained at the same time, with a shaking
and trembling of the Earth, which must needs add to the trembling and horror
of the people who dwelt there about. The City of Catania it self did feel the
earth quake, the houses whereof sho^k so and danced, as if they would
immediately have tumbled from their foundations: But the Earthquake was most
violent in the Countries and Villages nearer unto, and upon the sides of the
Mountain, where there was such a shaking and concussion, that people could not
stand upon their legs without holding one by the other, but reeled and
staggered too and fro, as if they had been overcome with Drink; and the houses
of many were so cleft and torn, that first shaking out their Inhabitants, who
with all speed hastened out of them, they quickly tumbled to the ground. The
whole Town of Nicolosi was utterly ruined by the Earthquake, the Towns of
Padara and Tre-Castager were the greatest part of them ruined and destroyed.

The sight of such ruins before the eye, the feeling such motions and shakings
under the feet, the found of such roarings from the Mountain in the ear, surely
did strike those people with more terror and amazement, than was upon the
Inhabitants of London, when their houses were in flames before them, and they
forced to seek their lodgings in the Fields.

Besides this, the, fear of these perplexed people was increased when they saw
the ground to cleave in several places about them, and the Earth to open its
mouth as if it would have devoured them, as formerly the Rebellions Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram were swallowed up. This put them upon the wing to fly with
all have from those parts, who in great amazement, with hair standing an end,
joints trembling, distracted looks, hardly able to speak, brought the tidings
of these things to the City of Cantania.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Eruption it self of Fire and Brimstone from Mount
Aetna.
AFter warning given by the voice of the Mountain, and the shaking of the Earth
unto people to fly from that place of danger and threat^d ruin; on Monday the
11th. of March, there were three great eruptions on the side of the Mountain,
besides the smoke and flames which issued forth of the mouth at the top
thereof: the breaches and clefts of the Earth were a half of a mile in compass
(as afterward g^sed) out of which an horrible burning flood (...) come forth,
and more fiercely than any floods of Water could do, ran down the sides of the
Mount. It was the fire contained before within the bowels of the Mountain too
big and great to vent it self at the top, that forced it is way through the
sides, and making doors for it self, brak forth with such noise and rage as was
terrible to hear and behold.

This fire in its first vent, folding it self in great flames as if more than a
thousand houses had been burning together, mounted up toward Heaven not less
(as was judged) than a hundred Yards in height; which was accompained with such
a roaring noise, far beyond what was heard before at the mouth of the Hill,
like as if more than a thousand Canons or great pieces of Ordinance had been at
once discharged; and there withal vast stones were shot forth, some of them
three hundred pound weight, which were mounted aloft very high in the Air, and
with great force were thrown many miles from the place: this grew into a
furious Tempest, not of Rain or Hail, but which was far more dreadful, of
burning coals and ashes, and suffocating smoke which beat down upon the
Country all about, something like that rain of Fire and Brimstone, which fell
upon Sodom.

But that which was most notable in these eruptions, was the stream and flood
of fire, which in liqued melted matter, gushed forth at the breaches. We read
Isa. 30. 33. Of a stream of Brimstone kindled by the breath of God, which
runs in burning Tophet: Such was the stream of Fire and Brimstone which came
forth of this burning Mountain, the flames of it were blew like burning
brimstone, the color of it fiery red, like melted brass, the motion of it
like Quicksilver; this stream (wherein great stones were seem to swim of the
bigness of an ordinary Table) coming forth at the sides of the Mountain, ran
down like a mighty torrent, and meeting with a Hill divided it self into two
currents, which spread themselves, one of them in some places at least six
miles in breadth, and was judged to be fifteen yards in depth. In its progress
this stream ran in, upon a Lake of four fathem Water, and four miles in
compass, which it both filled up, and raised a Hill of ragged Stones and Rocks
upon it. The composition of this fiery stream was judged to be Sulphur, Nitre,
Sal Ammoniac, Lead, Iron, Brass, and other Metals, melted with the vehement
heat of the fire.

We have read of a Deluge and Flood of Waters, which drowned the old World; and
other lesser inundations which have drowned particular places; but I know not
any History, which gives relation of a Deluge and Flood of fire, such as this,
which devoured and destroyed whatever lay in it is way. The late relation
tells us that wheresoever it passed, it left large heaps of it is congealed
matter, with which it covered and burnt the Earth, melting the Walls of Castles
and Houses, throwing down all before it, nothing being found able to resist
it is force, or quench it is burning, Water being observed rather to add to it is
fury: Where ever it has passed, it has left dreadful marks behind it,
levelling some Hills, and raising others; so much changing the situation, that
not the least trace of any place or Town, which was in it is way, remains,
nothing being to be seen, but confused heaps of ragged stones, which yiedling a
noisome fume strick terror and astonishment in all that behold it.

The first breaking forth of this burning Flood of Fire, was on the Monday the
11th. of March, which in it is progress divided it self into several lesser
streams, and filled the whole Country therebout with Fire and Brimstone, in
many places where these streams did come great flames were seen to arise
together, with thick smoke as from the mo^ths of so many great Furnaces.

After the Flood of Fire was come down the Mountain, and toward the foot,
which is not so steep, it did not move, with that swiftness as before; yet
nothing could divert it is course, but it overturned and consumed all where ever
it came. The first streams continued their course for twelve days together, and
after hopes that the fury was now spent on Friday the 22d. of March the
Mountain Aetna roared and thundered, smoked and flamed again most hideously at
the mouth, shook and trembled throughout most dreadfully unto the very
foundations, and cast forth such heaps of scinders stones and ragged Rocks out
of it is bosom and bowels, at those breaches before made in it is sides, that
they grew together and were raised into two large and high Hills, and this
acccompanied with another stream of it is liquid melted matter, which overtook
the former currents, and thrust them forward with great fury.

But on the 25th. of March the Mountain bellowed with a greater noise than ever
before, and was shaken with such violence and force, that a large part of the
head and top fell into the breast and bowels, and that the depth of half a mi^e
as some do judge. And then issued forth fiery streams in so great abundance,
that joining forces with the former, they made great havoc and desolation,
destroying the habitations of no less than seven and twenty thousand persons:
the Towns of La Guardia, Malpassa, Campo Rotundo, La Potielli, Antonino,
Pietro, Mosterbianco, Monpileri, Falicchi, Placchi, were wholly consumed and
ruined: Yea, the Image of the blessed Lady of the Annunciata, (^o highly
reverenced by the Superstitious Papists, unto which many resorted in Pilgrimage
from remote parts) was not spared, whatever power the Intercession of that
Virgin Lady has with her Son in Heaven, for persons here upon the Earth, (as
the Papists ridiculously fancy) yet nothing could now avail to secure her Image
from being swallowed up by this devouring fiery stream; whereby all may see
that there was no difference between the stones of that Image, and those of the
other buildings in that place which equally felt the fo^ce of the fire. Other
places were ruined in part, as Ma^calucia, Giovanni de Galermo, with many
other, and at length the burning streams do approach near unto Gates and Walls
of the City Calania, in their course destroying Fields, Gardens, Orchards, and
Vineards about it; which filled the Inhabitants with such fear, that far the
greatest part of them removed themselves and their goods out of the City. Yet
what ever the danger and fear was, the Lord preserved the City from being
swallowed up by these devouring streams; part of these streams were congealed
on the Land, one of them emptied it self under the Walls of the Castle into the
Sea in four fathom Water: which held it is current in the Sea two fathom high
above it, and to the astonishment of all spectatours, burned in the Sea it self
for a great while, and making progress into the Sea a mile in length, and a
mile in breadth, was not quenched by the water of the Sea, until having spent it
self, it did of it self congeal.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Concomitants of the Eruption and burning of Aetna.
WHilst the Mountain of Aetna or Gibel did thus vomit flames of fire at the
top, and streams of fire at the side, accompained with such horrid noise and
cracking in the Air, such dreadful trembling and shaking of the Earth; other
things also were very observable at the same time; such as the swelling of the
Sea unto a great and unaccustomed height, with great raging and roaring Waves,
the Floods of Water did seem to lift up their heads to see this dreadful
spectacle of the Floods of fire, and the Waves of the Sea did lift their voice
in great tumult, as being amazed at the horrid aspect of the Waves and Streams
of Flames and Brimstone.

The Winds also, which raised this Tempest in the Sea, were high, having broken
loose from their habitation, and with great noise and blustering whirled about
the Land, in fierce blasts beating upon the houses and unsheltred people in the
Fields, as if they would contend for force with the raging and irresistible
fire.

The Clouds were gathered thick in the Sky, and arrayed the Heavens with black
attire, hiding the comfortable and refreshing beams of the Sun, from the sight
which if sometimes it deed peep through the Clouds, it was with a pale
countenance, as if it had been struck with fear, and dared not to appear in
such a dismal place.

Storms of rain often powered down from the Clouds, which seemed in compassion
to weep, to weep Floods of tears, endeavoring thereby to contribute some help
for the extinguishing of the flames; but all the Rain which fell was so far
from quenching or allaying, that it did but the more increase and exasperate
the fury of the Fire, which hereby burned so much the more feircely.

In the City there was danger of the Houses overthrow by the Winds and
Earth-quak, or their being devoured and swallowed up by the Deluge of Fire: In
the Fields and Countries there was danger of being destroyed by Thieves and
Robbers, who took advantage of the peoples confusions to set upon them,
murdering many, and spoiling them of their choicest things, which they had
saved out of their ruined houses.

Great was the dread and terror, which now did possess the hearts of the
people; Our Savior foretells, Luke 21. 25, 26. That on Earth there should be
distress of Nations with perplexity, the Sea and the Waves roaring, and men^
hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things, which are
coming upon the Earth. Such was the distress and perplexity of these people.
It is said in the Relation, That people ran with cries and lamentations about
the City and Country, expecting nothing but to be swallowed up, or consumed by
the Fire, having no other apprehensions bu^ of death, and a general
Conflagration.

Had the Christian religion taken place there in the purity and power thereof,
it might have born up the spirits of the sincere, and established Christians
against overwhelming fear and amazement in all those storms and danger; If of
the virtuous Man much more may it be said of the truly Religions. Si fracitus
illabatur orbis impavidum ferient ruinae, though the frame of the Earth and
World should crack and be dissolved, yet such a one would be undaunted under
it is ruins; such, when the Mountain was dissolved and did melt with fervent
heat into Floods of burning Fire, might look upon Death, (the utmost the fire
could bring upon them) with an unappaled countenance; yea, with great
considence and comfort, because of their wellgrounded hopes* of rest and
happiness in Heaven, whose habitation prepared for them there is beyond the
reach of any Earthly Fire to consume.

But no wonder if the blind Superstitious Papists, whose worship is mingled
with such vanity and Indolatry, be filled with such dread and horror,
especially the more notorious Sinners amongst them: surely the consciences of
the most are now awkened, the stings and lashes whereof (no doubt) above all
other things did at this time increase their terror.

But what course do they take for the diverting Gods anger, which so visibly
did break sorth in these Flames and Fire from the burning Mountain, and for the
prevention of the threatened ruin? they do not betake themselves to their
knees, to Fasting and Prayer in any way of Gods prescribing; they do not apply
themselves by Faith unto the Blood of Christ, to appease the wrath of the angry
God No. The Relation tells us that The Religious appeared every where with
much devotion, carrying in Procession their Relics, especially those of St.
Agatha, the famous Martyr of Catania, in which they reposed no small
confidence, followed by a great multitude of people, mortifying themselves with
Whips, and other signs of penance. And at another time. The Bishop of the place
followed by the Clergy, Secular, and Regular, and an infinite number of the
people went in solemn Procession out of the City of Catania unto Monte de St.
Sophia, carrying out with greatest Devotion, their choicest Relics, and upon
an Altar, erected in view of the Mountain exposed them, where they celebrated
Mass, and used exorcismes accustomed upon such extraordinary occasions.

Thus blind and sottishly Superstitions these people are; But is the anger of
the Lord hereby appeased? No, it is so much the more increased, and they cannot
charm the noise and flames of the Mountain with all their Exorcismes. But all
the while they continue in their Superstitious exercices. It is said, The
Moantain ceased not as before with excessive roaring to throw up it is smoke and
flames with extraordinary violence, and abundance of great stones were carried
through the air, some of them falling within their view, though as ten miles
distant from the eruption. This was an open rebuke of them for their
Superstition ^o odious and abominable in the ^ight of God.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the cause of the Eruption of Mount Aetna.
THe Supreme cause of the flames and fiery streams, which brake forth from the
Bowels of Mount Aetna, was the Lord, who is not only Ens Entium, the Being of
Beings; but also Causa Causarum, the Cause of Causes; whatever was the second,
God was the first cause all the works of Nature in the World, being effected by
him who is the God of Nature, in and by him every thing has as it is being, so
also it is virtue and operation. It is said, Job 9. 10. He does great things
past finding out, yea and wonders without number; amongst the Mirabilia Dei,
the wonderful works of God, this is none of the least; In Miracles God does
work more immediately, and in wonders God does work more remarkably than in
ordinary works. Moreover this Eruption of Fire, which made such a dreadful
devastation of houses carried with it the plain face of a Judgment, and every
judgment it is from God, as the Judge of the World; God is in no wise the
Author of Sin, but he is the Author of all penal evil: the anger of the Lord
did not only smoke, but break forth into a Flame; it was the breath of the Lord
that did kindle this Stream, which overturned and swallowed up so many
Habitations.

And surely, the Inhabitants of the place had been blowing up the Coals of Gods
anger before by their Sins; It was not without cause from themselves that this
judgment was brought upon them. The distance of this Place from Rome is but
little, and the difference between them in Idolatry, and all sort of wickedness
is reported to be less; Sicily has drunk deep of the Cup of Fornication,
which is in the hand of the Romish Whore, and God made some of them drink
something of the Cup of his Wrath and Indignation: yea, Sodomy it self is of
frequent practice in those parts, and God brings ruin like unto that of Sodom
upon their houses by Streams of Fire and Brimstone, though through infinite
patience their persons were preserved.

The cause under God of these dreadful Eruptions was the Fire in the Bowels of
the Mountain, which meeting with a large quantity of combustible matter and
kindling it, could not be contained in so straight room, but with such noise
and violence brake forth in such flames and streams at the mouth and sides.

When this Fire was first kindled is not known, the burning of the Mountain
being more ancient than any History can remember. What the Poets feign
concerning the War of the Giants with the Gods and their casting down great
Enceladus with Thunder, and keeping him down with vast Mountains, and this of
Aetna being thrown upon his head, that this Fire was kindled by his hot breath,
is as ridiculous, as it is fabulous.

Some are of the opinion that there are Fountains of Fire under ground as well
as of Water; and that in the bosom and bowels of the Earth, God has laid up
Treasures of this Element, enclosing it in vast Caverns, as in so many
Storehouses; which Subterranean Fire they assign to be the cause of hot
Bathes, and that Mount Aetna, as also Vesuvius with other flaming Mountains,
which Geographers and Travelers tell us are to be seen in all the parts of the
World, are the breathing holes of this Fire: but the Scripture is wholly silent
of any such work of God there; we read of the Earth, and the gathering together
of the waters, and the Fountains of the great deep, but nothing of any
Fountains of Fire mingled with either of these Elements; and the laying up of
this Element in store, in a place so low, when naturally it tends upwards, is
not easy to conceive; besides who ever has descended into the depths of the
Earth, to search and find out these depths of Fire?

Justin gives other reasons of this Fire, Lib. 4. Ca^. 1. Est antem terra
tennis and fragilis, cavernis quibusdam* fistulisque ita penetrabilis, ut
ventorum tota ferme flatibus pateat; nec non and ignibus generand^s,
n^triendisque soli ipsius naturalis materia: quippe intrinsecus stratum
sulphur and bitumine traditur: quae res facit ut spiritu cum igne inter
interior a luctante, frequenter and compluribus l^cis nunc flammas, nunc
vaporem, nunc ^umum eructet. Indo denique Aetnae montis per tot socula durat
incendium. The meaning in brief is this, The earth in that place being so thin
and hollow, and penetrable by the Winds and the nature of the soil so
Sulphurious, and so fit matter for the begetting and nourishing of Fire, the
motion of the Wind closed in, does kindle the Fire which bel^heth forth in
smoke and flames, and hence it is that the burning of Aetna has endured for so
many ages. Unto which he adds a little after, speaking of the fall of the
Waters. Eade^ caus^ etiam Aetnae Montis ^erpetuos ignes f^cit; Nam aquarum ille
con^ursus, r^tum secum spiritum in imum sundum trahit, atq^e ibi suffecat^
tamdiutenet, donec per spiramenta Terrae diff^sus nutrimenta ignis incendat.
The cause of Aetna's perpetual Fire is from the great and perpetual fall of the
Water, near at hand which carries down the Wind and Air, and suffo^ateth it at
the bottom, whence it breaths away through some crevices of the Earth,
toward the Mountain, and this kindles and blows up the Flames.

Another assigns the cause more clearly thus: ^ tnam constat ab ^a part qua
Eurus and Affricus flant, habere speluncas, and plenas Sulphuris, and ad Mare
deduct as: Haespeluncae recipientes in se fl^ctus ventum creant, qui agitatus
ignem gignit ex Sulphures. Mount Aetna, says he, that way which the East and
South wind do blow, has Caverns and Vaults full of Sulphur, which reach so far
as the S^a, which Vaults receiving into them the Waves of the Sea, Wind is
begot hereby, which Winds being violently moved does beget the Fire out of the
Sulphur, and therefore afterward he tells us, that as the East and South Wind
do blow so this Mountain does more on lesser vomit up sparks and fire.

Lucretius, Lib. 6. does set forth the cause,

-- Primum totius subcava Montis
Est natura fere, ^ilicum suffulta cavernis:
Omnibus est porro in spelu^eis ventus and are, etc.
The Mountain Aetna hollow is throughout,
With stones of Flint it is Cave are lined about,
Whereby it is held up; The wind is there
In every Cave begot by moved Air*
Through motion heat's engendered i^ the Earth;
Thence fire springs forth, and flames have birth.
Besides; against the Mountain's Roots the Main
Break her swollen Waves and swallow them again;
From whence unto the top of it is ascent
The undermining Caves have their extent
Through which the Bellows breath, and cast forth flames
With showers of stones ashes. --
Thus concerning the cause of Aetna's burning,
which as to the second cause, may rather be guessed
at then fully understood.
CHAP. VII. The Use of the Burning of Aetna.
THese late dreadful Eruption of Fire and Brimstone from Mount Aetna, should
carry our eyes upward unto God the Author hereof. The Lord has been lately
upon the Earth, he has shown himself in great Majesty; a Fire has devoured
before him, and it has been very tempestuous round about; a smoke has gone
out of his mouth and Coals have been under his feet; he has clothed himself
with flames, and of late appeared very terribly in these Europaean parts; he
has not only kindled fires in houses and Cities, turning them into ashes and
ruinous heaps, but he has also kindled a fire in a great Mountain, which has
broken forth with a great flame. We read Psalm. 27. The voice of the Lord is
powerful, and full of Majesty; the voice of the Lord is upon the Waters, the
God of Glory thun^reth, the voice of the Lord upon many Waters; the voice of
the Lord shakes the Wilderness, and makes Lebanon to Ship like a young
Unicorn. Such Majesty and Power has been in Gods voice, which was heard from
this Mount; the voice of the Lord has sounded from the Earth, the God of Glory
has thundered out of the bowels of a great Mountain, whereby the foundations
thereof have been so shaken, as if he would have overturned it in his anger.
Formerly the Lord brought forth streams of Water out of the hard Rock, and
lately he has brought forth streams of Fire out of the deep Earth. This is the
Lord's doing, and it should be mavelous in our eyes; If we wonder at the
work, let us wonder more at the Worker; if we admire to hear of such floods of
fire, we have more reason to admire Gods infinite Power who has effected this.

Use 2. The Relation of Aetna's burning should awaken impenitent Sinners out of
their carnal security, whilst they consider the hand of God herein, and that
this God who kindled such a Fire in the Mountain, is highly incensed against
them, so long as they allow and indulge themselves in any Sinful practices; and
that the Fire of Gods anger which is kindled in his breast against them, is ten
thousand times more dreadful, than the Fire which was kindled in the bowels of
the Mountain, yea that God is preparing the Fire of Hell for them, which shall
burn them everlastingly, if they do not repent; that God who has power to
kindle a Fire in the Earth, has power to kindle the Fire of Hell, and he that
has power to keep alive the fire of this mountain for some thousands of years,
has power to keep alive the Fire of Hell unto Eternity, this he can do, and
this he will do, and oh how fearful a thing will it be, to be thrown into
everlasting flames! (of which more largely in the next discourse.) Awake then
all ye Sons and Daughters of sleep and security, ye children of night and
darkness, and all ye workers of iniquity!

Look up and see how powerful and terrible the Lord is, and how unable you are
to make resistance, when once his hand shall take hold on vengeance; Gods anger
now does but smoke against you, ere long it will break forth into a flame,
which will burn to the lowest Hell, and never shall be extinguished.

Let me therefore persuade you to break off your Sins by repentance, and apply
your selves to Christ by Faith, that the anger of the Lord toward you may b^
appeased, and that being reconciled, you may escape the dreadful effects of his
displeasure.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the burning of London that may be.
Use. 3. THe Relation of Aetna's burning, should lead us unto the consideration
of the Burnings which may be, and the Burnings which will be.

First, Consider the Burnings which may be: our dear and beloved City of London
may be burnt again with fire, and that not only ^he Suburbs and Southwark, and
remaining Timber houses, which the last Fire spared; but also the New-built
Houses of Brick, many of them have been tried that they can burn, for no
Building on Earth is a sufficient defense against Fire; I don't think we are in
danger of any such Fire as that of Aetna, to break forth from under our feet
out of the bowels of the Earth; but we may be in danger of a Fire Forged in
Hell, I mean some Develish wicked men may be contriving again the burning of
the City. It is not long since this our flourishing City was laid wast by
devouring flames.

The Depositions given before Magistrates* concerning the hands of the Papists
set on work herein, are not forgotten; the principles of the Papists, which
will allow them to murder Princes, blow up Parliaments, Massacre people, burn
Cities, if they be Heretics as they call them, are not altered. The attempts
of late to set houses in the City on Fire in several places, have been made
evident, and I wish that there be no cursed design now on foot, amongst such
vile persons, to burn our City, and Massacre our persons together; it is not
amiss for us to think what may be; the may be of a house's falling down upon
our head in the street, and being crushed thereby to pieces, (as some have
been)* should put us upon continual preparation for death, and much more when
we are in danger of death many other ways. If you should hear a cry at
Midnight, the Papists are come, that Fireballs are flying about the street,
that Fires are kindled in several parts of the City at the same time, and that
bloody cut throats stand ready to Butcher a naked people, as they come forth of
burning Houses with their goods. If you should hear the groans and shreeks of
your Neighbors, whilst they are cruelly Massacred by the hands of merciless
villains, and when they approach your doors, and you see no way of escaping,
but inevitable '^ath is before you; if you should then be found unprepared for
death, when you have no time to prepare, how would you be surprised? how would
you be affrighted? It is good to provide for the worst, that when ever death
does appear, in whatever shape it may not prove a King of Terrors. How happy
are those who have made their Peace with God, when some men will not be at
peace with them? how little reason have those to fear the wrath of any here,
who are delivered from the wrath to come? how safe is that treasure, which is
laid up in Heaven, far beyond the reach of Thief or Rust or Flames of Fire? get
clear evidence of these things; if you be delivered out of the snare of the
Devil, you need not be afraid of the snares of Men; if you be not in danger of
Hell, ye need not be afraid of Death; if you have well-grounded hopes, to
escape everlasting flames, and to attain evealasting joys through your Intrest
in Christ and his purchase, you may smile at the flames of your Houses, and
laugh at destruction when it comes. But I hope (if there be such a design
which I neither do, nor can affirm) that the Lord will prevent the effusion of
our Blood and Destruction of our City, which too many may desire* and that if
ever they should attempt such a Massacre as in Paris, or Ireland, and to mingle
our Blood and Fire together, that the Lord will so spirit all true Protestants
and Englishman, to stand up so in their own defense, which the Law of God and
Nature will allow, as by them to bring that Destruction upon themselves, which
they may endeavor against against all Justice and Law, to bring upon Gods
people.

Secondly, Aetna's burning should lead us to the consideration of the Burnings
which will be: There are three great burnings, that certainly will be.

1. The Burning of Rome. 2. The Burning of the World. 3. The Burning of Hell.
CHAP. IX. Concerning the burning of Rome.
First, WE may be minded hereby of the Burning of Rome, which certainly will
be, of which this Eruption of Aetna so near may be a Prognostic and
Forerunner; it being of common observation amongst them that the extraordinary
eruptions of this Mount are ominous, especially unto Rome. That Rome is the
Babylon threatened with destruction and Fire, will be evident if you look into
the Description. Rev* 17. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And there came one of the seven
Angels, which had the seven Viols and talked with me, saying unto me come
hither, I will show unto thee the Judgment of the great Whore that sits
upon many Waters, with whom the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication,
and the Inhabitants have been made drunk with the Wine of her Fornication. So
he carried me away in the spirit into the Wilderness: And I saw a Woman sit
upon a Scarlet-colored Beast, full of names of Blasphemy, having seven Heads,
and ten Horns: And the Woman was arrayed in Purple and Scarlet color, and
de^ked with Gold and Precious Stones, and Pearls, having a Golden Cup in her
hand, full of Abomination and Filthiness of her Fornication. And upon her
Forehead was a name Written: Mystery Babylon, The Great, The Mother of
Harlots, and Abominatio^ of the Earth. And I saw the Woman drunken with the
Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. That this
Decription is applicable unto the Papacy of Rome* and to no other is evident
from every part thereof, as it is explained by the Angel in this same Chapter,
and fulfilled as to every particular in the Popedom. We are not to understand
it of one particular Pope, but of the whole Race and Succession of them, who
are called the great Whore, sitting upon many Waters, with whom the Kings of
the Earth committed Fornication, etc. signifying the spiritual Fornication,
committed by them with her, or the Idolatry which she draws them unto the
practice of. The Waters are the People, which she has under subjection. The
Scarlet-colored Beast she sits upon, having seven Heads, and ten Horns, is
the great City of Rome, and the state thereof; the seven Heads signify seven
Mountains on which Rome was built, therefore called Septi-collis Roma,
Sevenhill'd Rome. Moreover the City is described to be the City which then
Reigned over the Kings of the Earth, which was the City of Rome the Emperial
Seat at that time; the ten Horns signify the Kings of the Earth, which give
their power to the Pope for his support. This Whore is called Babylon, the
great the Mother of Harlots; who makes the Nations drunk, with the Wine of her
Fornication, and who her self is drunk with the Blood of Saints and Martyrs.
And to whom can this be applied? but unto the Pope, who does intoxicate so many
Nations as with Wine or potions, whence it comes to pass that they wallow in
the Filthiness of Spiritual Fornication; and who has shed so much of the Blood
of Saints, for the Testimony of Jesus, against the Romish Superstition and
Idolatry. I should digress too far to apply all the parts of this description
with other descriptions in the Revelations, and of Antichrist in the
Thessalonians unto the Pope of Rome, as I might do and prove by unanswerable
Arguments, that the Pope is the Antichrist, and Rome Spiritual Babylon; That
which here chiefly we should mind is the Judgment of this great Whore, It is
said, Ver. 6. The ten Horns which thou saw upon the Beast, shall hate the
Whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her Flesh and burn
her with Fre. And again Chap. 18. throwout we have the destruction and burning
of Babylon, or Rome, set forth at large, Ver. 2. Babylon the great is fallen,
is fallen, Ver. 4. Come out of her my people, that ye partake not of her
Plagues, Ver. 7. As she has glorified her self and lived deliciously, so much
torment and sorrow give her. Ver. 8. Her plagues shall come in one day* and she
shall be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God who judges her.
The Kings of the Earth, that committed Fornication with her, and Merchants and
Ship-masters shall bewail her, when they see the smoke of her burning, Ver. 9.
But in Heaven there shall be joy. The Lord will rejoice, the Prophets and
Apostles will rejoice, and all the Saints will rejoice, in the vengeance which
shall then be taken upon Her. Ver. 20.

Rome was standing and did rejoice when London was burning, and I hope London
will be standing, and much more rejoice when Rome is burning; London was burnt
but in part, Rome shall be utterly burnt with Fire; London after it is burning
is rebuilt in a great measure, but Rome shall never be rebuilt after this
burning. This Babylon when it falls, shall never rise more. Ver. 21. And a
mighty Angel took up a stone like a great Mile-stone, and cast it into the Sea:
saying, Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown down, and
shall be found no more at all. As a great Mile-stone thrown into the midst of
the Sea is overwhelmed with Water; so shall Rome be overwhelmed with Fire: and
as a Mile-stone cannot be raised and drawn out of the Sea: so Rome when burnt
shall never be raised again out of it is ashes and ruins.

Dreadful will the destruction of Rome be, when the time of her barning is
come; those which stand a far off, for fear of her torment, (who have been
friends to her) shall lament; what lament^tions then will there be, by such as
shall be found in the place it self, when it shall be set on Fire about their
ears? when the Pope and Cardinals, and the other Inhabitants of that Filthy
and Abominably wicked City, shall be consumed together, (as is likely) in the
midst of the flames; O the hideous out-crys which then will be made in every
street* when they are surrounded with Fire on all sides, and there is no way
left for them to escape; when their Houses and Wealth, and Persons shall be
consumed, together by the devouring flames; when God by such a dreadful fire on
Earth shall convey them down to the more dreadful fire of Hell.

Then the Lord will avenge all the blood of his Saints, which under the
Antichristian tyranny has been shed, for so many generations; then he will
avenge all the Idolatry Pride, Covetousness. Oppression, Blasphemy, Filthiness,
Cruelty, and Wickedness of Rome together. When the Grape^ of this Vine are
fully ripe, the Angel with his sharp Sicle will cut it, and throw it into the
Winepress of Gods wrath, where it shall be squiesed and crushed to pieces. When
their iniquities are full, then their ruin shall come.

And surely the time is not far off; I am much of the persuasion, that this
generation shall not pass away before God will accomplish what he has
threatened concerning R^nes burning and destruction; the last Sands of the hour
of Gods Patience seem to be running; the forty and two months seem to be
expiring, and the two witnesses civilly slain, it may be, are arising, and then
Rome will quickly be fa^ling.

CHAP. X. Concerning the burning of the World.
2 BY the burning of Mount Aetna, we may be minded also of the burning of the
World, I mean the last general conslagration of the World at the end thereof:
whether Aetna's burning be a Prognostic of Rome's burning is not so certain;
but that it is a Prognostic of the Worlds burning and dissolution by Fire, may
be proved from Scripture, as Luke 21. 11. Where our Savior foretelling his
Disciples what the signs should be of his coming, and the end of the World,
amongst Wars, Pestilences Earthquakes, does reckon up fearful sights, as one
Forerunner, and I verily think there has not been a more fearful sight, since
the days of our Savior, then this of the Eruption of Fir^ and Brimstone from
this flaming Mountain; the Inhabitant* of the place expected a general
conflagration then, but we may well say, that this fearful sight is a
Forerunner of it foretold by Christ, and therefore should put us in mind of it.

The notice of this great and universal burning of the World we have not from
reason, but from the Scripture; the clearest and fullest place to prove this is
2 Pet. 3. 5, 6, 7. By the Word of God the Heavens were of Old, and the Earth
standing out of the Water and in the Water; Whereby the World that then was
being overflowed with Water, perished: But the Heavers and Earth which are now
by the same Word are kept in store, reserved unto Fire, against the day of
Judgment, and perdition of Ungodly men. And Ver. 10. The day of the Lord will
come as a Thief in the Night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a
great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also, and
the works that are therein shall be burnt up.

Here Note.
First, That as the World of old was drowned by Water: so that the World that
now is shall be consumed by Fire; as certainly as the former was; s^ certainly
the later shall be, and as dreadful as the Flood was to Sinners on that day: so
dreadful and much more dreadful will the Fire be to Sinners on the last day.

Secondly, It is by the Word of the Lord that this general Conflagration shall
be effected, by the Word of the Lord the World was made, and by the Word of the
Lord the World was Drowned, and by the Word of the Lord the world shall be
burned. In his word he has foretold it, and by his Word he will effect it.

Thirdly, The Heavens and Earth are said to be reserved in store for fire; when
the Old World was drowned, it was only the Earth and Inhabitants thereof, the
Heavens were untouched, and the Earth also did remain undissolved, and the same
Earth did appear afterward, when the Flood was drawn off by God: but at the
last day the Heavens and Earth too shall be dissolved by Fire; not by
subterranean Fire as some imagine, and that, as when the World was drowned, the
Fountains of the great deep were opened, and the Waters kept before in
Storehouses were brought forth, which overwhelmed the Earth: so that there are
Fountains of Fire in the bowels of the Eatth, and that there it is kept in
Storehouses, all which then shall be opened, and that the fire shall break
forth in a more dreadful flame then ever was seen at Mount Aetna, and set the
whole Fabric of the World on ^ire. For as was said before we read nothing of
this in the Scripture; it is said, that the Heavens and Earth are kept in store
for Fire, but it is not said that fire is kept in store for them. Besides how
can we conceive that any Subterranean fire should have power to reach and
dissolve the Heavens?

Fourthly, The time of this burning of the World shall be at the day of
Judgment and perdition of the Ungodly, called Ver. 10. The day of the Lord, It
will be at the day of Christ appearance to Judgment, when he shall be revealed
from Heaven, with his mighty Angels in flaming fire to take vengeance on the
Ungodly World: having first raised up the Righteous from the dead, and gathered
them together from the four Winds, and called them up into the Clouds, and
openly acknowledged and acquitted them, and set them in a place of safty (for
as Noah and his Family were hid from the Deluge of Water in the Ark: so the
Lord will hide all the Righteous under his wing from the Fire,) and having
examined and Sentenced the wicked unto Eternal perdition; then most probably
will the time be of his setting the World on fire, and that all the wicked of
all Generations will remain in the midst of those flames* until the whole be
consumed, except themselves, who will be then cast into a place of more
dreadful burning, I mean the everlasting fire of Hell.

The time cannot be far off, the Lord will come very shortly, Yet a little
while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10. 37. And
the Lord will come suddenly, as a Thief in the night, Ver. 10. When the World
is secure, and does no more expect it, than the old World did the Flood* or the
Sodomits did the fire, then the Lord will come.

Fifthly, Here is a more particular description of the burning of the World. It
is said Ver. 10. The Heavens shall (...) away with a great noise, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also and the the works that
are therein shall be burnt up. And Ver, II. All these things than be dissolved.
The Heavens shall be in flames, and the frame of them crack with a hideous
noise, far beyond whatever before did ^ound in the ear of any mortal, and like
a great scroll they shall be rolled together, and fly away out of sight; all
the Elements also shall feel the force of this fire, and hereby be melted and
consumed into nothing, the Elementary fire and air, and water, shall all melt
with this fervent heat and evaporate, so as to be no more; but especially the
earth and works thereof shall be the subject of these burnings, all the
Buildings, all the houses and Towns and Cities of the world shall be on fire
together, all the great and vast Mountains shall be in flames; yea and the
great Woods, Plains, and Fields, and the whole Earth from the very bottom of
it is foundation shall be on fire, and be burnt up.

O what a dreadful fire will this be! it will be dreadful to behold it, how
dreadful will it be then to feel it! to be in the midst of it! as the wicked
shall be in their passage to the eternal flames of Hell; when they shall see
the Heavens on fire, and the air on fire, and the Water on fire, and the Earth
on fire, Cities on fire, and Fields on fire, and themselves on fire, Head,
Back, Breast, Belly, Hands, Arms, Legs, Feet, every part on fire, and that such
a fire though it does torment them, yet that shall not be able to consume them;
when they see the Heavens, which have endured so long to melt, stones to be
broken, and the hardest metals to be dissolved by the fervent heat of this
fire, and yet their bodies made so strong, that their flesh shall not be
consumed hereby; O how fearful will this be! tongue cannot utter, thought
cannot conceive, the anguish of the wicked on this day, and in this place of
fire* Mr. Doolittle in his Book of Rebukes, does Patheticplly set forth the woe
of the Ungodly through this fire, from page 297. to p. 305

See the inference which the Apostle does draw from the consideration of these
flames, which shall burn the world. 2 Pet. 3. 11. Seeing then that all these
things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy
Conversation and Godliness? Unto which add the 14th. Verse. Wherefore (be loved)
seeing ye look for these things, be diligent, that ye may be found of him in
peace without spot and blameless.

1. Look to your state, that you be Godly persons, that you be regenerate, and
have the Image and likeness of God upon you, such will be safe and out of the
reach of these flames at that day; but woe be to the Ungodly they cannot escape.

2. Look to your conversation, that it be Holy, that you be Holy in all manner
of Conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 15. These great burnings and dissolution of all
things, should take off your heart from the World, which ere long will be in
flames, and quicken you unto a holy and circumspect walking; that when the Lord
does appear, you may be found of him in paece, without spot and blameless; and
then you shall be taken to inhabit the new Heavens, and new Earth, those
glorious mansions, which the Lord will prepare for his people, where you shall
have the presence of the Lord with you for evermore.

The third burning which will be, is the burning of Hell, of which in the next
discourse.

Fire and Brimstone in Hell, to Burn the Wicked.
Psalm. 11. 6. Upon the wicked he shall rain Snares* Fire and Brimstone, and an
horrible Tempest, this shall be the portion of their Cup.
CHAP. I. The Introduction.
THe flames and fiery Streams, which were rained down from Heaven upon Sodom
and Gomorrah formerly, and which issued forth from the Earth in the Eruptions
of Mount Aetna lately, are but shaddows of the future flames, and like painted
fire in comparison, with the streams of Fire and Brimstone, which in Hell shall
burn the wicked eternally. For as the Glory of Heaven (whilst we are in the
dark Vale of this World) does far exceed all conception, and therefore cannot
be set forth in full by any description; but as one says, whoever attempts to
speak of an Heavenly state, while himself is upon the Earth, his discourse of
that must needs be like the dark Dreams and Imaginations of a Child, concerning
the affairs of this World, while it self is yet swadled and cradled in the
Womb; and the Apostle Paul himself, though he had been rapt up unto the third
Heaven, and had such discoveries made unto him there, that he wanted words to
utter what they were, as 2 Cor. 12. 2, 3, 4. Yet acknowledges that he
understood like a Child, and had but daak views of this Glory, even as through a
glass, 1 Cor. 13. 11, 12. So also the torment of Hell through that Fire and
Brimstone, which shall burn the wicked, is beyond all thought to imagine, or
words to express; and when we have strained our conceptions unto the highest
pitch, when we have made use of the most dreadful and tremendous things that
ever came to our eyes or ears, or any way to our understanding to help us in
the forming notions to our selves of the horrible punishment, which the damned
shall endure in the unquenchable flames of Hell fire; all does fall beneath and
far short of the thing, all our views hereof by any representations, being like
our sight of colors in the night, which if not in whole, yet in the greatest
part do fly from our sight and disappear.

Yet since we are capable of understanding such future things, only by shaddows
and representations, and nothing can represent future burnings in Hell so well,
as the greatest burnings that have been upon the Earth, therefore we may
receive some help by the Relation of Sodom and Aetna's Storms and Streams of
Fire and Brimstone, to conceive something of those, whereby the wicked in Hell
shall eternally be tormented.

Doct. That an horrible Tempest of Fire and Brimstone, God will Rain upon the
wicked in Hell, as their deserved Portion. In treating of this great subject, I
shall show,

First, That there is such a place as Hell, where the wicked shall be
tormented. Secondly, That it is a place of Fire and Brimstone. Thirdly, What
are the properties of this fire. Fourthly, Who are the persons that shall
eternally burn in these flames. Fifthly, The reason of the eternal torment of
the wicked by these flames. Sixthly, And lastly, And chiefly I shall endeavor
to improve this Doctrine in some Uses.
CHAP. II. That there is such a place as Hell, where the wicked shall be
tormented.
THe blind Heathen were persuaded of this; for however they were ignorant of
Christ, and his first coming to redeem the World, as also of the Resurrection,
and his second coming to Judge the World; yet by the light of nature and
reasonings from thence, they arrived to the understanding of a Deity, who was
both just and good, as also that the soul was immortal, and that both rewards
and punishment were prepared for the souls of men after this life, according as
they were found, either virtuous or vicious; and therefore as they did feign
such a place as Elizean Fields, where the virtuous should spend an eternity in
pleasures: So also a place called Tartarum, or Hell, where the vicious and
impious should be eternally tormented. This Tartarum the Poets did set forth
with many fictions, to affright people from vicious practices* such as of the
four Lakes of Acheron, St^x, Phlegethon, and Cocytus, over which Charon in his
Boat did waft over the departed souls; of the three Judges Aeacus, Minos, and
Rhadamanthus, who were to call the souls to an account. and judge them to their
state; of the three furies Tisophone, Megaera, and (...), who lashed guilty
souls to extort confession from them: of Cerberus the Dog of Hell with three
Heads, which would let none come forth, when once they were in; and of several
sorts of punishment inflicted, Iron chains, horrid stripes, gnawing of
vultures, wheels, rolling great stones, and the like.

Take part of Virgil's Description of this place, which he feigneth Aeneas to
have visited, Lib. 6.

Hac iter Elisium nobis: at l^eva malorum
Exercet p^nas, and ad impia Tartara mittit
Respicit Aeneas subito, and sub rupe sinistr a
Maenia lata vidit, triplici circundata muro:
Quoe rapidus flammis ambit torrentibus amnis
Tartarens Phlegethon, torquetque sonantia saxa:
Tisiphoneque sidens, pal^ a succincta cruent a,
Vestibulum insomnis servat nosttesque, diesque.
Hinc exandiri gemitus, and s^va sonare
Verbera, tum stridor ferri, tractaeq^e catenae.
This way unto Elisium leads, where such do dwell
As have lived virtuously, the other leads to Hell,
Where wickedness is punished. Aeneas's eye
Turns quick unto the left-hand-Rock, and there
^
Great structures closed in with triple Wall about*
This compassed by Tartarian Plegethon throughout
With feirce and fiery streams, with noise like stones on shore
Rolled by Waves of Sea. On th'threehold of the ^or
Which lets into the place Tisiphone does sit
Awake, both day and night to watch and look to it
Girt with Red-pall. Here he did hear the noise of chains,
The sound of cruel lashes, th'groans and cries from pains
Which they endured within --
Although most of these things which we may find in many Poets, and other
Heathen Authors are fictions of their own brain, yet that there is such a place
as Hell is real, and the punishment real, and far beyond whatever any of the
Heathens could imagine it to be: Therefore let us consult the Scripture, which
will give clearer light in this thing, where God, who has made and prepared
Hell for the wicked, has made known the thing, and threatened to punish the
wicked there everlastingly. Look into the Old Testament, Psalm. 9. 17. The
wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all Nations which forget God. I know that
the Original word for Hell, namely (...) does signify the Grave; but here it
must have a further signification than that of the Grave, since it is
appropriated unto the wicked, and such as forget God, otherwise, it might as
truly be said, that the righteous shall be turned into Hell, and those that
remember and fear, and love, and serve God, for they shall be turned into the
Grave. So Isa. 14. 12, 13, 15. How art thou fallen from Heaven (speaking of the
King of Babylon,) O Lucifer Son of the morning, thou have said in thine heart I
will ascend into Heaven, and exalt my Throne above the Stars of God; yet thou
shall be brought to Hell, to the sides of the pit. That Hell here is not to be
understood of the Grave only, but of the place also where the wicked shall be
tormented will appear, if you compare this pla^ with Isa. 30. 33. Where the
Prophet speaking of the same King of Babylon says. Tophet is ordained of Old,
yea for the King it is prepared* (...) made it deep and large, the pile thereof
is (...) much Wood, the breath of the Lord like a (...) of Brimstone does
kindle it. Which descripti^ is applicable unto no place, but that place of
everlasting burnings, which the Lord has prepared for the wicked. Indeed
Tophet was a real place upon the Earth, where some Idolatrous Israelites did
offer up their Children in sacrifice to Malec; but here Hell is called Tophet,
in allusion to that place, because of the shreeks and cries which the damned
shall make there worse than the children did in Tophet, when they were
Sacrificed by their cruel Parents.

In the New Testament it is most clear, that there is such a place as Hell
prepared both for the soul and body of the wicked, to be tormented in. Math. 5.
29, 30. And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee;
it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that
thy whole body should be cast into Hell; and if thy Right hand offend thee, cut
it off and cast it from thee, for it is profitable for thee that one of thy
members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into Hell.
That this Hell is not meant of the Grave, into which the body shall be thrown
is evident, because those who do cut off the right hand, and pluck out the
right eye which offend, (that is mortify those offensive lusts, which are as
dear and as hard to be parted withal as the members of the body) shall be
exempted and delivered from this Hell, whereas none shall be exempted, though
never so holy and mortifyed from the Grave. Yea, and in this Hell it is said
that both soul and body shall be destroyed. Math. 10. 28. Fear not them which
kill the body, but are not able to kill the Soul: but rather fear him which is
able to destroy both soul and body in Hell. Now the soul is not destroyed with
the body in the Grave, as they both shall be (if wicked) after the Resurrection
in Hell. Moreover this Hell threatened by our Savior to those that don't cut
off right hands, etc. will appear plainly to be the place of torment prepared
for the wicked, by the description of it repeated three times, Math. 9. 43, 44,
45, 46, 47, 48. To go into Hell into that fire which never shall be quenched,
where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. By the unquenchable
Fire we are to understand the fire which shall burn the body; by the
never-dying worm, the worm of conscience, which shall eternally gnaw the soul.

This Hell is called a Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. By which also he went and
Preached unto the Spirits in Prison, which sometime were disobedient, when once
the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah. By the spirits in Prison,
we are to understand the Souls in Hell, the Souls of those wicked and
disobedient persons in the old World, who would not give ^ar to the Preaching
of Christ by his spirit in Noah, and therefore a whole World on them were sent
into the Prison of Hell together, unto whom are gathered the souls of all that
since have died in their Sins, where they are bound up in chains of darkness,
and reserved unto the judgment of the great day. Hell is also called a place
of outer darkness, where there is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.
Math. 25. 30. It is called a Furnace of fire, where all those that offend and
do iniquity shall be thrown, Math. 13. 41, 42. It is called the great
Wine Press of Gods Wrath, where all the wicked shall be crushed to pieces under
the exceeding and eternal weight of his wrath, Rev. 14. 19, 20. But especially
it is set forth as a place of fire of which in the next particular.

Many have been the conjectures of Divines, concerning the place where Hell is.
Some have thought it to be in the bowels of the Earth, because it is spoken of
as a place below, and called by the ^ame of a pit, the bottemless pit, out of
which the smoke and locusts did arise. Rev. 9. 2. And in which Satan was bound
and held as in a Prison, Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3, 7. And they have conceited the pit
spoken of. Number. 16. 33, Into which Corah, Dathan, and Abiram went down alive,
when the Earth clave asunder and swallowed them up, was the pit of Hell into
which both their soul and body together were immediately conveyed; and that
which has the rather established such in this opinion has been, the vast
quantity of Subterranean Fire, which they imagine to be in the Bowels and
Caverns of the Earth: others have rather conceited it to be beyond this visible
World* (which will pass away at the last day,) and removed at the greatest
distance from the seeds b^atorum, the place where the righteous shall eternally
Inhabit. But the Scripture being silent as to this, whatever is spoken on this
subject where Hell is, must needs be only by conjecture, the Lord grant that
none of us may know by experience: our chief care should be that we may escape
the punishment, and not be inquisitive about that which the Lord has not
thought fit to reveal, let it suffice us to know that there is such a place as
Hell, where the wicked shall be tormented.

CHAP. III. That Hell is a place of Fire and Brimstone.
THere is nothing that Hell is described by in the whole Book of the Scripture
so much as by Fire, and sometimes by Fire mingled with Brimstone. It is called
Fire, Math. 3. 10. Every Tree which brings not forth good fruit is hewn down
and cast into the Fire. Hellfire, Mark. 9. 47. It is better for thee to enter
into the Kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes, to be cast into
Hellfire. A Furnace of Fire, Math. 13. 42. And shall ^ast them into a Furnace
of Fire. It is called a place where the wicked shall be tormented with Fire and
Brimstone, Rev. 14. 10. And he shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone, in
the presence of the Holy Augels. A Lake which burns Fire and Brimstone, Rev.
21. 8. And shall have their part in the Lake which burns with Fire and
Brimstone, which is the second death.

I know that it is a great question amongst Divines, whether the fire of Hell,
which shall burn the Wicked will be a Real fire, or a Metaphorica fire. There
are men of great name, who assert it to be a Mataphorical Fire only, and that
because it is called a Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, who cannot
be hurt by a real Fire; because the worm which never dies is Mataphorically
taken for the everlasting gnawings of conscience; because the New Jerusalem,
which is above is Metaphorically described to be of pure Gold, clear like
Glass, the foundations to be garnished with all manner of precious Stones, and
the Gates to be Pearls, Rev. 21. 18, 19. And by the same reason, they say the
description of Hell in the Scripture is Metaphorical: those that thus affirm
the Fire of Hell to be Metaphorical, are so far from lessening the torment
hereby, which this Fire will inflict, that they so much the more aggravate it,
because that Metaphorical fire, they say will afflict more than if it were Real
fire; for as the glory of the New Jerusalem, that Building of God made without
hands eternal in the Hea^ens, does far surpass all Metaphores, whereby it is
set forth, which are made use of only to help our understanding in the
conceiving of it is Glory: so also the pain and torture of the damned in Hell,
will be more horrible and intolerable, than if they were to be cast into
Nebecadnezzars fiery Furnace, when it was heated seven times more than it was
wont to be heat; insomuch as the Metaphor does come far beneath the thing,
which it is used to set forth.

Others are of the judgment that Hell fire will be real Fire, it being so
positively, so plainly, and so frequently asserted to be Fire, fire with
flames, fire which shall burn, and because nothing will put to greater pain
than fire, and because it is proper for the body to be tormented with some real
material substance, and when the Holy Ghost tells us it shall be fire, why
should he turn this fire into a Metaphor, which may tend rather to weaken our
conceptions of it is horror than to highten them; and therefore in answer to
that great Objection, that it is said to be prepared for Devils, they are ready
to say, it shall be such fire as will not only torment the Soul, but also
Devils too, God having power to make such a fire; the other Metaphors are made
use of but once, this of fire is the almost constant expression in Scripture,
where Hell is described.

I confess that I do not judge these answers to be fully satisfactory* for
however the souls of wicked men and women may by sympathy with the body be
tormented by real Fire, yet God having made Devils to be wholly Spirits which
are wholly incorporeal, I don't apprehend how any fire or bodyly substance can
have any impression upon them, but that Fire, Air, Earth, or Water, are all the
same things to them, and that they are incapable of suffering by any of them,
that as Water cannot drown them, so neither can fire burn them, that as Air
cannot refresh them, so neither can Fire afflict them. Indeed were the opinion
of some Ancients true that Devils have bodies, but more pure and resined, such
as cannot be seen any more than the Air, a real Fire might be made so pure by
God as to torment the Devils; but I am altogether of the Judgment that Devils
are wholly Spirits, the Scripture asserting it, and many reasons I might give
of it, but that it would be too large a digression; moreover the fire of Hell I
believe will be such as immediately to afflict the souls of the wicked, and not
only by Sympathy with the body, because otherwise the torture of the body would
be greater from it is immediate object, than the anguish of the soul by
Sympathy* when the Souls desert of punishment is greater, being more highly
guilty of Sin than the body which is made use of only as an instrument.

Yet I cannot be of the opinion, that the fire of Hell w^ll wholly be
Metaphorical for the reasons before given, therefore I judge that both the
opinions may be reconciled with themselves and the truth, by asserting that
this fire of Hell will be partly Metaphorical* and partly real.

First* I conceive that the fire of Hell will be in part Metaphorical, and that
this also will be the most grievous and tormenting, though not to the sense,
yet to the soul and to the devils, who can be tormented by no other fire: my
meaning is that the Fire which will be Metaphorical, is to be understood of the
feirce anger and wrath of the Sin-revenging God, who himself is called a
consuming Fire, Heb. 12. 19. And whose anger is often expressed by the Metaphor
of fire in the Scripture, and so that everlasting fire prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, and for the souls of wicked men and women, (which will be
accompained also with a real fire, prepared for their bodies, of which in the
next particular) is the everlasting wrath of God, which he has treasured up
against the day of wrath, when he will open and bring forth those treasures,
and make immediate impressions thereof upon all damned spirits, which shall
burn worse than Fire, and cause greater anguish to the spirit, than any fire
can do ^o the sense; hence it is said, Heb. 10. 31. It is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God, and that because the immediate strokes
of Gods vengeance, which damned Spirits shall fall under, when he takes them
into his own hands to punish them in Hell, will above all things be most
intolerable; The Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. That the wicked shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, ana from
the Glory of his Power. This is to be understood causally; as if he should have
said, that the destruction of the wicked shall arise from Gods Presence and
glorious Power, which will p^t forth it self so mightily, as to glorify it
self in the punishment of them in Hell. God will appear in Heaven to the Angels
and Saints, in a flame of Love, and make immediate and most sweet impressions
thereof upon them, which will be their chief happiness: and God will appear in
Hell to Devils and damned Spirits in a flame of wrath* as a consuming fire, and
make immediate impressions of his wrath upon them, which will be their chief
misery; for Sinners to be taken thus into the hands of God, and punished by the
fire of his wrath will be more dreadful, than if the most furious Creatures in
the World were mustered up together, and let loose upon them to t^ar them in
pieces and devour them; if they were tormented with the most exquisite
torments, which can possibly proceed from any second causes, it would be no
more than the biting of a Flea, or the Prick of a Pin in comparison with these
immediate strokes of Gods vengeance, and the burning under the fire of his
indignation.

Secondly, The Fire of Hell I believe will be in part real, I mean that fire
whereby the body sha^ be afflicted, I judge that as the torture will be real,
so that the fire whereby it will be tortured will be real too; of all senses
the feeling is most capable of being cruciated and afflicted, and of all the
objects of this sense fire is most afflictive and painful, and therefore God
has appointed fire to be for the punishment of the body; indeed other senses
will be afflicted too, the ear with hideous noises, shreeks, and yellings of
fellow damned Sinners; the eye with fearful ghastly and horrible spectacles,
the smell with suffocating odious and nasty stench, worse than of Carrion, or
that which comes out of an open sepulcher; but the feeling will be most
afflicted by the devouring and eternally burning Fire, which the wicked shall
be thrown into.

I shall not dispute whether this real fire of Hell will be such as our
culinary fire, (I mean that in our Chimneys) which sometime creeps into Houses,
and is of so great force us to burn down Cities, and seiseth upon all
combustible matter before it, and which will continue no longer than it is fed
by such gross matter; or whether it will be more purely Elementary fire, such
as Philosophers affirm to be between the upper Region of the Air, and the lower
Orb of the Heavens; or whether it will be such fire as sometimes breaks forth
out of the bosom of the Earth, at the mouth of flaming Mountains, of which some
think there are vast treasure below, beyond whatever did ever appear to the
eye; such as did send forth those ^aming and burning streams from Mount Aetna
of late, which at least will help us to conceive something what the Lake of
Fire and Brimstone will be; or whether it will be a fire created on purpose by
God, Sulph^rions and stinking like unto, but far beyond that which was raised
upon the wicked of Sodom and Gomorrah, which of all burnings that ever have
been in the world, I conceive did most lively represent the burnings of Hell
Fire; I shall not, I cannot determine in this case; but am most inclinable to
think this fire will be immediately created by God, differing from all fires
that ever have been in the feirceness of it, which by the word of Gods Power
will be made, and by the breath of hi^ indignation will be kindled, and kept
alive to eternity without any fuel to feed it, except the bodies of the wicked,
which though they shall be tormented by it, shall never be consumed by it.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the properties of Hellfire.
THere are seven properties of Hellfire.

First, It will be a great Fire. Secondly, It will be a dark fire. Thirdly, It
will be a feirce fire. Fourthly, It will be an irresistible fire. Fifthly, It
will be a continual fire. Sixthly, It will be an unquenchable fire. Seventhly,
It will be an everlasting fire.
First, The fire of Hell which shall burn the wicked will be a great Fire. We
have seen some great fires, which have burned many Houses together, such as
that in 1666. which burned down the greater part of London; but this fire of
Hell will be so great, as to burn all wicked persons together, all the wicked
will be in flames at the same time, the greatness of this fire is set forth,
Isa. 30. 33. Tophet is prepared of Old, he has made it deep and large, the
pile thereof is Fire and much Wood, the breath of the Lord, li^e a stream of
Brimstone does kindle it. Tophet does signify Hell, the place where the damned
shall be tormented, of which before, God has made it deep and large, the
depths of the Earth, or the depths of the Sea are nothing in comparison with
the depths of Hell; for those depths have a bottom, but this is called the
bottomless pi^, Rev. 20. 1. It is deep and large, of vast capacity, it will be
sufficient to contain all the Sinners of the Old World, and all the Sinners of
this world, who have lived or shall live in every generation, until the time of
the Worlds dissolution. The pile thereof is Fire and much Wood; as much Wood
being kindled does make a great Fire, so this Fire though it have no real Wood,
but that which will be equivalent, will be very great, especially being kindled
by the breath of the Almighty, as the breath of the Lord kindled those showers
of Fire and Brimstone, which came down from Heaven upon S^dom and Gomorrah, so
the breath of the Lord will kindle those streams of Fire and Brimstone which
shall be in Hell.

Secondly, Hell Fire will be a dark Fire, there will not be the least
glimmering of light in that doleful place, which will add to the horror
thereof, Hell is called by the name of utter darkness, Math. 25. 30. It is
called blackness of darkness for ever, Jude 13. There will be no light of Gods
countenance, not the least smothing of his brow, his wrath will be poured ^orth
without mixture into the cup of his indignation which they must drink of* Rev.
14. 10. There will not be the least light of comfort, nothing but weeping and
wailing and gnashing of teeth; there will not be the light of the Sun, or the
Moon, or the Candle, and the fire it self will give no light, all will be dark
and black, black Devils, black Bodies, black Souls, and they may without light
have perceivance one of another, as Devils have now unto whom light is of no
use; or if there be a duskish light there, to represent one another ruful
countenances, and other fright-ful spectacles, be sure there will be no
refreshing light, th^re the damned will be in a place and state of darkness for
ever.

Thirdly, Hellfire will be a feirce Fire. The Fire of Sodom, of Aetna, yea, of
London in the day of it is burning was feirce, but no Fire burnt so feirce as
Hell Fire will do. The Fire of Gods anger and wrath will burn feircely, now it
does but smoke against Sinners, then it will break forth into a flame; tongue
cannot express how feircely the wrath of God will burn, when hereafter it shall
seize upon the Ungodly, Psalm. 90. 11. W^o knows the power of thine anger?
even according to thy fear so is thy wrath. The power of the anger, which any
creature may have may be known, it is finite, it is limited, it reaches no
further than the body* but who knows the power of Gods anger? it being
infinite, and unlimited, and such as will reach the soul, and most grieviously
torment the Soul through it is immediate impressions. According to thy fear so
is thy wrath, that is according to the fear which we may have of thee: the
wrath of man is not proportiable, unto the fear which we may have of it, we
often fear that men can do more than they are realy able; but the wrath of God
is commensurate and proportionable unto the greatest fears thereof, yea does
far exceed; he can afflict more than our fears are able to conceive, and that
because of the infinite power of his wrath, God will hereafter make the power
of his wrath known, as Romans 9. 22. and how feircely then will it burn? the fire
also which will torment the bodies of the wicked will be very feirce, it will
be so feirce, as to torment every part from the crown of the head unto the
foot, and every part in extremity, in the utmost extremity, and that beyond the
present capacity.

Fourthly, Hellfire will be an irresistible fire, all the power of Hell with
their combined forces, shall not be able to make the least resistance against
the fire of Gods anger, Nah. 1. 6. Who can stand before his indignation? and
who can abide in the feirceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire,
and the Rocks are thrown down by him. Isa. 27. 4. Who would set the Briers and
Thorns against me in Battle? I would through them, I would burn them together.
Briers, Thorns, dried Stuble, Chaff cannot resist a consuming fire, so neither
shall the wicked be able to resist the fire of Gods jealousy; and the real
Fire prepared in Hell for the body, will burn with that feirceness that it will
master and prevail over all, none shall be able to keep off it is force, it will
pierce through and through every part of the body: we read of the three Children
which were preserved in the midst of the fiery Furnace, so that not so much as
the smell of the Fire was upon their Garments; but none shall be preserved from
burning in this fiery Furnace, indeed the wicked shall not be burnt up and
quite consumed, but they shall be always burning; For

Fifthly, Hellfire will be a continual Fire; other firessometimes are in, and
sometimes out, but this fire will be always in, always burning without any
intermission, and always burning in the same high degree of intension, there
will be no aswagement of the Flames of Gods anger, no abatement of the Fire of
Hell, this Fire will be always alike hot, and always hot in the highest degree.

Sixthly, Hellfire will be an unquenchable Fire. Math 3. 12. But will burn up
the Chaff with unquenchable Fire. Mark. 9. 44. Where their worm dies not and
the Fire is not quenched. Now the fire of Gods anger before it break forth into
so vehement a flame may be quenched by the Blood of Jesus Christ; and the Fire
of Hell may be prevented, but hereafter it will be too late, no Sacrifice will
be accepted then to appease Gods wrath, and if all the Waters of the Sea could
be poured upon the flames of Hellfire, they would not put them out; And
therefore.

Seventhly, Hellfire will be an everlasting Fire. Math. 25. 42. Depart from me
ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Rev.
14. 11. And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever. This
Fire will be ever burning, and the damned will be ever tormented therein:
Extremity and Eternity are the two most bitter ingredients of the damned's
torments, who can set forth the Eternity of the wicked's punishment in
Hellfire? this Eternity is immeasurable, it is incomprehensible; all the Rays
of the Sun may more easily be comprehended in a small room, and all the Waters
of the Sea contained in a small nutshel, than boundless Eternity be conceived
by our finite and shallow understanding; none have shaddowed Eternity, and set
it forth better than those who have shown how infinitely short all measures and
numbers do fall, when they are applied to the space of it is duration. One
expresses himself thus on this subject in another language: suppose ten
thousand years past, after that an hundred thousand Millions of years past,
after that ten hundred thousand Million of Millions of years past, and yet you
are not come to the end of Eternity, no nor to the middle of Eternity; yea, you
are but at the beginning of it; add unto this the number of all the thoughts of
Angels and Men, of all the motions in every Creature, of all the grains of sand
which would fill ten thousand Worlds; gather all the minutes of time, from the
beginning of the Creation of the World, all the numbers of Arithmetic that can
possibly be conceived, and all this is but the beginning of Eternity. How long
will Eternity last? Always. When will Eternity end? Never. As long as Heaven
shall continue to be Heaven, and God shall continue to be God, and the Saints
shall be happy in the enjoyment of God, so long shall the wicked be tormented
in the Fire of Hell. We may apprehend the everlastingness of this Fire of Hell,
but we cannot comprehend it.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Persons that shall burn eternally in the Flames of
Hell.
IT is upon the wicked that the Lord will rain this horrible Tempest of Fire
and Brimstone in Hell* all the workers of iniquity, all that live and dye in
their Sins must suffer the vengeance of Eternal fire. These are the Chaff which
shall be cast into the unquenchable Fire. Math. 3. 12. These are the tares
which shall be bound up in bundles to be burnt. Math. 13. 30. These are the
Goats, which shall be condemned to everlasting fire. Math. 25. 41. Look into a
few places where in the plain Letter of the Scriptures, the persons are
described, that shall be the subject of everlasting torment in Hellfire. Math.
13. 41, 42. The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather
out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; and
shall cast them into a Furnace of Fire, there shall be wailing and guashing of
teeth. Romans 2. 6, 8, 9. Who will render to every man according to his deeds, to
them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness,
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of Man, that
does evil of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9. The
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming,
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel; who shall
be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord and the
glory of his Power. Take one place more amongst many, Rev. 21. 8. But the
fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and Murderers, and Where-mongers
and S^rceers, and Idolaters, and all Liars shall have their part in the Lake,
which burns with Fire and Baimstone. I shall spoke more of the persons, when
I come to the application, which I would chiefly insist u^n, the Doctrine being
so well known, and therefore I shall but briefly touch upon the reason, why the
wicked shall be eternally tormented in the flame of Hell, and so come to the
Use, which I mainly intend.

R. The torment of the wicked in Hell is a punishment, and therefore has a
respect unto Sin, the guilt of which does lay the wicked under an obligation
hereunto, and lays God under an Obligation to inflict this punishment upon
them. Sin is the violation of a Holy and Righteous Law; and an offense of an
Infinite Majesty, whose Justice requires infinite satisfaction, which it can
receive no other way from Sinners themselves, than by their undergoing the
punishment of Hell, although this punishment be not infinite in regard of the
quality, yet it is infinite in regard of it is duration, and therefore the
torments of the wicked shall have no end.

CHAP. VI. Application. 1. Use of Examination.
WHen you had the relation of Sodom and Gomorrah's burning, you might think
this was done long ago, and look upon your selves as unconcerned; when you had
the Relation of Aetna's burnings, you might think this was done a far off, and
look upon your selves as unconcerned; but when we come to discourse of
Hell-burnings, here you all are concerned; those burnings are past, these are
burnings to come, those were burnings for a while, these will be burnings for
ever; the greatest part of the children of men will be cast into these
burnings, and very few comparatively will escape: O what a vast number of all
kindreds, and Nations, and Languages will there be tormented for ever in Hell!
what a vast number of Christians, yea, of professors of the Gospel! you had
need to look to it, that none of you be found in the number.

The dreadfulness of these everlasting burnings, me thinks should stir you up
with all sollicitousness and utmost diligence, to enquire whether you are in
danger, and how you might do to escape.

The most Men and Women that live this day upon the face of the Earth are in
danger of being thrown into the flames of Hell; the whole World may be divided
into two parts, they are either such as are in a state of nature, or such as
are in a state of grace, the former are many thousand times the greater number,
and the Apostle tells us expressly that such are Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.
3. And if children, then heirs; the children of God are heirs of Heaven; the
children of wrath, who also are called the children of the Devil, are heirs of
Hell. The later only (I mean such as are in a state of grace) are in a state of
Salvation, they only are free from all obligation to the punishment of Hell,
having Interest in Christ's satisfaction. There are two ways; in one of which
all the Sons and Daughters of men may be found, Math, 7. 13. 14. One is a
narrow way, which has a strait Gate, and very few are to be found therein, and
that is the way of Holiness of self-denial, of Mortification and
Gospel-obedience, and although this be the way of Life and Salvation, the way
to glory and honor and everlasting happiness, yet it has but few passengers,
few take this course: the other is a broad way, which has the greatest crowd
and throng although it lead unto destruction, and this is the way of Sin, the
way of Profaness, Licentiousness, Unrightiousness, disobedience; this is the
course of the World; this way has a wide Gate, and many there be that go in
thereat, and the reason our Savior gives, because the other way has so
strait a Gate, because of the difficulty of it is passage; namely, the wicket of
regeneration, few attempt to go through this strait passage, or if they do
attempt they are quickly discouraged with the difficulty, and so let it alone,
taking the broader, because the easier way of Sin, the steps of which will
certainly take hold of Death and Hell.

I beseech you all with the greatest seriousness to examine your selves,
whether you be in a state of Nature, or in a state of Grace? you have been all
born once, have you been born again? you have been born of the Flesh, have you
been born of the Spirit? you have born the Image of the Earthly Adam, do you
bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam? you are partakers of the Humane Nature,
are you partakers of the Divine Nature? have you new and clean hearts? are they
changed? do you lead new and Holy lives? are they reformed? I beseech you
examine which of the two ways you are walking in; is it the broad way of Sin
and wickedness? or is it the narrow way of Faith and Holiness? these are
questions of great moment to be resolved in, your everlasting weal or woe, your
Salvation or Damnation does depend upon them; if you be brought into a state of
Grace, and are got in through the strait Gate, into the narrow way, you are made
Men and Women, happy you that ever you were born, you not shall perish with the
wicked, but most assuredly attain eternal Life and glory: but if you be in a
state of Nature, if you be in the broad way, and continue therein to the end of
your lives, you are undone Men and Women, woe be to you that ever you were born,
Heaven will be shut upon you, and Hell will be opened unto you, where you shall
be unconceivably and eternally tormented in the flames of that unquenchable
fire.

Take heed that you do not mistake your state and way; thousands have gone to
Hell through a mistake; it is very easy to mistake, it is difficult not to
mistake, and no mistake is worse than* this mistake; all is not Gold that
glisters, all is not grace, that has the show of it, all are not in the way to
Heaven that pretend to it, many deceive others much and deceive themselves much
more. Nothing is likely to hinder you more effectually from attaining grace
than ungrounded conceits that you already have it, if you should nourish in
your selves a false Faith, and false Hope, they would be so far from saving
you, that they would fasten you the more strongly in Satan's Chains, whereby he
will the more unperceivably and inevitably drag you unto Hell. And think if you
should go out of the World, under a mistake with fair, but groundless hopes of
Heaven, and shall find your selves unalterably judged by God unto Hell, how
this will render the lose of Heaven the more bitter, and the pains of Hell the
more grievous; the disappointment of happiness, especially so great happiness,
and to be overtaken with misery, especially so great misery, and that when all
means are cut off for ever, of attaining the one or avoiding the other, this
will be unspeakable vexations. And let me tell you, that it is better to be
mistake on the other hand than on this, it is better to fear when you are
gracious, than to hope when you are ungracious, a dangerless fear is better
than a fearless danger, the former may cause you to go droopingly for a while
toward Heaven, the later if it cause you to go merrily, it will also cause you
to go securely and surely to Hell.

I need not spend time (neither may I least this Volume swell to big) in
telling you that Idolaters, and Adulterers, and Drunkards, and Swearers, and
Blasphemers, and Scoffers of Religion, and Persecuters of Gods People, and
Thieves, and Murderers, and Liars, and Apostates, and profane persons, and all
the more notorious Workers of Iniquity shall have their part in the Lake, which
burns with Fire and Brimstone; amongst whom if any of you who ^ast your eyes
upon these lines be numbered* and your conscience with a slight reflection do
accuse you herein, give me leave to hold you a little by the arm and ask you
why so fast? what mean^ this have? why so furious? what means this eager
pursuance of lust? Do you know whom you serve? and do you think what your wages
will be? do you know what is before you? do you see the end of a sinful course?
do you know what Hell is? Is it desirable to dwell with devouring Fire? do you
think to escape in this way? But the awakening Use is afterward

But let me beseech you that are more sober, and although professors of
Religion to examine your state, take heed you do not deceive your selves, and
thereby undo your selves irrecoveably. Have you been under convictions of Sin?
and these followed with contrition! and that backed with found humialiation,
such as has rendered Sin above all things most odious, and your selves of all
other persons most vile in your own eyes? have you had conviction of Christ's
Righteousness! and this working hungering desires after him, and these
accompained with Faith, and that bringing you to Christ, choosing him as ^ost
precious and needful for you, casting your selves upon him, with a renouncing
of your own righteousness, accepting of him and his righteousness; resigning up
your selve^ unto him, putting your neck under his Yoke? have you received the
spirit enabling you to pray, mortifying Sin, and quickening you unto all the
duties of new obedience. Hereby you may know the change of your estate. If your
hearts remain unhumbled, unbroken for (...); If you are strangers unto the work
of Faith, and never truly closed with Jesus Christ; if you ^re without the
Spirit of Christ, and under the power, the reigning power of any Sin; if you
live in the neglect of prayer secret and with others, and of the great
Salvation, which the Lord Jesus has purchased, if you have a form of
Godliness, but are without the power thereof, you will be found foolish Virgins
at last, which will have no admittance into the Bride-chamber, you will be
found hypocrites, whose portion is the burning Lake, and it will be impossible
for you to escape the damnation of Hell. Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we
neglect so great Salvation?

CHAP. VII. 2. Use of admiration at the security the wicked, showing the cause
thereof.
ARe the burnings of Hell so certain, being threatened by God! are they so
dreadful, beyond any burnings that ever have been, both in regard of feirceness
and duration? and are they indeed prepared for the wicked, and all graceless,
Christless persons as their deserved portion? and are the most of the children
of Men wicked, ungracious, unrighteous, unregenerate, unbelievers, who are
already condemned to this place of torment. Ioh. 3. 18. And by consequence
every moment, while such, in danger of being dragged sorth to execution? Here
then we may sit down, and wonder at the senslesseness and carnal security of
such persons, especially of those who sit under the light of the word, which
does make discovery of all thi^ most plainly unto them; what ever their danger
be, what ever their Sins which have deserved Hell, what ever Gods threatenings
of everlasting burnings, what ever execution there is, and has been upon other
Sinners like themselves, yet they are without any fear, they are fast asleep in
Sin and very secure: though their conscience be full of guilt, their hearts
full of lust, their lives full of Sin; though their steps are carrying them
forward in the broad way, which leads unto destruction; though death has
them upon the chase, and is at their heels, though the wrath of God pursues
them hard, and is at their backs, though the day, wherein they must give an
account, and be punished for their iniquity, hasteneth greatly, and the Judge
stands at the door; yet they care not, they fear not, none of these things do
move them, none of these things do trouble them; they eat and drink, and sleep,
and buy and sell, and plant and build, and go on in a sinful course, as if they
should live here eternally, or as if their Soul should perish with their body,
and all these things foretold in the Word, concerning future retributions were
but mere fables.

First, Some are thus secure, through an Athistical persuasion that there is no
God; because they are enemies unto God, and live in a course of Rebellion
against him, and so it is their Interest and desire that there should be no
God, therefore they do what in them lies to work themselves unto this
persuasion: there are too many in our age who endeavor to wear off all
sentiments of a deity from their mind's that they might Sin freely without any
check and control, that hereby they might arm themselves against the thrusts
and wounds, which the Sword and Arrows of Gods threatenings would otherwise give
unto them, and that by this means they might still the noise of their clamorous
and accusing consciences, which otherwise would give them no rest under such
Heaven-daring provocations, as they daily are guilty of. But such persons, if
they will not believe the engravings of God, which are upon the face of the
Universe, the impress of infinite power, and an invisible Deity on his works,
which are visible unto the eye; they shall not remain long under their
Atheistical apprehensions, but he will make them to know and feel that there is
a God by the immediate impressions of his wrath upon their Souls, and the
dreadful flames of Hellfire, which his breath will kindle to burn their bodies
everlastingly.

Secondly, Others are secure, notwithstanding their danger through a fond
persuasion that there is no Hell, that there is no account to be given no
judgment to be passed, no punishment to be endured after this life, but that
death puts a total end to their being, and that for ever. We read in the Book
of Wisdom Chap. 2d. of the reasonings which such have: Our life is short, and
in the death of a man there is no remedy, neither was there any man known to
return from the Grave: For we are born at all adventure, and we shall be
hereafter, as though we had never been; for the breath in our Nostrils is as
smoke, and a little spark in the moving of our heart; which being extinguished
our body shall be turned into ashes, and our spirit shall vanish as the soft
Air: our life shall pass away as the trace of a Cloud, or like a Mist driven by
the Beams of the Sun; our time is a very shadow that passes away, and after
our end there is no returning, for it is fast Sealed that no Man comes again.
Hence they are secure and encourage themselves in wicked and licentious
practices, Come on therefore let us enjoy the good things that are present, let
us fill our selves with costly Wines and Ointments, and let no flower of the
spring pass by us; let us crown our selves with Rosebuds before they be
Withered, let none of us go without his part of our voluptuousness, for this is
our portion and our lot is this. Such persons they live like Beasts, and they
would persuade themselves that they shall dye like beasts, that there is no
immortality of the Soul, that there will be no resurrection of the body, and by
consequence no punishment of both in Hell; whereas right reason will evince,
that the Soul being a spiritual substance will survive the Body, which the
wiser Heathens have acknowledged; and the Scripture does clearly reveal this,
and that the body shall be raised again at the last day, and both the soul and
body of the wicked be eternally tormented in Hell; which Scripture being the
Word of God, which no carnal reason could ever yet disprove, these things are
as certain as God as true.

Thirdly, Others if they have not drunk in those Atheistical and
Anti-Scriptural persuasions, which some are besotted and intoxicated withal,
yet are secure and senseless of their danger, through their ignorance or
misapprehensions of God; they conceive him to be made up all of mercy, that
there is no fury in him, that however sinful they are or have been, yet that
God is more merciful, and nothing more easy than to obtain a Pardon, and if
they call on his name and cry for mercy, though at the last gasp (what ever
their wicked lives have been) they shall be saved; not considering that God is
Holy and jealous, just and righteous, as well as merciful and gracious; and
that such as go on still in their trespasses have no share in his mercy or any
of his promises.

Fourthly, Others do lull themselves asleep upon the Bed of security, because
of their own and others impunity, thus abusing Gods patience and longsuffering,
which should lead them to repentance, to grow more hardened and impenitent
hereby, Romans 2. 4, 5. Because Sentence against their evil works is not speedily
executed, therefore their hearts are fully set in them to do evil and they are
secure, Eccles. 8. 11. Not considering that though God be long-suffering, yet
that he is not ever-suffering; that patience long and much abused will at
length break forth into fury; not considering that Gods vengeance, though it
has leaden heels, yet it has Iron hands, and though the Fire of Gods anger be
long kindling, yet that it will be longer, yea for ever burning.

Fifthly, Others quiet themselves for the present, and arm themselves against
fears of Hell, through their intention of after repentance and reformation;
however they indulge themselves for a while in their sinful course, yet they
resolve shortly to become new Men and Women, to turn over a new leaf, and lead
a new life, and to become as Holy and strict as the best; not considering that
repentance is not in their own power, and how they provoke God hereby to deny
the grace to them hereafter, and to remove from the means of working it; not
remembering how many thousands have perished with such intentions, which never
have been put into execution.

Sixthly, Others are quiet and secure through want of serious consideration,
what their guilt and danger is; they fill and throng up their time so full with
worldly business and secular employments* that they leave themselves no room or
leisure for to think of Sin and their near-approaching death, and future wrath,
and the eternal burnings of Hell, which they are in danger of. The cares of
this world and the deceitfulness of riches do choke their Meditations in the
first springing forth of them that no fruit does come from them to perfection.
Did but guilty Sinners sit down one quarter of an hour every day, and look
upward to the angry God who frowns upon them, and down-ward to the flames of
Hell, which are preparing for them* and forward to the last judgment, when
they will be sentenced by the Judge to dwell with devouring Fire, and Inhabit
everlasting burnings; and were persuaded that if they continue in Sin, they can
by no means escape; surely the could not be so secure.

Seventhly, Others are secure though they are going on in the way of Sin which
leads to Death and Hell; because the most of the children of Men are going on
in the same course, and they hope they shall fare as well as others; their
Forefathers trod in these steps, and their neighbors are their companions in
Sin, and if they be punished at last in Hell, they think they shall have
company enough, and bear it as well as others; not considering how intolerable
the wrath of God is by any, and that their company in Hell will be so far from
alleviating, that it will exceedingly heighten and aggravate their pain and
torment.

Eighthly, Others and the most are secure through their frequent practice of
Sin, custom in Sin has taken away the sense of Sin; their lusts have
enthralled them, and their lusts have stupifyed them, however conscience did
grumble at first, especially when they first ventured upon some more notorious
Sins, yet now they have shut the mouth of conscience, they have charmed and
feared it as with a hot Iron, 1 Timothy 4. 2.

Ninthly, Others are quiet and secure under their danger of Hell, because they
are not so bad as others, because they do not run with others unto the same
excess of riot, and have escaped the more gross pollutions, which are in the
World through Iusts; especially if they carry some face of Religion too, if
they have a form of Godliness, and employ themselves in all the ourward
exercise of Devotion, and withal have had some inward flashy affections, and a
counterfeit of all saving grace, though they never were truly humbled for Sin,
emptied of themselves, cut off the old stock, and truly by Faith engrafted
into Christ, and from him draw virtue and spiritual influence, (which is proper
to all those that are in Christ, and are freed from condemnation through him.
Romans 8. 1.) Thus the Devil and the deceitful hearts of men do bewitch and
befool the most, some of these ways, to sit still in peace and security, until
destruction come upon them suddenly, and that without remedy; and they are not
awakened out of their spiritual slumber until they are awakened in the midst of
the flames of Hell.

CHAP. VIII. 3. Use of Reproof and Terror for the awakening of the Wicked and
Ungodly, out of their carnal security*
HOw long will ye sleep O ye Sinners? How long will ye slumber in such imminent
danger, ye Graceless and Christless persons? what sleep under the light? what
sleep upon the brinks of the burning Lake? and will nothing rouse you, and
awaken you out of this sleep? are you resolved it shall prove the sleep of
death? shall it insensibly and effectually usher you to Hell before you are
aware? have you been called already so long, so loud, so frequently, so
fervently, and yet do you deafen your ear? have you been told so often of your
guilt and danger, and yet harden your ^art? yet will you hold fast your sins,
resolving not to let them go what ever they cost you? have your hearts been
like so many brazen walls, beating back all the Arrows of reproof, and
threatenings which have been shot at you? or are they like Cley and Mud, which
grows the more hard and obdurate under the Sun and Light of the Gospel which
has shined upon you? have no Heavenly dews and showers of the Word yet melted
and softened you, no Fire and Hammer new-moulded and framed you? have you been
threatened with Death, and Wrath, and Misery for ever, and yet not startled, yet
stupid and senseless?

O that yet at length you might be awakened, and by the Spirit of the Lord
effectually persuaded ^o lift up your eyes, and look a little before you,
Younder, Younder! look Sinner younder! is a horrible burning Tempest driving
toward thee, a dreadful burning Lake preparing for thee, but can not thou
see it; look through the perspective of Sodom's burnings, when fire came down
from Heaven, and Aetna's burnings when Fire came forth of the Earth, and this
will discover something; but the perspective of the word will show it plain; if
thou loo^est upwards with this perspective, thou may see some glim^s of the
Glory of Heaven, and if tho^ loo^est dow^ward with it thou may see some
glimps of the Fire of Hell. Look do thou not see a horrible deep and large
pit filled with horribly burning Fire, and that Fire filled with damned Men and
Women? Lay thy ear to the mouth of this pit, and har^ what the dolorous
complaints, what the shreeks and yellings be of that cursed company! and do
thou not perceive thy self hastening forward in the way to this place of
burning? and will thou go forward still? or will thou suffer thy self to be
carried on furiously by thy impetuous lusts, until thou art fallen into this
pit, and there be no po^sibility of ever getting forth again?

But more particularly I shall lay before you some considerations for the
awakening of the secure.

First, Think how doleful a day of trouble and adversity is like to be to you,
if you be then in danger of Hell, where will the quiet and security which now
you have appear on that day? possibly it may last and abide with you so long as
the warm Sun of prosperity does shine upon you, in the spring of youth and
sensual delights, whilst you thrive and flourish in the World, whilst your
friends and flatterers are about you, your health and outward peace does remain
with you; but you may live to see all your outward comforts lie dead before
you, and hid in the Grave from your sight for ever: your Sun of prosperity may
set at the noonday of your lives, and a black night of adversiry may come upon
you; stormy Winds and a bitter cold Winter of trouble and affliction may
assault you, and wither all your sensual pleasures like the herb and Flower of
the Field: some unlooked-for-providence may blast your estate, and your name,
bereave you of your dearest Friends and Relations, and withdraw all the fuel
and provisions which you have been storing, and laying up for your flesh and
sensual satisfactions: how well and strong so ever you are for the present, an
unexpected Sickness and Death-threatning distemper may suddenly invade you, and
bring you down to the sides of the pit, and fill you with such pain and grief
as no outward enjoyments shall be able in the least to aswage:

And then think with your selves, you that are in danger of Hell, what dread is
like then to seize upon you like an armed man, which you will not be able to
resist; then your carnal security will fly away like a Bird or a Cloud, and
vanish like smoke in the Air; then your false peace will be broken and torn to
pieces, like the Spider Webs by the feirce Winds, as being utterly unable to
resist the feirce blasts, and rougher assaults of an adverse estate. And oh how
doleful and dismal is a day of trouble like to be to you, when all outward
stays and comfort, and all nward quiet and peace shall fail together; when
there are storms abroad, and worser storms at home; great trouble without, and
greater trouble within; when you shall fall under the scourge of outward
affliction, and under the lashes of an accusing conscience; the fear of Hell
and everlasting burnings is like to be more lively, and afflictive in a day of
trouble, than when prosperity does restrain conscience from doing it is Office.

Secondly, Consider if you should escape the greater storms of outward
affliction in your life, yet you cannot escape the stroke of death, and think
how the apprehensions of future wrath and burnings are like to consume you with
terrors at your later end, Psalm. 73. 19. Death has a grim aspect, and looks
with a feirce countenance upon guilty Souls; and when this enemy shall assault
and wound you, when your last sickness shall come and prove* mortal to you;
when the Physician shall give you over and leave you, your friends shall mourn
and stand weeping about you, when death has seized upon the extreme parts of
your body, and the cold clammy sweats are upon you, and then you apprehend the
second death near yo^, which will immediately follow upon the first death, when
you think that whilst Friends are conveying your body to your Grave, that
Devils shall drag your Souls to Hell; how are you then like to awake in
horror, despair and utter confusion? the dying sobs and G^oans of some guilty
Sinners, when awakened at their entrance in at the port of death are dreadful,
but the inward anguish of the heart is beyond all compass of conceit, or
expression of tongue.

Thirdly, But think how fearful the separation of your Souls and Bodies will
be, think with what dread your spirits will appear before God, when your
consciences shall furiously charge you with guilt of all the Sins which ever
you committed, and you have not one pardon to show, nor one word to answer for
your selves; when being examined and accused and found guilty, you shall be
condemned unto eternal punishment, think oh think what your horror is like
then to be.

Fourthly, Think of the day of doom, when the Lord Jesus shall come. I mean
when he shall come down from Heaven to judge the World; when the Graves shall
be opened and you called forth to appear before him, and the Book of your
conscience shall be opened, and all your Sins made manifest to the whole World,
and having nothing to answer when you shall be Sentenced to everlasting Fire:
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire prepared for the D^vil and his
Angels, and when the Lord shall then drive you out of his presence into Hell, O
what will you shreeks and outcries be at that day? See my Book of Christ's
certain and sudden appearance to Indgement.

Fifthly, Think of the punishment of Hell it self, which you will be condemned
unto; and that,

First, What will there be taken from you. Secondly, What there will be denied
unto you. Thirdly, What there will be inflicted upon you.
First, Think what in Hell will be taken from you, all your riches will be
taken away, riches will then take the wing and be gone, and you shall never set
your eye upon them any more; you shall never buy and sell, and get gain any
more, never purchase Houses and Lands, and Inheritance more, and not then have
so much Land left, as whereon to set the sole of your foot, all your money and
estate wlil perish with your selves, and oh how poor and miserable will you
perceive your selves then to b^ when you are deprived of all your riches and
treasures on Earth, and instead thereof are made to possess treasures of wrath?
your honor also will be taken away, and everlasting shame and contempt shall
be poured upon you. Although you may be raised to a higher seat than the
ordinary rank now, then you must stand upon even ground with the meanest, even
such whom you would think scorn to set with the Dogs of your Flock, or to
employ in the meanest office about you: the crown will then be plucked from the
Head, and the Robe be torn from the back, and all the honor of wicked great
ones belaid in the dust; and they will find no more respect in Hell than other
men; wicked Princes and Noblemen, wicked Knights and Gentlemen will have none
to bow to them there, and do them homage, and the most Highborn Ladies that
are not Newborn (what ever they have here) will find no Courtship hereafter,
but will be handled as roughly ns meanest of their attendants. All your sensual
delights and pleasures will then be at an end, they are now but for a season,
Heb. 11. 25. Yea, but for a moment, Job. 20. 5. Sometimes they fail before the
life is at an end, be sure hereafter they shall have an eternal Period: In Hell
there will be no Feasting and delicious fare to pamper the Flesh, no carowsing
and drinking Wine in Bowls, no chanting to the sound of the Viol, no singing,
dancing and making merry; the glutton shall there have no sweet morsels, the
drunkard no sweet draughts, no ^or so much as a drop of Water to cool and
refresh him: the wanton shall no more melt in la^ivious embraces, nothing will
remain of all your sweetnesses and pleasures here, but the bitter remembrances
accompained with unutterable grief and and gr^ans, and the intolerable sting
and bitings of the never dying-worm of conscience, what ever you have prized
and pleased your selves withal here, you will then be stripped of all, and oh how
bitter will this be to lose all that which you now so much esteem and love, and
place your chief happiness in?

Secondly, Think what in Hell will be denied unto you; you shall be denied
admission into the Kingdom of Heaven; when you see Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, and many from the East, and West, and North, and South, come and sit
down in the Kingdom of God; when you shall see all the Saints of all ages shine
like the Sun, and be caught up in the Clouds to meet the Lord, and be crowned
by him and received to inherit the Kingdom prepared for them, ye shall be shut
out* no room will be found for you there; you could find no room for Christ in
your hearts here, and he will find no room for you in his Kingdom hereafter,
The loss of Heaven of that unspeakable happiness, which the Angels and Saints
shall have in the immediate Vision and Fr^ition of God; when you come to
understand what it is, will appear as many observe to be greater than the
punishment of sense; especially this l^sse will be most grievous unto you, who
have had discoveries and proffers of it, but neglected and refused it,
preferring some base lusts before it* O how will you then be ready to tear your
selves to pi^ces for madness and vexation!

Thirdly, Think what punishment in Hell will be inflicted upon you.

First, The soreness and intollerableness of it. Secondly, The sureness and
unavoidableness of it. Thirdly, The neerness of it. Fourthly, The
everlastingness of it.
First, Consider the soreness and intollerableness of Hell's torments, and that
both of the pain, which there you shall feel in your bodies, and of the anguish
which shall be put upon your souls; If you be found amongst the Wicked and
Ungodly at the last, your bodies shall be tormented in every part in the flames
of Hellfire; no pain is more grievous now to the body, than the pain of Fire;
but what is the extinguishable Fire on Earth, in comparison with the
unquenchable Fire of Hell? what is the Fire of Man's kindling in comparison with
the Fire of Gods kindling? what is Fire fed by Wood in comparison with Fire fed
by the breath of God? no Fire here can torment like to the fire which God has
prepared for the bodies of the wicked hereafter. You have seen fiery Ovens, and
you have heard of Nebecadnezzars fiery furnace, should your bodies now be
thrown into such fires, you would find them horribly painful, but the pains of
Hellfire will be ten thousand times more horrible and tormenting: your bodies
now cannot endure much pain, without expiring which puts an end thereunto; but
hereafter God will strengthen your bodies to endure, they shall have greater
strength and quicker sense, and so more capacity for pain, and they shall be
filled to the uttermost of their capacity; your bodies shall never dye, and
they sha^ be filled with pain in extremity, and that to eternity; this will be
very sore. All the tortures that ever were invented by the most mischievous
mind, or executed by the most cruel Tyrant on any whom they have had the
greatest spleen unto, are not so much as the least gentle touch in comparison
with the torture, which the least member of the damned shall endure in Hell.

Some of you have had extreme pain in your heads, others have had extreme pain
in your bowels, others have been extremely afflicted with pain in your legs;
others have felt much torture with the pain of your teeth; but if you live and
dye in Sin, you shall be extremely and eternally tortured with pain in every
part, your eyes shall be full of pain, your tongues full of pain, your hands
full of pain, your heads full of pain, your backs full of pain, your bellies
full of pain, your feet full of pain, from the crown of your head unto the sole
of your feet, no part shall be free; your bodies shall roll and tumble in
flames, and there burn with horrible pain, and yet never be consumed.

But the anguish of your Soul will far exceed the tortures of your bodies, and
here words fail, conceptions fall short; who can tell how the worm of
conscience will bite! how dreadful the lashes of your consciences will be, when
they are let loose (as Gods executioners) with full rage upon you? who can
utterthe anguish you shall endure under the immediate impressions of God's
wrath upon your souls; this will exceed what ever can be inflicted by the means
of any second causes: The punishment of Hell fire will be very sore and
intolerable, such as are tender cannot without unutterable fear and grief bear
the thoughts of being burned alive here on Earth, and oh the shre^kings of such
persons, when they have been brought to the fire, and the flames have begun to
seize upon them! O I cannot endure it! O I cannot endure it! how intolerable
then will Hellfire be! many Martyrs have endured great tortures in their
bodies with much patience, some were slain with the Sword; some burnt with
fire, some scourged with whips, some stabbed with Iron forks, some their skins
plucked off whilst alive, some their tongues cut out, some stoned to death, some
starved with hunger and cold, some dismembered and naked to the shame of the
World; and yet in the midst of all their pains they have had a composed mind;
yea, sometimes have been filled with joy; God has not suffered man to inflict
upon them more than he has given them strength to bea^; but there will be no
patience to undergo the pains of Hell; the spirit will uttterly sink under the
the heavy burden and pressure thereof, especially the pressure of that pure and
weighty wrath, which shall be immediately upon the soul. The terrors of
conscience here and foretasts of wrath, are intolerable in this World, Prev.
18. 14. The spirit of man will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded spirit who
can bear? If the body be infirm and weak, full of distemper and pain, yet
whilst the spirit is whole and sound, whilst there is peace within, the spirit
may sustain this, and bear up under it: but if the spirit be wounded by the
Arrows of the Almighty shot into it, who can bear it? if God let fall some
scalding drops of his wrath upon the spirit, if he kindle a spark of Hellfire
in ye conscience, who can endure it? no Balm nor Physician on Earth can cure
such wounds, no Earthly riches or sensual delights can aswage these inward
griefs and horrors, which by the hand of God are imprinted upon the Spirit:
when the wicked are filled with dispairful agonies, through apprehension of
future approaching wrath, and there remains nothing but a fearful looking
for of Judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries,
Heb. 10. 26. this is enough to sink the heart of the stoutest under it is
burden. And if the wounds of the Spirit herebe so intolerable, what will those
be which the Lord with such mighty force and by his immediate hand shall give
hereafter? if you cannot bear some drops of God's wrath now, what will you do
when the full Viols of Gods wrath shall be poured out upon you, if you be found
under the guilt of sin? if you cannot endure the sparks of Hellfire, how will
you endure the flames, and most burning heat thereof? If the foretasts of Hell
affect ye heart with such horror, and the fears thereof fill the Spirit with
such amazement, what will Hell it selfs do when the pains and anguish thereof
is beyond the greatest fears, and highest conceptions thereof?

Should you fall into the hands of the most cruel Men to torture and Massacre
you, this would be fearful; should you fall under the power of Devils to tear
and rend you, this would be more fearful; but to fall into the hands of God,
this will be most fearful, this you cannot bear, and yet if wicked you must
bear it, and that to eternity, and can you sleep still in Sin, under the
thoughts of such danger?

Secondly, Consider the sureness and unavoidabieness of Hellfire; nothing is
more sure than what God has revealed in his Word, and nothing more unavoidable
than what God has threatened; and such is the tormenting of the wicked and
Ungodly in the flames of Hellfire. Whilst you are here upon the Earth, there
is a possibility of escaping future torments; Pardon, P^ace, and Salvation are
attainable: If you lay your Sins to heart, if you confess and forsake them, you
may find mercy; if by faith you apply your selves unto the Lord Jesus you shall
not perish* but obtain eternal life. But if go on still in your trespass, if
you live and dye in a state of impenitency and unbelief, it will be impossible
for you to escape: Indeed could you make you party good against God, could you
gather forces together, and wage War against Heaven and obtain the Victory* you
might avoid the threatened punishment; but alas God is infinite in power, and
will not permit any such attempts, you will not be able to hold up head or hand
against him: who can stand in his sight when once he is angry? God will bind
all the Devils and wicked men and women together in chains of darkness,
stronger than any Iron chains, and none shall be able to make any resistance.
Could you hide your selves at the last day from his eye; could you fly from his
presence into some remote corner, could you creep under some Rock or Mountain,
and there be covered from his view you might think to escape; but this cannot
be, Gods eye will follow you, and his hand will reach you whither soever you
go: Could you by your Prayers and Tears move God to compassion, and prevail for
mercy as now you may do, there might be some hopes of avoiding this punishment,
but (...) Gods ear will be shut, and the doors of mercy shut against you for
ever; your knocking at the door will be in vain, it will never be opened, your
cries and prayers will be no purpose* they will receive no answer. Hereafter
the punishment of Hell will be unavoidable by the wicked.

Thirdly, Consider the neerness of this punishment of Hell. The sands of your
life are running apace; the time of your abode here is wasting very fast, your
bodies will quickly be in the Grave, and if you dye in your Sins, your soul
will be as quickly in Hell. You cannot long escape this punishment; You may
shuffle the thoughts of God and future wrath out of your mind for a time, you
may busy your thoughts about other thing; whilst you* are here; but all these
things will shortly shrink away from you, and leave you naked, and you must
stand before God to be judged by him, and to be condemned by him, and to be
punished by him; God will meet you as a Bear bereaved of her whelps, and rend
the caul of your heart, or like a roaring Lion, and rear you in pieces; when
there shall be none to deliver; God will take you into his hand, and throw you
out of his presence into the bottomless gulf of unquenchable burnings: me
thinks this should awaken you.

Fourthly, And lastly, consider the everlastingness of Hellfire, and your
torment which there you must endure, if you be found in the number of
unbelievers. The wrath of God will never be at an end, the Worm of your
conscience will never dye, and the Fire of Hell will never go out; but the
smoke of your torment will ascend up for ever and ever, when you have been the
space of as many Years in Hell, as there Stars in the Firmament, as there are
drops of dew upon the Earth in the morning, as there are spires of Grass which
spring out of the Earth, as there are drops of Water in the Ocean, as are there
Sands upon the Sea shore, your torments will be as far from being aswaged, and
as far from being ended, as at the first minute of your entrance into this
dreadful place. As there is an infinite space of place (if I may so call it to
help our apprehensions) beyond the circumference of the Heavens, and the
visible World in comparison with which ten thousand Millions of worlds would
not fill up the space of the least speck: so there is an infinite space of
duration beyond the circumference and bounds of time in comparison with which
the duration of ten thousand Millions of worlds for ten thousand Millions of
years, would not be so much as a Minute, or the least imaginable instant; and
this whole eternity you if wicked must spend in extremity of torment; the real
length of eternal torment cannot be measured, and the imaginary length will be
greater (if I may so say) because of your misery. If a short time of misery
here on Earth seem long, what will an eternity of misery seem to be in Hell?
when the body is in health, and the Soul is sweetened with delight, time steals
away insensibly, Years seem Months, Months Weeks, Weeks Days, Days hours; but
when the body is sick and the Soul imbittered with sorrow, a short time seems
long, and it passes away slowly in our apprehension, Hours seem Days, Days
Weeks, Weeks Months, Months Years; how do we count the Clock, and reckon the
Sands that fall in the glass, and time seem to have a Leaden heel; how long
then will the eternity of misery in extremity seem to be? I believe that the
space of one quarter of an hour in Hell will seem longer to the damned than a
whole life of misery in this World; yea I think I may add that a Minutes pains
in Hell will seem longer to the wicked than a thousand years of pleasures in
Heaven to the Righteous, who will sweetly pass forward in the infinite
duration of joy, without the least trouble or tediousness: so that the ternity
of misery in Hell will be as it were a double, treble, yea thousand-fold
eternity.

Me thinks these consideration should startle all you that are asleep in Sin,
me thinks they should make your hearts to quake, and every joint to tremble; me
thinks the Sinners in Zion should be afraid and fearfulness should surprise
the Hypocrites, and I should hear some of you cry out, as Isa. 33. 14. Who
among us shall dwell with devouring Fire? who among us shall Inhabit
everlasting burnings? And as the Jailer, Act. 16. 29, 30. When awakened by the
Earthquake, and the impression of guilt made by God upon his conscience; Sirs,
what shall we do to be saved?

CHAP. IX. 4. Use of Comfort to the Righteous.
SUch of you as are Righteous through the perfect Righteousness of Chri^ made
yours by Faith, without the imputation o^ which (what ever righteosness you may
have within you, because imperfect) it is impossible you should escape the
damnation of Hell; you that are clothed with the white Robes of Christ's
Righteousness, under which all your iniquities are covered; and withal have
the Spirit of Christ given unto you, to work you into a conformity unto the
Image of Christ in your regeneration and Sanctification, which are inseparably
joined unto justification by Faith; you may take comfort in this Doctrine,
which is matter of such terror unto the wicked and Ungodly. As in Sampsons
Riddle out of the strong and feirce Lion, came forth Honey and sweetness: So
this Doctrine which looks with such a feirce aspect upon those which are out of
Christ, yet will yield sweetness unto you which are in him, because there is no
condemnation unto them which are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. Because Jesus has
delivered you from the wrath to come. 1 These. 1. 10. Who shall lay any thing to
your charge, when God has justified you? who shall condemn you when God has
acquitted you? Need you value then the wrath of men, when you are delivered
from the wrath of God? Need you fear men's threatenings of temporal punishment,
which can reach no farther then the body, when you are delivered from
condemnation to the eternal punishment of Soul and Body in the Lake, which
burns with Fire and Brimstone? what though you should lose your estates? yet
since you are not in danger of losing your Souls; what though you should be
thrown into a Prison on Earth? yet since you are not in danger of being thrown
into the Prison of Hell, you may take comfort and the consideration hereof may
alleviate all your fears and grief upon the account of any pains and
afflictions, which in this life are upon you, or you are in danger of. You may
say of them all, these are not the torments of Hell, there are light, the other
heavy these short, the other eternal. Lift up then your heads with joy: yet a
little while and you shall see what a difference the Lord will put between you
and the wicked; when they shall weep, ye shall laugh; when they shall mourn, ye
shall be glad; when they shall cry and howl, ye shall sing and leap for joy;
when they shall go with fighing to Hell, and everlasting horror in their
hearts, and all mirth and joy shall flee away from them for ever; ye shall come
with singing to Heaven, and everlasting joy in your hearts, and all sorrow and
mourning shall flee away and never any more be found.

CHAP. X. 5. Use of Exhortation both to the Wicked and Righteous.
ANd now Sinners what will you do? will you dare to go on in that broad way of
Sin, which ere long will open under you, and let you down into the horrible
gulp of unquenchable burnings? can you be contented with a portion in this
Life, and to receive all your good things here, and that Fire and Brimstone,
and everlasting burnings shall be the portion of your Cup hereafter? will any
pleasure of the Flesh and Sin for a season countervail that everlasting pain
and misery, which will be the bitter fruit and consequent of them? Let me
therefore exhort you without any delay to come out of the broad way of Sin, It
is the way of Hell, and will you proceed any further in it? You that are
profane and unclean, you that are Swearers, Sabbath-breaker, Scoffers of
Religion, Persecutors of Gods people, Drunkards, Covetous persons, yea all you
that are Hypocrites, that are impenltent and unbelieving persons, give me leave
to stop you in your course, or rather hearken unto the voice of God in his
Word, who calls you to turn from your evil ways, that iniquity may not be
your ruin. Come out of the broad way, and get into the narrow way. It has a
strait Gate, namely the Gate of Regeneration, this you most pass through; you
must become new Creatures, get new hearts, and lead new lives, you must walk in
the narrow way of mortification, self denial, new obedience, otherwise you will
certainly be numbered amongst the damned, who will be everlastingly burned in
the Fire of Hell; the passage is difficult, and the way narrow, but both are
necessary; it is the passage from Death to Life, and the way from Hell to
Heaven: Nothing in the World is so absolutely necessary, as that which is
necessary unto Salvation; better the belly be without food, than the heart be
without grace; better the back be without raiment, than the Soul be without
Righteousness; better be starved, than damned; better be hanged than burned;
better dye the most painful temporal death, than endure the pains of eternal
death. What you should do that you may be saved from the everlasting burnings
of Hell. I refer you for direction in my Book of Words, whereby you may be
saved; because I have not room for large direction here. [But ^ch of you which
read these Lines, who have passed through the strait Gate of Regeneration, and
are got into the narrow way; you are safe, you are in the way to Heaven. Learn
to admire free grace, which has made the difference between you and Vilest
Sinners; use your endeavor to bring others into the same way, commend to them
the ways of God, both by your Word and example; and perseveer in these ways to
your lives end; be faithful unto the death, that you may receive the Crown of
Life, I shall shut up all with the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 58.
Therefore my beloved Brethr^ be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding the
work of the Lord; for as much as ye know your labor is not in vain in the
Lord. When the wicked are steadfast and unmovable in the ways of Sin, and no
argument can persuade them to forsake those ways, when they abound always in
the work of the Devil, and the wages which they shall reap will be death, and
wrath, and everlasting burnings in Hell: be you steadfast and unmovable in the
ways of the Lord* be not allured by flatteries, not affrighted out of them by
threatenings, but abound more and more in the work of the Lord, and your reward
shall be everlasting life and Glory in Heaven.

FINIS.

