Unholsome Henbane between two Fragrant ROSES. OR, Reasons and Grounds proving
the unlawful and sinful inserting of the corrupt and most erroneous Apocrypha
between the two most pure and sacred Testaments.
Together with a most humble Vote, and serious desire to our most Reverend and
Religious Assembly of DIVINES, to be a means to the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament for the utter expunging of it out of the Holy-Bible.
AMong the many rank and high-grown stinking weeds of wickedness and impiety,
fit to be eradicated and plucked up by the roots, and thrown out of the Garden
of Gods Church, in these so hopeful Halcyon-dayes of a most holy and happy
Reformation; I have a long time taken notice of one, which I humbly conceive
to be none of the least, namely, the heertofore peremptorily commanded, and
hitherto uncontrouled inserting, and mavelous ill misplacing the unholy and
unholesome Apocryphall-writings in our Bibles, and that between the two most
holy and Canonicall-Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; just, me thinks*
like a deal of clinging Clyver, or noisome Cockle, and Darnel, perking-up in
the midst of a fair and full-grown field of Wheat or Corn. Upon just and
serious apprehension of the undoubted evil whereof, I have humbly made bold to
be (though a mean and most unworthy, yet) a faithful Remembrancer both to our
most grave and godly, learned and religious Assembly of Divines, in special,
for the holy and happy reformation of this great evil among us; And also to
all the rest of Gods people and truly faithfull-ones in general, not to permit
or tolerate such an uncomely and corrupt piece of patcherie, yea of downright
errors, and therefore palpable impiety, in the very midst of, no nor in any
part of their Bibles, the pure and unspotted, the most holy and wholesome Word
of God. The not only Indecencie but apparent Impiety, and therefore undeniable
sinfulness and unlawfulnes whereof, I have here endeavored (and, I hope, not
unfruitfully) to make most easily and evidently appear to every pious and
prudent Christian, who is bound to Abstain from all appearance of evil, much
more, from every apparent evil. 2 Thessalonians. 5, 22. And this, I say, will most
perspicuously and plainly be manifested to us, if we wisely consider these few,
but most serious and weighty considerations following. First, then, as
touching the Indecencie and unfitnes thereof, consider, with me, I pray; That
between the prophecy of the Prophet Malachi, which is the end of the Old
Testament, and the Gospel of St. Matthew which is the beginning of the New
Testament, have too-long and too-inconsiderately, if not irreligiously been
inserted certain Private-writings, called Apocrypha; which I may, me thinks,
fitly call an Unwholesome Henbane planted between two most od^riferous and
fragrant Roses. It being, indeed, a mere humane stinking-breath, between the
two sweet and most sacred lips of the most holy Old and New-Testaments, even in
the midst and very heart, as it were of the blessed-Bible, Gods Book, the
onely-Book of all Books: Now, then, for the better dilucidating and clearing of
this great and gross Indecencie, I shall desire the Christian and candid
Reader to consider, That Malachi, the last Prophet (which signifies Messenger,
or Angel) did prophecy plainly, c: 3, 1. and c: 4, 5. that the Lord would send
to the Jews a Messenger, even Elijah, to prepare the way before the Messiah, or
Messenger of the new Covenant, viz: Christ. And these speeches of Malachi, or
last Angel of the old-Covevant are the very face of the New Testament or
Covenant made for many. Then, immediately, comes (or, indeed, should come) the
first Evangelist, St. Matthew, and he reports ( Matthew: 1. 20.) the Angel from
heaven bringing news of Jesus; and immediately after, the Messenger of the
New Covenant is born, cap: 2, 1. And then, cap. 3. John Baptist, the Repairer
of Christ's way, is introduced to the manifesting of that work. And this John is
by the Evangelists, yea by our blessed Lord and Savior Christ Jesus himself,
called and declared to be that Elias, which Christ said should come before him
( Matthew: 11, 14, and 17, 3, 11, 12.) And he, indeed went before Christ, in the
spirit and power of Elias: Luke 1, 17. And thus, I say, all the 4 Evangelists
begin their work of the New Covenant, making the last Sweet-Breath of the
Old Testament, and the first and most sweet and savourie Breath of the
New Testament all one sweet Canonicall-Breath inspired upon us from heaven.
They look not, like bi-fronted Janus to 2 contrary coasts or ways, but, hand
in hand, as it were they do (or at least, as I said before, should) join
immediately and sweetly (without any stop or disturbance) meet and kiss each
other. And who, now, should dare and be so bold as to hinder their holy lips
from so due and decent a meeting? who, I say, should dare and presume to
disjoyn and put asunder, at such a foul distance, Those things which God has
so justly conj^yned together, by inserting such uncanonicall writings, yea such
a private and pernicious unholesome and unsavourie a stinking-Breath, as I
shall immediately show it to be? Besides, the Jews (who most carefully kept the
Canon Law of God, or rather God for them) never received these writings for
Canonical as the Learned well know; neither were they written in Hebers
sacred-tongue; A sufficient brand upon them to render them but a spurious
offspring of merely erring men, and not a legitimate Birth sprung from Jehovah,
nor any of his Divine Oracles given to Hebers people. Now, all this, I humbly
conceive does abundantly show the most unfit and undecent misplacing of these
Apocryphal writings, in the midst, or very heart, as I said, of Gods
Canonical, unerring and immaculate Scriptures. And, now, in the next place, I
shall, I hope, by Gods assistance, make it no less clear and evident, that it
is not only thus undecent and uncomely, but, indeed, most impious, and
unlawful so to misplace them in the midst of Gods Book, or, indeed, in any
part thereof; which may most easily appear by these subsequent enormous and
dangerous evils in them, viz. Errors, Untruths, Blasphemy, Magic, and
Contradictions of Canonical Scriptures.

1, Err^urs.

For proof of this, namely, that the Apocryphall-writings have Errors in them;
See, 2 Maccabees, 12, 43, 44, and 45. The words are these. And having made a
gathering through the company, he sent to Jerusalem about 2000 Drachmes of
silver to offer a sacrifice, doing very well and honestly that he thought of
their resurrection. For, if he had not hoped that they which were slain, should
rise again, it had been superfluous to pray for the dead. And he perceived that
there was great favor laid up for those that died godly, and therefore it was a
holy and good thought. So he made a reconciliation for the dead that they might
be delivered from sin. See here a plain and most notable Popish tenet of
praying for the dead, and offering sacrifice for the sins of the deceased,
maintained and justified by Judas Maccabeus, as a very godly and honest act in
him. Again, see another gross error asserted and justified by the Author of
the Maccabees, 2 Mac: 14, 41, 42, 43, 44, etc. In which place is set forth and
expressed the high commendation and praise of Razis a Jew, for murdering
himself in a most desperate, wilful and butcherly manner. Also,
Ecclesiasticus, 46, 20. And, the book of Wisdom, 19, 11. The words I omit to
quote and express at length, for brevities sake.

2. Untruths.

For proof heerof, look into, 2 Esdras, 14, 21, 22, 23. The words begin thus.
For thy Law is burnt, wherefore no man knows the things that are done of thee,
or the works that shall be done in the world. But if I have found grace before
thee, send the holy Ghost into me, and I shall write all that has been done in
the world since the beginning; etc. Now that that is a palpable falsity and
untruth the most complete History of the worlds Creation and preservation all
along, in the 5 Books of Moses, etc. and the books of the Prophets, Evangelists
and Revelations, most admirably preserved and kept from burning and
destruction, notwithstanding the frequent devastations and conflagrations of
Jerusalem and the Captivities of the Jews, and persecutions since of the
Christians, as in all former ages, does most abundantly evidence and declare to
the everlasting glory of God, and comfort of his children. So, likewise, you
may see such other untruths, in, 2 Mac. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Tobit: 5, 11, 12, 13.
Judith, 8, 33. And Judith, 10, 9, compared with 10, 12. And, 11, 6, 12, 13, 14,
15. Also, 1 Mac: 9, 3, 18, compared with 2 Mac: 1, 10, As also, 2, Mac: 1, 13.

3, Blasphemy.

For the clearing of this, look into Tobit, 12, 12, and 15. The words are
these. Now therefore when thou did pray, and Sara thy daughter in law, I did
bring to memory your prayers before the holy One; and when thou did bury thy
dead, I was with thee likewise. I am Raphael, one of the 7 holy Angels which
present the prayers of the Saints, and which go forth before his holy Majesty.
These 2 verses being compared with Romans 8, 34. Who is he that condemns? It is
Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. And, with the 1, Tim: 2, 5.
For, there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ
Jesus. And also with, Revel: 8, 3, 4. And another Angel came and stood at the
altar, having a golden censor, and there was given to him much incense, that he
should offer it, with the prayers of all Saints, upon the golden altar which
was before the throne. And the smoke of the odours which came up with the
prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God out of the Angels hand. Compare
these 3 places, I say, with that of Apocryphall-Tobit, and then see and say
whether it be not abominable Blasphemy to make or mention any other Mediator
twixt God and his Saints, than Christ Jesus alone; as there it is of one
Raphael.

4. Magic, or Enchantment.

That this is so also, be pleased to see Tobit, 6, 6, 7, 8, 9. The words are
these. Then the young man said to the Angel, Brother Azarias, to what use is
the heart, the liver, and the gall of the fish? And he said unto him; touching
the heart and the liver; If a devil or an evil spirit trouble any, we must make
a smoke thereof, before the man or the woman, and the party shall be no more
vexed. As for the gall, it is good to anoint a man that has whitenes in his
eyes, and he shall be healed, etc. Also, Tobit, 11, 10, 11, 12, 13. Tobit also
went forth toward the door and stumbled. But his son ran unto him and took hold
of his father, and he struck of the gall on his fathers eyes, saying, be of
good hope, my father. And when his eyes began to smart, he rubbed them, and the
whitenes peeled away from the corners of his eyes. Now, if these were not plain
Spells and unwarrantable ways of Magic and Enchantment, thus to drive away
devils and evil spirits, and to cure diseases, by the help of such a spirit, as
Azarias and Raphael, let all truly godly say and determine.

5. Contradictions to Canonical Scriptures.

For proof heerof, be pleased to take notice of that in Judith 9, 2, 3, 4* The
words are these. O Lord God of my father Simeon, to whom thou gave a sword (
Genes: 34, 2, 25.) to take vengeance of the strangers who had loosned the
girdle of a Maid to defile her, and discovered the thigh to her shame, and
polluted her virginity to her reproach (for thou said, it shall not be so,
and yet they did so) wherefore thou gave their rulers to be slain, etc. Now,
compare this with Genesis 49, 5, 6, 7. The words are these. Simeon and Levi are
brethren, instruments of cruelty are in their habitations; O my soul, come not
thou into their secret; etc. Cursed be their anger, for it was feirce, and
their wrath, for it was cruel, etc. And then see and judge, whether that of
Apocryphall-Judith, were not a most false and foul contradiction to this
Canonical Scripture in Genesis; Judith accusing the Lord God as consenting to,
and allowing of that cruel murder, committed by Simeon and Levi, on the
Shichemites, for the rape of Shichem on their sister, Dinah. Also,
Ecclesiasticus, 46, 20. The words are these. And, after his death, he
prophesied and showed the King his end (1, Sam: 28, 18, 19) and lift up his
voice from the earth, in prophecy, etc. Now, compare this with Isa: 57, 2. He
shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, every one that walks
before him. And, with, Ecclesiastes, 12, 7. Then shall the body return to the
earth* as it was, and the spirit shall return to God that gave it. And, now,
see if there be not a most egregious contradiction of Gods Canonical Truth, in
that of Apocryphall-Ecclesiasticus, falsely bringing in the holy Prophet Samuel
to rise alive out of his grave, and to prophecy to Saul, after his death. So,
also, in Hester Apocrypha, 12, 5. compared with Hester Canonical, 1, 3. And
Hester Apocryphal, 15, 9, 10. compared with Hester Canonical, 5, 2. And there
you will also easily perceive apparent oppositions and clear contradictions to
Gods sacred-Truths not to be admitted or endured, especially in one and the
same book and volume. Besides, take this one more note by the way (as a
black-brand and mark of unworthines of thus misplacing the Apocrypha with (or
in the heart and midst of) the holy Bible, the most sacred
Canonicall-Scriptures) even the low and base style of the Penman of the
Apocrypha 1, who, at the conclusion of all, writes thus, 2, Maccab: 15, 39. If
I have done well, and as the Story required, it is the thing I desired; But if
I have spoken slenderly, it is that which I could do. Whereas the Inditer of
the holy Canonicall-Scriptures, begins, goes on, and concludes from Genesis to
the end of the Revelations, with majesty, gravity, and convincing authority,
Thus says the Lord; The Word of the Lord is pure and undefiled; And, Cursed is
he which adds or diminishes from this word, and such like most high and
authoritative expressions, I say, all along, from first to the last.

Now, then, all these most serious and weighty premises advisedly and piously
considered, How dares my man (especially by his or their authority, who ever
they be) join such patcheries, nay rather, such putrified and pernicious
impieties, with Gods most pure and holy Canon, the sacred Scriptures? Certainly
it is most impious, and impudent pertinacie and saucynes for any man, I say, to
presume and dare to join and set up such bumane and rotten-posts by the Lords
most strong, pious, and precious Posts, and their Thresholds by his Thresholds;
which the Lord himself complains of, and calls and counts defiling abominations.
Ezekiel: 43, 7, 8. And for which very thing, he cut off and consumed in his anger,
his people of Israel, both them and their kings; as there in that Scripture is
most evidently clear. And yet, even this durst our late most impious and
imperious tyrannizing Taskmasters, the Prelates do in their formerly
uncontrolled most proud and even Papally-domineering days; yea, and so
audaciously durst they do it, and proudly command it to be done, as not to
suffer any Bibles to be bound up without it, under pain of sharp reproof and
severe censures and Fines too for it. Yea and to this very day do too many even
very good Christians, and especially almost all our irreligious Malignants and
sottish Ignoramuses both in City and Country (I know not out of what
insensible and corrupt custom) hug and hold-fast in their Bibles, these so
impure and polluted Apocryphal-writings (just as they idolized formerly their
prelaticall Common Prayer Book) almost with equal faith and affection to the
most pure and unspotted, most holy and wholesome Canonicall-Scriptures, which
only are abundantly sufficient and profitable to life and salvation, as being
for this very use and end indicted, pend and preserved by the Lords own special
command, power and providence in all ages, maugre all the malicious
machinations of Satan in any or all his instruments to have destroyed them,
Atheists, Infidels, and Assyrian or Babylonish heathens. But, here, it may
peradventure be objected (especially by or blockish Malignants and silly
Ignerants) O, but, Sir, are there not very many excellent and Divine sayings
and Sentences in the books of Apocrypha, as in the book of Wisdom, and
Ecclesiasticus fit for men and women to read, and therefore were it not pity
(say they) such good things should be so ill spoken of, and so harshly and
wholly rejected, and quite put out of the Bible? Whereunto I easily answer,
first, But are there not far more excellent, purely-holy and Divine Sayings and
Sentences in most parts of the sacred Scriptures, especially in those precious
pearley-Bracelets and golden-chains of sacred Sentences in the books of
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the sacred and sugared Book of Psalms, and, as I said,
generally all over the whole Bible, which may, nay ought to be more holily and
holesomely read and ruminated on, than any or all those in the so polluted
Apocrypha. Secondly, I answer, If the mere moral goodness of those
Apocryphal-writings (and that is the most and lest you can make of them) be the
main and only ground of retaining them in your Bibles (as so it seems it is)
then, I say, for the very same reason, and on the very same ground, you may as
justly, yea and as profitably place in the midst of your Bibles, the excellent
Sayings and Sentences, collected in a book called The Lives and Answers of the
Philosophers, wherein is contained as many, and as excellent, wise, and morally
Divine Sayings and Sentences of those Philosophers, as any that are in the
books of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus; But, I say, neither these nor those, nor
any other men's sayings, who ever they were, being but meer-mens, ought (as I
humbly conceive) by any means to be conjoined and set cheek by jowl (as the
proverb is) especially, not to be tolerated in the very heart and midst of the
sacred Scriptures, what ever specious pretenses or fair glosses may be urged
for it. For, that which, ofttimes, seems good and very goodly to the eyes and
heart of man, is a most palpable and execrable abomination to the Lord.

The Vote upon the Premises.
O, therefore, that among the many most excellent and eminent work of
Reformation, in the Church of God now lately thought upon, and in much measure
fairly (already) effected (to the perpetual praise and glory of our good God,
the just honor of his pious Instruments Both Houses of Parl^ament, and the
most learned, Reverend and religious Assembly of D^vines, and to the ineffable
soul ^^^^ring joy and comfort of all true Engl^sh-hearted Saints and Servants
of the Lord, who have (together with mine unworthy-self, the meanest of them
all) long time longed for, and from the root of their hearts desired to see
those holy happy Halcyon-dayes of King Jesus, sitting solely upon his throne
of powerful and pure Ordinances) O, therefore, I say, that it might please the
Lord to put into the hearts of our most grave and godly Assembly (to whom, I
humbly conceive it most properly, now, appertains) seriously to see unto (if,
already, they have not) a most exact and accurate Reforma^^^^ both of the
particular great and gross vitiosities and also the g^nerall foul abuses
offered to the whole Kingdom in and about this sacred Book of God, the Bible,
both as touching the constant defect of exact correction of the Orthographie of
it from the Printers-Presses, whereby the sense is in very many places, feully
corrupted and falsely mistaken; as also the constant and general printing of
our Bibles in very course and extreme thin and bad sinking-paper, and a dull
and blunt letter, yet setting a high and inhaunced price upon them; a most foul
shame to them, and an intolerable abuse to the whole-Kingdom, that such a most
preciously useful, and daily vendible Book should be so ill used: Also the
adding unto ( heertofore by constra^nt, and on pain of H^gh-Commission
penalties and forfeitures of their Bibles, through the horrible pride, tyranny
and Popish-superstion of the Bishops, and by the base aims and ends of some
London-Stationers and others, who for filthy lucre, got Patents for) the adding
unto (I say) and binding with our Bibles diverse humane patches and pieces of
men's inventions; to be, as it were of necessity (by reason of their Patents)
bound with every B^ble, making them, thereby, to swell out to a bigger bulk, and
so the more unconveniently portable, principally to raise the prices of Bibles,
and to vent every man's inventions, if, I say, they could but procure the
Bishops Papal authority thereunto, as namely, the superstitious and idolized
Book of Common Prayers, the Genealogies, the Concordance, the Doctrine of the
Bible, the History of the Bible, and such like. Some whereof, though I
acknowledge to be useful in themselves for honest, ignorant, and plain people:
yet not fit (as under correction I conceive) to be set cheek by jowl, with the
pure and immaculate Word of God. But, most especially, I say, my humble suit
and hearty desiro is and shall be, that our most Reverend and Religious
Assembly of Divines would be piously pleased to be a means to our present
Parliaments that by their supreme Authority the most vile and vicious
Apocryphal-writings (so erroneous and enormous, as has been forementioned)
may be utterly expunged and expelled out of all Bibles whatsoever, hereafter to
be printed and bound up for public and private use; and this, under such pain
or penalty as their grave and godly wisdom shall see fit. That so, Gods holy
word alone may be had and used in its own genuine orbs and native purity
without any humane coagulated mixtures or improper additions, in any part of
them: That thus, both those arch enemies of the Lord Jesus Christ, I mean
Jesuits and Papists may loose a mighty advantage, which they, at least,
seemed and pretended to have among us, and against us, and Gods Truth,
especially, by those vitious-writings, so equalized (as it were by many of us)
with Sacred Scriptures; and by which they most boldly (though most falsely) used
to boulster up (upon mine own knowledge, I speak it) and to wrangle-out many of
their blasphemous and damnable opinions, against the most pure, immaculate and
invincible Truths of Gods word: And, also, that by this means, all Malignants
and ignorant poor and blind formal Protestants (whom the specious and
glitterring tales and fables, and, for ought we yet know to the contrary,
untrue Stories, of Susanna, Judith, Bell and the Dragon, and such like, do so
please and affect, as has been fore-specified) may be made better, yea, only,
acquainted with the pure, and undefiled, and most authentic Word of God, the
sacred Scriptures, which are able, of themselves alone, to conform and confirm
souls to Christ, and to make simple-ones wise to salvation. Psalm: 19, 7, 8. And
this, I say has been the longing and thirsty desire, and (till it be
thoroughly effected) is and shall be the most servent and zealous prayer of one
of the meanest and most unworthie Servants of his most dear and precious Lord
and Master Christ Jesus,

John Vicars.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Ja: Cranford.

London: Printed for John Rothwell at the Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1645.


