THE DEATH OF MINISTERS Improved.

Or, an Exhortation to the Inhabitants of Horsley in Gloucestershire, and
others, on the much Lamented Death of that Reverend and Faithful Minister of
the Gospel, Mr. Henry Stubbs.

BY Tho. Vincent, John Turner, Rob. Perrott, M. Pemberton.

To which is added A SERMON upon that Occasion, by RICHARD BAXTER.

Printed in the Year 1678.

To the Inhabitants of Horsley in Glocestershire, and other places of the
Country, who did ordinarily attend upon the Ministry of Mr. Henry Stubbs, late
Deceased.
Beloved Friends,
ALthough you, whose Habitation is so remote, are unknown by face unto us, as
we whose work and Ministry is in London, are unto you; yet because of the great
Love which Mr. Henry Stubbs your most worthy and laborious Pastor, and our most
dear Friend and Reverend Brother) ^id bear toward you, whilst he had the
oversight of you; we are willing to give some Testimony of our great respects
to the party deceased, whose memory will always be pre^ious to us, by showing
our respects to you in sending you some lines to further your im^rovement of
this sad Providence which has taken away your Minister; looking upon our
^elves as under a particular Obligation to pay ^ur mite, by endeavoring to
promote the spiritual benefit of Mr. Stubbs's hearers in the Country, after he
has taken such indefatigable pains for the advantage and Soul-welfare of our
Hearers in the City.

We want words to express this so great and public loss, of this so great and
excellent Minister; who as he was generally known by the best of people in the
City, and adjacent parts; and as his Ministry was highly prised, although but
sometimes tasted when he came occasionally to London: so his death both by
Ministers and People here has been greatly Lamented.

But what Tongue can utter your loss, who were more especially under his
Pastoral charge and inspection, his care and instruction! We suppose it was
grievous to you to part with him for a while when he came last to the City
although it were with hopes of receiving him again: But when you heard from
London that your ^astor was fallen sick, taken sick in Preaching, so sick that
he could not Preach (and then he was sick indeed), when you heard of his
Fever, the violence of it and his danger; O what thoughts of heart had you?
What fears di^ there then arise in your hearts? Wha^ wr^stlings at the Throne
of grace? Lord spare him! Lord restore him to us again! Lord try us again a
^^^tle longer with this mercy! What care was there among you, and solicitude
about his health and recovery! Not without some hopes, that the Lord might be
entreated, and ^end a gracious ear to the many prayers both ^n City and Country
put up in his behalf, so as to raise him and rescue him from the Jaws of death,
in order to his further serviceableness in the land of the living.

But when the doleful tidings came to you that Mr. Stubbs was departed, that
your Pastor was dead, that he had finished his course, and resigned up his
spirit; what were your looks, your thoughts, your speeches then? What ^ighs,
what sorrows, what tears, what bitter mournings and lamentations were there
generally then to be found amongst his acquaintance and hearers in the Country?
And is he gone ^ndeed? Shall we no more see his face? No more hear his voice?
Will he pray amongst us, and pray for us, no more? Will he appear in the Pulpit
and Preach to us no more? Did we think that the last Sermon which he Preached
before his last ^ourney, would be the last Sermon which we should have and hear
from him? He lately Preached to us of praying without ceasing, and did we think
he would so soon cease to pray himself? He called upon us with great
importunity that we would pray fervently, and he lived in the practice of his
own Sermons; we have heard of his constant secret Devotions, his daily prayers
with his Wife, and in his Family; and he did bear us upon his heart in his
private addresses unto God; But O how did this good man waste and spend his
spirits in his fervent prayers with us and upon our account, when he prayed
amongst us on ordinary and extraordinary occasions? We have often known him to
continue five or six hours together in Preaching, chiefly in prayer on
fastingdays (being in the Country destitute of the help of any other Minister)
and that without impertinencies, tautologies, tedious repetitions, or any
crude, raw, rude, and nauseating expressions, but with a great and delightful
variety of holy pleas and arguments; and if our base hearts have been tired
sometimes with the length of his administrations, yet he himself has seemed to
be little tired, at least his spirit has been unwearied with all his pains and
labor. We remember how affectionately be used to make acknowledgment of sin,
of our sins, which he was more grieved for than our selves; we remember his
sighs and groans which from an oppressed heart brake forth at his mouth,
signifying an inward sense beyond the utterance of words: we remember how the
tears did often steal from his eyes, and run dow^ his old cheeks, how he has
often wept for us when our eyes have been dry, our hearts stupi^ and hard like
a stone within us. We remember his humble Petitions, his fervent supplications
a^ the throne of grace for us, how he would wrestl^ with God like Jacob; and
when we thought he ha^ been quite spent, how he has recovered his strength,
and renewed his hold, as one resolved to take no denial, and not to let the
Lord go, without his blessing for us as well as for himself. And did we think
that these extraordinary motions and affections in one so ancient did presage
his near approaching death? that he was come now very nigh to the end of his
race? That being so ripe for Heaven, he would not be long out of Heaven, in the
Suburbs of which he seemed to be, when he was in his Devotions? Did we think
that the Lord would so soon gather him and receive him to himself, and say to
him, pray no more for this people? We remember his introductions to his work
when he first entered his Pulpit, beyond the ordinary custom of other Ministers
(and indeed there were many things extraordinary in him) how before his Sermon
and Prayer too, he used to be speak our attention, and endeavored to incite
and stir up our affection with various arguments; sometimes minding us of Gods
Omnipre^ence and his all-seeing eye; sometimes of the Divine Authority of the
word which he was to Preach, that it was indeed the word of God by which we
should be judged at the last day; sometimes minding us of the worth of time,
especially of such seasons of grace; sometimes of the worth of our Souls, which
the gain of all the world could not compensate the loss of; sometimes of the
worth of grace beyond all the treasures of the Earth, which we were capable of
gaining by our diligent hearing; sometimes minding us of our death and the
eternity which we should enter upon immediately after the separation of our
Soul from our Body; but did we think his own death was so near, and that he
would enter into eternity so soon himself? We remember with what gravity,
seriousness and sincerity he used to Preach unto us, with what plainness he did
accommodate the word to our capacity, with what zeal and fervency he did make
application to us of the great truths of Religion; how he pressed sins upon our
consciences by a clear, close and powerful conviction, adding the most moving
considerations to awaken us unto a sense of them, a hearty grief and repentance
for them. We remember how feelingly he made known to us the glad tidings of
Salvation by faith in Jesus Christ; how earnestly he urged upon us our duty
toward God, and one toward another, backing his exhortations with the most
cogent arguments; and how notably he did insinuate what he spoke hereby into
our affections: we remember how he taught us not only by his Doctrine, but also
by his example, going before us in the way of duty and the way to Heaven; but
did we think however in Heaven he would be above us, that he would be also in
Heaven before us?

He came to my house not long before he went to London (it may be one may say,
and another may say, and possibly many of you may say) ^lthough I were unworthy
to receive such a one under my roof; and methought his face did look ^ike the
face of an Angel. I remember his ^umble grave look, his image is still upon my
^ind, as if his person were still before mine eye; ^ remember his kind pleasing
countenance, his ^weet and obliging speeches; he came not to eat of my bread,
but to feed me with the bread of life, and how did he entertain me with holy
and ^eavenly discourse; he spoke to my self, and he ^pake to my Wife about our
Souls, I hope I shall ^ever forget his last words so long as I have breath and
a memory to retain any thing; he spoke to my Children and my Servants, he would
needs ^ave them all called, that he might give them some words of instruction,
that he might speak something to awaken and quicken them to mind their Souls
and Salvation; He told us all of ^eath and judgment, how near we were to
Eter^ity, but did I think his own glass was so near ^un out, and that he would
so quickly be himself ^n that Eternity which he spoke of so frequently and
affectionately to others? When he went forth ^f my doors, did I think he would
never set foot ^ithin them again? And that when he went ^way, he was going and
was so near unto his long ^ome?

The last Lords day of his Preaching to us, ^e gave us notice of his journey
that he intended on the Monday, and desired to see us the nex^ morning, not at
his house, but in the Church that there he might take leave of us; and ther^
several of us came together to see him, and ther^ we heard his last Sermon to
us: his Text was Prove 3.6. In all thy ways acknowledge him and he shall direct
thy paths; We well remembe^ the words that dropped then from his mouth, bu^ did
we think they wou^d be his last words to us* Did we think when God was
directing his path t^ London, that he was thereby directing his way so soon to
Heaven? Did we think that when he took his Farewell of us, that it was his last
Farewell, and that we should meet him no more until the Heavens shall be no
more? O that we ha^ persuaded him (for he was a man easy to be entreated) that
he would have stayed in the Country with us some weeks longer, and have
forborne such frequent Preaching, until the hea^ of the season were over, which
his old body and wasted spirits could not so well brook, although he thought
himself able to bear it well enough and that he should go through it as he had
done in former times. Had we foreseen the issue and ven^ of this journey to
London, rather than fail we would have raised the whole Country of his
acquaintance, and come about him with earnest desires and requests to stay him
here; we would have hung about his arms and neck, we would have ta^en hold of
his hands and his feet, and forcibly (if we could not otherwise) have detained
him among us, that he might have escaped that arrow and stroke of death which
was prepared for him in London: If he had been resolved to go, that he might
hasten home to his Fathers house, we would have used our endeavor to alter his
resolutions, we would have wept, and cried, and prayed with importunity, Good
Sir don't leave us yet, good Sir stay with us a little longer; pity such and
such ignorant Families, which when you are gone are like to perish for want of
instruction; pity such and such unconverted persons, who are hastening and
rushing forward in ways of sin to their own damnation; and although they have
not hearkened to former calls, it may be some further calls from your mouth may
(through Gods blessing) prevail with them, and be effectual to convert and save
them. Pity your Wise who is like to be left a Widow, and what a sorrowful Widow
is she like to be? Pity your Children which will be Fatherless, and if some of
them be provided for, yet you know who of them are low and shiftless, and
quickly will feel your loss, and all of them will greatly miss your company and
your help of them in Heavens way. Pity your Spiritual Children, some of whom
are but new born Babes in Christ, who are not like to thrive should they be so
soon weaned from the breast, who have need that you should give them more of
the sincere Milk of the word (which they have tasted and so well relish) in
order to their Spiritual growth and nourishment; pity your poor flock which you
are leaving, think what grievous Wolves, when you are gone, may enter amongst
them to rend and tear them: some of them are sorrowful, and they have need of
you to comfort them, and how will their sadness and sorrow be increased when
they hear of your decease? Some of them are weak, and they have need of you to
strengthen them; some of them are staggering, they have need of you to
establish them; yea, some have lost their way already, and are wandering, and
they have need of you to reduce them: some of them are bruised, and they have
need of you to bind them up; and the most of them are exceedingly diseased, all
have their Spiritual maladies, and they have need of you to administer
Soul-Physick to them in order to their cure and healing; and will you leave
your flock in such a condition, when there is so much need of such a Pastor,
and they are not like in have to get another to succeed you, who will watch
over and feed them as you have done? Indeed after so much toil and labor, you
may well long to be at rest; after so much work, you may well look and long for
your reward; but will not your rest be the sweeter if you ^abour a little more?
Will not your reward ^e the greater, if you add further work to what you have
done already? If you long to be in Heaven, O stay a little for us till we be
more fitted for that place; good Sir abide a little longer with us, that you
may gain more Souls for Christ, who will add to your glory and joy at the day
of Christ's glorious appearance.

Thus we might have argued and pleaded with him to stay, had we known that he
was going from us, not to London only, but also unto Heaven. But it was the
will of God, he should take this journey to London and that he should finish
his course there; his glass was run, his work was done, the bounds of his years
and days were determined, over which he could not pass, had both he and we
never so much desired it. He is gone, he is gone; never to return to us again
in this World. We have lost a most dear, tender hearted, faithful, laborious
and painful Minister; but our loss is his gain; he is happy, we do not envy his
happiness, but he has left us behind forlorn and sorrowful in a World of sin
and misery.

Such language as this we may suppose to have been amongst you in the Country;
and as you are most deeply concerned in the loss of Mr. Stubbs, so that you
have been greatly affected therewith beyond what we can set forth.

Two Funeral Sermons on Mr. Stubbs death have been Preached in the City, one on
the Lords day by Mr. Thomas Watson, the other on the week day by Mr. Richard
Baxter, both which we suppose will come to your hands. The Character which Mr.
Baxter in his has given (the only Sermon of the two, which we have seen) of
Mr. Stubbs his Spirit, Doctrine, manner of Life, conversation; his great
diligence and unwearied pains in public Preaching and private instruction,
when the Sermon does come forth, will sufficiently evidence to others as well
as your selves, what a loss above others you have sustained. Should we employ
our Pens in drawing further lineaments of this excellent person, they might
prove but shadows, not to set off, but obscure the picture of his spirit
already drawn so lively by a far more skilful hand; and therefore we forbear
any further commendations of him, who is above our commendation. Our design and
business is to mind you of your duty in reference to this sad providence which
has bereaved you of such a Pastor as Mr. Stubbs was unto you.

One great duty is to lament and lay to heart your Pastors death; to affect you
herewith, what we have already written has a tendency; we know all of you have
reason to grieve, but are there not too many of you unsensible of this great
loss? And is not this loss the greatest to such? When good old Jacob dyed, his
death was lamented sorely, not only by his own Children, but also by the
Egyptians, Genesis 50. 10, 11. When Moses and Aaron dyed, the Israelites mourned
for each of them thirty days, Numb. 20.29. Deuteronomy. 34.8. When the good King
Josiah was slain, there was a great mourning for him amongst the Jews, called
the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon. When Elisha the Prophet
lay on his deathbed Ioash although a wicked King did weep over him. 2 Kings
13.14. Now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof he dyed: and Joash
the King came down to him, and wept over his face and said, O my Father, my
Father, the Chariot of Israel and Horsemen thereof. And we read, Act. 8.2. when
Stephen the Protomartyr was stoned by the Jews, Devout men carried Stephen to
his burial, and made great Lamentation over him. Eccles. 12.5. Man goes to his
long home, and the Mourners go about the streets. But when such men go, men of
God, Ambassadors, Ministers, such eminent Ministers as yours was, O what
mourning should there be for him: you have lost a Soul friend, yea a
Soul-Father, an old Disciple, a Soulcounsellor, a true shepherd, a Soul feeder,
a sincere Nathanael, a Barnabas, a Soul comforter; you have lost an Angel, a
steward, a labourer, a watchman, a builder, one that studied for your Souls,
Preached, prayed for your Souls watched for your Souls: wept for your Souls
spent himself for your Souls good, and shall not such a loss be bewailed? As
Paul said to the Ephesians concerning himself, we may say to you concerning Mr.
Stubbs, Act. 20.25. Behold all ye amongst whom he has gone for some year^
Preaching the Kingdom of God, ye shall see hi^ face no more: and it is said,
Verse 37.38. And they all wept sore, and fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him;
Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spoke, that they should see his
face no more. Mr. Stubbs has several times come to the City and returned to
you again, but now he will return to you no more; he has done Preaching to
you, he has done praying for you, he will weep and wrestle for you no more, he
will never more instruct and counsel you, never more warn and admonish you,
never more exhort and persuade you, never more comfort and encourage you; the
doors are now shut, the doors of your ears have been too often shut against his
message, and now the doors of his lips are shut up, and never will they be open
to you any more. It would have been a just cause of great trouble if your
Minister had been removed into a corner, or had been thrust into a Prison,
although there you might have visited him sometimes and received a Spiritual
benefit by his private converse, and not have been without hopes of his
deliverance and enjoying the fruit of his labors again; but now he is gone
from whence he will not return; his Soul is fled beyond your reach, and his
body is gone down to the place of silence, the Lord has put him to silence;
men could not do it, he would preach so long as he had a Tongue to speak: but
God has silenced him in the grave, so that now you must not look that he
should pray more, and put up further supplications for you, or preach more, and
give further instructions unto you: this is a Lamentation and should be for a
Lamentation. Especially you should lament your sins which have procured this
loss, this sad stroke: have you not sinned away your Minister by your
unteachableness under the word which has been taught by his mouth; your
unfruitfulness under Gods showing upon you, Gods dressing and manuring of you
by his hands? We have had our loss too here in the City not only of him, but
also of many other eminent and faithful Ministers; our glory is in a great
measure departed, our strength is decayed, our Moses's, our Jacobs, our praying
our wrestling Ministers are many of them gone lately to God, and have we not
reason to fear that God is about to remove his Gospel, when he calls home his
Ambassadors so fast? that a great storm is near when he houseth so many of his
servants? Is not our hedge in danger of falling, when so many stakes are plucked
up? and our houses of tumbling, when so many pillars are thrown down? When the
righteous perish, not only righteous men but Preachers of righteousness, does
it not presage some great evil at hand, which they are taken from to a place of
rest and safety? The times did look with a bad face before, but do not they
look worse and worse, when so many Ministers are removed, who by their prayers
and ministerial labors, might have been helpful to prevent those judgments
which we are in such danger of? The clouds do now gather blackness faster and
faster, and dreadful thunder storms do seem to be in their bowels, and the Lord
knows how soon all faces may gather paleness: the most serious Christians and
the most understanding and considering persons, do look with trembling
expectations, when this Island will crack and break with a ter^ible voice over
us, and beat down with a fierce Tempest, it may be in showers of blood upon us.
The loss of our dear brethren in the Ministry does weaken our hands that are
Ministers, who have lost the advantage of their company and help; but the loss
is most near, most sore to them who were under their charge; and the loss of
this our lately deceased Brother and Fellow Laborer should be bewailed
especially, and laid to heart by you who were under his care and Ministry.

There are two sorts of persons amongst you, whom Mr. Stubbs has left behind,
Unconverted, and Converted persons; we will speak to both.

First, Are there not many unconverted persons, whom your Minister after all
his Soultravel and pains in Preaching has left unconverted? Are there not many
grossly ignorant persons with you, notwithstanding all his Catechizing and
instructions? Are there not many openly vicious persons, notwithstanding all
his reproofs and admonitions? Are there no profane persons among you, no
swearers? Are there no unclean persons, no adulterers? Are there no intemperate
persons, no drunkards? Are there no unrighteous persons, none that are
fraudulent in their dealings? And amongst those who are civilized and outwardly
reformed, are there none among you, who are secretly wicked? none who are
covetous, under the reigning power of that sin which is inconsistent with the
power of godliness? Are there no hypocrites among you, painted Sepulchers,
rotten at heart, whatever your outward show and profession of Religion is? Are
there not too many among you who mind your Bodies, but neglect your Souls? who
make provision for your flesh, but neglect your Salvation? Alas! Alas! What is
like to become of you who are still unconverted, and have not been wrought upon
effectually by such Preaching, such a Ministry, now this Minister is removed?
If you were not converted whilst you had such powerful means, are you now like
to be converted, when the means are gone, and you are never like to have such
powerful means of grace again? Did not your Minister whilst alive call upon you
frequently, and that with earnestness and importunity that you would repent,
and turn from your evil ways presently, and that you would not delay, lest God
should leave off calling you, and take away the means of your conversion from
you? And has not God left off calling you now by his mouth? And if you should
not be effectually called at all, if you should not be converted whilst you
live (which now seems very unlikely to be) better had it been for you that you
had never been born; better you had been Dogs, or Swine, or Worms, or Toads,
rather than Men and Women with immortal Souls, because of the dreadful miseries
coming upon you, which inferior Creatures will escape. Without Conversion,
there is no Salvation; without Repentance and Faith in Jesus Christ, and love
to God and a holy life, there is no escaping the Damnation of Hell. Our design
is not to drive you to despair, only to awaken you, who have been so long and
so fast asleep under such an awakening Ministry; if you sleep still and are not
startled by the loss of your Minister, we much fear the next thing will be the
loss of your Souls. Awake! Awake! Ye drowsy, secure, sleepy sinners, God calls
upon you once more, by us he calls you to awake, to repent and turn from sin
before it be too late, and the door of mercy be shut, and death has
unexpectedly surprised you in your sins.

God by us does command the vilest of you to repent, Act. 17.30. And he
threatens death if you disobey him: should an earthly King command you to come
out of a dirty way into a clean path, and that upon pain of temporal death,
would not you obey? And when God who is the King of Kings, does command you to
repent, to come out of the dirty ways of sin into the clean ways of holiness,
and that upon pain of eternal death, of everlasting torment and punishment in
Hell will you not obey, will you not repent? Will you choose to dishonor God,
and damn your own Souls rather than to repent of your sins? Shall the
threatenings of a weak man have more force with you, than the threatenings of the
great and glorious Jehovah who made Heaven and Earth? Shall the threatenings of
lesser evils which are but for a moment, have more place with you, than the
threatenings of the most dreadful evils and eternal plagues shall have?

Moreover God does invite you to repent and uses arguments to prevail with you
Ezekiel. 33.11. Say unto them, Thus says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live: Turn ye,
turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O house of Israel? God does
encourage you to repent by his promises; all the promises which you will find
in the Scripture of Remission, of Adoption, of Salvation, of Spiritual
privileges here, and eternal happiness hereafter, are made to those that
repent and believe; both which are always in conjunction, See Prove. 28.13. Isa.
55.17. Chap. 1.16, 17, 18. And will not Gods invitations, Gods promises, and
none of the rich Gospel priveledges move you to repent? Will you slight
pardoning mercy, and choose rather to abide under guilt? Is it good to keep
wounds in your consciences when you may have them healed? Is it good to have
God your enemy, when you may be reconciled? Is it desirable to continue
Children of the Devil, when you may be made the Children of God? Will you
prefer rags before robes to cover you? And choose poverty when you may have
Jewels to enrich you? And eternal misery, when by repentance you may attain
everlasting happiness? There are three sorts of unconverted and impenitent
persons among you; some of you are young, some in your middle age, and some of
you are arived unto old age, we would apply this Call to every one.

First, You that are young men and young women, repent of your sins, and turn
from your evil ways whilst you are young; as you ought to remember your Creator
so as to turn to him in the days of your youth, so you ought to remember your
sins so as to turn from them, in the days of your youth. Had any of you been
born without sin, and lived without sin, there would have been no occasion for
your repentance; But who among you can say he is innocent? Have you not
original sin and actual sin to repent of? Will not your consciences witness the
corruption of your natures, how averse naturally you are to good, how prone to
evil. Is there not a Register in your bosoms of sins committed in your
childhood, together with your more late and more aggiavated youthful
transgressions? And do you not then need to repent? Are you too young to
repent, when you are not too young to sin? You have heard of Josiah, who had a
tender heart in his tender years; and of Timothy who when a Child did know the
holy Scriptures, which taught him the lesson of Repentance; and if others have
attained repentance in their Childhood and youth, why may not you attain it?
The Devil will persuade you it is too soon, and the flesh will persuade you it
is too soon to repent; and your companions in sin will persuade you to hold on
with them still in your sinful practices: many carnal arguments you may find
out to move and plead for indulgence of your selves still in your sensual and
sinful delights; and you may be prone to think graver years will be most
suitable for the serious and severe work of Repentance; and you may presumingly
hope, when you are grown up to years of more maturity, then you will mourn for
your iniquity, then you will turn over a new leaf, return unto God and lead a
new life. But does God allow you to procrastinate your Repentance? Does God
give you a dispensation to sin, so long as you are so young? If it be a duty to
repent hereafter, is it not now as much your duty? If it be good to repent at
all, is it not good to repent whilst you are young? Are you sure to live till
you are grown men, and grown women? Did you never see or hear that others have
died as young as your selves, and as likely to live, and that notwithstanding
their hopes and presumptions of long life? Indeed you may live to be old, but
think also that you may die whilst you are young; you may die suddenly before
you have time to call upon God for mercy, and if you die in your impenitency
you will most certainly be thrown for your sins into Hell, that place of most
horrible and unspeakable misery; and will you venture your everlasting
damnation on presumption of long life, and future Repentance? Besides, are you
sure to repent, should your life be continued? Is Repentance in your own power?
If you have not hearkened unto former calls of your deceased Minister, and if
you will not hearken to the call of diverse Ministers now together, are you sure
God will call you any more, that he will send any other Minister to you? Or if
he should, may not he withhold his blessing, and swear in his wrath that his
Spirit which has been striving with you so long, shall strive with you no
more? Moreover, can there be a more fit, a more reasonable time for your
Repentance, than whilst you are young? Will not your Repentance now be with the
less difficulty? If it be difficult to repent when your sins are fewer, will
not the difficulty increase when your sins are increased and grown more
numerous? If it be difficult to repent when your sins are lesser, will not the
difficulty greaten when your sins are greatned and grown more heinous? Is not a
twig more easily bended, than a grown Tree? Will not long custom in sin added
to your natural propensity, add to the difficulty of your repentance? Is it not
easier to repent when you have less sin and more time, than when you shall have
less time and more sin? Will not sin be more easily mortified whilst it is more
weak, than when by long continuance it has gathered more strength? Will it not
be very hard to remove long contracted hardness? Do you think the Devil will be
easily cast out, when he has had long possession. Or can your last Repentance,
if it were easily attainable, be so pleasing and acceptable unto God, as
Repentance in your youth? Does not God call for your first fruits? Shall the
Devil, and the flesh, and the World ravish your Virginaffections, and then will
you repent? Has not God work enough for you to do although you begin never so
young? And will you choose rather to serve the Devil and your own lusts in the
spring, the prime, and vigor of your years, than to serve the glorious
Jehovah, when the service of the former is such slavery, such drudgery, and the
ways will be eternal death, and the service of the latter is so honorable, so
beneficial, and its reward eternal life. May this Call, these arguments prevail
with all of you that are young, without any further delay to repent of your
sins, and to day, whilst it is called to day to hearken unto Gods voice, and no
longer to harden your hearts through the deceitfullness of sin.

Secondly, You that have continued in your sinful ways and practices to your
middle age; it is high time that you should repent. If your Spring be over, and
your Summer be come, and hitherto you have neglected your Souls, and allowed
your selves in your sins; O delay no longer time, repent of your sins, and
repent that you have repented no sooner. God stretches sorth his hand all the
day long to a stubborn and gainsaying people; if you have been stubborn
hitherto; If you have deafned your ear to former calls, don't deafen your ear
to this call, which may be your last call. God has been very patient with you,
he might have cut you off in your sins long ago, and think where your Souls
would have been now. Have not some of you been visited with sickness, and
brought down to the sides of the pit, and been raised again beyond your own and
others expectations? Have not others of you escaped great perils and dangers,
and been wonderfully preserved when your lives were in great jeopardy? And
shall your restoration or your preservation, be but a reservation unto more
dreadful destruction? Or rather shall not Gods patience and goodness lead you
to Repentance? Will you return evil for good? Because God does not speedily
execute his vengeance upon you, shall your hearts be fully set in you to do
evil? If your youth has been given away from God don't give the strength of
your years too. Let the time past be sufficient wherein you have served diverse
lusts, and let the remaining part of your days be devoted unto God It is likely
that many of you are now got into intanglements, and will be hindered by
incumbring business in the work, which is like to be more difficult than if you
had begun betimes: but think, although the difficulty of Repentance be never so
great, yet the necessity of Repentance is far greater; Repentance is both
universally and absolutely, altogether indispensably necessary; you must
repent, all of you must repent, otherwise you are lost irrecoverably, and will
perish everlastingly; It may be hard to you now, and grievous to unravel all
your sinful works, to undo what hither to you have been doing, to begin another
life now after you have spent, or rather misspent so much of your time; It may
be very grievous to you to cut off your right hands, to pluck out your right
eyes, but better do so than that the whole body be cast into the fire; we mean,
it is better to part with your most beloved lusts, called in the Scripture, and
by our Savior, the right hands, and the right eyes, than that the Soul should
perish in sin, and be tormented in Hell; surely Hells torments is far more
grievous than repenting work and converting work can be. O be not befooled by
the deluding Devil, and your own deceitful hearts, to defer so great and
necessary work any longer; you have thought to repent at this time, and thought
to repent at that time, and yet this time has come, and that time has come,
and both have slipped and are gone, and still you are where you were; as far from
Repentance, yea further from it, more indisposed, more averse to it than at the
beginning. Sinners, what do you resolve upon? will you hold fast sin still?
Will you pursue your lusts to the burning lake? Or will you defer again this
work of Repentance until a fitter season? What season can be more fit than the
present season, when God calls you, commands you, and stretches forth his
hand to encourage you unto this duty.

Thirdly, And lastly. We shall add one word to call old sinners to Repentance:
your Spring is past, your Summer is ended, your Winter is come, and yet you
have not repented, yet have not amended. And what do you think now to do? Are
you resolved to finish your course as you have begun it? Are you resolved to
fill up the measure of your sin, with your days; and will you deafen your ears
against all Gods calls unto the last? You have one foot in the grave, and don't
you sometimes think of Death? Can you think to live here always? Don't you feel
your strength to decay? Have you no Harbingers and forerunners of death with
you? Do not your Silver hairs mind you of the loosing of the silver cord? and
your daily breakings through the infirmities of old age, of the breaking of the
golden bowl and pitcher at the fountain, and wheel at the cistern, whom dust
shall return to the earth as it was, and the Spirit to God that gave it, that
by him you may be judged? Eccl. 12.6, 7. Young ones may die in youth, but you
must die in old age: you cannot last much longer; in a moment you may go down
into your dust, and what do you think will become of your Souls when they are
separated from your bodies? Will not God call you to an account for all your
sins? Shall you not receive according to what you have done in the body? Can
you be content that God should banish you from his presence for ever, and
punish you amongst Devils in Hell? Can you dwell with devouring fire? Can you
inhabit everlasting burnings? Can you endure to be tormented and that to
eternity, and that with extremity of torments? But you will say, is there no
hope? I answer, the Devil may tell you there is no hope; when you were young
the Devel persuaded you it was too soon to repent; and in the strength of your
years, that it was too soon, time enough hereafter; and now it may be he would
persuade you it is too late; yet however grey-headed Converts are very rare,
some such there are and have been found: We read, Math. 20.6. of some called to
work in the vineyard at the eleventh hour. Indeed your Repentance now will be
with the greatest difficulty; but consider what has been said of its
necessity, and you may take same encouragement from its possibility. It is
possible for you to obtain Repentance, and Remission, and Salvation, if without
further delay you seek it, if you diligently seek it. You have need to ransack
your hearts, to read over the Register of your Consciences, to draw up bills of
indictment against your selves: you have need to retire within, to go down into
your Spirits with the candle of the Lord in one hand, and the word of the Lord
in the other hand, that you may find out, and bring out, and slay those lusts
there, which war against you, and which if they be not slain, will be your
ruin: you have need to humble your selves greatly before the Lord, to lie very
low, to cry very loud, to mourn and weep, to grieve and lament over so many
sins, and those so highly aggravated as yours have been; And then know there is
mercy enough in store for such as you, free grace can save the oldest and
greatest sinner; the merits of Christ are sufficient for your pardon; the
promises of the Covenant are large and may reach the worst of you. O then break
off your sins by Repentance, and lay hold on the Lord Jesus by faith, and
devote what remains of your life unto God, and it is possible that such as
you may get into the Kingdom of Heaven, and eternally admire the infinite
Riches of Gods free grace in your Salvation.

Our Letter would swell too much should we add particular directions in order
to this work; we therefore exhort you to call to Remembrance what your own
Pastor has Preached to you for your guidance and help, and it is possible that
the seed which he sowed whilst alive, may spring up after his death; and the
Sermons which he has Preached amongst you and the Counsels which he has given
to you, may (through Gods blessing and your Remembrance, and Application) have
their effect even now he is gone, in your Conversion and Salvation.

Besides unconverted persons, we hope there are many true Converts, truly
gracious persons among you, and not a few who have been the Seal of Mr.
Stubbs's Ministry. Some of you are new born, others well grown Christians; some
of you are in a declining state, others are thriving Christians; we might be as
large in our writing to you, as we have been in our call of the Unconverted; we
might give particular counsel and advice, in order to the healing of wounded
Consciences, the reviving decayed graces and affections, the resolving and
removing groundless doubts, and perplexing fears concerning your spiritual
condition; the arming you against Satan's temptations; the guiding of you in the
dark night of desertion, and when under the Eclipse of the light of Gods
countenance; and for your quickening and encouragement under affliction^ and all
oppositions and difficulties which you do or may meet withal in Heavens way.
But should we write particularly and fully to you of these things, our Letter
would grow into a treatise, which is beyond our design; therefore we must refer
you for Counsel, in these things, unto the Word of God, and those Books in our
English tongue, which are written on these Subjects; and particularly to call
to remembrance what your dear Pastor has taught you and advised you, who was
the best acquainted with the state of your Souls.

All that we shall further add, is to mind you of some duties, and to suggest
some considerations for your comfort and encouragement under this so great a
loss.

The duties which God calls you more especially unto, after his taking away
your Pastor from you, are, 1 Watchfulness. 2 Fruitfulness. 3 Prayer. 4
Family-instruction.

First, Watchfulness: All Ministers are, or ^ught to be the Lords Watchmen; the
Watch^^n; whom the Lord set over you, was emi^ently faithful, but he is now
gone and will ^^itch over you no longer, and therefore you ^^ve the more need,
and are now called to ^atch over your selves the more diligently, and to watch
over one another.

1. Watch over your selves; guard your ^^nses which are the inlets of sin, and
keep ^our hearts with all diligence, from whence ^re the issues of sin; it is
not long since you ^ad the eye of your Minister over you, ^ho was a faithful
reprover; now he is removed, take heed you give not your selves the more
liberty either to neglect duties, or to comply with temptations, whereby you
may be enticed unto any sin; were Mr. Stubbs alive, and by you, it may be you
would not yield to such and such Temptations, lest you should offend him, and
be reproved by him; but think with your selves, that God is by you always; and
being infinitely holy, is more highly offended with sin, than the most holy man
on earth can be; and you have also an observer within you, a reprover, we mean
your own Consciences, and take heed of offending them in offending of God, for
if God and Conscience should be against you, it is a thousand times worse than
to have all the men on Earth and all the Devils in Hell against you. Watch not
only against grosser, and more scandalou^ sins, but also against lesser sins,
and such as a^^ of more ordinary practice in the World, an^ that not only
amongst the profane, but all amongst professors of Religion themselves amongst
whom too many hypocrites will b^ found at the last day. Watch also again^
errors, especially such as are damnable, su^ as are in the foundations of
Religion, whi^^ should you entertain, would be more effectual to ruin your
Souls, than if you we^^ guilty of the grossest immoralities. Havin^ received
the truth, hold it fast, prize it abo^^ Silver and Gold, as being far more
preciou^ yea above life it self, and let all go rather tha^ let any truth go;
let truths be rooted in you^ hearts, embrace them with love and delight
otherwise you may be imposed upon with e^rours by some cunning impostors, and
be tosse^ to and fro with diverse winds of Doctrine^ by the flight of men and
cunning craftiness (...) such as lie in wait to deceive; always suspec^ them as
dangerously erroneous, who endeavou^ to bring the Ministry of Christ's
appointme^^ into contempt, and persuade you to a neglec^ thereof, which you
have reason above other ^ighly to esteem and keep close unto, having ^^d so
eminent and faithful a Minister amongst ^ou.

Secondly, As you ought to watch over ^our selves, so also to watch over one
another, that so instead of one, there may be many ^atchmen amongst you. Watch
over one another in reference to sin, and in reference to ^uty. In reference to
sin, both to prevent sin (...) one another, and to restore such as are fallen
(...) it. Watch to prevent sin, so far as you have ^ower; say not with Cain, Am
I my brothers ^eeper? As you ought not to murder the ^odies of any, nor to
suffer any (if you can ^inder it) to murder themselves; so you ought ^ot to
murder the Souls of any, nor to permit them (if you can hinder it) to murder
their ^wn Souls: should you see any of your neigh^ours, or acquaintance, take
Swords, or Dag^ers, and therewith to gash and wound them^lves, lift up their
hands to thrust them into their hearts, would not you run to them, and ^atch
away those weapons and instruments of ^eath from them? Would not you argue and
^ead with them, to forbear the laying such ^^olent hands upon themselves? By
sin your ^^ighbours wound themselves; if they wound (...) their flesh, they
wound their Spirit; if they wound not their bodies, they wound their Souls; and
as those wounds are most inward, so they are the most deep and dangerous; the
wounds of sin are mortal wounds, and not only temporal death but eternal will
be the effect of them, without a seasonable application of the blood of Christ.
O do what you can to prevent sin in your friends, do what you can to arm them
against Temptations, and to encourage them to resist the Devil; to expose
themselves to any kind of sufferings and pains and to deny themselves any kind
of delights and gains, rather than to offend God, and wound their Consciences
by their sins.

But if any of your Brethren have been tempted and have yielded, if they are
fallen and wounded, watch to restore such; and there in follow the direction of
the Apostle, Gal. 6.1^ Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, (...) which
are Spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy
self lest tho^ also be tempted. If you hear of a fault in any of your
neighbors, be not forward to believe it, unless the thing be evident by clear
proof, or the parties own confession, and then think what the Law of love does
require, Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart, thou shall
in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. When your
neighbors lie under guilt, let love to their Souls prompt you to use your
endeavor for the removal thereof; don't speak of their faults behind their
backs to their defamation, and the wounding of their names; but speak of their
faults to themselves in your plain and faithful reproofs, in order to their
amendment and the healing of the wounds in their Consciences: and that your
reproofs may be successful, they must be managed with much prudence, with a due
consideration of the fault, the person, the place, the time, and the manner; as
to the manner the, Apostle directs you to do it in the spirit of meekness,
don't use opprobrious terms, railing angry accusations, remembering that the
wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, and anger in your reproof is
apt to beget anger in the parties reproved, the effect of which is like to be
excuse and extenuation of their faults, a hardening of them in their sins,
recriminations and retorts on your selves: whereas if you reprove them mildly
in a spirit of meekness, and they perceive your love therein, and design of
their good, you may the more probably reach their Consciences, and through Gods
blessing imprint a conviction upon them, and be instrumental for their
restoring; a soft Tongue breaks a bone, and a mild reproof may mollify a
heart that is like a bone, or like a stone in hardness.

And as you ought to watch over one another in reference to sin, so also in
reference to duty; as you occasionally or purposely meet together, watch to
advise and counsel one another, to quicken and encourage one another in your
duties both to God and man, read Mal. 3.16. Then they that feared the Lord,
spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a Book of
remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon his name. Here you have, 1. Your duty, to speak often one to
another; and what it is you should speak: The wicked speak often one to
another, but they speak vanity and sin, as if their Tongues were their own, and
they had no Lord over them; their discourse is froth and filth, they have a
Treasure of evil things in their hearts, and thence they bring forth that which
is evil; but you who fear the Lord, have a Treasure of good things in your
hearts, and thence you should bring forth that which is good: your words should
be like choice Silver to enrich one another; your lips like a Tree of
righteousness to feed one another, your discourse should be always with grace
unto your mutual edification, that you may excite one another in the ways and
service of the Lord.

2. Here Is a motive to quicken unto the duty, the Lord hearkneth, takes
especial notice hereof, records this on his Book, in order to the reward he
intends and has prepared for such in the other World. Look into another
Scripture. Heb. 10.24, 25. Let us consider one another to provoke (not to
anger, but) unto love and good works; not forsaking the assembling of our
selves together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another, and so
much the more as you see the day approaching. We have not room in this Letter
to enlarge in exposition of this Scripture, but must leave it with your selves
to do it in your Meditations, must also contract in the other particulars.

Secondly, The second duty which God calls you unto, on the loss of your
Minister, is fruitfulness. Your Minister was a spiritual sower, and we hardly
know any who has sown so much seed of the word, as he used to do in all places
where he came; none more frequent in Preaching on the Sabbath days, on the week
days, on ordinary, on extraordinary occasions, publicly, and from house to
house, he ceased not, whilst he had a Tongue and Breath, to Preach the word. We
need not tell you how much seed he has sown amongst you; and what it is that
God does look for, after such a seed-time as you have had. But that the harvest
of your fruitfulness should be in some measure answerable hereunto; that as you
have had more seed scattered among you than others, so you should bring sorth
more fruit than others: Take heed now your Minister is dead, that his Sermons
don't die with him, and be forgotten by you, as if they had never been
Preached, never been heard. Take heed you be not found barren after such
sowings; that you be not found dry after such droppings; that you be not like
Pharaohs kine, lean after such plenty of spiritual food, and such abundant
means of Spiritual nourishment as you have enjoyed. The fruits which God does
look for, are the fruits of Repentance, humility, meekness, self-denial,
patience, contentment, diligence, righteousness, filial fear of God, faith in
Christ, love to God, and one to another, zeal for Gods honor, lively hope of
Heaven, thankfulness for mercies. God looks that you should be fruitful in good
words, and in good works; let the seed your Minister has sown, spring up after
his death in such fruits as these; such things he has often taught you, and
exhorted you unto, in his Sermons, and he has gone before you in the practice
of them in his life; ye are witnesses and God also, how holily, and justly, and
unblamably he behaved himself among you, and how he exhorted, and charged you
as a Father does his Children: and be ye followers of him who through faith and
patience does now inherit the promises.

Thirdly, The third duty which God does now call you especially unto, is
Prayer. Your Minister whilst alive did pray much with you, and he prayed more
for you; he was one of the most Prayerful Ministers in England; he gave himself
as to the Ministry of the word, so also unto Prayer: but now his praying work
on Earth, is changed into praising work in Heaven; you have lost a praying
friend, you have therefore now so much the more need to pray for your selves,
pray secretly, pray frequently, pray fervently. Pray against sin, and pray for
larger effusions of the Spirit upon you. Pray against sin; do as, Hos. 14.2.
Take with you words and turn to the Lord; say unto him, take away all iniquity,
and receive us graciously. God has taken away your Minister, O beg of him that
he would take away your iniquity, the cause of this so great a loss. Say, Lord
thou have taken away him who was our glory, O take away our sins which are our
ignominy and shame; thou have taken away him who endeavored to save us, O take
away our sins, which if not taken away will destroy us. Shall our Ministers go,
and our sins stay? Shall our glory depart, and our shame abide? Our blessings
go, and our curse continue? Our builders go, and our destroyers remain? God
forbid. Pray earnestly that God would take away the guilt of sin, and deliver
you from the power of sin; not only the reign, but also from the rage of it;
not only from its dominion, but also from its Tyranny. And pray also for larger
effusions of the Spirit upon you, for the teachings of the Spirit, the witness
of the Spirit, more of the graces, more of the comforts of the Spirit, forget
not Zion in your Prayers, and the land of your nativity; bear also your
particular friends on your hearts when you are before God on your knees.

Fourthly, The fourth duty we would mind you of, is Family Instruction, the
Catechizing of Children, and Servants, and bringing them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord: And here we must not enlarge in motives and directions,
only we desire you to remember what the Counsels, persuasions and practice of
your deceased Pastor was in this particular, and accordingly let your practice
be.

And now it is high time to draw to a close; we shall add only one word or two,
for your support and comfort under this sad providence; your loss is great, and
we doubt not but this loss is very grievous to many of you, that you do and
will feel it more and more, that you feel it on the Lords days, and feel it on
the week days, when you miss him in the pulpit, and miss him in your Families.
But none of you ought to be overwhelmed with sorrow upon this account,
considering, first, that your loss is his gain: if he had continued still in
the flesh, and further exercised his Ministry amongst you, it might have been
more profitable for you; but his dissolution and departure was best for
himself. His body is decently interred here, and is fallen asleep, asleep in
the bed of his grave, his wearied body does sleep now quietly without any
disease or pain, and will abide in rest until it be raised up in glory in the
morning of the Resurrection. His Soul immediately after its separation had the
attendance of Angels upon it to be its convoy into the heavenly Paradise, and
think what joy there was in heaven at his arrival there; if there were joy in
heaven at his conversion, surely there was great joy at his Coronation, after
he had done his work and been instrumental in the conversion of so many, some
there before him, and others whom he has left behind; but O how full of joy
was he himself! How ravished and transported with joy, when he appeared in the
presence of the glorious Jehovah, and was welcomed into Heaven by his dear
Redeemer; when he first viewed the glorious place he was brought into, and saw
the glorious face of God, and perceived such glory to be put upon himself,
which we want thoughts to conceive and think how full his enlarged Soul is now
of joy; you are weeping, but he is rejoicing, and he might say (could he make
known his mind) as our Savior to the Daughters of Jerusalem, Weep not for me
but for your selves. What, do you grieve that your Minister is so highly
promoted? Will you mourn for him, as if he were lost or annihilated? Could you
wish that he were alive again? Surely he would not for a world change his
place; nothing could persuade him to come out of the bosom of Christ, and
assume again a body of sin and death; and could you wish that he would lay
aside his glorious robes, and clothe himself again with black garments? you
should rather joy in the ^houghts of his joy, than grieve inordinately for the
loss; especially when you think he is ^ut gone before, and you may and will
arrive at the same place of felicity, if you follow his example, and walk in
the same way as he walked. Consider also, that although your Minister be gone
from you, yet the word of God does remain with you, to guide and counsel you;
to quicken and comfort you, and you have or may have ordinances with you, if
you look after them; indeed they will be no more dispensed by him, but you
ought to bless God and rejoice that they have been dispensed by him so long,
that ever you had such a Minister amongst you; you ought to rejoice in the good
you have received by his Ministry, and you may receive further good by the
Ministry of others, if you seek after it, and give your diligent attendance.
Chiefly, Consider although your Minister is gone, yet God is not gone; if you
are truly gracious, God will never remove his gracious presence from you. If
you walk in Gods ways according to the teachings and example of your deceased
Minister, you will have both the gracious and com^orting presence of God with
you in those ways. Therefore what things you have learned, and received, and
heard, and seen him do; and then though so eminent an Em^bassadour of peace be
gone from you, the God of peace shall yet be with you, which the hearty Prayer
of

Your unfeigned and assured Soul friends, Tho. Vincent, John Turner, Rob.
Perrott, M. Pemberton.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF That Holy, Painful, and Fruitful Minister
of Christ, Mr. Henry Stubbs; About fifty Years a Succesful Preacher at Bristol,
Wells, Chew, Dursley, London, and diverse others places.

By his unworthy Fellow Servants, hasting after him, RICHARD BAXTER.

Printed in the Year, 1678.

Act. 20.24. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear
unto my self, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the Ministry which
I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.


THis hour being designed to such a commemoration of our deceased friend, Mr.
Stubbs, as is laudably used at such men's Funerals, I have chosen words of this
Text, which the heart and life of this holy man did so constantly express, that
doubtless the same Spirit suggested them to blessed Paul and him. They are the
profession of a full devotedness to God, in his Christian and Ministerial work,
notwithstanding all expected difficulties and oppositions, which he resolved
with unmoved patience to undergo to the joyful finishing of his course.

The witness of the Holy Ghost, with his own experience did teach him to expect
bonds, and afflictions at Jerusalem, it being the ordinary entertainment which
every where did abide him: but how much worse might come he knew not, but was
resolvedly prepared for all; The joyful finishing of his course was so
desirable to him, that no suffering, though it were the loss of life it self,
did seem too dear or hard a means for its accomplishment.

Here is then, first, The great and desirable prize for which nothing could be
too dear. Secondly, The cheerful resolution of the Apostle to go on, and part
with life it self to attain it.

The first, though the words have no great dfficulty, yet as to the matter may
need to some, a brief explication. viz. 1. What is meant by his Course. 2. What
by his Ministry and testifying the Gospel of the grace of God, 3. How this was
received of the Lord Jesus. 4. What is meant by the finishing of his course. 5.
How it was to be done with Joy. 6. Why he was not moved by foreseen sufferings,
no^ accounted his life dear, to attain this end.

And for brevity, I shall now observe thi^ method, to add the instructions and
other applications, to each part of the Text as I explain it.

First, The word translated Course, signifies a race to be swiftly run. And a
threefold race is here included. 1. The race of human life; which is short and
uncertain: we are not born for nothing; nor does God give us life, and time,
and maintenance, to live in idleness, or to serve the flesh. The Sun stands not
still whether we sleep or wake: Our breath, our pulse are still in motion, our
glass is running; And O how quickly shall we see and hear, that time on Earth
shall be to us no more. This Course will be certainly and quickly finished; but
whether with Joy, it concerns us timely to foresee. For the review of Time,
of precious Time, and the work of Time, will be no contemptible part of our
everlasting work.

Secondly, The Course (or Race) o^ Christianity, is the necessary improvement
of our Time. This is not a play, nor an idle, brutish or a jesting life. It is
a great work for a selfdestroying undone sinner, to believe in a Savior, and
such a Savior, and wholly to trust his merits, Sacrifice, Counsel and Conduct,
his powerful operations, and effectual intercessions for all our present and
our future hopes. It was not a dream of War that we were listed for in our
baptism under the Captain of our Salvation. The resisting of temptations, the
quenching of the Devils fiery darts, the denial of our selves, and forsaking
friends, reputation, estate, and liberty, and life, for the sake of Christ, and
renouncing the flesh the world and the Devil, for the hopes of a promised
unseen glory, is a real work. To believe in Christ and his promise of Heaven,
to the forsaking of all wordly hopes, is a serious business. To love God above
all, and our Neighbor as our selves, and to do as we would be done by, how
easily soever mentioned and professed, are works not unworthy to be ascribed to
the Spirit of the living God, and to the grace of the Almighty. He that well
finisheth the Christian course, shall certainly receive the Crown of
Righteousness: And though none of these works do in the least participate in
the Office of the justifying Sacrifice, Merits or Grace of Jesus Christ, yet
shall we be judged according to them; and we must live to Christ, if we will
live with Christ.

Thirdly, The Apostolical Ministerial course was also to be finished with joy.
His call was wonderful, his Office honorable, his gifts powerful, his
sufferings great, his labors greater; his successes, by miracles in themselves
miraculous: yet all this would not have saved himself, if he had not faithfully
finished his course. To begin hopefully is more common than to end happily. The
Sun of persecution withers much fruit that seemed flourishing: Judas his end
did more difference him from the rest of the Apostles, than his beginning.

His Ministry was considerable as common to all the Clergy, or as Apostolical.
To Preach the word as he commanded Timothy, to be instant in season and out of
season, to reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and Doctrine, to
rule well, and labor in the word and Doctrine, to take heed to our selves and
unto Doctrine, and continue therein, that we may save our selves and them that
hear us; to take heed to our selves, and all the flock, to hold back nothing
profitable to them, but to teach them publicly, and from house to house, day
and night with tears, ( Act. 20.) in meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves, if God at any time will give them repentance, all this is not a
dream or play.

And to go over much of the world, from Nation to Nation, by sea and land, to
Preach this Gospel to strangers of various languages, through all difficulties
and sufferings, to confirm all by miracles, to leave this sacred Doctrine
infallibly in records to the Church, as a rule to the end of the World, to
teach men to observe all things. Christ had commanded them, as well as to
disciple nations, and baptize them, and to settle the orders and government of
the Churches according to the will of Christ, this was the extraordinary part
of his Ministry.

Thirdly, This Ministry was received of the Lord Jesus, by an extraordinary
call, a voice from Heaven, and an inspiration of others that were Ministerially
to send him, and the special inspiration of his own soul, for apostolical
qualifications. But do not ordinary Ministers also receive their Office from
the Lord Jesus! Yes; And though the way of their reception differ, their
Obligation to finish their course is divine as well as Paul's. Christ called
Paul by himself and by inspired Prophets. And he calls us by his qualifying
grace, and by his stated Law (as the King makes Maior^ and Bailiffs of
Corporations by his Charters) wherein the ordainers and electors, orderly
determine of the recipient persons, and the ordainers ministerially invest
them; but the office, power and obligation is directly from the Law of Christ.
And if any breach o^ interuption should be made in human ordination and
tradition, the Law still stands to direct men in the choice and investiture,
and to confer Authority, and to oblige, as well as the Holy Ghost, to give men
the necessaries thereto.

Therefore as we receive our Office from Christ, we must use it for Christ, and
not for carnal self, nor as the servants of men; And we must use it according
to the Laws of Christ, whose Laws soever shall gainsay them.

Fourthly, The finishing of Paul's Course, is the bringing his work of
Christianity and Ministry to the desired joyful end. 1. To the end of duration:
not to be weary of well doing, nor having put his hand to Christ's plow, to look
back and repent, nor forsake the warfare in which he was engaged. He that
endures to the end shall be saved: and in due time we shall reap if we faint
not. 2. To the end of Intention. 1. To do his own appointed work, that his
grace being exercised and increased, he may be acceptable to God, and fit with
joy to meet the Lord. 2. To call and save sinners; and to build up Saints, and
to gather Churches unto Christ, and edify them, and leave to all ages his
Doctrine and example, a certain word and powerful motive. 3. To glorify Christ
and God the Father in all this not to sit warm in a reverend habit, for me^ to
honor for the sake of the Office, and bar^ name of an Apostle.

But to testify the Gospel of the grace of God to declare the truth of it, the
necessity of it the privileges, and the honor, the great love of God,
revealed by the Son of his lo^ to sinners, and the great and manifold benefi^
given them in Christ, the hope of glory s^ before them, and the just and
reasonable mea^ and conditions of obtaining it. Thus did ^^ as immediately
sent, and thus must we as se^ by Christ's appointed Order in his Law, testify
the Gospel of the grace of God.

Fifthly, Concerning Paul's finishing ^^ Course with joy, we must consider. 1.
Wh^ joy it is that is here meant? 2. How mu^^ of this joy each faithful
Minister may expec^ 3. And whence and on what account he m^ expect it?

First, The Joy here meant which Paul e^pected is, 1. The joy which the nature
of (...) work affords: Divine certain, great a^ holy truth is pleasant to him
that understan^ eth it, believes it, and is exercised in (...) ^erious
meditation of it. It is sweet to read, and think and speak of the essential
love of God; and of his unspeakable grace in Christ, of his free
reconciliation, justification, adoption, and Salvation of those that were his
enemies: of the wonderful mysteries, and methods of Gods love in our Redemption
and Salvation, of the Heavenly glory which we and all the elect of God shall
enjoy for ever. What sweeter food or business for our minds, than such things
as these? Secondly, The success of our work is an addition to our joy. The
success of it on our own Souls, while they increase in holiness, and are raised
to the greater knowledge of God, and greater love to him and Communion with him.
And our success on others while they are brought home to God and saved: ^f it
be pleasant to a succesful Physician to save men's lives, it must be more so to
a succesful Minister of Christ, to further men's regeneration, and to save men's
Souls. To add more to the number of them that love the Lord Jesus, that are his
members, that are enemies to sin, examples of holiness, that pray for the
World, and that shall live in glory; ^^ not this a joyful work? There is joy
among the Angels in Heaven for every sinner that repents, Luke 15.10. Christ
rejoiceth in it, and all good men that know it rejoice in it, and shall not the
Minister of it then rejoice? 3 Job. 2 3. I rejoiced greatly, says St. John,
and I have no greater joy. 1 These. 2.19. Ye are our joy and Crown of rejoicing.
Thirdly, The honor of Christ, and the pleasing of God in our labors, and the
success, is the top of all our joy. 2 Cor. 5.9. Heb. 12.28. Ephesians. 5.10. Heb.
13.21. and 11.5. For to please God, and to be perfectly pleased in him, is our
Heavenly felicity it self. Fourthly, It is our joy to foresee the blessed end,
the everlasting glorious reward. To live in the belief and hope of this, and to
taste the love of God in Christ, which is the first fruits. All this is the joy
in which we may hope to finish our course.
II. How much of this joy may we here expect.

Answ. 1. So much as shall satisfy us that in our dedication of our selves to
God, we made a wise and happy choice, which we need not to repent of; Though we
might easily have chosen a way more likely for wealth and pleasure to the
flesh, and in which we should not have kindled the indignation of so many
against us; nor have brought on our selves so much envy and malice, so much
slanders and reproaches, to name no worse, yet experience tells us, that God
taught us to choose the most pleasant life, as our deceased Brother and I have
truly often told one another, that we have found it. Even when we are sorrowful,
we are always rejoicing, 2 Cor. 6.10. When we are falsely reported of, our
rejoicing is this the Testimony of our Consciences, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, and not in fleshly wisdom, we have had our Conversation in the
World. 2 Cor. 1.12. Paul and Silas could sing with their backsfore with
scourging, and their feet fast in the stocks, Act. 16. And the Apostles
rejoiced that they were accounted worthy to suffer reproach and abuse for
Christ, Act. 5.41. Never yet did difficulty, or suffering much tempt me, to
repent that I had not chosen another calling; much less to repent of the
Christian choice; For says Peter, Joh. 6. Whither shall we go, Lord thou have
the words of eternal life.

Secondly, We may expect so much joy, as shall make the duties of Christianity
and Ministry easy and delightful to us, Psalm. 1. 2. and make us say, that, A
day in his courts is better than a thousand, and to be a doorkeeper in his
house, than to dwell in the tents or palaces of wickedness. And that it is good
for us to draw near to God: And if any time our diseased appetites shall lose
their pleasure, we are yet sure that we have chosen the only wholesome and
delicious food; and God has Physic that can recover our appetites.

Thirdly, We may expect so much joy as shall keep us from thirsting again for
the world, or longing for the forbidden pleasures of sin, and as shall make
even the house of mourning and godly sorrow, pleasanter to us than mirth and
feasting is to the ungodly, and never desire to partake of their delights.

Fourthly, We may expect so much joy as shall make all our sufferings very
tolerable, especially those that are for truth and righteousness, Mat. 5.10,
11, 12. Believers took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, and accepted not
offered deliverence, Heb. 11. As seeing him that is invisible, and expecting a
better and more enduring substance. And that which is not joyous, but grievous
at the present, will bring forth the quiet fruit of Righteousness, Heb. 12.

Fifthly, We may expect so much joy, as ^all encourage us to hold out to the
end, and ever to forsake Christ and a holy life, as weary ^as hoping for a
better.

Sixthly, We may expect so much joy, as ^all be some foretast of the heavenly
joy, and ^ome reward here of all our labors. Yea some ^ay be filled with joy,
and peace in believing, and have unspeakable glorious joy. Romans 15.13. Pet.
1.7, 8.

Seventhly, We may expect so much as shall convince the ungodly, that we live a
more com^ortable life than they: Paul and Silas singing ^ the stocks, its like,
had some part in the con^iction of the J^ylor.

III. Whence and on what accounts may we expect this Joy?

Answ. This may be gathered from what is ^id before. 1. From the love and
acceptance ^f the Father. 2. From the grace of the Son.

From the Communion of the holy Spirit. and therefore, 1. From the goodness of
^ur work before mentioned. 2. From the ^uth of the promises of God. 3. From the
Communion of Saints. 4. From the continued protection; and other mercies of
God. 5. And from the certain hopes of glory. All which I must now but thus only
name.

There is another kind of joy, which too many seek in this sacred Office,
thereby corrupting and profaning it: And the bes^ things corrupted become the
worst, and such men most pernicious to mankind, and these rotten pillars the
greatest betrayers and enemies to the Church; I mean such as Gregor^ Nazianzene
sadly describes in his time, eve^ at the first general Council at
Constantinople And such as Isidore Pelusiota in his Epistles t^ Zosimus, and
some such others freely reprehendeth; And such as Gildas describes i^ this
land; And such as Salvian rebukes; An^ such as the Canons of abundance of
Council tell us swarmed heretofore.

First, Had there not been Prelates an^ Priests, that had placed their joy in
dominion over their brethren, and getting into exalte^ thrones, in being rich
and idle, and bowed t^ even by Princes, and mastering Kings an^ Kingdoms by
cursing them from Christ making themselves as the Soul, and Prince as the body,
themselves as the Sun, and Prince as the Moon and Stars, abusing ( Tibi da^^
claves) and ( the disciple is not above his master) to the mastering of Kings
and States as their sheep and disciples; a great part of the Church History had
been unwritten, or otherwise written than it is.

Secondly, Yea far be it from any Minister of Christ, to expect their joy from
humane applause, and the multitude of followers or disciples; to be accounted a
Learned, or a holy man, an excellent Preacher, and so to have the respect and
love of many.

A good name and love are not to be despised, when they follow fidelity as its
shadow; and as they signify the good of those that profit by the word. The
Galatians would once have even pulled out their eyes for Paul: But alas, what
is the thought and breath of man, that is hasting to the dust, and to the
impartial Judge! How small a matter should it be to us to be judged of many,
that are so near the final Judgment! And what a terrible sentence is it to the
hypocrites, Mat. 11.6. Verily they have their reward: O poor and miserable
reward! And yet what age has not seen that verified, Act. 20.30. Of your own
selves shall men arise, that shall speak perverse things to draw away disciples
after them. And Romans 16.17. Such still have been as have caused divisions and
offenses, contrary to Apostolical Doctrine, not serving the Lord Jesus, but
their own bellies (being ever fleshly, worldly men) and by good words and fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. And men that have had the form of
Godliness (or the lifeless Image) but deny the power of it by wicked lives, are
those from whom we must turn away.

Thirdly, Yea and far be it from any faithful Minister, or Christian, to take
up his Joy from a conceit, that he has commutatively merited of God, by the
excellency of his faith or labors. Alas! who is sufficient for these things?
And what have we that we have not received? Or who has given to God that it
may be repaid him? or what faithful Minister of Christ, did ever come out of
the Pulpit, or from his private duty, without grief and shame that his faith
and love, his skill and zeal, have been so vastly unsuitable to such great and
excellent things that he was about? And yet the Conscience of simplicity and
godly sincerity, and Gods forgiveness, assistance and acceptance, may set our
Joy above that shame and grief.

Fourthly, And now it is easy to see the reason why Paul accounted not his
life dear, nor was moved by the foresight of any sufferings, so he might but
finish his course with Joy.

For first, he well knew that the end would pay for all, and no man shall ever
lose by God; nor shall the most abundant labor be in vain, 1 Cor. 15.48. Is
there any Repentance in Heaven for their labors or sufferings for Christ on
Earth? Do they think that God is in their debt? Faith ever reckons that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. For which cause we faeint not; but
though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day: For
our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory: while we look not at the things which
are seen which are temporal, but at the unseen things which are eternal, 2 Cor.
4.16, 17, 18.

Secondly, And Paul well knew that he and all the World were in the hands of
God, and that he served such a Master as could easily perserve him as far as he
saw meet, from all his enemies and sufferings. And that sufferings chosen for
us by God, are better than if w^ had the Kingdoms of the World by the gif^ of
Satan, Mat. 4. Balaaks words to Balaa^^ methinks were words of Honor and Joy (
the Lord has kept thee from Honor.) O^ who would not be ambitious of being so
kep^ from Honor? The poverty and shame tha^ is by, and for God, is better than
the Prefer^ment and Honor of men: And the reproac^ of Christ is greater
Riches, than the treasure^ of Egypt. And if God see it best, he knowet^ how to
save the Righteous from trouble; and if not, to give them suffering strength
and Joy.

And it is a wonder of providence how God preserves their names and honor,
that despise Honor and life for him: so that ever they that killed the present
Prophets and jus^ men, yet build the Sepulchers of those that were killed by
their Fathers, and say, if w^ had lived in the days of our Fathers we would not
have been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets, Mat. 23.27, 28. The
wonder of that Foreigner in H. 8's. days, Deus bon^ quomodo hic vivunt gentes,
that saw men killed for being Protestants, and for being Papists; was not so
contradictory a subject as the Papists usage of the Saints, a stupendous
instance of man's madness and Satan's methods, that at the same time can rack,
and burn, and murder Saints, and yet Honor the relics, names and memories of
the dead that were before them. That while they zealously cast away men's lives
and treasure, to recover the Holy Land where Saints had lived, at the same time
murdered those by thousands that did most nearly imitate them: and to this day
kill the living Saints under the name of Schismatics or Heriticks (for not
obeying the King of Rome before God) and keep holy days for the dead, and
reverence their shrines and relics: What contempt did poor St. Martin undergo
from his neighbor Bishops, as suspected of Priscilleanisme, and as an
unlearned Hypocrite, that was for liberty for Heretics: so that he separated
from their Synods and Communion? And yet what a name has he left behind him
even in that Church, whose Prelates thus despised him?

Thirdly, Moreover Paul had now tried both the ways, of being against Christ,
and being for him; and was so fully convinced by experience and revelation of
the evil of the one, and the goodness of the other, that he had great reason to
be resolved and unmoved, as knowing that no suffering can make the servants of
Christ as miserable as his Enemies; nor any preferment or prosperity make any
one of the worldlings as happy as the poorest Saint. Because he had rather be
Lazarus than Dives hereafter, and had rather stand on the right hand of Christ
than on the left, therefore he accordingly made his choice. For he well knew
how bad a bargain it would prove, to win all the World and lose his Soul; and
to lay up a treasure on Earth so, as also to treasure up wrath against the day
of wrath; and to prepare for such an even-song, as Luke 12. Thou fool, this
night shall they require thy Soul, and then whose are the things that thou have
provided?

Alas! what gain is it to save an estate a little while, that at death must
certainly be forsaken? To save a life this year, this month, this day, that may
be gone on sadder terms the next, and certainly will ere long be gone? Is not
the Bishop of Winchester and London, Gardener and Boner now dead, as well as
the Martyrs whom they burnt? Is not Alexander the third, and Innocent the third
and fourth, and such other persecuting Popes now dead, as well as all the godly
Christians whom they murdered? Alas! what a nothing is time! and how little
difference between to day and to morrow, this year and next! That which has
been, that which is, and that which will be! Shall a man part with his God, and
his everlasting hopes, that he may be able to say in Hell, I was once a Lord, a
man of Honor; I had once full provision for the flesh, I had pleasure in the
way to the torment which I undergo?

IN the expounding of these words of St. Paul, I have but given you the Image,
or rather the Spirit of Mr. Stubbs. Funeral praises by flatterers brought into
disgrace, will be here blamed by no wise man that knew the person, no more than
in Nazianzene for his Orations for Cyprian, Basil, and others; Unless it be for
the defect, which is unavoidable.

First, This faithful servant of Christ has run his race; what that was and
how he performed it, the County of Gloucester knows, and the City of Wells in
Somerset shire knows, and this City, and this Congregation partly know. And I
will speak but little of him, but what I know my self, and have by
unquestionable testimony. His birth, parentage, and youthful life I am not
acquainted with. He was a Minister of Christ about fifty years, dying at the
age of seventy three. His studies, and parts, and labors lay not in the
Critical or Controversal way: And as he was so happy as not to waste his time
in contentious studies; so he was so humble and honest, as not to trouble his
Auditory with such matters, nor to pretend to have studied what he had not;
nor, like many proud ignorants, to boast or contend most where they know least.
His Soul was taken up with the great things of Religion. His Preaching was most
on the Baptismal Covenant, on the Articles of the Creed, the Lords Prayer and
Decalogue, and such necessary things which essentially constitute a Christian.
I never heard him meddle with controversies in public, or in his private
talks; but all, how to know God in Christ, and how to seek and serve him, and
how to resist temptations and sin, and what a life we shall live with Christ
for ever: And how to live in love, righteousness, peace and profitableness to
one another; especially how to serve God entirely, and in what state, we shall
live with him for ever. He was the freest of most that ever I knew, from that
deceit of the Serpent mentioned 2 Cor. 11.3. who corrupts men by drawing them
from the simplicity which is in Christ. His breath, his life, his Preaching,
his Prayers, his conference, his conversation, was Christian implicity and
sincerity. Not as the world ^alleth simplicity, folly; But as it is contrary ^o
hypocrisy, to a counterfeit zeal, to mere ^ffectation, to a divided heart. He
knew not how to dissemble, nor wear a Mask; his face, his mouth, his whole
conversation, laid bare his heart. While he passed by all quarrels, and
controversies, few quarrelled with him; and he had the happiness to take up
head, heart and time, with only great, sure, and necessary things.

II. Of all men that ever I knew, he seemed to me one of the most humble. His
Preaching, his discourse, his garb, and all his behavior, spoke pure humility,
and were far from pride; never did I hear from him a word of oftentation, much
less of envy at the precedence of others; he came to Christ as a teachable
Child, and Preached as a Learner, and I never heard that he strove with any. He
had learnt of Christ to be meek and lowly, and to make himself of no
reputation, nor seek the Honor that is of man. O how far was he from striving
to be above his brethren, or troubling the Church, by a proud, imperious, or
turbulent Spirit!

III. He was exceeding peaceable in his principles, and in his practice: never
contending with opiniators, or those that cry down this and that error of their
brethren, to get the reputation of being free from errors. He put not his
finger into the fire of contention nor ever that I heard of made himself of a
sect or faction, nor Preached for this party against that, except for Christ's
party against the Devils. Nor did I ever hear him in his private talk, back
bite any; nor exercise the too common liberty against others, in carping at
their infirmities, or making himself their judge: Had the Church had no more
unpeaceable Pastors, we had not been in the sad condition that we are in,
denying peace and concord obstinately to the Servants of Christ, and militating
by forbidden arms against one another. Long would it have been before he would
have reviled, vexed, or hindered any true Minister of Christ, from Preaching
his Gospel, or living in peace.

IV. He was an Honourer of his superiors, and obedient to Authority, as far as
would stand with his obedience to God. I never heard that publicly or
privately he spoke a disloyal or irreverent word of the King, or others in
Authority. After he had here Preached awhile in London, he had a preferment to
a ParishChurch in Glocestershire, of eight pound per annum maintenance, and it
had many and many years had no Minister; and by the honest connivence or
forbearance of the Reverend Bishop of Gloucester, he there Preached for some
years past in peace; of which I am past doubt that Bishop has no cause to
repent. He used part of the Liturgy, not sticking at the censure of them that
called this as their judgments led them. His judgment, his work, his age and
experience, set him above all factions inducements, and taught him to please
God, whoever were displeased: And when at last he was driven away, I never
heard him speak of it with any bitterness. He is now where Gods praises are
celebrated, and whence no holy Soul shall ever be cast out.

V. His labor was such as be seemed one absolutely devoted to God: His
Preaching was very plain and familiar, fitted rather to Country-auditors, than
to curious ears; and he chose accordingly; but it was wholly for faith, love
and holiness. He was much in Catechizing, and very moving in his familiar
exhortations, setting his whole heart upon the winning and edifying of Souls,
and longing for the success, as much as covetous Merchants do for rich returns.
He kept a private weekly meeting for the young people, to deal with them as a
Catechizer, by way of familiar questions; which was much of his labor where
ever he came: And he much rejoiced in the young peoples willingness and his
success. The greatest Benefice cannot please one that works for the fleece,
so much as he was pleased that his unwearied labor profited his flock. How
thankful was he to God, and the Bishops connivence for that short liberty to
work. And to their honor I must say, that he praised not only the friendly
peaceableness of the Magistrates and Gentry of the County, but also of his
neighbor conformable Ministers that lived by him in love, and envyed not his
liberty.

This holy man so little cared for the hypocrites reward, that no reproach of
men did move him; nor did he count his great labor or life dear to him, that
he might subserve him that came to seek and save the lost. He took that for the
joyful finishing of his course, from which Satan and many mistaken men would
have discouraged him: As it was one of the greatest aggravations of Christ's
sufferings, that he was crucified as a reputed sinner, even as a blasphemer and
an enemy to ( Caesar, and a contemner of the Law; so he knew that all things
must be accounted dung that we may be found in Christ, and conformed to him
even in his sufferings. And if a Seneca could say, that no man more shows
himself to be a good man, than he that will lose the reputation of being a good
man, left he should lose his goodness it self, and defile his conscience; no
wonder if this holy man accounted not his fame too dear to preserve his
Conscience. And indeed his Friends and Physicians suppose that his labors
hastened his death.

He came from the Country to London, again to work, and after his journey,
Preaching almost every day, and some days twice, even after he began to be ill,
no wonder if the fever and Dysentery that followed, dispatched him. At first he
fell down in the Pulpit; but recovering, went on; and so again after, till he
was disabled. Some will censure him for imprudence in such labors; But they
must consider what it is to be above the inordinate love of life, and to long
for the good of Souls. And withal, that which much emboldened him was, that he
was wont to go somewhat ill into the Pulpit, and to come better out: But the
heat of the season, seventy and three years of age, gave advantage to the
messenger which God did send to end his Labors and all his Sufferings.

Two things especially I commend to imitation. 1. That he was more in
instructing and Catechizing Children by familiar Questions, than almost any man
that I have known; which showed that he labored not for applause. 2. He prayed
as constantly as he Preached, and no wonder then that his labors had much
success. He omitted not his duty to God in his family, by the greatness of his
public labors. And a man of prayer is a man of power with God.

For my part I never saw him till his coming to live in London, I think not
seven years ago, though I long heard of his succesful Preaching. But to show
you how great his Charity was, and what a loss I have my self, and how faulty I
and others are in too much forgetting of our friends, I will tell you, that he
has often told me that (as I remember, above twenty years) he never went to God
in prayer but he particularly remembered me. But his love has not tempted me to
say a word of him, which I verily believe not to be true. And I conclude it
with this profession, That I scarce remember the man that ever I knew, that
served God with more absolute resignation and devotedness, in simplicity and
godly sincerity, and not with fleshly wisdom, and lived like the primitive
Christians, without any pride or worldly motives, or in whose case I had rather
die. And therefore no wonder that he lived in peace of Conscience, and dyed with
Paul's words, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course: henceforth
is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which God the Righteous Judge shall
give: which both Paul and he might say without any injury to Christ, or grace,
or free ^ustification. Thus did he finish his course in eminent fidelity, and
constant peace of Conscience; and what was wanting in fuller Joy, ^s now made
up.

USE 1.
AND what use should we make of all, but to imitate such examples, and not to
be moved by any trials, nor count our lives dear that we may finish our course
with joy, and the Ministry which we have received of the Lord Jesus Christ, to
testify the Gospel of the grace of God? Run the same race, and you may have
the same joy and blessed end. Would you have more particular counsel how to
finish your course with joy? I shall briefly give you some: The Lord cause you
and me to follow it.

I. He that never began well, cannot finish well: search the Scriptures, and
advise with the wise; prove all things, and hold fast tha^ which is good. Take
heed that you take no^ evil for good, and good for evil: set out in the way of
truth. If you are out of the way the faster and the further you go, the more
you have to repent of, and lament. Be honest and faithful in seeking truth, and
God will not forsake you. But go not with Balaam^ coveteous heart, and
pre-engaged purpose. O^ fear a false heart, and false Teachers, especially men
that plainly prosecute a worldly interest and design.

II. If God, Christ, grace and glory be no^ enough for you, and seem not a
sufficient portion unless you have also prosperity to the flesh undertake not
the Ministry, nor profess Christianity: For without self-denial, contempt of
the World, taking up the Cross, and forsaking all, you have but the delusory
name and image of Christianity. Absolutely devote your selves to God, and hope
not for great matters in the world: except nothing from him, suspect and fear
the hypocrites reserves, serve Christ and trust him: trust him with estate, and
liberty, and life, and Soul and all: study your duty for your part, and cast
your care on him for his part. Take no thought what ye shall eat or drink, but
seek first Gods Kingdom and the righteousness thereof. You will never finish
your course with joy, if you be not absolutely devoted to God.

III. Preach to your selves first, before you Preach to the people, and with
greater zeal. O Lord save thy Church from worldly Pastors, that study and learn
the art of Christianity, and Ministry; but never had the Christian Divine
nature, nor the vital principle which must difference them and their services
from the dead. Do you love other men's Souls more than your own? will a dead
nurse give warm and vital milk? Nothing does more to make you good Preachers,
than that which does most to make you good Christians: I thank the Lord for the
Method of his grace and providence, that cast me diverse years into the care of
my own Soul, before I purposed to Preach to others, and made me read over the
most of all our honest English practical Divines, to make me a Christian
indeed, before set my self to the artificial part. I repent ^ot of this unusual
method.

IV. Let your joyful part of Religion bemost of your Meditations: The infinite
goodness of God, who is Love; the wonder of man's Redemption; the freeness and
fullness of the promise; and the certainty and glory of ou^ future state; these
are the chief part of ou^ Religion, and of chiefest use: which must resolve us,
fix us, quicken us, and help us to live in thankfulness and joy.

V. Above all, labor to strengthen faith in Christ, his word, and the life to
come, and to live in the constant exercise thereof. Faith is it that shows us
the matter and reason of our duty and our joy: And if believing Meditation have
too long intermissions, our jo^ will also intermit. And if affliction or
weakness make our present state to be grievous to u^ and keep us from much
present joy, yet faith and hope can see that which is to come. Man^ of Gods
faithful servants labor in peace ^^ Conscience and in hope, who through
infimities of the flesh have no great joys: and y^^ may be well said to finish
their course with joy because everlasting joy is the end, which at t^^
finishing of it they obtain.

VI. Stick not at labor or suffering: Hearten not to the repining and seducing
flesh. Think nothing too much or too dear; your work is good, and much better
wages in it self, than fleshly pleasure. Labor for God and ^ouls, and keep out
selfishness and carnal ends, and God will secure your reward. Labor
^aithfully, and trust God confidently; fulfill his ^^mmanding will, whoever
countermand you: and then rest in his accepting, disposing and re^arding will,
whatever befall you in the World. His will is the only infallible rule; and his
will is the only secure and felicitating ^^st. They that conscionably do his
will, may ^^mfortably say, The will of the Lord be done; ^our brother in his
sickness often did.

His will made us, his will has maintained ^^d preserved us, and multiplied
mercies to us. (...) his will we live, and by his will we die, ^^d in his will
we hope to rest for ever. Mr. ^^ubbs is gone before; This Will has guided
(...), and this Will has received him. In (...) same good hand, I am closely
follow(...) him. Our separation is like to be very ^^rt. And none of you will
stay long behind: ^^rewel vain vexatious World: Farewell ^^lignant, lying,
cruel, World! Welcome (...), Light and Love, delightful perfect and Eternal.
Let it be our care so to finish our course with joy, that we may hear, Well
done good and faithful servant, enter thou into t^^ joy of thy Lord. Blessed is
that servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly, Amen.

USE 2.
BUt methinks I should not let you, th^^ have been the hearers of Mr. Stub^^
and such as he, go without some*notice, wh^ it is that this Text, and this
providence of G^^ do call you specially to consider. Which (...) 1. Whether you
have furthered the Joy (...) your Teachers course. 2. Whether you ta^^ care
that your own course may be finish with joy, and why it must be done, (...) how.

I. Do not think that you are not m^ concerned in the matter, whether your
T^^chers live and die in joy; Neither say w^^^ they are dead, it is too late to
mind that wh^^ is past and gone. As much as it is past, yo^ account is not
past. You may hear of (...) again in another manner than now you do^^.

You are concerned in it, 1. For your own interest. 2. For their Relation to
you, and labors for you, in gratitude and humanity. 3. As you are obliged to
the Church of Christ, and regard its interest. And 4. as you are men, and
lovers of mankind.

I. What is their Ministry but the seeking of your Salvation? And what is their
Joy, but their success, (next Gods acceptance of their labors) And if they
miss of this, is it not you that will be the greatest sufferers? If you fall
out with your Physician, or cast ^way, or cast up the only Physic that can
cure ^ou, is not death more to you, than the loss of his labor and Physic to
him? Shall the Physician mourn over his dying patient, and shall the patient
think it nothing to him? If ^he Child prosper not, or die, the Nurses sor^ow is
a smaller matter than the Child's death. ^s your unconverted, unpardoned,
miserable ^ate, and your danger of Damnation, more ^o us than to you? Will your
Hell be no more ^ainful than our compassion? And when your ^orm never dies,
and your fire will be un^uenchable, our compassion will cease, and we shall
grieve for you no more.

The God that forbad Samuel to mourn any more for Saul, will cause us to
approve of hi^ Righteous judgment, and to rejoice in the glorifying of his
Justice on you. Abraham did but upbraid Dives with his former sinfu^ pleasures.
Your Teachers, yea your own Parents will not mourn in Heaven for all the
torments that you undergo in Hell, not consent to ease you by a drop of water.
Luke ^ 16.

O what a pitiful sight it is now to see a Teacher or Parent mourning over the
misery of ignorant, careless, wilful sinners, and they themselves rejoicing and
despising compassion and laughing at the brink of Hell? I hea^^ of a passionate
Wife that cut her own throa^ to anger her Husband. And they tell us that the
Circumcellian Donatists (that separated from other Christians, in a Prelatical
ze^^ for their own Bishop) did murder themselves to bring the odium upon their
adversaries a^ persecutors.

But that poor sinners should merrily run toward Hell, to anger their
Teachers, yea tha^ multitudes should do thus, what an instance is it of the
madness of corrupted minds? On^ says, I will never hear him more: and another
says, shall I be Catechized like a Boy? and another says, These Preachers
would make us mad, if we should believe and lay to heart what they say: and
another says, Cannot one drink, and be merry, and please his flesh, but he
must be damned for it? Are none saved but Puritans and Precisians? And who is
it that will have the worst of this at last? God will not condemn us for your
sins? If you will needs be miserable for ever, our desires and endeavors to
have saved you, shall not be lost at all to us. O how dear will impenitent
sinners pay for all the tears and groans which now they do constrain from their
compassionate Teachers?

That God who is Love it self, and puts love into Parents for the education
of their Children, has also put a tender love to Souls, and especially to
their own flocks, into every faithful Minister of Christ. Which makes all
their study, and labor, and sufferings, easy to them, or tolerable at least,
for the comfortable hope which they have of men's Salvation. O may we but serve
the Savior of the World, in the gathering of his chosen flock, and in bringing
sinners from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, in making
reconciled and adopted sons, of those that were the enemies of God and
holiness, what a joy would it be to every true Minister of Christ? Did a damned
wretch cry, Send Lazarus to warn my brethren, that they come not to this place
of torments?

And shall not we rejoice if we cannot only keep sinners from those flames, but
also help them to live in joy with Christ and holy Spirits for ever. May we see
Souls in Heaven for ever praising God, and know that this is the fruit of our
labors and Gods grace. Yea may we here see holy persons living to God, and
calling upon his name, and rejoicing in hope, and serving, and honoring him in
a wicked World, and say, these are they that God has given to Christ by our
Embassage; How much sweeter will this be to us, than fleshly pleasures? And
will you not allow us the joy of your Salvation? If so, judge your selves
whether the loss of Christ, and Grace, and Heaven, and Happiness, and all hope,
will be a smaller loss to you, than the loss of such comfort, in your hoped
welfare will be to us.

O all you that are yet unconverted, fleshly, worldly persons, strangers to a
holy Heavenly life, under the Ministry of such holy men as I am speaking of,
think in time I beseech you of these two particulars.

First, What a loss is it to lose the blessing and fruit of a holy Ministry?
God gives not such to all the World. Many Kingdoms of Heathens and Infidels
have no such helps. Nay most of the Christian World have too little such: All
ears are not so happy as to hear the joyful tidings, the sound instructions,
the close convictions, the earnest exhortations which you have heard; and these
not mixed with the poison of Heresies. And will you lose, will you wilfully lose
all this? What! have the best of Physicians, and be yet unhealed? Have the best
of Teachers, that long, and labor, and pray for your Salvation, and yet by
ignorant unbelievers, or base neglectters of this great Salvation? Will you as
Capernaum, be lift up to Heaven in mercies, and cast down to Hell by your
contempt. O that you knew in time how great a loss it is to lose one Counsel,
one Sermon, much more all the life and labors of one such a Minister of
Christ, that prayed, and studied, and labored for your Souls. Do you ever hope
to be saved, or not? If not, despair is a beginning of Hell. If yea, do you
hope to be saved without Preaching, or by it? If without it, what reason have
you for such hopes, when God has made this his ordinary means? What ever hope
they may have that can have no Preaching, you can have none that might have had
it, and would not; or that had it, and despised and disobeyed it. But if it be
by Preaching that you hope to be instructed, converted and saved, what
Preaching is it? Do you look for better than such as you have lost? Or is
smaller and weaker remedies like to cure you, that to the last despised
greater? Secondly, And remember that all this will aggravate your sin, and rise
up in judgment against you to your condemnation: Do you think all these
Sermons, and Prayers, and tears, shall never more be thought on? Yes! God that
sent his Ministers, sets not so light by their labors as you do. He knows,
and thy Conscience shall one day consider what importunate exhortations thou
did neglect: How on such a day, on such a Text, his Minister earnestly
pleaded with thy Soul, and thou had nothing to say against the word, and yet
thou wentest on and did not repent. O for your Souls sake, put us not to come
in against you as witnesses to your condemnation, instead of rejoicing in your
Sanctification and Salvation.
O put us not to shake off the dust of our feet against you! Turn not all our
love and labors, to kindle a greater fire for your misery. Remember, that even
the merciful Savior of Souls has said, that it shall be easier yet for Sodom
and Gomorra, in the day of judgment than for such. Fire from Heaven declared
the wrath of God against Sodom and Gomorrah: and will you yet have a more
dreadful fire? And what moves you to all this? Do they persuade you to any
thing dishonest or to your hurt? Will you despise all our Counsel, and go to
Hell rather than love God, and learn and do his holy will, and live in the
delightful hopes of Heaven, and in love, peace and good works toward one
another? This is all that we persuade you to. And will it not torment your
Consciences for ever to remember, that this was all that you fled from God for,
and that you avoided more than sin and Hell?

Secondly, I have told you that your own interest is more concerned in the
success of our Ministry, than our joy; I next tell you, that it is inhumane
ingratitude to deny us such a joy as this. Our relation and labors for you
make it our due; shall Children deny their Parents the comfort of their Love,
when it is only their well doing and happiness that they desire? As Christ and
Angels rejoice at a sinners conversion, so do true Ministers in their degree.
And is it not base ingratitude to deny Christ, Angels and Ministers this joy,
by refusing obstinately to be saved?

Thirdly, And why do you take on you to be Christians, and no more regard the
interest of the Church of Christ? Those are the Churches enemies that will not
give up themselves to Christ, that would not have him to Reign over them, and
subdue their fleshly minds and lusts, Luke 19.27. Romans 8.6, 7, 13. That hinder
the success of the Ministers of Christ, that would build up his Church. And
what is our building, but to bring home Souls? Our Office is not of man but of
Christ: He gives us our Commission, though man deliver it us. He commands
you to receive and obey his word which we deliver you, and terribly threatens
those that will not, Heb. 13.17. Job. 13.20. Mat. 9.36, 37. Luke 9.18. etc. Is
it not rebellion against him then to be refusers? Nay what do you but as much
as in you lies to destroy the Ministerial Office, and so destroy the Church of
God. For if we are but to stand here and talk to you a while, and not to win
your Souls to God, this is but an Image or Carcass of the Ministry, as to the
success and end. As you mortify all Gods Ordinances, and turn them into a
lifeless image, so you do the Ministry to you; and make it to you, but as
sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal: Is it worth your tithes, or are we worthy
of your reverence, merely to talk to you, and never to convert and save you?

O the blindness of the minds of the ungodly. If the Seekers or other Heretics
do but cry down Ministers, and Universities, you justly rise up against them as
enemies to Christianity, and the Church; And yet you your selves destroy their
Ministry as to your selves, and would have but the name, and garb, and image;
He that would have the tenth part of all men's revenues to be settled to maintain
Physicians in the land, and yet would not have men be healed by them, is a
foolisher and worse enemy to the Country, than he that would have none at all.

Fourthly, And as you are lovers of mankind, you should not deny us so
reasonable a joy, as your own Salvation; especially to such as for the hope of
this, renounce the pleasures and honors of the world. If you could do well
enough without instructors, Christ would not have appointed them, nor if there
had been any better way for your Salvation. And for our parts, we could have
found out work and callings that would better have served us for worldly ends;
and we could live idle, and seek preferment, and flatter, and please you, and
neglect your Souls in this calling that we are in.

But then woe to us as well as you. O remember who has said, Obey them that
have the rule over you, for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give
account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for you, Heb. 13.17. He is not worthy to be called a man, that
will deny any joy or good to his neighbor, which does no hurt to himself or
others? But consider whether he be not herein worse than a Devil, that will
deny another the comfort of seeing him happy, and freely doing him the greatest
good?

Do you not see now, how much you are concerned, that you further our joyful
finishing of our course? I beseech you let Conscience judge you, before God judge
you: speak as before God; Have you been turned by them from darkness to light,
and from unbelief to a lively faith, and from a fleshly, to a spiritual life;
and from worldly love and hopes, to the love of God, and the hope of endless
joys in Heaven? Are you at a point with the flattering world, and fleshly
lusts? and have you heartily taken God and Heaven for your portion, and Christ
for your Savior, and the holy Spirit for your Sanctifier and comforter; and
the word of God for your Law and Charter, and the servants of God for your
pleasantest company, and the service and praises of God for your best and
pleasantest work, and sin for your worst and greatest enemy? If this be so,
bless God that made the word so effectual to you. But if it be not, you have
wronged your Teachers in robbing them of the joy which was their due. This is
it that we studied, prayed and Preached for: This is it that we live and labor
for. This was to have been the chief part of our reward from you. It is not
your Tithes and Money without this, that will satisfy any but an hireling.

Many old Canons of the Church forbad Ministers to receive any offerings or
gifts from unbelievers and wicked men; As if they had said, keep your money to
your selves, and think not to stop our mouths with gifts. Give up your selves
to Christ, or you give u^ nothing. I tell you it is you that are our great
afflicters: and you shall answer for it. It i^ much more to us to lose the Joy
of your Salvations, than to lose our estates or liberties, o^ worldly Honor
and Reputation. And you can never be saved if you will not be Sanctified, nor
happy if you will not be holy. Oyet look back and remember what Counsel^ God
sent you by his Ministers; and what importunities they used with you; and if
you have denied them yet their joy, O pity your selves, if you regard not them:
and deny not your selves still the present joy of a holy life, and the
everlasting joy of heavenly glory, which yet you may attain.

II. And have not you also a course that should be finished with joy, as well
as we? O Sirs, time is precious, short and hasty. This race is for all
eternity, and is to be run but once. Heaven will be quickly won or lost for
ever. Can any one hear and believe this, that has the heart of a man, and not
be awakened presently to make have? Dare you die in an unholy unpardoned state?
Dare you go out of the World more foolishly than the unjust steward out of his
stewardship, before you have provided another habitation? Dare you appear
before God without his Spirit, and image, and without the wedding garment of
sincere holiness, and so without a part in Christ? O Sirs, no heart can now
conceive what a dreadful appearing that will be. Alas Sirs, we are dying, we
are all dying, one to day, and another to morrow, and we are all quickly gone:
And do you take no care whither you shall go next, when God bids you care in a
manner for nothing else? Your course will soon be finished: shall it be with
joy, or the beginning of everlasting misery? O resolve now, resolve this day,
as you would speed for ever. Gods grace must save you, but it lies more on
your present choice and resolution, than careless sinners will well consider of.

Quest. But how should I finish my course with Joy.

Answ. You may gather it from what is said already. Are you willing, if I tell
you, to do your part? Asking Questions will not serve instead of work.

I. Will you see that you perish not through your own mere carelessness, and
wilful neglect of what you can do for your Soul: If you will not do what you
can, what good will directions do you? If men will live as if they had not
reason and self-love, and knew not that they must die, or care not what becomes
of them for ever, what can one do for the safety of such men? As men cannot
dispute, that agree not in some granted principles, so we cannot lead you to
Christ by the Gospel, if you agree not in some principles of humanity and self
preservation. A sottis^ carelessness is the undoing of the most.

II. Set your selves to study the Gospel o^ Christ, till you understand what
Salvation is, and what is the way to it, and know the nature of true Religion.
And then you will see in it so much truth, so much necessity, so much amiable
beauty and fitness to make you wise, good and happy, that it will win your
hearts to love and pleasure in it.

III. Study thoroughly the true meaning o^ your Baptismal Covenant, and solemnly
before God consent to it with tongue and heart and live as under the Obligation
of it all your days. And also live in the belief of all the promises of it, and
expectation of all the benefits promised. The sum of all your Religion for duty
and comfort is comprised in your Baptismal Covenant. Though it be an error to
be often Baptized, it is a hundred times worse error, never truly to understand,
consent and practice, after so solemn a Vow and Covenant.

IV. When you have given up your selves to God, as your God and Father, your
Savior and your Sanctifier, remember that your great relations have engaged
you in the greatest business and the highest hopes in all the World. And
therefore now live as fellow Citizens of the Saints and the Household of God,
that have nobler converse, work and hope, than worldly unbelievers. Remember
now with whom and what you have to do; and that it is not a by and trifling
business, but the best and greatest that you have undertaken.

V. Join with those, that are for Heaven, whose Counsel and Company may be your
help; separate from no Christians by way of division, further than God
commands you; and do not easily forsake the judgment of the generality of
godly men. But make few your familiar friends, and those such as are most wise,
and humble, and sincere, and cheerful in the belief, and hopes of glory, and
suitable to your use and converse.

VI. In all doubts, and difficulties of Religion, judge not hastily before you
have thoroughly heard and tried. Prefer a suspended judgment, that stays till
it have tried, before a rash and hasty judgment of what you know not, and may
repent of.

VII. Carefully govern your fleshly appetites and sense, and avoid needless
temptations, especially to sinful ^leasure. For lust will conceive else, and
bring forth sin; and sin being finished will bring forth death. You will find
sin and comfort contrary.

VIII. Especially fear the flatteries of the world, and hopes of a pleasant
life to the flesh on earth, and an itch after riches, plenty or preferment, and
designs for the attaining them; love not the World, nor the things that are in
the World, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and pride of life, the
portion of the wicked, for if any man love the World (for the flesh and it
self,) so far the love of the Father is not in him, 1 Ioh. 2.15, 16.

IX. Value precious Time, and live not in idleness: spend time as you would
hear of it at last, and as those that know what it is to have but one short
life to determine where they shall live for ever. Hear and abhor all pastimes
and triflings, that would rob you of your time.

X. Converse daily in Heaven while you are on earth: let Faith still see it;
Let Hope still make after it, and let Love desire it, and delightfully remember
it. There is our Father, our Savior, our Comforter, our friends, with whom we
must live for ever. There let our hearts be as the place of all our hopes. And
let the strain of your Religion be as Heavenly as you can; Let it consist in
love, in unity and concord, in the joyful praises of Jehovah, and in a pure
holy life. This will raise you above the sinful love of this transitory life,
and the fear of death, and give you the soretasts of Heaven on Earth, while you
do Gods will on earth as it is done in Heaven. But it is the Spirit and grace
of Christ which you must beg and seek, and on which you must obediently depend,
for the performance of all this, and not upon your unconstant wills: Without
Christ we can do nothing; but by his strengthening us, we can do all things
necessary to our Salvation; and we are more than Conquerors even in our patient
sufferings, through the Captain of our Salvation who has Conquered for us.

Thus we may finish our Course with Joy.

FINIS.

