AN ESSAY FOR Regulating of the Coin: Wherein also is set forth,

I. How we have lost that Import of Plate and Bullion we formerly had. II. What
is become of the great Quantities of Money coined in the Reign of King Charles
II. and the preceding Reigns. III. The necessity there is at this time for to
rectify the present Coin of the Kingdom. IV. By what Methods the Charge of
calling in the present Money, and bringing it to a designed Standard, may be
accomplished. V. Whether the Method proposed for the advancing of our Money (and
the Bullion of which its made) be Convenient or Inconvenient for the Trade of
the Nation.
The Second Edition: With an Additional Proposition for the Regulating the Coin.

By A. V. Merchant.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Cumberland, at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCVI.

To his Excellence Sydney Lord Godolphin, One of the Lords Justices of England,
etc. AND To the Right Honorable Charles Montegue, Chancellor of His Majesty's
Exchequer; Sir William Trumbold, Knight, one of His Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State; Sir Stephen Fox, Knight, and John Smith, Esquire, Lords
Commissioners for the Executing the Office of Lord High-Treasurer of England;
and of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Excellence, and your Honors,
WHEN I consider what Occasion there is for the exhausting, and what
Disadvantages we are under by the defacing of our Coin, though I have but one
Myte, I would gladly cast it into the Treasury.

My Offering is not considerable for Value, but I hope it will be found to be
of just Weight. And since your Lordships are the Keepers of CAESAR's Purse, I
promise my self you will vouchsafe to look upon my Penny. To which if your
Lordships will give your Stamp, I doubt not but it will pass for Sterling.

I know the Metal I bring is Course, but I must leave it to better Artists to
Refine; I bring it to your Lordships, as we are wont to do our Gold and Silver
to the Assay Masters, that if it bears your Touch, it may be Coined, if it
proves Counterfeit it may be Suppressed.

I am, my Lords, Your Lordships Most Obedient Servant, A. U.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
AS it was not the Esteem I have of my own Capacity to manage so intricate a
Subject, that first engaged me in it, so its not the Opinion I have of my own
Performance that persuades me now to Publish it; I know others are better
furnished for such an Undertaking, and if what I have written may but provoke
them to it, I shall have my End, though it be accomplished by another Hand.

That it is the Value of our Coin that has occasioned it is being Melted down,
Clipped, Transported and Counterfeited, I hope I have sufficiently proved; and
if you will but allow me this Foundation, I promise my self you will not
quarrel with the Superstructure, which though not built according to Art, yet I
hope it will prove agreeable to Reason.

September. 2. 1695. A. U.

CHAP. I. Setting forth how we have lost that Import of Plate and Bullion we
formerly had.
THat we have had not that Import of Plate and Bullion, does proceed chiefly
from the present War we are engaged in, and that wherein the Spaniards were
with the French, before us, which now for these 15 years past has put a stop
to the regular Proceedings of the Fleets they used to send annually to the
Vera-Cruz, Cartagena, Porto bello, Hunduras, Rio de la Plata, Havana,
Marracaya, and other places in their West Indies, whither they carried great
quantities of our English Manufactories (as well as of most other Countries;)
and those Ships in former times, used to make a Voyage in 12, 14 and 16 Months,
and bring to Spain among them above thirty Millions of Pieces of Eight (in Coin
or in Bullion) which is above six Millions of Pounds Sterling; and since their
War with France (and the daily apprehension they had thereof) it has been
sometimes three or four Years Interval between their coming home and going out,
which has obstructed a great part of that Consumption we used to have of our
Manufactories, and the return that used to be made for them in Plate and
Bullion. And the French, Dutch, Genouese, Italians and Portugueses, have been
proportionable Sufferers by it also. It has likewise had an influence on our
Turkey, East India, Barbary and Guinea Trade, the said Fleets taking off great
quantities of Wax, Blacks, Mohairs, Carpets, Callicoes, Silk-stockings, made of
Turky-silk.

Another Reason why we have not that Import of Bullion and Coin, proceeds from
the charge of our Fleet abroad; the proceed of those Goods that used to be sent
home in Plate and Bullion is now diverted to supply them.

Another Reason proceeds from a greater than usual Import of Spanish and
Portugal Oil and Wines since the War, that we used to have from France and
Italy (before) in return for our Manufactories, which has also obstructed the
Import of the Plate and Bullion.

Now this extraordinary Import of Spanish and Portugal Oils and Wines proceeds
(the latter from the Expense of them in room of those we used to have from
France before) from the extraordinary Hazard and Charge it would be to the
Importers of Oils to bring from Mayork and Gallipoly, more than it is to bring
them from Portugal, Sevilla or Malaga; the further they fetch it the greater is
the Freight, as is the hazard, and of consequence the Insurance; so that the
Merchant Importers can and do from these Considerations give a better price for
Oils in Portugal, and in any part of the Kingdom of Spain as high as Malaga,
and thereby we lose the Sale of many of our own Manufactories that used to be
truck'd for Oils, or that proceed employed therein, and now being brought in
greater quantities from Portugal and Spain (which the Importers pay for in
Money) obstruct the Importation of so much as they Import, or of Bullion, or at
least increases our Debt on the balance of those Trades.

Another Reason that has prevented that Import of Plate and Bullion,
proceeds from the little Encouragement that has been given to Trade in
General, and the little care had to our Manufactories in particular, the
returns of which would have supplied us with Bullion enough (from those
Countries that take off the Product of ours) to carry on a Trade with those
that do not. But we have lost the Expense of many of them, by not keeping them
up to a Standard, as the Colchester Bays are (or ought by Law to be) every one
making our Serges, Says, Stuffs and Stockings of less goodness each day than
other, so that of late years, they have come to Foreign Markets so bad, that
other Goods of other Countries have been introduced in the room of them. And
the making of our Silk-stockings of East India Silk that used to be of Turkey,
we have thereby lost the Expense of them in Spain, and in the Spanish
West Indies, for which Markets I have known one Man send out of England thirty
thousand Pair a year: By which may be computed the Loss that it has proved to
us thereby. And now they are chiefly supplied by the Genoueses and Italians. By
these (and the like Methods) we have not only lost the Expense of our own
Product and Manufactory, but have obstructed by it the returns there would have
been made (for such Commodities) in Foreign Bullion.

And for the retrieving of our lost Trade, and the preventing any future Loss
thereby, it will be necessary that a Committee of Trade be erected to sit every
Week for the Improvement thereof, and that they have full power given them to
have our Cloth, Serges, Says, Stuffs and Stockings both Silk and Worsted to be
made of such a Length, Breadth and Weight; and a Penalty to put on all that buy
or sell any but what are so, and also empowered to encourage those Trades that
most conduce to the Nations Interest; and, on the contrary, to discourage any
Superfluities from those Countries that Import to us more than they Export of
our own Product or Manufactories.

CHAP. II. Setting forth what is become of the great quantities of Moneys
Coined in the Reign of K. Charles II. and the preceding Reigns.
THE Loss of our Coined Money has proceeded from the suffering Bullion to be
Shipped off, when the price of it does exceed the value of our Coined Silver
and Gold, under the notion of Foreign Bullion (as really it is ab origin). But
still it may be our Coin melted down and sold to those that Export the same,
and four Pence and six Pence might, and now twelve Pence may be got by a Crown
piece, or five Shillings of unclipped Money so melted down. And twenty per Cent.
advantage is a good Allay for any scruple of Conscience those may have that
practice it; and those that receive and pay one thousand Pounds a day, and
meets with but one hundred pounds among it of unclipped Silver, may in a Year
(accounting but three hundred Days) get six thousand Pounds Sterling.

For the preventing of which it would be necessary that no Foreign Bullion
should be brought into the Kingdom, but what should be carried to the Tower,
and stamped there, or at least none suffered to be shipped off again, but such
as had the Tower Mark. And if this Method were used, no Bullion could be
Exported that had been coined here, or wrought into Household Plate.

And because much of our coined Silver and Gold may be believed to be melted
down, it would be necessary that none were suffered to melt down old Plate or
Gold, or the Dust thereof. But that a convenient place or places may be
appointed where all such Gold or Silver should be meltd down, and when so
melted, then marked with a particular Mark, by which it should be known to have
been old Plate or Gold so melted, and then delivered to the Owner or Owners
thereof, for which he should in Books for that purpose stand Debtor, and in the
same Books be credited again by a Certificate from the Gold-smithsHall of the
Ounces of Plate he or they has worked up, and the Wyer-drawers should, bring
what they have so worked up to be weighed. And the same method used for any
Bullion that is designed to be worked up, if this or any other method could be
put in practice, one Halfpenny in an ounce would defray the Charge, and save
the Life of many a Man; for if this be practiced, those that steal Plate cannot
so easily dispose of it.

Another Reason we find for the Decrease of our coined Money, proceeds from the
great Increase of the use of Plate in the Public and Private-houses, which I
compute amounts to as much (if it does not more) as the Silver Coin in the
Kindom, the very Improvement of which in Trade I leave any to judge how useful
it would be to promote the Nations Interest, which now lies dead; besides,
advances the price of Silver and Gold, and occasioneth thereby the
melting-down of our Coin; and if there be but seven Millions of Pounds Sterling
in Household Plate (and things made thereof) and in Gold Rings, Buttons,
Buckles, Watches, Sword-hilts, etc. the very Interest of that Money at six per
Cent. amounts to four hundred and twenty thousand Pound a Year, and in seven
Years, with the Annual Interest, amounts to three Millions and five hundred
twenty five thousand four hundred and ten Pounds Sterling.

Therefore it would be highly necessary that no Person but of such a Quality
should be suffered to use Plate in their Houses or Utensils made thereof, or at
least not any pieces of Plate above such a value; and those that will have
more, to take out a License for it, and pay the King five per Cent. per Annum
for it toward the support of the National Expenses.

CHAP. III. Setting forth the necessity there is at this time to rectify the
present Coin of this Kingdom, which is so much adulterated and lessened by
Coining and Clipping.
THE Arguments for the proving the necessity there is for the immediate
Regulating of the Coin might be many, but for Brevity sake, I will reduce them
to these following.

First, That from the present Exorbitant rise of our Coin, and the Bullion of
which its made, we come to lose as much Money as the Money is advanced, by the
Goods we Export. As for instance, to make it more plain, I ship for Spain one
hundred pieces of Serges, which cost me two hundred Pounds all Charges aboard,
and before the rise of our Coin and Bullion, would sell in Spain for twelve
pieces of Eight aboard in Gold (or pieces of Eight.) But now our Coin is risen,
and the Bullion of which it is made, I can sell the same Goods for Eight pieces
of Eight, being those Eight will yield me here in England as much as the Twelve
did before, so that by the rise of our Coin and Bullion, we come to lose one
third of the value of our Exports; and if we Export to the value of nine
Millions a Year, we consequently lose three Millions of Pounds a Year, so long
as our Coin goes unregulated; which alone I think is a sufficient Argument to
prove the necessity there is at present of regulating our Coin and Bullion.

But it may be Objected, That although it be true we do lose one third part of
what we Export, yet its only on such Goods as we sell for Money, with a design
to bring it home: But that this has no manner of influence on such Goods as we
sell abroad, and return other Commodities for the proceed of them, which is for
the greatest part of the proceed of our Exports, and consequently your Argument
will not hold good, that it is so great a loss to the Nation.

I say, still the loss is the same. Trade to what part of the World you please,
their Coin is the Standard by which their Goods are Sold, and if you can make
so much of their Coin here at home, so consequently the Goods you bring are
rated to Cost you; so let your Trade be for Money or in Barter, it tends to the
same end, and by it we lower our own Product and Manufactory, and raise that of
other Nations, and Enrich them by our own Ruin.

Another Reason that may be given for Regulating our Coin, is because the
poorer sort of the People in the Kingdom pay more than the amount of any. Tax
laid on them (for the support of the War) has amounted unto, particularly in
Coals, Corn and all things made of Leather, these being bought and laid up by
Monied Men, who conclude thereby they shall see their Principal and Interest,
and prevent the Loss which they apprehend may be by the Coin when regulated,
and is a great occasion of the rise of most other things.

Another Reason that may be given for the Regulating of the Coin, may proceed
from the baseness of the Mettle, and from the Clipped Money, which latter being
of less Value than Coined for, gives Encouragement to our Neighbors to Coin
Money of the like weight (and probably not of the full Allay) and bring it over
here, which may be believed from the great profit they may make, and of
consequence we may increase the national loss five hundred thousand Pound a
Year; together with the bad Money that may be imposed upon us by them (and our
own Country Men;) and its not unlikely but the demand of Bullion may arise the
more from the Expense this way.

For hitherto, the Importation of our own Coin has not been regarded or taken
notice of by the Officers of the Custom house, or by others, supposing it to be
only a return of what is carried out by Travelers, Soldiers and Seamen; and
Money brought over in a Bag sealed up, is so delivered to the Person that goes
aboard for it; therefore it would be more convenient to have all Money and
Bullion lodged in some place, and after it was inspected into, delivered to the
Owners thereof, whereby the false Money may be found out when so Imported.
Besides our Soldiers, Seamen and Travelers take care to carry the best Money
out of the Kingdom; for though bad goes here, it will not with other Nations;
and then its liable to be Clipped there, and returned us.

Another Reason that may be given for the Regulating of our Coin and Bullion,
is that when its so done the Expense of the War may be carried on with less
Charge than now it is, for all Money for the supply of our Fleet abroad costs
the King twenty nine per Cent. more than it may be done for when the Money is
regulated.

For they that have Money abroad will not give it under five Shillings and six
Pence a piece of Eight, because the Silver in a piece of Eight will yield them
so much, the Charge and hazard of bringing it home being deducted.

When Tangier was in possession of the English, that Garrison was supplied with
pieces of Eight from Cadiz, at four Shillings and four Pence, which now costs
the Nation (to supply the Fleet) five Shillings and six Pence, and is twenty
nine, and one sixth per Cent. difference, and in five hundred thousand Pounds,
one hundred forty five thousand eight hundred and thirty three Pound is saved.

CHAP. IV. Setting forth by what Method the Charge of Calling in the present
Money, and reducing it to a designed Standard may be Accomplished.
FOR the making good the Loss that may arise by the Clipped Money, I do not
apprehend any Method more effectual than the calling in all the coined Silver
and Gold, and re-coyning it into pieces of the same denomination, but of less
Value in Substance.

And that value, less in substance, to be in proportion to what is requisite
for making good the Loss by the clipped Money, which I do compute to be at least
two Millions of Pounds Sterling. Thus,

I suppose eight Millions of People, and they to have twenty Shillings one with
another in coined Silver, and that three quarters of it is clipped, which is
six Millions, and that one third of that is clipped and worn away, so that two
Millions will be the Sum required to make the same good.

It cannot be imagined that I have undertaken to Treat on this Subject without
making some Inquiry into the quantity of the Money there may be, and what may be
lost by the clipped Coin. And although I may err in the Computation of the
quanity, yet the quality may be pretty near computed, and upon trial, I have
found,

That five Shillings of Milled-mony has weighed eight Shillings of the present
current Money, and three Shillings of the eight was not clipped, only worn.

Again, I have found ten Shillings in Mill'd-mony to weigh twenty one Shillings
of the clipped Money.

Again, Twenty Shillings Mill'd-mony to weigh forty three Shillings of our now
Current Money.

I have gone to several Goldsmiths in London, and have got them to take out of
their Counters a Bag of one hundred Pounds (as came to hand) which upon trial I
have found at one place to weigh

Oz. dw. gr. A Bag of 100 l. 230 13 6 Another place 100 l. weighed 222 15
Another place 198 17 Another place 190 Another place 182 3 Another place 174 11
20 1198 05 17

The six hundred Pounds weighing in all one thousand one hundred ninety eight
Ounces, five penny Weight, and seventeen Grains, and is no more than what three
hundred and ten Pounds in Mill'd-mony will weigh.

I am informed the Money paid into the Exchequer does weigh from fifteen (and
seldom the 100 l. reaches) to twenty Pounds weight: So that the very best
brought in there does not weigh two thirds of what it ought to do, and the Money
paid into the Exchequer is supposed a great part of it to come from the Country.

But as it is believed that the Money in the Country is generally not the one
half so bad as it is in and near London, I have procured an Account to be sent
me from the following Cities, from whence I am informed, that one hundred
Pounds does weigh on trial of two Bags in each place, to be, viz.

Oz. dw. gr. In the City of Bristol one Bag of 100 l. weighed 240 00 00 another
weighed 227 15 00 In the City of Cambridge a Bag of 100 l. weighed 203 05 10
another weighed 211 00 19 In the City of Exon one Bag of 100 l. weighed 180 07
00 another weighed 192 03 00 In the City of Oxford 100 l. in half Crowns
weighed 216 10 00 100 in Shillings 198 00 15 Oz. 1669 01 20

The eight hundred Pounds weighing sixteen hundred and sixty nine Ounces, one
Penny weight, and twenty Grains; and is not more than four hundred thirty one
Pounds fifteen Shillings of Mill'd-mony will weigh, and but a very small
difference between the weight of the Money in London and the Country.

And if there be but four Millions and three hundred thousand Pounds, it will
require two Millions to make good; these are Experiments that any may make with
very little trouble, and on which I make my further Computation; since two
Millions of Pounds, is the Sum supposed or calculated to be necessary for the
making good of the clipped Money, the next thing to be considered is how to
raise it.

For effecting of which it will be necessary to make an estimate of the coined
and uncoyned Silver and Gold that may be in the Kingdom, which I compute to be

Eight Millions in coined Silver.

Three Millions in coined Gold.

Four Millions in uncoyned Silver.

One Million in uncoyned Gold.

Which several Valuations amount to sixteen Millions of Pounds Sterling, and if
twelve and a half per Cent. be taken from it, the said twelve and a half per
Cent. will amount to two Millions of Pounds, and will answer the loss by the
Clipped-Mony.

So that what Money is new Coined, must be at the rate of twelve and a half per
Cent. less weight each species than before it was coined for.

And the Gold and Plate that is uncoyned advanced twelve and a half per Cent.
in like proportion.

For the Collecting of the said twelve and a half per Cent. to be raised on the
Houshold-plate and Gold, and things made thereof, I would have every one that
has any, be obliged to carry it to the Tower (or to Places appointed for the
same purpose) and there have the 12 per Cent. taken out in specie, or paid down
in Money (at the Election of the Owner) and when so done, it should be stamped,
and when so stamped, it should be of twelve and a half per Cent. more value
than before, to countervail for what was taken out and paid into the Mint.

And all things made of Gold or Silver after a day prefixed, that should be
found or offered to be sold, or left by any Deceased unstamped, should be
forfeited.

And all Bullion either Gold or Silver, wrought or coined, Imported into the
Kingdom, to pay seven and a half per Cent. in time of War on the Importation,
and ten per Cent. in time of Peace; and then also stamped, thereby to prevent
the imposing on us coined Money from foreign Parts, for if they have the
encouragement of five per Cent. in time of War, and two and a half per Cent. in
time of Peace on the Importation, they will never run the hazard (nor can afford
to be at the Charge) to Coin Money.

And although I have proposed the Raising of our Money twelve and a half per
Cent. yet it ought to be considered whether 2 l per Cent. Allay may not be
necessary to add to it, the Reasons pro and con being these.

First, That Allay in Silver or Gold does make it the more durable.

Secondly, When the Coin has Allay, and not the Housholdplate, etc. it is not
so liable to be melted down, for the Charge and Trouble for to separate it will
much discourage the working it up, being more easy to add Allay to it, than to
substract it from what has been coined.

Thirdly, The putting in Allay into our coined Money will prevent its being
Exported, or if Exported will occasion its return again, no duty being laid on
such Money returned.

The Objections that I foresee will be brought against the adding of Allay to
our coined Silver and Gold, are these.

Object. 1. That Metals that are mixed, may be the better falsified, and the
Color, Sound, and Weight not so well distinguished.

Answer, For the same reason, I propose only two and a half per Cent. and not
twelve and a half per Cent. Allay to make up the weight taken from it, which
cannot make any great difference in the color, sound or weight, but it may be
discovered if a greater proportion be added, at least such a proportion as to
countervail the undertaking.

Object. 2. But if there should be occasion for the future to alter the Money,
it cannot be so well done as by Money of pure Silver.

Answer. When all our Money has proportionable Allay in it, it may be raised
or lowred without recoyning; and for the same reason (with others I shall show
hereafter) I propose the recoyning all our present Moneys, as well what is not,
as is clipped.

Object. 3. But it will be a dishonor to the King (and Kingdom) to have his
Stamp on mixed Money.

Answer. Two and a half per Cent. is but a small addition to the Allay, our
Coin has at present, and it cannot be believed any dishonor since, it is the
practice of other Nations as well as it is of our own, witness our Copper Money.

Having laid before you my proposal for the raising of two Millions of Money by
raising the Coin twelve and a half per Cent. and all household Plate and things
made of Plate and Gold, and laying an Imposition on all Plate Bullion or
foreign money Imported, I proceed in the next place to answer those Objections
that may arise from the Proposal, especially such as have not any reference to
Trade, which I design the Subject of the next Chapter.

Object. I. I see by your Proposal you would have all the Silver Coin called
in, as well that which is not, as that which is clipped, and defaced, which
will be an unnecessary Charge and Trouble.

Answer. The reason why I propose the recoyning of the good as well as the bad
Money, proceeds from the Confusion there will be otherwise in all receipts and
payments, for if the old Coin (that is unclipped) be only raised in proportion
to the new Coin twelve and a half per Cent. there will be odd fractions of
Farthings (as I shall show hereafter) which will be very troublesome in
Accounts, and to raise the six pence to seven pence, and so the Shilling, half
Crown, and Crown in proportion, is to raise sixteen and two thirds per Cent.
and is more than requisite to be raised for the end designed, and nothing less
will make each Species even pence.

So if the unclipped Money be not recoyned, it must be raised four one sixth,
or eight two Thirds, or twelve and a half per Cent. for if it be under or over
either of these, the Fractions in the several Species will be under or over a
Farthing.

Now if you advance our Silver and Gold twelve and a half per Cent. and the
Import thereof be sixteen Millions, it will raise six hundred sixty six
thousand six hundred sixty six Pounds, thirteen Shillings and four Pence, and
then the old Coin, if only raised in proportion, and not all recoyned again

l. s. d. The Guinney that did pass for 21* s. 6 d. must pass for 1 02 4 The
Crown that passed for 5 s. must pass for 0 5 02 The half Crown that passed for
2 s. 6 d. must pass for 0 2 07 The Shilling must pass for 0 1 00 The six Pence
must pass for 0 0 06

If the Coin and Plate be advanced eight and one third per Cent. it will raise
on Million three hundred thirty three thousand three hundred thirty three
Pounds, six Shillings and eight Pence; and then, if not all recoyned,

l. s. d. The Guinney must pass for 1 03 03 The Crown for 0 05 05 The half
Crown for 0 02 08 The Shilling for 0 01 01 The six Pence for 0 00 06

If our Coin and blate, etc. be raised twelve and a half per Cent. it will
raise two Millions, and if not all recoyned then l. s. d. The Guinney must pass
for 1 04 02 The Crown for 0 05 07 The half Crown for 0 02 09 The Shilling for 0
01 01 The six Pence for 0 00 06

Another reason that may be given for the recovering all the present Money both
clipped and unclipped, is because its impossible for to coin new Money in
proportion to the value of the old, for the old Money has been already culled,
and the weightest gone, and what if left is light and worn, so that the new
Coin will be still better if not abated in substance, and that cannot be
because there is a great difference in the weight of the pieces of Money, so
that still the new Coin will go from us or be melted down, and the old remain.
And the same inconveniency there will be to have more Allay in one than the
other.

If these difficulties can be overcome, I agree with you it will save a
considerable Charge and Trouble, and the Memory of the preceding Kings and
Queens will be the better retained from the keeping of their Coin.

Object. But if you recoyn all the present Money in the Kingdom, in the
interval where shall we have Money to carry on our Trade, and for Household
Expenses, etc.

Answer, First, I would have the twelve and a half per Cent. raised out of the
uncoyned Silver and Gold, and the same coined into Shillings and six Penny
pieces, which may amount to a Million of Pounds.

Then I would have the half Crowns that are clipped called in, and coined into
Shilling and six Penny pieces also; and paid for out of the Money coined from
the household Plate and Gold, etc. as far as it will go, and if they amount to
more, then Notes to be given for the over plus, which should be as current
Money until the half Crowns were new coined and delivered out.

When the half Crowns are paid for then I would have the clipped Shillings and
six Penny pieces called in, and new coined into half Crowns.

Then the unclipped Money called in, and coined into Crowns; and the Gold into
Guinneys and half Guinneys.

And all Money unclipped should pass in proportion to the rise of the Money
immediately, and brought into the Mint and stamped, paying the twelve and a
half per Cent.

And by this method we may carry on our Trade, and supply our selves for
household Expenses, etc. till the whole was finished.

Object. But notwithstanding you by your Calculation do make the loss by the
clipped Money to amount to two Millions of Pounds, and bring a Computation
thereof from what you have had weighed, yet it can-never be believed to be so
much, for you do not consider that since the rise of the Gold, that great
quantities of Milled and unclipped Money have been hoarded up (in lieu of the
Gold) expecting an advantage by the Silver, whenever the Coin is regulated.
Therefore you must undoubtedly have over computed the Loss, and of consequence
the Sum, required to make it good: And therefrom you do but disquiet the
People, and make the regulation of the Coin more difficult.

Answer. If I have over Computed the* Loss, it will not be so great an Error as
if it had been under Computed, for should it fall short, and a stop be put to
the execution of the whole, then what may be done, may be to do again by that
time you can raise Money for it. And then also it cannot be by the same method,
having coined at first in proprortion to your first Computation.

But by being over it may be applied to the Charge of the War, for which Money
must be raised.

But you will find I have Computed it also for six hundred sixty six thousand six
hundred sixty six Pounds, thirteen Shillings and four Pence, which is four and
one sixth per Cent. advance, then I have Computed it for one Million three
hundred thirty three thousand three hundred thirty three Pounds six Shillings
and eight Pence, which is eight and one third per Cent. advance, and then for
two Millions of Pounds, which is twelve and a half per Cent. advance, so that
either of these may be taken as may be found necessary.

But if the coined and uncoyned Silver and Gold in the Kingdom should be but
eight Millions (as some Compute) and one Million required to make good the
loss, yet twelve and a half per Cent. must be raised, for as the loss by the
one abateth, so does the value of the other in proportion prove less.

Object. But it will be unreasonable that every one should be obliged to carry
their Plate to the Tower, or to the next Market Town they live at because some
may live Miles from a Market (and many of those Gentry) that may have more
Plate and unclipped Money than they would run the hazard of to carry to and
from the next Market Town.

Answer, In such a case, the person or persons appointed for the stamping of
Plate, etc. may go to the House of any person where they are advised to be
above fifty Pounds value of Plate to be stamped, or any Villiage where they may
bring it all to one house in the said Villiage to have it done.

Object. But how will it be possible for such small things as the Watches,
Rings and other small things made of Gold and Silver to be stamped: and if they
are not stamped or marked, how shall it be known which of them have, and which
of them have not paid.

Answer, It Is very true, there may be a great many things made of Silver and
Gold that cannot bear Stamping, or marking now they are made up, but there is
nothing but what may when making, therefore it would be necessary that an order
may be given for the future to have the Date of the Year, or any oother Mark
put on all such things as shall be made for the future, and thereby they will be
known not liable for to pay. And for those things that are already made, a
Cirtificate may be given, what has paid, specifying the parcels, and to what
value as near as can be guessed, and no body should buy any such things but the
Owner should produce the Certificate, to have paid the twelve and a half per
Cent. But this not to excuse what can be stamped or marked.

Object. But many people may be desirous to keep the Old Coyns by them, either
to the respect they have to the Memory of those Kings or Queens in whose time
they were coined, or as the Gift or Legacy of some particular Friend, and would
think it hard to part from such Pieces.

Answer, They need not only paying the value they ought to pay in Money and
suffering them to be Stamped, they may retain the quantity of any Coyns they
desire.

Object. But why may not our Coin be only raised, and the uncoyned Plate and
Gold excused, and all Plate and Bullion that shall be Imported since the Charge
and Trouble therefrom will be so great?

Answer, If our Coined Silver and Gold be only raised, then we should have as
many Coyners as there are at present Clippers, from the advance they would make
by buying up of Plate and Gold, and then Coining it, and the like may be done
in Foreign Parts with less hazard, and Imported hither, and besides, the
uncoyned Plate and Gold would in a short time advance thereby near to the value
in the coined Money, and be only an advantage to particular persons, and not
the Nation in general.

Object. But if the method you propose be put in practice it will be a great
Charge to execute it, besides that of new coining the Moneys, from whence shall
that Charge be paid.

Answer, If two Millions be raised, then that two Millions will be of the new
Coin, two Millions, and two hundred and fifty thousand Pounds, as being twelve
and a half per Cent. of less weight, and will more than answer the Charge in
execution of my Proposal.

Object. You by your Computation do make to be three Millions of Guinnies, and
old Gold to be in the Kingdom, which going now at 30 s. a piece, when the Money
is regulated will be 8 s. 6 d. loss in each Guinney, and is 42 per Cent. and
this loss will be the ruin of many Tradesmen, and those that had never any hand
in the raising of them, or benefit by them, and it will be very hard they
should thus suffer, so great a loss, and the Consequences thereof may be of
greater detriment than at present may be foreseen.

For never was a greater demand of our Manufactory than now, which proceeds in
a great measure from the apprehension of the necessity there is to regulate our
Coin, therefore every one is employing their Moneys in Goods, to avoid the loss
that may accrue to them by the Gold, or the badness of the Silver. And
therefore this loss will be severe to the Managers and Workers of our
Manufactory; and Tradesmen who they will now pay, for to put off their Gold.

Answer. I am very sensible of the great loss it will be, by the fall of the
Guinnies, and of the Consequence that may be therefrom, therefore I would have
the amount of the Imposition laid on Plate, Bullion and Foreign Coin,
appropriated to make good that loss, and be a Fund to pay the Annual Interest
thereof, which may answer the principle.

Object. But as the Import of Bullion, Plate, and Money into our Kingdom is a
benefit to it, it cannot be imagined the Parliament will lay an Imposition
thereon, but rather Encourage the bringing it in, by some allowance to the
Importer.

Answer, The Imposition laid on the Importation of Plate, Bullion, and Foreign
Money (by my Proposal) will be no hindrance but an encouragement to the
Importers thereof, for in time of War, they have 5 per Cent. and in time of
Peace 2 per Cent. advantage thereby, as you ll see by it, for if the Plate and
Bullion be advanced twelve and a half per Cent. and the Importer pay but Seven
in time of War, and Ten in time of Peace, the remaining 5. or 2 per Cent. is
profit to them, and it ought not to be more being Foreign Commodities will rise
in proportion to the encouragement you give, for the Importation of Plate,
Bullion, or Foreign Coyns.

Object. But if when our War is over and our Trade improved, it should be
thought necessary to reduce our Coin again to the present Standard undoubtedly,
that Charge and future Trouble may be avoided by keeping it so now.

Answer, Should it be thought convent hereafter for to reduce our Money to the
present Standard it is of (or ought to be) then it would be necessary to recoyn
all our Money of same Weight and Allay they are at (or should be) at present,
and to make them Current at Sixteen and two Thirds per Cent. more than they go
for now, and then the several pieces will be

l. s. d. The Guinney that passed for 21 s. 6 d. must pass for 1 05 01 The
Crown for 0 05 10 The half Crown 0 02 11 The Shilling for 0 01 02 The
Sixpence. 0 00 07

But in such a case I would have all Coin, I late and Bullion that is Imported
to pay Eleven and two Thirds per Cent. in time of War, and fourteen and one
sixth per Cent. in time of Peace. And then also all uncoyned Plate and Bullion
in the Kingdom either Gold or Silver to pay Sixteen two Thirds per Cent.
proportionable to the rise of the Coin.

But I would have but twelve and a half per Cent. taken out of the Gold, and
the other four per Cent. go toward paying that loss that the owners will have
by them, which loss will be the sooner paid by the Duty on the Plate and
Bullion Imported.

And all money uncliped should pay but twelve and a half per Cent. also whereby
it will prevent those that have it to clip it.

But still should we be obliged to reduce our Coin to the present Standard when
the War is over, yet I do not foresee (while we are engaged in it) we can avoid
the raising of our money and the Bullion of which it is made.

For I apprehend the laying a severe penalty on any that shall take more for
any foreign Commodity (as Bullion is) then such a price (which he cannot afford
it at) is in effect to prohibit the same.

Again if Bullion be under the value of our Coin, then of consequence it will
be melted down, and both what we have in Bullion or Coin will go out of the
Kingdom as fast as the Gold has of late come in.

Again, should we not raise our Plate and Bollion as well as our Coin, you lay
a Tax on the possessors of the Money, and advance those that are owners of the
Plate and Bullion: And I think the general good of the Nation ought to be
preferred before that of particular persons, who are also such that have reaped
a Benefit by the Calamity others lie under.

CHAP. V. Whether the Method proposed for the Advancing our Money and the
Bullion of which it is made, be Convenient or Inconvenient for the Trade of the
Nation.
BEfore I Treat of the Inconveniences, or Conveniences that may follow the
raising of our Coin, Plate and Bullion, it will be necessary to answer one
Question that may arise, which is,

Whether the regulating of our Trade will not more effec^ually answer the end
proposed, than the raising of our Money, Plate and Pullion; for if our Imports
do exceed our Exports, of Consequence the Balance of our Trade must be paid in
Bullion or Coin, or our Trade must Sink.

Answer, That the Improvement of our Trade will increase our Coin and Bullion
is most certain, and is of as great importance that the prosecution thereof be
carried on (for that end) as far as the present Circumstances of our Nation
will permit, during the War, which may extend so far as to balance our Trade
with other Nations, and also contribute toward the necessary expense of the
War abroad.

But the regulating of our Trade can never answer the regulating of our Coin,
and making good our Clipped Money, which must be done either by raising the
Value, or the raising of a Tax to make the same good.

Which is the next thing to be considered of, whether it be not more the
interest of the Nation to raise a Tax, and make good the clipped Money (and
keeping it up to its former Standard) than by raising the value thereof, and
the Bullion of which it is m^de.

With s^^^ission to better Judgments, I do apprehend it (...) r^st of our
Nation to raise our Coin, Plate and (...) to raise a Tax for the making go^d
the clipped (...) ^hi^h at this juncture of time (or during the War) can^^^
(...) executed for these following reasons.

F^^s^, Should the Parliament find out a way to raise a Tax of two Millions of
Money for the making good the clipped Coin, such a Tax in Conjunction with what
must be necessarily raised for the support of the War will be of as ill
Consequence to raise (in one year) as the making good the clipped Coin is
necessary.

For there will be a further Tax, or Loss to the People (which i^ equivalent)
of one Million of Money (if not more) by the bad Coin.

And more one Million two hundred seventy five thousand Pounds by the fall one
Guinnies (which they will do when the Silver Coin is regulated) and Compute but
three Millions of them and in Old Gold.

So that four Millions two hundred seventy five thousand Pounds will be the
Sum the Nation must pay, or will suffer one way or other; besides what must be
raised for the support of the War.

And when a Tax is given for two Millions of money, for the making good the
clipped Coin, it will be a year in the raising (besides the Charge) and another
year before the money can be recoyned, in which time we shall too sensibly
increase our Debt on the Balance of Trade.

And although the money should be anticipated, yet then it must increase the
Charge from the Interest thereof.

But this must be effectual money, and not Credit, so that it will be the more
difficult to raise, considering at the same time the bad money goes not, nor
the Guinnies, for above twenty one Shillings and six Pence.

Besides should our money be recoyned of the same Weight and Value, and
fineness as it went for before, we have no greater security of keeping it in
the Nation than we had, or can we thereby prevent its being melted down, for it
has been the Value of our Silver in the Milled-money, that has been the
occasion of its being melted down, for Exportation or making up into Plate here.

Now the reason why I apprehend and affirm it to be the value of our Coin, that
has been the occasion of its being melted down is this.

Silver and Gold is none of our own Product, but is brought from the
West Indies, Guinney and Barbary, and nothing that comes from Foreign parts,
in time of War, but costs more than in time of Peace, as we found here in
England at the breaking out of the War, all Foreign Commodities immediately
were risen, proportionably to the distance from whence they came, and the
hazard thereof: As did our Silver and Gold, for those that had any in Bullion
by them, at the breaking out of the War, were sensible it would be worth more,
being before the War, they could insure 100l worth of Bullion home to England
by a good man of War) at own Guiney per Cent. which afterward would (and did)
cost seven per Cent. Here therefore is a reasonable rise for our Bullion.

But still, this is not all in time of War, we have not those frequent supplies
as in time of Peace; this brings a scarcity of it, and that again raises it
more and more.

From whence people finding the profit that may be made by melting down of the
Coin, do it; others they Clip it, and thence again becomes another reason for
the rise of the Bullion, the badness of the Coin, and the demand of Plate
therefrom.

And when the Materials of which any Commodity is made is dear, it is evident
that Commodity must rise: As when Corn is dear, Bread rises, and when Wool is
dear, our Seiges rise, and so for other things, and Consequently, I think that
our Coin ought to be raised.

And I cannot but think the King of France did raise his money at the opening
of the War for this reason, and having been made use of several times, it is not
to be doubted, but an advantage has been found thereby, and a main support to
him in the present War.

And this is another reason for the raising our Coin twelve and a half per
Cent. and our Plate and Bullion, and money that is Imported to pay but seven
and a half, or ten per Cent.

Now since the method for the increasing of our Bullion, and keeping of our
Coin (by the Improvement of our Trade and Manufactory) has no influence to
remedying our present clipped Money, we ought to pursue those methods that will
do it, which is by raising of our Coin, and the Bullion of which it is made; and
I am persuaded will be more agreeable to the people, than the raising a Tax to
make the same good. (...) having been already done without an Act of
Parliament, therefore it may be believed would be contented an Act should pass
for it. For from the raising of our Coin, we shall reap these advantages.

First, There will be two Millions less to raise by a Tax on the People.

Secondly, What is raised for the support of the War, they will be better able
and will more Cheerfully Pay.

Thirdly, It will give a larger extent to the Cash of the Nation, and thereby
lower the Interest of Money.

Fourthly, Therefrom it will increase our Trade and Manufactory, and from it
our Navigation.

Fifthly, Again from their Improvement will arise the Value of Land.

Sixthly, We shall be the better able to hold out the Charge of the War, and he
that can spend the last Pound, is like to prove the Victor, for its Money that
supplyeth Men and all other Instruments of War, Offensive and Defensive.

The Objections that may be against the raising of our Coin and Bullion may be
these.

Object. But the Coin of those Countries that have any, has been the M^asure
or Standard in all times of our Trade and Commerce from one place to another,
and of Consequence, if we lower or raise ours in value, it will be of no
validity for the end proposed. But may be of great trouble to our Merchants,
and put a stop in our Trade, until such time as it can again be regulated
according to the rise or fall of our Money

Answer. The Objection had been very reasonable, if it had been made by the
Subjects of the King of Spain or Portugal, or by any people, or Nation that are
obliged to suffer, or connive at the Export of their Coin and Bullion, as not
having sufficient Manufactory of their own, to give in return for the Goods
that are Expended of other Countries amongst them.

And those that carry such a Kingdom, or Nation any sort of Merchandise, and in
Return or Exchange, receive coined Money or Bullion, I will allow they must
make a Computation of the Weight and Allay thereof, that it may so correspond
with that Country they carry it too, as that they may not lose by it.

But I deny that our coined Silver or Gold has been, is or ought to be
Standard for any Commodities that are Imported, but to those people that Export
our Coin or Bullion in return for them. And that, that Trade that does require
it is the most pernicious Trade to our Nation.

And the Effect of raising of our Coin will have this Benefit, that the Goods
of such a Kingdom or Nation, will advance in proportion to the rise of our Coin
and Bullion. And therefrom discourage the Importation of Commodities that are
introduced (and we can be without) and prevent the offense that may be given to
such a Kingdom or Nation, by a prohibition which would be otherwise requisite,
and by this means we may the better balance our Trade with them.

But still suppose we Import from every Kingdom or Nation* and People we Trade
with, more of their Commodities than we do Export to them: And that the balance
of the Account of Trade may Import one Million of Pounds Sterling a Year (for
it is evident it has not been always so) which for the discharge of the Debt so
contracted by our Trade, it is requisite you ll say money or Bullion must go out
of the Kingdom to pay the Balance, and will do notwithstanding any Law to the
Contrary.

That our Imports do exceed the value of our Exports now is not to be admired,
since we lose as much money as it is advanced, in value by our Exports. So long
as the Coin goes unregulated (as I have showed in the third Chapter of this
Book) and if we lose thereby but two Millions a Year when our Coin is
regulated, we shall bring them in Debtors on the Balance, of Trade on Million a
Year, which will supply the Expenses of our Fleet and Armies abroad, without
having occasion to send out Coin or Bullion.

Object. But you give us an Example, that the rise of our Gold and Silver is so
great a disadvantage to the Trade of the Nation, that from the present advance,
that if we Trade for nine Millions, we lose three thereof from our Exports. And
yet you your self propose a method, and would have it raised twelve and a half
(or eight one third of four one sixth per Cent. as there may be found occasion)
which seems a Paradox to your proposition, for as I apprehend it, we shall
then lose in proportion to the rise that may be made on the Coin and Bullion.

Answer, It may be so supposed by those that have not well considered the
proposal it self. But you ll find my proposal different from what has been
practiced by other Kingdoms, and that the advantage by the raising of our Coin
and Bullion will not accrue to any particular person, but to the Nation in
general, for the twelve and a half per Cent. I propose to have taken out of the
Gold and Silver, either in Coin, Plate or Bullion that goes to make good the
present extraordinary want in the clipped money, and loss by the rise of
Guinnies.

For if I pay eighty seven Pounds ten Shillings for Goods that I Export, and
twelve Pounds ten Shillings to the Nation, I cannot sell these Goods under one
hundred Pounds. and yet those Goods shall not be the dearer abroad than be^^re
whereby the expense of them will not be obstructed.

Object. But if our Coin and Bullion be raised, all things whatsoever will
rise, as it did in Spain and Portugal, and therefore we had better raise a Tax
and make good the clipped money, than leave it to the mercy of each Trader to
do.

Besides they are likely to continue it, and if Taxed by Parliament, it may be
but for a certain time.

Answer, I do affirm it to be a general mistake, (and do appeal to those
persons that lived in Spain, or in Portugal at that time of the rise of their
Money in either of those Kindom) for nothing did rise that was the product of
their Countries; as their Corn, Oil, Wine, Fruit, House-rent, Salaries, etc.
for what eight Ryals of the old money would pay for, eight of the new would
answer, which was twenty per Cent. of less value in Spain. And nothing but what
was imported into those Kindoms did raise, and not the Exports of their own
Growth and Manufactory, which as I have already hinted, proceeded from the
account that foreign Merchants made of their money, by reducing it to the
Standard of the Country they sent it to, which also proceeded from the want of
Manufacories of their own, to Balance the account of Trade

And therefore they do (tho against their Law) connive at the Export of Plate
and Bullion, for if they did not, they could not maintain their Indies, nor
having Manufactories of their own Countries to supply them (and from whence is
brought the Treasure to Spain) and they not being supplied with Apparel and
those necessaries they now receive, would soon Revolt from them, and have a
Tradewith those that could and would do it.

The last rise of the money in Spain, was the 14 October 1686. their style,
when the piece of eight was advanced to ten Ryals, and the Vellone from 12 to
15 Ryals, and any that doubts the Truth of what I have inserted, may from
hence examine their Expense Books, before and after that time; and also the
price of Malaga-Fruit, and any other Goods bought with ready Money, and not in
Truck, or taken for an old Debt.

For I say all such things or Commodities that used to be bought, and agreed in
Vellone, did not rise.

Object. But if our Coin and Bullion be raised, the King's Revenue will be so
much the less (in proportion to what he receives) as the money is raised.

Answer, I do not foresee any loss it can be to the King's Revenue by the
raising the Money, which of it self is of no use, but for the purchasing those
things that are useful, and if Provisions, Clothing, House-rent, Salaries and
Wages is not raised (in which said Revenue is spent) there can be no loss to
the Crown.

Nor can it be believed that any of our own product or Manufactory will or
ought to) rise for the same reasons, and the Experience we have found, that
they have not (but rather from the Taxes) although our Gold is advanced 42 per
Cent. (and our Silver Coin now Current, is not much above half what it ought to
be) therefore it may be believed it will not, when it is brought down to twelve
and a half per Cent.

The Tin-money that was, and the Copper-money that now is (was and is) as
current as our Gold and Silver (and now more) and though that wants of the
Value, yet it purchases any thing we have to buy at Market as well as our
Silver without the Sellers raising the Value therefrom.

And I presume nothing that is bought and paid for in BankNotes, is advanced
the more, as not being in Specie, and the same Power that Established the one,
doing the other may be as good payment, and not so liable to the misfortune of
a Domestic War as the Bank will be) should any such happen, not but that I
think the Bank is of great advantage to the Nation now, and may be more
hereafter.

Object. But if you give so great incouragment to the Merchant Importer of
Plate and Bullion, as 5 per Cent. in time of War, and two and a half per Cent.
in time of Peace, then Foreigners from the advantage arising thereby, will be
sending of Bullion and Plate over.

Answer, From hence will arise our advantage, and I cannot apprehend any
disadvantage (unless what before hinted,) to us, the bringing of Gold and
Silver into the Kingdom for it cannot be believed that they will Import more than
they Export Commodities of our Kingdom for, therefore the Consequence from it
will be, we shall thereby increase our, Trade and Navigation, and therefrom the
value of our Lands.

Object. But if our Coin and Bullion be raised, then the Soldiers and Seamen
abroad cannot be suppli^d with necessaries (without a great loss) by the money
so raised, for tho and Act of Parliament should make the Coin (so raised)
Current here, in another Country they will expect the full weight, and the King
must raise the Officers and Soldiers and Seamen^s pay, as much as the Coin is
raised.

Answer, When our Coin is once regulated, and our Trade improved (as I have
already set forth) we shall become the Creditors on the Balance of Trade, at
least on Millon a year, which is hoped may be sufficient for to supply the
necessary Expenses abroad, so that they ll be paid in the Coin of the Country
they are in, and will be no loss to them, as not having occasion to remit the
Coin or Bullion of our Kingdom to pay them.

Object. But this Balance of Trade will belong to Merchants and not to the
King, and they holding up of exchange of money so high from own place to
another, it will be the same loss to to the Kingdom, to remit it by exchange as
in Coin and Bullion.

Answer, The high praemio's that are demanded, and given for the exchange of
money from one place to another, proceeds from the over Balance of Trade, and
from whence that arises I have already in some part shown you.

That over balance of our Trade, caused the Export of our Bullion for the
payment thereof, and that Export caused the rise of our Gold and Silver.

The rise of our Gold and Silver occasioned the melting down and clipping of
our Coin, from the advantage thereby.

Then our money proving so bad by clipping and counterfieting, occasioned again
the great rise of Gold.

This great rise on Gold, occasioned the raising of the praemio of Exchanges.

For says the Merchant that has money abroad, I will have so much for the
Exchange of the money, or I will bring it home in Specie; for here in England,
it will yield me so much to Coin, and Gold and Silver is not worth more in
other Countries this year than it was the last; but from the misfortune we lie
under by our Coin, which once regulated, you will find it also in the exchange of
money, and so long as it goes unregulated we lose the extraordinary praemio
given.

Object. But if our Coin be raised, our Exchanges will rise in proportion from
one place to another, as it did in Spain, all Bills running so many pieces of
Eight in Gold as it went before the Proclamation for raising the Coin.

Answer, I have already showed the reason which proceeds from the same, as that
of raising the Foreign Commodities in Spain. But I do not forese^ any for the
raising our Exchanges, for if one hundred pounds of our new raised money will
purchase the same value of Goods as the old, there can be no reason to alter
the Exchange, although we should our Coin.

But the Members of the Bank of England will be the persons most capable to
regulate the Current of Exchanges, by their examples in those places where
there is any.

Obj^ct. But the landed Men of this Kingdom, are those on whom the greatest
Burden of the War has layen hitherto, and if our Coin and Bullion be raised,
of Consequence their Land will be worth so much less Silver (if sold) than
before.

Answer. We see Taxes lower the value of Land, and by the raising of our Coin
we excuse the raising a Tax on it, besides for raising of two Millions it is 20
per Cent. on the annual rent, and I cannot sorsee where the landed men can
suffer by it, but on the contrary of advantage to them.

To prove which we will suppose a Genleman of five hundred Pounds a year to
have 100 l. worth of Plate and uncoyned Silver and Gold, and so each of them in
proportion to their yearly Income, and that instead of paying 100 l. for five
hundred a year they have (at 8 per Cent.) they I pay but two years Interest of
one hundred Pounds, and can loose no more should the Coin and Bullion be
brought again to the present Standard.

Again, I leave any to jude whether the landed Men would not suffer much more
should our Kindom be drained of its Coin and Bullion (by which Trade will
decay, and of consequence the Value of Lands lessen) as it will do if our Money
is not raised.

Object. In Spain I remember on the rise of the money, there were many Law
Suits commenced about the Debts then owing, whether they should be paid in the
old or new Coin, and for Goods contracted and not received, and on money
deposited and untold, which in the end proved a loss to the Creditor, and if
such should happen here it would breed far greter confusion.

Answer, From my proposal there can be no manner of dispute between Debtor and
Creditor, for the value disputed for in Spain, here goes to the making good
the clipped money, and can be no manner of advantage to either party.

Object. But Gold and Silver is risen every where abroad, to to the value that
our Gold and Silver goes for here, therefore the value of our Bullion cannot
be altered.

Answer, I must confess I have heard the same Objection made, but not by
persons whose calling leads them to know otherwise, and it is the praemio of
Exchanges, and the Charge or Hazzards that Merchants are at extraordinary,
makes our Bullion the dearer to bring home, and is not dearer at the place from
whence it comes.

The Repository, where the Gold and Silver is laid when brought from the
Indies, is Spain, and if you will remit thither a Bill of Exchange, for five
hundred pieces of Eight, you may buy with it as many marks of Silver, or
Castillanos of Gold, as you could have done before the War with the same money,
now that Plate and Gold is dearer in France, Holland, Flanders, etc. proceeds
from what I above set forth.

Having finishing what I first proposed, I shall only add, that unless, our
coined money be kept above the value of Bullion, we shall continue under the
present Inconveniences. And therefore Bullion out not to be exported when it
exceeds such a rate, but that price to be in reason for what it may cost the
Merchant Importer extraordinary in time of War. And if so, our Coin must be now
advanced whether by increasing the value, without altering the Species, or by
diminishing the matter, and leaving the same Name and value, or by leaving the
Species of money of the same value and weight, but the fineness abased by
pu^ing more Allay will te^d all to the same end.

But if our Coin be raised, it is most certain our Bullion will also, and be
only an advantage to particular persons, which if done by the method I propose,
will acrue to the Nation in General, and save the Expense that it will
otherwise be to the landed Men.

From what has been treated on, we find that the regulating of our Coin, and
the improvement of our Trade is of equal necessity, and the less useful we make
Foreign Commodities among us, the better we shall accomplish both, and it is
thought the prohibition of Muslings alone, would be at least five hundred
thousand pound a year advantage to the Nation, and that the one third part of
what is here expended is not brought directly from the Indies, but from
Holland, which with other Commodities much increases our Debt on the Balance
of Trade, and may be supplied by Manufactories of our own.

FINIS.

