A VINDICATION Of the Late Reverend and Learned John Owen D. D. BY A Friendly
Scrutiny Into the Merits, and Manner of Mr. Rich. Baxters Opposition to Twelve
Arguments concerning Worship by the Lyturgy, said to be Dr. Owens.

By a hearty Friend to all good Men, and of the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond
of Peace.

Detrahere, vel detrahentem audire; quod horum damnabilius, non facile dixerim.

Bern. Rumor res sine test, sine judice, maligna, fallax.

Tacit. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Malthus, at the Sun in the Poultry. 1684.

A Friendly Scrutiny into the Grounds of Mr. Richard Baxters Treatment of Dr.
John Owen deceased, and the manner of it, in his Examination of twelve
Arguments, never Printed; but, according to Mr. Baxters Title of his Book, said
to be Dr. Owens. In a Letter to Mr. Baxter, by a lover of all good Men, and a
hearty Friend to the Unity of the Spirit, in the bond of Peace.
Reverend Sir,
I Have some months since seen diverse small manuscripts in the hands of several
private Persons, containing reasons against some Men's attending to the Worship
of God by the Liturgy, under their present Circumstances; and said to be Dr.
Owens. I read over most part of one of them, but I not apprehending in them
that Accuracy, and close arguing, as suited the well known abilities, and
printed works of that Pious, and learned Author; concluded they were not his:
or (at least) not the products of his Industry, nor intended by him for a
public view. And this was not my Opinion alone, but the sense of others, both
of greater, and lesser latitude in the points controverted therein.

The first reports I had of your undertaking to expose, and confute them in
Print, as Dr. Owens upon hearsay, was to me (all Circumstances considered)
somewhat of surprise, though not altogether increadible. Yet I hoped your
Prudence would obtain the ascendant of any inclination of your own, or motions
from others to such a task: It being your often repeated advice, that in things
Lawful, yea, sometimes Duties; we are to consider whether they will do more
good, or hurt; and accordingly to act, or desist.

But the thing is done; whether well, or ill. And I have found it in the hands
of diverse Persons of Quality, to whom you sent them, and from whom I perceive
you are likely to have no great return of thanks, nor do I find it well
relished by many of those, who bear a special respect to your Person, and are
of the same sentiments with you in the latitude of private Men's Communion with
the Parochial Assemblies. But let every Man prove his own work, etc.

Dear, and truly Reverend Sir (for such the real Affection, and value I have
for you, moves me to style you) I beg of you to reflect again on this Action,
and consider if it savor of that Evangelical Love, Union, Peaceableness, and
Wisdom, which you have professed (and I believe sincerely) so great a Zeal for.
Sir, I need not tell you for your information (but it may be you need a
remembrancer) that in the best of Men, private, and sinful Passions may join
with holy Affection, and serve their ends by it, and upon it: and that, where
holy Zeal, a stirring nature, strong Parts, and an exuberant invention, and
elocution are one man's properties; a double Caution and wariness is more than
needful: and such often overdo, seldom the Contrary. And (to speak my thoughts
freely) I believe that as this ill circumstanced Action of yours is matter of
grief to seriousholy Persons of differing persuasions, (as to the points
agitated by you) of sport, and scorn to haters of all Religion, and Godliness
in truth: so upon the whole it may make work for your own Repentance.

I have had the advantage of some Personal Acquaintance with the worthy, and
Reverend Doctor you presume you oppose, and also with your self: And I have
that veneration for you both, that I cannot be insensible of what concerns
either, much less of what concerns both in so high a degree. And had the
Doctor, surviving you, trampled on your Grave, and taken such unequal
advantages against your good Name, and Principles, as you have done of his; I
should have been under the same obligation, and inclination to embalm your
memory, and adventured my going less in his respects for my pains.

I do not pretend in what follows, to maintain against you, that it is unlawful
to use a from of Prayer, or comply with an imposed Lyturgy, or under some
circumstances to join in the use of ours in Worship. For beside the hazard he
exposes himself to, who assaults such an armed Interest: Enough has been
written pro and contra, already to inform, and it may be to tire any Reader,
who knows what to do with his time: besides, the torrent of violence and fear,
or anger, its effects, scarce leaves men freedom, and quiet enough for a due,
and rational weighing what is written.

Neither shall I undertake to justify altogether the 12 Arguments you have
Printed as Dr. Owens, in order to refuting them. If you had had a mind to be
doing with them, nakedly as Arguments; such as they are, better or worse;
without interesting in them the Reverend deceased Doctors Name: You might have
done your pleasure, and displeased no body that I know of: at least not cast
such a dead fly into the precious Ointment of the name of that worthy Person,
whom your Charity places in Heaven, and whose memory notwithstanding, will be
precious with the Saints on Earth.

But that which I proposed to my self was, according to my small Prudence, and
weak Abilities, First, to signify to your self, and therein to others, whom by
exposing that work so, you have interested in it, that there was neither Reason
nor Justice in Printing, and Printing against those Arguments as Dr. Owens. Nor
(all Circumstances considered) a compliance with that Honor, Love, and
Tenderness, mutually due, especially from Persons of your, and the Doctors
Station, and Circumstances, while living; much more from the surviving to the
dead.

Secondly, That the reasons you oppose, (be they whose they will) are not
altogether so tardy, and contemptible, as you make them seem to be. And seeing
you were resolved they, and the Doctors Name should run the Gantelope together,
and their weakness be your Weapon to wound him; a little Weapon Salve may
contribute to the cure of his good Name by way of Sympathy.

And Reverend Sir, if I shall let fall any thing in what follows, that is
contrary to that Respect I profess to bear to you, I can say it in truth, that
it is not only beside, but against my intention; and if I can espy it, when
done, it shall suffer a deleatur.

The Manuscript of Arguments which you profess to consider, you all along
superscribe D. O. to each Argument, which is enough to entitle him to them as
their Author precisely, in common sense. Although all the ground you give for
so doing, is, that they are said to be his, which you so express in your Title
Page.

Dear Sir, do you not know that the world is full of Falsehood, and the better
part of Men subject to many mistakes, and not only innocent, but very hurtful,
and injurious ones too. Conclusions are too often mere, or ungrounded guesses,
and they that carry on such mistakes, are partakers in the imprudence, and the
evil Consequences also, which they put out of their power to cure.

You say Sir, of a Book you reply to, bound up with this, that it is famed to
be Mr. Ralphsons, and upon that ground proceed to censure him accordingly.
Whereas his Jury (who could not be supposed partially indulgent, and who had
all the Evidences that could be procured, to prove Mr. Ralphson the Author, and
improved by the Bench, and Impleaders, to that end to the utmost) durst not
from common Fame, nor that particular evidence they had, find him the Author,
and thereby expose him to the penalties. But Sir, you pretend not such
particular evidence to father these on the Dr. but only that it is said; Your
proceeds thereon are therefore more groundless, and the censures, and
reflections you write upon his dust much more uncharitable.

But if it be inquired by whom it was said? So far as your Print pretends to
(which I suppose has made report of your best evidence, your wisdom being
seldom wanting to your interest in such cases) it was by an unknown Author of a
Letter to you lately sent: Title to the Letter Printed, with Mr. Baxters piece
now Considered. In the second line of that Letter, which you say was Dr. Owens,
viz. the Manuscript here concerned. (Also some of the Doctors Friends, who, or
how many, or what grounds they had for so saying, is yet a secret.) What poor
Evidence was this, to fix so faulty a work (as you your self represent it) upon
so worthy a Person? But although your Informers Person was unknown to you, yet
somewhat you knew of him according to your Letter printed. And though it may
seem enough to object, that the Book was printed off, before the Letter of this
Person unknown, came to your hands, (or the other Chode you for answering) and
this report could not be the Evidence on which you proceeded. To this I say,
that then, for ought it appears, your Evidence was less then any ones; who did
affirm it to be Dr. Owens, except common Fame? And, non emibus and non
apparentibus eadem est ratio. Moreover, when you had his Letter, and observed
such a positive reporter of the Manuscripts being the Doctors, to be such an
injurious frequent mistaker against your self; and in his reports to your self:
it had been enough to persuade you to put a stop to the dispersing of the Book;
lest that affirmation should prove a mistake also. And O that we were arrived
to that practical justice, as to be as sensible of injuries done to others as
to our selves, and as careful to avoid having any hand in them! You say in your
printed Letter to this Informer line 14. But your misinformation tells me the
pitiful case of most in the world. Your honest reproofs are founded on
abundance of untrue conceits: There are about twenty untruths, through mistake
in matter of Fact, in your Letter; and how gross are many of them? I shall
leave the inferences from these words of yours to your own ingenuity.

But let it be supposed that the Doctor had written somewhat called Arguments
against Liturgical Worship; and delivered it to some private Person or Persons
in his own handwriting. Could this be sufficient ground for you to print your
Manuscript Copy, and deal so severely with it? Worthy Sir, I conceive, and not
rashly; that it is possible, and probable there might be many variations in the
transcribing, which it may be was done by many hands, and those none of the
most exact: and by that time your Copy had its being, as unlike the Autograph,
as a Boys Scribble is to an Artists Copy. And Sir, You know that every fair
Antagonist will examine the Printers Errata, e're he will presume to understand
the sense of the Author examined, and to be opposed: which, how you could do
here, let any discreet Person judge.

And if it be granted yet farther, that the Copy you Printed, and examined,
were the Doctors; and the very Autograph it self. It may be justly presumed
that he not intending it for the Press, but for the private use of some private
Persons; he took not so much care in the Composure of it, as he would have
done, had he designed it to the adventure of a public Test. O Sir, how would
you take it, to have any of your indigested Scripts, never intended (at least
in that dress) for a public view, and what concerned points greatly, and with
too much animosity controverted, to be so exposed under your name, and dealt
with so Critically, and with so much reflection? I have known you very tender
in printing what was of great use, and not liable to much opposition; without
some plain intimation of the Authors consent; as in the case of Judge Hale of
worthy Memory. And I take it to be a right in works of this nature, that the
Author be owner, and disposer of them as his property; till he have made them
common, and without limitation; as any other work whatsoever. But Sir, to
conclude this unpleasant Section, I never knew a precedent of the like nature,
and it may be nor your self neither.

I shall in the next place look into the reasons you give, for thus exposing
the Arguments; notwithstanding the grief and reluctance you profess at such an
undertaking, against so holy, and worthy a Person.

First, Because, (to give your own words,) The last sheet of my reasons for
Communion being Printed, and the opposite 12 Arguments suddenly sent me, as
being in many hands, and such as would frustrate all that I had written, if
they were not answered: For the sake of such as have not skill to see Truth
from Error, and are led by prejudice, and names, I durst not in Conscience let
them pass unanswered; they being of such dangerous tendency, and so exceeding
erroneous and fallacious. Postiscript. page 1.

To this I answer, that as to your mention of the Arguments, being suddenly
sent you; I know not well what to make of it for your justification. For, it
appears by this, that you had not the notice of these Arguments fathered on the
Doctor, or at least not the arguments themselves, and their tendency; but after
the Printing of the last sheet of the tracts, bound up together with this: And
then your undertaking cannot be excused from too great suddenness, and
precipitancy. Moreover it is a fair ground of doubting, that they were not in
many hands; seeing they came to your hands, and (for ought I know, or you say)
to your notice no sooner: And I know that I have seen a Copy of somewhat like
them about a twelve month since, and I believe were but in few hands before
your concerning your self with them.

But as to that part of the information which looks like the prevailing motive,
that they were such as would frustrate all you had written, if they were not
answered. Either you believed it, or not: If you did not credit it, it would
have proved but brutum fulmen, and wrought no farther effects by you. But if
you did believe it, I know not who can excuse your so easy credulity of that,
which was not only improbable, but as near as can well be imagined to
impossible.

Improbable (if you have given a right, and due Character of the Arguments) to
work any such great effects against your Arguments, which you do not seem to
suspect of any feeble parts, at least such as may endanger their main Cause, by
whatever force assaulted. I must here necessarily transcribe your Character of
the 12 Arguments, you take Dr. Owen to task for.

In your Preface, toward the end, It Is true that abundance of good people
fear, and distaste Communion in the Lyturgy: What wonder, when such reasonings
as these 12 Arguments (which how gross soever, people have not the skill to
answer) persuade them it is false Worship, and heinous sin. Dear Sir, I fear
that those people, who have not the skill to answer the 12 Arguments; will be
found to want skill enough to discover the strength of yours. And I confess
it is matter of lamentation, that on all sides Peoples Opinions are mostly, and
most strongly (I will not say guided, but) mastered by their affections: and
it is beyond all our power to cure the disorder, though the best way I know, is
so far to lay aside all the very appearances of enmity, and bitterness; and to
be clothed with so much love, meekness, and all that is lovely, that we may win
their hearts, and then it will not be hard to influence their heads, Ad modum
recipientis recipiatur.

But I have not said the worst you say of the 12 Arguments in contempt. You add
Postscript p. 6. The 12 Arguments I understand are likest to prevail most, by
the honor of Dr. Owens name; more then by any strength that is in them: I was
willing as long as I could, to believe that they were not his, they being as
frivolous, and fallacious as any of the rest, and one Error managed with above
forty mistakes. Here Sir you render them very feeble things, but for Dr. Owens
name; and yet you have contributed the strength of Dr. Owens name to them in
Print; which you had far better have left out, upon more scores than one. But
how long were you willing to believe they were not his? Not long to be sure;
for it was a very little while betwixt your receipt of the Arguments, and
Printing them, and intitling Dr. O. to them. How frivolous the Arguments are in
your account, may be best understood by the Comparison, as frivolous as any of
the rest. Among the rest were Mr. Warners, of which, you say in the next words
foregoing. Mr. Warner has since Printed a farther Accusation, with the same
charge of Idolatry, and false worship; against the manner of Worship not
instituted, -- and said so little, that I will not write for him that cannot
himself confute him.

In short Sir, I know not Mr. Warner, nor his writings; but those you speak of,
are so feeble, that he who cannot confute them himself, shall have no help from
you; which in sense is, they are so easily confuted, that he that has any
degree of understanding, or that is capable of information, may confute Mr.
Warners Arguments, if he will; and consequently the Doctors, being never a jot
more invincible, if you can but get over his name. O for Moderation! This
overdoing passionate work spoils all. Well Sir, I suppose you will allow me
that the 12 Arguments considered nakedly, were not the danger you feared.

Yet I must not forget that I said it was next impossible (take them as armed
as you can make, or imagine them) that they should do such mischief as your
informer affected you with the apprehensions of, viz. To frustrate all that you
had written: We will suppose it meant of all the tracts bound up with this.
Dear Sir, could you imagine that those Scripts would visit as many hands as
your Prints, or that all that had your Prints, and might receive any good by
them, would certainly meet with these 12 Arguments, and be conquered by them. I
beseech you Sir, be not so easily persuaded by such hotheaded heedless
reporters, as to make their reports, that carry precipitancy, weakness, and
contradiction in their Foreheads, the occasions of such distastful (and J fear
worse) tasks as this.

The other motive to expose them is, the Doctors name being so prevalent. But I
pray Sir, who gave them that name? Truly some few private Persons privately;
but Mr. B. upon the public Theater, with a Noverint Vniversi. But Sir, you
Printed them with the Antidote, both to the thing the Poison, and the Vehicle,
the Doctors name, that did so powerfully insinuate it. But Sir, what is this,
but opposing your name to the Doctors? Your name thrust in voluntarily (some
say violently) to his, dragged upon the Stage after his Decease, against his
will? Seriously Sir, though I have heard many of your Friends, who would rather
be partial for you, than unjust, speak of this matter; I never heard one of
them attempt an excuse for your concerning Dr. Owens name in your Print. And
some will not stick to say (do you or I what we can to the contrary) that this
is but the working of an old Spleen against the Doctor, and taking very
ungentily this advantage. But Sir, I am confident whatever the deceitfulness of
sin may do, you would abhor the appearance of such an evil.

I have not overlookt what you have said, as well to justify your self from all
prejudice against, or designs upon the Doctors name; as also that you have said
to render it a strength to Weakness, and Error; and a prejudice against Truth,
and Argument. And indeed in many things you speak very honorably of him. But
Reverend Sir, whereas you say, It is so far from your design, to wrong the name
of Doctor Owen by this defense; If you have done, or it be the tendency of your
work to do it, though the design be far from it, that will not be a just
compensation.

Now Sir, I remember where you your self have hinted an excellent advantage to
have avoided, much of what is now so distasted. You say in your Letter to the
unknown Author, That the Doctor owned the ill Principle, which you now confute,
viz. against all Public Worship by Liturgy, and against man's power to command
any more than Christ has done in the order, and manner of Worship, and Church
Government; and this to be seen in his Preface to his Original of Churches, his
vindication of the Nonconformists, etc. And you add also, That for the many
healing, peaceable passages in those Books you long purposely forbore all
contradiction of him in it, (though you plainly answered his Arguments in your
Cure of Church Divisions.

When I look on the use you make of these passages, I am confirmed how
different men's Constructions may be; and how cautious we ought to be of
partiality. Sir, I find the improvement you make of the same ill principle in
his Books (as you call it) is to countenance your opinion, that these 12
Arguments have the same father. But Sir, you know that as many men, many minds,
so many men in some one Opinion (and that none of the best) may be of one mind:
so that this concludes not they were the Doctors. Yet there were no great hurt
in all this; but that you answered his Arguments, in your Cure of Church
Divisions, is news to me; wherein I can find neither his name, nor Arguments,
nor the names of the Books you say they were in, to any such purpose.

It appears by what you say, that the Doctor had in Print asserted the same
Principles contained in his 12 Arguments; and not only at loose, but, ex animo
and industria. What a brave advantage had you here, to have incountred the same
ill Principles under the Doctors avowed name, all in a posture, wherein the
Doctor had Harnassed, and Marshalled them for the open Field? Who would have
said this had been surreptitious, or ungentile? or not warrantable by the
strictest Rules of Ecclesiastical Combating.

Whereas, as the case stands, we shall not hear so well of it, nor will it bear
it.

I have done Sir, with what I thought amiss (at least I though fit to write) in
the grounds of your writing against the 12 Arguments, and confuting them as Dr.
Owens. The next things I proposed to consider, was, What manner of Treatment
the Doctor has from you in your scrutiny into those 12 Arguments as his.

It is not only observable, but greatly observed, that in all this tract, you
speak in the second Person to a dead man, which is such a solecism, or riddle,
that I meet not with any that can reconcile to your Learning, or Candor. If it
should be said that all this while you forgot your Grammar, or neglected it:
That is not to be admitted: and if you did it upon design, I would you had
explained your self, and saved me that necessary, but thankless Office. Should
I say, you perhaps had no design in it at all, but did it from first to last,
ex improviso: This would reflect too much upon your Prudence, and Care: But the
sense of it must be had (people are so concerned at it) though it be at the
charge of a diver of Delos.

There are only two constructions that I can obtain a prospect of, the first
less, the other more probable. The first, that it may resemble those Poetical
Raptures, wherein Persons are carried by the excess of some passion, to feign
to themselves that the dead are living, and the absent present, to whom, as
such, they direct their speeches, with a greater, or more grateful sense.

The latter, and more probable sense I take from a Conformity of this manner of
application to the deal (as speaking to them, as well as of them) with a very
remarkable passage of your own, and much talked of by understanding persons. It
is in your Postscript, p. 7. in these words, I doubt not, but his Soul [Dr.
Owens,] is now with Christ: and that, though Heaven have no sorrow, it has
great repentance and that Dr. Owen is now more against the receiving of this
mistake then I am: and by defending it, you far more displease him, than me.

Worthy Sir, that you here affirm without doubting, (for your I doubt not in
the beginning, qualifies all you say, to the end of what I have transcribed)
that Heaven has great Repentance, and that the Dr. there is more displeased by
the defense of his Opinion, which you call a mistake, than you your self: And
that must be a displeasure of no small degree, if we measure it by your
expressions of your own, at the defense of the said mistake. What soundness
there is in the Opinion, that there is repentance, and displeasure to the
Saints in Heaven, as a foresaid, shall be considered by and by. But if it be
your Opinion, that Dr. O. will be so greatly displeased now in Heaven, at
defending the said mistake by any on Earth; it must needs be your Opinion, that
he will know if any such defense be made. And if his knowledge now in Heaven be
so extensive, I, and all men that understand sense, will acknowledge, you did
not so impertinently address your writing to him after he was dead: Only we yet
understand not, when you expect an Answer from him, or how; except we must take
that speech you have made for him, in your Postscript, to be re vera, the
Doctors, and then you may have an Answer when and what you will. I know not
Sir, whether you will tak^ this as jest, or earnest, or both: I am satisfied it
well suits to the Refolution of the Question, and the occasion by you given.
What is next to follow, I am sure requires weighing, and is no jesting matter.

Your representing Dr. Owen in Heaven, so highly displeased at those who defend
on the Earth his said mistake, has two great Contradictions in it, to the
generally received Opinion of all that I have met with, as to one of them; and
all Protestants as to the other. Yet you say, you do not so much as doubt of it.

Is Heaven a place and state of perfect rest and peace, joy, delight and
pleasures, without the least mixture of their contraries? Where God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain, Rev. 21.4. And have
you now brought it to this, that the Saints in Heaven may be affected with
great displeasure? I know you do not make Dr. Owen's estate in Heaven, an
exception to the general Rule, so much to his disadvantage. And if such as he,
or your self, when arrived at that Blessed State, are yet liable to so much
displeasure, what an allay of their happiness may they expect in Heaven, who in
comparison of such Stars, near to the first degree of magnitude, are hudled
among the unobserved Sporades? Dear Sir, I should have been glad to have found
most of this passage in your Errata of the Printer, or Copy. I doubt not but
the good Doctor in Heaven, for all his mistakes on Earth, has feelingly and
experimentally corrected this uncomfortable mistake of yours, that renders the
Saints everlasting rest not such a rest, nor so desirable as you more truly
represented it in your Saints Everlasting Rest, part 1. cap. 3. sect. 3. This
Rest contains a perfect freedom from all the evils that accompanied us
through our course -- And doubtless there is not such a thing as grief and
sorrow known there.

I would fain have persuaded my self by some distinction, to put a better, and
more pleasant countenance upon the word displeasure, and agreeable to the
heavenly Rest, but it was beyond my Talent: I would have reconciled its sense
to mere dislike, or disapprobation; acts of the understanding and judgment,
which may be exerted without grief, but displeasure I found would still remain,
not only (in tantum) a privation of, but a contradiction to pleasure, as far as
dishonesty is to honesty, or disease to ease. O how uneasy would the Saints in
Heaven be, if they were liable to displeasure, at the pleasure of any on Earth,
who shall well meaningly, or maliciously, defend their, or others Errors!

But I must not pass by the second most obvious sense of your words, which is,
that the Saints in Heaven know what is done, written, or said in this world,
after their decease. How can Dr. O. be displeased at that he has no notice of?
How will you be able to prove that he shall have notice of any ones defending
the mistake you speak of. I am not sure that the Angels do not give notice of
many things done on Earth, to the Saints in Heaven. Our Savior tells us, That
there is joy in Heaven, and in the presence of the Angels, over one sinner that
is converted, Luke 15. And it is very congruous to the state of the Blessed, to
have motives of joy imparted to them. But it is dangerous to be wise in these
matters, above what is written.

You know Sir, what work the Papists make of praying to deceased Saints, either
to do for them what they pray for, or to intercede for them at least. And that
this is charged on them by the Protestants, as Idolatry, or Superstition, or
both. Now Sir, if they could gain but this point, that it is undoubtedly true,
that the Saints in Heaven know what we on Earth say, or do, they would disarm
us of our best weapon against that piece of Superstition, which is, that we
have no assurance that the Saints we pray to, hear or know what, or when we
pray; and therefore whatever their power or interest in Heaven may be, it would
be absurd, and fruitless, and bear no parity of reason with our desiring the
Saints on Earth to pray for us; for which we have a precept, and an assurance
that we can acquaint them with our desires.

I know not Sir, what your abilities may produce in the defense and
justification of such expressions: But, for my self and such pore-blind
creatures as I: We dare not make such dangerous leaps.

What you say of Repentance, viz. That though Heaven has no sorrow, it has
great repentance, is not so safe, and clear as to be swallowed without chewing:
and is to me a very solitary notion, and it may be to most others that are no
strangers to reading. The Greek words, (...), and (...); whatever
significations their etymologies, or their use in profane Authors may afford,
which are indeed very many, and various: we must stick to their sense in
Scripture, when we put men upon the duty, and use the English word Repentance
in that sense, or those senses it obtains amongst English Men, (when we use it
in a general notion) who understand their own language.

I need not tell you that the more general, if not the only senses of the words
in (...) New Testament, are in the Latin Poenitet, Poenitentia moveor,
poenitentiam ago, and resipisco, from whence are the Nouns poenitentia, and
resipiscentia; which answer to our two English words, Compunction, and
Reformation, or Conversion, both in judgment, affection, and practice. But our
English word, Repentance takes in both, and (when it respects men) sounds very
lamely, and defectively without grief, or sorrow. And (not to speak of
Repentance in an Evangelical sense, or Repentance to eternal life, which,
though it be conditional of, and preparatory to eternal life, cannot in all the
essential, and integral parts of it, be congruous to the state of the blessed
in Heaven) Repentance in the common notion, and sense, in which we must take it
here, is often understood of sorrow, and vexation, without any change of
practice, or after Wisdom; but seldom, if ever of after Wisdom, or change of
practice, without sorrow, or vexation. And therefore, however you may come-off
(at least in appearance) by sheltring in the sense of foreign words, some part
of the true evangelical notion of it; it does, and will sound very offensively,
and most by far, will either not understand you, or misunderstand you.

If I may venture Sir, to shoot my bolt, to hit your meaning, I shall take it
to be that, according to the Greek words, they shall in Heaven be after-wise,
or a Saint in Heaven shall mutare mentem in melius, have a better understanding
than he had here; and disapprove what he here thought well, and true: it might
as easily have been so expressed, (if this were all you intended) and have
saved many a puzling thought, and untoward censure.

Another thing, Sir, in your manage of this work, that gives great distaste, and
I cannot contradict their censure, who say that it looks with a very unkind
aspect (to say no worse) on the Doctor is, that throughout your examination of
the Arguments (except the last) which you so positively, and ungroundedly
entitle the Doctor to: When you conclude you have found a mistake, you mark it
in a numerical order in the Margin, viz. The I. Error, the II. the III.
Error, and so on, till you arrive at last to the XLII. Error: so that if your
Reader should forget a great part of your supposed Errors, found out by you in
the Arguments; he may be enabled to retain this black Character of the Doctor,
that he was such an erroneous Person, that he was a man of forty two Errors in
so small a tract, as might well be contained in half a sheet of Paper. From
whence an unfriendly prejudiced Reader will conclude that his Errors in all
his large, and manifold writings were tantum non innumerable. But though you
were so severe, you were not less merciful than the Jews; for you bated him
those stripes, you might by the same Law have imposed on the last Argument
also. Sir, this is not the common method of Theological Controversy, it must
have some more peculiar impulse to derive from; whether good, or bad, I leave
to the discretion of others, but chiefly to your own; who should know, beyond
any Mortal, the temper, and agitations of your own Spirit: But I am not dainty
to affirm, that if others examining your Writings, should take this liberty to
mark out all that is contrary to their Sentiments, it would rise to a long sum;
and as it would be very indecent in them, it would not be a little distastful
to your self: If ye fulfill the Royal Law according to the Scripture; Thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self, ye do well.

You say in your Preface, line II. Some wise, and good men will blame me for
making our differences to be so much known: especially for remembering old
miscarriages: I obey my Conscience: All thesse things are commonly known
already, and we hear sharply of them from God, and Man, because Men hear not
our Repentance, but our Justification: Had we confessed, God is faithful to
forgive, Impenitence threatens our yet greater suffering. And truly Sir, I take
this exposing old miscarriages so frequently, with such asperity, and
extremity, to be so liable to objection, that renders your Controversies with
those you concern in them, both distastful, and fruitless: Nor does it hear
well from standers by, of any calmness, or moderation.

Reverend, and worthy Sir, I beg your Candor, Patience, and Pardon, for I may
need them all (though I shall give as little occasion as I can, or the thing
will bear for their Trial) if I impartially weigh your own Objection, and your
subjoyned Defense.

Some wise and good men will blame you for, etc. This you had a prospect of,
either from the nature of the thing, as meriting it, or that good, and wise men
will mistake, and be injurious; or from what you have had experience of, upon
the like, or far less occasion. I will not entertain a thought of the first,
for that were to charge you with a sin against your own Conscience: and not
only the sin of Presumption (which some natures powerfully and insensibly
incline to,) but also a presumptuous sin. I should greatly wrong you, if I
should be so uncharitable. I heartily believe that the great Wheel that moves
you is, a Zeal for God. But I think both the latter might persuade you to
expect the blame you seak of.

Now Sir, should you not well have considered this, and taken more time to do
it calmly, and coolly than you did; seeing you knew wise and good men would
think it blameworthy. These were not rash, headless, heedless, proud
ignorants; but good men, and therefore well meaning; and wise men, and
therefore had skill to say, as well, as mean well. There is that speaks like
the piercings of a Sword, but the Tongue of the Wise is health. It may be you
will say that you did also expect that some good, and wise men would commend,
or speak well of you for it; and so there would be some against some. Dear Sir,
believe me, that I speak impartial truth: I have known many wise, and good men
blame, and not one commend it; no, not of those that in the points here
controverted, are of your own Opinion, and Practice. What do you think of the
healing Parliament, that provided by a Act of Oblivion against such
remembrances? There was the Wisdom, Goodness, and the Authority of the whole
Nation; Head, and Members against you. Did your Judgment consult this before
you wrote it; or do you think it is eximious Christianity, to act the part of
Hyaena's; to feed on dead Carkases, when they have torn them out of their
Graves? Or were the wise, and good men the far greater number, that were for
thus remembering old miscarriages? How came you by the Poll to make such a
conclusion? I think the Parliament (in this Case) might be so dead a weight,
that all others could not counterballance. Truly Sir, all these Considerations,
without other Auxiliaries, should at least have stayed your hand for altogether
in this matter, if not condemned the first motion.

In the next place it is fit that I give some account of what old miscarriages
you are pleased to expose by way of remembrance, and place to the account of
Dr. Owens Party, but especially of himself, as the Master separate. You fill up
more than three pages, with one entire harangue of this nature; viz. from p.
25. to p. 29. inclusive. And you begin with what you say you will pass by,
scil. The Histories of Munster, and Muncer; and of David George in Holland, and
of Henry Nichols, and the Familists, which were the Offspring of Separation:
And the sad conflicts which they had against the sober Nonconformists.

Your business is to make all the extravagancies the aforesaid Persons acted,
and fomented, the Fruits of Separation, (as you tell us elsewhere) or else you
produce them very impertinently. But I besecch you Sir, does it follow that
being Consequents, they were Effects? Have there not been as great Dissorders,
and Confusions of Civil Government, where there was no Separation from
Liturgies, and great Commotions, and Rebellions too; which if they had had
success, might have arrived at as great Disasters, and Confusions as any other?
You go on, and give a substratum of most of the miseries, and mischiefs,
disorders, and extravagancies in Church and State, Spiritual, and Civil
concerns here in England from the year 40. to 59. And I am of the opinion Sir,
that as necessary as you make these remembrances to the refelling the Arguments
against Lyturgical Worship; If you cannot overthrow it without these instances,
you cannot do it by them. For, whereas the Argument lies against the Lyturgy,
not only from the Consequences, but necessary effects of Lyturgies; (I will not
say with what strength) your instances reach the Consequences, but not the
necessary effects of breaking that boundary. It must be confessed that if men
had kept to the Lyturgy, and its praescripts; they had not then separated from
the Church, or the Churches worshipping in that form: And it cannot be denied
that those who brake those bounds, were not necessitated to run mad, nor
forsake Parochial public worship: Else, how came it to pass, that when the
Lyturgy itself as thrown out, the Parish Churches, notwithstanding, were as
much frequented as ever they were, since England was a Nation; (and with as
honorable as Ministry) and of those the far greater number, were not much
offended at the Lyturgies expulsion? And those who took such extravagant leaps,
might have stopped there, as well as others. But as to Confusions in State, we
need not look beyond sea for like instances: The Commons Insurrections, the
Baros Wars in the Controversies of the Houses of York, and Lancaster; the
horrid Tyranny, and Cruelties of Richard 3. will afford enough of
Extravagancies, many acted, more intended, and no Religion concerned in the
case. Yea, in Hen. 8. Edw. 6th time, were very great Commotions, and Contests
for the interest of a Popish, or Protestant Lyturgy, which King Hen. 8th wittly
called the old mumpsimus, and the new sumpsimus. And Sir, I have seldom seen
strength, or calmness, or success in managing Controversies, and forcing
Arguments from pretended Issues, or Consequences, good, or had.

But Sir, Let us hear your defense, and it is this, I obey my Conscience. You
know Sir what might be said, and what has been said of the woeful issues of
obeying Conscience: This may satisfy our selves, it is not enough to satisfy
others. Yet Sir, you believe, and I too, that men must not cast off obedience
to Conscience, and condemn obedience to it, because of the wretched effects of
some men's Consciences, which are not to be imputed simply to their Obedeince,
to their Consciences, but to some ill circumstances, under which their
Consciences are, and which ought to be conscientiously, and impartially
examined, and corrected.

But you add somewhat for reasons, to satisfy your Readers Conscience, as well
as your own, scil. All these things are commonly known already. Pardon me, Sir,
if I believe, and say this is a mistake: your all is somewhat too many for this
affirmation. Was it commonly known before you made it so (supposing the
Manuscript to be the Doctors) that Doctor Owen ever said, as you affirm he does
in the following words? That Gods Worship has no Accidentals, that all that is
in it, and belonging to it, and the manner of it, is false Worship; it it have
not a Divine Institution in particular; that all Lyturgies (as such) are such
false Worship (and not the English only) used to defeat Christ's promised gifts,
and Gods Spirit. And this (you say) is the cause you write against, and bid
your Reader understand it, or meddle not with what he understands not.

Now Sir, the matter of Fact before us is to be considered. You begin your
report thus: 1. That Gods Worship, (says Dr. Owen) has no Accidentals, and so
proceed in a different letter, as I have transcribed it. Sir, you are not so
little acquainted with writing, as not to know that passages affirmed to be an
Authors, in a different letter, ought to be exactly, and precisely the Authors,
without adding, taking away, or transposing a word, syllable, or letter that is
material, especially when opposed. But that you have done so here, I cannot
find, after six times most diligently perusing all the Arguments according to
your Edition, merely for the examining the last passages. You set out with
numb. 1. which is no sense, without a second; yet where you began, you made an
end of numbering here; though you did not so of the Doctors Errors. I mention
this, chiefly to show how heedful you were when you wrote this passage. And let
this go for the first note, which shall have this as a second, that you point
not your Reader to the number of the pages in your book (which you might have
done, it being in your Postscript) wherein these passages were, or any one of
them, nor tell me in which of the Arguments they are to be found. This has put
me to more trouble to write a few lines as I ought, than some would take under
the like difficulties to write so many pages. And I do affirm, that there being
three, and but three complete sentences in all; there is not one of them
entire, nor in that order in any of the 12 Arguments. What may be implied, or
the genuine sense of what is said in the Arguments, I do not here concern my
self with. But certainly I ought not to be charged with saying any thing but
what I have said expressly.

The first sentence or Proposition is short, and somewhat I find like it in p.
13. thus: It is replied, there is nothing Accidental in the Worship of God. You
report it, Gods Worship has no Accidentals. And I suppose, (waving the term
Accidentals, as to its fitness in this place) that having no Accidentals, and
no Accidentals in the Worship of God, are of very different Construction; being
in it, making at least an integral part; having may take in variable
circumstances of time, place, indifferent postures, and the like; some, or
other of which are necessary to it as an action in genere naturali. And the
Author, (whosoever he be) explains his sense of Accidentals, within 2 or three
lines thus; But all things duly belonging to it, are parts of it; or of its
subsistence: outward circumstances are natural, and occasional, no Accidental
parts of Worship. And p. 16. of your Edition (for I have no other.) Outward
Rites, and Modes of Worship Divinely Instituted, and determined, do become the
necessary parts of Divine Worship. Therefore such as are Humanly Instituted,
appointed, and determined, are thereby made parts of Worship: namely, that
which is false, for want of Divine Institution. I doubt not but Dr. O. was able
to sind apt terms to express his sense by. But the Authors meaning by what I
have said, is but this. All things of Divine appointment are necessary,
necessitate praecepti to the Worship for which they are so appointed: and
therefore every human invention, made necessary to any part of Divine Worship,
is false Worship; because it is put into the room of a Divine Institution,
which it has not. Whether it be a good Argument, or not, I do not determine;
but that this is the Authors sense, is plain, and so taken, is not so bad, or
absurd as you make it seem to be. Now Sir, the abovesaid differences betwixt
you and others, and the Doctor, were not all so commonly known already, and it
may be were not in being, and so not possible to be known.

But for matters of Fact which you expose, and charge particularly, or by name
upon the Doctor, I shall give two instances. You say, p. 27. After the death of
Oliver, his Son set up, and his Parliament first pulled down (in which the
Reverend Author now opposed, told me he was an Agent) and next himself. And p.
29. But I will tell the Bishops, that they should not be too angry with the
learned Author of these 12 Arguments; for I know not three men alive, whom they
are more beholden to for their restitution, by opening the door, and sweeping
the way, and melting down, or pulverizing all that was likely to have resisted
them. Thus far it is intelligible: But I am directed in the Errata to add
immediately, than those of the Opinion he pleads for, (and now let him
understand it that can) I speak not of the intention, but the action. I think
you have rendered him here such a meddling, mischievous busy-body, as neither the
Bishops considering the action without the intention; nor many others
considering both, or which you will, have any great reason to thank him: nor
his Friends to thank you for these Characters. Yet you afford us one more that
outgoes all the rest.

What they truly upbraid us with in malice, let us openly lament in serious
penitence, and not stand to a sinful, dividing Principle, and Cause; lest the
Saints be blamed, that have fathered it on God. This learned Author has done
otherwise himself, and so has the Party now opposed. He and I knew the man,
who was Pastor to the Commanders of the Army, when they pulled down, and set
up, and again pulled down, till they had turned their Armed Bulwarks into
Atoms: And when he saw what they had done, said, [I wonder the People do not
cast stones at us as we go along the Streets] was not this a blaming of his
Flock? He knew how often the addresses of the Separatists to the several suddenly
erected Soveraignties did change their minds, and cry peccavimus by their new
Addresses for the old. And why may not we blame them that blamed themselves,
for fathering their mistakes on God.

I shall a little comment on this Text, which would better have become the
Observator, than Mr. Baxter, who will say as much for him, and those he calls
Innocents: and Crucify all alike, as under one Condemnation. And surely some of
these things were so far from being commonly known, that they must stand on
your only legs for their credit, or none at all that I know of. You blame them,
because they blame not themselves for these things, and yet tell the world they
have blamed themselves, and how you can equal their worst Adversaries in a
scornful, virulent, spreading it on their faces.

Worthy Sir, I pray bear with a truth, which I hope your piety will make some
good use of (though it must be now in the after-part) I know not any man alive,
who was less fit to throw these, or any other reslections on the Doctor; I
speak it not in respect of your Abilities, which I value, and honor; but in
respect of the want of that good understanding betwixt you, while the Dr.
lived; which was commonly noised: I say not where the fault lay, I should have
been glad to have been a means to cure, or conceal it.

But take things as they are, and it will be next a Miracle, if this work of
yours be not imputed to some ill Original; and then it is like to do little of
that good you really intend by it. And I think you did not well weigh those
words, p. 2. of your Preface, when you wrote them, soil. And the Author that I
deal with, necessitateth me to recite the late fruits of Separation, etc. Dear
Sir, do you not tell the world here, who, and what you had in your Eye. You say
not here, the matter of the Arguments put you on such a necessity but the
Author you deal with. The Author, whom you will have to be no other than the
late Reverend, Learned, and Pious Dr. Owen. No doubt but Arguments, be they
what they will, must have an Author. But if they had been ascribed to some
other Author (as your words import) there had been no such necessity on you to
recite the late fruits of Separation, and what follows.

Some of the pretended Errors considered, as they are fixed in a Numerical
Order, and ascribed to D.O.

THis is a Task, Sir, that must be done with great Caution, not only with
regard to your Answers, or your Person; but the subject: which puts the hilt in
the hand of him that writes in its Countenance, but the point to him, who shall
be so daring as to offend against it. But I hope I shall do nothing liable to
exception; for I shall not undertake any thing against the Lyturgy, or
Communion thereby: only, fairly consider how far you have justly fixed those
Errors, on the Author of the Arguments, which you call Dr. Owens.

Now Sir, I shall not take it for granted that your Edition in Print is exactly
a true Copy of the Autograph, nor will, or can you your self assirm with any
ground how far it is metamorphosed, by that time it arrived to your hands;
therefore I shall think it reasonable to put the best constructions that equity
will allow on the disadvantaged side. Only I must tell my Reader my Order, that
he may know which is which.

The Author of the Arguments words are in the common letter with these notes,
["] at the left hand of the line, Mr. Baxters, in a different letter, and mine
in the common letter, except now and then a special word.

Position. It is not lawful for us to go to, and join in public Worship by the
Common Prayer; because that Worship itself, according to the rule of the
Gospel, is not lawful.

You answer, 1. I shall use the same method that he has used, and first give
you my Positions, and then the supposed matter of fact; and then consider his
Arguments.

Posit. It is not only lawful, but a duty for those that cannot have better
public Worship, without more hurt than benefit; and are near a competent
Parish Minister to go to, and join in public Worship, performed according to
the Lyturgy, and in Sacramental Communion: And for those that can have better,
to join sometimes with such Parish Churches, when their forbearance
scandalously seems to signify that they take such communion for unlawful; and
would so tempt others to the same accusation, and uncharitable Separation. The
History of the matter of Fact must be premised, for the right deciding of the
cause, which is as follows.

I shall first say somewhat of the Authors Position, and then of yours. The
Authors Position (as you Print it) consists of a Position, and also the reason
or ground of it. And I find the reason exceeding the limits of what was to be
proved: which makes it look not like Dr. Owens. But to take it as it is, the
Position if [it is not lawful for us to go and join in public Worship by the
Common Prayer.] He does not say it is unlawful for any, and for ought you know,
this us whom he concerned in it, might be a very few, to whom this Manuscript
was imparted, and they might be under such Circumstances, as your own
resolutions often in print, would discharge from that Worship as a Duty.

But you may reply, that the reason of the Position gives no countenance to
such a restriction. And I say so too: but seeing they agree no better in your
Edition, what must be done in the case? But to have recourse first to the
Errata, ay, and to the Author too: but as you have ordered the matter, non sunt
inventi is a good return; for the Author was, but is not, and the Errata never
was, nor could be. And therefore in my Opinion, if the Position be of a better
Countenance than the ground of it, let us take that; but if the Reason be of a
righter make than the Position, let us take that for the Authors.

The reason, as large as it is, is expressly inclusive of the Common Prayer
only; And therefore considering that all the Arguments are according to the
Authors profession, subservient to this Position; and the ground of it: and
otherwise are exuberant. or impertient: I conclude you had not sufficient
reason to say as you do, p. 2. of your Postscript, That Dr. O. (or the Author)
says, that all Lyturgies, usuch, are such false Worship (and not the English
only) no, nor to say that it was his meaning.

But farther, I conceive the Author may not, yea, does not mean by these words
[because "that Worship itself -- is not lawful] that it is simply unlawful;
which must render it so at all times, and to all Persons, under what
circumstances soever: but that taken with all its modes, as well as matter, and
the manner, severity, and universality of its imposing, it is so. Beside, it is
not said that according to the rule of the Gospel, it is unlawful but
[according to the rule of the Gospel it is not lawful] which may fairly be
construed thus. The rule of the Gospel does not authenticate, or warrant it:
and I think ought to be so Construed; it being the defect of that rule, not its
opposition, which he lays the great stress of his Cause upon.

A short consideration of your answer (hitherto) will suffice; because you do
not pretend therein to consider his Position, but to lay down your own
Positions (which I have already transcribed (and that is enough) and the History
of the matter of Fact, which must (as you say) be premised, for the right
deciding of the cause: Which amount to the number of 25 heads. The first head I
think very improperly called matters of Fact, at least many particulars
contained in it. From first to seventh, you give an account of some Forms
Divinely prescribed, which has little, if any thing to do in the question. And
for the instances you give of what was done, imposed, submitted to; how far,
and in what manner, by diverse Persons, in diverse times, and of as diverse
circumstances (which with the former take up full out four pages) I suppose
will not not be greatly cogent to the men of your Controversy, without some
Divine Precept, or Pattern express, or implied. I may have leave therefore to
procced to the Authors premises, and your replies.

Some things must be premised, to the confirmation of this Position.

First. The whole System of Lyturgical Worship, with all its inseparable
dependences, are intended: For (as such) it is established by Law (as such) it
is required, that we receive it, and attend unto it: It is not in our power, it
is not left to our judgment, or liberty to close with, or make use of any part,
of it, as we shall think fit.

There are in the Mass book many Prayers directed to God only by Jesus Christ,
yet it is not lawful for us thereon to go to Mass, under a pretense only of
joining in those in those lawful Prayers. As we must not affect their
Drink Offerings of Blood, so we must not take up their names in our lips, Psalm.
16.4. Have no Communion with them.

In your answer to this Premise, you say, p. 6. I shall now examine the Doctors
Premises. To the first I answer, First, If he will include all that is in the
Lyturgy, the Nonconformists consess that there is somewhat in it which they
dissent from as unjusitsiable; and so there is in all men's Worship of God.

Sir, I cannot well tell who you mean here by the Nonconformists, which you
contradistinguish from the persons you oppose, you somewhere in this piece
divide a sort of men into Formalists, and Fanatics, and p. 29. I presume the
same concerned in your ranks of Worldly PR. IGs and the unruly PR. IG's for so
usual are these obliging terms with you, that you need not doubt but proud
Ignorants will be easily spelt in these contracts. But we have Coiners enough
of disgraceful Titles, without the help of Persons of your Circumstances. I may
guess freely that you put your self, and those Nonconformists that jump just
with you, in neither of these divisions; but betwixt them, i. e. neither
Formalists, nor Fanatics: But there be enough will take the liberty of such
Coinage, and put you, and yours into the Cub with the Phanaticks, and call the
Contests between you, and those you here oppose Bellum Fanaticale. But I must
pass from this dividing concession, to your next words, containing (as you say)
the Authors first Error.

Secondly, He intimates that it is not in our power to close with some, and
not with all: This is his first Error, [which you score up in the Margin, as I
have done Error I. here; you prove it thus.] Though Man gives us no such power,
God does; as it is in my power to believe all that one speaks truly: and
well; and not that which he speaks amiss. I am not bound to own all that any
Preacher, or Priest shall say in the Church. God put it in the Disciples power
to beware of the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, and yet to hear them.
Proving all things, is not approving all things.

But Sir, The Author does not say what you charge on him as his Error; nor do
you say that he says it, only he intimates so much. And I cannot call this
fair dealing; for suppose his words seem to you to intimate that Error, they
may not so to him. And you know Sir, that many say such words, who deny, and
abhor that which others say, and know is the just sense, or consequence of the
words they express their minds in: But the Error you fasten on him is neither.
Look again on the words that must intimate this Error, if any. [It is not in
our power, it is not left to our judgment, or liberty to close with, or make
use of any part of it as we shall think fit.] I will not so much suspect my
Readers judgment, as to say any more to enlighten it.

Yet suppose he had said those very words; the Friends of the Lyturgy I believe
will consent to them as true, and now I shall prove that you have not proved
the contrary. You say, Though man gives us no such power, God does. But it is
as plain as two and two makes four, that the Author assirms it of power, or
liberty left us by the Law of men, and that requires compliance in all. I am
sorry I must be fain to repeat his words again, but that will suffice; and they
are, [For as such it is established by Law, and not in any part of it only; as
such it is required that we receive, and attend unto it; it is not in our
power, etc. And Sir, take this, and what follows of proving not to be
approving: and our license to distinguish what we hear: I humbly conceive they
do not belong to the present question, and that though proving, to discern the
truth, is the duty (whatever be the power, a word easily mistaken) of those
that hear, yet it is not the duty, or the liberty of those that pray by a known
Liturgy: that may, and ought to be proved before, and not to be a matter of
doubt, when they might beforehand have put it out of doubt. I hope you have
not forgot that you have said this to be one benefit of a set, known Form,
which a Ministerial, Conceived, extempore prayer has not. When men Preach,
they bid us hear, and the Ear tries words, but when they pray, they bid us
pray, and by the Lyturgy our Amen is required, and not our Opinion, or
Scrutiny: In extempore prayers both are required to what is good. Your Author
proceeds.

There are in the Mass book many Prayers directed to God; only by Jesus Christ;
yet it is not lawful for us thereon to go to Mass, under a pretense only of
joining in such lawful prayers.

All this will be granted by all Protestants that I know of, but how far you
render it short of the Authors end, is now to be considered.

You answer, Though the Mass have many good prayers, the Corruption by twisted
Idolatry, and Heresy, makes Communion there unlawful. Heathens, and Turks have
good Prayers. Prove any such Heresy, or Idolatry in the Church Worship by the
Lyturgy, and we will avoid it: But if I may join in your own good prayers, and
preaching, notwithstanding your many failings, and such Errors as are here
pleaded for, why not with others?

Reverend Sir, Reasons against the strength of this answer are, First, The Mass
is not more twisted in all the parts of it by Law, than the Lyturgy, nor left
less to our power to pick and choose. If this union do render the far greater
pollutions, the Idolatry, and Heresy of the Mass infectious to the whole
Worship, who can prove that the pollutions of other Worship, where we are
likewise commanded not to distinguish, or divide, does not in their kind, and
degree diffuse the taint alike? Mental dividing, or culling by secret
disapprobation, and not joining in our hearts, is all you pretend to, unless
you did allow (which you do not) Mr. Humph. Fens manner, to say aloud Amen to
every Prayer of the Lyturgy, except the Prayer for the Bishops, and to that to
dissent by a singular silence. Nor have you proved that no other sin but
Idolatry and Heresy, may justify refusing to Worship by the Mass; nor that far
less sins than they may do it, nor that the Lyturgy has not by some way or
other such sin cleaving to it, as is like the Leprosy that could not be
scraped; washed, or fired out.

Your instance of Heathens, and Turks having good Prayers, is not a very good
one. What good Prayers without faith in Christ? Though they may be prayers for
some good thing: and you let drop this Weapon without any using it, for your
opposites to take up; for whose purpose it serves much more than for yours.
There is no parity of a word, or sentence in a conceived prayer exceptionable,
and the other entire, will all known, or doubtful circumstances. All men are
not, few men are to be compared with your self for conceived Prayer: yet a man
may find many, whose failings in matter do not pollute their Prayers; nor if
they have Errors in their minds, do they put them into the words of their
Prayers. These things you have not obviated in your answer, which to me is not
sufficient to prove against the Authors Agrument, that men must not go to the
Worship by the Lyturgy, under a pretense only of joining in such lawful Prayers.

2d Premise. It is to be considered as Armed with Laws, (1.) Such as declare,
and enjoin it as the only true Worship of the Church, (2.) Such as prohibit,
condemn, and punish all other ways of the Worship of God in Church Assemblies:
By our Communion, and Conjunction in it, we justify those Laws.

The second Error you charge your Author with, is [That our Communion
justifies all Error 2, the Laws that impose the Lyturgy, yea, the poenal
severities.] This. (you say) is too gross an Error to be wirtten with any show
of proof. You endeavor to prove the Error such, by inquiring, What if the
Creed, or Lords Paryer were too rigorously imposed -- must we forbear them, or
justify the Law? -- then a rigorous Law-makes may take away our Christian
liberty (you might have said as aptly our Christian duty) by commanding us to
use such things so strictly. p. 7.

I answer, First. That you give us not the said Error in the Authors words
formally. Secondly, That you add all the Laws, and the poenal severities which
are not to be found in the Author, and thereby strain these words [We justify
those Laws] beyond their necessary sense, for you turn an Indefinite into an
Universal, all Laws, and the justification of each Law to the most distastful,
and exceptionalbe part of it: And I doubt not to affirm, that doing that which
a Law requires, so far as the intention is moved by the Law, is a justifying of
it: And submitting to any Law upon the consideration of its penalties, is so
far a justifying its praeceptive part, as not so great an evil as the poenal.

To your proof I say, that a duty, though imposed by Laws, with penalties,
remains a duty notwithstanding: and you know that the Author does not allow it
to be a duty, whatever you do: and he who does that which is a duty, though not
imposed by a human Law, may, and ought to be supposed to do that duty simply as
such, unless he say the contrary: and therefore does not at all justify the
imposing Law thereby; which reaches your Query fully: But your Author says it
of that, which none that I know say is a duty simply, or without any dependence
upon human Sanctions; which makes a wide difference: for things of their own
nature indifferent, and submitted to as Commanded; this compliance must needs
so far justify the very jus of the Law. As to the poenal respect I spoke before.

Your Authors third Premise is, that, 3d Premise. This Conjunction in
Communion, by the Worship of the Lyturgy, is the Symbol, pledge, and token of
an Ecclesiastical Incorporation with the Church of England, in it is present
Constitution. It is so in the Law of the Land. It is so in the Canons of the
Church. It is so in the common understanding of all men; and by these Rules
must our Profession, and Practice be judged, and not by any reserve of your
own; which neither God, nor good men will allow of.

In answer to this, you first distinguish of the Church of England, as an
ambiguous word; which I must repeat, though you do not determine what it is.
You say, page 8. it is ambiguous, I. As it signifies a part of the universal
Church, agreeing in Faith, one God, one Christ, and all essential to the
Church. 2. And also as it is a Christian Kingdom, under one King. 3. And as it
is a Confederacy of many Churches to keep Concord in lawful Circumstantials, as
well as integrals. In all these senses it is a lawful Association. I humbly
conceive Sir, that your Reader is little edified by any of these distinctions
of the Church of England, which do not so much as pretend to any definition of
a Church specifically distinct from the Universal: but resolve it at last into
that, which may be no Church at all; nor have any the least pretense of being
so, soil, a lawful Association. Yet this serves your turn to induced an Error
of the Doctors thus, But if any Church go beyond these bounds, Error 4.
and on good pretenses shall agrce upon any Error or Evil, it is a mistake to
hold that, all that incorporate with them in the three foresaid lawful
respects; do therefore confederate with them in their Error. This is your
fourth Error.

Sir, I have searched narrowly into the Authors Premise, to find where he holds
this Error, or takes any notice, or has any thing that senses of the Church
of England under all, or any of your threefold respects; much less that he
hold, That all that incorporate with them in those respects, do therefore
Confederate with them in their Error. The third Premise to which you answer,
is here before the Readers Eye, in which the Error must be found, or no where.
And if all the Eyes in the World, with the help of the most enlarging
spectacles can find it there, I am content to forfeit mine own. I beseech you
Sir, does the Author hold, or any man breathing, that to incorporate with a
Christian Kingdom under one King, is to Confederate with them in their Error?

But in your numeration finding this the fourth Error, I bethought my self
that the last was branded with the second Error; but do what I could, I found
the fourth Error next succedding to ehe second, and no such thing as a third
Error with his mark on, nor without it. In short Sir, (if you will bear with a
very small criticism) you mistold the third Error, and told the fourth very
much amiss, I cannot like this manner of inflaming such reckonings.

I proceed to the fifth marked Error, of which you say, p. 9th. Error 5.
It is therefore another of your mistakes, that owning the Parish-Churches, and
Worship, is an owning of the present Diocesan Constitution. By the way, I will
tell my Reader, that though many have believed, and stiffly affirmed otherwise,
I never found any of your Words, or Printed Works, countenancing the Form of a
Diocesan Church, or a Prelatical Hierarchy. I do not here determine of the
Rectitude, or Error of it: But I say it here, because the Error charged, or
the charging of it as such, has some influence from the fore mentioned hint.

But to the purpose, I must say Sir, that the matter of subject of this said
Error, has some relation to the Authors premise; for a Diocesan Constitution
is a part of the present Constitution of the Church of England: But for the
Predicate which must contain what makes the Error, if there be any, I can find
no more of it than in the fomer, in all the words you say are the Author's
premise. I beseech you Sir, does he say a word here of owning Parish-Churches,
and Worship? or do Parish-Churches, taken strictly in our Ecclesiastical sense,
find the Form, or Name of a Church? Do you not know, that only the Bishop is
the Pastor, all other Priests or Ministers but Curates? And if we try the
strength of your therefore; by which you prove it an Error, it will amount to
little more: It is this, But I further distinguish between the many
Parish-Churches, and the Diocesan; and the Church of England, as constituted of
such Diocesan Churches. The Old Non-conformists commonly owned the
Parish-Churches, (and the Church of England as made up of such) but not the
Diocesan: This they openly professed. It is therefore a mistake, etc.

I did not expect such manner of disputing from Mr. B. You distinguish contrary
to the Civil, and Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions; and the Old
Non-conformists commonly owned your distinction, which distinction is a nulling
of the Diocesan Church, from which the Parochial is not only distinguished, but
separated: It is therefore an Error, etc. Is this proving per notiora, or
obscuriora? And all amounts to this: The Doctor, or Author hold that Error
which you cannot find the sense of in the Premise, and you prove it by such
Arguments to be an Error (if it were there) that none will take for
unquestionable, or at least unquestioned Verities; and therefore this fifth
Error may be wiped off with the former.

Also it is your mistake to say, VI. Err.
that Communion by the Liturgy is the symbol and pledge of the foresaid
Incorporation into the Church of England, in its present Constitution.

In the matter and form of this, I acknowledge you come nearer to the Authors
words, than I have usually found, tho not without some difference. But before I
proceed, I must take leave to distinguish a little of Communion, thus: 1.
Communion by the Liturgy is either very rare, it may be but once, or twice, or
so. This I do not take to be a symbol of the said Incorporation; nor can you
give any proof that it was the Authors meaning. 2. Or it may be considered as
constant, and such (taken strictly) I know none, or very few that practice. 3.
Or an ordinary Communion, such as is more frequently, than with any, or all
other Churches, contradistinct from the Church of England: And this practice, I
think, ought to be understood as the Authors meaning: And so understood, it
will be hard for you to prove, it is not such a symbol. You endeavor to prove
it thus; The Rulers openly declare, that they take multitudes to be none of
their Church, who join in the Liturgy. I answer:


What Rulers do you mean, Civil, or Ecclesiastical? Who, or how many of them,
or when, and where did they declare this so openly, or secretly either? Do they
not own all the Kings Subjects of England to be of their Church, if baptized,
and not excommunicated? Yea, to the very Dissenters de jure, and that they are
straglers from the Fold they belong to? Therefore they first admonish, then
excommunicate them, if contumacious. Your Argument therefore from the Rulers is
but dark, and gratis dictum: And I have proved it a mistake.

You tell us next what is the Symbol, And it is subscribing, declaring, and
swearing Obedience, which is the Symbol. These are all your own words, and not
one added. A Symbol I little expected from so learned, and intelligent a
person, etc. The Symbol you give here, is the Symbol of the Clergy, or men in
Orders: I hope you are not come to this on a sudden, that only the Clergy are
the Church; and if this be the Symbol, or badge of a Member incorporated into
the Church of England, and no other; what becomes of the poor Laity? You have
not forgotten sure, that all this debate has been, if not of the Communion of
the Laity only, at least of mere Lay-Communion. You add, Yea they excommunicate
many that come to the Liturgy-service. Some I confess but not very many,
supposing the Office of the Communion, to be part of the Liturgy they come
unto. And I shall add, that when they are excommunicate, they come not, or more
unwelcom, till they be declared absolved. And I believe I may now have my
intelligent, impartial Readers suffrage, to send this Error after its fellows.

Next Task is to consider these Three Errors, which are all in a file; which
thus in short you express.

VII Err. You mistake when you say, It is so by the Law of the Land. VIII Err.
You mistake again, when you say, It is so by the Canon. IX Err. You mistake,
when you say, It is so in the common understanding of all.
You put me almost to a stand to come thus fast upon me; I begin to bethink my
self, If you or I be not mistaken in the nature of a Symbol, as we had almost
taken the Clergy for the only Church even now: I shall therefore spend a word
or two in inquiring, what it may import: I find that it means a sign or badge
to know one by from another; such as the Colors which Soldiers wear in their
Hats, or the white Handkerchiefs about their Arms in nightly Encounters, to
know friends from foes by: And I think our Creed, called the Apostles (I knew
not well why, except because it is a Composure worthy of such Authors, or the
number of its Articles being just Twelve as theirs) is therefore in the Latin
called Symbolum Apostolorum, because it contains so exactly the Essentials of
the Christian Faith (or at least has been so esteemed) that you may know a
Christian by it, from another man. Now Sir. I shall go on, and begin where I
ended, at the 9th Error. [ It (scil.) Communion by the Liturgy, is the Symbol
of the Incorporation aforesaid, in the common Opinion of all.] And if you take
the all, not for all men, Heathen, etc. nor all in the Kingdom, or Church of
England, of which many know nothing of a Symbol at all, but of Christians in
this Kingdom, or elsewhere, any thing acquainted with the matter in hand: I
believe our Authors Error will prove a Truth, in the common Opinion. We cannot
bring it to the Poll, and therefore being brought thus far, must leave it to
the Readers judgment; but if any differ from me, or the truth either, in this
matter, I shall not think it worthy to be scored up in Capital Figures, for one
of his Errors.

If I prove that the foresaid Communion is the Symbol of a Membership in the
Church of England, in its present Constitution, both by the Law of the Land,
and by the Canons; then the Author is not guilty of these two Errors you
charge him with, and they will be returned upon your self as two of your own
mistakes.

I hope you will not say when you think better of it, that a man may be a
Member of the Church of England at the present, and yet not a Member of it in
its present Constitution (though you seem to say so;) for then a man must be a
Member of that which is not: unless you believe it has one Constitution for
some, another for others. The Constitution of it is the same, though the
Membership is different; so that Person who is a Lay-Member, is not obliged for
that Membership as a Priest, or Archdeacon for ^is as such; yet the difference
lies not in the Constitution of the Church, which is made up of all the parts,
in the order, and manner prescribed; but in the station of each Person,
according to that one Constitution. In short, whatever different station
Persons may have therein, Communion by the Worship of the Lyturgy is necessary
to their Membership, (which is the question) and without it there can be no
Member of one sort or another.

The Law makes it the Symbol; for if the question be put whether any Worship be
according to the usage of the Church of England, it is not Sermons, nor private
Conceived Prayers will be taken for such, without the use of the Lyturgy: But
the use of the Lyturgy will be so accepted, without either Sermon, or Conceived
Prayers. I can tell you of a Conventicle, Convicted in Kent, which was kept on
a Lordsday in the Parish Church; and all because the Lyturgy was not read at
that time, and place. Recusancy depends on the observation of the Lyturgy; and
no other part of Worship. This alone is called the service of the Church either
in Law, or Canon, and is therefore prescribed to be done in a Surplice, etc.
which none of the other parts of Worship are by Law to be honored with. He
that attends not to this, is l able to Excommunication, by Law, and anon; he
that is Excommunicate for this, or other Crimes, must not be admitted to this
Communion, nor to Christian burial, i. e. in Consecrated ground, or any where
else, by the Office of Burial in the Lyturgy, read over his Corpse, and Grave.

But it may be you will require proof of all this by Citations, though I think
their mention is enough, to all that pretend to any insight into Law, or
Canons. However I shall comply. The Acts Primo I lizab. Decino quarto Caroli
Secundi, obdlige all to it according to the Lyturgy; which is thereby entered in
matter, and form into the very body of the Law. These are the preceptive parts
of the Law, which enjoin the whole to every Member, and no other but Members:
for such these Laws will have all the Kings Naturalborn. Subjects in this
Kingdom to be.

The Canons oblige to the same, by punishing all that shall speak against, or
inpugn all, or any part of the Liturgical Communion, or relatives to it as
such, with Excommunication ipso facto; Canon 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and Cannon 9. all
that separate from Communion by the Lyturgy, and count such as Conform, unmeet
to join with, and combine in a new Brotherhood, are to be excommunicated ipso
facto. And Can. 13. obliges to a total observation of Lyturgical service, to
all Persons within the Church of England; and the Canons are said to be
estabilished by Law. I hope I have said enough to bring off these two said
Errors from that Character. Now Sir, I pray consider, that I have concerned my
self in my inquiry as far as to your 9th Error on the Doctors score, and have
said somewhat to all (except the third, which was not in your Catalogue) in
order, without picking, or culling; and I believe you your self will see cause
at least to doubt, that you have too positively, and rashly imputed these
Errors, both for matter, and form, on the worthy Doctor deceased: who had he
survived your Print, he would not have needed such a silly Advocate as I. But
you knew he was dead, etc.

I have done my main work, intended to the demolishing of that hard-favoured
Monument, you had erected over his grave, and fame: And in its room, I shall
give my Reader a true, though defective Character of him.

He was a Person whose Learning, Parts, and Piety, silled not only this Island,
but also many other parts of the world, with the acceptable sound of his name.
His Learning was universal, deep, and solid in his early days: which raised him
to the stations of Dean of Christ-Church, in Oxford, and Vice Chancellor of
that University; which he was Elected to (and held diverse years successively)
when he wanted some years of the Age of Forty; a very rare example. And though
his Years, Piety, Principles, and strait Discipline, with the interest he
adhered to, affected many of the Heads, and Students with Contempt, Envy, and
Enmity at the first, his Personal Worth, Obliging Deportment, and Dexterity in
Affairs that concerned him in that Station, so Mastered all, that the
University grew not only content with, but proud of such a Vice Chancellor. And
indeed such were his Temper and Accomplishments, that whatever Station, or sort
of Men, his Lot, Choice, or Interest should place him in, or among; it would be
no small wonder if he were not uppermost: that was his proper sphere, which
those with whom he was concerned, generally Cour^d him into, and few envied, or
corrived. He was an excellent, and sound Writer; his Works many, some large;
wherein he dived beyond most into the less obvious parts of Learning: yet was
he so great an Ornament to the Pulpit, that for Matter, Manner, and Efficacy on
the Hearers, he represented indeed an Ambassador of the most High, a Teacher of
the Oracles of God. His Person, and Deportment were so gentile, and graceful,
that rendered him, when present, as affecting, or more, than his Works, and
Fame, when absent; this advanced the luster of his internal Excellencies, by
shining through so bright a Lanthorn. No wonder the then regnant Party Courted
him, or that his Happiness should prove his Temptation. He was indeed sometimes
a little Impatient of Contradiction (the common Companion of high Esteem) yet
on Cool Thoughts, or the conviction of Experience, he would pay the greater
Respects to those, who freely, and faithfully expressed themselves; he was not
Nice of receiving Honor, and Respects from others; yet as free to return them,
where they were deserved. He had indeed an humble Loftiness, and a losty
Humility. His exercises by Afflictions were very great, in respect of his
Children, none of which he much enjoyed while living, and saw them all go off
the Stage before him: In respect of sicknesses, very long, languishing and
often sharp and violent, like the blows of inevitable death, yet was he both
calm, and submiss under all; In respect of the state of Christ's Church, it lay
so near his Heart, that if he were led to any thing that looked like too
sudden, or extreme, it might rationally be imputed to that. His general frame
was serious, cheerful, and discoursive; his expressions savouring nothing of
Discontent, much of Heaven, and love to Christ, and Saints, and all Men, which
came from him so seriously, and spontaneously, as if Grace and Nature were in
him reconciled, and but one thing. In a word, whatever he was, a mean could not
contain him. Take him altogether, he excelled as a Man, a Christian, a Scholar,
a Divine, and a Gentleman.

Sir, I have now done with what concerns Dr. Owen, I have been upon the
defensive part of his Name and Principles which you have assaulted
(unseasonably, to say no more) and who has greater concerns to mind then such
pitiful scuffles as these, if they were within his reach. And when I read, and
considered that ingenuous acknowledgment of your infirmities, Postscr. p. 5.
your loss, and disesteem of reputation, p. 13. (which I will not recite,
because some may make worse constructions of it) wherein I believe you have in
your Hamility, and Self-denial, as much overshot against your self, as you seem
at other times against others whom you oppose: I cannot but after all dislikes,
continue in the same perfect Charity, and respects for you, as formerly, and
confide in the sincerity of what you say, scil. That though your writings
contain some expressions that seem over-sharp, you can bear twice as much from
others; which is a great, and exalted patience. I hope I have not taken a
liberty so far to try it, which would ill become me, and I am sure I have taken
no encouragement from this, your more than good natured indulgence.

After all that has been said by you in the discourse above considered, I
perceive your drift is (and I think you will say I am not mistaken) not to
assert Lyturgical Worship to be absolutely necessary, as you manifestly oppose
those, and only those who affirm it to be simply unlawful: which it cannot be,
if ever it was, or can be lawful to any; which is the sense of your words, p.
2. of your Postscript. Whereas I have written over, and over; that I persuade
no man either to, or from a public Church, 'till I know his Circumstances: And
that I doubt not but it is one man's duty, and another man's sin. I believe, Dear
Sir, that tho this concession may displease those who may best bear it, it may
reconcile you to most of those who are called Dissenters. And you say also, p.
46. of the book, Let it be noted, that it is not all, nor the greatest
objections, I confess, which I here deal with; [ scil. in the 12 Arguments]
having done it elsewhere. Some of which you instance in, and others may be
added; but how far they will go in the Controversy, I shall not, I must not
say. We live not in the days of Trajan, when every man might think what he
pleased, and speak what he thought; and it may be, such a liberty would neither
be fir, nor safe. And if (as you allow) the practical determination depends on
the Circumstances of the persons, you reduce the Controversy to a far narrower
room, than was by many supposed. And every one being best capable of
understanding his own Circumstances, it will not bear great heat, or
importunity from another: This I say, as Argumentum ad hominem. I know Sir, how
apt our natures are to sidings, and to partial, unconsidered Animosities
against those who do not just jump with us in our Opinions, and every mean to
their interest; such mean Spirits are we of! Whatever others do, or say, or
think, I desire to love all men, with a love of benevolence, and that which is
good in all men, with a proportional love of Approbation, and Complacence: To
carry it with a special love, and respect, to all that fear God, though not in
all things, nor in many things of my persuasion: yea, to hold Church Communion
with them as far as the Gospel allows, and no farther; choosing Love, Peace,
Communion for their own sakes, and for Christ's sake: but Debates, and eparation
of any degree, only for necessity sake, and as a less evil than sin: To keep
close to the Principles I profess in mine own Practice, to be Charitable, and
Peacable, and not unwarrantably Censorious, and troublesome to those who
believe, and practice different from me: To have mental Communion with all the
Members of Christ, throughout the world; and whatever any of their Carriages
may be to me, to love, and speak as well of them, as consists with Truth, or
warranted Charity, whether they will accept of it, or not. Now the God of the
Spirits of all flesh, dispose the hearts of Rulers, and Ruled, of what Degree,
or Station soever, effectually, and practically to know their respective
Duties, and therein the things that belong to their present, and everlasting
Peace.

Let every Man prove his own Work, and so shall he have rejoicing in himself,
and not in another,

Gal. 6.4. Errata.
P. 4. l. 35. for an, read the. ibid. l. 36. blot out from the the word sent,
to the word also, l. 39. these 3 lines being obscure. p. 5. l. 8. read who you
say Chid.

FINIS.

