GODS Drawing, AND MAN'S Coming TO CHRIST. Discovered in 32 SERMONS On John 6.
44. With the difference between a true inward Christian and the outward
Formalist; in three SERMONS On Romans 2. 28, 29.

By Mr. RICHARD VINES, late Minister of the Gospel at St. Laurence-Jury in
London.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Sun against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street, 1662.

Good Reader,
THe great duty of Christianity is Coming to Christ, and Christians are
described to be those that come to God by him, Heb. 7. 25. Now this work is not
easily done; Nature is averse from it: Partly, because Believing or Coming to
Christ is a mystical duty, not evident by natural light, but instituted in the
Gospel: And we usually bid better welcome to our acquaintance than a mere
stranger. Moralities, which are in part engraven upon man's heart, go down
sooner with us then matters of Faith. Partly because Nature affecting a
self-sufficiency, is loath to be beholding to another, and therefore does not
easily submit ((...), Romans 10. 3.) to fetch all from Christ: As a proud man
will rather choose to wear a russet coat of his own, than a silken garment of
another. Partly because it is a long time ere we can get men to be serious,
and to wind soul-affairs; and if it be so hard a matter to bring them and
themselves together, What is it to bring them and Christ together? Partly,
because Christ and the main of his Blessings lie in another, in an invisible
world; and man that is so enchanted with the pleasures of sense, and ^iassed
with fleshly lusts, which are importunate to be pleased with what is visible
and present, is not easily moved with unseen hopes, and induced to deny himself
and lay all his affections and interests at the feet of Christ, and entirely to
consecrate himself to the use and service of God.

For these and many other reasons man hangs off from Christ; and nothing but a
divine power can cure this aversness: The work of reducing man from his
strayings, and bringing him to seek his happiness in God through Christ, is
carried o^ among the Divine Persons, between the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:
God the Father as a Judge by the spirit of bondage drives us to Christ as
Mediator; and Christ as Mediator by the spirit of (...) brings us back
again to God as a Father; Through him (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 13.) we have
access by one spirit unto the Father.

This mystery is notably unfolded in the present Treatise; and if either the
weight and importance of the matter, being one of the chiefest points in the
Christian Religion, or the known worth of the Author, Mr. Richard Vines, a man
sufficiently eminent for the graces of the spirit, for sound Learning and
well-tempered moderation, or the accuracy of discussion, these Sermons being
not the sudden issues of a light spirit, but the fruit of grave and mature
studies; I say, if these, or any of these be any allective to thee, thou will
find them all in this Treatise that is now put into thy hands.

And because many pretend to Christ that are none of his there is added another
Tract of the difference between a true inward Christian and an outward
Formalist, necessary to be subjoyned to the former, that we may build surely on
a sure foundation and not content our selves with a name that we live in Christ
when indeed we are dead in sin: I commend both to thy serious perusal, and the
Blessing of the Lords Grace, in whom I am

Thine in all Christian service, Tho. Manton.

Errata.
PAge 6. line 22. for derisons read divisions: p. 25. l. 10. for to r. no: p. 4
^. 9. for as r. not: p. 90. l. 28. for gripes r. gropes: p. 138. l. 23. for Ro^
r. Luke: p. 160. l. 30 blot out always: p. 214. l. 9. for mean r. mere: p. 23^
l. 21. for volentem r. violentum: p. 293. l. 22. r. While he is: p. 313. l. 5.
for Sodom r. Scdem: p. 320. l. 8. blot out to: p. 326. l. 17. for is r. in: p.
32^ l. 30. after Its add true: p. 328. l. 22. r. a man may be full, etc.

Reader,
THe Name and Memory of the judicious and Learned Author of these Sermons, is
so precious to me for his great worth and eminent abilities, that I cannot but
heartily rejoice in the publication of any of his Labors, that are proper and
genuine. And that these Sermons are such, I am confidently assured. If thou
question the truth of this, Come and see; do but peruse them; their features
will show who was their Father; Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic or a ferebat. I
commend them therefore to thy reading, and thy self in all thy Christian
endeavors to Gods blessing.

Tho. Jacomb, D.D.

Reader,
THough I may suppose that the precious name of Mr. R. Vines will do much in
procuring thy estimation and acceptance of this Book; yet if it had not a
greater excellency, I should not commend or tender it to thy perusal. Though I
have not so exactly read it, as to give my judgment of every sentence; yet by
the general survey which I have made, I am able to tell thee, that the Doctrine
of Conversion is plainly and judiciously here unfolded; the necessity and
victory of effectual Grace is solidly asserted; and the opposition of corrupted
nature discovered; and in all thou art taught that greatest duty, to know God
as he is revealed in his infinite Goodness, and incomprehensible Mercy, to
miserable man, in and by his Blessed Son our Redeemer, and to give him the
Glory of his Love and Grace. If thou have the Grace thou read of, it must
needs be sweet to thee, to read of so sweet a thing, as the treasures of
restoring saving Grace, so copiously and clearly opened; and to be employed in
so high and sweet a work, as to labor with all the Saints to comprehend, what
is the breadth and length and depth and height, and to know the Love of Christ
which passes knowledge, to be filled with all the fullness of God: The
happiness of those that study* Christ by the conduct of Christ, and are
strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man, that Christ may even
dwell in their hearts by Faith, and they may be rooted and grounded in Love.]
Ephesians. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19. But if thou read of Grace with a graceless heart, the
Learning of the Writer, and the clear decision of the several controversies,
may possibly be acceptable to thee; but as for the sweetness of the excellent
subject, no wonder if thou be a stranger to it. It is a pitiful thing to hear
some men Learnedly discourse of the Nature and Necessity of Grace, and
disputing of its Universality and Speciality, its sufficiency and efficacy, the
way of its operations, whether Moral or Physical, etc. that yet never felt the
illuminating, changing, renewing, resolving, mortifying, strengthening, or
elevating works of Grace upon their souls, nor were ever brought by it to a
Life of Faith, to an hatred of their most secret sins, to a predominant Love of
God, to a superlative esteem of spiritual things, and to an Heavenly
conversation; and that must perish forever for want of that Grace, (yea for
their contempt and hatred of it) which they verbally magnified in their
preaching and disputes! If any subject in Divinity be practical, and to be read
with holy affection and resolution, it is this. Remember when thou read of
Grace, that the Reader is one that is lost and miserable till Grace recover
him, and must be beholden to Grace to save him from everlasting woe. Remember
that God has therefore thus wonderfully revealed himself in Love, that
appearing most Lovely to us, he may be most Loved by us, and all the beams of
his transcendent Goodness may terminate thus upon our hearts, and heat them
into ascendent flames of Love: Read till thou thus Believe, and thus Love;
and then thou have read well. And I hope thou will find much in these Sermons,
which may be bellows and fuel for this holy fire: Though they are not those
exact and elaborate works, by which Mr. Vines should be known in his great
abilities to the world, but such Sermons as he ordinarily preached to his
Flock; yet if even here thou find not matter to increase thy tears in the
remembrance of those faithful Laborers that sin has deprived England of, thou
differest from

One of the afflicted servants of the Church, Rich. Baxter.

These Books following are to be sold by Abel Roper, at the Sun in Fleet Street.
ALl Mr. Vines Sermons published by himself, collected into one Volume. The
Papers between his Majesty and the Divines at the Isle of Wight, concerning
Episcopal Government; with Mr. Vines stating his Majesty's Concessions.

Vindiciae F^^deris, A Treatise of the Covenant of God entered into with
mankind, in the several kinds and degrees of it, by Mr. Thomas Blake Minister
of the Gospel.

The Covenant sealed, or a Treatise of the Sacraments of both Covenants,
Polemical and Practical: especially of the Sacraments of the Covenant of Grace,
by Mr. Thomas Blake.

-- his vindication of the Birth, Privilege, or Covenant-Holiness of Believers
and their issue in the time of the Gospel* together with the Right of Infants
to Baptism.

Mr. Anthony Burgess his Expository Comment, Doc^^nal, Controversal and
Practical, upon the whole first chapter of the second Epistle of St. Paul to
the Corinthians.

-- his Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Blake.

Three Sermons of Dr. Tho. Jacombs.

Bucanus Common Places English.

A Discourse of the visible Church, by Francis Fulwood Minister of the Gospel.

The Italian Convert, or the life of Galeacius Caracciolus, his admirable
conversion from Popery, and forsaking a rich Marquesdom for the Gospels sake.

St. Augustines Confessions translated into English, by Dr. Watts.

Reynolds Celestial Amities, or the souls sighing for the love of her Savior.

-- his benefits of Afflictions.

-- his Advice against Libertinism.

-- his Eternity weighed with temporal and fading things of this world.

Josephus History of the Jews, fol.

The works of Mr. William Perkins, first Vol. fol.

Dr. Fulk on the Rhemist Testament, fol.

The Temple of Solomon pourtrayed by light of Scripture, by Samuel Lee, fol.

The Story of Stories, in a Harmony of the four Evangelists, octavo.

Gods Drawing, AND Man's Coming to Christ.
JOHN 6. 44. No man comes to me, except my Father which has sent me draw him.
Conversion: for coming in to Christ upon his Call (which is the phrase used in
the Text.) and Conversion unto God, differ not but in sound of words, which
amount unto one and the same meaning.

The Philosopher in his Dialect would call this Conversion, or this Coming unto
Christ, a motion, not local, from place to place; but transitive, from Term to
Term: for there are two Terms of every motion. And the Evangelist, according to
Scripture, expresses the terms of this motion diversely, but denoting the same
thing: From darkness to light; says the Text, Acts 26, 18. And from the power
of Satan unto God.

The Design that I have in my eye is to Treat of the point of Conversion, not
pretending to accurateness and curiosity, anxiously inquiring after the method
or manner of Gods working; But (...), and practically to handle this point unto
you.

For as thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, or how the bones do
grow in the womb of her that is with Child; so thou know not the works of
God, Eccles. 11. 5. nor all the particulars of the methods and ways wherein
God works in the Conversion or Creation of this New man.

This Conversion sometimes denotes the potent and immediate work of God,
renewing and converting; and this is called in my Text Gods drawing of a man to
Christ in these words, Except my Father draw him.

Sometimes it denotes the action of man, converting himself to God, by the
Faith and Repentance which he does receive from God; and this my Text calls
man's Coming unto Christ when he is called, in that phrase, No man can come to
me except.

In time, these two can hardly be distinguished; but in order of causality, they
are easy to be distinguished one from another. I mean Gods work, converting or
drawing man; and man's action, converting and coming unto Christ: The act of man
in coming to Christ, that's not first; but the work of God drawing in to Christ,
that is first; and the act of man's coming must needs follow; as the Sun must of
necessity first shine upon the wall, before the wall can give or reflect light
or heat from it self back again.

Facti sumus opus Dei, We are first made the works or workmanship of God; there
is Gods drawing. Then (Facimus opera Dei) we do the work of God, or walk in the
works of God which he has ordained, that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2. 10.
There is our coming.

That you may clearly look into every corner of this Text, you shall observe
here two things.

First, the doctrine that is here taught by our Savior.

Secondly, the reason of his teaching it at this time.

The Doctrine here laid forth consists in these three things.

First, the magnifying of the work of God in man's Conversion, to raise up your
praises and thanksgivings to God, by whom you are, what you are: for to his
Power and Grace, our Savior Christ assigns the only, or the principal part of
it, and that's expressed in the work of Gods drawing a man to Christ: Therefore
this Doctrine is not spoken in a simple form; he does not say in plain words,
My Father draws man unto me, but its spoken in an exceptive or exclusive form
of words excluding man's power; (...), except my Father draws, no man comes to
me: So that without the divine traction there is not an ability or power in man
to come to Jesus Christ; for he comes not by a power of his own, but my Fathers
drawing.

Secondly, the insinuating of man's duty. For here your duty is employed in these
words, coming unto Christ: Your coming unto Christ is the great charge or duty
that lies upon you; the observation of the Law of God, and every of his
commands, that is duty: But it is not duty of absolute necessity unto
salvation; but coming unto Christ is that which is of absolute necessity, you
cannot otherwise be saved; because this contains the great condition of the
Covenant of life and salvation, upon which hinge, eternal life does hang, and
the whole work, not only of your Conversion, but of all the means that tend to
your salvation do depend upon, and are comprehended causally and eminently in
this your coming unto Christ, and therefore it is put for all here, No man can
come to me.

Thirdly, the depression of man's pride, or derogation of man's natural ability
to faith in Christ, or Conversion. There is none of you but think it is an
easy matter to believe; that you can believe at pleasure, its very easy to
believe Gods promises, God speaking in his word. Here now is the depression of
man's pride as to this work: No man can.

(...), No man can come to me: Grace and Gods power is here exalted; exalted to
the disparagement and diminution of man's own ability; and it cannot otherwise
be: For as the Sun when it arises with his light, blots out the light of the
Moon and Stars that shined before; so when the Lord Jesus does appear unto you,
and God puts forth his arm to draw you to Christ Jesus, this act of God does as
it were put down, diminish, disparage all the pretended ability of man, his
worthiness, and merit. This is the Doctrine that is here taught, or the sum of
Christ's Doctrine in these words. And then,

Secondly, the reason of his now teaching it: (the hearers of Christ they were
called Jews; but indeed were Galileans his Countrymen, that knew his education,
about Capernaum, near Nazareth:) his hearers were observed by him to murmr at
this doctrine, as being very offensive to their ears and reason: For Christ
having preached himself quite off those expectations that the Jews had of him,
that he should be a great and potent Prince, a King, and a great victorious
Conqueror, expectations wherewith they had been prepossest; and preached himself
to be above that which they saw in him, that he came down from heaven, having
preached such doctrine that was very distasteful to their carnal ears (for
spiritual doctrine is always hateful to carnal ears) they began to vent their
hidden prejudices against him: Say they v. 42. Is not this Jesus the son of
Joseph? Do not we know this man's Fathers and Mother? for Nazareth, where he
lived, was near to Capernaum: how does he say, I came down from Heaven? what an
assumption is that? That he called himself bread, is a Metaphorical word, and
they used it in their speeches; this troubled them not: But that he came from
Heaven, and nothing appeared in him to be of Heaven more then other men, this
was distasteful to them. Now our Savior answers these prejudices, and tells
them, that it did appear that the preventing Grace of God had not touched their
hearts, to fashion and to mould them unto faith in him; and therefore I find
that your prejudices and carnal reasons stick by you still, and continue your
pride and obstinacy against me, unto whom indeed no man can come except my
Father draw him. Here is the File of the Connection of the words; by this thread
the words are to be cut out, which shall serve to raise a porch or gate of
Entrance into them: And therefore I shall raise thence three Observations.

I pray God that none of you may be offended at this Doctrine: For as I confess
these Jews pretended somewhat for the offense they took at Christ Jesus, his
meanness and simplicity: for he was mean and of simple appearance: So this
Doctrine may be somewhat offensive to you, if you bring your own ears to hear
it, if this converting and preventing grace of God have not already began to
mould and fashion your hearts to Christ Jesus, and made you resolve to stick to
him through thick and thin, notwithstanding all scandals and offenses that may
appear to be in him.

First, I observe That the Doctrine of Christ himself is entertained with
distaste and murmuring by prejudicate and corrupt minds, v. 41, 42, 43. The
Jews then murmured at him for his doctrine, etc. Murmr not among your selves,
says Christ. Will you take me right in this word that I am now speaking?
Christ is the most scandalous person that ever was: I mean fullest of scandals
and offenses to corrupt and carnal reason and interest. His person, how mighty
scandalous! his doctrine as well as his person; his birth very mean; his
conversation while he lived in this world; the death whereby he died on the
Cross; the administrations of the offices of his Kingdom, as he administers is
still, even though he be in heaven glorious: All of these are scandalous, and
full of offense unto corrupt reason.

How often has it been upbraided to Christians, that they believe in an
ignominious and crucified Savior, that hung upon the Cross, which the Apostle
calls the scandal of the Cross!

How scandalous are the great afflictions that sit many times heavy and long
upon the Church, as if they had no deliverer!

How scandalous are the divisions of the Church, as if they had not one Savior
and one Lord!

How scandalous to Christ are the corrupt and wicked lives of Christians that
profess him! He that will be a Christian indeed, must have (as they say) a good
swallow: I mean he must swallow these hard morsels; and a good digestion to
digest iron, to run through all the scandals that fleshly reason will lay in
his way concerning all things that belong unto Christ.

Its a good observation: A Christian must believe in a stumbling stone, in a
rock of offense, Romans 9. 33. Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling stone. If he had
said, I lay a stone of safety, a rock of refuge, that had invited faith to come
unto him: But to say, He that will believe in Christ, must believe in a rock of
offense, in a stone of stumbling; this seems rather to alienate the faith of
man from Christ, to estrange and throw faith off. Oh how hard a thing, is faith
in Christ! There must be such a faith as may overlook so many scandalous and
offensive things, so opposite to carnal reason. That's the first observation.

Secondly, The more Evangelical the Doctrine, and the sweeter, the more is the
offense, and the greater is the dislike of it, ver. 41. because he said, I am
the bread that came from heaven; because he rose high in his Doctrine above
what they looked for in him. And who are these that took offense? Even
disciples, and they that followed him: They say, this is a hard saying; and
they also murmured, nay they take the wing and fly away and leave him, in the
61, 62, 63. verses of this Chapter.

Oh Beloved, there are many of the followers of Christ that take offense at
this Doctrine; and it is to us even in our days, very scandalous to many men;
and that's the reason why I insist so long upon the Connection.

If Christ preach himself the Son of God, that is God: For I pray let me give
you warning once for all, that the word frequently used in the Gospel, the Son
of God, it means no less then God, that Christ is God, God as it were by
nature: Its used eighty eight times, as I think, in the New Testament: The Son
of God is God as well as man; and therefore the Socinian does but quibble (as I
may so say) when he comes to distinguish: Christ indeed is the Son of God (and
so are we called too:) But that phrase does not imply that he is God. Yes; for
they that heard the words, took it so, in John 10. 33, 34, etc. they took up
stones to throw at him for his blasphemy; and that was, In that being man, thou
make thy self God; they took it in a right meaning.

The purest Gospel-doctrine is most harsh: Christ's preaching himself the Son of
God, was very unpleasing to these carnal men: We measure Gospel-doctrine by the
metwand of our wit and reason, and peradventure by our learning (which may be
of great reach.) Therefore we are offended. Now let me show you this, that

The great design of the Gospel, is to advance God, and to lay man low: And I
beseech you, carry this along as the great Design of the Gospel, to advance the
power and the grace of God, in bringing men unto salvation, and to lay man, and
all their parts and reason low: God in the power and freedom of his grace,
saving man, is advanced; man in the power and merit of himself is extenuated
and made nothing: The design of the Gospel, in giving all to God, is seen by
one Text: In the 1 Cor. 1 Chap. last ver. That he that glories, may glory in
the Lord; showing that the main plot of the Gospel, is the advancement of
Grace; the depression of man, and the derogation of man's abilities may be seen
by what is said in Romans 3. 17. Where is boasting then? It is excluded (says
he) By what Law? Not by the Law of works, but by the Law of Faith: And that's
the doctrine of the Gospel that takes men off from their own bottoms and
hinges: And so I think I have sufficiently proved it unto you.

Of Gospel doctrine, that that advances free Grace, is the most glorious to
God, the most full of admiration to them that are godly, and yet the most
obnoxious to offense and scandal of man, to ordinary men of reason.

There are in this Doctrine so many offensive principles: I shall instance in
eight that I know are scandalous and offensive, and stumbling blocks to reason:
And much ado we have to leap over them, when we come to believe.

mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens. This is one scandalous
point, Romans 9. 18.

Esau and Jacob, equals, that tumbled both in one belly, twins that had both
one birth; for these to be so differenced, that God should say, I have loved
the one, and hated the other. This is another point scandalous and offensive to
man's reason, laid down in Romans 9. 13.

Who made thee to differ, O man! says the Apostle.

Romans 9. 30, 31.

Gospel-doctrine, laid down in Galat. 2. 16.

Matthew. 11. 25. Father, I thank thee, etc. hard and offensive to Reason,

Matthew. 22. 14. There are many called, and great offers are made in the Gospel,
but few chosen and select.

John 6. 44, 65.

There are two things that make the doctrine of the Gospel something
contemptuous tomen.

First, because it opposes men's carnal interests. It crosses the lusts of the
flesh, and of the world; it brings men to self-denial.

Secondly, because it is dissonant to reason, to pride and self that is in men,
and thereby they are prejudiced.

Romans 9. 16. but in God that shows mercy: Then why does God find fault, or
complain of us? why does he find fault with us, that we do not believe, that
we stand out in opposition? Who can help it? ver. 19* whose: hand lies it in?
not ours. This is the great offense, Who has refisted his will? Nay but O man,
ver. 20. Who art thou that reply against God? And then the Apostle goes on
to clear the doctrine of free grace, according to the method whereby it can be
cleared. This seems to me a great scandal, whereat men stumble.

Romans 9. 11. then if so be these works required and commanded will not serve my
turn, will not confirm my Election or Justification, I may follow them, and yet
not attain righteousness by them, Romans 9. 31. This is a great scandal and
offense to man's reason.

Thirdly, if God cast so many of the world off, and choose so few of them that
are called, but throws them out as the man that was thrown from the Feast, not
having the wedding garment; This is a miserable offense.

Fourthly, if God require faith of me and repentance, call for a new heart and
a new spirit, and says, Make you a new heart, and yet teaches me that none can
come except a divine power draw him, except it be given him, then he requires
impossible things. And is not this (say some) like to Pharaoh, that will have
the full tale of brick, but will not find the people straw.



Upon all this that I have said, it appears that the doctrine of Christ, and of
the free grace of God in Christ, requires an humble heart, a captivated reason;
or else prejudices of pride, and the reason of man, will trouble the whole
Scene.

And I may give an instance in a point so resented in the times wherein we
live, by our Masters of Reason (as some call themselves) as the Gnostics of
old, those damnable Heretics called themselves the knowing men, who had their
opposition of Science falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6. 20.

This is it, That Christ's blood is not a blood of Atonement or expiation of
sin; that there is no proper compensation, nor any satisfaction made, or
needful to Divine Justice for sin: How then? God pardons us our sins by an
absolute goodness, by an absolute free pardon, without such satisfaction: As a
man forgives a delinquent without any satisfaction; or as a man forgives a debt
another man owes him freely for nothing: And this is the great Hinge on which
the Socinian Doctrine hangs, which has leavened and passed through so many men
in our times: But this free pardon, without satisfaction of Gods justice,
ruins and razes the foundations of our Christian Faith; as if men would not
have Christ to do too much for them, were angry at him for his being their
surety, for his paying their debt, and freeing them from prison and damnation;
which makes me cry out as the Apostle does in 1 Cor. 1. 20. Where is the wise?
where is the Scribe? where is the Disputer of this world? (Let them take notice
of it, the great learned men that preach Heathenism among us) Has not God made
foolish the wisdom of this world? how? by the Doctrine of Christ and free
grace. And this I preach, that we may listen, and hold the truths that to
others are offensive, overlooking all the scandals that may be found in the
person and doctrine of Christ.





In the election of any man to salvation, it is free, because it excludes man's
worthiness or works; and yet its not universal, so as all are elected and
chosen.

One calling, I mean that calling that is according to purpose, it is free, not
standing upon works: You are called by Gods grace; and yet it is not universal,
so as all men are called according to Gods purpose. Its free to such as are
called, though it be not common to all: Was not the grace of God free to Jacob?
yet not common to him and Esau: It was free to Peter, and yet not common to him
and Judas: To you it is given to know the mystery of the Kingdom of Heaven;
there is the freedom; to others it is not given, there is a denial of the
universality, Maith. 13. 11. And therefore we must distinguish between the
offer of free grace, and the effects of it: grace in the offer of it may be
common, and in a sort universal, but in the effects you shall always observe
grace to be of a differencing nature; it discriminates and makes^ difference
between one and another in salvation, and therein is the glory of it; and
reason will show, that so far as it differences one from another, it is not
universal: for that which differences, cannot be universal; the election has
obtained, and the rest were hardeued, Romans 11.

It is indeed offensive when it opens, or is made to open a window to looseness
of opinion, or profaneness of life: That makes it rather to be called loose
grace then free grace: for free grace truly preached, neither takes off the
bridle of restraint of sin, nor the spur of excitation of holiness from Gods
Law; these two must stand together: Sin is restained by the Law of God, there is
the bridle; and then its a spur and incentive to obedience: Shall we sin (says
the Apostle) because we are not under the Law but under Grace? God forbid. Romans
6. 15. Again, Shall we sin that Grace may abound? Romans 6. 1. No, we may not
make the doctrine of Gods free grace a Pander, or a Porter, to let in or open
us the gate more freely to sin against him: And the reason is excellent good;
there is no greater and sweeter obligation obliging man to thankfulness and
obedience, then this Doctrine of free grace: The sense of this free grace (I
say) is the most obliging and indearing of the heart to God, of any doctrine
that can be preached; so contrary is it from being a loosener of those bands
whereby we are tied to God.

it is not rightly preached when it is made to deny to man all agency in
Conversion, as well as all power whereby he is converted: For the act of faith,
and repentance, and obedience, is man's act; and therefore those that poison us
with this doctrine, Christ believes for me, and repents for me, tell us a
ridiculous piece of nonsense: No, it is you that must repent, and believe, and
act obedience: for common reason will show you, o^ sense, it is not the Sun
that sees; for that which sees is the eye; the Sun only gives light, without
which the eye cannot see: And so we must distinguish between the power and the
act; God draws man to Christ Jesus, the power is of him; but coming to Christ,
or the act of Conversion, that is man's; the power is Christ's, the duty is
yours: And therefore, though this doctrine be never so offensive, yet it seems
God puts his greatest glory in that which is most offensive to man's reason. In
the 33. of Exodus 19. ver. I will make all my goodness to pass before thee, and
I will proclaim the name of the Lord. And what is that Proclamation? that
doctrine that is conceived to be so scandalous? I will be gracious to whom I
will be gracious, and show mercy to whom I will: Which the Apostle insists upon
in Romans 9. where this point is agitated. That's the second Observation.

Thirdly, for the silencing of these murmurers at Christ in the verse before
the Text, Christ gives the close reason of man's believing in him, and man's not
believing in him, a closer reason, then they were aware of: The reason he gives
is this, That those that God draws to Christ, they come to him, ver. 44. And
every man that has heard and learnt of the Father, comes to me, ver. 45. There
is the teaching of God called the drawing of God, and persuading the mind of
man; which whoever has, believes and comes to Christ Jesus; and every man that
is not thus drawn, is left unto himself, is left under his own disability, and
so he cannot come: For no man can come to me except the Father draw him. Man's
impotency is alleged on the one hand, and Gods drawing is alleged on the
other hand; and though there might be great objections made against it, yet our
Savior insists upon this close doctrine, Joh. 10. 26, 27. You believe not,
because you are not of my sheep. Many other reasons might be given, but he
comes unto the bottom; Because you are not called, because you are not of my
sheep by the election of God. And so again in Joh. 6. 37. All that the Father
has given to me, shall come to me: You that are not of my sheep, do not
believe, therefore you do not come: And he sets it forth again, ver. 65. of
this Chapter, No man can come to me, except it be given him of my Father. These
are strange reasons, will reason say, and rather apt to give offense, then to
take it off; rather apt to breed murmurings, then to qualify and allay them.
And its true, had Christ encouraged man's natural abilities, and ^lattered them,
he should have pleased the corrupt and carnal reason of man: for without all
question, that which most flatters self and carnal reason, is most acceptable
with you: But so does not he; for he asserts that God must draw and give faith:
This gives all to Christ, and assumes all the glory out of your hands to God;
whereby you may gather, that those that are not of the sheep of Christ, are not
drawn; those that are not of the sheep of Christ by Gods election, they are not
drawn to Christ by Gods operation. This is that which reason stumbles, and is
offended at. And

How shall this offense that reason may take at the proceeding of God in this
point, be cured? No way that I know in the world but this, by laying down the
wasters and the cudgels; not disputing with; and repining at God, but humbly
waiting on that hand which of necessity must work faith in you, and convert you
to this grace: And that all unconverted persons may do so, know it for a
Maxim, or a rule, for so I take it to be, that God has taken the best and the
surest way, the most infallible that can be in the world, to save his people:
which I thus illustrate: Had the salvation of man been left to his own power,
as some would have it, it had been desperate and hopeless to all men, even to
the best man in the world: But now this powerful and gracious God has reserved
it in his own power; for all those that are saved, are saved by this power, and
this grace: And now in this way of salvation some are saved; some are in the
way that God has set for bringing man to Christ Jesus; for if God had set
forth Christ, and caused him to be preached to you; yea if Christ should have
shed his blood to have redeemed you, notwithstanding all this, it had been
possible that not a man in the world might have been saved without this
powerful drawing of God, and this hand of God, whereby he brings some men unto
salvation: And so now some are saved, and so are obliged to greater admiration
and thankfulness to this God, then all the world besides are obliged to him,
for this differencing grace whereby he brought them unto Christ; otherwise, if
he had left it to you to believe in Christ Jesus, I cannot conceive how any one
man in the world had been saved, notwithstanding the Redemption laid down, and
the Atonement made; which is a rare point, and worthy of all serious
disquisition and proof: And I would I could convince men thereof, that if it
had been as they would have it, there would not a man on earth be saved. In the
mean time let this pass for a proof; That which never was yet in the world, may
rationally be presumed will never be: That hitherto no man has attained to
faith, no man has come to Christ by the mere use of his own natural abilities
and power, without the working of this divine grace, which all that partake of,
have magnified and blessed God for: We know of none, we read of none in the
Scripture, that have had this wrought in them, but have returned the glory of
it to God: But because we do not find that it ever (...) has been, we may
conclude it shall never be; that without this drawing of God any man can come
to believe in Christ Jesus, if it were left to their natural abilities and
capacities. Be they as they think them to be, never so great and valuable, all
this is but premissary to the Doctrines in the Text.

The Use of these Doctrines of Connection altogether shall be threefold.

When the Word of the Gospel is improved with all manner of advantages among a
people. Whether in Capernaum, as this was; or living in a Parish, as you do,
yet you shall find that many of the hearers of this doctrine may yet lie in
their strong holds, and lie under prejudices, and notwithstanding the preaching
of this saving doctrine, may happily not believe; as its said of them that Paul
preached to from morning to night, and opened Christ to them from Moses and the
Prophets (their own Scriptures) yet how is this Sermon concluded in the 28 Acts
24 ver. And some of them believed the things that were spoken, and some
believed not!

By this we may learn what to resolve upon, and what to rest in, if the word of
the Gospel be inclucated and taught out of the Scripture, with all possible
advantages of conviction, prejudices will remain, and murmurings; some believe,
and others believe not, as they are drawn by a divine power in to Christ Jesus,
or not drawn. There is some higher and secreter reason to be shown for this
then yet they think of, and see in themselves: for the Text tells you, No man
can come to me except my Father draw him. When this drawing power goes forth,
then they come; whom he draws not, they murmur, and take offense and prejudice:
And therefore it is said in Acts 13. 48. As many as were ordained to eternal
life, believed. This we rest upon, and are resolved: But you believe not,
because you are not of my sheep, John 10. 26.

As for the Ministry of the Word in the hand of man, it works but
instrumentally, and not as the principal cause: It is not the axe that builds
the house: Its not the pencil that limbs or draws the picture, but the workman
by such instruments does it: as I may give instance both in faith and
repentance.

See this in faith: In Isa. 53. 1. Lord, who has believed our report? there is
the preaching: and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? there is the inward
working: The revealing of Gods arm must go together with the report, or else
who has believed it? The word preached, and the work of God, must go together.
So in repentance: In 2 Timothy 2. 25. Let the Minister meekly instruct them that
oppose themselves (that murmur and are prejudiced) if God peradventure will
give them repentance, to the acknowledgement of the truth: for else our
instructions are but peradventure.

If there be such disability and opposition in man, here you learn that
Gospel-hearers have need of subdued hearts: Hearts mightily tamed and
captivated to the very doctrine of the Word of God, beaten down into a
tractable humility: For else, as the best meat is distasteful to a corrupt and
vitiated palate, so will Gospel-doctrine, the doctrine of free grace, be
scandalous and offensive to proud reasonings: And I conceive (it may be you
have not observed it before) that our Savior when he began first to preach the
Gospel, did so much insist upon humility, meekness, poverty of spirit,
self-denial, that his hearers might be subdued unto captivity of their
reasonings and high thoughts (as the Apostle excellently) in 2 Cor. 10. 5. unto
the obedience of Christ: For I must say it, no doctrine in the world was ever,
or will ever be again so obnoxious to scandal, so opposite to the pride, and so
cross to the reason of man, as the highest and sweetest of Gospel-doctrine, the
points of free grace, which no man can receive without murmurings, except the
Lord first give him a very subdued spirit, and a captivated reason: And
therefore, though the benefits received from Jesus Christ be very great, and
every man will witness that Christ is worthy of all acceptance, to save the
chiefest of sinners; yet when they come to look upon his person thoroughly, and
consider what may be said against him, as well as what is said for him, and the
course and tenor of his doctrine, that has it in so many stumbling blocks,
that may give distate; its great odds, that you would never have come in unto
him, were there not put forth in you a divine hand, and a powerful, to draw you.

A famous instance we have of this in Matthew. 11. 5. when John Baptist sent his
disciples to Christ, to know whether he was he; not that I believe John Baptist
doubted of it; for he was in prison, and now ready to be offered: why (says
Christ) tell John what you see, the sick are healed, the lame walk, and all
sorts are cured; very good things, such as no man could be offended at: and
then he adds, Blessed is he that shall not be offended in me, ver. 6. as if he
had said, as there are many things in me, and in my doctrine, that draw men to
me, multitudes crowd after me, because I heal, cure, and relieve them; so there
are others of hard digestion, that may by their offensiveness to men's reason
drive them from me.

So it was in this Chapter: His disciples that followed him, began to take
offense, and to cry out of hard sayings, ver. 60, 61. and then presently go
away, and walk no more with him, ver. 66.

A man obstructs his faith, when he considers too much the appearance of
inconsistencies of his reason and sense to faith in Christ. As these
Galilaeans, Countrymen of Christ's, that knew his parentage and outward quality,
fell a murmuring at his doctrine, that he came down from Heaven; for their eyes
were all on those things that they thought inconsistent to his coming from
Heaven; they could not stand with them, and so obstructed their faith:
Whereupon he says, except God draw men out of their inconsistencies, no man
can come to me: A man may follow his own reason unto an absolute unbelief, and
Atheism; not that Scripture or divine Reason is to be rejected; I do not speak
to that point: But I speak to that natural reason that is taken up from other
grounds, and not weighed in the balance of the Word: Faith believes God,
though reason comprehends him not; there is no reason that I should have my
reason satisfied in the point of eternal salvation by free grace, but that I
should have a clear word of God, that I conceive necessary: That God promises
so or so, that I must needs have as the object of my faith; but that I should
have my reason satisfied before I believe, I know no reason of that: Take it
either in the narrative part of faith, or the promissory part: God promised
Abraham a son in the old age of him and his wife, when he did not expect such a
thing; did he say, Show me how that can be now I am old? No, he did believe
that he was able to perform; he received the word which he believed. -- These
people reasoned themselves into an absolute unbelief; they considered the means
of Christ, what they saw in him; but the excellency of Christ, that he came
from Heaven, the Son of God, the Savior and Redeemer, they believed not.

And therefore let me from that observe a notable lesson: A man that will
believe firmly, let him look upon the excellency of Christ Jesus, not on that
which is offensive and scandalous to our reason: It was excellent doctrine,
that he was bread from Heaven; somewhat more then Joseph's son: Look upon the
excellencies of Christ Jesus, the satisfaction that he has made for you by his
blood, the acceptance of that satisfaction by God the Father, and those things
that are excellent; and in this doctrine of free grace look well on the
Sovereignty of God, for he has mercy on whom he will; that surmounts the
reason of man: And so you may believe for the words sake that is delivered unto
you; and not because it is commended to you by sense and reason. This that has
been delivered, is but the preamble, yet so necessary, that it could not well
be omitted.



First, the assignment of the power by which man comes to Christ, unto divine
drawing. Except my Father draw him.

Secondly, the insinuation of man's duty, which is coming unto Christ, which is
not like the duties of the Law, which yet we are all bound unto; for the Law is
a Law of duty: But this is a Gospel-duty, and does denote the great condition
of salvation; the great condition of the Covenant upon which God will save
mankind, is, that they believe in, and come unto Christ Jesus, employed in these
words, No man can come to me.

Thirdly; the depression of man's pride, or derogation of man's power and natural
abilities in these words, No man can, etc.

These are the three points that may profitably be handled out of these words.
The last of these points first comes to hand in the order of the Text, which is,



That I might not go far to prove the point, therefore I give it you in the
words of the Text it self:

Which shows unto all men universally, that what is of greatest necessity to
man's salvation, and tends to his greatest happiness, which is to come to
Christ, and so consequently to be saved; unto that, he is impotent and without
strength.

So that the Person upon whom we are to discourse, is not a man already in
grace, but a man in a state of unregeneration. The Subject of our discourse
has three characters given of him together, Romans 5. 6, 8, 10. While we were
without strength, while we were yet sinners, while or when we were enemies: Man
thus qualified, or rather unqualified, may be, and is, a capable subject of
divine traction or operation. So that observe,

No man in himself, while he lies in a state of fin, an impotent estate,
without strength, is a cause first moving himself to his own conversion. And
secondly, he can be no cause moving God by any of his worthiness or works to
convert him: He moves not himself; for he is without strength; and he moves not
God; for he is a sinner and enemy to God; and so consequently he moves not to
his own conversion and salvation either way; either by way of power, stirring
up himself, or by way of merit and desert, stirring up God to move him.

This point shall be opened from three particulars. The three particulars are,







First, the greatness of the work it self. Lift up your ears, that you may lift
up your thanksgivings and praises: Attend to the greatness of the work of
Conversion, and believing in Christ, that you may magnify and exalt it
according to its worth: The greatness of the work properly leads us to the main
point, to show the imparity and impotency of man: For as the greatness of the
Heavens that are over our heads, does diminish the earth that's under our feet,
and is the reason that its called punctum, a little point; so you may
rationally conceive, that the greatness of this work of man's conversion, does
easily and rationally diminish the power and ability of man unto it, and makes
it nothing. -- And the work is great in three regards.

First, in respect of the change it self that is wrought upon every man that
comes to God, which is expressed in Scripture by terms of the greatest distance
that can be, from darkness to light; a great change.

Secondly, in respect of the power required for the effecting it; which is the
drawing of Almighty God.

Thirdly, in respect of the concernment of it unto man's eternal happiness and
salvation: For except you be converted and thus drawn to the Lord Jesus, there
is no hope of salvation for you: And therefore in Ezekiel. 18. last ver. Wherefore
turn and live ye.

The greatness of the work of man's conversion, may be estimated and proved to
you,

First, by the names that are given unto it: It is called a Creation, a
Resuscitation of the dead, a begetting of a new Man, or a new Creature, or
Regeneration. Now mark how great a work that must be: And though I confess that
every similitude must not so be stretched and urged, as to make it run of all
four (which is but a kind of trifling preaching of Divinity) yet we may press
the scope of Scripture: Similitudes may be preached out of Gods Word, according
to the scope wherein the similitude holds; which hereby intimates a great work,
which no man can work upon himself, but is wrought by a divine hand ( non sine
novitate essendi) not without a newness of being, as they use to speak.
Creation is such a work as brings forth a newness of being, whereby that which
is now made was not before.

It is not necessary (I think) to this work of Creation, that it should
presuppose a total nonentity, or a not being to be before it: For Eve, the
first woman, formed of a rib, yet may properly be said to be created; yet
creation may extend so far as to signify a producing of something out of
nothing: For God when he made the world, made the creatures (...), of the
things Heb. 11. 3. ver. that did not appear: And when he converts, he chooses
things that are not, 1 Cor. 1. 28. that is, that were not such as they are
made, that have not that existence as is given to them afterward.

The Artificer and Workman requires and presupposes the matter that he works
upon; he does not make the matter, and therefore is not the cause totius entis,
as the Schoolmen use to say, of the whole thing: But God can, such is his
omnipotency, call all things out of nothing; else, I assert (...) matter
coeternal with God, which I should not do. God requires not in his call that
the matter be sitted to his hand, he creates us of nothing; For we are his
workmanship created in Christ Jesus, 2 Ephesians. 10. And that you may see there is
nothing in the work of man that gives any being and rise to Conversion and
Regeneration, you may note that it is so wrought in us, as it is compared to
that which was brought forth at first out of nothing, in 2 Cor. 4. 6. Whereas
in the first Creation there was darkness, and then light was called out of
darkness by the word of Gods command: So says the Apostle. God commands light
to shine out of darkness in every one that is converted to him; he brings him
into a state of light and knowledge out of just nothing, as the light was at
first commanded to shine out of darkness, having no pre-existency in the
darkness as any seed of light. I know this is quotidianum argumentum, an every
days argument, and therefore I will go on to the next;

Which signifies the greatness of this work; a Resurrection, or Resuscitation
on man's part, and passively; a resurrection on Gods part; and actively a
raising of them that are dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. called a
quickening of men together with Christ that were dead before; which clearly
resembles it to a miraculous work: For such is the raising of the dead: Were
not they miracles whereby Christ raised the dead? And though I confess the
similitude between natural and spiritual death is not to be squeezed into
impertinencies; yet I say that those that shall make natural man to be as it
were sick and wounded, and only in fetters, and not stark dead in spirituals,
they wrong the grace of God, whereby man is converted; and as the saying is,
that which gains in one part, loses in another; so look where man gains in this
point, God loses: They take from God the eminency of his power, so much as they
give to man, and so enrich man by robbery of God himself, and so make it a less
work then indeed it is; it being a less work and wonder to heal a sick, then to
raise a dead man.

That word Regeneration, or second Birth, does also denote the gracious act of
Gods great power, whereby he brings man into a new estate: for generation even
in nature, if it be but of a chicken out of an egg, it is full of admiration,
and worthy to be the object of the enquiry of the learned men: And therefore
what shall we think of Regeneration, of this second Birth, as its called? which
Nicodemus in John 3 wondered and marvelled what it should be; why should not we
think this to be a great work, which is said not to be of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, 1 John 13. And our
Savior shows (me thinks) a natural reason, That which is born of the flesh is
flesh, like it self; for the flesh can beget nothing to the spirit: And that
which is born of the spirit is spirit; the spirit begets not to the flesh, nor
the flesh unto the spirit, but every thing begets unto its like, John 3. 6. And
therefore if this be so, Regeneration must be a great work. That's my first
Argument, from the titles that are given unto it.



(...): For man exalts self, and hates and opposes God. Now this man shall be
changed from self to God; Be ye met amorphosed, says the Text, be ye changed
in the spirit of your minds, Romans 12. 2. Now look by way of comparison; for we
may well compare Scripture things with Scripture: As the resurrection of the
body is attended with a change of that body that rises into a spiritual and
incorruptible body: He shall change our vile bodies, that it shall be like unto
his glorious body, 1 Cor. 15. So the resurrection of the soul is accompanied
with a mighty change of natural disposition, and of those habitual principles
of lust and corruption, which had first taken root, and happily by time, custom,
and education, more fixed in you: Rooted they are naturally; and therefore when
you come to be changed in these, do not you think as great a change follows in
this resurrection as on the resurrectection of the body? Nothing makes so great
a change as this converting grace, whereby God draws man to Christ Jesus. The
moral Philosopher teaches virtue, and excellently, to appalliate the nature of
man; for indeed he can teach no further: that is, he can teach amendment of
vice by virtue; but they know not the meaning of those Scripture-words,
Creation, Resurrection, Regeneration; these they are very great strangers unto;
emendation of life is all they speak of. Justin Martyr in his second Apology,
shows what a wonderful change was wrought in them that were religious, in them
that were called: In his time the people did observe it, the libidinous are
chaste, the drunkards made sober, the worldlings that had great estates, and
were tenacious, hard enough, sell their estates, and communicate to them that
were converted with them; and so goes on, to show, as the Scripture speaks, the
professors of Magical Arts, and such ungodly Impostures, sold and made away
their books; and Paul, that had destroyed the faith, preached it: We preach men
not only out of sin, but out of virtue; for Conversion is a change extended
thus far, as bringing man into grace, and unto Christ: Our Savior called the
young Ruler beyond the virtue that he professed: Follow me, says he. Oh
beloved, to come to Christ Jesus, and to be converted by spiritual grace, is
beyond all the virtue that you profess: And therefore we preach men not only
out of vice but virtue.

Nothing lies nearer our self-love, then our lands and houses, right hands,
right eyes, and the like; yet Christ calls men to the loss of these, and he
calls to no more then grace enables easily to perform: The greatest conquest of
spiritual grace in any man, is over self-love and self-seeking; and therefore
for a man to deny himself in any case that is for the excellency of Christ, is
the greatest change that can be wrought in any man: For a man to deny himself
upon a force, is nothing; but to do it out of sympathy, is much: As we find
this change described in Isa. 11. 6. where you must allow to the Prophet such
expressions: The wolf and the lamb shall dwell together; the leopard and the
kid; the calf and the lion. You must not think this is to be understood of
wild beasts, but of wild men, whose dispositions being quite contrary, they
shall be reconciled to agree: And the reason is given, verse 9. The earth shall
be full of the knowledge of the Lord. This knowledge of Christ, whereby men are
turned to God, is the great thing that changes natures, alters properties; even
as that is altered between the kid and the leopard. That's the second Argument.

John 14. 12. where he says, He that believes in me, shall do the miracles
and the works that I do; and greater works then these shall be do when I go to
the Father. When I go to send the Holy Ghost from the Father unto the world,
what greater works can there be? It cannot be otherwise explained then the
Ancients downard from Origin: The conversion of the world, of the Gentil world
from Heathenism, and Idolatry, and Devillism, and vanity to Christ; because
they work such great conversions, to turn men from darkness and Idolatry, these
are greater works then Christ himself did, because he did not convert so many
as they: This is the Hyperbole of Gods power toward them that believe; this is
the working of his mighty power: There is never a verse expresses it in so full
words as that Ephesians. 1. 19. speaking of the power that he wrought in Christ
when he raised him from the dead, This power wrought in you when you believed.
Read this verse, and consider it well, I think you will never hereafter look
upon it as an easy thing to believe the exceeding greatness of power. Learned
Divines observe there is an aggravation; the raising power, whereby Christ
rose, was a great power; he lay under all the sins of mankind; the greatest
stone lay upon his grave that ever man had; every man lay dead to his his own
sins: Christ lay under all the sins of mankind in their full weight; That which
went to raise Christ, and to roll away the stone, was a mighty power indeed;
and the same is put out in you, whereby you are called out of darkness into
light, and from a natural state to believe in Christ.

Ethiopian his changing of his skin, the leopard putting off his spots; The
Blackmoor cannet change his skin, nor the leopard put off his spots, Jer. 13.
23. When they can do so, then may you that are wicked and accustomed to sin,
change and turn to God. There is another instance in Luke 18. 25. Can a Camel
go through the eye of a needle? no more can a man that trusts in riches, a
worldly man, believe or repent; which are expressions of so great a height,
that we may well conclude the greatness of the work.

John 5. 6. The satisfaction of Christ, that's the taking away sin by his blood:
And therefore in John 12. 32. If I be lifted up, I will draw all men to me,
here is another drawing: There is Gods drawing by power, and Christ's drawing by
his being lifted up, by his meritorious ^ppearing to satisfy justice. In the
creation of the world there was no need of a satisfying and sanctifying Christ
to appear: Its true indeed, Christ as God, and the Son of God, did appear; for
by him the worlds were made, but as Mediator there was no appearance of Christ:
But now, if he will convert a sinner, and bring one of you home to God, out of
darkness into light, here must Christ as Mediator appear. Oh that men would
admire the greatness of this work!

The Use of this part shall be twofold.

That the Church of God has still her miracles, and is not deprived of that
gift. Men may say that miracles are put down and ceased; but the Church of God
has running and abiding in it the gift of miracles. Why so? Because God by the
Ministry of the Word works after a wonderful and miraculous manner in the
hearts of men, to bring them out of Idolatry and self-vanity. The raising of
the Widows son from death to life, that we read of in the Gospel; and the
raising of Lazarus, that was four days dead in the grave; these were great
works: But if you compare the conversion of sinners with them, it is a greater
work. When Christ raised Lazarus, its said, that he groaned in spirit; that put
him to his groans: But when he came to redeem man, that put him to his
bloodshed: And therefore on the sudden to change the heart of man from hating
God, as every natural man does, to love God; from persecuting the truth, to die
for it; from being inwardly possessed by Satan, to follow the Lord Jesus Christ:
I would have men to consider it, that they may come with thanksgiving to the
Table of the Lord. And what faith a reverend Divine that is now with God,
Hildersham.
Conversion is the greatest Miracle that ever God ^^ought. And it is to be
compared to the Creation of the world, says another, Perkins.
and gives this reason: The Spirit of God seems to make it a greater work: To
the creation of the world nothing was required but the word of God; but to the
conversion of a sinner, the arm of the Lord; alluding to Luke 2. the arm of the
Lord; and to Isa. 53. 1. To whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? And certainly
there appears the most grace in it, and a power above any creatures: It is the
assiduity and commonness of the work, not the ^lightness and facility (says
Austin) that takes off the wonder of it: The commonness of the Suns light makes
it not so much regarded, because it is day; those men that have felt the power
of God in their own spirits, they know it is a wonder. In the Gospel it was a
Miracle to turn water into wine; and is it nothing to change a filthy swine
into a sheep, and darkness into light? The creatures at first were made by the
Word of God; but this Conversion is caused by the arm of God, Origin.
says one. It has been Hyperbolically spoken of by the Ancients that lived in
this Church of England, as a very great work to turn the Gentil world, and
Heathens from their vanity to the knowledge of Christ.

Austin says: And consider with thy self, that among all the miraculous works
of Christ that are reckoned, Matthew. 11. 4, 5. The blind see, the deaf hear, the
sick are raised up and walk, this cure is added* that the poor receive the
Gospel. As who should say, these are the wonders I usually work, and among them
this may pass for a wonder too: Its a pretty ingenious observation; take
something from it that may greaten your hearts, to the admiration and
magnifying the goodness of God. And so I have shown the greatness of the work.

John 5. 40. (...), you will not come to me that you might have life: And of
the very same persons, and almost with the same breath, in the 44. verse, (...)
how can you believe? you will not, you cannot. What do you gather from these
two expressions? You may very well collect that this cannot is a moral
impotency; and a moral impotency, as learned men do know, differs very little
from an unwillingness; you cannot believe, because you will not, being disabled
by such worldly and carnal lusts and prejudices, as do forestall and take up
your hearts, and make it justly to be said you cannot. The reason why I compare
together these two verses, you will not come to me, and ye cannot believe, is
to show what manner of impotency Christ points us to in this matter: namely,

Not a mere and simple impotency, that is without our default, but a moral and
culpable impotency, whereby the heart is captivated by some lust, or forelaid
with prejudice against Christ, so as we cannot, because we will not come to
him: And of this impotency, let me say this to you at the first; it takes away
all excuse, all defense; and the more impotent, the worse: who can excuse his
blindness, that has purposely put out his eyes? yea though it be resembled in
Scripture to a simple impossibility, yet it is moral and culpable. Can the
Ethiopian change his skin? Jer. 13. 23. then may you that are accustomed to do
evil, learn to do well. it is a moral impotency, the fault whereof may be
charged upon you, such as for which you stand culpable before God.

This impotency of man to convert or come to Christ, I speak unto in this
branch, and man's unwillingness in the next: And so ye shall have both the
cannot and the will not.

There is an impotency in man, and a disability to come in to Christ, and act
to his own conversion: These are the same things; but in the handling of this
point, I may sometimes name the one, and not the other, without offense.

Man in his integrity (for truly the estate of man's created integrity has, as
I conceive, a mighty influence into all Divinity) man in that estate had a
posse velle to obey God a power to love and to keep communion with God: An
absolute velle was not determined; but he had a power; and therefore men that
are under the fall (as all men are) must needs acknowledge they have lost
somewhat by it; we have lost the power to will, which he had; nay some say,
that if there were a power of believing in Christ, and of conversion in lapsed
man, he should seem to have a greater power then Adam: As the power to rise
again from the dead, is greater then to act life when a man is alive. I hold it
to be but a trifling objection, which is made upon design; and this is the
design upon which it is made: (for clearly to know the reason of any thing, is
to know the thing it self) to oblige God by virtue of his Covenant with man
fallen, to give forth universal grace, because this faith in Christ, this
repentance, were not lost in Adam, who could not lose that which he had not;
neither are we to pay for that we took not up in him: Therefore God is engaged
to give to man a power to believe; because he has made a new Covenant with me,
he is bound to enable me to be responsible to the Covenant that he has made.

This Objection amounts to no more but this, That Adam could not exercise faith
in Christ, nor the grace of repentance; I grant it, there was no need of it;
nor conversion, very true; for that supposes a deviation and a fall: If man
say, he could not look to the Serpent on the pole: I answer, true, because
neither had the fiery Serpent stung, nor was the Serpent set upon the pole to
heal them that were stung, before the institution of God had taken place. Adam
did not exercise obedience to the fifth commandment, and yet you account it
one of the moral commands; for he had no Parents and Superiors to honor: Very
true; but there was a root of integrity, a root of faith in God, and love of
God; there was the image of God, from whence, if occasion had been, grace might
have budded forth: But to argue from the not-exercising, to the not having of
grace, is no argument: There was a seminal in Adam, of which there is none left
in man; the root of holiness, the principles of faith, these are lost: Nor are
there any seminals left in man, out of which faith can be educed, as forms are
educed out of the fitness of the matter: The Scripture seems to speak
punctually to the point, No man can come to me, John 6. 44. The natural, or
animal man, by the light of his intellectual perception, cannot know the things
of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The wisdom or sense of the flesh is not subject to the
Law of God, nor can be, Romans 8. 7. They that are in the flesh, cannot please
God, Romans 8. 8. We are not sufficient, that is, not empowered of our selves to
think any thing as of our selves, 2 Cor. 2, 3. And this is enough to prove this
point of man's impotency and disability: Which shall be handled in two members.

First, No man can by his natural power convert and turn to God.

Secondly, No man can come to Christ, or believe in him. They are both one; but
for order sake we speak distinctly.

Its true, we are commanded to turn, in Ezekiel. 18. ver. ult. Wherefore turn and
live. And in another place, Make you a new heart and a new spirit: Because that
is our duty, and the condition of the covenant of life required of us. The
great condition is, Turn and live; Believe in Christ Jesus, and be s^ved: This
is clear, and there is no question against it: But yet we are turned before we
turn, Jer. 31. 18. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; and I will make you a
new heart; and I the Lord will circumcise thy heart: For God makes good to his
people, not only the benefits and promises of the Covenant; but the graces and
conditions that are required; he undertakes for grace as well as for the
promise; which is one of the greatest points, and main hinge of Divinity: The
design and plot of God in the Gospel, being to illustrate the glory of his
grace (having past by the Angels that sinned, and leaving them without excuse,
without redemption) very well. Now then say I, there is no point that serves
better to that end, then the depression of man's pride and power, by that
impotency and disability that is in man to that which is saving: God by this
magnifies the freeness of his grace, that takes this work to his own power: So
that the conclusion will be, man's foolishness does magnify Gods wisdom; our
unworthiness illustrates his freedom, our poverty his riches, our captivity his
redemption, and the enmity of man to God, his reconciliation: So that as in
traveling by sea or land, the more you raise one of the poles, the more you
depress the other; and the higher one rises to your eye, the lower the other
sinks to your Horison: So the same degree you raise man in worthiness or
ability, you lay low the grace of God, and take it down from its due elevation:
The more you illustrate the free grace of God, the more you derogate from the
power and ability of man. And therefore you may conclude there is no point or
way serves more to the illustration of Gods grace, then the depression of the
pride and power of man.

To go on, I must a little make a distinction. No man can deny God to be the
working or productive cause of grace, but must some way or other exalt himself:
But I know very few men, nay not excepting Pelagius himself, that does or has
denied God to be the working or productive cause of grace in us: But they
sufficiently depress the grace of God, that will allow man the share of a
meritorious or procuring cause to obtain it, or some way or other to procure it
of God: For that is as contrary to the freeness of it, as any thing can be.

If we give to man the working or producing of grace in his own heart, that
takes off from the drawing power of God to which it is to be assigned; it takes
from grace the power of it: If we give to man the worthiness, that takes off
from grace the freeness of it; for it is not free, if there be a worthiness in
man: And we cannot give grace her due, except we leave to her her power and her
freeness: And therefore Pelagius our Countryman, at least a Welshman, that said
grace was given secundum merita, according to works: And the Semi-Pelagians
that followed him, that thought he went too high, and therefore would mend the
matter with Facienti quod in se est, etc.

God denies not grace to men that do what they can; that to a man that does
what he can (though no such man (I think) is found in the world) that walks up
to the utmost of his light, to him that does the utmost of his power, God does
not deny grace in our times, when men have learned to spin a finer thread; but
to be as absolute fastened to the same doctrines as they were of old, they do
assign the first reason of Gods giving grace to the honesty and probity of man
(as they call it) these spin a finer thread one then another: But this I will
say of them all, That which they give to man, they take off from God; and so
much as they give to man's worthiness or power, so much they derogate from the
power and freeness of God; and do so much pull down grace, as they build man.
And I think it to be a good rule, We must build man upon God, and not God upon
man.

I confess that our Savior here in my Text properly speaks of the power of
man, not the worthiness and merit, which you may clear to your selves by the
opposition, Except my Father draw him; which signifies some kind of power: But
I have spoken this little of distinction in derogation to the worthiness and
merit of man, that I might not trouble you with it afterward, and that I might
show you that man's merit is opposite to Gods free gift and free grace, and will
no more stand together then man's power and Gods drawing. That's an excellent
Text for this purpose, Romans 11. 35. (...), who has first given to God? and it
shall be given to him again reciprocally. Thus much unto the point of merit,
because that I quit, and come to that which my Text properly leads me to; viz.

The power of man to self-conversion, or faith in Christ: And here there are
three things that offer themselves for distinctness of method.

First, the subject unto whom this power is denied, is every man in the world,
as he is considered abstractly in his corrupt natural estate, without the
traction of God: No man.

Secondly, that which is denied, is power and ability to bring himself to God:
Not merely will, or readiness of will, or forwardness, as if man were in
fetters, or sick and crazy; but power he cannot; which is the most offensive
denial that can be made to man's reason, as leaving to man no share in his own
conversion, nor to God (as they dee^) any justice of commanding man to turn and
believe.

Thirdly, that unto which this power of man is denied, is the most absolutely
necessary thing to his salvation, conversion; and the most clearly easiest
thing (as men think) which is believing in Christ, then which they suppose that
nothing is more facile and easy; you think it to be as easy for a man to
believe, as for a sick man to cry out for a Physician, or a hungry man to call
for meat; whereas Christ says, without coming to me you cannot live: For it is a
work that requires the drawing of God, and such a work as is in no man's hand.

First, the subject, No man. If I open this point genuinely according to the
Text, I must look back, ver. 41. where Christ silences the murmurers, and gives
them a general reason, that reaches all them, and all men else, No man can. And
then also it gives a comfortable cordial to them that do believe, that they may
know that they are drawn of God, or else they should even be in the same
condition with unbelievers: And you may observe it, that in Scripture the
universal misery and impotency of mankind does render the cordial and comfort
more sweet to them that shall find that they have tasted that the Lord is
gracious, 1 Pet. 2. 3. Or as I may give it by this comparison: When Egypt is
stricken throughout, in every house one dead, the deliverance of Israel was the
more admirable, in whose houses there was not one stricken, but all free: So
when you see the impotency of man, and man lying under it, and to find himself
recovered and reduced by the power and free grace of God to Christ Jesus; how
should it serve to magnify the power of the free grace of God!

But somewhat more closer to speak to this point. If Christ would have spoken
tenderly of man's impotency to believe, he might have given these murmurers some
other reason why they did not come to him; viz. their prejudices against him;
you know my Father and Mother, as you say, that I am of mean race and extract,
and that's the reason why you believe not; and so needed not to have said any
thing of the universal impotency of man: But you see he makes a universal
negative, (...), No man can. Therefore there is not such a tenderness unto man's
power to believe, as some pretend.

If Christ would have pretended tenderness of his Fathers credit (as our men
do) that they assert not something in man, to emproud man; but to lay the fault
at man's door, and vindicate the justice and impartiality of God, that requires
all men to believe; for he boldly and clearly lays the fault at man's door, and
yet clearly gives the reason of man's unbelief too: Christ boldly and
confidently denies to man, he cannot; No man can come to me except the Father
draw him: And more peremptorily, ver. 65. he says the same thing; No man can
come to me, except it were given him of my Father: And he says it again, John
10. 26. You do not believe, because you are not of my sheep. No, God has not
given you to me; you are not of my sheep by election, therefore you believe
not: So that Christ fears not any discredit that may redound to God, as if God
could not answer your pleadings against him; for God can make good his justice
and impartiality against all man's reason, but to show a secret reason for the
comfort of Gods elect, though others may stumble.

And if it shall be, as it is, objected that it is God that gives the power
indeed; but that's universal to all: The act, the will, is put by man himself,
who has not power but of God. This is the curiosity, this is the hinge of all:
God gives a power or sufficiency to one man as well as another; but the will,
the acting of this power, is by the will of man, and that little string they
have to hold by: And truly I have this to answer against it.

Our Savior in this place gives such a reason, as makes a difference between
man and man; such a drawing, such a gift of faith, such an election of sheep,
as makes a difference, and works the effect; or else it made no difference
between them that come, and them that come not; therefore its said, He works to
will and to do: giving says to some, and not to others, is a differencing
work; and if it be a differencing reason, there can be no universality in it;
for things that make a difference, make no universality: Therefore he says not
only, you cannot believe, except this power be given; but, (...), Joh. 10. 26.
ye do not believe, because you are not of my sheep: Showing that this is a
differencing thing he speaks of, and overthrows quite the universality of power
that men assert.

No man, whether he be (...) or (...), Carnal man, or animal man; you shall
find ground for such a distinction, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and in 1 Cor. 3. 3. But what
do you mean, may some say, by carnal man? He is one that is forelaid with
grosser lusts, that is, transported and carried away with byassing lusts, that
walks after fleshly interests, or fleshly principles: And what is the natural
man then? He is one that has what this corrupt nature can give, understanding
and wisdom, and is embelished with the highest parts of that Sphere: All that
can possibly stand with corrupt nature, that cannot be charged with such lusts.
Now of the natural man, and of the best of them too, its said he does not,
(...), receive, or learn (for it is the common word for learning) because he
cannot (...), know the things of God, he cannot learn Christ; not the best man
in the world, by an animal or natural light, can discern the things of God: And
the reason given is, because they are spiritually discerned: For in that place,
(...) and (...), the natural and spiritual man are distinguished; the spiritual
man goes by the guidance of Gods Spirit; the natural man by the guidance and
light of reason: And (as I shall show) no man by the mere light of natural
reason and natural wisdom (I speak of a moral impotency) can believe in Christ,
and receive him as a Savior and a Lord; which, if you consider the opposition
of the words, you will easily grant.

The second thing is, No man can: That is, no man can convert or come in to
Christ; such is the (...), or impotency of natural man: And this the Apostle
would convince all the world of, before he treats of the point of justification
by faith: His method is admirable in the Epistle to the Romans; till he had
convinced Jew and Gentil, every man in the whole world to be guilty before God,
he says, Romans 3. 9. that every mouth may be stopped; and all the world be
(...), ver. 19. obnoxious to God; that is, liable to the judgment of God;
brings man into a lost estate, and then preaches salvation to him. And the
reasons of this impotency of man may be taken, if you consider man what he is,
and Conversion what it is, and the Gospel-reasons that it gives, and what is
this faith and coming unto Christ, that is denied to man: For I will not give
four reasons, but four heads of reasons that may be given of these points.

First, Consider man in his natural estate, and look on him two ways,
Privatively, or Positively: Privatively, as under the privation of that
rectitude which he was created in; and so is called darkness, and not light;
said to be dead in trespasses and sins, not alive; for darkness and death are
both privations. Oh miserable man that is without light and without life! Now
that it may be judged you are without and deprived of these, there is no better
argument to prove it, then by that whereinto we are redintegrate by Christ;
this proves your lapse, your loss, your ruin; for by that which is restored
unto you, you may know what loss you were at before, but so as (which is worthy
observation) at the first the Image of God was planted in man by creation; for
God created man after his own image: The first man did not work the image of
God in himself, but it was planted in him by that creation by which he was made
a man: So this conversion comes not by any work of man; this new Image of God
is replanted by a second creation: And therefore its said in Ephesians. 4. 24. The
new man is created after God in righteousness and holiness. This I speak, to
show that this flower needs not a watering only, but a new plantation in our
Garden; that I might bring you to pray, and give God no rest, till you find
this work wrought in you.

Secondly, Consider man Positively; and in him you shall find a world of lusts
that bias him another way; Lusts that fight against your conversion; lusts
that fight both against God and your souls; so that no man can any more move
and free himself from this lapsed state wherein he is, then a bondsman can free
himself from his Master: That's a Scripture-comparison; for there is not one
lust you are under but you serve; Serving diverse lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3.
3. one haling this way, and another pulling that way; and under the name of
this bondage does the Scripture often set forth man's impotent and indeed
obstinate condition, being as that servant in the Law, that said, I like my
Master, and will not go out free. I will be a servant for ever. There are many
that say, I will not leave my covetousness, I like my sin; bore my ear for
perpetual servitude, let sin be my Master for evermore. Thus you see man is not
only under privation, but under the power of positive lusts.

Secondly, From the work of Conversion it self, that gives us very good reason;
no Philosophy in the world will deny this to be reason. First, this conversion
to God is not wrought as habits that are generated, produced, and begotten in
man by acts, as a man writes often before he learns to write; that is a moral
way: But this grace is planted in man first as potentia naturalis, it produces
the acts, and must first be: The eye is a natural power (...) a habit: I do not
by seeing learn to see, as I do by writing learn to write; but first I must
have sight in my eye, before I can make any act produce any fruit: Grace is
like sight in the eye, we do not get grace by the several acts by us performed,
but first God plants it in our souls, and then, as with the eye, we see: Our
Savior Christ gives me the form of this reason; First make the tree good, and
then the fruit will be good: This must first be, a man must first be endued
with a divine and saving principle; there must be a new man, a new self, a new
creature, before there can be any new acts. How often have I told you, that
before this great work of God that plants a principle in me, before this be
wrought, nothing at all can be expected from me! Now Conversion is such a thing
as this, it makes the tree good; and that cannot be by man's power, because
Conversion makes a new self in man. I say it is impossible to reason and nature
that this should be; he that cannot do a good act, can much less make himself a
good tree: Who ever heard of a thing in the world making it self? Is any thing
both a creature and a Creator? I think there is no such thing in the world; for
if there were, it would be something above a miracle: A dead man raising
himself; its miracle great enough if another hand do it; I say it is above a
miracle, and impossible in reason: And truly if this Scripture-truth were
brought to the ponderation of reason, reason it self would not refragate and
oppose the thing. And secondly,

Conversion is a work supernatural, and brings forth supernatural grace, as to
believe in Christ Jesus the Lord, and to love God above self: For that which is
said in Scripture, in the Law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self: If thy neighbor be to
be loved as thy self, then that which went before, is the loving God above
self: And if this be true (as it is) that God is to be loved above self, its an
impossibility, till there be a principle put into the mind and heart whereby to
do it; for self cannot work above self; nothing can act above its sphere of
activity; my reason is (as the Schoolmen observe) if a thing act and bring
forth any thing without it self, there would be some effect without a cause,
and the cause cannot reach it; which is clearly in reason impossible, and a
contradiction: Darkness indeed was, and light was called out it: God commanded
light to shine out of darkness in our new creation, 2 Cor. 4. 6. but that
darkness should produce light, I say that light is without a cause; for there
is no causality in darkness; and to make an effect without a cause, is a thing
contrary to nature and reason, and therefore there must be a power to command
it out, otherwise you put nature to work above it self.

Thirdly, If you consider the Gospel-reasons, which that most of all insists
on; and these are the simplest, they have no Philosophy in them: Why no man
has power to convert himself, there are two reasons the Gospel gives, and
there are no more that I can give in this point: I am sure Bellarmine
acknowledges it.

First, it lays in caution against boasting, and takes that for reason enough.
Why not? If man were able to believe and convert himself, then there is
foundation laid for boasting and pride, that man reflecting on himself, might
say, I believed; and for that reason the Apostle does deny in Ephesians. 2. 9.
Salvation (says he) is by grace, not of works, lest any man should boast: not
so, lest that should be: Its contrary to the scope of the Gospel, and also to
the Gospel-design, that is to unhinge the power of man, and to draw all the
water to Gods own mill, the free grace of God. And oh that we were in love with
this free grace of God! that whereby when we were involved in sin, we were
brought out.

The second Reason the Gospel gives, and it needs no more, is, it gives all the
honor to Gods grace throughout, assigning all the difference of one man from
another, to that fountain: If a man converts himself, then he differences
himself from another man; but the Scripture assigns all the difference to
grace, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who made thee to differ from another? and what have thou
that thou have not received? Well then it cannot be, and must not be said, that
man has power of himself to believe, or to determine of himself to convert and
turn to God.

Who made thee to differ? is meant of Christians, differencing one from another
in graces and gifts.



No man can come to me: that is, no man can believe in me, or no man can give
himself up to me; for so it is explained in ver. 35. foregoing, where coming to
Christ, and believing in Christ, are equivalent and of one sense. The
Proposition I shall speak to, is; No man of himself can come unto, or believe
in Christ, without a divine power enabling and persuading him thereunto: No man
of himself, that's a Scripture-expression, in Ephesians. 2. 8. Not of our selves.

No man of himself, or by his own power, can come unto Christ. In this verse it
is said, No man can: In the next verse its said, Every man that has heard and
learnt of the Father, comes to me; which two places, if compared together,
show, that no man of himself can, but every man that is enabled by the power of
a divine traction, and the inward teaching of God, who so teaches the heart of
man, as thereby to draw and persuade it to receive and believe in Christ, does
indeed believe in him unto salvation: For the teaching and drawing of God are
made both one; and every one that is so taught, every one that is thus drawn,
does believe; and no man without it does believe in Christ unto salvation: For
the faith here meant is saving faith, and so expounded, ver. 47. He that
believes on me, has eternal life.

The impotency and disability which our Savior speaks of in the Text, so far
as I understand, is a moral impotency, and this lies much of it in the will of
man: An indisposition to, and dislike of Christ, to the acceptance of whom, and
against the acceptance of him, the heart of man is possessed with prejudice, and
forestalled by lusts, forbidden and hindered by self-righteousness of his own;
which he maintains all he can. If the handling of this point may lead you
further into your own hearts; to see the guile that lies in them, and the
sinful impotency that is in you, it will be pains well spent.

For the handling whereof, this inability of man to receive Christ unto
salvation, may be distinguished into these two.

First, a judicial disability of some men.

Secondly, a natural disability of all men.

The first of these is, when in the just judgment of God a man is insensibly
(I mean to his own sense) secretly and spiritually smitten with unbelief, with
a mind that is alienated from Christ, as Phara^h was insensibly smitten with
hardness of heart: And of these its spoken in John 12. 39, 40. Therefore they
could not believe, because he has blinded their eyes, and hardened their
hears, least they should see, and understand, and be converted, that I should
heal them. This is a dreadful condition of men that are judicially hardened in
their unbelief, under impotency and disability with which they are smitten.

And who are they, and what is their sin? may some say.

The people smitten with this, are those that have had the light of the Gospel
shining among them, and have been allured by the offers of grace and Christ, to
turn unto, and come to him; but they have neglected and despised the offers
that have been made, and preferred the pursuit of their own lusts and
interests, before the entertainment of Christ Jesus; these are the people. The
character is the character of us; it was then of the Jews (for they are
properly meant in this Text) whom God followed by his Word and the Ministry
thereof from time to time; but they preferred their lusts before the teachings
of God: They believed not, because they could not, Joh. 12. 37. and they could
not, because God had smitten them; and he smote them, because they did not like
to retain the knowledge of God in their minds, as it is said of the Heathen in
Romans 1. And so when the offers of Christ are unpleasing, and you prefer to keep
acquaintance with your lusts, then to receive him and the knowledge of God,
then he smites you, that when you would, you shall not believe; as these Jews,
that had seen so many Miracles, yet could not believe.

And let it sit sadly upon your hearts, that you that have received the light
of the Gospel with such contempt, that have had so many offers of grace, and
such long space of time of hearing and receiving the knowledge of Christ, that
you be not sealed up under a poenal unbelief, even then when you think your
selves to be believers; that whereas it may be said of you in the days of your
prosperity, as it is in John 5. 40. You will not come to me that you may have
life, it so fall not out one day with you, when you cry to believe, that you
shall not be able: For many shall seek to enter (says our Savior) and shall
not be able. This point is hard of digestion to you; but take heed you be not
found in the number of them: But this not the unbelief in the Text.

Secondly, there is a disability of all: For no man can come to me, etc. And
this the reason of man stumbles at almost above any point, that God, in making
a Covenant with man of life and salvation, should lay the condition of the
Covenant upon an impossibility, which is man's coming to Christ: For the
condition of salvation being laid upon man's coming to Christ, and man being
impotent unto it, it both defeats the benefits of the Covenant, and puts into
the mouth of man an excuse whereby he may excuse himself for his not believing,
as not being able to perform impossible things, nor indeed bound unto them, as
the Rule says, Nemo tenetur ad impossibilia. Therefore this lets man loose
unto an excuse that our Savior should deliver these words, No man can; and
seems to lay the blame upon God, that lays the conditiou of the covenant of
life, upon that which cannot be by man performed: But truly

Man's reason errs in the objection that it makes, as well as in the
apprehension that it has of spiritual and divine things; for a thing may be
secundum quid, or respectively impossible, that is not simply so: Its not
simply impossible to rise from the dead, for then it could never be; but its
impossible for a dead man to raise himself: So to believe in Christ, its not
impossible through grace and the divine traction; but to a man as he is in
himself and in sin, it is impossible: Faith in Christ is not an impossible act;
but it is not possible by man's own power; and therefore if Reason quarrel at
God for laying the conditions of the Covenant of life upon impossibilities, for
not laying the condition of the Covenant in man's own power, yet that Reason is
without reason in it; for the condition was once in man's power; and the
forfeiture of the Covenant, the event may teach us to bless God that it is so
no more, that the condition of the Covenant lies no more in the power of man to
forfeit it, or in man only to accomplish it: God has given (I do believe) and
does give so much power unto man, as may justify his commanding man, and
condemning, in case they do not observe his commands; there is so much power
given as may justify God in both; and so much knowledge as God does give to
any man in the world, so much knowledge as any man has, or might have, so much
he is (...), without excuse: I think that's a Principle and Maxim that will go
far in all Divinity: So much power as you have, so much your excuse is taken
from you; so much you may believe, and therefore are left inexcusable; even
those that have knowledge of God but by the light of Nature, so much as they
did know him, are without excuse. But certainly (as its said) the purpose of
Gods election stands not by our works, but ex vocante, of him that calls,
Romans 9. 11. so is his Covenant made good, not by man's putting the condition,
but Gods giving of it; else the covenant that he has made with us, should be a
covenant of works or merits, and not of grace, if it did not stand upon Gods
performance as it does: And therefore its not laid upon an an impossible
condition, but a condition performed and made good by God himself: I will put
my law into their hearts, and I will write it in their minds, and they shall
all know me: that is, shall believe in, and love me, and accept me for their
God, as the tenor of the covenant runs, Heb. 8. 10. And the very reason why
this covenant of life should not be defeated, frustrated, and made void;
therefore its not committed to your power, but reserved to the hands of the
grace of God to make it good, Romans 4. 16. Therefore it is of faith, that it
might be of grace, to the end that the Covenant might be sure to all the seed;
otherwise it had been as unsure as the Covenant that he made with Adam, or as
that which he made with Israel, that God said was broken, Heb. 8. 9. For in
every Covenant, that with Adam, the promise was sure enough to the condition;
life was sure enough to the condition, Do this; if that condition had been
performed, it had been a sure covenant, none surer. What failed then? the
condition failed (...), because it leaned on man; and for that reason only it
failed; and therefore the covenant was not sure; and this I have spoken all
along to answer that objection, that the covenant might be sure, the condition
does not rest barely on the power of man: But God performs the condition of the
covenant that he makes with his people; and (I think) he that gives the object
of faith, gives also the act of faith: He that gave the serpent on the pole,
gives also the eye to look upon it, that so Christ the object of your faith,
and faith that you might believe in him, might be the gift of God: For what
avails Christ set forth to a people, and no faith to lay hold on him? Of what
avail is the setting forth of an object, where there is no eye to see it?
Grace, I believe, saving grace (though I confess it is not so resented by many
learned men) comes from the purchase and merit of Christ, as well as benefits
of pardon: The conditions and graces of the covenant come from the merit of
Christ also, without which there is no pardon; since Christ is called, Heb. 7.
12. the surety of a better Covenant, an undertaker of the best Covenant. Now
all the question of the Text will be whose surety is Christ: Is he Gods surety
that makes it, or man's surety with whom it is made? Gods surety (says a
learned man of latter times) God and man's (sure) I think; Hammond.
man's surety he is by giving satisfaction to the justice of God for the sins of
man; Gods surety he is by sending forth his Spirit to certify and seal us: Or
thus, he is surety for God, that he will pardon us; and sponsor or undertaker
for us, that we shall know God, and believe in Christ, and receive him for a
Savior; therefore also called a Mediator of the same Covenant: Now a Mediator
is is not of one, but of two parts; in Zach. 13. 9. I will say You are my
people; they shall say The Lord is my God. If Christ then be the surety of the
Covenant, Gods surety and ours, for God and for us, it will follow that Christ
undertakes for us, and that we have grace, our believing, our faith, from his
merit and his purchase. Well then

First, I say, all men are naturally unable to believe in Christ, or to come
unto him; for though he be a fountain opened, that was once a fountain sealed
comparatively, Zach. 13. 1. In that day a fountain shall be opened for sin and
for uncleanness: (speaking in the dialect of the Jews) that is, as in the Law
there were sins and uncleanness; sin to be purged by blood, and uncleanness to
be purified by water; and there were expiations of sin, and purgations of
uncleanness represented in several Types: So the Prophet shows that Christ
shall answer them all; (...) Christ all these Types; yet though he be a
fountain opened, as the impotent man said, I have none to put me in, Ioh. 5. 7.
I lie lame and decrepid at the pool-side, and when the water is moved, have
none to put me in: So it may be said in this point, there is a fountain opened
in Christ Jesus for sin and uncleanness; but none is able to come to it without
a supernatural help, and a divine hand go along with him.

The Gospel-preaching opens this fountain to you; and this grace Pelagius
rested upon, and held that the grace of God was the preaching of the Word, and
opening the fountain to men: For Orthodoxis verbis non abstinuit. He (as other
Erronists that live in our times) did not abstain from Orthodox words: But what
said Austin to them? Nolumus istam gratiam, we rest not upon that grace merely
of having the Gospel preached, and the Fountain declared to be opened unto us;
but there must be a divine hand to enable the will of man to come to this pool
when it is moved. Of any Text in Scripture this is most clear to prove the
miserable impotency of sinful man to this point of salvation; he cannot comply
with this of himself. No man can, etc.

And if this do not suffice, we will argue the point a little further, Isa. 53.
1. Who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?
Here is Isaiah the Prophets report; but there is an arm must be revealed, both
which must go together; the report revealed by the Ministry, and the arm of the
Lord revealed, must go together; for else, though they saw so many miracles
(the means of believing) yet they believed not, says our Savior, quoting this
Text, John 12. 39. And whereas every one taught and drawn of God does come, and
no man can come except so drawn, it manifestly proves, that as the coming is
man's act, and the free act of man (for I think man is never more willing then
when he is convinced indeed, and enabled to come to Christ) yet the drawing is
Gods power; that must first be; and the drawing of God, that is first in time;
for man does not come that he may be drawn; but because he is drawn, therefore
he comes: And therefore this drawing of man to faith in Christ, sounds like a
work of Almighty power, or a work of omnipotence, Ephesians. 1. 19. The exceeding
greatness of his power toward us that believe, according to the working of his
mighty power whereby he raised Christ from the dead, and lifted him to glory.
The exceeding greatness of his power: The Hyperbole of it (here is a thrusting
and crowding of words together) a power that is compared to the raising of
Christ; Christ (I say) who bore our sins in his body on the tree, though he
lay, under our sins (for the death of Christ must be considered a little
further) no such load could depress him; the Lord would have the stone rolled
from his grave for him to rise again: This was a work of mighty power, and yet
according to this, God puts forth his hand in drawing of man to Christ; so that
(as I conceive) it cannot but argue that the free grace of God giving, and the
great power of God drawing, makes faith to be above man, and takes it from man's
merit, and man's power: And truly it could not else be rightly said in Ephesians. 2.
8. Through faith, not of your selves, if this faith were of our selves.

The Root of this impotency shall be shown you in five particulars.

First, there are some footsteps of the Law of God remaining, that were written
in the heart of man: In Romans 2. 15. they show the work of the Law written in
their hearts; that as by the rubbish that you see, you conjecture what building
there was before, and by the defaced lines you may guess at the picture; so you
may by the common Notions left in men's minds, judge of right and wrong, and the
differences between justice and injury, without which no society could be of
any men in the world, but would be herds of wild beasts rather then men; but
of Christ there appears nothing written naturally in the heart of man; nothing
at all concerning a Savior and a Mediator, but an utter darkness and silence
of Christ, and consequently of Faith in Christ.

Secondly therefore, man, when his conscience is angry (having something of the
Law in it) and accuses as it does, for sins against Nature, common Law, and
common Light; and when it accuses and troubles him, being altogether ignorant
of the righteousness of God by faith in Christ, and how he should be saved and
justifieed, knows not till it be revealed by the Gospel; for therein is the
righteousness of God revealed, Romans 1. 7. For who can so much as guess by the
pregnancy of natural light, that God in his Covenant of Salvation, should pitch
on; such a way as Christ, a Sponsor or Surety, the Mediator between God and
man? that he should make expiation for sin? truly no more then Moses, or an
Israelite could have so much as found out the way of healing the biting of the
fiery Serpents by a figure set upon a pole to be looked unto; no man could
imagine, no man's reason could have found it out, had they wandered in the
wilderness never so many years; and yet this was Gods way, and a Type of
Christ; signifying what man could never have found out to conceive of
compensation for sin by a Mediator, which was a thing impossible, and had not
been known; therefore man being ignorant of this, must of necessity fly to his
own plasters and figleaves; for if by nature he may be convinced of sin, yet
by the dictates of natural conscience, he can never find out any righteousness
and satisfaction to Gods justice; then it must follow that he must fly to
making a medicine of his own righteousness, which is of works; for that only
comes by man to be found out, as being next to hand in this case; that I say,
or nothing, as being his only hope; and this bulrush the drowning man takes
hold of, and holds it fast as for life, and so comes of necessity to settle on
his own righteousness, being ignorant of the righteousness of God, which is by
faith in Christ: And this the Apostle tells you, Romans 10. 3. For they being
ignorant of the righteousness of God, went about to establish their own
righteousness, and so submitted not to the righteousness of God. where you see
the righteousness that is our own, maintains our pride (in that word submitted
not) and rising from ignorance of that of Gods righteousness (to which we must
submit by way of humiliation) which is a cause that men believe not. And then

Thirdly (and pray mark) there is a double Revelation of Christ; the one is a
revealing of him by Gospel-doctrine, the other is a revealing of him by
spiritual light: The revealing of Christ by Gospel-doctrine to the natural
knowledge of man's corrupt understanding, cannot procure or produce any other
then literal knowledge of Christ: The Scripture calls it knowledge in the
letter, as to know the Gospel as a History may be known to be true, whereof a
man has a dogmatical knowledge; you have many believers, and these by knowing
the Gospel by a natural light, are differenced from Heathens: But this does
not, nor never will produce a saving faith; most men have a literal knowledge;
we see in ordinary experience, all men have some knowledge, and Scholars a
great deal; yet being seen by natural light, though revealed in the Gospel,
will not reach so far as to beget faith, saving faith in Christ.

But the other revealing of Christ by the light of the Spirit of God, conveying
the knowledge of him into the mind and heart of man: This is that which is
lumen fidel, and shows him as he is, so as to draw unto him, and is called the
teaching of God, whereby every man that has it does believe and receive
Christ, Joh. 6. 47. Who is seen in his own light, as the Sun in its own; for by
torch-light or candles we cannot see the Sun; so the natural man cannot know
him, because he is spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. And so its said, Flesh
and blood has not revealed this to thee, but my Father, Mat. 16. 17. The truth
of the History of the Gospel that you read, may be revealed to flesh and blood;
but the revelation of which faith is begotten, is from my Father: And in 1 John
5. 20. He has given to us an understanding, that we may know him, and we are
in him. Such a knowledge, to know him by faith, is a knowledge of union, and
brings us to him: Therefore this light of the sweetness, excellency,
comfortableness, and necessity of Christ Jesus appearing to your minds and
hearts by Gods teaching, is that which throws down your reasonings, pulls down
your strong holds, and brings every thought in you into captivity to the
obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. And doubtless that is the light which is
necessary to the production of true faith in Christ, which yet few have:
Therefore let not men wonder that have a great deal of natural knowledge, that
yet they have not a proportionable light that is commensurable to spiritual
things, no more then the Moonlight is to judge of colors; you have not the
light that produces faith, and because you have it not in a natural estate,
therefore the natural man is not able to believe.

Fourthly, the act of man's coming is an effect of Gods drawing; for man does
not come that he may be drawn, but because he is drawn first. Faith is an act
of a vital principle; faith is not the act of a dead man; there must be life
before there be sight: we do not first see, and then live; no, but all seeing
in nature is an act of life, and from life it must come: A dead man sees not,
and therefore it is no more easy for a man to believe in Christ, then to make
himself to live; for your reason will teach you there must be potentia before
there be actus; he that will believe in Christ, if he will not have an act
without power, must first make himself alive, raise himself from being dead in
trespasses and sins, that he may put forth lively acts from a vital principle;
therefore I conclude from that demonstration, that no man is able of himself to
believe in Christ.

Fifthly, no man can believe aright that undervalues God or Christ to his own
lusts, or any of them: If any man undervalues God or Christ to any worldly
earthly interest (true, in judgment you may not, but in practice you do) and
every natural man has some lust that he values, somewhat of the flesh, or the
world, that is predominant and prevalent in him, which he values even above
God, that man sets up himself before God in his choice or election, and so
cannot believe in Christ. Christ said in John 5. 40. How can ye believe, that
receive honor one of another? that have a humor of doing honor, and
receiving honor from men, and do not content your selves with the honor that
comes from God only? As the least chap in the joint between the graft and the
stock will hinder coalition; so that man that has either one lust or other
(for the same reason holds of all) if he be ambitious of honor, that he
prefers and holds fast, rather then leave, and come to Christ. From all that
has been said, the hardness and difficulty of faith must be considered what it
is, and then reason will convince you, that no man can come to, or believe in
Christ, except the Father draw him.

The Use of this point is five-fold.

First, to humble the pride of man, that is so much unale as to contribute one
act of saving faith to his salvation, able to do little in a thing on which
depends his eternal happiness, (...) believing in Christ: A dead hand, or a
full hand, neither of them can receive or hold fast any thing: Now every man in
the world has a dead hand or a full; dead without life, or full of himself;
his own righteousness and obedience; and therefore it humbles the pride of man,
that so confidently can believe and receive Christ, they can do nothing if they
cannot do that: Truly you can do nothing indeed; there must be a moulding, a
drawing, a teaching of God, whereby there must be a new life put into you, and
your hand must be emptyed.

Secondly, it shows the folly of those that undertake to believe and repent at
their own pleasure, and their own time: That are like Israel, All that the Lord
commands us we will do: or as a Mariner that is to go to sea, truants his time
away, as if he had the wind in a bag, or in his fist: Sin is a deceitful thing,
and men are hardened through the deceitfulness of it, Heb. 3. 13. Take heed,
you that are so great undertakers, I will assure you, you shall be little or
small performers of this point: For

Thirdly, it is not an easy thing to believe, as is pretended, as I have
shown: They seem to me to have but little faith, or little proof of it that say
so, or have not found it a hard thing to believe. In time of peace, when
nothing troubles the conscience, no temptation, no sin, no discouragement, its
easy to pretend believing: But is it easy when temptation comes? when a man
sees the vast compass of his sins, and sees the frowning face of God; no
ability nor power to help himself, is it easy then? I believe you will find it
a hard thing, and our Saviors words will be found true, No man can.

Fourth Use of this Point: Be not deluded with a conceit of a common interest
in Christ, or hope thereof, because of his general salvation, because he has
redeemed you, and common and general men are deluded by it: I will tell you, I
have known many that have made this to be their comfort; this may be an
encouragement to men to believe, but can be no comfort to men until they do
believe: This is an encouragement inviting men to believe; but that's not sure
or strong consolation: You must indeed come to him; but the power whereby you
come, will be found not to be at your command: But God vouchsafes it unto those
he will draw, and those only.

Lastly, learn hence that God has laid the condition of salvation upon that
which he himself works: God has laid it upon our coming to Christ, which does
require the very grace of God to perform, our coming to Gods drawing; that so
in every man's salvation the power and freedom of the grace of God may be
acknowledged. And so much for this Point, That it is not in the natural power
of man to believe.

No man can come to me: you may remember I propounded to handle these two
things; the impotency of natural and corrupt man; and the repugnancy and
opposition of him.

The impotency or disability of man, was first in general to his own
conversion, in particular to his coming in to Christ, which is the particular
in the Text: And having done with the Impotency or Adunamy of man, which is a
privative thing:

I now come to that which is positive, and has more of ths will in it, though
(as I showed) it was a moral impotency: The opposition to this work, which will
show you that corrupt man is by his own will oppositely carried toward God:
And this point, as the former, speaks generally to the opposition that there is
in man to God, or to the holiness of God, in two things. First, his
contrariety: Secondly, his enmity to the holiness of God or his Law: And it
speaks particularly to the opposition that corrupt man does make to Christ, or
the grace of Christ that is offered in the Gospel: And that also in two things.

First, his averseness to come, and

Secondly, his resistance of grace when its offered to him!

In which four steps this opposition may be handled and manifestly seen,
showing you thereby what a miserable thing a natural man is, being in statu
belli, in a state of war and hostility against the great God, his Law, his
Grace, and consequently an enemy and opposite to his own happiness: And this
point shall be opened to you to this end, to vilify and depress the pretended
pride or worthiness of man, and to exalt the freeness and power of Gods grace
in the salvation of man. For there are two eminent things in that Doctrine that
you call the free grace of God: Freeness and power.

First, the contrariety of man in the state of corruption unto the nature of
God, is palpable, and may be felt; and so indeed had need to be, rather then
only taught: And it is this Contrariety to God, that renders the natural
condition of man most deplorable, and is a very good argument, as there is any,
to prove that David in that confession of his in the 51 Psalm. did intend the
confession of his own sin, and not the sin of his Mother, I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my Mother warm me. For he went backward from his own
trasient and actual sins, to the original and root of his malady, and
aggravated his sin by this contrariety to God; which says no more then that
expression of Paul, Romans 7. Sin that dwells in me: or happily that in Isa. 48. 8.
Thou wast called a transgressor from the womb: And concerning this contrariety
of man to God so deplored, I show you these three things in general.

First, this Contrariety to God is not acquired or gotten by iteration of acts
and actual sins; but is innate and bred in nature: As the strings of an
instrument are out of tune before you play upon them, and they sound harshly to
you; so is the heart of man; the faculties there are vitiated, but not quite
blotted out; but all the strings are out of tune before they come to be
actuated: For they have a good saying in the Schools, and it is true: First, the
person, viz. Adam, infected man's nature; but now the nature infects the person;
so that there is this contrariety of man to God by nature: For

Secondly, the Image of God in man was before this contrariety in corrupted
nature; but this contrariety to God is now, before the Image of God restored to
man; therefore its said, Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are
light: And, Ye were dead in sins, but now are quickened, Ephesians. 2. 1. Ye were
the servants of sin, but now ye are made free from sin, Romans 6. 17. that look
as life and death, servitude and freedom, light and darkness, are contraries
one to another: So are expressed the state of Nature and the state of Grace.

Thirdly, there are in sin (say the Schools) two parts; the first, man's
aversion, or turning from God; the second, man's conversion or turning to
himself or the creature: The one of these has more of sensuality and self; the
other bewrays more Contrariety to God.

But to come more particularly to the point: This contrariety shows it self in
this, that an unregenerate man cannot by any principle that is in nature, love
God above all things or above himself; which thing, if well minded, may let you
in to see spiritual wickedness, and not only carnal and sensual; self may love
God as a benefactor, or as a servant to his own ends, whom he may make use of
to gain by, and live upon. Call this love of God if you will; but such a man
does uti Deo ut fruatur mund^, uses God, that he may enjoy the world: A
Merchant may traffic and commerce with an enemy whom he hates; so you may
converse with God, whom you hate in your hearts, merely to get by him, and for
matter of advantage: This love of God is not amor amicitiae, a love of
friendship, but concupiscentiae, a love of lust, to gain by God; a love of
parasytism, and flattery, and self-love of God.

Concerning which self-love, I say particularly thus much.

First, that every man by nature is brim-ful of inordinate self-love; I call it
inordinate self-love; for there is a subordinate self-love, which neither can
nor ought to be put off, God having linked together his own glory and man's
happiness in himself: For the chief end of man, is to please God and enjoy him;
Moses, in denying of himself to please God, had an eye to the recompense of
reward; But that's inordinate self love, when a man seeks God in order to his
own ends, and neglecting his holiness, which it is impossible a corrupt man
should love; only serves himself upon God, and makes use of him in prayer or
otherwise for his private interest, either ut prosit, or ne noceat, that God
may profit him, and keep him in health or wealth, or that God may not hurt him,
and lay judgments, torments, and plagues upon him, as the love of a whore is
for hire: This is that inordinate self-love that a man has to himself, because
he sets himself above God, as making himself the end, and God the means to
attain that end.

Secondly, this Self-love, with the branches of it (which are very many)
self-seeking, self-pleasing, self-ayming, etc. is the root and mother of all
sin: And therefore when the Apostle makes you a catalogue of sin, he sets this
in the front, in 2 Timothy 3. 3. Men shall be lovers of their own selves: And then
they shall be filled with all politic sins, and all sins of private interests;
and above all this, and more then these, they shall have a form of godliness,
and deny the power of it: That whereas its said of some of the Elements, they
move to the Center, and not from it; so I may say in this case, a corrupt man
always moves toward this Center, and moves not from it: This self-love begets
not a love, but a contempt of God (as Aquinas) and takes the wall of him in
every thing; for it makes him a servant only to work my own interest, and to
enjoy my self, which is the great Idol of man, to which every man naturally
burns incense, and offers sacrifice, and is no more able, whatsoever he may
pretend, to exalt and set up God any further then may stand with self, then a
current of running water that comes from a Spring, is able to run above the
height of the Head or Fountain; for then it would follow that a heavy body
should run above it self.

Thirdly, that the true love of God above self, or all other things, cannot
possibly flow from any other principle but that which is above nature, viz.
regenerating grace: And I take it to be one of the most demonstrative
arguments, and the first product of saving grace, to love God for his holiness;
and ability to delight in him for himself, as the Psalmist says, Delight in
the Lord, and he shall give thee thy hearts desire. This shows that there is
planted in the soul a similitude and likeness unto God, which likeness is
always the cause of love; and where this likeness is not, it is impossible
that the corrupt heart of man should put forth any act of love to God himself:
And therefore its a very hard thing to persuade a natural man that he loves not
God, until he find that grace in himself that shows him plainly that he did not
love him before; and the reason is, because every man living measures his love
of God by a false measure: For,

First, either he measures the love of God to him by a common goodness of God;
which as it may stand with Gods hate of him, so it may stand with his hate of
God; and so all that love of God is but a love unto himself, because its
sounded merely in nothing else but common goodness, that God vouchsafes to you
peradventure in this above other men: For, as it is said of Abraham, He gave
all that he had unto Isaac; but unto the sons of his Concubines he gave gifts
and sent them away, Genesis 25. 6. so those that are indeed the beloved of God, to
them he gives the inheritance of divine grace; but as for others, he gives them
gifts, but sends them away from all comfortable presence and enjoyment of
communion with him: And therefore that's a false measure to measure the love of
God to you by. Or

Secondly, he thinks (and will not be beaten off it) he loves God, because he
can say, and that truly, that God is amiable, and to be beloved above all; and
that the chiefest good and happiness of man is to be found in God, and in the
enjoyment of him. These are fair words. But the Schoolmen have a true saying,
Man's corrupt nature is more corrupt quantum ad appetitum boni, then quantum ad
cognitionem boni; more out of the way in choice of good, then in knowledge of
truth: And therefore, as it is the best way to know whether you love God or no,
by bringing things to particulars, unto choice and unto vote, to hic and nunc,
to particulars that stand in competition with God, then it is plain with you, and
alas, plain with us all in our natural condition, that sensitive interest and
sensual profit is chosen and embraced before God, as infinite experience
shows that the poorest and meanest lust, or the enjoyment of any creature in
the world, when it comes to choice, shall carry it quite away from God; which
is a demonstration that this love of God is not in some, and does not
preponderate.

I shall show you, First, that an unregenerate man cannot love God.

Secondly, why he cannot love God.

First, He cannot. No man, until God renew his Image in him, can love God; for
there goes renewing grace to this work, to love God above self; its a rare
thing, very seldom do you find out this corruption. Ah, I pity you! you know
not the half of that contrariety that is in every one of you to God: In Deuteronomy.
30. 6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, to love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart: For there is a foreskin upon the heart of man that must be
taken away, and that is a natural hardness and indisposition, and this sticks
upon the very elect of God themselves, until they are called according to Gods
purpose; for they are born uncircumcised, and have not this love of God in
them, but a contrariety and enmity to God: Indeed its true, they have a love of
God toward them, while they are in a state of alienation from him, and that is
called Amor (...), but not yet Amor (...): the love of his good pleasure
toward them, but not a love of complacency and well-pleasedness in them: For
so the Scripture calls him only that serves Christ in righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 18. These are under the well-pleasedness of
God only; and therefore, though the love of his purpose may be toward them, yet
this of complacency is not in them until they be converted, I the Lord will
circumcise thy heart to love, etc.

Secondly, the effects of alienation from God may be found in every natural
man: For so in Col. 1. 21. You were sometimes alienated and enemies in your
minds by wicked works. And again, in Ephesians. 4. 18. Being alienated from the
life of God. You will say this speaks to the Gentiles, what they were before
they came to Christ: I grant it; but were the Jews, that were Church members,
as you may seem to be, any better? Of them, Christ says in John 5. 42. I know
you, that you have not the love of God in you. You may very well think that
they would have spit in the face of any that should have said they had not the
love of God in them, as you may hold any man in defiance that shall say it of
you: But you know not the enmity and contrariety that is in your hearts to God:
He proves it by this argument; he that has not true faith in Christ, has not
a sincere love of God; As men put fallacies to themselves in point of
believing, so in point of loving: And I remember Aquinas goes about to prove
that all unbelief arises from the hatred of God; when a man traces his unbelief
in Christ to the last result of it, he shall find it to be the hate of God: I
would not strain things higher then they are, but so far forth as they may give
a good demonstration: By which argument it appears that there is not much love
of God in the world, or indeed in the Church: And this contrariety to God may
appear,

First, in that a natural man has not (and cannot have any) delight in
communion with God; and I think he can have no delight in God, in Heaven, or
Earth: In Earth he cannot; it is an irk some thing! They say, When will the new
Moon be gone, and the Sabbath be over, that we may set forth wheat, and keep
our markets! Amos 8. 5. weary of communion with God.

Nay, and some say that it is demonstrable, that if by supposition an
unregerate man were let into Heaven, he would not take content there, could not
possibly have any delight in it; proving by this supposition, that if one were
in heaven that had not this divine grace, this likeness with God, there would
be no delight and content there with him to abide; for both the happiness of
the place is unproportionable to his sensuality, and the holiness of Gods
presence and communion with him are as unsuitable to him, as the glorious light
of the Sun unto the eye of an owl, which he cannot bear, and is no more
desirable then pearls that are cast before a swine: For things are to be
measured not by the excellency of the place it self, but by the
proportionableness of nature to them: And therefore, as you desire to find
happiness and delight in heaven it self when you die, so it concerns you to get
your corrupt natures changed and sanctified, without which I do verily believe
heaven it self would not be heaven unto you. Oh what a miserable case does a
corrupt and natural man live in, that would not go to torment and perdition,
and cannot go to heaven and salvation, because of the contrariety of his nature!

Secondly, it appears, in that a carnal man delights to do that which God
hates, and prefers it, and is not troubled, does not tremble at his offense of
God; They rejoice to do evil, Pro. 2. 14. And if any of you sometimes find them
to be troubled for sin, and to be in anguish, as it is ordinary, it is but out
of self-love, being affrighted at the punishment and torment, being willing to
be rid of them; for so the Devil is, Art thou come to torment us before our
time? but not at the offense of God, except as of a Judge which has the Law
ready in his mouth, not of God as a Father, which shows their fear to be
servile, and servile fear has torment in it, which love casts out, and not
filial and son like, which love causes.

Thirdly, it appears in the hatred they express to the Image of God, in
whomsoever they see it: For as he (and it is so all the world over, from the
beginning to the end) that was born after the flesh (it is not a falling out
between man and man for a time) but he that was born after the flesh,
persecuted, or despised, or mocked him that was born after the spirit, Gal. 4.
19. as then, so now, that as they say, the Leopard or Tygre will express their
hatred to man even in his picture, where they find it they will tear it, in
hatred unto man; you shall find it so in the wicked carnal men of the world,
wherever they see the Image of God shine forth, they will be sure to tear and
persecute it; and therefore from that it may be certainly concluded that they
love not God: And this is the contrariety that I charge upon corrupt nature
unto God.

Secondly, why a natural man loves not God.

First, this rule may be the reason of it; he loves not God at all that loves
any thing more then God: I think we shall set our selves into a very great
strait anon; an underlove is accounted none at all; a woman would not much
account of the love of a husband, if he loved one woman in the world more then
her self; love will not bear one more; He shall leave father and mother (says
the Scripture) and cleave to his wife. How do you think God will esteem and
account that love to him, if so be your selves, or any creature in the world be
loved above him, or better then him? And therefore the love of God then begins
to be accounted lovely, and reckoned for love, when it exceeds all other love:
Its accounted by the surplussage of it, that it has above life and liberty,
above the world, and all the dear and near things of the world; if you account
it otherwise, you shall be mistaken: As you account a thing to be weight, if it
draw the scale; for that that makes one scale weigh down the other, that makes
the weight; so though thou love, God in many respects, yet until it come to
surplussage and preponderation, God accounts not of it; for the greater weight
carries down the scale from him; for while the scales stand even, it is not
accounted weight: And therefore every natural man that commits forni^ation
with the creature, and is married to some one or other lust, has no love to
God, because God is overweighed by it: And this Doctrine our Savior taught in
Matthew. 10. 37. He that loves, Father, Mother, son, or daughter more then me,
is not worthy of me. And the reason is, while God and the creature are in
competition, while God stands not against us in any lust of ours, we know not
whether we love God or our selves best; but when they come into election, then
its seen: As while the scales stand upon the Counter, there is no sight which
end is the weightier; but when you take the balance in hand, then you find
which preponderates: So when you come to particulars, either lose this profit,
or Gods favor; while these stand in competition, there is no knowledge, no
sight; but when you come to try, your hearts and consciences will quickly tell
you; the balance does not tell you which end the gold lies in, and which the
brass, but where the most weight lies: Every man tells himself that God is best
to be loved, and that end has the gold in it; yet the choice of the creature
above God, shows that there lies most weight; and that's pure interest and lust
that takes place with you. Thus it is when God is weighed against lust in a
natural man's beam; and therefore whatever you say in that point, look to the
election and choice of the heart, that chooses the creature before God, and
shows that God is less esteemed then lust, or a natural man's interest.

Secondly, an unregenerate man cannot love God, because he can have no
assurance that God loves him first; for that is a rule, 1 John 4. 19. We love
him, because he loved us first: that is, to ordain and fashion us unto eternal
life; the sense and appearance whereof is hidden to a natural man; and there
must not only be a first love, but also the sense and knowledge of it, before
it beget a reciprocal and answerable love to God: And therefore the love of God
to his elect in their state of nature, cannot produce any love in them to God:
why? because it must be a thing known; there must be daybreak or Sunrising, a
work of effectual vocation and calling, by which light you may see it; you can
no more love God, till not only you have his divine grace, but also know it,
then the pavement can be hot, or reflect heat to make you hot, till the Sun
has shined upon it; no more is it in your hearts to love God above self, until
the love of God has shined into your hearts, to make them in love with him.
And this is the second thing, the contrariety of corrupt nature to God.

Esau and Jacob, when they strangely strugled and wrestled in their Mothers
womb, and she went to the Oracle, and asked, Why is it thus with me? it was
answered in Genesis 25. 23. There are two Nations, and two manner of people in thy
womb. This sets forth to us grace and nature, flesh and spirit, which in the
same womb of man's heart do fight and struggle; and if you will have the very
words, it is in Gal. 5: 17. These are set one against another, the flesh
lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: And these are of
contrary persuasions, principles, byasses, and affections; and every man is
opposite to this grace, by reason that his corruption has first possession,
and having so, fights against that grace that comes to take him captive to
Christ Jesus; and there can be no more compliance in a natural man to comply
with the grace of God, then between fire and water: why? because there is a
contrariety; every thing that is, be it of never so vile and base a being,
would be what it is, and has no principle to aspire to a higher being: A
spider cannot aspire to a being above her; a toad or serpent cannot wish (as I
may say) to be any thing then what they are; only man indeed may aspire to be
worse, and more contrary to God, but never better; and therefore I see no
reason that can be given, why corruption should desire to change its estate
into the state of grace: Corruption supplanted grace at first, and is always
prone to supplant grace again: Corruption supplanted Gods Image at first, and
is ever attempting to do so again, but that through Christ grace comes in, and
supplants sin in part, fighting down the dominion of it, though not the
existence and being of it: Sin dwells in me, says the Apostle; that look as
Joshua, when he came to the Land of Canaan, destroyed all the Canaanitish
Kings, but not all the Canaanites and petty people; for they were left for good
uses, to teach them humility, and to do Gods work upon them; so if ever
regenerating grace come into the heart of man, it will certainly kill and
subdue all kingship and dominion of sin: Sin shall not have dominion over you,
because you are not under the Law but grace: But yet all sin is not
extinguished; the Canaanites yet live: Sin dwells in the people of God, but it
dwells in them for good ends; for if it had not been for good ends left, be
confident it should not have been. There are two Uses of it; for Humiliation,
and for Consolation: For though it be a lamentation to every Christian to draw
the clog: Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death! Romans 7. 14. yet it is a comfort when a man finds this contrariety in
him; he has cause to bless God that he is not all of a piece, that he is not
all flesh, that there is Esau and Jacob in him: For it is not the conquest that
shows grace, but the fight or contrariety of grace unto corruption. And were it
not that grace had a stronger Second, viz. Christ and the Spirit, as its
delivered 1 John 4. 4. Greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the
world, it would be extinguished and beaten out of the field every day; for it is
as easily put out as the light of the Sun would be put out by any
interposition, and would no longer live then a spark of fire in the Ocean; but
only God does as well keep it in, as bring it in at first by his mighty arm;
for as to heat the water you know there is need of fire, but not to cool it;
the nature of the water will out the heat: And though the Sun gives light, yet
there needs no cause of darkness; for if the Sun cease to shine, darkness it
self returns, and comes into the Air, where it was before: So the very
cessation of the influences of the spirit, if they should but cease, though
there were no contrary causes (as there are from the flesh and the world that
infuses corruption) yet these corruptions would return, as the first
inhabitants in man, to which he is first principled; so that it is the
wonderful power of God that keeps grace alive. That's the third particular to
prove this Contrariety, that maintains the fight, and keeps out divine grace
until the heart be made willing to receive it.

Fourthly, the Contrariety of corrupt nature unto God, is manifested by this,
that the holy Law of God (which the Apostle calls holy, just, and good) makes
sin more sinful, and exasperates it into a greater height; and therefore those
men that live where the Law of God comes closest to them in reproof and
correction, are the wickedst men alive; that as you see by making of a Dam the
stream is raised, and the water fumes and furiously beats against it; so when a
restraint is put upon the nature of man by the very Law of God, nature it self
(I mean corrupt) becomes furious: And this point is taught almost in a whole
Chapter, Romans 7. whereof excellent use may be made for a man to see his
corruptions in Paul's glass, ver. 13. Was that which is good made death to me?
God forbid; but sin, that it might appear sin, wrought death in me by that
which is good, and by the commandment became exceeding sinful. What a
miserable creature is natural man! if God give him a commandment, he is the
worse for it; there is a renitency, an opposition in the heart of man to the
Law of God; that most appears, in that we the less do what God commands,
because he commands it; and we the rather do that which God forbids, because he
forbids it. A horse, or stomackful colt, put the bridle on him, and he is mad;
let him run in the field, and he is quiet: Let the Sun shine on a stinking
dunghill, and it stinks the worse, not because the Sun gives pollution by its
heat, but by accident makes the stink break forth so much the more. Alas, when
the Lord comes to put the bridle of restraint on man, he is filld with more
stomach and rage; and when the sweet Sun shines on him to invite him to God, he
is still the worse, and the rather evil; so little compliance is there of man's
heart with God: And as we may truly say that Antipathies and Sympathies do show
us very far into nature where they are found, as the Schools do well observe;
for a lamb to hate and fly from, not this and that wolf, but every one, though
it never saw it before, which shows a general antipathy to all wolves: So it is
in this case; if there were a Law of God made known to any natural man, such a
Law as he never saw nor heard of before, he would hate it, and never comply
with it; which shows the stone that is in his heart, and manifests a rebellion
in it against God: As on the contrary, a Sympathy, an agreement: A soul that
loves and delights in the Law of God, though most cross to private interests,
is a very excellent proof of grace, that has reconciled the enmity of the
heart to God, Romans 7. 22. I delight in the Law of God concerning the inner man.

Fifthly and lastly, the pleasingness, (...), of the heart with any lust to
which its taken by peculiar agreement of nature, which is peccatum in deliciis,
does show this contrariety unto God; so long as this sin of delight continues
his master-sin, he will walk contrary to God, say what you will. I confess
every man cannot practice every gross sin, as to be a drunkard, a whore-monger,
covetous, no more then one man at one time can possibly be sick of all
diseases; but that sin which takes him up by natural propension, inclination,
or custom, or whatever it be, that either takes acquaintance with, or
possession of him, no such man can come to Christ: He himself tells them, How
can ye believe, that are taken up with worldly credit and ambition? John 5. 4.
Let it be any sin, Covetousness, Drunkenness, or Lust, which he feeds by other
sins, and serves as a master, to which he is tied as fast as by a Cable, which
he cannot break until divine grace appear to him, and cannot get off by any
power of his own, but Gods; no afflictions; though they bray him as a fool in a
mortar, pound him to pieces, yet his folly shall not depart from him; no vows;
though he seem to bind himself never so firmly, nothing while the lust remains,
will alter or change him; nay, set the judgment of God and death eternal
before his eyes, ye do nothing; the pleasure of his sin remains, Romans 1. ult.
Who knowing the judgment of God, that they that commit such things are worthy
of death, yet not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them.
Nay, would you think that any man's sin should be so fast rivetted in him, as
that it should cause him to love death? He does so interpretative, by Gods
construction and interpretation. Prove. 8. ult. He that sins against me,
hurts his soul; and they that hate me, love death. Now how filthy and
abominable is man (says God) that drinks in iniquity like water! comparing a
natural man to a fish in the water, in its own Element, from which you know he
cannot be willingly pulled to the dry bank; and therefore I conclude that man
is not willingly of himself brought into that estate, though it be far better,
yea a thousand times better then his own, until his nature be changed, and then
he is brought. And so much for the first branch, the Contrariety of corrupt
nature to God, to his Law, and to his Grace.

But whereas an Objection might be made, that man is not so contrary to grace,
because that shows him life: Certainly there is a greater opposition in the
heart of man to the grace of the Gospel, then to the Law of Duty, to humble
man, and show him that the work of Conversion is from contrary to contrary: And
therefore let me make use of that which some say, that God in creating the
world drew the creatures out of nothing; but in this new Creation, Conversion,
he finds opposition and contrariety in the subject that he works upon, that
bids him battle, and sets him at defiance: The Minister converts by new
objects, and God by new natures, until which, there is little done.

The second Branch of this opposition of corrupt nature to God, we call enmity
unto, or hatred of God himself; self; which I instance in, to show that poison
and venom that is in man, in every one of your best hearts in your natural
condition unto the Lord God; you will not be known of it in your selves: Hate
God, may some say! there is not one of us that take our selves to be haters of
God, but seem to defy all that hate God: But the Scripture speaks much of it;
Them that hate me, says God, Exo. 20. 5. And he calls them (...), Romans 1. 30.
Haters of God. And in handling of this point, I shall enter upon that sin which
is diabolical. First, Hatred is a part of that diabolical malignity, which
makes man like the Devil; for when he overthrew man at the first, he spawned
into man a certain diabolical seed; not sins of sensuality and the flesh, but
malignity, and opposition, and spite against God; this man is of a serpentine
nature: One man may be angry with another man; but a Serpent hates the very
nature of man: Anger is in particulars, hate in generals, say the Schools; so
that this arises higher then the other does, into a hatred of God himself. And
then

Secondly, Hatred differs from Contrariety in this: It rises from the
consideration of such effects of justice which are threatened or executed upon
man against his will, punishing him for sin, and so causes hatred; but
Contrariety is to the holiness of God and his Law, and so is an opposite to
Gods justice, and the effects of it; for corruption is so desperately carried
against God, that like the Devil, it hates God punishing and inflicting; not
peradventure as God is a benefactor and sustainer of nature, but he will not
abide Gods vengeance on him: Insomuch that a man in his private retired
thoughts has secret wishings in himself sometimes that God were not, looking
upon the effects of the Justice of God.

And this I will show you in three Particulars: And oh that this might rifle
your hearts, to go away from this self-love of yours, whereby the great God is
so opposed!

First, all the hate that is in man aganst the Law, the Holiness, the Image of
God, rises originally from the hate of God himself, there is the core of this
disease; you think if you hate man for the Image of God that is in him, that
you hate but man; but the root of the disease lies in the hatred of God:
Therefore Christ teaches it, John 15. 17. If the world hate you, ye know it
hated me before it hated you. Men are ashamed to see this Fountain; but the
malice of the Devil shows whence this hatred does arise.

Secondly, every corrupt man, more or less, holds the truth of God in
unrighteousness, and does as it were keep it under a bushel, Romans 1. 18. The
wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteouss
of men, that hold the truth in unrighteousness. That is, that whereas there is
a shining light that shines in man, he has common notions of right and wrong;
this he knows, but he will not let it breath out in practice, but lets his
affections and lusts imprison and dam it up; he will not let this light
restrain his lusts: There is no man living that lives up to his own light; he
knows more then he will practice and put forth to the glory of God, in his
place and family; and therefore there is wrath to him. There is no man in this
place, let him be never so vile, but has some beams of light, Amat lucentem,
edit arguentem; he loves the shining light, but hates the reproving and
convincing light. This also is the sin of the Devil.

Thirdly, this hatred appears in this; man is angry that he may not sin impune,
and do what he will without control; and if he cannot, then he fastens his
hatred upon God: God has given him grace, but he would fain enjoy and serve
lusts and pleasures freely, and would have impunity not to be punished; he
would sin and escape, sin and be saved, sin and be happy; this is his temper:
And if the wrath of God be revealed, that he cannot do so, then he is carried
out to an utter hatred of God himself; for if he could, he would continue and
go on in the height of his iniquity, and would not be punished, but could wish
that God were out of his way: If he could disarm his justice, he would; and
therefore he can be content that God give life and being, and fuel to maintain
his lusts; but if he see that God come out to punish, then he wishes with all
his heart rather that God were not, that there were no such inflictor of
punishment upon man: These are the secret thoughts, the eruptions and
belchings, secret breakings up of hatred that are in the hearts of men to God:
And if you ask for an instance of it out of man, I can give none but the Devil,
that in all these three steps wishes that God were not. And this I have briefly
said to show the enmity of man to God, that besides sensual lusts, there should
be such a poison in his spirit against the holy God, which we hear of often in
the Scripture; the wisdom of the flesh or appetite (call it what you will) in
Romans 8. 7. is enmity unto God; for it is not subject to the law of God (let him
be never so wise) nor indeed can be. And in Col. 1. 21. And you that were
sometimes alienated and enemies in your minds by wicked works. And let no man
marvel at it; the reason is this, the love of God will not stand with any thing
that is better loved: If any thing be better loved then God is, then it turns
to hatred: Ye adulterers and adulteresses, says the Apostl, Jam. 4. 4. meaning
worldly men, know you not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God?
Now if you recollect these two Arguments, the Corruption and Contrariety that
is in natural man to God, and the Enmity that is in him, I think you will say
the first part is proved, That no man can come to Christ, by reason uot only of
the impotency, but the opposition that is in him. This in general to the
Opposition.



First then I will show you the unwillingness of corrupt natural man to accept
of grace offered: And this is a point wherein the demerit of man, and the
condemning Justice of God thereupon does appear without all excuse of man's
self, without all exception against the Grace of God; for what exception can
man make against his condemnation that is willing to be condemned; what excuse
can he make for his unbelief that is unwilling to believe? that whereas all
creatures in the world do affect that most wherein their happiness does lie,
and are infinitely carried toward it, in the persuite whereof no creature can
be indifferent: yet corrupt sinful man does not only oppose the commands of
God, break his bonds asunder and cast his cords away, Psalm. 2. 2. but is also
unwilling unto salvation, to which he is invited by so many solicitations, to
which he is drawn by so many powerful arguments and persuasions of the Word of
God under the Gospel as are afforded him. And this is the point I handle;

That man naturally is unwilling to be converted, to turn to Christ, that he
may be saved.

I think you will hardly believe this point: But it may justly be said he
cannot come, because he will not; for in John 5. 40. this point is clearly
proved; You will not come to me that ye may have life. And it is the complaint
that our Savior makes over Jerusalem, Mat. 13. 37. How often would I have
gathered thee, and ye would not! And in Prove. 1. 24. I have called, and ye have
refused; I have stretched out my hands, and none regarded; you have set at
naught my counsel, and would have none of my reproof, but have cast my words
behind your backs. Nay, you would have none of me, says God, Psalm. 81. 11.
Israel would none of me. They that have not heard of salvation offered, do not
seek it; they to whom it has been offered, do neglect it; and they to whom it
is commended by all commendations, they have despised it.

Conversion is as little beholding to the will of man as to any thing; that
whereas friends would have their friends, and one relation would have another,
when they know Christ, they would have them know Christ also: The woman of
Samaria called the whole Town out to Christ: Conversion is least beholding to
the Queen of Faculties, as they call the Will of man, which is rather the slave
of all the rest, the Captain of rebellion, whereby man is unwilling to his own
conversion and faith in Christ Jesus: And therefore it is said in 1 John 1. 13.
We are born of God, regenerate, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor
of the will of man, but God. Those that do receive Christ, are born again: But
this regeneration is denied, First, to a natural instinct, not of blood.
Secondly, to a carnal principle, not of the will of the flesh. Thirdly, to any
moral rational principle, not of the will of man. But it is affirmed to be an
influence of God, as its said, but of God. There can be no just reason given
that man should be unwilling to come to Christ, or to be converted; for no man
can give any reason against the chief good, or the only means that may serve to
that end: Man's happiness lies in the enjoying of God; and the means tending
thereunto, is coming to, and closing with Christ Jesus: But there may be reason
from the miserable and mischievous corruption of man, that does, and will, and
can do nothing else but walk contrary to his own happiness; the Bow is made to
hit the mark, but yet sometimes (as we say) it must needs miss; the reason must
be taken from the crookedness and deceitfulness of the Bow: So it is with man,
he is made to be happy in the enjoyment of God by this one means of coming to
Christ; yet he must needs sometime miss; the reason must be taken from the
deceitfulness of the heart of man, that is possessed with vanity, folly, pride,
and lust. This is the point then, the unwillingness of man to his own
Conversion.

And first in General I shall lay down this Reason for it, that is the sum of
all reasons;

That every man by nature is forelaid with some impediments and obstructions
that prohibit his closure with Christ, and that Gospel-way of salvation by the
faith of Christ. He fights against it, he opposes it, he is unwilling unto it:
Corrupt man fights against these two things, the holy Law of God, and the
Gospel: He fights against the law of God, in maintenance of sin, lust, and
corruption; he fights against Christ and Gospel Grace as much as against the
Law: And this he does in maintenance of that we call self; and of the two this
is the sharper opposition: For the first desire of man's heart is to be himself,
and to seek himself, and to maintain himself from all manner of captivity; and
therefore the Apostle tells us, That there is might in this arm of God to bring
every thought in us into captivity to the obedience of Christ: To whom he would
not come, if he could preserve that self that is in him; in the maintenance
whereof he is unwilling to accept of the grace of the Gospel when its offered.

And this point shall be thus handled. First, what I mean by the Gospel-way of
Salvation; these two things.

First, the one and only way of the salvation of a sinner, is that which is
brought to light by the doctrine of the Gospel: Moral doctrine teaches
reformation of life according to principles of virtue; but this which is called
the glorious Gospel of the blessed God, in 1 Timothy 1. 11. is that only which is
the Jubilee-Trumpet, proclaming the acceptable year of the Lord, the day of
salvation: In allusion to which its said, Psalm. 89. 15. Blessed are the people
that hear the joyful sound; for thereby is brought life and immortality to
light, viz. through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. showing that life and immortality
are hid, and in the dark to all the world, until they be brought to light by
Gospel-doctrine: For therein is the righteousness of God revealed, Romans 1. 17.
The way of Gods making righteous, or justification of man, is revealed and made
known to man by the doctrine of the Gospel: For as the children of Israel in
Egypt (may be) might know that there was a promise of deliverance; but whether
they should deliver themselves, or that Moses, an exile and cast-out, was the
man to deliver them, that they knew not: So that Christ is that Moses which was
to be manifested to Gods Israel, to bring loft man out of damnation, from
Egyptian slavery under which he was, its only brought to light by the doctrine
of the Gospel.

Secondly, by this doctrine Christ is set forth the righteousness of a sinner,
and the root of spiritual and eternal life, acknowledging Christ to be the tree
of life, into which all that are saved must be transplanted from off the tree
of corruption whereon they naturally grow: For Christ and a Believer make but
one body; Righteousness they have none at all but what they have through him;
spiritual and eternal life they have none but what they have from him, as is
shown in Romans 11. 24. by a comparison given of the branches of the tree: Thou
were cut off from the Olive Tree wild by nature, and were grafted contrary to
nature in the good Olive Tree: Where you see that conversion of a man to Christ
and Gospel Grace is compared to an ingrafting contrary unto nature; for the
graft grows not naturally, but contrary to nature; so that there must be a
transplantation, a cutting off man from the Crab-tree of natural corruption,
that he may, contrary to nature, be planted into Christ Jesus, unto which work,
that man is unwilling, may appear by these two expressions, Thou were cut off,
and To be grafted contrary to nature: For to be cut off by sharpness from a
condition to which a man is naturalized, though it be worse, and to be
ingrafted contrary to nature, though into a better, man cannot be willing.

Secondly, he is not willing to this way of salvation by transplantation into
Christ, upon these grounds.

First, because this way of salvation is out of his sight; for nature and the
wisdom of it does not teach it him; though there be the greatest sagacity and
quickness of scent in natural wisdom that you can imagine; yet it cannot reveal
Gods giving Jesus Christ the Lord to man; there can be no willingness to
receive that which is not known; the greatest wisdom accounts it foolishness:
Those two words are taken for one and the same, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man
receives not the things of God, neither can know them. Receiving is an act of
faith and believing, and goes not before knowing; for being ignorant of Gods
righteousness, Romans 10. 3. that's the way of Gods making man righteous; ignoti
nulla cupido: And therefore as Israel in the wilderness did not know that the
Serpent on the pole should heal the mortal sting and biting of the fiery
Serpent, till it was set up; so Christ did as much lie out of the way of
manifestation for man's wisdom to find out; neither could it be known to a
natural man, before it had been revealed to him by the Gospel.

The second Reason arises thus: As in nature they say there is no vacuity, but
every place in the whole world is full of somewhat, until there come some other
matter to expel it; now so is it with the heart of man; its taken np with
corruption, and possessed, till the grace of God come and drive that out, and
extirpate that which is in possession already: For the heart is not as a thing
wherein there is nothing of God, or sin; but every man living, his heart is
blotted with corruption, before it be written upon with the Law: I will write
my Law in yonr hearts, says God when he regenerates any man; for the heart of
no man is rasa tabula, a white paper, that is neither good or bad; but is like
a pair of scales not empty, it inclines one way or other: Now supposing a
natural man blotted with corruption, and sin is first in possession; then there
is this rule, that as the inclination of every thing is, so is the appetite of
it; for the appetite follows not the goodness of the object, but the
inclination of the creature as that that does desire it; as the stomach
vitiated, desires not the most wholesome food, but longs, and has an appetite
after coals and ashes, and that because it is full of humors: Its not the
goodness of the thing, but the inclination draws out desire; so the will of man
being sowred with corrupt ferment, wills not, desires not grace, but follows
the Byas or inclination of that humor that has corrupted it: And this the
Scripture speaking of every man by nature corruptly principled, says, he
cannot act contrary to that principle which inclines him to sin; he cannot will
that which is against that inclination that does possess him, and disiinclines
him to do good, Rom: 8. 8. So then they that are in the flesh, cannot please
God: He says, they cannot; the principle that inclines them to act is fleshly,
and therefore the appetite cannot be spiritual: A will on the contrary to that
which is good, is made the property, and follows upon regenerating grace, Psalm
110. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. Meaning in that
day that the Lord shall show his power upon the will, to draw it, and ingraft
another principle on the heart; then a man shall come, and not till then: And
then to will is present with me, as the Apostle says, Romans 7. when there is
this principle laid; every appetite follows the inclination; as the inclination
moves, so the appetite does; and because this is corrupt in natural man,
therefore it cannot will good.

Thirdly, a man is naturally enamoured with a pleasing apprehension of some
righteousness of his own; not only some, but every man naturally is of this
opinion, and therefore is not willing to come to Christ; and while he is filld
with this opinion, and pleased with this apprehension that he has somewhat of
his own, whereby he shall be righteous with God, so long he is not willing to
take in this righteousness of Christ: no more then a Merchant is to cast his
loading into the Sea, until he see the necessity of life require it; so will
not the natural man, until he see a necessity of this righteousness unto
eternal life; and therefore so long as he can patch up any shelter to himself
out of the fragments of his own hopes, he does not submit himself to the
righteousness of God, as the Apostle says, Romans 10. 3. They went about to
establish their own righteousness, and submitted not unto the righteousness of
God. As a Manslayer under the Law would not fly from his own house unto the
City of refuge, until the avenger of blood threatened him; so no man until he
hear the voice of Gods wrath, and the malediction of the Law, will take his
heels to fly from his own righteousness, but will lie quiet there: This
self-somethingness is predominant in every man that lives, until Christ be
found; and in it, man places his gains as the Scripture calls it, viz. the
arguments of his confidence, as S t. Paul in his natural estate did: Those
things that were gain to me, I accounted loss for Christ, Phil. 3. 7. Those
things that were gain to me in my natural estate; which stopped and hindered Paul,
made him so opposite when they stood in his way, and appeared gain to him;
these he accounted loss upon the discovery of Christ: And so you find in the
Gospel, men naturally set upon doing, and to have somewhat of themselves.
Master, what shall we do, that we may work the works of God? And, Good Master,
what shall I do, that I may inherit eternal life? John 6. 28. Mark 10. 17.
As if they made no other question but the way of salvation lay in doing: This
is the work of God (said our Savior) that you believe in him whom he has
sent, John 6. 29. answering them in their own words to their own question. And
the Nation of the Jews do make us an example of the invalidity of our own
works: They which followed after the Law of righteousness, have not attained,
Romans 9. 31. And the Gentiles make an example of the sufficiency and necessity of
faith in Christ: They believed when Christ was preached unto them, and attained
righteousness, because they did not seek it by the works of the law, but by
faith, ver. 31.

The Reason why every man naturally and willingly does build himself upon this
false bottom, which makes him unwilling to come to this Gospel-way of
righteousness that God has revealed by Christ, is;

First, every man will have some shelter for himself; when a man sees his own
nakedness, fear and shame will drive him to seek a cover, though they be but
fig leaves, as Adam did when he felt himself naked: The cobweb serves the
spider, and the shell the snail; every man has somewhat to cover his
nakedness, that he thinks may shelter him. And then

Secondly, this is the usual shelter. First, because it is your own: They went
about to establish their own righteousness, Romans 10. 3. their own: For we all
love our own things, even because they are our own; there is in every natural
man something that he calls his own: This he puts in the place of Christ, until
he be thoroughly and soundly convincd to receive him: And therefore it is a
demonstration of a man that has truly found Christ, when he is come so far as
to quit his own for the righteousness of God which is by faith, when he is able
to look on that as dung and dross, and to lose it all for the excellent
knowledge of Christ Jesus, Phil. 3. 9. And secondly, this is that which is his
strong hold, because it seems the most natural and rational way to a natural
man: Ask a man how he shall be saved; he can instance in nothing but the way of
his own works; for this being the condition of the first Covenant made with
man, Do this and live, it sticks still in his teeth; and therefore he still
gr^pes after this old door, still harping on this Doing and live: Its natural
to him. And then

Thirdly, it makes you, and the best of you unwilling, because there is in this
way a maintenance of pride and boasting: The Peacock may here spread his tail;
in this way I can maintain self: And therefore its said, Romans 3. 17. that
glorying is not excluded by the Law of works, not so; it maintains some string
uncut that upholds a man on his own bottom. This for these reasons being man's
darling, is the cause that he is unwilling and averse to take the Gospel-way,
which sets up another righteousness, that pulls down this; and that makes him
cry up his own Diana.

Fourthly, when Christ is holden forth to a natural man that opposes himself,
you must know that the offer is made to a man in his strong holds: Every
natural man is fortified beforehand against the knowledge of Christ Jesus; and
you know, if men come to a strong hold, and offer fair conditions while it is
tenable, and they within be able to hold it, they are unwilling to yield; man
is unwilling, being fortified, to take in the Conqueror: Now every natural man
is fortified, and till he be brought to exigents, or dismantled, he will stand
it out; for he is not willing to admit the contrary party; every man by nature
is self-content, and self-sufficient: no so poor creature, that is without his
den or hold; now before that the thoughts be every of them brought into
captivity to the obedience of Christ, as Conversion is called, 2 Cor. 10. 5. he
will never come in, until the Lord Jesus by the Word of the Gospel, and the
power of the Spirit, has pulld down and dismantled these strong holds,
reasoning high things: For always when you are converted, and Christ enters
into the soul, he enters like a Conqueror at a breach in the wall; until this
breach be made, he that conquers cannot enter, neither shall he prevail; until
then, men will not admit him. There is a refuge of lies that men make to
themselves, an they hide themselves under falsehood, Isa. 28. 15. Therefore
(says God) I will lay a Cornorstone, a sure foundation, ver. 16. But this is
not accepted by them that have other holds.

Fifthly, man is unwilling to come to Christ, because the receiving of his
righteousness and of his yoke, lays low both pride and self, and abaseth these
which are the two chief corruptions in the heart of man: and therefore proud
man most of all opposes and hates Gospel-Religion, which of all Religions that
ever were, has this glory, That it most tramples upon proud self, and calls
for poverty of spirit, self-denial, and forsaking all dearest things: And for
this reason men a^e so unwilling to accept of this way of salvation, and had
rather suffer, and bleed, and lay out themselves, wherein they may be somebody,
then only take such a profession upon them which makes them no body, and leaves
them neither merit nor glory: How far will merit, credit, and glory, carry the
heart of man in any doing or suffering? But the proposal of this free grace of
God, which draws all the water to another mill, and must let Christ be my
Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
my Righteousness, my Sanctification and Redemption, that is hard to digest,
because that crushes the head of our pride, and of being something in our own
eyes. What poor draughts of men did Christ make by his preaching, until he was
lift up, and by his Spirit drew men by conviction? For first his usual doctrine
of self-denial, of forsaking all for Christ, has no show to a natural eye.

Secondly, the very way of Gospel-salvation is so ordered, that it proclames
the man that is saved, a beggar, a mere nothing; for the richer he is, the more
he owes to the free grace of God; and the more he receives, the more he is in
debt; and the more duties he does perform, the less the merit, because he has
received it from God; and Faith, which is his chief grace, is a beggarly grace;
for the nature of it lies in mere receiving, and taking; to as many as received
him, John 1. 12. It is depending upon another for every drop of sap and life;
and has it not from its own root, but from another, Romans 11. 18. Thou bear
not the root, but the root thee.

Thirdly, this Gospel-way of Salvation leaves no power of your own to make any
difference between your selves and them that perish: Who made thee to differ
from another? and what have thou that thou did not receive? 1 Cor. 4. 7.

Fourthly, you are bound to acknowledge the acceptance and receiving of all
unto another hand; not your working, but Christ's giving hand: And the reason
is, That he that glories, may glory in the Lord; leaving by this
acknowledgement no manner of glorying to himself, 1 Cor. 1. 30. And then

Lastly, that you may see the Lord will crush all pride, he is obliged by his
receipts from Christ, to live to Christ, and not to live unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.
14. He died for all, that they that live, should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but to him that died for them. Enlarge these Meditations upon your
own thoughts; God has crushed pride and self in this Gospel-way of Salvation,
and therefore it is so unacceptable to man, until he be made willing to it by
Grace: And all this gives the first and general Reason of man's unwillingness to
come in to Christ.

Cor. 10. 5. which until it be done, the man remains in his opposition and
unwillingness: And this I conceive to be the meaning of that in Job, Job 21.
14. where having described a man at ease, and peace, and prosperity in himself
(that is not sick of self) therefore they say unto God, Depart from us, for we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways: What is the Almighty, that we should
serve him, and what profit is it that we pray to him? Does any man say unto
God, Depart? The Scripture brings in oftentimes what the heart says within it
self; not that any man is so impudent and brazen-faced, as to say to God,
Depart; but this the proudest heart of all does do: And this Conviction is
twofold.

First, this Conviction is of our lost, hopeless and helpless condition in our
selves: But let me tell you, we are not presently, fully and duly convinced,
when we see and own our sins; the reason is, because the sight of sin drives a
man unto his shifts, drives him to his harbor, to his refuge of lies, his own
works, and righteousness, and helps; it does but drive him from sin unto
another thing that holds him as fast. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah
saw his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jar^b; yet
could he not heal you, nor cure your wound, Hosea 5. 13. Let that be an
instance in the case: When Ephraim and the ten T^ibes saw that they were
smitten, and in miser^; and like to be led into captivity, the sight of their
misery drove them to shelter and refuge, as the hunted beast flies to his den
and covert where he hides himself; for he is not always caught when hunted: So
the heart of man, when the Law goes out against him, and thunders the wrath of
God in his face, and he is convinced of this, and sees it, is driven to its
refuge: But this is requisite to full conviction, that a man be (as they say)
digg^ out of his borough, unkenneld, and all his refuges disman^led and pulld
down about his ears, humbled out of his refuges as well as out of the guilt of
sin: And this is taught you in the parable of the lost Son, Luke 15. 12, 13.
When all was spent, and the famine came, he began to be in want; yet he went
and joined himself to a Citizen of that far Country, to relieve himself by
feeding swine, etc. The meaning is, when a man begins to be pincht with the
sense of his lost condition, and is in want of a shelter, he does make shifts,
he flies to some refuges of his own to support his conscience, and relieve his
famine: And mark it, he takes hold of a Citizen, that keeps him in a far
Country, if he would maintain him, he would live there still: If by your
refuges you can gain to relieve your selves, you will keep off from God still:
But when he was beaten from his refuges, as well as whipped by famine, then
(says the Text) he came to himself, and began to think of plenty in his
Fathers house; showing, that until poor sinners be not only humbled under the
smart of sin, but driven from all shelters and refuges, he will not think of
the riches of that God and Father whom he has offended, but willingly use all
means to stay in that far Country; but when he is beaten from all, then he is
resolved for God. You have the like saying to this in Hos: 2. 6. Therefore I
will hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a wall, that she shall not find her
paths: Ver. 7. And she shall follow her Lovers, but shall not overtake them;
shall seek them; but shall not find them: Then shall she say, I will go and
return to my first husband; for then it was better with me then now. A true
Emblem of a man cast out of all content and possible relief; he finds no
contentment in sin, but a pricking and sharpness: He shall follow his Lovers;
but the plaster will not be wide enough for the wound, he shall not find
them, shall not overtake contentment; he seeks his Lovers, but is not relieved
by them: Then the Conviction becomes full, and he resolves to take up with God
as best. And then

Secondly, this Conviction is of the fullness and excellency, the sufficiency
and fitness of Christ Jesus, That he is able to save to the-utmost all that
come to God by him, Heb. 7. 25. And upon these two hinges hangs this full and
thorough Conviction. Of which, I have to say four things, that I may not leave
that Argument, till I have brought it to a Conclusion.

First, that this Conviction must go before the resolution and acceptance of
the will, because it leads unto this willingness and resolution, as its said,
John 6. 40. This is the will of him that sent me, that whosoever sees the Son,
and believes on him, should have eternal life. The first thing is seeing of
Christ, that is, convictively; and this believing follows after, and is
somewhat more then seeing: They that oppose themselves, must be instructed,
that by repentance given they may recover themselves out of the snare of the
Devil, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. That they may recover and awaken themselves ont of
their sleep: Till they have this instruction they are captives, and oppose
themselves. Tertullian, in his time, speaks of some Erronists (that did in his
time as now in ours) suadendo docere, teach by persuasions, and wooing their
credulous Proselytes; whereas they should docendo suadere, first teach by
Conviction, and then persuade men; not childishly, to persuade before you have
convinced; for when you have convinced, the persuasion is half made: That's the
method of dealing with men as men.

Secondly, the will of man naturally follows the conviction of the
understanding, and of the mind: The understanding is like the seeing man that
rides upon the shoulders of the blind but going man; the will moves, but it
sees not; the understanding does not move the man fully and wholly, but sees
the way; for the will of man is (...), a rational appetite led by reason: The
ancient Divines and Philosophers had a saying, Every evil man errs (And by that
saying they prove that the conviction of the understanding must lead the will:)
or, as Solomon's phrase is, is a fool: For if he did not err in judgment, if he
had so much light to guide him and lead him, he could not be wicked in his
choice, or miselect: But there is an error in all sin, an error in the mind,
whereby not being fully convinced of truth, it leaves the will to mischuse,
under the specious choice of good, to choose that which is evil. I know in these
latter days some of the Schools have chopped the understanding and the will, not
into diverse acts upon several respective objects, Truth and Goodness; but into
diverse faculties, that I believe they will never be able to prove, and for my
part I will not dispute; only this I tell you, whenever God commands light to
shine out of darkness, and shines into your hearts the knowledge of himself by
the faith of Christ Jesus, this is by conviction, 2 Cor. 4. 6. as in the
Creation a light begotten shined out of darkness. And by this light he cures
the darkness of the mind, and the enmity of the will; by which means, when a
man is fully and duly convinced, he comes and receives Christ Jesus the Lord.

Thirdly, till the light of Conviction do premonstrate Christ in his glorious
beauty, goodness, truth, and sufficiency to the soul, or in all those glories
that render him eligible, whereby he may draw your hearts unto him, there is no
willingness in man's heart to accept or receive him: For (the reason is) by the
natural light of man's own reason and understanding, though there be never so
much sagacity in them, Christ and the things of God have no more show to the
eye of man, then the most orient colors have by moon or torch-light, which
lies under prejudices, and vility, and misapprehensions; and so much as they
lose of their beauty, so much they come short of their convictiveness; because,
as the medium is the cause why a strait staff in the water appears to my eye
crooked, and otherwise then it is, it is not crooked; but because I look
through that medium, the staff seems to be so, and is so to me: Just so to the
eye of a natural man, looking not through the medium of this light of divine
grace, and the conviction of the Spirit, but looking to the natural reason and
understanding of man, the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, as Paul calls
it, looks poor to a natural man; Phil. 3. 8. 1. Cor. 3. 19.
wisdom to him is foolishness; and that mean show of Christ through a corrupt
medium, is the reason why we despise and contemn him: And therefore it is said
in Isa. 53. 3. speaking of Christ, and how he should come into the world, He
has no form and comeliness: And when we shall see him, looking on Christ as
the Jews did who were not convinced, there is no comeliness in him, that we
should desire him. But was it so with all? those that were enlightened,
convinced by this light commanded to shine out of darkness? No, We saw his
glory, in John 1. 24. though veiled under flesh, as the glory of the only
begotten Son of God: saw his glory under all disadvantages and vails; but the
generality saw no comeliness in him to desire him: And therefore in 1 Cor. 1.
23. Christ crucified is to the Jews a stumbling block; they took offense at
him: and to the Greeks foolishness; they saw nothing in him. But how is he to
us that are called both Jews and Greeks? Christ, the wisdom of God, and the
power of God; such difference is made by the medium, or by the eye that sees
Christ in his own light; there is to us an excellent beauty in him. For

Fourthly, the light by which God shines into the heart, does make every man
that has it, willing to come to Christ; and every man left to the eye and
natural light of the own reason and understanding, is left unwilling to come to
him: Every man that is thus drawn does come, and none else; and so every man
that is a natural man, and has no other light then that, is unwilling; and
every man that has this divine light shining in him (for it is not acquired)
convincing him, is the thereby made willing to come to Christ: Thou art Christ
the Son of the living God, says Peter, Matthew. 16. 16, 17. Bessed art thou
Simon, this saving knowledge is not revealed by flesh and blood, the light of
natural understanding, or of reason, but my Father: And the verses following my
Text, say, That every man that has heard or learned of the Father, or has
learned me of the Father, comes to me, and therefore is made willing to come.
Oh that I could affect you with this difference between light and light, this
light of divine teaching, and that you have by the teaching of books and
ministry alone; for (this is the great reason of all) Christ being given to
mankind, without being found out by man's wit and reason, has a spirit of his
own that leads him into man's mind by a peculiar light: in which light of his
own, those that do not see him, shall never be willing to come to him: that is,
to give themselves up to him; for he can never be known by a natural light
savingly: Let Scholars and Learned men say what they will, this is no frantic
reason.

very hard to bring the heart of man to the terms of the Gospel; that is the sum
of what I would say on this reason: which though (for you may mistake) it
require nothing by way of merit or price; for the grace is free; yet by way of
fitness which is called worthiness or suitableness of spirit to a Christian
condition, the terms are hard to a natural man, and therefore its said in Mat.
22. 3. They that were bidden would not come: and ver. 5. they made light of it:
here you see there is an aversness in the will of man; and yet notwithstanding
this text does not express hard conditions; they were only open and other of
these outward things that diverted and turned them aside: Christ in his
preaching propounded himself on hard conditions; and that is the reason, that
unto natural men that were averse to it, it was so disrelisht; I need not stand
to show what conditions he offered himself upon. Whosoever will come after me,
let him deny himself and take up his Cross daily, Mark 8. 34. Whosoever he be
that forsakes not all that he has, cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14. 33. And
one thing thou lackest; Go sell all that thou have, and give to the poor, and
come and follow me, Luke 18. 22. This was a condition hard as he himself
confesses; and such as is not always in specie required of you. It was
impossible to that man under that worldly spirit: you see by this taste, that
Christ put men to it by propounding hard conditions.

Ob. Indeed in those times and the succeeding, when the Cross fell so heavy
upon Christians, it was so: first, from the Jew, and secondly, from the Empire:
but is it so now?

Answ. I answer, that in all times that are or ever shall be, I am persuaded
the terms and conditions of Christianity in truth professed, will be very hard to
flesh and blood to the worlds end: ( I would not flatter you with fleshly ease)
for there is more self-denial required to this profession then to any (and less
shown) and of all things that is most necessary to the plantation of faith in
Christ; and then there is a divorce of the affections, the loosening of them
from pleasant sins and lusts: if he will be a Christian, there is required a
close subjection to holiness, and a resolution to ^ollow the commands: and a
possibility of suffering the loss of dearest things, yea even of life it self;
so that the conditions of Christianity are hard and as impossible for the
heart, not drawn, to close with, as for Iron to move upward that's not touched
with the loadstone, or a tree to pull it self up by the roots from the soil to
which it is naturalized: therefore our Savior speaking of the conditions he
had propounded, says, with man indeed it is not possible, Mat. 19. 26.
but with God all things are possible; and the reason of all is this: Christ
commands those things from his people that nature is most enamoured of; such as
life, self-righteousness, pleasant lusts, dearest enjoyments: and why these? I
will show you reason for it; first, that so he may try our faith and love to be
toward him above all: which he cannot try with the loss of petty things: And
secondly, that he may hold us firm to himself, by cutting off every string; for
if any of those strings which he will have cut, should hold us to the world and
to our selves, when the competition comes between them and Christ, they will
hold you where you are and make you lose Christ Jesus; and so it is in mercy to
us, that we are stripped of all other things which might have diverted us from
Christ: Exodus 10. 26.
that not a hoof is left in Egypt to put us in mind of returning: nor any bunch
on the Camels back that may hinder his going through a strait, Mat. 19. 24.
as our Savior hints the comparison: And these hard conditions are reasonably
required of us, because he has for us overgone and overdone all the world; nay
if there were a thousand worlds, he has overdone them all: and therefore if he
requires conditions that are hard to flesh and blood, they are but reasonably
required: and the Apostle insists upon this reason in Romans 5. 8. Peradventure
one would dye for a good man; that is, a Benefactor, one that is good to him;
some such may be found: but for a righteous man one will scarcely dye that has
not been to him a Benefactor: But the Lord Christ has overdone all; in that
when we were sinners and enemies (and no man will dye for an enemy) he dyed for
us, and thereby has obliged us to take such conditions from him as he will
propound; the Lord settle it in all our hearts.

Mat. 11. 6. Mark 6. 3. Luke 7. 23. etc.
his person, his parentage, his mean life, his death on the Cross between two
thieves; and therefore the Apostle calls it the scandal of the Cross, Gal. 5.
11. His appearance, life, death, and doctrine, all to carnal reason so unlikely
and unsuitable to such a person and officer as indeed he was: nay the Apostle
Peter makes it general to all that believe not in him, 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. He is a
precious stone to them that believe; and a stone of stumbling and rock of
offense to them that stumble at the Word, etc. whereat men dash, first their
reason, and then themselves to pieces. According as the light is wherein men
see him, so he is either a precious stone or a rock of offense: and let me say
it again, the sweetest promises in Christ Jesus have no more show to a natural
light, then a Pearl or Diamond have to a swine, or as a delicate color seen by
the light of a rush candle: and on the contrary, the hardest conditions seen by
the light of faith the attractive light whereby God irradiates the mind, in
order to Christ, these are desirable and have an admirable luster in them
above all the beauties in the world; as an Egyptian (for I would reason this
point out of Scripture) thought the glory of Pharoahs Court admirable (as may
be you might do) but as for Moses that looked upon it with another eye, he
esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches, Heb. 11. 26. showing that as
the eye is that looks on these things, so is the will captivated: And this
weight of glory (as it is called) that is in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
is made more weighty; for that is but a Scripture allusion; Glory is weighty
in the Scripture: the weight of Glory that is in Christ, may be made greater to
our eye two ways; either by conviction of Christ his excellency seeing seeing
more of him; or by humiliation of man under his misery; by laying lower the
price of this dung and dross, undervaluing the lusts of this world; as the
light is by which he sees sin or Christ, so the weight in the scales appears
more; either if we add to the one end, or take out that which is in the other
end of the scale; for so much is this more weight, as that is less that is put
against it: Oh that we had hearts to make abatements of the weights of this
world and the things of this life, that so the glory of Christ may be more
weighty in our eyes: and this is done by conviction: I say the will is
regulated by knowledge: men will not choose Christ because they know not his
worth: you would not (says Christ to Jerusalem, Mat. 23. 37.) And thou knew
not the time of thy visitation, Luke 19. 44. where there is no knowledge or not
such a knowledge as is convincing, there thou would not.

Obj. True may some say, the prejudices that men had against Christ in those
days of his appearance to the world were many: And if we had lived in those
times and been left to our selves, we had had as many as they; but now they are
ceast: And therefore of all other this is no reason, why men should yet always
be unwilling to receive Christ.

Answ. I answer, there are perpetual prejudices against Christianity, through
the mistakes and misapprehensions of men, why they will not come to him or have
him: I cannot name them; they are as the Devil or their own fancy do suggest to
them; for every one makes Christ a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense to
them that are thereunto appointed, as the Apostle Peter speaks, 1. Pet. 2. 8.

When a man being enlightened, and a little convinced, begins to be disquieted
and finds trouble brought upon him: by this there is wrought in this man's
breast a prejudice against converting Grace, that it takes away his sleep and
appetite, shakes him, troubles him, disquiets him, that he cannot enjoy himself
and the things of this world: this is a prejudice and a mistake: the truth is,
you must look for disquietness and broken bones when this is made known unto
you. But yet take it for granted, you are now entering into a comfortable
estate: I will make the valley of Achor a door of hope, the skirts of the land
of Canaan, Hos. 2. 15. I will make that to be a door of hope: what is that?
that a man or this people when I bring them to tribulations and disquiet them,
it shall be the beginning and commencement of hope, comfort and delight,
wherein I will visit them in mercy: Again,

When a man comes to be a professor of Christ and Religion, he has more
enemies, more temptations; Satan molesteth him more, he is more troubled then
ever he was before; and he takes prejudice at this, not knowing that as Pharaoh
will make out with his Chariots and horsemen when Israel is a going: so will
Satan pursue those who are going out of his power. There is also this prejudice
against the ways of God; the ways of God are holy. I am unsuitable, unholy;
he that has gone so long loose as I have done, shall never bear such
strictness as is required: this is a mistake, he measures himself by what he
was or is: But God that commands the walking, will put on the Byas whereby thou
shall move right: It is as one should say, A hog or swine considering how a
sheep feeds cleanly on the grass, should never feed as a sheep, and live as he
does. Its true whiles he remains a swine: But if the nature of a sheep be put
into him, if he be so principled and altered, its impossible he should live
otherwise; if you measure the walking in Gods ways by the lusts in you, you
are never able to endure, to affect, to love them. But the change of the
principle makes the thing to nature changed. There is also a prejudice, that a
man shall see no good days: lose all content and joy, live a melancholic or
recluse life, etc. this is a mistake; he shall not lose but change his joy; the
countenance of God does not darken the heart, but puts in more delight then
Corn, and Wine, and Oil increasing, Psalm. 4. 7.

More of these prejudices might be named, but I instance in some, that you
might find your own in you, that render you unwilling to believe; for they are
but misapprehensions of Christ and the work of his Grace, by which the will is
hindered as the species or appearance of good does most frequently invite it. If
I would strain hard, there might be other reasons given for the unwillingness
of man to accept of Grace offered him, but these shall serve for this tract.

no man can come to me, is man's resistance of Grace, or the means thereof that
are offered toward conversion; and this resistance is the highest step; for it
is not so high to be unwilling to receive grace when it is offered, as it is to
resist grace, whereby, we might believe and be converted: And the Point that
shall be the foot of my discourse, shall be laid down in these words;

That the natural corruption of man prompts him to a rebellion against, and the
resistance of grace offered him for conversion, or bringing him in to faith in
Christ Jesus. Every one of us do stand in defiance, all the days of our
natural condition, unto the very grace of God that is offered us for
conversion. I say all our days, until the time comes whereof the Apostle
speaks, that every thought in us be brought into captivity to the obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. till then, we stand it out in rebellion: so that it may
very justly be said by Wisdom, Prove. 8. ult. speaking in the person of God and
Christ, All they that hate me, love death. A strange servitude of a man under
sin, that for the sake thereof, that which is the great terror of the whole
world, death, death eternal, should interpretative though not formaliter be
loved. Being to speak of this point of Resistance offered unto the grace of
God, we must note, that Resistance is either between equal or unequal powers.

The Resistance that is between equal powers brings forth the indifferency of
an equal Scale, where neither end is victorious.

The Resistance between unequal powers, is, either when a lesser power resists
the greater, and then it retards the action, but makes no conquest: or when a
greater power resists the lesser, and that conquers the Resistance and swallows
up the opposition. So that upon this point of the Resistance of man, because it
is of no proportion to Gods omnipotency, therefore if God should act ad
extremum virium, to the extremity or height of his own power, there could be no
opposition made unto Divine grace: But because God is a free agent, tempering
his working by his will, which gives the gage unto his power, putting forth so
much as he will and no more, therefore is his grace whereby he calls man, often
frustrated and defeated of his work. I will make no quarrel about these words
which one calls prodigious words, which learned men have made occasion of
quarrel in the Church; the resistibility and unresistibility of converting
grace; but so go on to handle this point, as to divide an even thread, that God
may have and reap all the glory of this work of Conversion unto his free grace:
and sinful man nothing but thankfulness and self-confusion; thankfulness if he
be drawn, or however self-confusion, and abasement to himself: as contributing
nothing unto, but a great deal of opposition and resistance against the work:
Let me fall upon a distinction that will clear your understandings in this
intricate and difficult point.

We will distinguish, first, between the act of conversion, or the grace that
is exercised in the act: And secondly,

The means and way of God which in the nature of it tends toward Conversion,
as preceding and preparing of the heart thereunto: for its very well said by a
learned man: God does not bring any man, ordinarily, into a state of
Justification per subitum Enthusiasmum, by sudden and upstart Enthusiasmes, by
an unexpected work of illumination, but by previous means and methods and
workings. Now upon this distinction I say: First,

That the Grace of God exerted and exercised in and to the act of Conversion,
so as it may be said, now the man is Converted and born of God, I say that
Grace in that act being carried on by the revealed arm of God, is so potent and
omnipotent, as that indeed it is insuperable, and cannot be resisted by any
victorious resistance; it conquers all the resistance of man that might be
thought to frustrate and defeat it: for when God has a meaning and intention
to overcome the heart of man; effectually to draw him, he puts forth a
victorious power, insuperable to any resistance that you can make, to make void
the work: But,

Secondly, That Grace which God offers and gives to sinful man, which in the
nature of it tends to the bringing of man to repentance, and to faith in Christ
Jesus, leading thereunto, as the Ministry of the Word, and the excitations, and
internal motions of the Spirit of God being dispenst by a more common hand:
this Grace of God, this Initial Grace, this previous Grace tending to move,
excite, and quicken man up; these are defeated, resisted, and frustrated by
man's resistance; and indeed no man shall be able to lay his impotency and
unbelief at the door of God: But be made to take it upon himself, upon the
resistance that he makes against the hand of God stretched out to him, he being
a gainsaying soul; and this is that I say which may be resisted, and is;
Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering,
called (...) the goodness of God, leading to repentance? these may be and are
despised, Romans 2. 4. So then,

This distinction being laid, we shall now enquire whether the heart of man do
make actual and victorious resistance of Gods Grace put forth in the act of
Conversion: And for our clearer proceeding therein you must remember,

That Conversion does either denote the work of God Converting man, and this is
Gods drawing; or,

It denotes the action of man thereupon turning and coming in to Christ being
thus moved: and this is called man's coming in the text, both of them make up
complete Conversion; the one whereby God turns man, and by the other man being
wrought upon turns himself to Christ: These two are inseparable in time, but in
order of causality Gods work is first; the traction of God is before the coming
of man; the coming in of the light into a room, we use to say expels darkness,
and plants in light, though it be but one motion and one act; so there must be
the work of God enlightening the mind, softning the heart, drawing the will,
before there be a coming of man to God: the act of drawing is Gods, the act of
Conversion or turning is man's: God in his act of putting in and drawing forth
faith, does not hinder, but rather is the cause that the heart of man performs
his own act: and therefore the act of believing, howsoever it be given by God,
yet being exercised and acted by us, is our act: for with the heart man
believes, Romans 10. 10. as we use to say, he that throws the bowl does nor roll
or turn, but the bowl by motion from the hand: So when God puts forth this act
to convert man, the act is man's; the act of Faith, and Repentance, and
Conversion; but the power and hand whereby the heart is turned* that only is
the act of God: Well then,

First, If we consider conversion as Gods drawing work converting the heart, we
may safely say The heart in that act does not make actual resistance; much less
overcome and defeat the power of Grace, which is put forth in believers with
exceeding greatness of power, according to the working of his mighty power
which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead: there you see the
work described in Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. Its true, there may at that time and does
lurk a bitter root of proneness in the corrupt heart (mark, here is the knot
and great point) to resist the motions of the Spirit, for the flesh lusts
against the Spirit; and this root of habitual perverseness is not wholly and
presently eradicate and rooted out by Converting Grace: But this we say, that
Grace does so powerfully work in the work or act of Conversion: it so sweetly
plyes the affections, the understanding, and the will with such drawings, and
carries the work on with that actual strength, that the actual resistance of
the heart is tied up, bridled, and suspended for that time, that it does not
overcome the Grace of God; but the Grace of God overcomes the heart by a
victorious delight to yield up it self to God; though there be corruption in
it, it is so suspended as it does not act: I will give it you by this
comparison; The tide does not take from the river an aptness to run downwards
to the Sea; but so powerfully when it comes in, bears the stream back, that it
cannot take his natural course. I need not make application. And this may teach
all Converts with what measure of admiration and thankfulness to come to God,
for overcoming, bridling, and suspending these resistances of your froward
hearts; for having lived twenty or thirty years in resistance of Grace, and
keeping it at the staves end; and after Conversion resisting Grace and
quenching the Spirit so often as you do; if God had left you in that act to
these resistances, you had been lost and undone; and therefore that God at such
a time should forbid, still, and quiet these rebellions and resistencies of
your heart, till he had turned the stream, and taken away the stone, this is an
admirable demonstration of the mercy, love, and power of his grace to you. Of
all things wherein God is to be praised, this is one, that a rebellious man
that had so often before time and since resisted grace, that at that time when
God Converted him, he did not leave him to the resistencies of his heart: And
how would that child had he wit, thank his Father for tying him hand and foot
that he should not struggle (and otherwise he could not do) while he was
cutting for the stone; for the struggling might have prevented the cure. When
God comes to work upon the heart, and man cannot but strive, and resist, and
rebel against grace, that God should take away at that time this resistance,
and bind a man hand and foot, and so to overcome him with grace that he cannot
resist it: Oh the admirable wonderful mercy, whereby the Lord makes a
difference between his elect and others, whom he leaves with the bridle on
their necks to run away whether they will; for it must be put among Gods
promises and mercies, when though with some sharpness he hinders us of the use
of our liberty, in hindering us from finding contentment in our walking,
contrary to our departure from him, as you observe Hos. 2. 6. I will hedge up
thy way with thorns that thou shall not find or enjoy thy paths: this hedge of
thorns is an admirable mercy, for which the people of God have cause to bless
God all their days, that keeps them from finding that content in the way of
their sins which otherwise they would have done: this Converting grace does so
put forth it self in the act of Conversion of every sinner (I know not your
experiences of it) that it subdues the actual resistance of man's heart at that
time, as the effect of it cannot be frustrated or defeated, which teaches us
with importunity of Prayer to beg this grace which comes with so much strength,
as that it bears down the wickedness of our hearts, and irresistibly works a
saving work. Turn thou me and I shall be turned, Jer. 31. 18. and draw me and
we will run after thee, Cant. 1. 3. And that you that have received such grace,
may magnify the goodness and power of God toward you in that dispensations.

The Reasons why Converting Grace does take away and overcome the resistance of
man's heart at the act of Conversion, which with great content and profit to the
Reader may be given of the point, are four.

suadere, but persuadere: I cannot distinguish these words in English; or this,
it does not only stand at the door and knock, and call, as you would do to
awaken them that are asleep within, Rev. 3. 20. as exciting grace does (which
is indeed a great favor) which is resisted by man; for to this Grace that
knocks and is only pulsant, calling and awakening the heart of man, we may
Ponere obicem, put a bar, bar the door the faster as against a thief and
invader that would come in by force: but the Grace of Conversion opens the
door; and if there be no body within but those that bar the door, it comes with
such power as opens the door, the heart, and comes in and takes possession: for
of the two, though corruption be strong, yet grace, especially when it comes in
strength, is the stronger: Our Savior in Luke 11. 21. tells us, while the
strong man possesses his goods, all is well: but when a stronger then he (and
that is the divine hand of God) comes to take possession he binds the strong
man; what that? binds up the resistance of the heart; that when God comes to
cut him of this stone, and he would struggle, and could not do otherwise, Grace
overcomes: it finds a man in unbelief, and does not only command him to
believe, but gives faith; therefore faith is not only the command, but the gift
of God: it finds a man unwilling, but it makes him willing: it not only stirs
up by way of exciting the will and the deed; but it works to will and to do,
says the Apostle, Phil. 2. 13. how long may one cry and call aloud at a dead
man's grave, Arise come forth! but if with the call there go forth a power, as
there did when Christ called Lazarus out of the grave, then he rises and starts
up; This Converting grace is called by Divines Creatrix gratia, a creating
grace, we are his workmanship created in Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2. 10. This
raises the dead, this gives Spirituale esse, a spiritual being unto the soul:
it puts in a formal principle of eliciting holy acts; this puts in new
strength, and heals the vicious inclinations; this grace does not only call,
and say, Obey my voice, but it puts in the very grace of obedience: I will put
my law unto the heart, and write it in the mind that they shall all know me,
Heb. 10. 16. this drawing is the teaching of God, and Gods teaching is always
followed or accompanied with success, with the work it self, viz. man's coming;
for every man that has heard and learned thus, comes to me; every man, John.
6. 45. and in a word, such is the power of this Converting grace, that says
the Apostle, it is mighty to cast down strong holds, reasonings, to bring down
every high thing that exalts it self, and to lead every thought into captivity
to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. and what is that, but it takes away
the actual resistance of the heart at that present time?

on the work with so efficacious and most sweet a hand, as to overcome all our
opposition, one of these two things would follow.

First, That our Conversion should be defeated, and Gods intention toward his
Elect should be frustrated: for this grace of Conversion comes from the purpose
of God which is infallible: It is a calling according to his purpose, Romans 8.
29. what purpose? why the purpose of his Election which must stand, Romans 9. 11.
the purpose of God must stand, that is, not defeated, frustrated, and finally
opposed, for then it stands not: And how does it stand? not of works and the
compliance of the will of man, but of Gods call: now shall that grace that
comes from a meaning and purpose of God, be defeated by man's opposition and
resistance? no, for then that could not be true, that he has mercy on whom he
will, and whom he will he hardens: God would have mercy on such a man; but by
his opposition made against that work he is defeated; which would be a sad
assertion.

Secondly, Or else this must follow, that the will of man casts the scales of
his Conversion, and so the chief part belongs to man, which is to decide the
determine the work; for grace does not then determine the will to a choice; but
the will determines grace to an effect o^ event, whereby man may stand out and
say, I made my self to differ from another; for another man had as much grace
as I, but he repulsed and opposed it; he shut the door against it, but I let it
in: and therefore the act of difference between my self and other men, is my
own act, the act of my own will: but this I should by no means admit of; for to
me it seems incredible, that God that made my will, and gave it that liberty
that it has, should not, if he will, so work on it or in it, as he will, to
his own glory, without any detriment to the nature or liberty of it, having a
most omnipotent power to incline the heart of man like a river of water whether
he will: De ipsis hominum volunt atibus facit quod vult: God does with the very
will of man, what he will; as if he that makes a lock and knows all the springs
of it, should not be able to make a key to it without breaking it all to
pieces: and it is also a thing incredible to me, that God that has determined
of some persons to grace and glory (let me suppose that, for I think it must be
supposed) should leave it to the will of man, (that knows not the purpose of
God to him) either to determine himself to grace, or to defeat it at his
pleasure: this makes very ill music in an humble and rational ear: that God,
that determines a man to salvation, should leave it to the pleasure of blind
will to defeat the purpose of his grace; for if he should stumble (as I may
say) on the resistance of it, he himself is gone for ever; which leaves not
unto God so much above the Publican or they that are past over, as the Pharisee
his God I thank thee.

viz. To put difference between some principal acts of grace, without which the
salvation of Gods Elect consists not; and those subsequent and following acts
of grace, or the motions thereof in the regenerate, which though they were very
good and godly acts, yet a believer may be saved without them. And upon the
first sort, viz. to believe in Christ, to Convert to God, to be made new
creatures, to persevere unto the end, for the performance of these, God in his
time gives to his people such a grace as shall not be frustrate or defeated,
they shall be performed in thee: But for other acts that God calls for of thee,
as to omit such a ^in, or to do such and such a duty; which being considered
single and particular, thou may be saved without: in these he gives thee his
Spirit whose conduct is to be followed: but as experience shows, the Elect and
regenerate may deessegratiae may be wanting to this grace, and repulse the
motions, and as its said, grieve the Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 30. if in one sort of
acts he should resist, he is lost: and therefore God puts in a mighty hand and
an absolute will: I will put my Law, etc. in the other he guides by his Spirit;
and a grace is given not so infallibly to bring the effect, which is good, not
simply necessary to salvation: because if you sin by not doing your duty, yet
your estate is not in danger: and here let me suggest a meditation or two to
such as are fit to make use of them.

First, Let the regenerate consider, that whereas they have resisted grace and
the motions of it a thousand tmes, and since their Conversion have grieved the
Spirit by indulgence of their lusts against the motions of the Spirit and the
dictates of their own consciences; if God had permitted them unto themselves,
and let them have done so in the act of Conversion, they had for ever perished;
and their resistance at other times shows they might or would have done so
then, if God that may let his child slip and take a knock, did not yet keep a
hand upon them that they fall not into the fire.

Secondly, Let them learn to understand God a right, and to take comfort, that
though in other acts he please to suffer them often and very grievously to
fall, showing thereby the perverseness of their spirits yet remaining, so as
that they may fear they may lose all and fall so as never to arise more: yet be
comforted that in such things as salvation lies in, he will be sure and an
infallible God to his Elect; to support and raise them up again: and let them
also remember, that God so makes good the condition of his Covenant in things
essential unto salvation to work them infallibly: I will put my fear into their
hearts that they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32. 40. or as it is said, Psalm.
37. 23, 24. The Lord or dereth a good man's steps, and he delights in his way:
though he fall he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him
with his hand; though he fall in the Covenant, he shall not fall from it.

A nullo duro cord r^spuitur; it is not resisted by the heart that's hard,
because it takes away the hardness and gives a heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36. 27. I
will take away the heart of stone and give a heart of flesh; take away the
heart untractable, and give a heart that's tractable; I will take away the heart
that's hard as stone to resist, and give them a tender heart to feel their own
misery. I may give it by this comparison: In a room if the windows be not shut,
the darkness cannot resist the light, because its given to that purpose to
expel the darkness: And when God gives any thing to take away an opposition,
that opposite cannot stand in its place; so this Divine grace is refused by no
hard heart of man, when it comes with the meaning and purpose of God to carry
it on, because then it comes with commission and authority to remove obstacles
and pull away bars that it may overcome: And this much be spoken of Conversion
as it denotes the act of God drawing or Converting, and the deportment of man's
heart under it.

The second consideration is as Conversion denotes the action of man;
Converting to God upon and by virtue of this drawing of God: And what is the
deportment of the heart when it is touched by this loadstone and drawn by this
grace? freedom say I, and willingness; there follows thereupon, a coming, nay
a running after God, in Cant. 1. 4. For the power of God and willingness of man
do consist together, thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Psalm.
110. 3. Now therefore I will say, that man cannot be supposed in this act of
Conversion, as it is his, to resist or be unwilling, because he is made
willing, and the resistance for this act is overcome and subdued. And therefore
it is said, as God draws, so man comes, and his coming is an act not of force
but of freedom, being both powerfully and sweetly drawn by the cords of man, by
the bonds of love, Hos. 11. 3. And therefore as man's resistance of Gods work,
and his free coming in to God cannot stand together in the same act, there is
reason in nature for that: a man may as well move East and West at the same
time, as resist and be willing to come all at one time; for there is a
contradiction in the terms to say, though a man does believe, yet he will not
believe; for man will not resist being made willing to comply with God; and
this is the miracle of Gods power and grace in man's Conversion; that the heart
so prone and apt to run into sin so headlong and uncontrouled, should upon the
touch of this loadstone of grace be made so free and delightful to come to God,
and by this marriage consent to join hands with God; loathing in comparison of
God the thoughts of those lusts and pleasures which he so doated on in the
days of his captivity to sin; and saying as they said to their Idols, Isa. 30.
22.
Fie upon you, get you hence; and therefore there can be no resistance
remaining in this coming; so that its clear, that neither in the act of Gods
drawing or in man's act of turning will there be found a victorious resistance
(an habitual corruption there will remain) but that it is bridled at any time,
let it magnify for ever Gods mercy and grace: 2 Cor. 13. 8^.
we can do nothing against the truth but for the truth, says the Apostle: But
though this may well be spoken to magnify the grace of Conversion to set you
to pray for it; and to teach that God is able to carry man out of himself in
despite of his teeth as I may say; as Iron touched with the loadftone cannot
but move to the North: yet withal to let you see to humble you the abomination
that is in your hearts, what enemies you are to Conversion and faith in Christ;
and consequently to your own salvation.

winter fruit, that never ripen, and come to maturity, as the blade in the
thorny and stony ground never came to ear well and so to harvest: so these
graces may be finally choked, and from them a man may finally fall away: this
is the point of resistance of this grace offered; which before I give the
reasons of, I shall premise three things to be handled:

First, Concerning these offers of grace, I shall say three things.

Secondly, Show the entertainment of these offers is with opposition and
recusancy.

Thirdly, The dangerous case that man falls into by this refusal;

As concerning the offers of grace that God makes you in the Gospel, know three
things:

First, That the Gospel tenor or terms may be propounded to every creature;
that's the phrase of Christ, Mark 16. 15. Go preach the Gospel to every
creature; that is, in the dialect of Christ which was the received form of
speech used at that time by the Jewish Rabbis, every man, every humane
creature; for it belongs not to the Angels that sinned, though they be sinful
creatures; these Gospel proposals do not belong to them, but every humane
creature, which is expounded by Matthew, Go and Baptize, that is, Disciple all
Nations, Mat. 28. and what is the meaning properly of all Nations and every
creature? this, that whereas the Jewish Pale was but of one Nation, they were
the Church of God impaled, and there was a wall of partition between them and
all the world beside, and he dealt not so with every Nation as he did with
them: It seems now the Pale is broken down, the wall of partition, and the
several is made common; now go preach to every creature: that is, the Jews only
are not the subjects of Gospel promises, but all and every man, to them it may
be proposed: and what are those Gospel terms? he that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved; he that believes not, shall be damned: but is this Gospel? he
that believes not, shall be damned.

To this I answer, you must consider the meaning of it: under the Law there was
a curse went out against every man for every sin: there could not be an idle
word or thought but the curse of the Law went out against: In Gal. 3. 10.
Cursed is every one, etc. Now mark, though this curse may go forth against
every sin by the sentence of the Law; yet it is dissolved and taken off from
believers, and abides only because of unbelief, Joh. 3. ult. Believing takes
off every score; and that only.

About these offers of the Gospel consider two things, they are made with
Invitation and with Encouragement.

First with Invitation of such as could not expect to be at the marriage feast
of a Kings Son: Go out says the King, to the highways and hedges, and invite
the meanest and most remote creatures, Mat. 22. 4. and they called in both good
and bad, and furnished the feast with guests: all sorts may have these Gospel
proposals made to them* And,

Secondly, Its made with Encouragement, and that to the most crimson and
scarlet sinners, Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18, Wash you, make you clean, etc. None that
came to Christ for cure were dismissed without healing, though they were
Samaritans and not Israelites: therefore no man can say, that God by the tenor
of the Gospel has excluded him, or shut the door against him; for in Isa. 56.
5, 6. the Prophet Isaiah gives in words of Encouragement; Let not the son of
the stranger say I am cast out; nor the Eunuch, I am a dry tree (for both the
son of the stranger, the Proselyte, and the Eunuch had a mark of disgrace upon
them) for if they fear the Lord, they shall enjoy the privileges of children
and favorites; his meaning is, there is no man so alien, so remote from God
and his favor, that has all the marks of disparagement upon him; but if he
will come in and believe, the invitation is made to him* I confess we read in
the Scripture, that the Spirit of God forbade the lantern-bearers of the Gospel
to go into some Countries, and the providence of God at all times and at this
time so regulates the sun of the Gospel, as that some people are as in night:
but this I say, that no man is excluded by the Gospel tenor from the offer of
grace that is propounded in the Gospel, by any national bar as in former time:
And then,

Secondly, As the Gospel offer, and the proposals thereof may be made to every
man without any other consideration then that he is a sinner. Art thou a
sinner? for thee Christ is a Savior: that as the brazen Serpent was set upon
the pole for the wounded and bitten with fiery Serpents: So is grace offered in
the Gospel, to them that are finners without any other consideration for the
offer of it: understand me right: but for the promise of the Gospel. that's made
to every one that comes to Christ for the grace promised; and here is no
condition of worthiness, but of fitness and meetness, whereby a man may be in a
nearer capacity, but has no more merit or worth, as I shall here show you: The
Gospel makes the Proclamation of pardon to all men that are in actual
rebellion: that as a Prince by his pardon charms the sword out of the hands of
a Rebel: so if your iron hearts were softened to understand the grace of God,
upon his Proclamation, you might have the sword of rebellion charmed out of
your hands, and be brought into submission unto Christ: but the Gospel makes
the promise of pardon and grace to a believer in Christ, and to every believer
without any respect to what he has been in times* past, whether he be
Barbarian or Scythian, bond or free; for the righteousness of God is upon all
and unto all that believe; for there is no difference, Romans 3. 22. Mark and be
invited I beseech you that have so long stood it out and resisted the grace of
God: Oh! be you invited to come in; the promise is to every one that thirsts,
Isa. 55. 1. All that are weary and heavy-laden with the barthen of their sins
and miseries, Mat. 11. 28. And whosoever will (viz. is willing) let him come
and take of the water of life freely, Rev. 22. 17. Every one that believes in
Christ, shall not perish, but have eternal life, John 3. 15, 16. So that you
see the Proclamation is general, the invitation of the thirsty to water, wine
and milk, of the laden and weary unto rest, of the willing unto the water of
life; and the Promise is general to all and every believer, and that of eternal
life; and therefore you may conclude, there is an offer of grace made to sinful
and wicked men by the Gospel; for thou (says the Psalmist of Christ) have
received gifts for men; yea for the rebellious also that God may dwell amongst
them, Psalm. 69. 18. And then,

Thirdly, Which binds all the rest, whomsoever God does call to faith and
Conversion by the invitations of his Word, and by the pulsations or knockings
of his Spirit, he calls and invites them seriously and in good earnest: what
think you? when Christ says, how often would I have gathered you! and when God
says, Ezekiel. 14. 13. I purged thee and thou wast not purged: are these things
spoken in jest? we must not judge that grace is not offered in good earnest by
the event that it has in us; for it may be frustrate and without success; but
judge by the nature of the benefit offered, by the excitements afforded, and
the aids and motions supplied, and by the tendency of them what they mean, and
in their nature drive at; even at the bringing of you to Christ Jesus: let no
man think with himself that God Tantalizeth man with the offers of his grace,
and that he is not really minded that they should be received; but let this
principle be settled and thoroughly fixed in your hearts, that God is in good
earnest and means seriously, when he woes and invites you to repentance; for
this principle is of great use; for that induces the acceptance, the reality of
the offerer: no man will look on a bargain that is offered him in jest: look
after a gift though never so rich that is holden forth in a pretense and
simulation; this will not induce a man to look after grace, if he has this
persuasion that God Tantalizeth him with it: what man living under the Gospel
can stand out and say? Lord, I would, but thou would not; I put forth my
hand and thou drewest back thine; let no man think this to excuse himself upon
God; this was intended by a Parable, Luke 19. 20. of him that had a talent
given him who laid it up and did not use it, thinking to excuse himself on the
temper, the austerity of the Master, so to put off all blame from himself,
whereby our Savior signifies that men would put the fault upon God; says he,
Master, I knew thou were a hard man, that reapest where thou did not sow;
therefore I laid up the talent that thou might have thy own; the Master
speaks to him, calling him evil servant, and retorts the objection upon
himself, if I were a hard man, thou ought to have put forth thy talent
rather: he is deceived that thinks to clear his neglect by fastening a reason
for it upon God: for there are four things in the Scripture that seem to me to
prove these offers of grace in the Gospel to be serious: I know not how others
may interpret them.

First, The pathetical form that is used of inviting sinners, so low sometimes
that God does beseech us to be reconciled; God and Christ does beseech you by
us that are his Ministers and Ambassadors, 2 Corinthians 5. 20.

Secondly, By the frequent exhortations: and amongst the rest (for I should
speak the whole Bible in a manner to name all) that 2 Cor. 6. 1. we beseech you
that you receive not the grace of God in vain (for its not offered to you in
vain) for he says there is a day of Salvation and that is now: And then,

Thirdly, By the expostulations with careless and negligent men for not coming
in, neglecting or abusing these offers; I wonder that you are so soon perverted
and carried away to another Gospel, in Gal. 6. 1. And then,

Fourthly, By the promises made and holden forth, Rev. 3. 20. I stand at the
door and knock, if any man will open to me, I will come and sup with him: and
do not all these forms of dealing with man prove sufficiently the reality of
the offers of grace to a sinner? yea verily, and that he does not dally with
men: For else,

First, God should seem hereby to deceive men, to offer them a purchase and a
prize, and call and invite them in the Name of his Son Christ, and never mean
or intend that this grace should be by them received.

Secondly, The messengers whom God sends forth to be woers of chaste virgins
unto Christ, and to bespeak the espousals as the Word is, 2 Cor. 11. 1, 2. they
should be found false witnesses; for what would you take him to be that should
speak to a man to bespeak a virgin for him, whom he never intends or means to
have, if she would have him? And then,

Thirdly, The neglect of this grace might more excusably be made a great deal,
and would have a greater color of excuse; for they would say, there was indeed
grace holden forth to them in mockery, without any reality that they should
receive it; but now God finds (...) with men and blames them for not
acknowledging or not considering that his goodness should lead them to
repentance, and therefore do despise it as the phrase is, Romans 2. 4. And
therefore it must be a plain case, that the drift and scope of that goodness is
to lead men to repentance, and so the whole army of providenti^^ dispensations,
the offers made in the Word, the excitements of the Spirit of God, as well as
other goodness, do all speak and tend to the clearing of God of simulation or
mere pretense: I would it were believed, that though you were never so remote
and far from this grace, and seem to despair that you cannot have it, and think
that. God does but dally when he makes the offer to you, or whatever your
apprehensions be, settle it in your hearts, the offer is real, and God is
serious and in good earnest when he offers Christ and grace in the Gospel. One
great objection there is in this point.

Quest. How can these offers of grace be serious or in earnest, when so many
thousands called by the Word are not absolutely converted? how does God deal in
good earnest in the offer of grace, when he does not absolutely give it and
work this Conversion? if God had a serious will, it would be absolute by power
to work that he calls men unto; if God were in good earnest that I should be
converted and believe in Christ, then God by his absolute and peremptory will
would give me this grace and work it in me?

Answ. But we answer that the will of God may be serious, though it be not
absolute and peremptory* God may by his serious will will that you repent, and
yet by his absolute will work it not: The great iustance in this point is: God
had a serious will that Adam should stand, for God was not in jest in that
business; but God had not an absolute will that he should stand, so as to work
and confirm him in that estate; so as to cause. Adam to stand in his integrity;
so the will of God may be serious in commanding of a man to repent, and yet not
absolute and peremptory to work it in that man if he refuse to obey the
command; when God commands a man to make him a new heart, to circumcise his
heart, or to obey his holy Laws, in all these, God is serious and in good
earnest, notwithstanding he does not absolutely work these in all: In the Elect
of God whom he has chosen he does indeed not only command, but works it: In
all he does not: And the reason is, because God is serious in his conditional
promises or Covenant, when he speaks to man to believe, and thereupon promises
pardon, he is in good earnest; for he would have men to believe, and it is
their sin not to do it; and then if they do, the connection between faith and
pardon is sure: a man earnestly persuades his servant or friend to be cut of
the stone; they will not; the man takes his child and binds him, cuts and cures
him; he goes further with his child then he did with his friend or servant; yet
he did seriously persuade them, though he did not go so far with them, nor had
he reason, but leaves them to themselves; not that a similitude should run on
four feet, but take it in the general meaning; God does persuade with men to
break the stone, and to plough up the fallow ground of their hearts: but he
takes them that belong to the Election of his grace, and whereas they refuse
this grace as well as others, he takes away the heart of stone from them; I
will take away the heart of stone and give a heart of flesh, and therefore when
the Lord says thus in Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32. Cast away your transgressions, make
you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will ye dye O house of Israel! I have
no pleasure in the death of him that dies, therefore t^rn your selves and live:
be assured God is in good earnest with you; this is his serious will, this God
calls upon man for, notwithstanding he does not work this new heart in all, but
in some: for he says in Ezekiel. 36. 27. a new heart I will give you; he bids
them to circumcise, and says, I the Lord will circumcise, Deuteronomy. 30 6. man's
duty is made Gods act, that which God requires in man seriously, is made Gods
act to perform in man, graciously: in the mean time by his calling and offering
of life, he hereby shows you what is his will of approbation, that is, what is
the acceptable and perfect will of God, Romans 12. 2. there is an acceptable will
and an effective will of God: the acceptable will of God is seen in this call
and offer of grace: the effective will of God is that of his purpose which is
effective of the work, works the work upon you: now God is serious when he
speaks according to his acceptable will, though he does not effect it
absolutely and peremptorily.

Th. 4. 3. this is the will of God, your sanctification; this God approves; and
the effective will of God whereby he works, is like that, I will, be thou
clean, Mat. 8. 3. or that Jam. 1. 18. of his own will begat he us. The
acceptable will of God is that which shows your duty, and what you must have if
you will not dye, if you will be saved, Ezekiel. 18. 31. Cast from you all your
transgressions, make you (...) new heart and a new spirit, for why will ye dye?
the effective will of God, is that which works both to will and to do; which
says, I will take away the heart of stone and give a heart of flesh, and I
will give a new heart and a new spirit, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. The acceptable will
is his signifying will, what he will have done by us. The effective will is the
will of his purpose, what he will do in us. The o^^ shows it self in the word,
the other in the work. This acceptable will of God manifested in Evangelical
commands and promises, whereby he commands faith and repentance, and promises
pardon of sin and life, is that which we must look unto and prove, as the
Apostle says, Romans 12. 3. and this is seriously proposed to men. But the will
of Gods purpose, his effective will is secret, and so cannot be the guide of
our addresses to God, nor the rule of our believing (for Gods acceptable will
is the rule of our faith) And this will of Gods purpose though it be absolutely
performed in and unto all that are under that purpose; yet there is an outward
calling of many that are not chosen, and there are offers of grace to infinite,
unto whom it is not powerfully given; for it is said, Mat. 13. 11.
to you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom, but to others it is
not given; and yet to those to whom it is not absolutely given, it is seriously
offered; according to the effective will is the one, and according to the
acceptable will is the other: and here comes in a question.

Quest. What is the reason that God effectually works that grace in one, which
he does but offer to another? that God works by his absolute will the grace of
Conversion and Faith in some, which he offers and requires according to his
acceptable will of others; and why does he so pathetically work with counsels
and persuasions that which he might command? if God command light to shine out
of darkness, and do not create that light, the light does not shine: one word,
fiat lux, would effect the work which he commands to be wrought in us, and by
us is resisted; this is the great objection.

To this I say three things.

Answ. First, That God might have converted his Elect as he made this world,
that is, immediately without tools or instruments: God in the Conversion of
man, will deal with man as man; he will use a ministry, a means, by
exhortation, by conviction, by counsel and by moral persuasions; that as its
said, Hos. 11. 3. he will draw with the cords of man, so he will deal with man
as man, by reasonable counsels and persuasions leading him, not as a stock by a
Cable rope of mere force, but so as that he may by excitation quicken the
affections, by enlightening convince the understanding, by awakening carry the
will; this must be that the affections may be allured and drawn up to the
consideration of spiritual things; so that this being the way of God, of
necessity it does require that there be used means, motions, counsels,
persuasions, and the like. I have to say further on this head these four things:

First, God by these offers and tenders of grace published in the Word and left
to the management of man, convictively shows what even his Elect are; that
without his powerful hand to strike the stroke the work will not be done; for
the Elect of God as well as others being only morally moved and persuaded to
Conversion, do use the same shifts, and Tergiversations, make as much
resistance and show the same unwillingness as other men do; and therefore take
this for a rule and find it in your selves, that God commonly convinces a man
before he converts; convinces man of his own impotency and opposition, before
he put forth his own arm; and therefore leaves him to his own recusancy and
resistance to ^ry his own strength, and a long time lets him alone to his own
purposes, which will savor of pride enough until God show him the difference
between the report of the word and the arm of the Lord revealed: for although
the word of God, the Gospel that we preach unto you, is the fittest means in
the world of an external instrument to convert the heart of man, and is
furnished with all requisites to work on the heart; yet its but like a key very
suitable to the springs of a lock, and put into it, that will not shut the bolt
and open the door without a hand to turn the key as well as put it in: so if
the Word preached be never so fit to meet with the springs in man's heart, yet if
there be not a strong hand to turn the key, the heart will not be opened: so
that when God convinces by the offer of grace, and leaves you to your own
acceptance, little good will be done without the putting forth of his own arm
to the work.

Secondly, With these offers made in the Word, God in Conversion goes out with
his arm, and so Conversion is wrought (in those he purposes to call) by the
instrument, morally by persuasion, by Gods hand supernaturally; so with the
word that faith Lazarus come forth, there goes a work of power to effect it;
this power goes forth with the Word, as the hand with the ax, with the
instrument, with the key for the honor of the ordinance: And therefore its
told you while Peter spoke, Acts 10. 44. the Holy Ghost fell upon the hearers;
meaning that there went out with the Word the power of the Holy Ghost to
convert them that God calls according to his purpose; he takes hold of their
hearts with his powerful arm and brings them in, yet not without means, as if
they were converted by Enthusiasms, but in an ordinary way, as I may clear it
by a comparison: frictions and rubbings used sometimes to a people in a swound
are very profitable to recall life where there was life before; but if used to
a dead carcass out of which life is gone, does nothing to beget or recall life:
so are the tenders of grace, offered with exhortations and counsels, motions
and knockings; if there be life of grace in the heart, they are profitable to
revive, to call in, to refresh grace: but if used to a natural man, to a man
dead in sins, of themselves they work nothing, they leave him as dead as they
found him, until there be a new life of grace put into him; which is the work
that I contend for to be of God.

Thirdly, By these offers of grace and exhortations, God takes from man all
excuse; all the light that God gives to man does tend to render man
unexcusable, though it be but natural light, for so far as it directs, Romans 1.
20. that they might be without excuse; for what? for not believing in Christ?
no, that light went not so far; no light leaves a man without excuse farther
then it goes; Gospel Light goes farther then natural light, and convinces in a
farther degree and proportion, as the light is greater; and as far as it
convinces, so far it will leave without excuse; and therefore there is no man
that has Christ offered, that is enlightened, convinced, has tenders made unto
him, but is left without excuse; and though men in wantonness of disputes may
weave a web of excuses, and muster them up against God: yet no man in agony of
conscience upon his deathbed or at Gods Tribunal, shall-be able to make any
excuse for the neglect and resistance of the grace of God, but shall be like
him in Mat. 22. speechless: he might have said somewhat for himself, as to them
that called him to the feast, but there was no excuse to be made to the King.
There are two cases wherein all excuses are taken from man. First, In case of
voluntary impotency by a man's own default, as if he imbezel the stock committed
to his hand, and would make an excuse for non-payment of a debt, though he may
say he have it not, that serves not his turn; for you had it and the stock by
you is imbezelled: Or secondly, if he be opposite and resist, as if a man that
will not or cannot see because he shuts the window and will not let the light
in, its no excuse for him to say I do not see, because its a voluntary act of
his own to shut out the light: in both cases he is without excuse. But
especially I lay weight on the latter, the resistance of man and his
opposition; for there is no man living that rests in a simple impotency, but
resists and shuts his eyes, and makes opposition to the grace of God tendered to
him: John 3. 19*
light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather then light, this is
the condemnation.

Fourthly, God in the Gospel seldom or never offers grace to a man, but he
affords and furnishes him with some degree of light and power to do more then
he does, to go farther then he does; for in Romans 1. 17. the wrath of God is
revealed from heaven against those that hold the truth of God in
unrighteousness: that is, for not living up to their light, nor doing so much
as they may or can: no man in the world until God work upon his heart
savingly, live^ up to his own rule, neither does facere quod in se est, do so
much as he might and has power to do; and therefore God is no way bound to
give converting grace; if a man will not employ one talent so far as he may go
with one, what reason has God to give that man five or ten talents? None at
all when the power and grace of God given is resisted and opposed, and
neglected; What reason is there that men should cavil against the Lord; and
say, I had not so many talents, whereas he did not use the one he had! no man
is without a talent, every man has somewhat whereby he may trade for God, and
because he does not do it, certainly the Lord is free and clear, if he do not
give him more, if he do not give him converting grace: God will I say be clear
when he is quarrelled at by man.

Answ. 2. Secondly, Converting grace is Gods own, not dispensed to any in a way
of Justice, but as a gi^t of Gods mere will and pleasure; and who shall call
any man to account for the gifts he gives? if it were in justice, there a man
might demand account; in Mat. 20. 15. is it not lawful for me to do what I will
with mine own? grace is Gods own, and therefore is not tied to accounts; so its
argued Job 33. 15. why do thou strive against the Lord? he gives no account
of any of his matters: and in respect of this sovereignty of God, he has no
other rule to guide his gift of grace but his own will; for he has mercy on
whom he will: for who has enjoined him his way, or who can say thou have
wrought iniquity? Job 26. 23. therefore let those that from Converting grace do
but seek an argument of excusing themselves and disputing with God, in silence
first ask themselves that question in Romans 11. 35. who has given to him first?
and it shall be given or rendered to him again; first let him stand out and say,
this I have done for God, and have given to him, and therefore let him be just
to render to me again, or cease to quarrel.

Answ. 3. Thirdly, God does not give Converting grace to all that have the
offer, to the end that he may make his grace the more glorious and admirable,
and his Elect the more thankful and obliged; who when they see what the Lord
has done, what scandal as it were he has run himself into in the eyes of the
world, to greaten his mercy in their eyes, how this is denied to many better
then themselves, may stand admiring at that whereof no reason out of God and
the cabinet of his will can be given. If this grace which God has given and
will give to his Elect, had been universal, I do think I may very well say it
must needs have fallen in price, because reason teaches us that full markets
make cheap commodities: and therefore the wrath of God on vessels of wrath,
does serve to show forth his mercy on vessels of mercy, Romans 9. 22. to whom it
appears to be riches of glory, even by the consideration of Gods wrath upon
others; let Gods people look themselves in this glass, and let them know that
grace has more glory by the property of discriminancy then it could have by
universality; for if diamonds were as common as Flints and Pebles, I think
people would not so much wear them on their fingers: and so much of the first
Premise.

I come to the second, which is, what entertainment the offers of grace do find
with a natural man, and that is opposition and resistance, that look as the
hard wall reverberates and beats back the ball that's thrown against it, and the
harder you throw it, the farther it recoils upon you; so the hard heart of man
by its renitency reacts and repulses the tenders of grace; and because this is
a point that no man will easily believe that he is a resister of grace,
therefore I mean to handle it only by opening some plac^s of Scripture, wherein
you shall see that God charges this on you, and then I shall sum them up into a
total.

First, there are two denominations of men that are said to hate the light and
to hate Christ, John 3. 20. every one that does evil hates the light: and John
15. 18. the world hates me: the highest degree of malignity is expressed by hate;
the two highest and most precious things, Christ and light are hated, by men
that love their lust; by the world, that is in the dialect of Christ, the not
called, the unregenerate, which shows us the general state of men that are not
brought into Christ, they hate the light and they hate Christ; but yet men will
not own it, they think not so; so Hazael when he was accused by the Prophet,
that he should rip up women with child, and other villainies when he came to be
King; What says he, am I a dog to do such great wickedness? no more do men
think this of themselves that they hate Christ or the light: Its true, the
general and toothless light, the shining and glistering light of speculation is
pleasant; that's not the light which is hated; but as the light that comes on
sore eyes and causes them to smart is tedious; so that light that discovers and
convinces of sin and misery by reason thereof, and threatens vengance from God
for it, that you cannot abide; for mark the Word, they hate the light lest
their deeds should be reproved; the reproving light is taken very ill, they
cannot bear that.

Secondly, Those that are in impenitency drunk and asleep in the devils snare,
do oppose themselves, or as the Word signifies, are contrarily disposed and
affected, 2 Timothy 2. 25. Let the Minister instruct in meekness them that oppose
themselves: And who are these? the secure wretched man, who being drunk is
fallen asleep in the snare of the devil; for it is that he may awaken out of
drunken sleep unto a sober mind those that lie cross in the way, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth
which they disown and disavow; and this is their resistance.

Thirdly, The Gospel invitations are slighted by men of worldly spirits and
employments, whose very callings do call them from the Gospel feast, Mat. 22.
1. For till a man be brought to God, his employment, his lawful calling in the
world makes him to slight the grace of God; they were called to the Supper; and
the farm, the oxen, the merchandise, and the married wife, hinders their
coming; this and that, other vanity are preferred; for though heaven be never
so great a thing (as indeed it is) yet to a man that has a closer, though a
petty thing, in his heart, that hinders his choice of heaven: as though the
firmament be a great thing, yet let a man put a six pence or three pence on his
eye and it hinders his sight of heaven, because a closer thing lies on his eye:
so when this world and the things thereof lie close to the heart, though petty
and mean, they bring a contempt and slighting of this converting grace offered
in the Word of the Gospel; and therefore ver. 5. they made light of it, and
ver. 3. they would not come, and this is their resistance.

Fourthly, The patient expectation and loving call of God is gain said, even by
Israel that had the Ordinances of God; what good did they? they were resisted;
how is that proved? in Romans 9. ult. all the day long (the day of that Nation,
while it was a Nation, till it grew night with them) have I stretched out my
hands to a gainsaying and contradicting people that believe not: all day long,
there is patience; have I stretched out my hands, a Metaphor taken from a
Mother calling her child: there is a show of calling with affection; and yet
the proud and self-righteous people were gainsaying and contradicting; thi^ was
their resistance as long as Gods patience: and do not you find this in your own
hearts? how often have you gainsaid and contradicted the God of heaven?

Fifthly, The counsels, invitations and reproofs of Wisdom ( i.e.) of Christ,
are not regarded; in Prove. 1. 24. a terrible place, I have called and ye
refused, stretched out my hands, and no man regarded; ye have despised all my
counsel, and set at naught all my reproof, or hated my reproof; and the^ he
proceeds to tell them how bitterly he will go out against them: here is
calling, stretching out of hands, counsel, reproof, and they all refused, not
regarded, despised, hated; I think this amounts to the point of resistance.

Sixthly, The Holy Ghost is resisted in Acts 7. 51. ye stiff-necked and
uncircumcised, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: but how does this stand
with the former point, that the Spirit of God in the point of Conversion cannot
be resisted? I answer: The clear meaning of this phrase, is, the Holy Ghost
speaking in the Prophets: you have resisted the Holy Ghost speaking and
testifying to you in the Prophets, as if he had said, the Holy Ghost speaking
in the ministry and calling by the Word of the Gospel, that's it you have
resisted; for its not meant of the renewing Spirit in the heart, but of the
Spirit testifying in the Prophets, ye uncircumcised and stiff-necked; like a
Bullock of a hard neck that will take no yoke: and uncircumcised, that is, hard
and obstinate against God; you do always resist the Holy Ghost: this was their
resistance, from whence you learn that there is a natural hardness of heart, an
obstinate neck that is the cause of man's resistance of the Holy Ghost, both
speaking in the Word, and knocking at the door, and exciting with motions the
heart to believe; all is in vain; for it is but as knocking at a dead man's
door, or at a guilty persons door, that will put more bars when one knocks: so
when God knocks and lays siege to man's heart, there is made the greater
opposition.

Seventhly, Men that refuse to submit to the way of Salvation by God appointed,
are said to reject the counsel of God against themselves, (...) 7. 30. speaking
of some that came not in to the Baptism of John; some read it Toward
themselves, the counsel of God toward them for their good, or the counsel of
God against themselves, that is, to their own hurt and prejudice, in that they
would not be baptized by John's Ministry to the profession of the Lord Jesus:
people that will not come in to the Ordinances of God, they reject the counsel
of God against themselves, to their own hurt; this is through resistance.

Lastly, Take a full measure of the height or this opposition; there can be no
higher expressions then those in Heb. 10. 29. to tread under foot the Son of
God, to account the blood of the Covenant an unholy or common thing, and do
despite to the Spirit of grace: but who does this? are there such monsters in
the world, such miscreants as do this; yes says he, that there is; and who are
they? such as have been sanctified; that is, called into Christianity, that's
the plain meaning, and the word in the text reaches no farther: separate from
heathenish Idolatry and pollution, to come to and profess the name of Christ,
and so have been sanctified* and I take those in Heb. 6. 4. 5. to be the same
men with these; there its said they were enlightened and tasted, they were made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and yet they fell; here you find men sanctified to
tread under foot the Son of God; there is a double apostasy; a simple apostasy,
called a stealing or a shrinking away from the profession of Religion; And
(...), or a venom apostasy, falling away with despite against Religion or
Christ: that in Heb. 6. speaks of the former; this in Heb. 10. of the latter:
and what does God construe their action to be? a treading of the Son of God
under foot, and offering despite to the Spirit.

In all these particulars I have held my self to the New Testament and the
words of Christ in it: and now as I said, that we have particularly pondred the
words of Scripture in this point, let us sum them up together; here is hating,
opposing ones self, slighting, refusing, resisting the holy Spirit, rejecting
the counsel of God, and treding under foot the Son of God, which fully amount
to a resistance of the offers of grace.

that we may not flatter our selves, and that men may see there is more poison
in their hearts then they are aware of, or will own; I know what it is that
usually blinds men, that they will not own these expressions of Scripture to
belong to them: for who will call himself an opposer of grace offered, a
resister of the Holy Ghost* and that is because you confess your selves to be
glad of the tidings of the Gospel, of remission of sin, and deliverance from
hell; and you delight to hear of Salvation as it is generally conceived to be a
state of happiness, not as it is a state of holiness and communion with God;
and in any extremity, agony, and death into which you fall, you pretend to have
some desires of grace as a bridge unto Salvation, or at least seem to magnify
it much in words; these things seem to be an argument to you that you are not
resisters and neglecters of this saving grace: but you may well remember that
the foolish Virgins knocked at the door and cried Lord Lord open unto us, and
the stony ground heard and believed the Word of the Gospel with a kind of joy:
And there is not the veryest coward in the world, but will take hold of a
swords point to save his life, and to pluck him out of the water: the Gospel as
it is interpreted and looked upon by the eye of self-love, seems very
attractive of the desire of man toward it, so long as he may serve himself and
his own advantage upon it; namely to live in sin and to his sin, and yet be
saved at last when he can sin no more* so long there is no carnal heart will
resist and make opposition: but all this may stand with hate of Christ and
Grace; for till a man's heart be thus molded and tempered by God, as to affect
Grace for reconciliation, and for conversion, that so you may be Gods as well
as have him yours; so as to live to him as well as have Christ dye for you,
till then there is little but fallacy and falsehood in you: the man that thrust
in at the marriage feast, who came to fill his belly with good cheer, not for
the honor of the bridegroom, was cast out speechless, signifying that a man
that does not come to Christ for the love and service of Christ, but to reap
those advantages that self-love spies out in Gospel offers, that man may be a
resister and opposer of Grace.

The third Premise is to show the deplorable condition into which the resisters
of offered grace do plunge themselves, though the time of this life be sweetened
with the affluence of all earthly commodities and contentments; all resistance
of Grace is dangerous; but that which is final and out stands the patience of
God, of that I may say, there remains no sacrifice for that sin, but a fearful
expectation of judgment, which I need no further to prove unto you, then to
call in two or three witnesses to depose unto it: and the first of them speaks
in Heb. 2. 3. for if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
transgression, etc. what then? how shall we escape if we neglect so great
Salvation: neglect is a word somewhat lower then this that we call resistance;
and yet how shall we escape? sinners against the Law of God, though there be a
punishment allotted them, yet they may escape: but for the neglect of
Salvation, great, so great Salvation, there is no escape, there is a peremptory
condemnation belongs to such.

In Ezekiel. 24. 13. is the second witness; Because I have purged thee, and thou
wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more until I
have caused my fury to rest upon thee: because I purged thee by my Ordinances,
the application and use of them, and thou wast not purged; etc. God will not
always wash a blackmore; his offended patience turns to fury.

The third witness is Prove. 1. 24, 26. Because I have called and ye refused, I
have stretched out my hands and no man regarded, I also will laugh at your
calamity, and mock when your fear comes: there is no comfort for such men that
refuse Gods call, stand out against grace offered: for when they call and cry,
God will laugh at their calamity. Oh the misery of men living under the Gospel,
that stand it out against the offers of Grace therein made, which are serious
and in good earnest!

I will handle this point distinctly proceeding in certain propositions.

First, That unto Countries, Cities, Towns, Families, Single persons, upon whom
the Sun of Righteousness (that is the Gospel) does arise with healing in his
wings, God does afford a day of Grace (which he does to you that now live) in
which day he proclaims peace to such rebels as cast down their arms, and come
in and accept the pardon and Grace offered upon these terms; and this is their
day of visitation, or as it is called their day; let every one consider it and
lay it sadly to heart; In Luke 19. 42 44. Oh Jerusalem, now that the things
pertaining to thy peace are offered thee: this is thy day, the time of thy
visitation: our Savior that wept at the death of Lazarus, did weep now at the
blindness of this people that did not see and own their day, wherein their
Savior appeared to offer them grace and so great a mercy: Oh that you would
say within your selves every one of you: What? have I a day wherein there is
saving Grace offered to me, as the terms of my eternal peace! have I a time of
visitation afforded by the Lord Jesus! Oh that I might work out my salvation
while it is called to day, before the night comes upon me (for there is no day
but has a night) wherein no man can work! Be tenderly affected to your own
souls; for this I tell you, and shall clear it by Scripture; there is not one
of you that stand here this day, but have a day afforded, a time of visitation,
wherein the things pertaining to your eternal peace are held forth to you: with
what earnestness does the Holy Ghost speak in Heb. 3. 7. To day if ye will hear
his voice, ver. 13. while it is called to day, ver. 15. while it is said to
day! three times in one Chapter: and oh that you would consider it while it is
day, while its said to day, and while its called today: And the Apostle exhorts
with all diligence not to take the grace of God in vain, not to frustrate, to
neglect or resist it, by this argument, Now is the accepted time, Now is the
day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 1, 2. it is a comfortable and yet a sad point;
comfortable that there is a day; sad if you outstand it, and it be taken from
you. I blame not in any man the desire of a long day of grace for England, for
London, for thy self, provided that the hope of a long day make not the morning
a truant: and though I blame not the desire, yet I blame their choice that
choose the eleventh hour of the day to come into the vineyard, the last hour of
their lives, of their day of grace, before they come into this vineyard to work
out their salvation. Oh that you would awake from your deadly sleep betimes in
the morning of your youth; for by this means the day of grace will be long, and
your day in grace will be long too; such will the benefit be that you shall
reap by it; and let it sharply enter into your spirits that God has set a time
to Towns, to Countries, and single persons, to you and me, when we must be
converted and brought into the state of salvation or never: a point clear
according to the Scripture, however some men dispute it, and the day of grace
is not always so long as the time of life: before thou dye, the Word of God,
the means, may be a dead letter to thee; no man knows the length of this day of
grace, how long the door will stand open to him; but this is certain, the more
of the glass is run out, the shorter is behind; the longer day of grace England
has seen and past, the shorter the day that is to come: And therefore let
these monitors strike and prevail with you: The one is Luke 13. 25. where our
Savior, as elsewhere, inculcates this point: When once the master of the house
has shut the door, then if you knock, he shall say I know you not: from which
place it is plain that there is a time when the door is shut, and will stand
open no longer: And then you may Cry to God for mercy and Salvation: But you
see the answer that will be made, Depart, be gon^ I will not own you nor know
you, because when the door of grace stood open, you came not in: The other is
Heb. 12, 15. 17. I take clear places because its somewhat a quarrelled point:
Beware, look diligently, mark you, lest any fail of the grace of God: for you
know that when he ( Esau) would have inherited the Blessing, he was rejected,
and found no place for repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears. A
Place worthy out sad and serious meditation: he found no place for repentance:
I confess learned men with whom sometime I have gone in the exposition of this
place, say he found no place for the repentance of his Father: he could not
find means to make his Father repent for bestowing his blessing on his younger
son; yet truly it may well and conveniently be expounded, He found no place for
his own repentance, though he sought it very carefully: the Gift is gone from
thee, thou have lost thy time; And though thou Blubberest and Cryest to me,
with doleful tears, I cannot help thee: And therefore the Best counsel I can
give any man in this point, is this: Work out your Salvation while God works,
make hay while Sun shines, Somewhat like to that, Phil. 2. 12. Work out your
Salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God that works in you both to
will and to do: Giving the Reason from Gods working, that we should work: lest
God that offers his Grace, and stretches out his hand should pull it in again,
after his long suffering and waiting, and offer no more: And learn to know your
day before it be lapsed: for the lapse of this day is Fatal: I, may some say,
that's worth the knowing.

Object. But how shall I do that?

Answ. 1 Pet. 2. 2.
First do ye find a prizing of and an Appetite to the sincere milk of the word,
that you may grow thereby? that's a sign that you are newborn babes; the Child
that cries to suck, is not dead: look for this thirsting appetite.

Secondly, If the spirit of God strive with you still, Convincing and
reproving: are your hearts often Convict of secret sins? if unfaithful in your
calling, you find no quiet, its a sign God has not done with you: for while
the spirit strives its a day of Grace: My spirit shall not always strive with
man, Genesis 6. 3.

Thirdly, Do you find God making a thorny hedge about you ways? and does it
stand, and is not pulled up? is there a restraint that a man cannot run out but
his Conscience pricks him? And when ever he sins in commissions, or omissions,
the thorny hedge is still goreing and pricking him. Hosea 2. 6. I will make a
thorny hedge, that thou shall not find thy path, not find Content in sin: an
Evident sign the door of grace is yet open.

Lastly, Do you find pulsations, beatings, knockings? does any body rap at the
door still, as they have done? behold, says God, I stand at the door and
knock, Rev. 3. 20. if any man will open, I will come in and sup: this is an
admirable sign: the invitation of God holds out still, motion upon motion,
beseeching upon beseeching: the knocker at the door is seldom quiet: by these
you may know your day of Grace; and therefore I say, Call for the bellows while
there is fire; Blow the sparks which lie in the Embers, and not all dead, blow
them up; For if the sparks die, if God call in his spirit from striving with
you, you shall blow among the dead ashes in vain. Oh the misery of man that
does not know his time! especially the time of his visitation as Jerusalem! For
whereas the swallow and the stork do know their time, yet in the 9. or 12. ver.
man knows not his time: and therefore they are snared in an evil time: and
Chap. 8. 6. because to every purpose there is time and judgment, if man hit
the time, well and Good: but mark says he, because man does not know his time,
take the nick, therefore the misery of man is great upon him.

Second proposition, which is a doleful one: that In this day of grace when a
man may take Heaven and Salvation by the Fore-lock, as we use to say, many
times the things belonging to his eternal peace are hidden from his eyes: which
is by the Apostle made the mark of a lost man. In 2 Cor. 4. 3. if our Gospel
be hid (that a man sees no beauty in it, finds no power) its hid to them that
are lost; in whom the god of this world has blinded their minds, that the
light should not shine into them. And it was the observation of Christ that in
Jerusalems day the things of her peace were now hid from her eyes, Luke 19. 42.
never could blindness have fallen upon her or any man else in a worse time: in
the day of his visitation, when the things of his peace are offered to him! Now
is the day in which as God opens the door widest, so now the devil is most
conversant about the eye, least, faith the Apostle, the light of the glorious
Gospel should shine into them: the devils aim is to pick out the eyes of men:
this he most frequently aims in this day.

Thirdly, Those that either refuse the grace that is offered to them, or fall
quite off from those initials and beginnings thereof which they had Received
(as I showed when I handled the point of Apostasy, they might do:) they bring
themselves by both into a worse condition then such as remain in their natural
estate, blind and without all light; then such, as never had such offers made
unto them. And without all question, you who either stand out against those
offers to refuse them, or desert and relinquish those beginnings of grace that
you have received, no heathen man in the world is in a worse condition then
you; for this Christ also taught, Matthew. 10. 14, 15. Whosoever shall not
receive you nor hear your words, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorah, in the day of judgment then for them. Matthew. 11. 21. we to thee
Chorazin and Bethsaida, Cities of Galilee where Christ walked; It shall be
easier for Tire and Sidon. Heathen Cities shall escape easier then such where
the mighty works of Christ have been showed forth: Oh that men can hear these
things with dull and drowsy ears! does nothing of this sit upon you? It is a
sign that your eyes are hidden in this your day: if the mighty works had been
shown in them, which have been shown in you, they would have repented. And they
have been shown in you, and you repent not: And as this is said of the
recusancy of Grace, the greatest and most vulgar crime among us: so it may be
said of those under the Apostacy of it, in 2 Pet. 2. 21. It had been better
they had never known the way of righteousness, then having known it, to turn
away from the holy Commandment given unto them. Let this bound your wandering
fancies, and afright you from your Apostasy from God; For as the Iron of the
Stethee is the harder for the often knocking upon it: so the heart of man that's
naturally hard, by the often knocking and pressing the word of God upon it, is
made the harder: And if the salt that seasons other things, be in it self
infatuate, its good for nothing; what shall season salt? they that are in this
case, heavier judgment waits on them, and greater guilt is upon them.



First, They are many times Judicially hardened in their resistance; every man's
heart is naturally hard: but every man is not Judicially hardened: as every man
must dye; but every man is not sentenced to dye by the Judge: so there is a
natural hardness and a sentential or a judicial hardness, whereby God himself
hardens the heart of man; every man is not hardened as Pharaoh was: such men's
hardness is their sin and judgment to, both in one: Matthew. 13. 14. there is
the sentence which is repeated three or four times in the New Testament,
hearing you shall hear and not understand: seeing you shall see and not
perceive: and this is the punishment of obduration, and of man's own shutting of
his eyes: and then God seals up his eyes; least they should be converted, says
God, and I should heal them. And it is repeated again in Joh. 12. 40: a
dreadful judgment that goes out against lazy, sleepy, neglectful hearers of
the Gospel; therefore they could not believe, because God has blinded them,
paenally, judicially: thou setest a lock on the door against his grace, and he
sets another lock on the door against thee. In respect of their hardness of
heart, Its said they would not; but in respect of Gods hardening, Its said they
could not: which I persuade my self is a judgment largely extended in our
Church, thought men will not be convinced of it.

Secondly, Therefore, the condition of these persons is very hopeless,
difficult, yea and desperate: there is no hope that the Bellows will do any
good where the fire is gene out, when there remains no spark alive in the heart
of man, there is a high word given of them in Heb. 6. 4. who were as greatly
endowed as most of us, It is impossible to renew them again by repentance; And
such is he that has extinguished his taste: And the Apostle uses a similitude
taken from the earth, that the rain comes often upon, as sermons upon you: and
the fruit it yields, is nothing but briars and thonrs: still they go on in sin,
the marks of a Cursed soil; they are nigh to cursing, whose end is to be
burnt; these are the people that have been purged (by means used) and yet were
not purged; and therefore shall not be purged any more, Ezekiel. 24. 13. take
therefore the grace of God by the forelock; for as they say of time, it may
prove bald behind: and there may be no lock to take hold of; the twig of a tree
that's once dead, never revives again: there may grow others on the same root,
but a blasted bud never revives more; when the master has shut the door, you
may knock in vain; And such as these that have refused the call of God, they
shall in their day (says God) call on me, but I will not answer; they shall
seek me early, and not find me, because in their day of grace I called and they
refused me, Prove. 1, 28.

Thirdly, The neglected talent is taken from them. Matthew. 13. 12. Whosoever
has not, from him shall be taken away that which he seems to have, nay that
which he has. God strips those professors of their parts, that will not admit
the power of his grace into their souls: there shall be taken from them that
which they seem to have: the improvement of Grace, and the keeping it alive, is
the way to increase it, and continue it; But otherwise the kingdom shall be
taken from you, the Gospel shall be taken away, and all the parts and
endowments that you have got together, you shall be stripped stark-naked of them
all: In Mark. 4. 25, 26. the example of this may be seen in the Jewish nation,
and other countries, towns, and people that have been stripped of the word and
Gospel by their undervaluing refusal of the Grace offered unto them in tbeir
day, and the judgment is like the sin: For Christ curses the Barren Figtree
with barrenness, Never fruit grow more on thee: Math. 21. 19.
Oh Let not this curse come on you: consider the dreadful Judgment, the curse
it is called, of the Figtree; No prevention of this, but by making use of your
accepted time, your day of Salvation, without which your house will be left
unto you desolate; Psalm. 69. 13. 2 Cor. 6. 2. Mat. 23. 38.
this is the judgment that flies over nations, and countries, and particular
persons, (I have observed) men sometimes forward hearers of the word of God,
men of good Elevated affections, seeming to be zealous and diligent in duties,
yet afterward when the world has grown upon them, as it is apt to grow upon
you all, then God for the neglect of their talent has come to distrain; and
what has he left behind? truly a kind of Bankrupt profession of Religion,
mouldring away and sinking to nothing; a company of sick professors whose parts
are spent, and many times they grow sottish and stupid; their parts, that which
they had, is taken from them; having forgotten says the Apostle, that they
were purged from their old sins, 2 Pet. 1. 9.

Fourthly, they are let alone to fill up the measure of their sins; In this God
deals with you as a physician that leaves a desperate patient to his own
appetite; Give him what he will have, you say, for the physician has left him.
God comes at you no more to humble you, to give you a feeling, a heavenly
thirst or appetite; It is a sore judgment as any is, yet men do not feel it,
when God pulls the bridle off a man's head, and lets him run; he that is filthy,
let him be filthy still; when God does not compass him about with a hedge of
thorns, but lets him alone, Hos. 2. 6. Oh miserable man! In Psalm. 8^. 12. But
my people would not hearken to my word, and Israel would none of me: here is
their sin: So I gave them up to their own hearts lust, and they walked in their
own counsels. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone, Hos. 4. 17. I will not
punish their daughters when they commit adultery, ver. 14. but let them run to
the end of their Teddar: what a misery is this whereof men are unsensible!
this is properly the punishment of the neglect of offered Grace.

Lastly, The grieving of the waiting patience of God, stretching out his hand
all the day long, and waiting on you, beseeching you to come to Christ, to
receive the Lord Jesus: and the answering and embittering it with provocations,
brings forth at last that fearful and irreversible oath of God, at which me
thinks any man that has life and sense in him should tremble, Heb. 3. 11. So I
swear in my wrath that they should not enter into my rest; that as there is an
oath of God made to the heirs of promise to show the immutability of his
counsel, Heb. 6. 17. mark it: so this Oath is made a Bar against the
Salvation of the resisters of his Grace (as it is applied) and does also
signify the immutability of his wrath, that its like the law of the Medes and
Persians that alters not: and therefore fear to outstand the day of grace; For
be you assured that as sunset to one, may be and is sunrise to another: so
the day of grace may arise to another, and yet set to thee: Oh that you would
know and tremble at it: fearing lest you should be at or past the sunset of
this day of grace: and so I have finished the three premises, First, That God
offers Gospel Grace to men seriously and in good earnest. Secondly, It is
natural to corrupt man to entertain this Grace offered with neglect and
resistance. Thirdly, That therefore he is plunged into a sad and miserable
Condition.

The second of which, that its natural to man to entertain this grace offered
with resistance, is that which I am to show the reason of.

The First and the Third, that God offers that Grace, which being resisted,
plunges men into worse condition then ever, affords matter of use to us.

But for the reasons of this resistance, though all reason is for man's
acceptance thereof, yet such is the frame of the heart that it opposes it self
against it, and therefore cannot come to Jesus Christ; the Reasons though they
are manifold, I need not long insist of, having said so much on the point
already; I shall therefore only name a sixfold reason.

the natural temper of the heart of every man which is hard and impenitent, and
therefore called a heart that cannot Repent, Romans 2. 7. a heart of stone,
Ezekiel 36. 27. that is untractable to God and resisting, as an adamant that
resists and dulls the tool that should cut it: the very sun that softens wax,
hardens clay; the means of Grace harden: therefore pray, Oh Lord, take away
this heart of stone according to thy Covenant; for a Broken and a tender heart
is the Gift of God.

The contrariety of the disposition and inclination of the heart of man to
Grace, shows it: for Grace offered, and the heart to which its offered, are as
Contrary as light and darkness, flesh and spirit; and we know in nature that
contraries cannot be reconciled; overcome they they may be, and many times one
is, by the victorious opposite: fire may be extinguished by water: but to make
fire and water agree, cannot be: so may Grace overcome: But the filth of the
heart is unreconcileable, having a contrary center to move unto and rest in.

Grace disturbs the peace of a Corrupt heart, and therefore is resisted. It
takes away the contentment which it finds in lusts and fins: as the stronger
man coming in, Breaks the peace of the strong man armed, and spoils his goods,
Matthew. 12. 29. when the strong man, the Devil, keeps the house, lust is in
peace: But when Christ comes, he disturbs the peace, and spoils the goods, and
that must needs cause dislike in the heart of man. For men would not be
awakened and disturbed: Let me alone, let me enjoy my peace: you shall seldom
see any conversion wrought without a great breach of peace: when a man's peace
is broken, in which he slept upon the Cushion of the devil all his days, its a
great sign that there is power of grace gone forth to make offers, to convince
and bring that sinner in: this is the cause that in defense of its own peace
the heart makes such resistance. A

the servitude of the will in Bondage unto sin; which is not like other
Bondages. A Bondsman is not content in his condition, he would quit himself if
he could, and would be glad to hear news of his redemption: But this is a
voluntary Bondage, and pleases better then a gracious freedom: its the bondage
of the will, and nothing can be more free and willing then that, Titus 3. 3.
serving diverse lusts and pleasures, is the character that the Apostles gives of
a natural state: the man is in bondage, under servitude to lusts and pleasures:
and though a bondsman usually desires freedom, yet this bondage has no such
desires, because it is not a painful irksome bondage: Its like that of a fish
that struggles against being pulled out of the water, because it is his
Element: A bondage whereby the will of man (whatever the Schoolmen say) is
like a Roman Prisoner tied by both arms to two of his fellow prisoners; so is
the will bound by a corrupt Understanding on one hand, and corrupt affections
on the other; so that alas how should this man willingly come to Christ? no
more then a prisoner in bondage can possibly break from his keepers and come to
you.

The heart is filled with Ignorant prejudices against Religion and Grace, which
it looks upon as an enemy that comes to strip it of all contentment, and to
bring it into captivity; he thinks of Religion and all the p^rts of it
otherwise then indeed it is: that it is a morose way, and will take away his
delight; or one thing or other he casts in his mind through the foulness of his
fancy; all the imaginations of the heart being evil, only evil, and that
continually, Genesis 6. 5.

A prepossession or a further possession; For corruption is the first
inhabitant: Every man's head is first taken up with ignorance and hate of God;
and as the first man that is possessour of a Castle will keep it against every
Invader; so man being first engaged in a party by the king of this world, and
put into the command of the Castle of his heart, when Grace comes, and in the
name of God demands a surrendry into the right owners hands, its looked upon as
an invader; And therefore he sets himself to keep it out, because he will hold
to his party; so that grace cannot get admittance till it bring an ejectionem
firmam, to throw out the enemy in possession.

For these and such like Reasons, man strives with God, and by the withdrawment
of grace, God seems to be out-striven with by man; Oh Jerusalem, will thou not
be made clean? when will it once be? Jer. 13. ult. A phrase of speech that
testifies there is a long patience in it.

The uses of the serious offers of Grace, and the misery of those that resist
those offers, are these two.

England, London, thou have had a long day of Grace where the Lord has visited
thee by tendering the things that belong unto thy peace, Christ Jesus to be
known and received: Come forth to this day, this day of grace; for the longer
it has been, the shorter it is; Examine the success and fruit; Oh England,
London, I am loath to speak, though I do not speak it as ominous; Genesis 6. ^.
In the old World when God said the days of man should be one hundred and
twenty years, its not to be understood of man's age, that's but a simple meaning;
But the Days of my Patience toward him; how many did the long suffering of God
gather (all this while I cannot say, but) out of the stood, out of a world of
men! the Apostle Peter observes that which I observe to you, In 1 Pet. 3. 20.
there were but few, that is, but eight persons saved from water in this long
day of grace dispenst to a world of men. therefore Gather your selves together
(not in Congregations and companies) but your thoughts together, oh nation, not
desired, lest the decree bring forth, (for the thing may be decreed) and ye be
as chaff that passes on a day, Zephan. 2. 1, 2. for without all question when
the winnowing day comes for England, there will be many thousands found like
chafe that passes before the wind in a winnowing day; and though you may think
with your selves, that the sun of the Gospel yet shines bright: yet remember
so did the sun shine bright on Sodom the morning that the fire came on it; Genesis
19. 33.
the sun shines bright many times when its very near setting; Oh Lament the
sins of England: we very well know (and its an observation well made) that
Josiah one of the last, was one of the best Kings that ever sat upon the
throne of Judah, 2 King. 33. 3.
for whom was great lamentation, that made an admirable reformation, and entered
into the Covenant with the Lord; a reformation, a nonesuch; there comes in a
bitter Pill after this; Notwithstanding the Lord turned not away from the
fierceness of his anger, because of all the Provocations of Manasseth, 2 Kings
23. 26. There were the sins of his Ancestors. In Deuteronomy you have to deal
with a Jealous God: and in 1 John 2. 18. if men understood the word when they
read it. John gave a true Character of the last times of the Jewish nation:
that's the true meaning of it: and you make use of that Scripture, because you
apply it to the Last day; there are many Antichrists by which you may know it
is the last time: Let us Consider it as a Character that sits too close on us:
one preaches himself Christ: another takes away his Deity. Christ sets a
character of the last times on Jerusalem: This long you are to continue, and
then your day of grace is gone; do you fear least your day of grace be
swallowed up by those multitudes of heretical teachers that swarm among you.
Its true (as the saying is) Now a man may be as holy in England as he will,
without fear of persecution; for holiness sake (that the meaning) and truly I
may well say (for it must be balanced;) a man may be as negligent as he will,
as wild in his opinions, without fear of giving an account or coercion; and
were it not for the goodness of servants (and I beseech you in your places
abuse not the common liberty you might take) a master could be no master of his
house, nor could not undertake Joshua his undertaking: I and my house will
serve the Lord; Josh. 24. 1^.
nor keep his sheep out of Rotting pastures: except the conscience, the heart
be principled in orthodoxal and Godly ways of truth. You read in the New
Testament that the masters influence on his house in matters of Religion was
great; such a one baptized, and all his house: what consequence in that! why
that by example, instruction or power, one way or other, did work them to come
to the same bonds of Religion with themselves: The Lord grant that you may see
the day grace, that in it, those that have power may exhort the people under
their roofs to day, while Its called to day, least they be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin.

word and day of grace. I shall name some places; and by the way this point is
mightily tended to in the epistle to the Hebrews, which was written purposely
to stir up the Jews that were running into by-ways, to hold fast the
profession of the Gospel; the first place is that Heb. 2. 3. wherefore having
heard this doctrine, we ought to give the more diligent heed least at any time
we let them slip: (like Riddle dishes that hold not water put into them) for if
the law had punishments for sin, how shall we escape, if we, etc. meaning This
is the last pull you have for the salvation of your souls, the last draw that
ever you shall make: for your souls are damned by the law, but yet you may
live: this is the last lot that falls; if you neglect Salvation, so great
salvation, (there lies the sting of the words) how shall we escape! St Mark
lays down the tenor of the Gospel, he that believes not, Mark 16. 1^.
shall be damned: which is as peremptory speech as a man finds ordinarily in
the law, and more peremptory: and John Baptiss (which is a place also mistaken)
speaking of the Jewish state in Matthew. 3. 10. tells them, Now your Savior is
come to preach the Gospel, look to it, your time is at an end, your destruction
is nigh: after the Gospel is come, and refused, Now the Ax is laid to the root
of the tree, Cut it down: And consider that place, Heb. 4. 1. let us fear least
having a promise made us of entering into rest, any of you should seem to come
short of it: a place full of sweet meditation: as the Jews when they went out
of Egypt, went on a promise of a rest in Canaan, and yet came short of it: so
may we fear, etc. me thinks the heart of men should be pierced with these
Scriptures. And Heb. 12. 14, 15. looking diligently least any man fail of the
Grace of God, when preached to him, he neglects it, refuses it, makes light of
it, as he did who was invited to the marriage of the Kings son: And in Heb. 3.
12. take heed (oh take heed) least there be in axy of you an evil heart of
unbelief to depart from the living God: that your unbelief do not carry you
away to continue in this resistance of the Grace of God: Let not the day of
grace be a day of provocation: But exhort one another daily, while it is called
to day.

There are two Motives whereby I would move this point unto you, and then
dismiss it; for still there will be backwardness: Oh that our Lord Jesus would
work a miracle on the dry land!

Thy particular day of grace wherein it is offered to thee, may not be so long
as the day of the nation, nor so long always as the day of your lives:
Understand me right: It may be, but is not necessarily so* Its true, he that,
is joined to the living, of him there is hope; we that know not Gods
dispensations, may hope the Best: and its probable that where God continues his
Gospel, there is something yet to do; there all are not come in while he sends
his servant to Bid his guests: yet your hearts may be hardened through
unbelief, and thy eyes may be sealed; And though men may hope till the eleventh
hour, yet thou may be under the irreversible oath of God: and though he may
send his servants to invite others, yet those that were invited and did not
come, he will invite them no more, Matthew. 22. this many times comes to pass. To
make a general rule is hard, and I will not venture on that; but this I say, it
may be sunrise with others, when sunset with thee: and therefore I pray
embrace the day of your visitation, least it prove not so long as you expect.

When thou would, after this day of grace is past, thou shall not; God will
laugh at your calamity; they shall cry, and I will not hear them, Prove. 1. 26.
when Esau would have inherited the Blessing, he did it not, Heb. 12. when the
master has shut the door, if thou knock, it is in vain; No man can come to me
except drawn: what do you think these things to be only skar-crows! they will
be found one day to have some meaning in them; therefore take the wind while it
blows; say, Lord, I bless thee; yet I feel sense and have thirst; hear thee
knock; yet I have taste and appetite: Oh let not these sparks die in me; let me
take thy offer before thou past in thy hand and hold it out no more; Its true
while there remains these knockings, God is not gone from the door; But alas
its a very sad thing to think that men should conceive they have power to come
and take the offer when they please. Why may some say,

Object. Will not God be found always when man seeks?

Answ. Yes verily: for so Hezekiah speaking to as lost a people as could be, 2 Chronicles. 30. 9. God is gracieus and ^^rciful, and will not turn his face from
you, if you return to him. But qui dat poenitenti veniam, non dat peccanti
poenitentiam, he that gives pardon to the penitent when he does repent, he does
not always give repentance to the sinner: And there (if you well observe it)
lies the knot, Heb. 6. 4. Its impossible (says he) to renew such a man again
by repentance: he speaks nothings of pardon that will follow, but speaks to the
grace of repentance: and have you power in your own hands? Its impossible to
renew them again; such men may knock at the door, may seek the Blessing, may
cry in calamity, for every man may desire to be out of hell, and to be happy,
when alas he has not so much grace as sinc^^ly to desire Grace; But then may
some say to me;

Object. Help us to some means to retrive the day of grace! I have lost it, I
have outstood my time: the day of grace is shut against me.

Answ. There are means for a man that has some spiritual life in him, that is
fallen into desertion, to recall the spirit and blow up the motions: to recover
him as it were out of a swound to life again; for rubbing of a man that has
life in him, will recall life to the outward parts; But if you rub a dead man
all day long, you find no life; a poor dejected soul that has some sparks of
grace in him, may have life blown out of the embers; but if it be dead at
heart, quite gone and extinct; that's another case.

If a man have through the natural resistency of his heart stood against Grace
forty years together, for they have grieved me (says God) Forty years, yet
notwithstanding there may be possibility of the conversion and life of this
man. else Gods Elect should not be saved, who frequently* resist; which is but
a resistance natural, that's made by the obdurate hardness of their own hearts;
and they are not under the seal of the Irreversible oath of God; But after that
the oath of God is gone out against a man, and the deadly seal is stamped on a
soul, that has so often, and so long, and with such provocations resisted the
arm, the wo^k and offer of grace; to prescribe means to help up such a man
again, is to pres^^be Physic for a dead man, or to call back the day after
sunset wihch I cannot do: and they say (how properly they speak I will not
inquire) that Christ himself did not die for the sin of final Impenitency, for
that sounds like a contradiction. And therefore Beloved in the Lord, carry but
this from this sermon; a preventive fear and trembling that's a preservative
from the danger; from which there appears to me no restorative. If you look for
restoratives after God has sealed up the eyes for grieving of his patience, it
is in vain; But if you will have a preventive or preservative from the danger,
why then to day, while it is called to day, come in, lest you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin; and so I have handled the three things
Premised.

No man can; And that shall be for the inquiry,

Whether the Elect of God, whom he has appointed and purposed to bring to
Salvation, be naturally of the same disposition, and have in them the same
spirit of opposition to grace offered as others have?

In handling of which I shall briefly lay down five Propositions, as that which
shall make an end of this point.

The motions, incitements, the knockings at the door, afforded by God in the
ministry of the word, are neglected and resisted for the present by the elect
of God as well as others: (I mean the elect in their present natural estate:
for their hearts are as hard and stony; even digd out of the same quarry as any
others:) And God we know does not choose any because they were, but that they
might or should be holy, In Ephesians. 1. 4. which shows that holiness is not the
cause but the fruit of Gods election. Neither does the purpose of God though it
be for everlasting salvation, while it is in his own breast, make any change in
the Elect, as says the rule of School, Praedestinatio nihil ponit in
Praedestinato, Gods ordaining for life makes no alteration for present in those
that are ordained, until it come to calling according to purpose: as
notwithstanding our Saviors purpose to raise Lazarus unto life, yet Lazarus
for the present lay as dead as other men not raised, until the time, and that
power that quickened him, was put forth: Israel in Egypt was never more free,
notwithstanding Gods purpose of an afterward deliverance which he did intend
unto them, till Moses the deliverer came: Paul while he was an elect vessel not
called, was never the more holy for that, until the time of his conversion
came. For Election is unto the means as well as to the end; which it could not
be if holiness should precede: For though there be a holiness before the End,
in regard of execution: you have your fruit unto holiness, and the end Eternal
life, Romans 6. 22. yet there is no such thing before purpose and decree; Elect
through the sanctification of the spirit unto obedience, 1 Pet. 1. 2. And
therefore the Scripture constantly gives the natural character of the Elect of
God, the same as non-elect: there is a double Character given of them: a
personal, and a natural: the personal Character is many times worse then that
of others: they confess that I was a Persecutor, a Blaspheamer, chief of
sinners, 1 Timothy 1 13, 14. In their natural character they are described as of
the same temper, lump and mould with other men. Among whom we also had our
conversation in times past, and were by nature Children of wrath as well as
others, Ephesians. 2. 3. And we our selves were also sometimes foolish,
disobedient, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3. 3. For otherwise these
three things would follow thereupon.

First, The mystery of comparative Election, why Jacob and not Esau, would
cease: for the reason being open and known, voideth the mystery.

Secondly, The distinction and difference of one man from another would be of
man himself.

Thirdly, Ephesians. 2. 10.
The production of Grace would not be de novo, by Creation. You are his
workmanship Created in Christ Jesus; but would rather be as the Bellows that
begers fire where there were sparks before, then the putting in new sire where
there was none before.

The deserters of grace by them received, and the resisters of Grace by God
offered, are Justly deserted by God, and the offers in time taken from them;
The deserters of Grace received, I mean that which they call common grace, are
such as either do put out the sparks, or let them dye and go out; Such as the
Foolish Virgins whose lamps went out; Mat. 25. 8.
or as the two Grounds, the stony, Mat. 13. 6, 7.
and thornie, whose green blade was blasted or choked; And such we have many
amongst us, that for a time and season do put forth blossoms; they have
Enlightnings, Convictions, and do pretend great affections; some sense of sin
at some time, especially some desires of Deliverance, and are like flowers in a
waterpot, that will keep fresh and maintain a greeness for a time; but as the
Scripture says, they have no root and so they wither and are extinguished.

Object. But you will ask me, What order or tendency have these workings, unto
regeneration.

Answ. These are common to the Elect, and non-Elect, and they are Precedaneous
and Previous works of grace toward regeneration, being initial things that by
the management of God do come to some effect in Gods elect, but yet in
themselves are such as may be suffocated and choked; for God does not usually
convert any of his people by way of sudden Ethusiasms, as if one should think
of life put into a stone or stock, as if in an instant a stone should change
into a man, a heart of stone immediately change to a heart of flesh; But God
moulds and prepares the heart by the ministry of the word and excitations of
the spirit, as it is said of Peter's hearers in Acts 2. 37. they were pricked in
their hearts, and made to enquire what they should do to be saved. For as it is
in natural Generation, there are many previous dispositions that go before the
induction of the form, which gives it the specifical Being; so are men brought
to a spiritual nativity unto regeneration, not by a sudden strait: God does
work by these previous workings, and in the way of his administrations he does
impart certain Initials or beginings of grace unto men.

Object. 2. If this be that the men in whom these are wrought, may desert,
extinguish, and fall off; why then will some say, is this so culpable a thing
to quench these, that have no regenerating life in them.

Answ. These are they against which the Scripture pours out so much wrath, and
declares so great danger in this case to such as shall desert, forsake, or
extinguish these workings of initial beginnings, as in that phrase Heb. 10.
ult. my soul shall have no pleasure in them that withdraw to perdition; not
because these have any root at the present, for so our Savior describes them
in Matthew. 13. 21. but because the things in themselves have a tendency to
further ripening and perfection; as the egg to the Chicken, the Bud to the
fruit, and the embryo to the Child, not yet actually perfect, Gal 4. 19. I
travel in pain till Christ be formed in you: In which respect they are said to
know the way of Righteousness, 2 Pet 2. 20, 21. And for this reason it is so
culpable, because they do destroy the fruit in the bud. But then may some say;

Object. 3. This renewing and converting grace comes immediately from God, and
does not require any previous or precedaneous workings.

Answ. The comparison of natural generation will give some light, what to say
of this: for suppose the rational soul be infused, not merely traduced, poured
in from heaven by the hand of God: yet notwithstanding there is use of
marriage, and many preparatory dispositions are required, tending to the
generation of a man: so that you may rightly conceive here if grace be (which
yet I dispute not) the begetting of a man to God, there may notwithstanding be
required many previous dispositions tending thereunto: which that it is so, may
be evident to you by the means and instruments that God uses in Conversion: the
instruments are men, the means are the ministry of the word; I have begotten
you by the Gospel, says the Apostle in 1 Cor. 4. 15. And if God was pleased
immediately (which I know not that any of you Expect, and should be sorry you
should be deluded so) I say immediately to convert, and suddenly to snatch a
man out of his unregeneracy, without conviction foregoing, without knowledge
and sorrow for sin, desire of pardon and deliverance, then neither would there
be need of the ministry of men, nor word preached: neither need the Minister
rightly divide the word, as the Apostles phrase is: that is, plowing down the
ridges of the law, or laying up the furrows by the Gospel preaching; this grace
therefore is that which may be deserted, and these offers of grace are many a
time resisted, and are by many finally resisted to the great danger of their
souls, and the loss of them. And therefore it is just with God to desert these,
and to withdraw the offers, as indeed he does, so as now after all they reject
and hate the truth, and are given up, and let alone to go on in their lusts: as
the Lord says, Israel would have none of me: therefore I gave them up, etc.
Whence men become hardened in their security, to rot and be stupefied in their
sins, and at last come to that which the Scripture calls the worm that never
dies, in the world to come, which above all other things as I conceive, grows
and breeds out of the neglect of grace offered: the refusing and recusancy of
the Lords stretched-out hand: this this sharpens the teeth of that worm that
will bite them the sorest, and sting them the worst, and upbraid them with this
above all: the neglect, the refusal of grace given or offered.

Those whom God has affected with some beginnings of grace, he does not
usually desert nor desist to promote them in the way toward Conversion, until
either by their voluntary neglect, or by the repulse of that Initial Grace of
God, he be by them first forsaken and cast of: and this is the mirror of the
kindness and mercy of God to poor men, that when he has begun to woo, he
follows them with kindness, and calls not in his Jewels or rings, until he be
by the party woed, denied, and repulsed: take the talent from him, says our
Savior: but it is not said till the man had hidden it in the ground, Matthew.
25. 28. and this seems to be given as the reason, in Prove. 1. 24. often quoted;
I have called, and ye refused, I also will laugh at your destruction, and mock
when your fear comes. And this is also the reason of Gods forsaking, 2 Chronicles.
24. 20. Because ye have forsaken the Lord, he has also forsaken you. And Psalm
81. 11. My people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me:
so I gave them up etc. God may set up a candle or Candlestick to his people, or
that Nation ^t pleasure: It is a work of grace, not of justice nor of injustice
to deny it: but having afforded these means and Ordinances for Conversion, it
is not ordinary: and there is no Scripture teaches that he takes away the aids
or subsidiaries of exciting grace, or the help given until he has been
forsaken, and there be a voluntary casting of him off until as the text says,
there be no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Oh that the length of the patience and
goodness of God might awaken your hearts, to take Grace by the Forelock when it
is coming toward you: because opportunity and season going from you may be
bald.

The Elect whom God has chosen to salvation, for their neglect and
undervaluing the motions and excitations of Grace, may be justly left and
deserted, though God does not deal with them stricto Jure, nor finally leave
the pursuit of them. I speak not of the grace of God in the act of Conversion,
that is victorious over the heart of man, as has been largely handled before:
but those overtures, those precedaneous workings I now speak of. If you
consider the Elect of God in the state of grace, that is the called, even they
are often wanting to the grace that is offered: there is a great deal of
neglect, undervaluing and contempt that abounds in them. And so for a time in
some particulars they are left: For a small moment have I forsaken thee: I have
hid my face from them, Isaiah 54. 7, 8. So it is said of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.
31. God left him to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart. And
My beloved, says she, Cant. 5. 6. was withdrawn, I sought him but could not
find him. But this is done in a way of discipline: for if the Lord should deal
in strict Justice with his elect, even for the neglect and resistance of grace
after conversion, how should they be able to stand before him? But much more is
this true of them in their natural state: they are as opposite as others, and
therefore they may also be left: and so they are, but not finally, but for
Conviction: And the Lord, I am confident, convinces most men before he converts
them: by giving them such offers as being left to their own management would
come to nothing; they would see that they have no more power of themselves then
others. And therefore as an Angler pulls back his bait many times, to quicken
the appetite of the F^sh to take hold of it: so many times God deals. For he
does not use to take us short at the first nay; and O the goodness of God that
does not! he that said, Matthew 21. 29. I will not, afterward repented and went:
if we should be taken short at our first refusal, all of us should rue it. And
therefore it is said, The Lord of the Vineyard sent servants, and he sent other
servants: and he sent yet again, ver. 37. which shows that God does not use to
take his people at advantage, but sends servants after servants, and the Son
after that: and yet most justly may leave us at the first.

That such is the special mercy of God, and his grace unto the men of his
purpose, that though they do repulse this enlightening and exciting grace, yet
he never leaves them fully nor finally: but continues to urge and pursue them,
until he have subjugated them to his grace, and placed them in the state of
his Adopted. I say, those that he means to save, that are ordained to life,
though they have repulsed: (you know it by your own experience) blown out
enlightnings and convictions, and when they are wounded, run to the herd, as a
wounded Deer to shift off the Arrow: yet finally God will not leave them: Ezekiel.
20. 37.
I will cause you, says God (speaking to a people rebellious enough) to pass
under the rod: not of correction, but of propriety and interest: A Metaphor
taken from a man telling his sheep out of the Fold with a rod in the morning as
they go out. And I will bring you into the bond of the Covenant: For the Elect
of God are as a child; if his arm be broken or out of joint, he would not have
it touched, but let alone so it might have ease. Is it not so with us? would not
we be at ease and quiet? Do not we cry and labor that our sores may not be
touched? but are better pleased to be left in our security, and natural
condition: yet God will follow us with conviction after conviction; breaks our
peace, that it shall not cement or be soadered: Make a thorny hedge about us
that we shall not find our path: Until being convict, we come to that, I will
return to God, or my first husband; for then it was better with me then now.
The Lord hews them and moulds their hearts, till of unwilling he makes them
willing: and have brought them as those that are in a Castle, whose strong hold
is beaten down, they are forced to surrender to mere mercy, upon the Victors
own terms. So the Lord will force his elect. All that the Father has given to
me, shall come to me, John 6. 37. And do it for thy Name sake, for our
backslidings are many, Jer. 14. 7. This is the word, and may be spoken even by
the elect of God. And if this were not, that God should not take the work into
his hand, he might stretch out his hand all the day long and find little but
gainsayings and contradictions: no effectual calling could be: there would be
no such thing as filial adoption: the very election of God would be frustrate.
This was the remnant or end that I had to deliver on this point, before I came
to the General Uses of all.

There are two things that follow from what I have now said, as two branches
from one stemm; viz. the Justifying of God, and the magnifying of grace: the
one makes humble, the other thanksul: for the one Daniel was eminent, Dan. 9.
5. To us belongs confusion, for we have rebelled against thee: to thee
belongs righteousness. The other eminent in Paul, 1 Cor. 15. By the grace of
God I am that I am. Learn these two lessons that are of great use in Practical
Religion: Humility to justify God that might have cast you off, and laid you
aside in the crowd with other men. And the magnifying of this grace, whereby he
has brought you out in despite of your own stubberness: And so much for the
opposition of man to grace offered.

No man can come to me. And First,

The true Test of sound and Christian Doctrine in this point of man's
Conversion: That both the Preacher of this point, and the Hearer of it may cut
by this thread that our Savior has set forth in this text. And it is this,
That in the conversion of man, the power of God and the freeness of his grace
be magnified, and the power or causality of man himself b^ decryed: For so the
Text, No man can come, except my Father draw him. This is the test: But the
touchstone that tryes other metals, who shall try it? how shall it be made
appear, that this Doctrine is indeed the true test? For that I will give you
three Reasons.

First, Because this Doctrine is consonant to the scope of Go which as it
suggests matter of glorying to the sinner in himself confounded with shame and
lost, and never leaves him till it has brought him to a state of glorying from
his nothingness: so it places this glorying in God only, not self: as the
compating two places of Scripture does witness: the one is 1 Cor. 1. ult. That
he that gloryeth may glory in the Lord: and Ephesians. 2. 9. Not of works; for this
Reason, least any man should boast. Which two places do show the scope of
Gospel Doctrine: And there cannot be a better test of Doctrine, then the
consonancy of it with the main scope of the Gospel: that is, with the Analogy
of Faith, Romans 12. 6. For if in expounding a particular Scripture, a man seem
to cut out one part of the garment unproportionable to the body, he seems to
have mist his measure, and as it were to make a monstrous garment: For the
scope of the Scripture is the measure and test whereby any particular is to be
measured: therefore this must needs be a good test.

Because all the gracious works of God from first to last, from election
according to purpose, to salvation in the Kingdom of heaven; I say every one of
these works upon, and in, his Elect to bring them to salvation, do all conspire
and tend unanimously to this great end, the praise of his free and powerful
grace, Ephesians. 1. 6. He has Predestined and Adopted us that we might be to
the praise of the glory of his grace. And what, are the other attributes of God
past by in silence? No* But grace is like Varnish, no color of it self, but
serves to set off all other colors. Wisdom, Power, Mercy and Love are included
or set out by Grace: And therefore the praise of grace is the praise of all:
for God does not work for the exaltation of man's power or pride, but to the
praise of his own grace.

Because we find the confessed experience of Gods people avouching and
attesting this: the experience of Paul that great trumpet of grace, 1 Cor. 9.
16. I have nothing to glory of; and in 1 Cor. 12. 11. I am nothing; For Gods
second Church is built as Gods second Temple (the second Church, give me leave
so to say, I mean the Gospel Church) not by might, nor by power, but by my
spirit. And they cry grace grace unto it, Zach. 4. 6, 7. as that which was
called the second Temple was meaner built to outward show, then Solomon's
Temple; and was built not by might, nor by power, but with much weakness of the
people returned from Captivity, and opposed of all hands. So is the Gospel
state of the Church built of a people returned from the captivity of Hell and
death; not by the might and power of man, but by the Spirit of God; And
therefore he that made the arrogant Answer to that Question the Apostle
propounds, Who made thee to differ from another, saying, Ego me ipsum discerno,
I discriminate my self, seems to be mistaken in his own Experience, (as
Christians often are) or not to own the confessed experience of Gods Converts,
as Paul and others that have been humbled out of themselves, to acknowledge the
free grace of God. For I think we shall rarely find a man on his deathbed to
be a Papist that is enlightened; because then he finds he flies out of himself
to Gods alone mercy; Nor seldom find a man in point of conversion to be a
Pelagian: because he acknowledges it to be the Free grace of God that brings
him both down and up: Down, to bring down his pride, to throw down his strong
holds; And Up again, by raising him from a state of nothing. And therefore as
the Apostle John in his time, when there were many deceivers gone forth into
the world, as there are in the days wherein we live, did give Christians a
test, or mark by which they might prove the spurious, or the true: whether they
brought sealed measure with their Doctrine, yea or no. And that test was the
coming of Christ in the flesh: (for that was then commonly denied by the spawn
of Gnostics) saying, If any come to you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive
him not, 2 John ver. 10. And so most commonly all along in the Scripture, where
any dangerous error is confuted, you shall find in that confutation a test
given, a touchstone whereby that Doctrine that is Erroneous may be tried: So in
this point of Conversion of man, and discriminating grace, if any man blow the
Bladder as well as the Trumpet to make him swell, and sill him full of Pride
and Self; building God upon man, and not man upon God; Let this that I have
said be the test at which you examine that Doctrine. For as the letting fall of
the string of a Vial or Lute too low, or the straining it too high, spoils the
harmony: And as the (...), Rom 12. 6. the proportion is changed by adding a
Unite unto, or by substracting it from any number; so in this point of
converting grace, if the denial of man's power be drawn to deny man's duty: or
the Calling for Duty in Scripture, be drawn so high as to exalt man's power, the
proportion and Harmony is spoiled in both. After this animadversion, and after
such a test of Doctrine, here found out and commended to you, let me give you
warning how to apply this sealed mete-wand to the Doctrine that you hear: And I
would that there were not so many instances as might be given, that the
Iniquity or Necessity of these times does require to be spoken unto.

First, That Doctrine by this test sounds not clear, but seems to have a crack
in it, That under pretense of duty does conclude and advance man's power: and
the reason is plausible with those men that have learning enough, that whereas
it is said, in Ezekiel. 18. 30. 31. Repent and make you a new heart, and a new
spirit, and cast away your transgressions; for why will you die? and from Jer.
4. 4. Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and be not stiff-necked; take away
the foreskin of your hearts: from these commands does conclude that man has
power to do it; or else says carnal Reason, why is he commanded? they that do
make this conclusion, let them be examined by this Established test of Doctrine;
and having hung the scales, let us now weigh the point: this is true, What God
in his law requires, that the law supposes a power to be or to have been,
because the law of God does not command things absolutely impossible, to which
there never was power given; and therefore man's disability to perform any
command arises accidentally when he has disabled himself: And this is called
by the Apostle; and the cause of it shown, in Romans 8 8. the Impossibility of
the law, and that is through sin and corruption that has Invaded man, and
disabled him unto obedience; But now in case of this disability, the law that
requires the duty, does not argue a power in you, but it does drive disabled
man to the remedy, and that is the free grace of God, and; therefore he that
calls on thee for repentance, does himself give it: 2 Timothy 2. 25. he that bids,
Make you a new heart, does promise it, I will give them a new heart, Ezekiel. 36.
27. He that says Circumcise your selves, says also I will circumcise your
hearts, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The command shows what man owes to God, and what must be
in him if he will not dye: and this drives him to the remedy, the free and
gracious promise of God, to work this in him: the measure of his duty is not
the measure of his power: as a man measures not his worth by what he ows; no
man will be so absurd; and yet men will measure their power to repent, to turn
to God, to believe in Christ by what indeed is their duty to do, which is (to
say no more) a false measure.

Secondly, Nor are they to be heard that from qualifications of fitness do
argue and conclude for qualifications of worthiness or merit: observe, for you
will not understand the answer to these, except you understand where the Error
lies: the law uses this word (worthy) for a dueness of the reward of debt; that
that has some proportion to the reward, when the reward is of debt, as the
Apostle describes it: but the Gospel dictionary uses the word (worthiness) for
the fitness of a man to receive the reward of grace and promise; and therefore
in the Gospel they are usually pronounced worthy, that are fitted and made meet
for to receive Christ or the promise: as the worthy receiver at the Lords
table, is not he that is meritoriously worthy, but he that is meet, that is
qualified answerably to the Sacrament, that has in him such qualifications as
are answerable to the body and blood of the Lord there exhibited: and so you
may read works meet for repentance: Matthew. 3. 8.
and so (...) and (...) to count worthy and make meet, 2 These 1. 11. and Col. 1
12. are one and the same; the Papists, and Bellarmine himself that sought as
far for that as any of them can search, can hardly find in all Scripture,
Hebrew and Greek, any thing that sounds toward merit of Salvation: but
worthiness of fitness, that is, an answerableness to the duty enjoined, or
mercy promised; he has made us meet to be inheritors: this you may find
everywhere, without which no man can be saved: and therefore to say this bottle
is fit to hold such a proportion of wine, and worth so much money, are quite
contrary sayings; the one relating to the capacity, the other to the metal of
it: so to say, the thirsty, the weary, the laden, are in a fit capacity for
Christ and the promises, by qualification of emptiness; and therefore they have
qualifications of merit and worthiness, is altogether absurd and inconsequent:
and if any among us, as there may be some that cannot digest these words
qualifications toward Conversion, etc. (a point that in the process of this
discourse I shall touch upon) will but clear their own mistakes, there remains
no quarrel upon the word at all: for we mean not meritorious qualifications,
not any thing meritoriously conducing to man's conversion, but meet and fit
preparatives unto grace and glory, such precedaneous workings as judgment, sin
and the law have discovered and preached to men, that they by being st^ng by the
fiery Serpent, may be fitted to look up to the serpent on the pole, the Lord
Jesus: In a word, they are qualifications of the subject recipient, not merit
of the thing to be received, that they may receive the Grace as an empty bottle
does receive the liquor.

Thirdly, That doctrine, by this test, will be found leavened, that makes the
ruinous condition of man less then it is: for then consequently it will follow
that the power of God in his restoration is less also: as for instance, if
Lazarus be but sick, his recovery is less then a resurrection: If you make man's
case better, so as sickness is above death, so far as man's power is made
greater in themselves, so far is the power of God made less then it is:
extremes on both hands are to be avoided, in lessening the freeness or the
power of man, or in the greatning of it; I will not so decry the will of man in
his conversion, that I will deny it to be freer in that act, then it is in any
action of this life, then it is to eat and drink, etc. but whence comes that
freedom? who has unshackled, nay who has revived this will? that is God; The
will of man is not so to be cried down as to make him a brute, Luther.
nor yet so to be advanced as to make him more then a Servant; They who make
man who is dead in sin, Ephesians. 2. 5.
to be like the man in the parable half-dead, Luke 10. 30. (which to answer
that place by the way, was enough to show who was his neighbor; It was enough
for the scope of our Saviors Parable, to suppose the man left half-dead:) do
unawares wrong the quickening virtue of Christ: You has he quickened who were
dead in trespasses and sins: Ephesians. 2. 1.
he that makes a man less then dead, makes the quickening power that converts
him, less then a resurrection: he that makes the captivity and bondage of a man
less, does thereby make his freedom less too; because these do follow one upon
another; bondage and freedom, captivity and liberty: as those Papists that free
the virgin Mary from all sin, do also remove Christ from being her Savior; his
name shall be called Jesus, because he saves his people from their sins; if
there be no sin, from whence is the salvation? if there be no salvation, from
whence is he called a Savior? as therefore I would not set works in the place
of Justification, which is Christ's place; so neither will I remove them from a
necessary place in sanctification and salvation, for they have a necessary
place: but not a place to work it; for we must be Gods workmanship before we
can do Gods work; the Apostle makes that plain, when he gives that as a reason;
Ephesians. 2. 10.
nor in the place of Justification; for that as I said, is Christ's place; nor
as a motive to move God to justify a sinner; for that is free grace; nor as
the condition and instrument: for that is the place of faith; yet they have a
place in sanctification afterward, as the fruit of the tree, though* not as
the root; for a cipher that in the first place of a figure is nothing, may in
the second place add a value: so that which in point of merit and causality, is
nothing, yet if there be first grace, a work of regeneration, and
sanctification wrought in the heart, then I say there is something to be said
of this obedience: and as I will not give to man the working of the will and
the deed, so neither will I deny the working out of Salvation to be man's act;
and therefore those that say, Christ repents for me, and Christ believes for
me, as if so be it were not man that believes, and the sinner that repents,
they speak a kind of nonsense; the text I am upon, teaches the contrary, where
he tells them the drawing is Gods; the coming is man's act and duty, and
therefore its not to be said Christ believes and repents for me; for I must
repent and believe, or I am lost, and lie in my lost estate. The duty and act
of faith and repentance are yours; But the grace and power whereby these are
wrought in you, are God's, and therefore the rule here is that the power and
Grace of God be not degraded by the extenuation of man's natural sin and
corruption, but that rather the (...), the much more, as it is said, Romans 5.
17. be given to the abundance of Grace; for if you consider and compare
together man's duty, and Gods power, man's act, and the power of God that works
the will and the deed, rather give the more to God then sin: if sin be
abounding, I would rather say Grace over-abounds; because that is the
favorable side, and gives unto the grace of God more then peradventure some
think to be due to him, that where as abounding may be said of sin, let super
abounding be said of Grace, Romans 5. 20.

Nor will that doctrine abide the due or true test, that under the pretense of
this sole power of God exerted in man's Conversion, does clamorously cry down
all instruments and means, Gospel and Gospel Ministry, under this pretense that
the sole power of man's new creation and conversion is of God; and therefore
hold that as God made this world without tools and instruments, so God shall
and will convert men by his converting grace without means, instruments,
ministry, and the like; And what danger is it to snatch up a piece of a
sentence? for they have heard this doctrine from the orthodox, that man cannot,
he is disabled to believe in Christ, that the power is of God, and have run
away with it, and thence have hatched this fancy, that therefore we need not
look after these means: showing to us that preach, that we had need to use due
Correctives in our preaching; for good medicines without apt Correctives
sometimes breed wind or disease, rather then cure it; so this orthodox doctrine
not rightly Corrected, breeds this fancy, that there is no need of instruments
to work that whereof God has the sole power; These men (I can say no less of
them) will teach God to convert man; Let them teach themselves to stand in the
way and rode of Christ, where he walks and does miracles; Let them stand in the
way of his ordinances. For though I confess, God can convert without ordinances
and means, yet to say that he does so, is as if because he did sometime make a
man at full stature (as Adam) therefore he does so always; And so abolish
marriage which he has instituted for the propagation of mankind; and so because
God can convert man, and bring him to a full autumn and state of grace at
first, that therefore God must abolish his own ordinances instituted for
bringing his people to him; Is it not enough that God has tied us to the use
of Ordinances, where Salvation is to be had, but we must tie God according to
our fancy, either to or from the use of Ordinances? what if God did
extraordinarily without the plough maintain Israel in the wilderness by Manna,
bread from heaven; is therefore God tied to do the same by such extraordinary
means, when they come to their settled Land, where they mow, and sow, and reap
Corn for themselves? this does not follow; Where there are no ordinances to be
had, there God may work extraordinarily: But God is not therefore bound to do
it, neither can we conclude he will do it; let Naaman the Syrian be an
extraordinary example of a man healed by miracle, and those that Christ
converted and healed: what is this to our purpose? God by his mere free will
has chosen this way of Gospel Ministry, and ordained it to be the Power of God
to Salvation, Romans 1, 16. God puts forth a power when he converts a soul: and
he puts forth this power in this way, the Gospel; Its confessed that the vessel
or pipes by which this excellency of power is conveyed, are earthen and
contemptible: But that is de industria, on purpose, 2 Cor. 4. 7. we have this
treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God,
and not of us: the weakness of the vessel does derogate from the power of the
vessel: It was his goodness, and not unto your loss, to teach you by men: for
if God had taught you by Angels that are by nature unsociable with men, it had
not been so well; now God has appointed to bring you to heaven by the ministry
of men like your selves; And in a way surable to man, that is, by word and
doctrine, by counsel, instruction, reason, God will so convince and convert
you, not by insinuating a sudden power into the heart of man: from whence
Ministers are called workers together with God, 2 Cor. 6. 1. and he also is
said to work together with them, Mark. 16. 20. If God and man work together,
what shall we think of them that divide this partnership, this conjunction?

Quest. Oh but you Preach the law! It is the Gospel that Converts!

Answ. You are deceived; we preach Christ when we preach the law, as is plain
when Paul was required by Felix to preach to him the faith of Christ, says the
text, he preached of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, whereat
Felix trembled: was this preaching the Faith of Christ? yea, or else Paul was
deceived; the Reason is, because Christ is the end of the Law for
Righteousness, Romans 10 4. and because by the law, men are concluded under sin,
that the promise, that is the Gospel, might be given to them that believe, Gal.
3. 22. and if so, what dissonancy will you make between preaching of the means
and the end? we are not so mad as to preach Salvation by the law: and when we
preach the Law to you, to wound, it is in order to the promise, and Christ
Jesus: It is not the plungers that trouble the water, that catch the Fish: we
know it is the Net, but the plungers drive the Fish into the net, that they may
be caught: we say the work of Salvation is not by the Law, its the net of the
Gospel whereby men are caught to Everlasting Salvation: But its the terror of
the Law, and the curse under which they are driven into this net: it is the
avenger of blood that pursues with the drawn sword, that makes you fly to the
City of refuge, and therefore there is more of Christ preached in a Sermon that
you call Legal many times then in the vociferations and clamors that silly
people use of Christ, Christ, as they cried Baal, Baal, though you pronounce
nothing but Christ, a hundred times together: and therefore let me charge you
(for that I may have leave to do to those that are under my charge) and exhort
all others, that since faith comes by hearing, since you are born again of the
uncorruptible seed of the word: since his Ministers are in pain, while they go
traveling in their souls till Christ be formed in you: since the Lord many
times in his word honors the instrument in the work of Conversion, with the
honor of doing that which he does by them (St Paul says, I am your father) as
Goliahs sword was honored with the work that David did by it: upon all these
considerations, be not you stricken with this madness, as either to think that
the excellency of power of Conversion is in the box that carries this treasure,
or to divide the treasure from the vessel that you have in it; for then you
lose it: But where then will you have it? But to consider in your serious
thoughts, what those gifts were which Christ gave to his Church on his
triumphal day; a phrase of speech alluding to the Roman triumph; when a Conquer
or came home and had a triumph allowed him by the Senate, he spread his prizes
that he brought home, and gave magnificent gifts; so the Apostle observes that
when Christ ascended and rode in the triumphal Chariot to heaven, he carried
spoils with him, and gave gifts to men; and what were those gifts? Ephesians. 4. 7.
he gave Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers for the gathering
and perfecting of the Saints: or thus (if you will) he gave the Holy Ghost,
which does not only work itself, but makes overseers, Acts 20. 28. and then
works by them, as the instrument is first made, and then wrought with: so the
Holy Ghost makes you overseers, and then works in and by them that are
Ministers made by the Holy Ghost, and therefore despise not means and
instruments: enough is said of that point to wise men.

Fifthly, Nor will that doctrine abide this test, that teaches that man is the
giver, and God the receiver: for the truth is, God is the first giver in all
kinds: make him but first in the work of Calling, Election, Sanctification,
etc. and you cannot be unsound or erroneous in any of these doctrines: but that
doctrine which makes man the giver, and God the receiver, cannot be true; the
reason is, he loved us first, says the Apostle, 1 John 4. 19. You have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you, Joh. 15. 16. and therefore it is said, Romans
11. 35. who has first given to God? and it shall be recompensed to him again;
that is, that has first done or performed any work, that obliges God to
recompense it; those therefore that make man the first lover, the first chuser,
the first giver, they make man the creditor, and God the debtor: and how
unsuitable is it with any modesty and ingenuity to speak so? which of necessity
must be, if you make man first.

Sixthly; Nor does it follow by this test (which is somewhat a difficult point)
that because there is a Covenant made with man, upon conditions of faith and
repentance, therefore these conditions must be performed by one of the
confederates, that is, by man's own power: to confirm this, its said, there was
so much required of Adam, and he had power, and God expected the performance of
the condition made with him; And you know many times it is thus with men; they
expect a mutual performance of Covenants one with another; and they do-in-many
cases think that man has power to perform the condition to which he obliges
himself: and yet sometimes it is otherwise; there cannot a general rule be made
of this; a creditor requires the payment of the sum; yet whether the debtor
pays it of money gotten by his own hand, or borrow it, or it be given him by
some benefactor, is not material; only this is material, that the condition be
performed, and the money paid: so we may say in this point; this is certain,
that the condition required of man, is man's duty, is man's act; and the benefit
of the Covenant is for him that performs faith and repentance: but God requires
not the performance of the conditions by man's own power: for therefore the
Covenant is altered from Do this and live, unto Believe in the Lord Jesus and
thou shall be saved, they are both expressed Romans 10. 5, 9. because man, fallen
man, could not abide such a condition of life as must rest upon his own power
to performance, which was before possible to him while he stood in integrity,
but now is impossible to him in sin: this objection may be further pursued, and
then I confess you make a hard knot of it.

Obj. Still it seems the condition continues impossible; for man by a natural
power cannot perform personal and perfect obedience, neither can he believe,
neither keep the law, nor obey the Gospel, neither perform the condition of
works, nor yet of Faith; and what are we then the better?

Answ. You must distinguish between a natural power, and a power restored by
grace; as to the natural power, there is no more in man to believe in Christ,
then to perform the law: to a natural power both these conditions are
impossible, (let me not offend you in words) for to Do this and live, you do
not pretend to, but to Believe and come to Christ, that you say you can. But
the text says, no man can come to me; Oh that you could but feel this
impotency in your selves; but then the power restored is a power to believe in
Christ, which is not restored to keep the law of works, but unfeignedly to
believe in and love Christ: and this power is given by the drawing of God, to
all that do indeed come to Christ: those that are not drawn, do not come; all
that come are drawn, and empowered to believe: Gods drawing, and man's coming
are, both of one latitude, one measure, one extent; as many as the Lord works
upon and draws, they do come, ver. 45. And those that are not drawn, do not
come, ver. 44. and this I call the restored power, not restored to man to keep
the Law, but to believe in, and receive Christ Jesus. And so the power to
perform the condition of the Covenant, is a restored power: but to perform the
condition of the Covenant of works, there is no power restored: therefore
Austin says, God will not that it should pertain but only to his Grace, that
man should come to him, that being come he should not recede from him. And that
God would not have the condition of this Covenant to be built on man's power of
performance, I prove by three Reasons.

God is pleased that his promise or Covenant should be sure to all the seed:
Romans 4. 16. Therefore it is of faith, that it may be by grace, to the end that
the promise might be sure to all the seed: not to all the world, but to all the
seed; and how unsure it had been, if it had stood and bottomed on man, the
experience of the first man Adam does teach, who though in his integrity, made
shipwreck of all, by defection from it; much more may be said of man under sin,
were he not supported by the power of a better prop, the Mediator; God will
have it sure, to all the seed; And therefore will not establish it on the works
of man, because he betrayed it and brought shipwreck on it at first, and there
shall come a shipwreck on it no more.

Secondly, God does not expect that the conditions should be performed by man;
only calls for it as a duty that I owe, but not as standing in my power: But
God makes promises of the very conditions which he requires; not of the
benefits of the Covenant only, but of the graces of it that they may keep it;
Mark the promises of the Covenant, I will put my Law into their hearts, and
write it in their minds, and they shall all know me, Heb. 8. 10, 11. I will put
my fear into their hearts that they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32. 40. I
will will put my spirit within them, and cause them to walk in my statutes,
Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will take away a heart of stone, and give them a heart of
flesh, Ezekiel. 11. 19. And who will say that these promises are built on any
conditions in man?

Because of this Covenant, Christ is surety, which in the first Covenant was
not: If we deal with a poor or suspected man, we lie hard at him for a surety:
happily we will take a rich man's word. Though there was no surety of the first
Covenant, for Adam had none, yet now there is a surety given that must stand at
stake, and therefore it is said God has made him a Mediator of a better
Covenant, Heb. 7. 22. and this surety-ship of Christ shows that man is not to
be trusted but upon surety. And what undertaking Christ performs, may be seen
in his account he makes of his sheep, John 17. 8. I have manifested thy word
unto them, and they have received it, and have known that I came out from thee,
And believed that thou have sent me: this is an excellent undertaker, and a
good Accountant for his sheep: not one of them is lost, they have received thy
word, they have believed: A rare comfort for all that are Christ's, they are
undertaken for, Christ is accountable for them to God.

7. Lastly, Since the glory of God is thus kept entire, that all things are of
him, through him, to him, Romans 11. ult. and that rectum est index sui and
obliqui, the right line is index of it self, and the oblique or Crooked: Let
whatsoever doctrine that makes not all to be of him, through him, and unto him,
be hence confuted, by this excellent test; as

First, That which makes man a beginner of Conversion, and God a helper of
those beginnings: that affirms assisting, but not preventing Grace; that which
makes grace the nurse, not the mother that brings forth; a crutch for the lame,
but not life to quicken the dead; that which makes God the finisher, but not
the author of Faith, this is not Scripture doctrine; this makes not all to be
of him.

Secondly, That which affirms that though there be no merit in Justification,
yet there is a power in man for Sanctification, because it deals unequally with
a long arm, and a short one; allows no merit, and yet assumes a power: that
sounds not well neither: yet this is a thought that is in many a man's heart, Oh
that God would pardon me, and for walking with God, let me alone: Oh that God
would forgive me my sins, and I Will cleanse my self, I Will live to God: you will
not assume the merit of Justification: but you may not set your power in the
place of the spirit of God in point of sanctification, no more then merit in
place of the Lord Jesus for Justification; for in Psalm. 103. he forgives all
thy sin, and heals all thy disease, ver. 3. where in one verse you may see
both: I Confess, Justification is like quitting of a Prisoner at the Goal
delivery; the sentence quits him in an instant, and frees him. But
sanctification is like the healing of a wound by a Surgeon, which is a
progressive work, a work of time: the power of man is nothing in the one as
well as the other; without me you can do nothing; both are from Christ that
comes by water and blood, 1 John 5. 6. for the remission of sin, and also for
cleansing, purging, and purifying of the heart; who is made both righteousness
and sanctification to us, 1 Cor. 1. 30. for else a man may be reformed by
virtue, not sanctified, which is by grace or faith.

Thirdly, That which though it denies not grace to be of God (no Pelagian would
ever do that) yet affirms the use of grace to be of man; it is in man to
receive it, or not receive it; to believe by it, or no; that is, that God may
give the power, but not the act: God gives the power whereby I may believe in
Christ if I will: But he gives not the act of believing; And this is the great
question which methinks is thus determined in the Scripture; God, says the
Apostle, works both to will and to do; and every man that has learned of the
Father comes to me, Joh. 6. 45. for though your reason tells you, that in many
cases a man has power to do that he does not, as to see when he shuts his
eyes, you must make a difference* for when God works faith, he frames the heart
to use his grace and to believe, as when the hand does turn the wheel, the
wheel always tnrns; for if it did not turn, it takes away the subject of the
question; when there is a power put forth from God to work upon my heart, to
lead me to Christ, he does not therein only give a power that I shall use it as
I list; that's clean contrary: for if he turn me, I am turned; and if I am not
turned, he does not turn me.

Fourthly, that which teaches That Good works acceptable to God, may be
performed without a new nature: (and by this point) I thrust every man to seek
a new nature, and a new being: and not only to do good works; for that
contradicts the point of our Savior, Make the tree good and his fruit good:
There must first be Regeneration, Renovation in the spirit of man, whereby he
must be implanted into Christ Jesus, or there will never grow good fruit
thereon.

Lastly, that it is true, God sends Christ, (as the text says.) But there are
so many attractives in him to draw a sinner, that there needs no drawing of
God: there needs no drawing of a lost man to a Savior, no more then a poor man
is drawn to a loaf of bread: But sinners lost and undone, stand in need of
drawing: And therefore I shall show, that as God gives Christ, so he must give
faith in Christ, or I cannot be saved: As God gives Christ, and sends him to
me, so he must draw me, and bring me to Christ, or else no saving effect will
follow. And that shall be the second Use or Inference.

THat as God sends Christ to us, so he must draw us also to him, or else there
can be no salvation: and this may be thus proved. Those that come not to
Christ, cannot be saved by him; those of the world that are not drawn by this
drawing of the Father, do not come to Christ: therefore they are not saved: The
service that this Inference does, is, this will beat down the thoughts of many
thousands that rest in this empty plea: God has sent Christ to die, and to
redeem mankind; it is well, and the plea is good for encouragement to believe;
but if this be all the consolation, if this be all you rest upon, Gods acts in
sending Christ, you are much mistaken; for the great question is, Has God
drawn thee to Christ? Thou pleadest Christ's mission: but Can thou make Gods
traction of thee to appear? This is the great point that this doctrine
preaches: as if Christ should say, It is true, My Father has sent me, and I am
come to you by his appointment, to shed my blood for you; but you must come to
me if you will have life; and come to me you cannot, except you be drawn by the
power of him that sent me; for no man can come to me except the Father draw him.

Whether of the two be most necessary to salvation; Gods mission of Christ, or
Gods traction of man to Christ, is as I conceive, a trivial question, hardly
coming into the Schools, which will tie a knot in any rush; for they are both
equally necessary: as the Serpent on the pole in view to be looked upon, and the
eye to see it, were both necessary for the recovery of them that were bitten by
fiery Serpents: except God send Christ, there is no object of Faith: except God
draw you to Christ, there is no act of Faith: And the necessity of the object
and of the act, cannot without fondness be compared together; for both, are in
their kind necessary in the highest degree: the mercy and the grace of God are
eminent in both: the Father his sending Christ, and the Fathers drawing of
sinners unto Christ, they are both necessary. But yet this sending, and this
drawing, are of distinct consideration in diverse respects.

First, Gods sending Christ, sets up to sinful man the object of his faith. For
though all the Scripture be the object of that they call the Catholic faith;
yet peculiarly, Christ in the Scripture is the kernel and marrow of all the
types in the Old Testament: Christ is the object of Faith, whereby it
justifies: For though the eye that looked to the brazen Serpent, could see many
things besides; yet they could have no cure by the sight of any thing but that;
this sets up to man the object of his Faith; Gods drawing, works in man the act
of Faith: If Christ had not been sent, there had been no object to be believed
on: If God should not draw sinners to him, there would be no faith to believe
by: So that it would be as with Israel, if there were either no Serpent on the
pole to be looked unto, or no eye to look up to it, the recovery of those bitten
with the fiery Serpents would fail.

Secondly, Gods sending of Christ was in pursuance of his Covenant made with
our Mediaeter: Gods drawing unto Christ, is in pursuance of his Covenant made
with sinners in the Mediator. That there is a Covenant of God the Father with
Christ Jesus, seems very probable: because there was a Covenant made with the
first Adam; therefore also with the second: And this is intimated by Christ
himself, in these words, John 17. 4. I have finished the work that thou gave
me to do. And in those, Heb. 10. 9. Lo I come to do thy will O God. For there
is that we call the Law, imposed upon our Mediator, that is the Covenant made
with Christ. And Arminius in his Orations De Sacerdotio Christi, confesses this
Covenant made with Christ, is very well expressed in these words, Isa. 53. 10.
When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin; therefore his soul was to be
an offering: And the promise of the Covenant with Christ, that he should see
his seed: this Covenant of God with the Mediator, what he should perform as
Mediator, is pursued and brought to effect by God his sending of his Son: But
the Covenant made with sinners in a Mediator, it is this, If you believe in,
and come to this Lord Jesus whom he has sent, you shall be saved: And this
part of the Covenant is brought to effect and pursued; by Gods drawing us to
come to Christ: The want of making distinction between the Covenant with the
Mediator, what he shall do, he shall make his soul an offering for sin: And
what he shall have, he shall see his seed, he shall divide the spoil, take the
captive out of the hands of the Devil: and between the Covenant with the
sinner; where there are the same two respects; what he shall do, he shall come
unto and believe in the Lord Jesus; and what he shall have, he shall be
justified, saved, and recovered cut of the hands of hell and damnation: How
shall man be able to do this? says God, I will draw him, for else he cannot
come; for, No man can come to me except my Father draw him. I say, the not
distinguishing of these two, breeds great confusion in the apprehensions of men
about the Covenant.

Thirdly, Gods sending Christ, puts a difference between mankind and the Angels
that sinned: But Gods drawing of man unto Christ, puts a difference between the
elect and others. The speculation of which point, is of delightful and pleasant
consideration. By sending Christ, he puts a difference between mankind, fallen
and lapsed, and the Angels that fell; there was no cord let down from heaven to
them, to draw them out of the pit into which they were fallen. By drawing unto
Christ, he puts a difference between those that God will save, and those that
he will not save; As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed, Acts 13.
48. To the Angels that sinned, Christ is not sent; there you see the love of
God to mankind: And they that are not ordained to eternal life, are not drawn;
that makes a distinction of men.

Fourthly, God in sending Christ does not look at man's faith as antecedent, or
required of man before God sends him: But Gods drawing man to Christ, works
that faith whereby man is saved. Gods sending Christ, does not look to faith at
all, because Christ is sent to man yet resting in his unbelief; but that faith
that is required to salvation, is wrought by Gods drawing, whereby he moulds
the heart of man to Christ; as by a familiar comparison may be instanced: The
eye looking up, was not required to the setting up of the Serpent upon the
pole: by Gods command it was set up, whether any man was stung or no; but
looking up was required to the recovery of the person stung.

Fifthly, If God should have sent Christ, and required it of man's power, or
left it to man's power, to come in and to receive him, there would not have been
a man, as I conceive, saved. And his sending, which is Gods act, would have
fallen short of its effect, without Gods drawing; because there would not have
been faith found to have received and believed in him; for No man can, etc. and
so Christ's Kingdom had not been set up and built; there had no members been
planted into this head. But the gift of Christ to and for men, being seconded
by a power of bringing men in to Christ, gives effect and success; and
therefore you shall find in the Gospel always, Gods giving of Christ to man,
is seconded by the giving of the Spirit; that as we are redeemed, reconciled,
and justified by Christ's merit and blood; so we must also be enlightened,
regenerate and sanctified by Gods Spirit; the one of these accompanies the
other: And this power of the Spirit does so certainly go along with Christ's
merit, as to the salvation of any man, that it is said, Have one, have both.
For he that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his, Romans 8. 9. Because
though Christ be sent by the mission of God, yet without this Spirit there is
no drawing, no traction of man to be partaker of Christ, as we have some
adumbration or shadow. In Israel they are delivered from the destroying Angel
by blood sprinkled on the door posts: Exodus 12. 23.
And from the Egyptian slavery by a mighty hand; showing these two works in the
delivery of man out of the slavery under which he lay: there is the work of
Redemption, by the blood of Christ sprinkled upon him: and he must march out,
be drawn out of sin by an outstretched arm and mighty hand: these two must go
together.

Sixthly, There is a general encouragement: you may call it Comfort, that
arises to us from Gods sending of Christ. For where there is no hope, there is
no motion; where there is no encouragement to believe, there a man has little
heart: From Gods sending Christ to save you, there is encouragement; but the
present Comfort, the special Consolation of a man's salvation, arises from the
second particular of the two, that God has drawn man to Christ Jesus; there
is, I say, an encouragement that God has sent Christ; that is, there is a
salvability; men are made saveable from the curse and condemnation of the Law,
under which they are involved: But the special comfort that they have to
themselves in particular, must arise from this, that God has drawn, and by
converting grace, made them to believe in Christ: For this faith, this drawing
of man to Christ, is both a pledge of salvation for the future, and a token of
his election beforehand. And that which as it were does couple both the poles
together, the election of God, and the salvation of man; the one as a pledge
because future; the other as a mark, or sign, because past; this is a
comfortable point indeed. But certainly the point of sending Christ to make
atonement for all, or of universal Redemption, (let it be supposed) does
neither speak salvation nor election to any one in particular more then
another; and therefore such silly souls, whether they be drawn by others, or
through their own ignorance of the point, are mistaken and deceived, that do
build the comfort of their salvation upon that, that God has sent Christ for
an encouragement to believe, and therefore they shall be saved; they do but
build Castles in the air, that is, without ground; for the Scripture tells you,
that you must be in the faith, and Christ must be in you, except you be
reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5. It is this drawing you to come to Christ that strikes
the stroke; this teaching of God which teaches you to believe, that gives you
the particular assurance of salvation. And therefore though God have sent
Christ, yet there are thousands of reprobate and rejected persons in the world.
It is Christ in you, and you in him by Faith, that strikes the stroke.

Seventhly, The point of Gods sending Christ affords sweet meditation; but the
sense of Gods drawing thy soul unto Christ, affords sweet consolation. In the
one thou may see the love of God to the world; for God so loved the world,
John 3. 16. By the other thou may see his special love to thee; concerning
which you find it written by the Apostle, Gal. 2. 20. He loved me, and gave
himself for me: No man can say this word me, until he be drawn unto Christ: And
when is that? may some say; that is not my point now to handle, yet in brief I
answer.

First, When thou art come, then thou have been drawn: If thou can embrace
and receive Christ as a Savior and a Lord, then thou have been drawn, Col. 2.
6. And therefore as I may say of the shadow on the Dyal that is gone to another
line, though you cannot see the motion, yet you may conclude it is moved,
because it is gone to another line: So you may certainly conclude, that you are
gone from the state of nature to the state of grace, when there is a reception
and embracing of Christ Jesus.

Secondly, When thy enmity and opposition is removed, and those things that
obstructed thy faith are taken away: (Gods drawing does that) If there be an
inclination to Christ as the chief Good, come in place of the aversation that
was there before; if there be a complacency come in stead of the hardness and
antipathy that was there before: It is made one of the first signs of grace, I
will pour out upon them the Spirit of grace and supplication, and they shall
look on him whom they have pierced, and mourn and be in bitterness, Zach. 12.
10. (spoken of the Jews) This is a sign that there is a great change: as when
light comes into a chamber, we conclude that the shutts of the window are
removed; so when you find a new light, a new disposition of the heart to God,
you may conclude the obstructions are removed, and the enmity is taken away. So
much for the second Corollary drawn from this point.

If no man can come to Christ except the Father draw him; Hence we may learn,
how much faith and coming to Christ, being both one, ver. 35. are mistaken in
the world: the great hinge on which the salvation of man turns: It is
undertaken and entertained as men think, with great easiness, and at pleasure
performed, without any sense or sensible need of Gods drawing, without which
Christ teaches us that no man can come to him. I shall make it appear that this
coming to Christ is, I will not say hard and difficult, for that intimates some
possibility of man's performance: but that it is altogether unperformable
without the assistance of divine power. That saying, A man may believe in
Christ if he will (to take in that by the way) is true and good, if it be taken
in a right sense: for so the Scripture, Rev. 22. 17. Whosoever will, let him
take the water of life freely. But then I must say, and I think Reason will go
with me, that every wish is not a will, and every velleity (as they call it) is
not a will set on edge, an earnest thirsty will after Christ Jesus: He that
has a will wrought by God (and the truth is, we differ from other men only in
this:) all confess him to be free in believing: But man is not made by himself
free: but the grace of God frees the will of man: for if the Son make you free,
then are you free indeed: John 8. 36.
And no man does any thing in the world with greater freedom then a willingness
to believe: when of nilling, he is made by God, willing, as Austin says, such
a soul being freed from its servitude, to thirst after the righteousness of
God, is pronounced blessed, Matthew. 5. 6. We may safely say, he has the seed of
faith that has this will in him: But every Balaams wish, to die the death of
the righteous: and every one that says, I will, but does not, Matthew. 21. 30.
this is not reckoned in Scripture to be a will; therefore men are as much
mistaken in their willing, as in their believing. The Reasons of the opinion of
this easiness of believing are three.

The mistaking of Leah for Rachel. My meaning is, the taking of a Dogmatical
for a saving Faith: which is the common mistake of the world that live under
the Gospel: For this is but light oar that lies near day, as the Mettalists
say; though it looks like gold, it is not gold: It looks like the Faith that
saves, but it is not it: For this, 2 Fet. 3. 5.
as the Apostle says in another case, they willingly know not: This is not the
Faith that is hard and difficult: You must not look to be saved by a Christ
without you, but by a Christ within you: For to be in the Faith, and to have
Christ in you, is all one. 2. Cor. 13. 5. As there are that may be called
Disciples outwardly, (...), Romans 2. 28. and there are others that Christ calls
Disciples indeed, or (...), really, John 8. 31. So there is a Faith that brings
forth a profession of Christ, as the blade in the stony ground. And there is a
Faith that brings a man into possession of Christ; and that is the Faith. Now
it is a fatal mistake of many men, to reckon themselves in Christ and a state
of salvation, by a Faith that makes them only Disciples outwardly. For even the
greatest part of the called are not chosen: That Faith must needs be unsaving,
that is consistent with predominant lusts, that encounters not reigning sins:
For all resistance of sin, in a Scripture Phrase, is called conquest: For in
the resistance of it, there is as much love seen to God, as in the conquest of
it; though there be not so much power seen. That which is the best kind of
Faith, and saving, is that which is most hard, difficult, and impossible to
man: The very Faith of Miracles, that you read of sometimes in the Scripture,
is not so hard as saving Faith, to come unto and believe in Christ: Certainly
this is to be known; those that came short of saving Faith, have yet attained
to the Faith of Miracles, as Judas and others: And therefore let us set these
two, the Faith which saves, and that which saves not, in front one against the
other: and see what the Scripture says of both: And you shall find the drawing
power of God affixt to the saving faith, but not to the other: In John 2. 23.
many believed on Christ, when they saw the miracles that he did: But they were
false-hearted men, that would not hold out if they came to wetting, And so in
Matthew. 13. 21. and Luke 8. 13. they that received the word, and with joy too,
they are such as believe but for a while: but having no root, they go away: As
the house built on the sand, may stand till the wind blows: And in John 12. 42.
Many believed on him, but yet they loved the praise of men more then the praise
of God: worldly things are preferred before spiritual: And in Acts 8. 13, 24.
compared together; Simon also believed, but that did not pluck him out of the
gall of bittterness, nor unfetter him from the bond of iniquity: That faith
that lets a man lie in an unregenerate estate, that is the faith of Simon
Magus: It is called Believing, and you may so call your selves Believers, and
yet be without saving Faith. For every place in which it is named, sets a
blemish upon it: Showing that such a believing is joined with predominant lust:
But now the Faith that saves, that is other ways in Scripture described, and
set forth with other recommendations. It is called a believing to the saving of
the soul; and so opposite to that which withdraws, that is Faith for a time:
Mark the distinction and emphasis of the words in Heb. 10: ult. It is a
receiving of Christ Jesus as Savior and Lord, Col. 2. 6. which is always
accompanied with true regeneration. In John 1. 12, 13. Whosoever believes in
Christ to the saving of his soul, is born of God. 1 John 5. 1. Whoever
believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God. Whoever believes that he
is so, and so takes him. And is called in Scripture by these properties and
epithites, a heart-purifying faith, Acts 15. 9. a faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5.
the Faith of Gods elect, 1 Tit. 1. a precious faith, 2. Pet. 1. 1. an effectual
or operative faith, etc. all this shows that though the Scripture call this and
that both by the same name, Believing, yet they differ as much as saving and
not saving Faith. This is the first Reason concerning that opinion of the
easiness of believing. They that will be thus mistaken, we may well say of them
they are in danger to miss of their salvation.

Reason is, That as men are mistaken in Faith, as I have showed, so they are
also mistaken in the Formalis ratio of believing. The formal reason of
Believing is the Word of the Gospel; which is therefore called the power of God
to salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1. 17. And it is an excellent
mark of true and saving Faith, that it has been wrought in thee by the word of
the Gospel; by that which is called the hearing of Faith, Gal. 3. 2. This is
the reason of believing, as you may gather from those words, John 3. 33. he
has set to his seal that God is true, (i. e.) he that believes: and he that
believes not, makes God a liar, 1 John 5. 10. showing that Gods Word, or the
testimony of Christ in the Word, is the ground and true reason of believing:
all that do believe truly, do resolve their Faith into this reason, the truth
and veracity of the Word of God; but now the common Faith of most that live in
the Church, in the air of the Gospel, if it be followed to the last resolve or
resort of it, is not into conviction by the word or spirit, but the custom and
example (...) men, that profess they believe Christ to be a Savior, because
they see it commonly believed and owned in the Church that they live among;
these have the same reason for believing in Christ, that the Turk has for
believing in Mahomet; and that the Jew has for his rejecting Christ: whose
Religion is milked into their mouths by education, in such places, and by such
parents as are of this opinion; thus it is with us that have sucked in this kind
of believing with our milk, which makes it easy to us, as the Fathers
authority to the Child in minority is the greatest in the world; But to think
that without a better Reason of our Faith, we can be saved, is a great mistake;
For the heart must be convinced and principled by the Gospel, and by the power
of God therein.

freedom from temptations: For many men are carried on the wings of this Faith
all their lives long, freed from temptations, doubts, fears, disquietments,
have no thoughts perplex them from the beginning to the end of their lives: for
they are temptations within that are the cause of the difficulty of believing:
when the wind lay, Peter doubted not: the Lord called, and Peter went to him
upon the water: But when the wind rose and was boisterous, then says the text,
he was afraid and doubted, Math. 14. 29. then, Lord save me, or else I perish:
then Christ says, Oh thou of little faith, wherefore do thou doubt? when the
wind was strong, faith became weak: when a man rides on in security and peace,
no guilt within, no fears, doubts, or soul-troubles encountering him, its an
easy thing to believe: But when tribulation seizes upon the spirit, and the
wind arises, then you come (...) doubtings, fears, and disquietments, and find
it hard to believe: then says the heart, Lord, that I had but one drop of
Faith, that I were but able to come and be fixed upon the center of believing:
this is the common and greatest Reason of easy believing: the empty traveller
sings before the thief. For

First, Satan rather keeps the peace of such a soul then molests it, because he
knows that his kingdom and possession is not endangered by such a faith as
sights not against his dominion: Pharaoh arms not his Egyptians, whiles Israel
followed a quiet drudgery: and therefore the devil rather rocks the cradle,
then he will disquiet his sleeping Child. And

Secondly, While a man is not sensible what it is to lose his soul, nor feels
the damnable sins he has, nor considers that the whole moment of his Salvation
hangs only on this cord, he does not fear, neither is disquieted: But when he
sees that life Eternal hangs upon this nail, it startles him, and makes him
afraid; When the man perceived that the cure of his child did he upon his
believing, it made him cry out, Lord, help my unbelief, Mark. 9. 24. They that
see not the concernment of their believing unto Salvation, cry not out for the
help of their unbelief.

While the props that a man leans upon remain uncashiered, it is not hard for
the man to believe: Faith is the easiest thing in the world whiles a man rests
upon something in himself: while he swims upon the Bladders that are not pulled
from under his arm-holes, it is easy for him to keep his head above water: Let
me tell every one of you, whiles you are in your natural condition, you have
some thing which you call your gain, Phil. 3. 7. and if you should presently
die, you have something to trust unto: and while these remain with you, it is
not a hard thing for you to believe, and therefore a man trusts to his fleshly
confidence, till he come to know Christ Jesus the Lord; But when the soul is
unhorst of her false confidence, and true faith has dismantled all man's strong
holds, 2 Cor. 10.
that there is nothing to relieve it, but faith in Christ: when a man is left
naked as Adam was of himself and his own righteousness, and a man has nothing
to trust unto but the word of God whom he has offended, and yet now he must
trust to it, and venture his soul upon it; when troubles and fearful questions
do arise, then you will find no sea, no Euripus is more unconstant then the
heart of man, nothing more hard to fix; this will make him cry out with Francis
Spira, Oh that I had but one dram of Faith! O that my Faith were fixed, and my
heart by Faith: these are the Reasons of that opinion, the easiness of
believing.

Now I must show the contrary to this opinion, about the easiness of Faith, and
to that end I shall say thus much, that it is not properly said to be hard for
a natural man to come to Christ, for that may denote a possibility: but that
man cannot come without Gods drawing, which I shall endeavor to prove.

First, Because the Scripture makes it the work of God, and the gift of God:
the work of God, for he draws: the gift of God, for it is given to believe: And
in some places gives that as the reason why men cannot believe of themselves,
as in the text, No man can except God draw: which is given as the reason of the
unbelief of these murmurers against Christ's doctrine; and ver. 64. 65. its said
Christ knew from the beginning who should not believe: For no man can come to
me except it were given him of my Father: And our Savior as appears by this,
thought it a good proof that they that were not drawn by Gods work, nor had
faith given them of his Father, could not believe in him, or come to him. That
faith is the gift of God, it is said expressly, Phil. 1. 29. to you it is given
to believe sincerely: And Matthew. 13. 11. to you it is given to know the
mysteries. And Ephesians. 2. 8. you are saved by grace, through Faith, and this not
of your selves, it is the gift of God. And

Secondly, That you may see that assigning of our Faith to Gods work, and Gods
gift, does deny man to be the social, as well as sole cause of his faith, and
that God only teaches the heart to believe: you may observe that it is spoken
(...), by way of opposition unto, and not of Composition or Concurrence of man
with God, in way of Co-ordination: where the Scripture speaks of God, it speaks
of God as the sole cause; Mark the antithetical places, where it is not only
said that God works it, but God works it, and not man; Flesh and blood has not
revealed this to thee, says Christ to Peter, Matthew. 16. 17. but my Father; our
sufficiency is not of our selves to the least thought, but of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
there is an antithesis excluding our selves; Not of our selves, but it is the
gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. As therefore they say in Philosophy, God is Causa
totius entis, which does deny all concausality; he made us, not we our selves,
in the hundred Psalm; so it may be said that we are his creatures in grace as
well as in nature. We make not a hair of our selves, no not the color, and
shall we not lay it to heart? In nature did I make my self? why shall not I
give as much to God in regeneration as generation, seeing God is seen in the
one as well as in the other?

Thirdly, Faith in Christ is a distinguishing grace, a work that differences
those that are sheep, from them that are not; those that are given, from them
that are not given to Christ: this is proved, Matthew. 13. 11. to you it is
given, to them it is not given; to the babes it is revealed, but hidden from
the wise, Matthew. 11. 25. This coming unto Christ, to speak plainly, is a fruit
and effect of election: all that are chosen to Eternal Life, shall come in unto
and believe in Christ, they shall all know me, Heb. 8. 11. both the least and
the greatest, every man that is taught of God does believe, Joh. 6. 45. If any
man living can know himself to be Elected of God, how must he know it? we must
know our election (if at all) ascendendo, not descendendo, not prying into the
abyss, but beginning at the lowest round of the ladder, my regeneration and
Faith in Christ: and from thence, ascend: As many as were ordained to eternal
life, believed, Act. 13. 48. (a place as it pinches hard, so men have set their
wits on the tenters, to make something of it, or rather nothing) not as were
qualified and disposed, as say some: but appointed or ordained: Its vain to
wash away the sense of the word: We know it is called The faith of Gods elect,
and that it is said, the election has obtained, Romans 11. 4. our Savior says,
John. 10. 26. you see the works that I do; miracles that one would think might
work faith: but there is a secret reason why you believe not, Because you are
not of my sheep, for all they, do believe in me: and this is my constant
doctrine, for this I have said unto you: It is said of the Council of Trent by
him that wrote the history of that Council, that when those that were for the
will and power of man, disputed with the other party by reason, they seemed to
carry all before them, to get the victory; but when the other party that was
for the Grace of God against the will of man, came to back their arguments by
Scripture, not by reason, then they went as far backward as forward. It is
objected that it is not likely that all that in that Congregation were ordained
to life eternal did believe at that time: It is but a quibble, which we can
speak no further unto, then the text does: It is enough that the reason of
believing is drawn from their ordination to life, as John 6. 37. all that the
Father gives me, shall come to me: and if all that God gives to Christ, shall
come to Christ, we conclude that it is proper to those that are the elect of
God: to those God gives it, in those God works it.



Because the knowledge or light in which faith is seated, is not a natural
light, but it is a light proceeding from the Spirit of God, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
showing that this light is bidden by God to flow out of our darkness, and a
Created light as the first light was: so that the light wherein saving Faith is
seated, is not a natural light: In all faith that is true and saving, there
must be a proportion of knowledge, and therefore faith and knowledge are
sometimes put for one and the same in the holy Scripture: famously in Isa. 53.
11. by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, that is, by the
Faith of him; and whence this light of faith does come, you may very well
perceive by that, Flesh and blood has not revealed it: It is not a light of
natural reason or acquisition, but is a light created by God, and conveyed by
the spirit of God only, Matthew. 16. 17. For that which is called a spiritual
discerning, and that must either be Faith, or the light wherein faith is
planted, that is affirmed, not to be within the power of a natural man, 1 Cor.
2. 14. where he gives the reason why a natural man does not perceive the things
of God, because they are spiritually discerned; and therefore I conclude that a
natural man has not the spiritual discerning of heavenly things: and having
not this spiritual discerning, it remains that it must be a supernatural hand:
and therefore all the light of Reason, learning and pregnancy of wit in man
naturally, is but darkness to this spiritual light, which is given to babes and
fools, as the moon light is but night and darkness unto that light which makes
day: and if this be that light whereby Christ is only savingly known in the
excellency of his knowledge, Phil. 3. 8.
it must needs follow, that faith being seated in it, must be a supernatural
work; which is a clear demonstration, and strong proof as any I know from
reason, that as the sun can not be seen in the light of a torch, so you must
see and know and believe in Christ Jesus by a light held forth from God, which
is supernatural.

Every predominant and reigning lust does not, cannot stand with saving Faith,
because it will hinder the plantation and growth of it, as the rock hindered the
rooting of the sown seed: and what is this to the purpose? may some say; very
much; sor it shows that no unregenerate or natural man (every of which has
some master fin or other) can have a saving faith: it must be said of every
lust what is said of one: for there is the same Reason, our Savior instances
in on Joh. 5. 44. how can you believe that receive honor one of another, and
not that which comes from God only? one marriage prevents a second, until some
divorce or separation be made: and so does any reigning sin hinder faith in
Christ; Oh that you would think of it, that live in any known reigning lust;
you can have no saving faith in Christ Jesus. I know, infirmities may stand
with faith, but reigning sin cannot, no more then a first and second marriage
can stand together; A miserable case that a man should think he has faith,
when he is martyed to sin. I confess a dogmatical faith, an opinionative faith,
a common faith may consist with a man's lust; Simon Magus was in the Gall of
bitterness, and yet he believed with that kind of faith that was in
unregenerate men; but saving Faith will not consist with lusts; that is the
second reason; therefore naturally no man can believe in Christ Jesus.

The establishment and pursuance of self righteousness by your own worthiness
and works, that also hinders the plantation of saving faith in you: and
therefore as Luther said, Of all taking heed, take heed you do not pursue any
thing that may be called your own righteousness; For they went about to make
their own righteousness to stand, and therefore did not submit themselves to
the righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3. they attain not that seek it so: as
Israel that pursued after righteousness, they followed the chase hard, but did
not overtake it, Romans 9. 31. why? because they sought it as it were by the
works of the law, and not by the faith of Christ Jesus: those that run fastest
as humbled men do after this righteousness, are but like a man that runs apace
after his shadow, that runs as fast away from him as he runs after it:
therefore as Adam did not strip himself, nor may be never would, but God stripped
him, and then clothed him with skins, (not with leaves) that was an emblem of
death, for it appears that some beasts were killed: the green leaves whereby a
man covers himself, are an emblem of his own righteousness, wherein he would
stand: But when God comes to strip him of this righteousness, Oh then, says
he, that I might be clothed with skins! an emblem of the atonement made for
sin by the death of Christ: this also does oppose and hinder the plantation of
Faith.

To bring a man to saving faith in Christ, is no less then to take a Castle
fortified: so it is compared, 2 Cor. 10. 4: a strong hold must be beaten down:
and this is the mighty work of Gods power, says the text; for the weapons of
our warfare are mighty through God, to bring every thought into captivity to
the obedience of Christ: now mark, if it be to take a fortified Castle, then
the Apostle supposes that every natural man, till he be converted, is in his
strong hold, and such a one will not dismantle his own Castle, nor take
himself, and become captive to himself: and certainly if the work be this, no
hand can do it but the hand of God.

Faith in Christ, is no less then the surrendering and delivery up of a man's
self to a new Sovereignty, to be no more his own: a man must acknowledge and
take a new Lord as soon as he believes in Christ: for as redemption frees us
from the vindictive Justice of God, so the conquest of Christ frees us from the
power of sin, from our Jailer or former ruler, the devil: It cannot be expected
of a bondsman that he should free himself, especially a voluntary bondsman that
delights to have his ears bored: you that say you are believers in Christ, if
your faith be true, know by this, it resigns and surrenders you up to the will
of a new Lord and Sovereign: and let any man ask counsel of his own heart,
whether he would be willing without divine power drawing him to surrender up
the mastery of himself: therefore I conclude, if this he cannot do, he cannot
believe:

The whole Soul is moved in or by the plantation of faith. The Schoolmen do
dispute and quarrel about the seat of faith, whether it be the understanding or
the will, or both: truly, I think he should answer best that says, faith is
actus totius hominis, the act of the whole man; the mind to know, the will to
Consent and Embrace, the affections to rejoice in and desire, as the Scripture
says: faith is seated in the heart, all the heart: Faith must be a work
brought into the heart by the hand of God: for if faith should come in by its
own forcible entry by opposition man would fight against it at every door or
room: and therefore it remains that it must come into the heart voluntarily;
the heart must be made willing, and when it is so, it sets open every door,
that it will not fight against any entry; It is God that makes the whole soul
willing to the entrance of faith into it.

Saving faith, always flows or proceeds from a vital principle: a dead man
performs no act of life; and if faith be an act of life, then this faith cannot
be performed by a man that is dead; that is, by a natural man, dead in sin; and
therefore, he that makes a man to believe in Christ, must first out a life into
him; (see the Reason how it hangs together) a spiritual dead man can no more
put life into himself then a natural dead man; this argument proves, that Gods
drawing a man to Christ, is as it were, the raising of him from the dead, that
man's believing in Christ is as much as a resurrection from the dead, and proves
that Gods drawing, must go before man's coming, or believing: the passive work
of Conversion preceds that which is called active Conversion: the one is Gods,
the act of raising: the other is man's, the act of turning to God; I know not
what can be said against it.

The greatest opposition that is made to the plantation of grace yet in the
heart of man, is made to faith; temptations are soarest, oppositions are
strongest against faith, because the soul and salvation lies at stake upon it,
the hinge that salvation hangs on, being in this point; therefore it has more
opposition by sin and the devil then any other grace; I have prayed, says
Christ to Peter, that thy faith fail not; Why not, that thy love, or thy fear,
or thy patience fail not? because the greatest batteries of the devil are
against faith, and the taking of that fort would take all; and therefore all
those considerations that give such weight to faith in order to Salvation, do
also give weight to the reason I am now upon, that a supernatural hand is that
which must work and create faith in us.

I should as easily and willingly ascribe the whole work of man's conversion and
regeneration, his new birth and justification, all to the power of man dead in
sin, as I would ascribe thereto, faith in, or coming unto, Christ: and so let
God sit by as a looker on, and behold what a fine thread the will of man spins
throughout the whole webb of conversion, regeneration and believing; and let
sinful man be suae fortunae faber, the workman of his own fortune (as they use
to say) and where then shall be the commendation and praise of Glorious grace?
sure there will be the commendation of the will of man, and not of the will of
God; and so all things will come at last, result to this which the Serpent said
to our first parents, ye shall be as Gods; if faith and coming to Christ be in
the power of man, you will be as God; for not he that supplies the object of
faith, but he that supplies the power and act of faith, the will and deed to
believe, sits highest in Glory; the Reason is, that notwithstanding the object
of Faith revealed, man might perish; but he that gives me the act of believing,
and makes good that, cannot perish, but must be saved. Let the evidence of
these Reasons quiet and settle you upon this point. And

Make those men jealous and suspicious of their Faith, that find an easy,
quiet and undisturbed faith, that have believed time out of mind as they say,
ever since they could remember, and never had ^^sence and feeling of this
drawing work of God, without which, faith cannot be wrought: It is true, I
believe that regenerating grace steals into many a one even in their in^^ncy
before they can reflect upon themselves (for this faith is not known without
reflection) and before they know who it is that calls Samuel, Samuel, and they
have cause of praise afterward that God marked them for his sheep, while they
were but Lambs: this may be, and therefore I will not say that this point ties
these men to know or to find out the time of the first working and plantation
of faith in them. But ordinarily, those that are of age, do hear the noise or
voice of this wind when it blows, though it be a secret work and thou know
not whence it comes, nor whither it goes, yet they feel a work whereby they are
drawn to believe in Christ: and in every man ordinarily there are inward
bickerings, temptations, troubles for sin, fears, all which do make faith hard:
and thereby as Israel coming out of Egypt, we have more sensible experiments
of Gods goodness and power: so in the first plantation, and further growth of
our faith, there will be very much all along to teach us this lesson, that i^
is a very hard thing to believe, either in God for matters of providence, or in
Christ for pardon of sin: yea and many times after the shaken heart is come to
a center, the earthquake may return again, especially if we take hold of
rotten refuges: for its we that make it hard to believe; otherwise they that
have a faith dogmatical, some righteousness and works of their own to trust to,
it is to them in their thinking a very easy thing to believe in Christ: but
its guilt that abates confidence; if we our selves did but know our secret
guilt, it must needs make it hard to us to believe in Christ; and yet all that
do believe, have this guilt staring them in the face: but the Goodness, truth,
and freeness of the promise overcomes it.

If God have drawn thee to Christ, and made thee a believer, then return and
acknowledge to him the Glory: Let it ravish thy heart with the love of God: for
his finger has been in thy heart, whether thou be sensible of it no: and to
whet and sharpen thy praise, let the open sight of thy former unfitness to
believe, equal to the unfitness of other men, and thy equal impotency and
opposition to thy own happiness, raise the tune of thy praise; for a Christian
must never lose the sense of his former sins: I was a persecuter and injurious;
and then it follows in 1 Timothy 1. 13. and the grace of the Lord was exceeding
abundant to me with faith and love; and therefore thou have reason to kiss that
hand that's put forth in thy heart to draw and bring thee to Christ Jesus, by
faith: and the reason of this thankfulness is threefold.

Faith is a discriminating grace: it makes a difference between man and man; to
you it is given: to them it is not given. And if the Philosopher thought
himself bound to be thankful to his gods, for that he was a Grecian, an
Athenian, a Philosopher, this is worth all the bundle of such differences
between man and man, that God has drawn thee to Christ savingly to take hold
of him by Faith.

This Grace of faith is the main condition of the Covenant of life: that
whereas no man is saved but by being in the Covenant, the condition is
performed by God as well as the benefit promised: faith is the very hinge on
which the promise of Salvation turns, the center on which it rests, Romans 10. 9.
if thou confess with thy mouth, and believe with thy heart, thou shall be
saved: where the Apostle brings in one in perplexity, Who shall ascend up to
heaven, or go down to the deep, who shall bring Christ to me! why says he, the
word is nigh, if thou confess, etc. God might have given thee some other gift,
and made thee to excel and differ from another, 1 Cor. 4. 7. but this makes
heaven sure: he has given thee to Christ, and Christ to thee: Both of these
are the gift of God, and worthy to be praised.

This faith is a mark and evidence that thou art one chosen of God, and
ordained to eternal life: if there be any, this must be chief; so that from his
faith, whereby he is drawn to Christ, he may draw an argument of life eternal;
As many as were ordained to life eternal, did believe: if from our love to God
it may appear that we are called according to purpose, Romans 8. 29. then also
from our faith. For all that thou have given to me, shall come unto me, says
our Savior.

Then let an unbeliever pray for faith: But to what purpose may some say, let a
believer pray in faith, let an unbeliever pray for faith: I dare not deterr an
unregenerate man from the use of prayer: happily no promise is made to such
prayer: nor no acceptance of the prayer as a savoury meat to God our Father:
but let not foolish disputers dispute you out of prayer; for it is a worship of
God, and we are bound to worship him; God calls upon us to make us a new heart,
that we may call upon him to do it for us; the poor, infirm, and diseased cried
unto Christ for healing in the Gospel, and when they came to him, certainly
they were not all believers; and Simon Magus was sent to pray by Peter for
forgiveness, Acts 8. when you come to hear, it is for faith: and you then p^ay
for the work of faith by the word, you show that you are convinced of sin, and
that you do acknowledge God to be the Creator of faith. And wicked men have
greater mercies from God, if not by way of Covenant and Promise, yet in the way
of free bounty and beneficence; and therefore let them wait on him that hears
the cry of young ravens. Bow your knees, pour out your prayers, that you may
come to Christ, that he would not leave you to your selves, your own emnity and
opposition.

There appears by comparing things together, that there is some admirable
secret in this work of believing in and coming to Christ; for if you observe,
there is all the reason in the world, why a man should believe, there being all
arguments and motives of faith in Christ himself, there are all manner of
invitements and provocations in the word of God: and there being some that do
believe by such a faith, as is under the rate of saving faith, what may be the
reason that our Savior yet says, No man can come to me without a divine
traction; if I should handle these largely, perhaps I should not be
impertinent, but I will be brief.

First, there is all reason that man should come in to Christ Jesus; for unless
he do so, and that sincerely, the wrath of God abides on him: It comes upon us
for any sin, but abides upon us for unbelief; not that unbelief is the only sin
that damns, as some do teach in these days. If a man be indicted of Felony and
found guilty, he is condemned for that; but the reason why he is sent to
execution is, because that having the Book he cannot read; so is unbelief the
great Reason that all other sins are bound upon your backs; none of them are
pardoned: Even as a woman in debt as soon as she takes a husband is no longer to
be accounted in debt, because all her debts involve him to whom she has given
her self; So that very hour, as soon as ever you believe, you have your sins
pardoned; as the Israelite stung with a fiery Serpent, as soon as ever he looked
up to the Serpent on the pole, he recovered, or as the Text says, he lived; so
he that believes, is healed of all diseases, restored into a state of favor,
made a Son and Heir of God for present title, and all his mortal sins become
venial, yea not pardonable but pardoned: Therefore there is all reason for it.

Secondly, there are all Motives and Arguments for faith in Christ himself:
There is many a man would be glad of the benefits of Christ that does not
receive Union with Christ himself; but marriage you know is not between a man
and the dowry, but between person and person: Men obstruct their own Faith by
looking to take rise for it in themselves, but there is all in Christ, he is
the sinners Savior, not sinful Angels, but sinful man's; therefore no argument
lies in sin to discourage thee, because thy sin makes thee a due object, as the
biting of the fiery Serpent made a fit Patient for the Serpent on the Pole; and
as he is the sinners Savior, so he is the sent and sealed of God, commissioned
and authorized by him unto this saving work: so that God cannot retract his
act, the promise of salvation to any that believes in him; as he is the sent of
God we need not doubt him whose anger it was that terrified us, so he is freely
offered and given to the sinner as a plaster wide enough for every sore; being
able to save to the uttermost, all that come to God by him: Therefore all
Motives are in him.

Thirdly, God invites us by all manner of invitations and provocations to
receive Christ: And I have showed and proved to you, that he does call you
seriously, and not tantalize us with the promise of faith; for then he could
not say, How often would I, but you would not? The Call whereby God invites men
to faith and repentance is serious.

Fourthly, there are many that do believe, and that with joy, by a faith that
is under the rate of saving, because it is by a faith of Conviction, not of
Acceptance: As a woman that can say nothing against a man, yet gives not
consent of marriage; so they are convinced of the excellency and necessity of
Christ, and yet do not receive and accept him for good and all, with
self-outing and self-renouncing: And all this being so as it is, well might
Austin say of this grace, which Pelagius was content withal, that is, the
doctrine, exhortation, excitation, by way of object propounded and counsel
moving; Nolumus istam gratiam, we are not content to rest in that grace, but
will have such as takes away the stony and gives a heart of flesh; as it was
with Lazarus, he did not rise out of the Grave, because he was bid to rise, but
with the word there went a powerful work, and so he came forth. Notwithstanding
all this that I have said as touching the object of faith proposed, the motives
and means of Faith used, which I confess are enough to lay the blame of
non-believing at man's door, yet this admirable secret of not believing upon all
this, arises from a higher reason or secret of God, as appears by our Saviors
Doctrine: And the Reasons are two.

First, Though all these be used as they are, for the preparing, and inclining,
and exciting man to believe, That God may deal with man as a rational creature
by moral means; for God does not draw man as a beam of timber or a stone is
drawn by force, but in a way of Understanding, Reason, and Argument; yet that
high design of God in giving men to Christ, or not giving them to him, is
assigned by our Savior as a Reason of men's coming, or not coming to him, Joh.
6 44, 65. No man can come to me except it were given him of my Father; and
verse. 37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me. The giving of Faith
to man, and of man to Christ, are both Gods work: And in John 10. 26. But ye
believe not, because ye are not of my Sheep; that is, not given to me by the
Father. And surely it is for this secret reason that many in the world, and in
our Congregations, that have all the formerly named Means and Motives to Faith,
do yet stand it out obstinately; and those that have appeared the most unlikely
of all others to be believers in Christ, have, after their long withstanding,
come in at length.

Seconldy, The reason why all these do not work Faith, is because they work but
morally and objectively, and do not (happily) ingenerate life, by which they may
be prevalent. We do not wonder why a Trumpet does not waken, and why Music
does not delight a dead man, because neither the one nor the other does beget
life, but supposes life to be. Faith, if it be lively and saving, comes from a
root of Life, from the Spirit of Regeneration and renewing Grace; and therefore
where such Grace is not by the Spirit implanted in the heart, all Means and
Motives of Faith are but like the frictions and rubbings of a dead man, which
are profitable to awaken the spirits if there be life, but not to recall or
produce it; and this is that which Christ speaks in the Text, No man can come
to me, because he is of himself dead, and void of power by Nature, until God
put a Spirit of life into him; and when he is alive, these Mean^ and Motives
may be profitable; or as is usually said by S. Austin, speaking of the Doctrine
of Pelagius; Hold a green branch or bunch of grass before a Sheep, and; if he
be alive, he may follow your hand; but it gives not life to him, if dead. All
that can be said is, That there must be first a Plantation of a vital
Principle, a seed of spiritual life, before there can be any Faith put forth to
these Promises and Motives of Faith; and therefore this bespeaks you all to use
the means for life; for God by these means works it: But yet the means are left
destitute, unless jointly with the Word of Faith there go the Work of Faith, as
with, Lazarus come forth, there went a Power to raise him from the dead; and
then man believes. And this is the fourth Consectary from this point.

Sept. 16.
No man in the world left to the disposal of his own will, or to the
sufficiency of his own power, will, or can, move himself out of his lost
condition, into an actual state of salvation. In ordinary things it is a clear
Maxim, That it is more easy destruere than astruere, to throw down or to
destroy, than to build up; to fell a Tree down than to plant and make it grow:
But in spiritual things, that observation begets a Problem and hard Question,
Whether it be more, easy to pull man down, to remove him from himself and his
own righteousness, (for it is the mighty work of God that must do it, 2 Cor. 10.
4, 5. The weapons of our warfare are mighty through God to pull down, to level
imaginations and high things;) than when he is down, to plant him into Christ
Jesus, to make him to believe? Whether of these is the hardest work? He that
shall answer this, I think might say as the Philosopher, The expelling of
darkness out of the Air, and the introduction of light be two terms, yet but
one motion, the act is but one to these two; so the bringing man down, and
raising of him up, the turning man from darkness to light, as it is expressed,
Acts 26. 18. Though there be but one motion, one act of Grace, yet there are
two terms, darkness and light, and so the matter is equally difficult; yet for
Order sake we begin with that which was first in time, with the cutting off the
Graft from the wild Tree, before we set or plant it in: And therefore I have
sp^nt some time, First, in showing man's indisposition to receive Jesus Christ,
which appears from Joh. 5. 40. Ye will not; and Secondly, man's impotency and
inability, in the Text, No m^^ can, except my Father draw him; that is, If left
to your own disposal, you would not, if to your own sufficiency, you should not
come to me. And this being a point serving to pull down man, that we may not
make man the worker, the doer, the mover of his own salvation; that we may
build man's will upon God, and not go about to build Gods Will upon man, as if
God did wait to see how man would dispose of himself. I shall therefore proceed
in it as homogeneous and agreeable to the former Doctrine in the Text.

And the Reason is clear that no man in the world can, because there would be
no active Conversion, were there not first a passive Conversion; no active
Conversion whereby man turns to God, except there were first a passive
Conversion whereby God turns man to God; no Conversion could be the act of man,
if not first Conversion be the act of God: To speak plainly, there can be no
coming to Christ except there be first a drawing of God: For no man can come to
me except my Father draw him. They are both of them delivered in Jer. 31. 18.
19. Turn thou me and I shall be turned: After I was turned I repented; there is
the act of Ephraim; after I had received the passive Conversion, that God had
drawn and turned me: There is no resurrection from the dead without first a
resuscitation, the word and power of Christ goes forth before the act of
Lazarus; the Sun shines upon the wall before the wall can re-shine any beams of
the Sun from it: so there must be the work of God upon the heart, the grace of
God must shine there before the heart can return, take hold, and carry the soul
to Jesus Christ: And there are two Premises, two Propositions that do carry on
this Conclusion in the generality of it: That no man will or can be saved, if
left to his own disposal or sufficiency.

That every man in the world must reckon of himself to be one that naturally
and of himself is come short of the glory of God. And oh! that this Point had a
sensible Impression upon us all! Romans 3. 23. All have sinned and are come short
of the glory of God: the Justification of a sinner is Gods glory; all are not
only in but under sin. Romans 3. 9. nay, all are not only fallen under sin, but
all are shut up, concluded under sin, Galat. 3. 22. all are not only shut up
under sin in their own thoughts, but by the Scripture shut up under sin; the
Scripture is the key whereby man is shut up, and what possibility of escaping
is there when all the world are shut up? and certain it is, that a man departed
from God and fallen into himself is in the Scripture account in a lost estate
and dead condition for that time, as the Prodigals Father said of his son, This
my son was lost and dead, but now upon his return he says, He was lost, but
now is found, he was dead, but is now alive, Luke 15. 32. From that time that a
man comes into Christ Jesus, he is alive; a man may live and yet be dead; there
is no time wherein you are to be reckoned alive and found, but only from the
time that you believe and take hold of Christ Jesus; and therefore in 2 Cor. 5.
15. That henceforth those that live should not live unto themselves, but to him
that dyed for them, and rose again; which argues, that all the time before,
they lived to themselves, that is, were dead. That Is the first Proposition.

That every man in the world ought to reckon himself to lie still in this state
of coming short until he be drawn to come in savingly to receive Jesus Christ:
For he that has not the Son has not life, 1 John 5. 11. For so I would preach
those out of Christ all of them dead; I would unchrist them of that vain
opinion that they have of being in him: The Scripture is plain, he remains
under wrath till he come to believe, receive, and lay hold on Christ, John 3.
36. For this is the only and necessary Condition of being saved that God has
assigned and proclaimed to lost man, this is the new door for man shut out of
Paradise to return to the Tree of life; this is the only passible, this is the
certain way of re-instating man fallen short, into capacity of the glory of God
(the Justification of a sinner is the glory of God) and there is no other way
but this; those that you harp upon are false ways and to be abhorred. Psalm.
119. For there are these two Reasons of it.

Cor. 11. 4 the Apostle challenges the Corinthians to find out if they can,
another Gospel, another Christ, another Spirit that cannot be found, there is
no other saving way but this: The first Adam was but one, and he lost all; the
second Adam must be but one neither; as able to save all that are saved, as the
other was to destroy all that are destroyed. Not that there is an equality in
the number that are saved by the one, and the damned and destroyed by the
other, that needs not to be; but that the one is as only in saying, as the
other was in sinning.

Either, grace makes works to be no works, or works makes grace to be no grace;
signifying, that it must be this, and not that; not this and that, not this
with that, which is necessary to bring you to salvation; but, that it is
Christ, and not your own performances and works; for without coming to Christ,
no salvation, and no man can come to me except he be drawn; that makes
Demonstration thus: A man cannot be saved, except he receive Christ, he cannot
receive Christ except God draw him in: therefore man left to his own disposal,
and the sufficiency of his own power cannot be saved; this sum stands in plain
Scripture terms. This is the doctrinal. Inference the practical Use which I
told you I would intermix with this Doctrinal, is as follows.

First, That we carefully maintain the necessity and soveraigntie, the freeness
of Gods grace, and the power of it in the conversion of man: Pelagius himself,
that has universally excluded or exploded the concurrence of the grace of God
in the Course of salvation, but have allowed it either for the inchoation or
beginning of conversion, or in the augmentation and increase of Grace, or else
in the consummation and finishing of it: either for the sole work or the social
work of it, in and with man; even very shame, and the evidence of the point
together, forbids man to exclude that to which he is obliged: not only for a
more easy conversion, but for conversion it self; for many have allowed it a
place in making conversion more easy, for a man to return and believe: But we
speak of the necessity of it, that conversion cannot be at all without it: as
therefore I may give it you by this comparison; they that do allow the work of
a Midwife in the helping of a child into the world, do not by that, make her
the Parent of the child: So, they that allow the grace of God to be requisite
to help man to conversion, the knowledge of God and Faith, do not thereby
affirm the grace of God to be the Parent, the Worker, Author and begetter of
this Grace; and therefore they say too little that make grace only an
assistant. And therefore as the Prophet in Zachary 4. speaking of the second
Temple after Solomon's Temple was burnt down by the King of Babylon, they should
cry, Grace, Grace to it; not by might nor by power, but that the Grace of God
should be seen in the building of the second Temple: So I may say of the
building of this second Inner Temple in man after the death of the first, (I
mean Gods Image in Man) that it is a work all of Grace; and therefore to set it
in common place, shows less sense of Gods honor by it, and of our obligation
to it then it requires. Those that grant that man more easily comes to Heaven
by grace adjuvant, do say truth, as Christ helping up Lazarus; (but raising him
from the dead, was more then so, for he gave him life whereby he rise) so to
grace, that it helps up man, is to say Truth; But if you will be good
Advocates, and plead the cause of Gods grace aright, (which men were famous for
in former times when it was disparaged;) you must acknowledge preventing and
preoccupating grace, which wholly raises the dead man, in that sense in which
Austin calls it preventing, that comes before our Act, that praeoccupates a
man, not barely helping the man to rise alone, but raising the man dead, and
begetting a new life in him. Those who are only for adjuvant grace, eclipse the
glory of divine grace, so as if they should say, Christ helped up Lazarus, who
else could not so easily have risen up, but it would have cost more ado to have
effected it. These are such as make the grace of Conversion to be as one horse
in a Teem, that helps indeed to pull out the stalled Cart the more easily, but
does not come so home, as that of Christ, John 15 4. Severed from me ye can do
nothing: But let us account it to be the only strength whereby we are pulled
out of the pit of damnation and perdition; the Contest of Nature with Grace for
place and power to make abatement of the necessity, sovereignty, freedom and
power of Grace in man's Conversion, has been in all times very great: and some
have given a greater share to man's power therein, then others that have given
too much: Therefore there have been Pelagdians (they went to the full) and
semi- Pelagians: And (for ought I know) there may be quarter- Pelagians, that
deny some part of the Grace of God: But it is to be observed, that God by his
Word has always determined the point for his own grace. In his great Oracle,
which I account the case of Esau and Jacob to be; when their Mother went to
inquire, the Lord answered, I love the younger and hate the Elder, and that
before they had done good or evil; It is my pleasure so to do, for I will have
mercy on whom I will. Now if you will go about to ask me how Reason umpires
this point in the Contest between Nature and Grace, we know that Nature
vanquished by the Word, has stood upon some proud and captious reasons, which
do rather show that it is determined against her; For the party that mutinies
and rebels does confess it, go^s against him: the mutiny of Reason is the
great reason that it goes against Reason in this point, as in that Opposition,
Romans 9. 19. Thou will say, Why does he yet complain, who has resisted his
Will? Man must needs be free and blameless, for God would have him so: Thus
Reason mutinies and complains, and comes with captious Arguments, but the
Apostle restrains it. Nay, O Man, who art thou that disputes, with God; which
makes it clear that God has determined against that part which holds up the
wasters, and makes insurrection. So then, the Grace of God is alone, and that
appears further, that Nature at all times is willing to part stakes; and its a
sign she is the wrong Mother, because willing to come to division, which Grace
will not, it will have all (...) none. I confess it is not the business of
modest men (for its liable to great exception and cavillation) no^ is it my
design to cry down Nature further then it need and ought; but this I speak
against, that those men that stickle for it, do not give something only to
Nature, but plume it with the feathers of grace, and enrich it with those
spoils that I take ill, that me thinks is not right: Let me give what I can,
what I ought to Nature: Let me adorn it but with its own, and if could be that
Nature might be adorned and grace lose nothing, it was more to be born: But
where the Sea gains, the Shore loses; so it is in these two, as much as men set
up Nature, they pull down Grace. Therefore, you that will be Advocates for free
Grace, do you kiss the hand of that Grace; whereby as the Apostle says, You
are that as you are: I^ prosecuting this I shall show.

etc.

Secondly, What those benefits are that practicle Godliness does derive from
the sense of Gods free Grace, in making us something out of nothing; us that
were not yet to be.

The Points to be maintained for the Luster and Glory of Gods free Grace are
five; the defending of which will keep you untainted from the diminution and
disparagement that it received in any.

Paul names the third Heavens) Philosophers name more; we must needs at length
come to some first mover, that we call the Primum Mobile, that moves the rest
under it; and it self is not moved by any Orb above it: for no process can be
in infinitum. So we may in the course of salvation count from step to step, for
so does the Scripture: But yet we must come to some Original, to some first
mover that moves all the rest, and is not it self moved by any, whether we go
forward or backward: Whom he Elected, them he called; and whom he Called, he
Justified; and whom he Justified, them he Glorified; and so from step to step*
but somewhere, we must begin; now go Retrogade in the same line; Whom he
Glorified; he Justified; and whom he Justified, he Called; whom he Called, he
Elected or Predestined. You must come at last to the first Original, whereof
there cannot be given any higher cause or reason; so then the reason of the
difference is not Orginally in Man himself; somewhere we must begin, from
whence we cannot rise higher. Now the free Grace of of God is the first round
in the Ladder of our Salvation, not any thing in Man, or the will or work of
Man. Here are three things coucht under this head.

First, There is a difference made between every Man that is saved, and every
man that is not; for all that is saving is difference making, whereby a man is
taken out of the heap and common lump of mankind. A vessel of honor is made
indeed of the same lump, but differs much from a vessel of dishonor; there
belongs a difference and a separation to every man that is saved, a separation,
not such as they call local, from the wicked of the world, but moral, whereby
his spiritual Condition is separated from all the not saved: Though all grace
that is discriminant and differencing is not saying, that I grant; yet all that
is saving is discriminant: And therefore you that will prove your selves to be
in state of salvation, are bound to prove the difference that is between you
and others that are not saved, nor can be.

Secondly, God is the maker of this saving difference between the saved and
others: In every step of your salvation there is some difference made; in
Election, there are Elect and others, Reus. 11. 7. In calling, there is an
actual difference between the called and others, etc. That God is the maker is
implied in the 1 Cor. 14. 7. Who makes thee to differ from another? some body
made thee to differ; and therefore he that calls himself, converts himself, is
like him that begets himself, or raises himself from the dead: Its a me^^^
imaginary thing, and if these two be true, then,

Thirdly, It will follow that the reason of this difference made by God is not
originally in man himself; the reason of comparative praeterition is not sin,
for then all might be rejected, because all men are under sin. The reason of
Comparative election is not good works, holiness, or worthiness of man; for by
that reason he should always take the best of men and leave the worst; but we
find the contrary, that God has taken the worst; Publicans and harlots go into
Heaven before you, and therefore there is a famous place, Romans 9. 11. That the
purpose of God might stand; it is not made good by the works of man himself;
not of works, but of him that calls is the purpose of God according to
election made good. They consult the Glory of Grace but ill, that pitch the
reason of Gods electing or calling, upon some Paritie or Probitie, or fit
temper of man himself; so our men lisp now adays toward a
quarter-Pelagianisme: (for I will not say it is semi-Pelagianisme) they say,
God calls man and indues him with saving Grace for that littleness or probitie
in man: But is this littleness or honesty they talk of of God or man, is it a
work of nature or Grace? if it be a work of Grace it is of God, and is no
otherwise a reason of Conversion then as one step may be in order to another,
grace in order to grace: All this while there is no offense: But if it be a
moral temper, and of man himself, then it is so much worse, they make God to
build on man, and to take a moral humane Foundation to a supernatural gracious
Act, to build supernatural grace upon the ground of common probity and honesty;
this does disparage the Grace of God; for as God in Creating of the world did
not work (...) matter praeexistent, so we say it is, in the Act of Grace: it is
the Creation of a new Creature: which brings him out of nothing, and not works
him out of any praeexistent matter. It is true I confess, that the best
disposition that can be in man to come to the Lord Jesus and believe in him, is
that which is called an Infant-like temper of meekness and softness, and
tenderness; for our Savior gives that rule, Except a man be like a little
Child, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; Peradventure he does not
mean the Glory of everlasting Life, but the Church state; he cannot be a true
Member of the Visible Church, unless he be made tractable, teachable, meek and
soft: But this is not a mere Moral or Natural temper, as if Nature should lead
on Grace; but it is a subaction, a moulding the heart by Word and Spirit to a
willingness to be brought to nothing for Christ; for there is something in the
work of man's Conversion that is like a preparatory to the main work.

neither: The one of them the Papists hold, That there may be merit of eternal
life by a man's own acting of Grace: But works of Grace died in the blood of
Christ; for that is the best of their opinion: But that a man-should merit
Grace, the first Grace by the works of Nature, or by any good works done by
Nature, that is a thing beyond the understanding and imagination both of us and
them; for Heaven as the reward of gracious works, we have a promise, if we walk
with God in holiness; but for the first grace, as the reward of works of
Nature, we have no promise, that for performance of what lies in us by the
power of Nature, God should give us grace: therefore we are, and that justly,
more offended at the Doctrine of merit of Grace, then at the Doctrine of merit
of salvation; the reason is, because Grace is more unproportionable to works of
Nature, then Heaven is to works of Grace; and the Kingdom of Heaven more
proportionable to works proceeding from grace, then Grace it self is to those
works that proceed from Nature; and therefore its too high to conceive of merit
of Grace, which is a merit of beginnings and first things, and that is not
usual; but merit is of the reward and end, and the Scripture insists on that
word, Romans 11. 35: Who has first given to God? as if that could not be to make
man the first giver to God; for that makes God a debtour of that which he
cannot owe, viz. Grace. For if it be Grace, it cannot be debt; for its
destroyed: and therefore though God may be a debtour in regard of his promise,
yet he cannot owe beginnings; but it any thing, its reward to some precedent
work of Grace; and therefore, as it is usual with us, that the man sollicites
the woman, the woman thinks it undecent to her sex and modesty to woo the
man: So God first invites, offers and draws, man does not first stretch out
his hand to God, but says God, I have stretched out my hand to again-saying
people; and our Savior in John 15. 16. You have not chosen me, but I have
chosen ^ou: Mark the Phrase, as the Apostle says. The man was not deceived but
the woman. Was not the man deceived? Yes; but not first: So it is expressed: We
love him because he loved us first, 1 John 4. 19. And this God urges as that
which most endears him; that he is the first in the work; he gives preventing,
and not only subsequent and following grace; he is the Author, not only the
finisher; he both begins the good-work and finishes it; and our will, does not
determine the will of God, (as they say,) but his will must needs determine
ours; the reason is, because the determining will is the master-will, the
determined is the waiting-maid: How incongruous is it to sense, that the will
of man being made willing, should lead the will of God, and not rather the will
of God lead the will of man? How incongruous is it that working is set before
Being? Every thing must have an esse before operari; now its Regeneration and
Conversion that gives a Being, makes the new creature: For if a man should work
before he be, then it would set even Philosophy cross to it self: But man does
not work, or make himself, nor give himself a spiritual being; for, Ephesians. 2.
10. We are his workmanship, created in Jesus Christ, etc. which is the Apostles
Argument to prove, that salvation is not of our selves, no more than Creation:
As therefore the Tree must be made good, before the fruit can be good, so the
man must be a new creature, and that he cannot make himself to be; and
therefore Grace first works, and this preserves its place, which is to begin
and to create.

That God puts forth more or greater Grace in those that are saved, than in
those who are not saved. This is one of the greatest points in the whole
subject of Grace, which if you understand and rightly, is that which states the
Question in difference in all this controversy; namely, that Peter, for
example, is more engaged and bound to God than Judas for the grace that is
given him, and had more bestowed on him that Judas had; and if so, then God
puts forth more grace in them he saves, than in them he does not save. I
dispute not whether of them that are saved, all are partakers of equal grace;
those that had talents were not all equal: But I am speaking of the saved, and
the not saved, and do say, That if equal Grace be given to two, they will both
be saved; if equal Grace had been given to Judas as to Peter, then Judas would
have been saved as well as Peter, one as well as the other: No, you will say,
that follows not; for there may be some one that has less Grace afforded him
than another, and yet is saved by the less, when the other is not saved by the
greater; because the one joins with and applies himself to the less Grace, when
the other resists the greater; as a weak horse that buckles to it, will draw
more than a restive lazy Jade, though stronger, that hangs back; as in weighing
of weights by the scales, if there be a difference in the scale, and one end be
heavier, it shall weigh down a greater weight, because it has somewhat to help
it, viz. the weight of the scale it self: But if this be granted, then man
turns the scale; for if one man may be saved with less Grace than another, it
is not Grace that makes the difference, but it is the will of man, that by
joining of his forces with the lesser Grace, the weaker Grace makes the scales
praeponderate; and so it comes to that which we must of necessity avoid, if we
will defend the free Grace of God, that that which makes the difference is in
man, somewhat what that he has from himself that turns the Balance; and
therefore I conclude, (for I think it a Demonstration) that two men receiving
equal Grace, will both be saved; for if he that receives the lesser Grace shall
be saved, and not he that receives the greater, that must be because the will
of man strikes in; then the will of man has somewhat to say and plead, I make
my self to differ, I have reason to glory in my self, because having less grace
than another had, I determine my own will to salvation.

That (which is a point that few men will believe, but it must be maintained)
it is far better, and more for our comfort, that our salvation is carried on by
the free grace of God, and the Sovereignty thereof, than if it had been
committed to our own hand, and left to our liberty and power. The sense of man
does rather incline to think, it had been better for mankind that they
themselves might have had some stroke in their own hands to have brought
themselves unto salvation, and then it is very likely that more men by far
would have been saved, than will be saved now; and that there is more Justice
that men should be condemned for not believing when they may, and have power if
they will; for he that has power to believe in Christ if he will, and does
not, his condemnation seems more just: But that is a great error; for now that
it is in Gods hand, it is more likely and better for our salvation, because now
some will certainly be saved; those whom God has chosen and elected, and those
few on whom he determines to show his grace, they will be saved, their
salvation will be carried on infrustrably and invincibly; but if it were left
to the liberty of man, as man is now, to dispose of himself, I say. Not one man
in the world would have been saved; for man being once a bankrupt already, and
having lost that stock of Grace bestowed upon him at first, and having no power
in his hand to recover, all had certainly perished, or uncertainly been saved,
if left to themselves; therefore the salvation of Gods Elect is in a far surer
hand, than if it had remained in man's power; for they are infrustrably brought
home, who, being left unto themselves, neither would nor could have been any
more saved than those that do stand out against God; for if none so left do
come in, we may well conclude, that all in that case would have stood out as
well as these do. But here an Objection may be made.

For Answer;

non posse, not upon his non velle, which yet our Savior affirms, Joh. 5. 40.
Ye will not come to me, etc. It Is true, God has linked his Glory and man's
chief good or salvation together, and so there is a self-love that is joined
with the love of God; for the salvation of man being linked to the Glory of
God, it follows that there must be self-love joined with it, I mean spiritual
self-love, self-denying self-love: But observe, besides this, there is a carnal
and sensual self-love in all men, and that we properly speak of when we speak
of self-love; that has the stronger bias of the two, and carries us from
salvation rather than to it; and this is the self-love which prompts us to that
by which we are deceived all our lifetime, pursuing rather what has the
species and color, than what has the reality of happiness and content: And
therefore that which is here alleged as a reason why we should all be saved by
our own will, if so be there were a power, because there is self-love in us, is
rather the reason why no man would be saved, there being two self-loves, and
every man naturally following the heavier bias of the two, which wheels off to
the body, and to the world, and to things speciously good, and draws him off
from the concernments of his salvation; and this self-love rather is the cause
of man's hate and dislike of God, because he assigns and pronounces Judgment to
sin, which self-love loves, and tenders salvation in such way as is destructive
to carnal self-love: But as for that which we call spiritual self-love, there
goes much Grace to the working of it in man; indeed if we had this self-love,
we should have one of the greatest fruits of supernatural Grace: This is not
naturally in man himself, nor can be, until there be an alter ego, a new self,
another self; for there are two selfs commonly in every man; Not I, but sin in
me, Romans 7. Not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. the one self-love follows
the one, the other the other, which is the stronger, and leads a man unto
perdition.

Let all Patrons and Advocates of Grace maintain the prevalency of Grace by its
own strength, and not because of some accessaries that strike in with it at
such a time, as the tide that strikes in with the wind. But my Father draws,
says Christ. The Jesuits that have a hand in this controversy, will tell
you, That the power of Gods Grace is prevalent, may fall out so or so in the
event, by reason of congruities and seasons, fit moods and tempers, and
persuasions; Blanda: tempora fandi; God speaks to men in a seasonable time: Few
men (say they) but may be wrought upon if they be taken by the right ear;
there are some times of speaking to men when they are in a good mood; but
otherwise come to speak to them when they are off the hooks, in a morose
untractable condition, as Jonah was in when God said to him, Do thou well to
be angry? Yea, said he, I do well to be angry to the death; then if you move
them with Arguments they prevail not: A man so taken may resist the offers of
salvation; but we hold that the Grace of God is strong, by its own strength
able to overcome the most morose, obstinate, cross grain that can be, when God
intends it to be powerful: Maintain therefore the prevalency of Grace, not
doing as those that will allow Grace to be prevalent in event, but it is by
reason of advantages that hit at that time, as Auxilliaries that come in and
get victory; this is too little to say of Grace, that it stands in need of such
helps; but it conquers the most cross grained and unwilling heart; and
therefore the invention is but to disparage and disgrace the Grace of God. If
you understood these things, it would, I hope, settle you to be firm Advocates
of the Grace of God. But,

Secondly, The benefits that practical godliness does reap by the exaltation of
Grace.

If thou receive, why do thou glory as if thou had not received, 1 Cor. 4.
7. If you will hold your selves receivers, that will pull down your glory; for
glory is of man that has not received.

Where are the nine, says he; and he that was cleansed and came back was a
Samaritan, that is not an idle word; the rest were Israelites, and took their
cleansing to be a courtesy due unto them; but this man thinking himself
remote, and if he were a Savior, yet he was no Savior to him, he was cleansed
and came and gave thanks: showing that a man that has least reason to look for
any thing is most thanful.

For the Love of Christ constrains us, that is, by bond of Ingenuity, Cor. 5.
14.

Peter to his Sense and Tears; makes a man that has tasted that the Lord is
Gracious, like a drop of oil on a rusty Spring, makes it go nimbly, sweetly,
and pleasantly. The sense of Gods mercy, that God picked him out, and made him
one that he would convert, and that when he had no more propension and
likelinesse then another, this quickens a man.

Sept. 23.
and not be faint, Isay. 10. last verse.

man savingly does believe and come to Christ, except God by an Almighty and
Omnipotent hand do draw him: The drawing of God is called the Act of God
converting man; the coming of man is called the Act of man converting himself;
both you find in this text, Gods drawing and man's coming: In the first of
these, man is merely passive, in the second man's coming unto Christ, he is
active as by way of comparison: the Sun shines upon the Wall, the Wall is
Passive, does nothing; in the Walls shining back by virtue of the Suns
shining upon it, the wall may be said to be active, because it shines back the
Beams by reflection, a plain case; God giving this Divine grace, Man is passive
therein: man converting unto Christ, and believing in him, by virtue of the
drawing of God is active, and performs the duty that is required of him: For
though Faith be an Act of Gods Power giving, yet it is an Act of Man's duty: I
believed, therefore I spoke: the Act is his, the power is Gods; this point our
Savior proves affirmatively, by an Argument drawn out of the Prophet Isaiah,
that all that have been taught of the Father believe and come to Christ: and
because that every man so taught does come, therefore no man does come but he
that is drawn, which is the Negative in the Text: from the affirmative he
proves this Negative; every man that is taught of God comes to Christ;
therefore no man does come but he that is so drawn; as in the natural being
there is the Creation of God, making us so to be: so in the Recreation or
making man a new Creature, there is a work of God making us to be so; and I see
no reason but man may as well make himself at first in the natural being that
he has, as re-make himself spiritually: And I wonder any man should pretend
that man has a greater stroke in making himself a new Creature, then he had in
making himself a creature at the first: A man may raise him self from the
natural and bodily death, as easily as he can raise himself from a Spiritual
death; therefore it is said that God quickens ^s being dead, Ephesians. 2. 5. Why
then may some say, i^ there no power in man to come unto, or to believe in
Christ Jesus? I answer, there is not active power to begin to come, but there
there is a passive and obediential power, as the Schoolmen call it, which is a
power to receive this work of God, to receive the impression from God, but not
an active power to work it in man himself: as in Ezekiels dry bones, the
Question was, Can these dry bones live? there was no Power for them to come
together to work life in themselves; but a passive Power to receive the breath
and life when God gave it: So there is in Man, he is not a stock or block, but
has a power obediential to receive the work of God: the work of Regeneration
and of Faith, is not wrought sine duobus, without two, as Bernard says, the
one in quo, the other a quo: the one in whom it is wrought as the Subject, that
is impotent Man; the one by whom it is wrought as the Agent, that is the
Omnipotent God: it there were not such a nature in man, a rational nature,
there is not quod salvatur, that which could be saved, if the arm of God were
not revealed there is not quod salvat, that by which man is saved; so that
there must be these two. From this point thus laid down and opened unto you, I
will sum up certain observations proper to the Text.

for we are His workmanship, Ephesians. 2. 10. and the dead does not first work, but
the living upon the dead, Ephesians. 2. 5. and as Ishewed in Jer. 31. 18. turn
thou me and I shall be turned; Gods act of turning, Gods, before man's being
turned; and after I was instructed I repented; you may further read this point
proved in Jer. 17. 14. Heal me, Oh Lord, and I shall be healed: Save me, and I
shall be saved: Gods healing and saving must precede and go before our being
healed and saved: It Is true in order of time, a Christian is not always
sensible to observe the time of Gods working, before the time of his
Converting; the work of God, and the act of mango so near together; who can
discern by way of comparison, any time between the shining of the Sun on the
wall, and the walls reflecting back the light of the Sun; and yet reason will
tell you from the order of Causes, the Sun must first shine on the Wall, so
neither is it in this Case. The Lords drawing and Man's coming are not sensibly
discerned in difference of time, but in order of nature and Causality; Gods
work is first which draws, and man's conversion next which comes to Christ;
Christ taught this Point in the comparison between the fruit and the tree;
suppose the tree bad, it brings not forth fruit that it may be changed into a
good tree but first the Tree is made good, and then yields good fruit, Math.
12. 33. And Austin has a like Similitude: Non ideo currit rota ut fit rotunda
sed quia est: the wheel does not therefore run that it may be round; but first
the wheel or bowl is made round, and then they run; so man does not work or
act that he may be made a new Creature, and walk in Gods way; but first he is
made Gods workmanship, drawn by Divine grace, and then acts, and brings forth
fruit to God; and it is the saying of Hugo, speaking of the grace of God and
the will of man, Gratia operatur eam deinde per eam; First the grace of God
works the will, and then it works by the will; here is the state of the point,
grace makes the will and works it, and then works by it.



I will give a new heart: I will cause you to walk in my ways, Ezekiel. 36. 26. I
will put my fear in their hearts that they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32.
40. The Lord thy God will Circumcise thy heart to love the Lord, Deuteronomy 30. 6. So
in the Text, No man can come to me except my Father draw him; here is the work
of God; for believing, the drawing of the heart, is Gods, and then man's work
follows: and verse 45. Every man that has heard and learnt of the Father
comes to Me. I might multiply Scriptures, but these may suffice.

potentia Naturalis, the faculties of seeing, hearing, and sense, we do not by
seeing and hearing learn to see and hear; but we perform the Act by the habit:
First, there is a power to see and hear, and then we see and hear: So it is in
these infu^ed habits that God powers into us by his Spirit; there is an habit,
and then there follows an Act, a faculty of knowing God, and then an Act of
loving God follows; we do not acquire them by acts of our own; we have the
faculty, the power, first given, and then we act.

aequilibrio, like a pair of even scales, not determining it to conversion,
then he concurs but contingently, but concomitantly, upon condition that the
will do and move it self; and this indeed would be no great matter; for by
this means, God does less in the Conversion of man, then man does; for the
will of man gives the act, turns the scales, specifies the event, not the
grace of God; and how disgraceful is this to the will of God, that the will of
man should do it, and the grace of God not: so it would be, if God should do no
more then set the will of man in equipoise, only make him able to turn himself:

Romans 8. 29. as those that love God are said to be, such as are called with an
intention of God to bring them to himself; and oh how powerful and infrustrable
is that grace which comes and is given by God with an intention to save you;
for if that grace should not save you, you must say that God is not able to
save you: Oh! But, may some say, the hard heart of man may refuse, rebel, and
resist; not the intention of God certainly, not the purpose of God doubtless:
Austin speaks very well to this purpose, illa a nullo duro cord respuitur quia
durities tollitur; this grace, this converting grace is refused by no hard
heart, because it is therefore given, that the hard heart of man may be taken
away, and as a man may properly convey it to you by this comparison; light
being given to take away darkness; the darkness cannot resist the light,
because it is therefore made that the darkness be expelled; so that grace which
is therefore given and intended to take away the heart of stone, (that is, the
resisting heart) cannot be resisted, because the intention carries it; I will
take away the heart of stone, says God, and so, to the comfort of a man thus
converted by grace be it spoken, the very stony heart, the hard heart cannot
resist.

Judas, and others as well as to me: And here, beloved in the Lord, you may see
from this observation,

First, Why God will have all the praise of Salvation to be to his grace.

Secondly, why God will have all the glorying to himself; for it would not be
just with God to rob the will of man of glorying, if man himself deserved it.

First, God will have all the praise to be to his grace, Ephesians. 1. 6. that we may
be to the praise of the glory of his Grace: it is glorious grace indeed, and
that we may be to the praise and glory of it, therefore God shows, and sets it
forth in all the great Turns of the Salvation of man: the first step is
Election, then Calling, Justification, and glorification, in all which grace is
set forth, that so all may be to the praise of glorious grace.

Secondly, God will have all the glorying to himself; and truly this is the
great mark of Gospel doctrine, that it brings the glory to God only, in 1 Cor.
1. 3^. that be that glories may glory in the Lord; therefore he has made
Christ to be Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, made
Christ to be all, that he that glories may glory in the Lord; which could not
be if man glory in himself, or have works of his own.

drawing man to Christ, that tells men who shall be saved, who are elected; as
God sends Christ to man, so he draws man to Christ; as he gives Christ to man,
so he draws men to Christ, and those he gives to him, he draws to him: For
verse. 37. All that the Father gives to me shall come to me, and no man can come
except the Father draw him; therefore all that are given are drawn to Christ.

Adam, but the Law was; and therefore there are some remnants of the Law left,
as fragments of the old writing that were written in the heart of man at first,
but not a line of Christ in the Book of the Creatures, or in the broken Table
of man's heart; and therefore since nothing of Christ was written in the Heart
of natural man, he must be revealed or else not known, and therefore its said:
2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. That Christ has brought life and Immortality to light by the
Gospel, being therein revealed: so that had there not been a book of
Revelation, revealing Christ to you, Christ had not been known; if there had
not been a hand of drawing to bring you to Christ, you had not come, Christ
reveals God, and God reveals Christ who is a stranger to man till then.

Reas. Secondly, Man by nature is opposite to Christ: Why? he is opposite to
the righteousness of another: For every man naturally would be saved by his
own; he is opposite both to Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation by
another: and therefore that man may be brought of his natural root and pride,
whereby he despises and not submits to the righteousness of another, Romans 10.
3. and to be be sanctified and saved by another being full of himself: It must
needs be that except this man be drawn of God he will not, he cannot come.

Of all that thou have given to me I have lost none, save the Child of
perdition: that God might show his love to Jesus Christ, he will draw those
that he has given unto him: the Elect of God are as deep in Sin as others are,
by their own natural condition, and if they were not drawn by Gods mighty hand,
they themselves could not come; and therefore the Lord will draw them, that his
gift to Christ might be maintained and made good: there was great power shown
in bringing Israel out of Egypt, which was a Type of Gods bringing His Elect
out of the slavery of their natural condition wherein they lay; the Elect are
given to Christ and appointed to be members of him, that Christ might not be a
head without a body, a bodilesse Christ; he will bring all his members and
plant them into him, for the Election of God does not make a man a member of
Christ by his purpose, or decree; as the Clay appointed to be a Vessel of
Honor, has no more form or fashion by the election, until it come to working,
than that which is not so appointed: So Gods Electing you to be Members of
Christ Jesus is by purpose; but Gods fashioning, and forming, and drawing you
into the shape and likeness of members, that makes you so, and till this work
be, you are at as great a difference, and lie in as lost a ^^ndition in your
selves as others do*

of man, that it is a work of great Power to bring men to believe; for there
are three things so opposite and obstructive to man's coming, that if he were
not drawn by the power of God, he would not come.

First, Man's Reason, which looks for satisfaction, till it be repelled, 2 Cor.
10.

Secondly, Man's Righteousness, which man bears up and holds as fast as he
can, for it is his gain.

Thirdly, The lusts of man that are opposite to the Reign of Christ, for he
came to destroy the works of the Devil: all which make it plain that it
requires drawing to bring men to the close profession of him.

Ita credimus potentem, ut negamus volentem, says Prosper. We believe the
Power of God fashioning and forming the heart, and bringing it unto faith, but
we deny the work of God to be violent and compulsorie: when the Apostle says,
the love of Christ constrains us, there is a Constraint of love, 2 Cor. 5. 14.
and therefore dream not of such a drawing, which is whether you will or no^ for
there is a powerful constraint by love it self: we do so believe the love of
God to be potent, as that we do deny it to be Violent; this man's free coming to
Christ is nothing contrary to Gods powerful drawing: Its said, I will draw them
with the cords of man, with bonds of love, Hosea 11. 4. which is not a promise
of Ravishment and Compulsion, but of a gracious and sweet drawing of the people
to him: and does not the Church pray for this drawing, Cant. 1. 4. draw me and
we will run after thee: and do you think that the Church prays for violence to
be used: No! the Church prays for such a drawing of God as may be followed by
the voluntary running of men; is there any man that knows how strong and sweet
this drawing of God is, but does and can pray for it with as great affection,
as he that sticks fast in the mire will cry for some to help him out; because
if it be a violence, it is pleasing to him to be so drawn, and therefore the
old word in this point was fortiter and suaviter: God draws men unto Christ,
strongly and sweetly: it is powerful, and therefore strong, and yet it is not
violent but sweet too: and is this drawing any thing contrary to man's freedom?
does not God know how to work upon the heart of man? determining and carrying
it out so as shall not prejudice the freedom and inclination of it? Cannot the
maker of the heart work upon the heart, he that turns the heart as the rivers
of water are turned in the channel? It was the saying of Austin long ago, De
ipsis hominum voluntatibus facit quod vult: God works upon the will of man what
he will: does not the Workman that makes the watch know all the springs, and
can set the watch going? and does not God that made the heart know how to move
and determine it to himself? did not God make the day without the Sun at first?
and cannot he move nature by his omnipotency without ordinary course? Its true;
I know men acute, men of the Schools, do hold it hard, if not impossible, to
reconcile Gods working with man's freedom, and think it not feasible, but
rather that the one crosses and thwarts the other; but I say there is a harmony
and sweet agreement, between Gods drawing and man's coming, when he will convert
and bring in the Soul to close with Jesus Christ, as there is between a weight
or plummet of a Clock; that accelerates the motion, and a natural propension
toward the Center, which both joy^, and inter^^^r no^: so it is here, the will
of man moves freely, and God by his drawing does give to it a greater weight
that accelerates the motion of the will; and by how much the more the Lord
draws, by so much the freer is the will made; Oh! that men would consider
this, and if they do not understand this, let them believe that God does, the I
pray what may be the meaning of that place, Phil. 2. 12. Work out your
Salvation: here is man's working for Gods works in you to Will and to Do; a Text
that plainly shows, that the work of God, and the work of man may very well
stand together: and the truth is, there are four things that I think according
to the principles of learning (of Scripture I am sure) that may make Gods
drawing man to Christ, and man's free coming very reconcilable, so as the more
man is drawn the freer he shall be, he shall come, as the Text, Nay: he shall
run, Cant. 1. 4. as the more weight, the freelier moves the plummet downwards.

Appetit us summi boni (...) the desire of my Chief good is an infinite desire:
Why? because the highest good must needs have the highest appetite, there being
nothing that may put measure or limitation to that desire, and therefore in the
desire thereof* the heart is necessarily carried, and not indifferently,
contingently, remisly.

Secondly, The chiefest good of man consists in this, the having and enjoying
of God: for this is the highest and most satisfactory good, that fills the
appetite: whereby the heart of man can be taken up and that fully; and there is
but one medium to the attainment of this chiefest good: there is but one line
leads unto it; and being so, the chief good and the line are equally desired;
the means is knowing of Christ, coming unto or coming in by Christ: so that
when the chief good is but one, and the means but one to it, there can be no
dissent of man's heart to either of these when they are known and apprehended;
and that this is the chief good and the only means to it you are taught, in
one text of Scripture (as I conceive) John 17. 3. This is life eternal, that
they know thee, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ: if the knowing of
God and life eternal be the (...) bonum, and knowing Christ the only means that
leads to that end, then without all question the will of man once apprehending
this to be so, is carried without indifferency necessarily in the pursuit of
both.

drawing, in the next verse 45. Its written in the Prophets, they shall be all
taught of God; every man that has heard and learned of the Father comes to me:
So that hence I prove, that the will naturally follows this voice of God; and
if this be Gods drawing, Gods teaching, what contradiction can there be between
these two; Gods drawing, and Man's coming; every one that is thus taught is a
Comer, a Believer in, and a Closer with the Lord Jesus, and does as freely come
as a man in the dark does follow a Lanthorn or light set up.

on it, and is taught to know God himself to be the chief good, and Christ the
only means leading thereunto: For this time this resistance is bound up, and
opposition is not made, though there be a power of resisting remaining, that
will sometimes put out it self, though not now. That Is the third Observation.

Except my Father that has sent me draw him. Wherein there are three things to
be taken up.

First, That it is the Father of Christ that draws all the saved unto Christ:
He draws all the appointed Members that are fore-given to his Son by him: The
Father has given them; and the Father that has given them, draws them. Every
one that is the Fathers gift to Christ, is the Fathers workmanship drawn to,
and created in Christ Jesus: For the gift of God which is by Election, is made
good by the drawing of God, which is by his calling, or his operation according
thereunto; now because they are the gift of God by election, therefore they
shall surely come to him by the Fathers traction; All that the Father gives to
me shall come to me, ver. 37. Why? because my Father will draw them; and if my
Father will draw, they shall come: And therefore God in Joh. 15. 1, 2. is
compared to a husbandman that sets in the graff, Christ is the stock or body of
the tree that bears and feeds it, and the Believer is the graff that is set in
by the husbandman: Here is a distinct operation; God sets, Christ sustains and
maintains it, and he that is called and converted is the graff planted into
this Tree, and saved by Christ Jesus.

But does not Christ say in Joh. 12. 32. that he draws? I, if I be lifted up
from the earth, will draw all men to me. How is it then said, Except my Father
draw him?

work, in bringing men to Christ, yet we may thus distinguish upon this
objection, That Christ being crucified and lifted up, draws all men to him
objectively, as a healing Serpent set on the pole, to be looked upon by the eye
of Faith: But God the Father draws to Christ effectively and powerfully,
working that power and life in them whereby they may come, begetting a new
nature, and giving a heart propending unto Christ, and closing with him. And
therefore if God should send Christ, and leave man to himself, (as most think
they can believe and be converted by themselves) this great inconveniency
thereof would follow, that the Election of God would be defeated and made
frustrate; but those he gives, he makes to come to him to whom they are given,
and so becomes both Christ's Father and theirs.

By those words, Except my Father draw, there is no mean^^g to shut out Christ
or the Spirit from this drawing work; for the work of the Trinity in converting
man is undivided. But shall I tell you, by the relative name of Father is (as
often in other places) meant, except man be drawn by a Divine hand, an
omnipotent power and operation of God; for that is the thing that Christ
intends, that no man can come and be a believer in him, except it be by a
Divine power and operation wrought in him, above man himself; so that it is not
any way intended to divide the Three Persons, or separate any of them from this
work, but to divide the work of God from man; and this is the reason that some
men do affirm omnipotentiss^mam potestatem, a most almighty power to go forth
from God that works the conversion of man, because it is said, Except my Father
draw him; and truly I know not why that expression should be quarrelled at, if
we do but consider the impotency of man to believe in Christ and be converted;
if we consider next that it is called a Creation, ( created in Christ Jesus,)
and a resurrection from the dead; and if also we consider what the Apostle
says of it, Ephesians. 1. 18. where there is weight of words, the exceeding
greatness of Gods power, according to that which God put forth in raising
Christ from the dead; we need not be ashamed to say, that God puts forth an
almighty power in making man believe, nor to look upon it as an uncouth
expression.

Thirdly, I observe from this Point, How impotent and unable man is to that
which is his greatest concernment. I know we are weak in other things; but to
be weak in that which is the main concernment of salvation is sad: This I would
have you to observe, that in that wherein your life lies, and the way to life,
in that very thing you are weak as water, and no more able to believe than to
keep the Law; and yet you will say by rote, I think many times that it is
impossible to keep the Law of God, but will not grant but that you can believe;
and yet let it be observed here, that God hereby signifies, that you are as
impotent to this, that is the great concernment of man, as to any thing else:
And,

There might be a fourth thing observable, God that thus imploys his power,
does it in his drawing man to Christ. See the method whereby God will save you;
he will not go to bring you to the Father himself, the Father to the Father
immediately, as to an absolute Judge, as Luther says, What have I to do with
an absolute God? he will damn me, and not abate me a farthing of the
righteousness of the Law, which I cannot keep. It Is true, he could have made
man able to keep his Law, and have made man perfect; but God will keep his own
way, and save man in and by his Son: Why, may some say, this is about; why does
he bring men to Christ? Surely God is so strict in keeping the way that he has
set for saving man, because that is his Covenant, and therefore brings to his
Son Christ, that he may save them; and as the husbandman will graft you into
him. And let this that is Gods way be your way; if you could find another, do
not look after it. By this you shall know the power of God, whether it be in
you, by this which is the work of it: It sets you not to other ways, but draws
to Christ.

The Use of this fourth Observation may be threefold.

That a regenerate man is twice Gods Creature: I may safely call him so; once
as he is a man, in his natural estate, made up of Soul and Body; next as a
regenerate man, created in Christ; and if men consider it well, that a believer
is called a new man, a new Creature, why should there be less power, why
should we think it less work to make a new man, then to make a man to be? Lay
your heads to consider this point, and you will find it very difficult why it
should be more the hand of God in this, then to make man to be: man has a
natural life, what is that to the purpose? for natural life is but a death in
comparison; and therefore its said, them that are dead in Trespasses and Sins
has he quickened: and whereas there was in the matter of our first creation no
propension to become a man, more then any thing else, so there was no
opposition; but now to this new creature, there is not only in us no
propension, but there is more, there is an antipathy and opposition, so as God
has somewhat to take away, as well as somewhat to give: I will take away the
heart of stone: so that it is a harder matter to make a man a second time, then
at first.

of Miracles did use men as in healing diseases and raising the Dead, Paul and
Peter, etc. So, God in calling and begetting you to himself and his Son by the
Gospel (as Paul says, I have begotten you by the Gospel) uses the Agency of
men even in working Faith and Conversion: this I thought good to put in,
because its clear, and that no man might stumble to look for a kind of
Enthusiastical Conversion, that God should work Faith, and Repentance, without
the use of any means: God uses instruments to awaken you, and excite you, be
you excited. Behold I stand at the door and knock, and God does not ordinarily
convert those whom before he has not excited, convinced, and awakened, there
are instruments used; though the power be Gods, So, as a man that has a Sore
expects not healing from the Cloth that holds on the Plaster, but from the
Plaster it self: I make this comparison, to signify that we are but the Cloth
that keeps on the Plaster, we do but apply and hold it on.



Sept. 30.
That both by the direct word no man can, and by the Power of God which goes to
the making man come, it appears that man is Impotent and Unable of himself
thereunto, and there is more goes to the converting of a man, then is in man
himself; which I confess is a point that I pitched upon before, but it follows
properly now I am gleaning from the words of the Text what can be further
gathered, from which observation these three things follow.

First, That man is naturally at a distance from Christ, being not in him
already by his first birth: but is to come unto him.

Secondly, This coming of man to Christ Jesus is a motion or passage from state
to state, so that indeed no man does come to Christ, but he does change his
estate and condition, Joh. 5. 24. he that believes is passed from death to
life: Oh! that God would make you look out for this transition, that you may be
sure you stand not still in the first estate wherein you were.

Thirdly and lastly, It follows that man is impotent to his greatest
concernment; not only for keeping the Law, for whole and perfect obedience to
God (which yet may humble man) but also to that on which hangs the great hinge
of Eternal life, his coming to Christ, that so you may be confounded in your
selves and quite ashamed.



to God that works in us; and therefore let no man look for a sudden
enthusiastic conversion, a faith wrought in without the ordinary way and means
we do not prompt you to look for, or to look unto; and to say all in short, God
can bring forth and work faith in the heart of man by himself without
instruments; as he made the day before he made the Sun, so that you see he did
not need the Sun to make the day: but now in the settled course of his
providence he works by man: Christ could have brought the Fish to hand to the
shore, but he would bring them to Peter's net, that was the usual instrument to
catch the Fish: so God that can work to bring you to Faith in Christ, an
extraordinary and easy way, yet will bring you to the Gospel net, because
that is the means appointed for the catching of the Fish: this hinders not, that
God is the sole worker of Faith, and I make it appear by this Similitude: God
appoints Marriage for the procreation of Children, and the prepagation of
Mankind: and it cannot be in an ordinary way without it: but will any man say,
the Soul is propogated, the reasonable Soul is traduced; No! you generally say,
God alone infuses the reasonable Soul into the body of the Child, a fit
instance to show, that wherein God only works, yet there must be means used:
God draws to Christ by a powerful work, and yet he will have man excited,
awakened, persuaded, and he will have the door knocked at by the ministry of
man: to the end that man may first be made sensible of his own impotency: and
secondly, that he may know what God does for him, that when the means used do
not, he can with a Key open the heart: Thirdly, that he may deal with man in a
humane may, with man as man; in a moral way, by Counsel and Instruction one man
works upon another. And doubtless God does ordinarily give the quickening
life, the life of Faith and Grace, when he has first excited and hewed man by
his word, at least to make some preparation in man, if it be but so far as
conviction goes: for conviction is the last work wrought in man foregoing
Christ Jesus; look on your natural forms, if but of a Chicken hatched of an
egg: It Is not introduced without preparations and previous works foregoing;
and that there should be some preparations wrought in man, in order to bringing
him to Christ does appear: as without the sense of a disease, no man seeks to a
Physician; and the serpent on the pole would have been of no use, unless some
had been stung to look up to it for remedy: these things seem clear to me, that
there are some previous works going before; and I for my part am of judgment,
that the preaching of the law used by divines for the humbling and awaking of
secure hearts to look out after a Savior, was a proper way, that the law as a
Corrosive may eat and open the sore, and then bring in the Gospel, which indeed
is the converting ordinance that works faith and the love of God: as the poles
that plunge the Water do not catch the Fish, but the net, yet they drive the
Fish into that which does catch them; so I say not, that the Law does convert;
the doctrine of the Law setting home a man's Sins, convincing and humbling man
does not properly bring a man in to Christ Jesus, or faith in him, but drives
him to the Gospel-net, to seek for refuge in the Lord Jesus Christ; and this I
speak, as to the preparation of a man to Conversion, I have hewed them by my
Prophets, and slain them by the words of my mouth, Hos. 6. 5. Oh! that we had
these words of slaughter among us, though I know and grant, a man may be
wrought upon by the Law, that never comes home to conversion by the Gospel.

Now therefore I will open what goes to this work of Gods drawing, or what
there is required to this drawing of God, in a few things.

Acts 2. 37. the Apostle Peter Preaching, When they heard that Doctrine, they
were pricks unto the heart, and said, men and brethren, what shall we do to be
saved; and he said unto them, repent and be baptized: Now, to confess the
truth, this Text is not a certain President: nor does it follow, because these
were, that all that are brought to grace are brought so to, for God is not tied
to one and the same president to every man; but here went before the full work
of Conversion, a breaking of the heart; there was a grief, and fear of
damnation seized upon them; there was a desire of Freedom to know the way out,
and some hope of pardon. This is the ordinary ministerial way, though as I said
before, it is no certain president; for the Plaster does not lie so long upon
every sore as it does upon some; therefore length of time in Conversion is not
in all alike; there must be longer work of smart, and preparatories, on some,
upon others it lies shorter on and makes quicker work, and yet the work may be
as well done to: now these precedaneous preparations, (for we speak but
vulgarly, not accurately, of this great point) may be considered two ways;
either as preparatives unto life, going before any sparks of Spiritual life
begotten in the soul, or as latent effects of life already begun; as they are
preparatives foregoing all degrees of Faith and Regeneration, so they may tend
to life, if they be managed thereunto by God: if God so manage this grief, this
sorrow for sin, these wounds, so they may tend to life; but if they be found in
hypocrites, in men themselves that God leaves, then they will be like an egg,
that may peradventure be hatched to a Chicken, but if left by the hen, will
come to nothing: so this sorrow, grief, hope, etc. that may be wrought in
hypocrites by the ministerial call of the word, but are not sitten upon, will
come to nothing; they die, because they have no root, and so are like the
grass in the stony ground; for the present its green, but it vanishes, because
it has no root abiding; Secondly, if they be latent effects of a secret life
already begun, which few men know the time of its coming in (the knowledge of
the time of conversion or dropping in this Spiritual life into the Soul is a
hard thing) but if these initials be latent effects of some seed sown, then
they will abide, hold out and continue; and there is a difference between
preparatives going before life, and those we call latent effects of a secret
life; the one being left to your management will fail, and come to nothing; but
if they be effects of life, then they will continue: and let me give you in
this comparison, as in the production of man: (For a spiritual birth much
answers the natural birth) there may be, and are, some qualifications of the
matter whereof the body is made, that foregoes the coming in of the Soul: and
there are some latent effects of the Soul already come in; yet when this life
came in, she knew not peradventure that is the mother; but here is the
difference; if they be effects of a body yet dead, without life, they may go
away and often do; but if they be effects of life, then they do continue, and
there is growth and increase, and a ripening, till there be a full birth: so
it is in the Conversion of man; those effects that proceed from a life already
begun will hold out, and therefore I am sure, I am thus far right on the
point: but what were those in Acts 2. 37. they were preparatives managed by
God; for it seems they came to effect, did go before an act of regeneration;
Repent and be Baptized, says Peter; God gave the act after that; but God
managed it so, that they came to effect, and brought forth repentance, which
had it been left to man, peradventure had not wrought that effect.

before there be Sun rise: but when may it be said, now the soul quickens, now
it lives? it is when God actually puts a principle of life into the Soul, and
changes it by habitual grace, puts in the New creature the Divine nature, and
gives it power to believe: And in this work there are two things that God does
to be considered: first, his taking away the heart of stone, the vicious
quality, stocking up those roots of gall and wormwood, sin and delight in
sin, and turning the heart into a softness, and weariness of sin; and
this he calls a taking away of the heart of stone, Ezekiel. 36. 26. And then the
second work that joines with and follows upon it, is the planting of a new
principle in its place, as the heart of flesh is given to come in the place of
the heart of stone, whereby it shall be inclined to the work of faith and love;
and this shall be (as Christ said) a well of water springing up to everlasting
life, John the 7th; and this is a work above the power of all means used in
themselves, till God use this Pen to write by; but every tendent and previous
act is not regeneration, but that which gives a spiritual being, and a vital
principle; for until there be a spiritual being begun, there is no new Creature.

act of Faith, and this Christ speaks of here; coming is an act, a motion, a
man cannot come till he move; and so in Phil. 2. 13. (...), And Philip. 1. 19.
to you is given to believe, not to you is given the power to believe, but God
works the act, the will, not only the habitual change of the will; when he has
habitually changed the heart, then he draws the act out; the reason is, if God
had given the power, and put a new principle into man's heart, to turn and come
to Christ, and then leave him; he had done no more for his Elect then he did
for Adam, when he was in his integrity: God gave him a power to obey, but he
did not give him the act of obedience; because there was a habit and a power
given him, and a sufficient power that he might have used, if he would, and
have stood by it; for if God had not only given him a power, but this act, then
certainly he had stood; but now the Conversion of man is certain, not on a
peradventure: God puts a habit which he does not leave to the will of man to
act alone; if he should, I know not how it would succeed; he does not only
habitually, but graciously perform these great effects in his Elect; and this
is that which you may pray and look for; and though you were possessors of the
grace whereby you might be someway inclined, yet look for this drawing of God,
whereby you may be drawn to believing in Christ.

Octo. 14.
Gods dravving; and therefore because I will not Tautologize; I shall but (as
they say) tie a knot upon the long thread that has already run out in the
handling of these words, and shall make this point.

That they that come to Christ do come by the traction of God; Deuteronomy. 2.
which point I will open briefly in a few particulars.

First, There is a sort of people in the world in whom God will magnify his
great power in drawing them into a state of salvation, by bringing them in to
Christ Jesus, and they are described by a Character that is before hand unknown
to us, a great secret, that they are a people known to him, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The
Lord knows them that are his; and by this, that they are given to Christ by
the Father, Joh. 6. 37. 39. they are called the chosen of God unto salvation, 2
These. 2. 13. they are the people of his inward and secret Covenant.

Ezekiel. 36. 27. to write his law in their minds, and put it in their hearts,
Heb. 8. 10.

they shall be all taught of God, John 6. 44 45.



To the bringing of them in unto it.

To the keeping them in that state.

First, To the bringing of them in, for all that the Father has given to me
shall come to me, verse. 37. they shall all know me, Jer. 31. 34. they shall all
be taught of God, v. 45:

Secondly, to the keeping of them in, they shall not depart from me, Jerem. 32.
40. they shall not withdraw: of these the Apostle speaks, Heb. 10. last verse.
we are not of them which withdraw to perdition: And our Savior, Joh. 6. 37.
them that come to me I will in no wise cast out.

And this is promised peremptorily of all that are Confederate or Covenanted
persons; they shall all come to Christ, they shall all know me: and I will give
them a new heart and a new spirit, every one of them shall be taught of God: I
will, says God, and they shall: And this Covenant of God thus made with his
Chosen, before the world began, is irreversible, not to be frustrated, for it is
a purposed grace, 2 Timothy 1. 9. There is not one of these in whom this
undertaking grace shall not be operative, working, and succesful; this is as
the waters of Noah to me, Isaiah 54. 9. God compares his Covenant with his
people to the Covenant he made in Noah's flood, and explains it thus; as I have
sworn that the flood shall return no more, so that my Covenant concerning the
waters cannot be reverst; so neither shall the Covenant which I have made with
thee be frustrate; for it is a sealed Foundation; the foundation of God stands
sure, and has this Seal, Tim. 2. 19. And concerning this know;

First, That it is not built upon any contingent condition by us to be
performed, which man can defeat, no more then there is required any such
condition that the waters do not return.

Secondly, There are no (...) or marks set on this people aforehand to know
them by, distinctively from the rest of the world, until he that owns the sheep
does set his brand upon them, in their calling, according to his Elective
purpose; and these be they of better or worser mould, be they near or far off,
in what regard soever they shall come; and if they cannot, or will not, no more
then the rest of men, they* shall be all drawn; they shall every one be taught
of God in their times, by such uncontrollable power as they shall not resist:
but since this company has no mark before hand whereby it may be known, who
shall come to Christ and be drawn, therefore learn;

called to repentance, to faith, and to Christ; for in the tenor of the Gospel
there is no exception, it being given to every creature; the condition of the
Gospel Covenant is, that every one that believes shall not perish but have
eternal life, Joh. 3. 15, 16. Though this be made with all that are outwardly
called, yet this is not the inward covenant which is pursued and followed by
the drawing of God, that I have explained, I may set it forth by this
comparison: A King or Sovereign Prince has a company of Rebels in prison, and
being minded to pardon some of them, he sends and proclaims to them this word;
if any of them bring and show him his Privy Signet they shall be pardoned; none
can; but he sends it to some whom he pleases, whereby they are enabled to bring
it, these now are certainly pardoned; but yet the Proclamation is to all that
can, though the King be not bound to send it to all. Here is the case; the
major of the Syllogism is, whosoever believes shall be saved: the minor this,
but you and you that are in my secret purpose shall believe, and therefore you
shall be saved: here is the outward part of the Covenant proclaimed to all; and
here is the inward part, whereby he draws some that are known to him, whereby
they are certainly saved: the Covenant is but one, though there be two
propositions or parts in it.

These. 1* 4. Knowing brethren beloved your election of God: But first he had
given those marks whereby he did know them; for the Apostle did not know the
elect of God by revelation, but when the sun is risen, that is, by marks he saw
upon them.

God has chosen you to salvation, that is the end, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. but this, is
through the sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth, as the means;
both of them appertaining to one election: Ephesians. 14. Chosen us in Christ that
we should be holy; holiness is the means, for without it no man shall see the
Lord; and the end is salvation, to which we are said to be chosen: And
therefore let no man hang upon so loose a point the salvation of his soul, upon
Gods election, which he knows not; but on Gods choosing man unto the end,
because he chooses him also to the means; and the truth is, the means are as
much to be used as if there were no election of man unto salvation; which I
speak now, to confirm men in a necessity of the use of means, which are to be
used as if our salvation did hang upon it, as being only to be wrought out by
us.

end follows naturally of it self; there is no new thing to be done after the
use of means, for the accomplishment of the end; there needs no further seeking
of heaven, than that we seek faith in Christ, and holiness; all your work and
employment is about means to be used, and for salvation it self, let it follow;
it will, without any new employment of yours.

Now for the further handling of this point thus laid down, I shall in this
method proceed, in which I shall be as brief as I can.

First, To remove those rubs at which the Reason of man does stumble in the
conception of this Point.

Secondly, show the nature and properties of this drawing.

Thirdly, How we may know that we are drawn of God; or how a Believer that is
already brought home to Christ, may know that he is drawn of God.

For those rubs that lie in the way of Reason, they are three.

First, That man's act is not assigned to man himself, but God; as man's coming
to Christ is assigned to Gods drawing; which is easily resolved; For man's act
is assigned to man, Romans 10. 10. With the heart man believes; It Is not God,
it is not Christ that believes for us, as some fondly speak; but man's act is
performed by Gods power; Ille facit ut cre^amus; For, faith God, I will cause
you to walk in my statutes, Ezekiel. 36. 27. so the hand turns the wheel, but it
self turns not; the hand throws the bowl, but it self runs not: So it is here,
God makes man to believe, therefore it is plain, the glory of our believing is
not ours, whose the act is, but Gods, whose the power is; though the act belong
to us, yet neither the glory nor the power; not the power, and therefore not
the glory.

Secondly, This power of drawing forces the liberty of man's heart and will. I
Answer, There is a constraint of love, which is not of force; for the Apostle
says, The love of Christ constrains me, 2 Cor. 5* 14. God draws by the cords
of a man; that is, sweetly; the drawing is not against the will, because it
makes the will willing; it does not move the wheel against the wheel, or the
natural motion of it, but with it; and then the heavier the plummet, the faster
the clock goes: If the power of God go with the will^ of man, it moves more
freely, as the stream does with the wind and tide; then the more power God puts
forth, the more willing you come, Thy people shall be willing, shall be
volunteers, in the day of thy Power, Psalm. 110. 3. as if the power of God, in
that day wherein its put forth, should make a man a voluntier in coming to
Christ Jesus. It Is true, God moves contrary to the natural stream, as the tide
carries up the River; but when the Lord puts a new Principle, a new bias into
the bowl, and that natural heart of sin is taken away, then this coming, though
it be with drawing, is so sweet, that the soul prays, Lord, draw me, and I will
run, Cant. 1. 3.

Joh. 3. 23. This is his command, that we should believe in his Son: So then
our believing in Christ is a commandment of God. And in Acts 17 30. God
commands all men every where to repent: Here you see that faith and repentance
both of them are commanded of God; and its the command that makes them to be
your duty: Well, yet for all this, both these are given by God, Phil. 1. 29. To
you li's given to believe, 2 Timothy 2. 25. If God peradventure shall give them
repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth: here you find that both are
given: Again, Circumcisc your selves to the Lord, and be no more stifnecked,
Jer. 44. (Oh Lord, may some say? does God put this impossible work upon me.)
Ezekiel. 18. 31. Make you a new heart and a new spirit, here these two are
commanded, Make you, and Circumcise you, and yet both these are promised and
given: Deuteronomy. 36. 6. I the Lord thy God will Circumcise thy heart, and Ezekiel. 36.
26. I will make you a new heart and a new spirit: Can any thing be plainer then
this; he commands, and works that which he does command; he commands, to
convince us of our debt, what is due; and of our impotency that we cannot pay;
that we may fall down at the feet of this God: and yet he gives too, for the
magnifying and honoring of his free grace to unworthy man, and his power to
impotent man that is unable; and therefore we distinguish between Legal
commands and Evangelical; those of the law require the duty, but afford no
strength; but the Gospel which commands faith and repentance that are
Gospel-graces, carry the grace and power with them; not unto all that shall
oppose and shut the door, but unto the Elect of God, and the people of his
inward Covenant; So that for a man to say, it is a Gospel command, is to say,
that it is possible through grace, that is, there goes grace and power with it,
which the Lord will convey by the command; for the commands of the Gospel are
vehicula spiritus, carriers and conveyers that carry along the Spirit with
them: John 6. 36. The words that I speak they are spirit and life; being like
the commands given to the dead, Arise, come forth. It is a vain thing to speak
commandingly to the dead: true, had they not ministered that which was
commanded, it had not prevailed; and such are the Gospel-commands of
repentance, faith, and making the new-heart: or else how should the Gospel-word
be called, as it is, the ministry of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 8. The ministry of
the Spirit is Glorious. So much for the removing of these ^ubs out of the way
of Reason.



there is cure: I but, says the cripple, the Angel moves the water, but I have
no body to put me in; so the promise invites, the Word calls, but I cannot
close with Christ there held forth. I am a cripple, and no need but of a hand
to help me; and whereas in Isa. 53. 1. there seems to be a double expression
concerning this point of faith, Lord who has believed our report, and to whom
is the arm of the Lord revealed! A man may say; I heard the report, and believe
it to be true, but the baring of the Lords arm must go to the making of man
believe, when we teach that men naturally cannot believe: men wonder and say
within themselves, why should not I believe as well as another man? I am as
learned and knowing in the Scriptures, and as pregnant as others; and why
should a man of a lesser measure and altitude of parts go before me in
believing? when we teach that men cannot keep the law of works, there is never
a one but will consent to it: truly I cannot keep the Law: I cannot love the
Lord with all my heart, and might, and strength; men yield they cannot; but
when we preach that faith is above your power, you cannot believe and come to
Christ, though we report the report of Christ to you, that you believe not; few
men that believe the one will believe the other: they will not believe but that
they can believe, as if it were an easier matter to believe in Christ, then to
keep the law; that is, as if it were easier to obey the Gospel, then it is to
obey the law, and that therefore such an omnipotent power, as this divine
drawing imports, is not necessary to make a sinner believe. Now I beseech you
consider, the Law has something in you: for being once written in the heart of
man, there do remain some fragments or rubbish, (if I may use that word, in
allusion to a building form) but of the Gospel there is not a line in the heart
of man by nature, because it is wholly revealed; and therefore it is as
impossible by a saving faith to believe in Christ unto salvation, as it is for
a man to keep the law; it is as easy for a man to love God above self, which the
law requires, as to believe in Christ Jesus with self denial: for in both, self
goes down; to love with all the heart which the law requires, is as impossible
as to believe with all the heart, as the Gospel requires and commands; and
therefore men are mistaken, that think faith is in their power, and confess
that obedience to the command is not.



Cursed is he that continues not in all things that are written in the Book of
the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 9. But now the Gospel requires only a sincere
heart: It Is true God in the Gospel is content and pleased with sincerity: and
mark what the Apostle says concerning the law: It Is a burden intolerable
which neither they nor their fathers were able to bear, Act. 15. 10. But Christ
says, that his yoke is easy, and his burden is light, Matthew. 11. 30. Here is
the difference; but to rise out of this estate into which we are plunged now
(for we must speak of a recovery and rising again) this is as hard and
difficult, as it is for us to keep the law, all is one. Suppose a man dead,
lying in the grave, bound in the grave-clothes as Lazarus was; and a man dead,
not bound at all, but perfectly loose from such impediments, is it not all on
to put life into either of these two? so though there be not a full integrity
of the duties required of necessity in the Gospel; ye^ man being dead and to
rise, recover and come again to a state of salvation and Gods Image: it is all
one power that is put forth, to raise a man by faith in Christ, which is
recovering Gospel grace, as to set a man in the state of perfection, which is
the life of Gods Image: but indeed this is made possible (as I said) through
grace to believe; but to keep the law perfectly is not made possible to us in
this life, no not by grace. God left it under an impossibility, called the
impossibility of the law, Romans 8. and therefore as the Apostle speaks of that
faith that is wrought in those that shall be saved: it is wrought by an
exceeding hyperbole of power, 1 Epes. 18. 19. ^he uses such a weight of words;
the exceeding greatness of his mighty power in them that do believe according
to the power that was exercised in Christ, when God raised him from the dead:
now Christ was perfectly dead, and lay under the weight of the sins of all
believers, and therefore the power that raised him up was omnipotent; and is
not this power exemplified in raising you to faith which is a recovering grace;
except men be pleased to deny that man is not so dead as Christ was, that he
has some degree of spiritual life, though Christ had no degree of natural
life; for then he had not been dead, as neither we, if it be so; and I know not
why they should deny the same omnipotent power, to raise them from being dead
in sins to come to Christ; for to deny the greatness of the power, is to deny
the degree of the death; and therefore I think it to be a good reason for the
conclusion of this digression, from the privation o^ defect that is in man to
believe, and the power that is necessary to relieve that defect, and heal that
privation; to argue the impossibility of faith to a natural man; And,

For that which is said, if others of lower form, less in parts, do believe,
why not I^^ why should not I think my self a believer, as well as he, or
another?

I reply, that in Scripture, especially our Saviors doctrine, the reason of
believing, and not believing, seems to lie very high and out of sight; (as they
say of the head of Nilus) mark and take no offense, but let your Reason stoop
to God and his Word) you believe not, because you are not of my sheep, John 10.
26. as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed; as if ordination to
eternal life were the original or cause of believing, Acts 13. 48. But we shall
look only into man himself, in whom there is reason enough for his unbelief:
how can you believe, that receive honor one of another? John 5. 40. there are
so many reasons for unbelief as there are master sins, for every master sin, as
it brings the soul under great guilt; so it hinders the soul from coming to
Christ Jesus: but then what reason in man can there be given for his faith in
Christ? We see many simple men the Scripture calls them babes, believe, learned
men, do not. We have read of a thousand converted at the first Sermon they
heard, as at Peter's Sermon: And again, many hear a thousand Sermons, and yet
are not believers. In short, though nature and art in their works require the
subject they work upon to be disposed and fitted with capacity, else the work
is hindered; (therefore the sun hardens and softens according to the temper of
the subject on which it works;) but God that works this faith, if he do not
find a subject prepared (as indeed he does not) he can make or create faith in
most indisposed subjects; for Creation requires not so much as matter to work
on, but works out of nothing, as we know, which nature cannot do. When God
works faith in y^^, he finds no propension to faith, but opposition; he finds
nothing, less then nothing in man, but he works it: I say, there is no cause
can be given, in man* why one believes, and not another: because it is the hand
of free and powerful grace, that works it in man, without finding any
propension unto it.



Secondly, By the conquest of Christ himself; for we must be partakers of that
before we can believe:

And thirdly, by the energie and operation of the Spirit; so that we may say,
as it is said, Zachariah 4. 6. Not by strength, (he means humane) not by power,
but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts: But to speak particularly to the
point.

Faith in Christ, as it is a duty in respect of the command of God; so it is a
principle of new life, in order to the recovery of the state of Gods Image: Now
let the consideration of faith, as it is a duty, pass, and consider it, as it is
a principle, seed, and root of spiritual life, whereby we live unto, or with
God; and then tell me in a sober judgment, whether nature can plant a
supernatural principle: (For plantation of principles the strength must be
supernatural:) whether a supernatural principle is likely to be planted by the
power of nature; I think there are but few that will affirm it: Forms
naturally begotten by generation are educed (as Philosophers say) out of the
power of the matter. But can a supernatural principle be educed by the power of
the matter? No, they rise merely out of nothing. I do not discuss now, whether
every duty of faith and repentance require a supernatural strength proceeding
from the principles already planted, as fruit from the ^oo^: but whether the
principles themselves, the habitual graces be of Gods plantation, yea, or no;
which no man will deny that thinks the new creature to be Gods work, as well as
natural man is. For (and it is but reasonable for me to speak it) shall we by
our natural being, confessedly be the creatures of God, and deny our selves as
new creatures, in regard of our spiritual being, to be of God: there are but
two places of Scripture whereby I prove all this that I have recited, John 1.
13. all believers are born (via^. by regeneration) not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God: a plain denial of the
will of man, to be a concurrent agent or cause in the work of regeneration: he
denies three things that natural generation has dependence on, and affirms
one; not of blood as natural generation, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God: This spiritual birth is left to be of God, and his
will; and mark, it is denied to be of the darling man's will: Deuteronomy. 29 4. you
have seen great signs and wonders (that one would think should have brought
faith out of a rock of stone) for the space of forty years, ever since you were
in Egypt, and came along through the wilderness; and yet the Lord has not
given you a heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear to this day.
Objects they had, that one would have thought should have wrought faith in the
heart of man: But the reason why they had not a jot of faith wrought in them
for so long a time, was; because God had not given them eyes to see: so that
the natural light of man is not that, wherein faith is seated: man may see and
not see: see and wonder; but not see and believe: a clear attestation that he
must see by Gods light; and perceive by a sense given to the heart by God: And
so I have done with that question, and shall now open the properties of this
drawing of God; which are four.





verse. 45.



First, It is a victorious drawing, prevalent over all resistance that can be
made against it: there is a contrariety in the heart of natural man to grace,
especially to faith, and no grace is so much opposed, tempted, beleaguered, and
fought against by the Devil, as a man's faith; and none that the contrariety of
nature makes head, and fights against, and resists, by reason of the innate
enmity which is in it, as Faith; it makes resistance, but how? As a drop of
water falling into a great fire, makes resistance to the fire as a drop can do,
but cannot make a victorious resistance to quench the fire, but is swallowed up
by it; so the resistance that is made against the power of God cannot be
victorious, but that the power of God overcomes all resistance and
withdrawment: My meaning is, when God engages purposely and intentionally,
according to his elective purpose, to draw men to Christ, then this power of
God becomes and appears to be victorious; then let Onesimus run from his Master
to Rome, God will find him in a prison there, and convert him; let Naaman be in
Syria, let the widow of Sarepta be in a City of Sidon, that is, (as Christ
means) out of all high ways to conversion, the power and grace of God will find
them out; I say, when God intends the work: For as Israel is prevailed over and
kept in slavery, until God says, I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my
people, and am come down to deliver them; then you know the deliverance is
wrought in despite of Pharaoh, then there was no longer keeping them under
slavery: So till the time be that God has appointed to draw his Children of
purpose to his Son by an actual call, a sinful lustful person lies in slavery
to every sinful lust, every cord holds him* and then he shall find a door open,
and the resistance removed and suspended for that time. When Moses was in
Egypt, and an Egyptian fought against an Israelite, he slew the Egyptian in
rescue of an Israelite; it was a preludium or presage that he should deliver
Israel out of Egypt, the whole body of them; and therefore when the body came
to be delivered forty years after this, he did it with a mighty hand: So God
victoriously brings out of the state of sin single souls, and slays their
corruptions, as victoriously as the whole Church shall be delivered at last
from the greatest Pharaohs, death, devil, and sin; and therefore observe the
style used in the Covenant is very peremptory, I will give; I will put; and on
man's part, They shall come; They shall know; They shall not depart away from
me. The reason of the victorious power of grace is, that the world moves by
carnal and sensual objects, and so the Devil and Flesh they move objectively,
their motion whereby they move from God is but objective, propounding pleasing
or fearful objects to the mind of man, either drawing, or alluring, or
affrighting a man from faith in Christ; now if Gods moving and drawing should
not be more powerful and strong then the devils, the worlds, or man's own
withdrawing, there neither would nor could be conversion wrought, if the
drawing of man to Christ were not more powerful than man's withdrawment from
Christ; for there nothing could be done, nor could conversion be wrought at
all: If the stream be equal with the Tide, then it would be standing water, the
tide could not run up, nor the stream run down; so if these two, the things
that draw me to, and that withdraw me from the Lord Jesus, were of equal power,
it would be standing water, there could be no conversion; but now the work is
wrought, because the strength is too hard for the opposite withdrawment; You
have overcome them, little children, 1 John 4. 3, 4. because greater is he that
is in you, than he that is in the world: For reason teaches, that the greater
power is the overcoming power God does otherwise move the heart of man to
believe in Christ, than these withd^awers can remove; for the devil or world
can but move by suitable objects, that are suitable to present temper, and
therefore they move by foreign motives; for you must needs confess, I think,
that the devil frights or draws men by objects, that is all he can do; but how
does God move? he moves by principle; there is the clear difference, putting
another principle into the heart of man, which shall wholly attend, desire, and
thirst after the gaining of the Lord Jesus: you may see the difference in this
instance; if you throw a stone upwards, it is moved by a foreign motive, a
strength without it; but see what becomes of it, see how the Principle within,
overcomes the foreign power; for it abates by degrees, till it comes to turn,
and down it comes again without throwing, by virtue of the principle whereby it
is moved to its own center: So it shall be and is, when God plants a principle
in his people that shall propend to Christ, as the chief good, these foreign
motives, though they may prevail to make agitation, and shake the man, yet it
overcomes; and God by giving a new heart, and bidding the soul with power to
come to Christ, it shall come, and overcome all objective suggestions;
otherwise I say again, the power of God in the conversion of a sinner would be
less than the concurrent power that withdraws, and there could be nothing
wrought; but now there is somewhat wrought, and therefore the power of God is
greater.

This victorious drawing of God is seen in two things.



I will take away the heart of stone, Ezekiel. 36. 26. there is the overcoming of
that which lies in the way resisting: And I will give a heart of flesh; that
is, I will turn the heart into a temper contrary to what it was, that it shall
relish what it distasted, and love what it hated; because there is a new
appetite and inclination moving the other way, that he can with as much ease
and propension move and come to Christ Jesus the Lord, as before he did from
him: For whether God come in with greater strength, as the tide into a River;
or also that the principle within be changed, as the bias on the other side the
Bowl, the heart will ^un contrary to what it did before: The power of God in
the conversion of a sinner must be victorious over all contrary power. Thus I
have shown that it is a victorious drawing.

October. 21.
2. The second property of this drawing of God is, that it makes the heart-more
willing for the drawing: All that ever come to Christ, they come as Volunteers,
they come willingly, they do not come as forcibly constrained; for constraint
is for slaves: Lactantius has a saying, and it is true, If Religion be
constrained* jam nulla est, then it is none: Religion cannot be compelled;
there is nothing more voluntary than that which we call Religion: So I say of
the heart of man in this point, that a forced will (if any such could be) is
rather noluntas a nilling, than voluntas a willing: And therefore though man at
first motion, when God by his Grace revealed does come to make seizure and take
hold of man's heart, do resist, and say as he in Mat. 21. 29. I will not; Yet
afterward, faith the Text, he repented and went: So when this drawing comes,
then the heart of nilling is made willing: The Scripture compounds in one man's
will and Gods power; Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Psalm*
110. 3. The exerting of Gods power makes a people Volunteers: And therefore
though at first Israel be unwilling to be delivered; when Moses first delivered
his Commission to them, they did not relish the motion, they found fault, Exodus
5. 21. Thou have made our favor to stink before Pharaoh, we shall be the worse
for thee: And Exodus 6. 9. They hearkened not unto Moses voice, because of their
affliction and cruel bondage: Yet this Israel, after they had seen the hand of
God with Moses, and the miracles that he wrought, and those impediments were
confuted, they were willing to go out in post haste; they went out in the
night, and there was not a dog that barked or moved his tongue to give
interruption to their clear passage, Exodus 11. 7. So I may allude in this point
very properly; man filled with prejudice and enmity at first, when the Lord
begins to call dislikes the motion, fights all he can to maintain self; but
then the Lord repeats his drawings, and his knockings, over and over again,
till his arm becomes victorious in man's conversion, and then being made
willing, and tasting a sweetness in God, and the motion made, he is drawn and
comes, he is drawn and runs.

The reason of this second point is, because there is loving kindness in Gods
drawing, he constrains by love, Hos. 11 4. I will draw them with the cords of a
man, with loving kindness will I draw them; this latter is an exeges^^ of the
former; what is meant by that phrase* the cords of a man? it is a metaphor or
figurative speech, borrowed (as learned men say) from a man that brings a
sturdy or untamed bullock to the yoke with stroaking and gentle usage; I will
bring them, says the Lord, so as they shall be willing, so that I will make
them delight in my yoke. God knows all manner of ways (says one) whereby the
heart of man can be wrought upon; and must he not needs know? As a workman that
knows all the springs of a Watch or Lock that he has made, knows every way to
open it, can make a key to hit every ward, which when he has fitted to all the
springs, does easily open it, without breaking it open by mere strength: Such
is the merciful way of God in conversion, sometimes he breaks hard knots indeed
with hard wedges, he brings in stomackful sinners with hard usage, but many
times sweetly and strangely; now there are two things that go to the making of
the heart of man a voluntier, or the will of man is freed by these two acts of
God.

the fish is free to swim on this or that side of the prison in the Pond, but
yet cannot get out of the Pond; so is man free enough to evil, yet necessary is
his bondage to it, that he cannot stir; he can do nothing but sin against God,
a miserable bondage and necessity of sinning, Joh. 8. 34, 36. He that
commits sin is the servant of sin: But if the Son make you free, ye shall be
free indeed; where you are taught this lesson, they that live in sin are in
bondage to it; that this freedom from sin is the work of Christ Jesus; and
therefore till these fetters this bondage be taken off from the will of man,
man is necessarily under the power of it, and cannot come to Christ. But you
may say, The taking off the fetters from a dead man makes him no more free than
before; for still he is dead and stirs not. I grant that; and therefore,

Elias called for to come from God, in that it swallowed up and lickt up the
water: So when the power of God thus drawing, shall so overmaster the rebellion
and opposition on the will of man, which it makes, and whereby it made head
against God before, this shows that it is the power of God: But he sides there
is also a sympathy put into the heart, inclining it, as iron touched with the
Lodestone has a property of moving and sticking to the Lodestone: These are
natural comparisons: If you see such thingsin nature, will you not believe, as
Christ says, when they teach you heavenly things? Will you not believe that
God is able by this sympathy in the will, to make the heart by power willing to
come to Christ Jesus? by virtue of which, if the option was given to man, what
would he choose? what Lord would he serve? what of all things in the world would
he pitch his choice upon, if he might have it for wishing? Why nothing but
Christ, says the heart: But what say you to victory over enemies? to worldly
greatness, pleasures, prosits of this or that kind? No, nothing but Christ; the
heart is touched with this Lodestone, and drawn to it from its proper center;
and so willing is this man to be drawn, that all his prayers (as at conversion
every heart is prayer-ful, and every corner serves for a Chapel wherein to
vent his desires to God) are for drawing, Cant. 1. 4. Draw me, and we will run
after thee; that God would work a further taste and a further inclination in
him: Therefore I may well say, that this drawing and this free coming may well
be compounded and stand together: And yet man thus drawn, as he comes freely,
so he comes certainly; as it is said, Turn me, and I shall be turned; save me,
and I shall be saved, Jer. 31. 18. speaking of the certainty that follows this
power of God in turning or in saving man. That is the second property. The

Isa. 54. 13. to prove this drawing to him; Is it not said in the Prophets, All
thy children shall be taught of God? as all the children of the visible Church
are taught by men, so all thy children shall be taught of God; and he proves
they are drawn, because they are thus taught* For the opening of which point,
in a word or two. You must know, that the knowledge of God, is put for all
religion; all acts of grace are denominated by this word, knowing God: this is
the phrase of the Covenant, in Jer. 31. 34. they shall all know me. And that
these are a peculiar and select people, that do know him; see how it follows
in the same place: for I will forgive their iniquities, and their sins will I
remember no more: There is none to whom this knowledge is given, but those whose
sins are also pardoned, who are taken into favor; they that are thus forgiven
do all know God; (for that which you call superficial knowledge, I speak not of
that now.) This knowing refers, to teaching, and learning; not unto man's
teaching, but to Gods; of whom this covenant people do learn, and are taught:
and therefore instead of what is said, John 6. 45. Every one that has learned
of the father. It is said Hebr 8. 10. they shall all know me, little and great;
one and other that have learned, that is* that have been taught: And we are
said, in Ephesians. 4. 1^. to learn Christ: and God is said (as the Geneva
Translation renders it) Genesis 9. 27. to persuade Japhet into the Tents of Sem:
and all this I say about Gods teaching; man's learning; God's persuading and
man's knowing of God; to signify that this work of God, upon the mind of man,
enlightening, and convincing it, does express this drawing of God: not but that
the will of man in his conversion is moved too; for the illumination of the
mind, and the made motion of the will, are two beginnings of Faith in man; but
if the corrupt will be only excited and awakened; and not healed, or changed,
that does not do the work; when the word of God excites and calls upon you, if
the will be not renewed, the work is not done: it would be but as the pounding
of spice; it sweet, it will be more sweet; if stink, it will stink the more:
the Pestil does not change the savor of the spice; but draws forth that which
is, by beating and pounding it! All excitations, if they fall on a good and
godly heart, then indeed they breathe forth grace; but if on a cranal and a
corrupt, will; then these excitations are denied, and gainsayed, and
contradicted: that which plants the vital principle in the will, that is it
that does it: but whether the understanding, that respects verum, the truth of
a thing, or the will respecting Bonum, the good, ness of a thing, for the will
chooses that which is good, be one faculty diversely related, or no; it does not
much matter to this purpose: But this is the thing that I am upon, that the
will must be healed, for it was corrupted: and though some say, the will of man
did lose nothing by the fall, nor gain nothing by Christ; there was no sin, nor
grace seated in it, but a mere indifferency, and liberty, that is contrary to
reason; for the will of man, being a principal faculty, it is a lease of the
new man, as it was of the old; and therefore must be not only put into motion
by the understanding, but restored to life by grace infused; only this I say,
that as the seeing man goes foremost, and leads the way to the blind man* so
the understanding goes before, according to natural order, and by, and through
it is the will changed, and renewed, as also the affections are. It Is a point
of great controversy, though perhaps it is little seen to what it tends: Romans
12. 2. Be ye tranformed by the renewing of your mind, that you may prove, or
approve what is, the good, acceptable, and well-pleasing will of God: b^ye
renewed in your mind, that you may prove, that is, that you may accept the will
of God: that you may be pleased, and make choice to obey it; where it is plain,
that the action of the will, follows the renewing and translation of the mind:
there must be a seeing of Christ, and then a coming to him; for in Joh. 6 40.
this is the will of God, that he that sees the Son, and believes on him
should not perish, but have everlasting life: mark the order, he does not mean
an ocular sensible seeing; but he that by the understanding sees the beauty,
and necessity of Christ, and then believes in him; there is an act of the will
that follows knowledge. And this is the light of God; that he sets up in dark
minds, that when the Lord finds you a foolish and ignorant people, not able to
discern the great things of God, he lights a candle in your minds; he teaches
you by the teachings of God; by such a powerful teaching, as draws the heart
after it, that it delights; and makes choice of the Lord Jesus; above all
things, this is the light, by which the will is led and converted, that has in
it such convincing clearness, and so full and powerful a dictate it gives
forth, has some what in it, that I confess I am not able to explain; being a
light shined into the heart by God; that it carries all with it; and the will
cannot stay behind this convincing light, this fixed dictate of the mind, this
light and teaching of God: No more then (I may instance in another thing,
whereof I can give no reason neither) Elisha could stay behind, when Eliah had
cast his mantle on him, 1 Kings 19. these workings of God in the hearts of men;
convincing by light, that they cannot gainsay nor resist, these are things that
the world know not; and man cannot explain till he have experience, no more
then a man that has eyes can explain green, red, and yellow, to a blind man:
the Apostle speaks peremptorily in this point: 2 Co. 13* 8. we can do nothing
against the truth, but for it: so powerful and great a work is this of God when
he will draw the heart unto him: yea, when the conversation is never so bad and
contrary; as sometimes you have seen a great aversation in the woman to have
such an husband, who is afterward pursued with as violent a desire that cannot
be denied, without hazard of her life: so is it in closing with Christ, though
a man have as great a defiance against him, as Paul had, and there be an
aversion to him and his rule; yet after the Lord has dealt with such a man's
heart: Oh! the violent affections, the ravishments that are wrought in the
heart of this man to Christ; even such as if there had never been such
aversernes before. There are two things that render this teaching, a
drawing-teaching.

First, That the mind be convictively taught, that to be acquainted with God,
and in covenant with him, to have God for ones portion and great reward; is the
chiefest good imaginable, either in this, or the next world; that nothing in
all the world is comparable unto it; this, which no wisdom of man could ever
find out, God himself teaches, and Gods people acknowledge it: many will say,
who will show us any good? when shall we be so happy, as that we shall have no
sorrow with it: Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, Psalm. 4
6. And in Psalm. 73. 25. whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none an
earth that I desire in comparison of thee. A spark leaping from the body of
the fire dies presently, but lives in its element: a twig cut off from the tree
will be dead before tomorrow morning; but sticking to the tree it flourishes.
Such is man, separated from the favor and fruition of God, as all men in the
state of nature are, dead, and miserable; but adhering to, coming acquainted
with God is happy; for this is the property of the summum bonum, that without
the having of other goods, it makes man happy; that is, the chief good, that
eminently contains all other goods in it; other things that are good, are not
the chief good. Why? because the whole confluence of them (if altogether) would
not make a man happy; as a heavy body, as high as the moon, will not rest, but
move to its center, and there it is quiet: so let God be a man's portion; though
he has no share in the world, he is happy and at rest. Now let God reach this
convictively, and he teaches drawingly: Let this be the dictate of the
understanding, unvariable, unshaken; that this is your chief good, and it
draws all the soul after it, and not a hoof is behind.

Secondly, that the mind also be convictively taught, and enlightened, what is
the only means to attain this chief good; that is, God for a portion, and
exceeding great reward: there is but one means, one ladder of Jacob, one way in
the world to attain it; and that is the knowledge of Christ, for out of Christ
God is, as I may say, an absolute God, with whom I can have nothing to do: a
consuming fire, from whom man, a sinner; through guilt as Adam did at first,
will fly away if he can. God in the law, curses, and condemns me; that shows
that from an absolute God a man will run, if he can get away* and therefore, as
my text faith; that no man comes to Christ, but by Gods drawing: so he that
couples, and brings me to God, to an adherence, and enjoyment of this chief
good, must be Christ; the gospel teaches him so to you; he teaches himself, to
be the way, the truth, and the life; that as the life is but one, so the truth,
and the way is but one, No man comes to the Father, but by him, John 14. 6. and
therefore, as one chiefest good consists in knowing God; so the only mean, to
know God is by Christ; to know Christ by faith savingly: John 17. 3. This is
life eternal, to know (...) there is the summum bonum; and him whom thou have
sent, Christ Jesus; the Mediator; the mean to it: Let this be taught to man, so
as to control, and bear down all carnal reasonings; and there needs no other
drawing: for the will of man is necessarily carried toward its chiefest good;
it cannot but gratefully turn to it: by this means which is the only means
thereof, and so farewell all remisness, indifferency, and lukewarmness when this
conviction takes place; then says the soul, I will come I will seek thy face O
God; for the understanding, by its ultimate dictate (a point in the Schools,
disputed) fixing this conclusion to the will of man: that it is the best choice
that can be made, to come to God, and it is the only means to come by Christ:
this cannot be refused by the heart, this is the drawing-teaching; or the
teaching-drawing.

Octo. 2
It may be objected; Then should all men (say some) come to Christ; for who is
not convinced of these two things: that God is man's chiefest good; and Christ
is the only means, to have, and enjoy God: and I believe you will say, that
this objection, indeed, is pertinent: for what man is there living in the
Church, under the dropping of the ordinances of God, that is not convinced of
the one, and the other? I answer this:

Hebrews, in their phrase, do put the name of God to any thing as an Epithet;
when they would set forth the comparative degree, or any eminency; as Cedars of
God, and mountains of God, and wrestlings of God; that is, high Cedars, huge
Mountains, great Wrestlings: So I may say, of this phrase; the teaching of God,
is the most eminent teaching, that is, effectually drawing the heart and mind
of man after it: and it is a resolved, and fixed teaching; subduing all
contrary reasonings, that may arise, militate, or make war against it:
therefore to the answer of this case, we say: though in theft, in the general
every man can say; God is the chie^est good, Christ is the only mean tending
thereunto: yet mark; when it comes to particulars; that is (as the Schoolmen
say) to Hic and nunc in hypothesi: to this time, and place; when beloved sins,
and pleasures and profits, rise up in their strength against this conviction:
does it then prevail to accept, and receive God and Christ; if it does not (as
indeed, it does not in the most) it is not this teaching; it is not fixed, and
clear, and resolved against all other reasonings; as I will give a clear
instance. Eve was convinced, that God had said, ye shall not eat of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil. Here was a conviction in the general: but when she
saw, that the tree was good for food; the fruit pleasant to the eye, and to be
desired: then the general conviction gives place to the particular lust, that
did arise then: it did not prevail against the present, and pleasant object:
this is the case of most men: Its ordinary for men, in the general, to say
right; but when their present lust comes in particular, to vie against the
general conviction; does it not presently bear down all before it? nothing more
ordinary among us, in all our ways: and therefore I account this to be the
teaching of God, that carries the mind against all particulars; and the
affections against all contrary motives, and inducements, that are in the whole
world, against that dictate, of the heart thus taught; otherwise it is but
video melior a prob^que, deterior a sequor: (as one said) I see, and approve
the best; but in my choice, I follow the worser part: this teaching of God
prevails, and preponderates over all particulars, hic and nunc: I thought this
necessary; that you might better understand, what conviction this is.

Lastly, This drawing of God, is peculiar to some men, not common to all: those
that we call, the elect of God; they are thus drawn, when they are called
according to his purpose: as its said in Romans 8. 28. these are they, whom God
has ordained to salvation; and therefore with an effectual, and outstretched
arm, he causes them to come unto himself; these are the men, of whom God
says, Ezekiel. 20. 37. I will cause you to pass under the rod, and bring you into
the bond of the Covenant: the passing under the rod, in this text, may be
explained by other Scriptures: for Scripture is the best key of Scripture, and
by it is the best exposition made, Levit. 27. 32. and Jer. 33. 13. you shall
find this phrase to be a borrowed form of speech, from the custom under the
Law of Moses: that the owner of the sheep, told them, as they went out of the
fold, with a rod, or wand in his hand; marking every tenth for Gods tithe;
which after that setting forth, was accounted Gods propriety; this is the
ancient custom, that God alludes to; you shall be marked for my propriety; and
therefore the next words are; and I will separate you from the rest of men;
take you, and make you my own possession; that this drawing is proper only to
Gods elect, we may argue thus;

Either the elect of God must be by nature better then others, that do not come
to Christ: And if they pretend to that; (then the miracle, as I may call it)
the admirable work of conversion, should not be ascribed to Gods work, but
their own goodness: But that cannot be; for its all of one lump, that the
vessel of honor, and dishonor are made, Romans 9. and all the elect are by
nature even as others, Ephesians. 2. 3. Titus 3. 3. or else the difference is to be
ascribed to God; who makes them differ from those that are strangers from the
world, that do not receive the Spirit of God, John 14* It must needs be the
drawing of God; whereby those that we call the elect, do come to Christ: these
are the properties of this drawing of God, it is victorious, makes man a
volunteer; is a drawing, teaching; is peculiar to the called, according to Gods
purpose. The

Second thing follows; How a man shall know, that he is, or has been drawn to
Christ, by God the Father: for as there are many things, whereof women have
experience, that counterfeit impregnation, which is not so. So there may be
such appearings of believing in a man, as give but an uncertain, or falls
evidence thereof: therefore, you need know some certain evidences, that you are
drawn to God, for your comfort. And

First, If you be come, then you have been drawn: this stands upon the evidence
of the text; the effect shows the cause; for no man can come, except the
father draws. If the wall shine, you may conclude, the sun is up, and shines
upon it; for it would give no light of it self, but by reflection; if you find
in your hearts, a willing receiving of Christ Jesus, for your Savior, and
Lord, that you have surrendered, and made a deed of gift of your selves, to the
Lord Jesus to be his: certainly you have been drawn by God; this light has
shined upon you, otherwise you could not reflect it.

Secondly, Is thy faith an inchristing, that is, a Christ receiving faith? is
it a marriage faith? I call that a marriage faith, which accepts of the person
of Christ, a Savior, and Lord; which some call, the faith of the person;
whereby you do not only believe, for benefits without him; but for the benefi^s
with him: there is a faith in formal hypocrites; and such as the very sound of
the word begets; as we see in all, or the generallity of us here in England,
that live under the sound of the word of the Gospel; a kind of faith and
opinion begotten in all men of Christ; by a general, and uncontrolled
conviction; as those that did believe, when they saw the miracles that he did:
but he did not commit himself to them, John 2. 24. But that which is called the
faith of Gods Elect, in Titus 1. 1. that is not found in any, but they that are
thus drawn; and is that which he works in man, in pursuance of his purpose of
election; making good the rest of the links of the chain, after the first;
namely, effectual calling, and Justification, and Sanctification; which every
faith, or believing, does not do; every faith you find in men is not in
pursuance of this drawing of God, as I have described it.

Thirdly, When we can willingly subscribe to the course that God has taken to
save our souls: (which the most of men do not:) now the course that he has
taken, is in another, not in our selves: it is in Christ, by whom God does
justify, reconcile, adopt, sanctify, and govern, all in Christ. A sanctified
heart, submitting to this course of God, is a sign that God has drawn you, and
given you some taste of Christ Jesus: and is your faith such a believing, yea,
or no? then certainly by the victoriousness; of it, to bring you to this pass,
it appears to be the teaching of God; as it is delivered in 2 Cor. 10. 5. It is
powerful to bring every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ: For
man naturally, and of himself, thinks very meanly of this way, and means, of
saving men by Christ; for so it was, in the type at first: Israel thought very
meanly of Moses, when he came into Egypt; one that seemed an unlikely
instrument to cope with (...), and such potent impediments: And therefore, the
Jew hold fast his own righteousness, and would not submit, Romans 10. 3. And man's
pride makes greatest head and resistance against this way of Salvation, that
may be; until it appear, that there must be no Salve or Chirurgerie to apply to
the sting of fiery Serpents, on pain of death: but that unlikely way, of
looking up to the brazen Serpent on the pole; for he that used his own medicine
perished, and died. So when a man is convinced, that there is no salve of his
own making, no medicine of his own applying will serve the turn; for a man may
die under his medicine, as well as under his sin, if he do not fly to this
only remedy, to look up by faith to Christ Jesus: When he is convinced of this,
he will subscribe, and give up his hand to God the Lord, as it is said; and this
submission does stand in three things.

First, In a contented loss of that, which was his gain; for every man has
somewhat to lea^ upon, that he may not lie open to the arrows of the fiery law
of God, and his own conscience; therefore some g^in he will have to shelter
him: and therefore, when he can willingly esteem all those excellencies, dung,
and dross, and adventure to make himself empty, and naked, that he may be found
in Christ Jesus, Phil 3. 8* 9. This is a sign of submitting to God; as the
storm makes the Merchant at Sea to submit: he loves his goods; but the danger
of his life, which the storm puts him into, makes him heave them all over
board. It Is good when a man is willing to be a loser of his proud
self-sufficiencies, or his beloved sins, to gain Christ; for these are our
hardest losses; and to make Christ Jesus our gain, answerable, and valuable to,
and with, all our losses: A hard point; but it is a point of submission.

Secondly, In a willing submission to the conduct of Christ: as Israel, if they
will go out of Egypt, they must submit to the conduct of Moses, and go which
way he will lead them; for not the shortest, but the safest way God leads them;
wherein he will show them wonders, further miracles then he had shown in Egypt:
so this submission to the conduct of Christ, in the wilderness that he leads
you through, where the cross, the loss may make you more miserable for
Religion, for Christ, then other men in the world are, as the Apostle says;
the confession of Christ makes us miserable men in the world; miserable for
religions sake, which we might avoid, if we would shun religions; if this can
be digested by you, and there be a sweetning of sour morsels by the name of
Christ: it argues well.

Thirdly, In a cordial submission to Christ his ways; especially when they are
quarreld by flesh and blood. Some men are so bold, as to account them foolish;
others as unreasonable: most of us do account them hard, and that we shall be
contrary to other men's examples, or reasons, or principles; and therefore it is
a hard thing, to submit to the ways of God, without consulting with flesh and
blood; so as though reasons taken from religion are the strongest with us in
any debate, or consultation; yet there is a propension in our natures, to
follow the guidance of our own reason, until the Lodestone have touched the
Iron; and caused it to look to the North point (as you use to say) till the
interest of God have taken place in our hearts, to draw them to Christ Jesus;
then there is a submission to Christ for righteousness, and to those ways and
Commandments, that he injoines us; be they never so hard and untractable to
flesh and blood.

Let them alone, Hos. 4. 17. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone. When
God finds a man joined to his beloved lusts, as Ephraim and the ten tribes
were joined to the Idols that Jerobeam had set up, to keep them from the
temple, and Jerusalem, lest they should soduer, and sement again: oh!
miserable, when God says, let a man alone in his ways; when a man's interest
lies in maintaining, and keeping of his beloved sins: So I gave them up to
their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels, Psalm. 81. 12. It
is a sin, and a punishment, to be given up to the lusts of a man's own heart,
and to walk in his own counsels: men that are thus given up, the Lord has
punished them sufficiently; men that are awakened and disturbed of their peace,
and course; that find themselves disquieted from their dangerous ways, the
pillow of Satan, on which they slept securely: how often do they mistake God,
and think that God does it out of hatred to them, when you see plainly that it
is in mercy: they are caused to tremble, and to be troubled, that they may have
peace; wounded that they may be healed: the Lord does as he says in Hosea 2.
6. Find your own experience in that Text: I will make a hedge of thorns about
them, and they shall not find their path; then they shall say, I will return to
my first husband; for it was better with me then, then now. God moves man by a
kind of self-love: if a man find it better with him when he is with God, then
he was before: Oh! says he; I will return to my true husband; for I am
disquieted in this way of sin: this seems to be the way of God; as the
shepherd lets loose his dog; not upon his sheep to worry them, but upon the
stray sheep to bring it in again: so God lets loose some temptations, inward
disquietments, on the stray sheep, to this end, that, he may bring him in to
his fl^ck again, that he may be saved. And as Joseph, when his Brethren came
into Egypt for Corn, spoke roughly to them, and clapped them into prison; because
he intended to bring them and himself into better acquaintance; such is the way
of God in conversion: the Lord Jesus out of love disquiets the waters; and
though he does not use other men so, yet those that are his, he frowns upon,
and lets loose temptations upon them, that he may bring them in: when God will
not let a man alone, in a state of distance, under sinful peace, it is a good
sign, as its said in Deuteronomy. 8. 15, 16. God led thee through the terrible
wilderness, wherein were fiery serpents, he fed thee also with Manna; he
mixed mercy with sorrows, manna with fiery Serpents; mark to what purpose, that
he might prove thee, and humble thee, to do thee good at thy latter end: here
you see his manner of dealing, he leads through the wilderness to do his people
good; and so many as are thus at first conversion assaulted, and buffeted by
Satan, p^stered with thoughts of blasphemy, with outward afflictions, its
only to disquiet them, and to hunt them, as the prodigal was by famine out of
the far country, to their Father: or as Job says, Chap. 33. 17. That God may
withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man: man being pitched and
resolved on some way of sin, in defiance to God, and the loss of his soul, God
will withdraw him from his work, and hide pride from man: But now,



Hos. 2. 6. She shall seek them, but not find them etc. and this, until she
say, I will return, etc. the Lord drops gall into all your honey and
contentment, wherein before you seemed to have some delight: he makes those
ways unpleasant; and if you have found content in them, you shall have so no
more.

Jonathans was, to inlighten their eyes, and draw them after Christ Jesus; the
one drives, the other draws; that is the fourth mark of Gods drawing. It Is a
great misery to be let lie in the lethargy of Sin.

John 2. 24. as he perceived were hollow, and fals-hearted, and did not receive
him in love. There is a faith in temporaries, hypocrites, and common
Christians; which is not wrought by such power as Christ was raised by: as the
Apostle tells the Ephesians; Chap. 1. 18, Their faith, was wrought by the same
power that God put forth in Christ, when he raised him from the dead: But as
easily as the History of Alexander, or William the Conqueror, begets credit in
the reader, without any divine motion: So the report of the Gospel begers a
faith, which does arise by the calling of the word; not by that which is a
calling according to Gods purpose: but the faith whereby we are drawn to Christ
has (as I may say) two faces (I crave pardon for the word) it looks backward
and forward; to election, as a sign of that; to salvation as the cause of that:
its a fruit or effect of our election, and a certain means of our salvation; it
bears upon it the mark of them both; it always purifies the heart wherein it
is; being never found in an unregenerate, and unrenewed heart. It makes the
tree good, and then the fruit. It makes the tree good, there is an alteration
in the man. And then the fruit good; there is the product that it brings forth.
It makes the flax smoke at least, though it be it self never so little a spark,
and unseen: if you have such a kind of faith, without all question you have
been drawn of God; for there is a double change that faith makes, that shows
the truth of it.

First relative, when man's relation to God is changed by it; as having stood in
the relation of a stranger, unaquainted; at a distance; he is now made a son, a
friend; as its said of Abraham, he believed and was called the friend of God,
James 2 23. And then,

Secondly, There is a real change of heart, of course of life; as if the stream
did run in a new channel, with as great strength as before in the old; heavenly
things are set up; Christ is prized and valued; and this life, and all the
things of this life, have an eclipse put upon them; so that, as he said, I am
not I: that's the fifth mark.

Lord Jesus? Is the promise of Christ more powerful with thy heart than the
performance of the world? his absent glory above the present inducements? Art
thou willing to be paid for thy service in spirituals, and (if God will) to
forbear temporals? An admirable temper in a Christian. The Apostle observes of
Abraham and his seed, that came out of their own country, and found themselves
not to be in the possession of the Land of Canaan; says he, they might have
returned if they would, Heb. 11. 15. but that they would not do, they embraced
the promises that they saw afar off; they took Gods pay as he would pay it;
though he would pay them nothing in this world, they would take out the earthly
Country in a heavenly; and then it follows in ver. 16. God was not ashamed to
be called their God; not ashamed of such a people as stick to him: This is to
live upon his word as Elshaddi, though he be not known to them by his Name
Jehovah: I did not perform my promises in being to Abraham, but he lived upon
me as God Almighty, as it is explained in Rom 4. It Is never known what value and
price a man sets upon Christ, by saying nay to some slight lust, or thing which
he can easily part with; but by that which is peccatum in deliciis, our
favorite sin, our delight, be it friend, or worldly content, or whatsoever
else it is known to be; as the usual old saying is, The Rabbits skin sticks at
the head; it cases off from the rest of the body, easily, but when it comes to
the head there it sticks: when God and his favor, and our own sin stand in
competition, it sticks not till it is come to that to which he is married, to
his favorite: When Christ tried the young man that had spoken great things, he
does not instance to bid him do this or that; for these things (says he) I
have done; but he demands the sale of his possessions, Go sell all thou have,
and come and follow me; there his heart was sorrowful; for the Text says, He
had great possessions; that was his master sin; and from that I observe, that
God will try his people; let us hang loose to that, for in that we shall be
soonest tried.

Pet. 2 3. as an Angler will sometimes pull away the bait, to quicken the fish
to follow it; such are these withdrawments of God from his own people; you see
an example of it, verified in the Church, Cant. 5. 6. My beloved had withdrawn
himself, I sought him; She runs out presently after him.

8. Lastly, When the Name of Christ, and the Grace from him and by him received
is the strong Argument against sin, the strongest motive of duty and obedience,
the Law of God is a strong obligation; but the grace and Mercy of God is the
sweetest obligation; Stablish me, says David, with thy free Spirit, Psalm. 51.
with the Spirit of a child; so the Apostle gives a notable Argument against
sin, in 1 Cor. 6. 15. speaking about Fornication, Shall I take the members of
Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. What Is the genius
and strength of the Apostles Argument, that a man that is in Christ must
consider, that himself, his body, and all the members of his body, are the
members of Christ; shall I prostitute the members of Christ to an harlot? God
forbid that I should do so; so that the possession and title that Christ has
of us, is the strongest Argument that can be against sin with a godlyman: A
Christian has more Arguments against sin, more Motives to obedience than any
other man, because he is all, Christ's, and all his members (as that Text says)
are members of Christ: he is not his own, but the price of another blood; and
therefore let him carry the Name of Christ always in his mind, as an excellent
Argument against sin: So much for the Point, Whosoever comes to Christ
believing in him, does come by the drawing of God; which point would have some
Use made of it, though the matter all along be useful and practical. And first,

far off; nay, it is as certain as the resurrection of Christ, when he was dead
in the grave, and lay under the sins of mankind, a terrible great stone to ly
under, yet he was certain to rise again the third day; and the power toward the
raising of those that believe is according to the working of the mighty power
that wrought in Christ; Ephesians. 1. 18 now it is said, that God loosed the cords
of Christ's death, because it was not possible that he should be holden of it;
Acts 2. 24. so shall the cords of thy spiritual death be loosed also, if you
belong to the election on of grace, though you be as dead and inanimate as
Christ himself was, this will set you free, knock off the fetters of bondage
from you, and all because there is a drawing of God, whereby you shall be made
able to come; for all that the Father gives me shall come to me, Joh. 6. 37.
and Christ professes that he has the power given him, that he should give
eternal life to as many as God has given him, John 17. 2. And that this is no
bolster for desperate security, to flatter it self, and hang all on that
string, If I shall be saved, I shall, appears by the certain means that are
used whereby this end shall be effected, whereby all that are within this chain
shall come and believe; Joh. 17. 6. I have manifested thy Name to them that
thou gave me; so then, say not, You shall be saved you know not how; for the
Name of Christ shall be manifested to you; and then he shows that the means
used are effectual in and unto such, ver. 8. I have given them that thou gave
me thy word; and they have received it, and believed in me, that thou have sent
me: them that thou have given me shall live; unto them I have manifested the
means, and to them they have been effectual; these are the persons that are
saved and called in time, according to a purpose and grace given them in Christ
before the world began, 2 Timothy 1. 9. And therefore it is certainly effected.

then he should be the first give; but who has given to him first, says the
Text, Romans 11. 5. For, as learned men observe, Faith is given to unbelievers,
as it is said God justifies the ungodly, Rom 4. 5. true, when he is justified he
is ungodly; therefore it is said, Ephesians. 2. 5. Even when we were dead in
trespasses and sins he quickens us. When we lay in our blood, Ezekiel. 16. 6. he
passed by and said, Live. When did he speak the word? When we were unbelievers
he drew us to come unto and believe in Christ; as our Savior says, When we
were under the fig tree (as I may say) he saw us: So when you were far distant,
this eye and countenance of God was upon you for good: and therefore as Austin
says, The will of man does forego many good works of man, (for God begins at
the will) but not all: Why, which is it that the will of man rectified does not
go before? Not it self; it does not begin its own willing; for that is first,
and that is made of God: So I may say, Faith goes not before all the workings
of God, because there is a drawing of God that works it; as the putting of life
into Lazarus was when he was dead in the grave, so the first grace that is given
to man is while is in unbelief; that grace is to be expected and looked for with
intention and bent of mind from this good and gracious God; and therefore as it
would have been a disparagement to the Miracle to have said, that Lazarus
stirred or breathed before Christ said Come forth; so all they do extenuate and
lessen the drawing and free grace of God, that put something, some seed of
faith into man before God work first: For man does not first come to Christ,
and then God draw him; that is like the mothers jest with her child that is down,
Come to me, and I Will help thee up; for then it must up before: so it is as if we
jested, Rise, stir, move your selves, and then I Will put life into you, but God
draws, and then man comes, as the Text says. But then there is a great
question that has not yet been handled; for some may object,

quaere, the hard knot to answer to the satisfaction of men.

Austine says, Noli quaerere si non vis errare, Do not search for the reason,
if you will not err and be mistaken; search not for the reason of this which
has no reason, but the will, and pleasure, and (...) of God: God made the
Creatures of nothing, he made the world so; well, you acknowledge it: Does God
make temporal creatures, the bodies of men, of nothing? And is not the new
creature made of as little as the old is? But to free you from all quarrels and
self-reasoning in this point, if you will have a reason, I Will give you an old
one, I Will assure you that it is elder than your selves by some thousands of
years; It was, says the Text, 2 Timothy 1. 9. his purpose and grace given you in
Christ before the world began; and therefore you are called and saved: This
shows that no man can begin the first grace; he may pretend to come unto Christ
Jesus himself, but he must receive this drawing first, that he may be saved;
there is no mark upon any man that lies in the state of spiritual death by
which he can know himself to be one that shall receive the first grace; but
it is reserved as a secret in the bosom of God: but when the first grace is
given and man is drawn to Christ, then he may know that he shall be saved,
true, there is means to be used, but not a mark to be known by: But shall I
tell you the bottom of the point: there may indeed be a ground for the first
grace in that secret-covenant that is between God and Christ; for doubtless,
such a one there is; that all the members of Christ, those whom God has given
him shall have this grace, this new heart and spirit, shall be all drawn and
learn of God, this in the general; all that the father has given to Christ
shall come in: if I be enclosed within that gracious covenant, that God the
Father made with the Son, I shall certainly be drawn; but for any marks of the
first grace, who these are, and how to be known; they have none until they be
made the children of God; for they are by nature children of wrath, even as
others: the Lord only knows who are his: there are means afforded that they
may come; December. 9.
but no marks that they shall be drawn.



First, It suggests matter of Humility; grace is not loose, though it be free:
there is no glorying at all left to us in the matter of our salvation: all
boasting is taken away by Gods drawing; every point that's profitable is so, so
far as it advances practical Religion; and much of that consists in an humble
frame of spirits; for as lower grounds are richer, and more fruitful then hill
tops, that see further, but are more barren: so a man that has tasted of the
tree of knowledge of good and evil, may see further and discern more in matters
of notion and speculation; but the humble soul that has seen the hand of God
working its works in it, is more fertile and fruitful to God.

Secondly, It suggests matter of thankfulness; for where humility goes before,
there thankfulness follows after; and according to the proportion of the one
is the other, in 1 Pet. 2. 9. That you should show forth the praise of him that
has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light; who were before no
people: when we come to consider, and have these impressions set on our souls,
that he calls us out of our darkness, for darkness is ours, into his mavelous
light, thankfulness arises from this: And as light came out of darkness, so God
has shined into our hearts the light of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ. Whence came the first light? out of darkness, where no man could have
imagined the light to be: so God has called us out of darkness. And

Thirdly, It calls for fruitfulness in requital of sogreat a grace,
fruitfulness is, as we may say of varnish, no color of it self, but sets off,
and puts a beauty upon other colors. Fertillity is the nature of good soil;
and men look for fruit from land or tree proportionable to the cost and labor
bestowed: so does God expect fruitfulness, according to the proportion of his
goodness; the meditation of this grace, quickens the ingenuous heart to
obedience: when a man has the sense of his justification, that he is
reconciled to God by the blood of Christ; and that being reconciled, we shall
be saved by his life: as it is Romans 5. 9. 10. this puts him on to a high degree
of fruitfulness; this manures the Tree: and therefore in 1 John 4. 19. We love
him because he first loved us, and 5. chap. 3 verse. It Is love that makes the
Commandments not grievous: Thus you see how it advances practical godliness.

And as it advances practick godliness; so likewise it heightens all the
obligations, whereby a man can be obliged to God, either to be humble,
thankful, or fruitful; they are advanced by the sense of the free grace of God.
Now for the advancement of obligations; they are twofold.

Such as have strength of Authority in them. Or

Such as have sweetness and constraint of love in them.

First, obligations of authority are by the law of God: For that does not cease
to oblige a believer being a perpetual law, that God has set on man in all
states and conditions: And then the

Free grace of God is an obligation by a constraint of love; the love of Christ
constrains us, in 2 Cor. 5. 14. Because we thus judge, or have this sense, that
if one died for all, then all are dead: so that the obligation it puts upon you
is of love, and service above other men. God may well expect some singular
thing of you; as namely: first;

Because he has drawn thee, not others, yea, happily has left many, for one
taken; thou art one taken, drawn out of the herd, marked out for God (as I
said) made to pass under the rod: Vobis datum est, non illis; to you it is
given etc. not to others.

Secondly, Because he has drawn us, when we withdrew; for every man by nature
does withdraw; even as a heifer withdrawes, and will not be yoked; so man
withdrawes from the yoke of God, from the doctrine, from the faith, the love,
and from the acquaintance of Christ Jesus: and therefore its said in Romans 10.
last verse. I have stretched out my hands all the day long, to a contradicting
or withdrawing people. Nay, he not only draws us out of darkness, and nothing,
but pursues and follows us when we run from him; if the Lord should let men
alone: yea, if the elect of God were let alone at first, when God begins to
draw, they would be deserters, forsakers, and relinquish God; you stiff necked
people, you do always resist the Holy Ghost: but now God still knocks; and if
man comes not at first; God knocks again; and this bends man's heart to God,
that the Lord pursues him with mercy, and follows him with loving kindness: if
God had let him alone he had perished; but God would not let him have his will
to perish.

Thirdly, Because he has drawn thee, no better then others of the same clay,
says the text; the potter makes the difference, not the clay: are we better
then they, the Jew, then the Gentile? Romans 3. 9. No, in no wise; and
therefore God to show that there is no difference in man, instances in twins
that tumbled in a belly: Romans 9 10. Rebecca conceived by one, even Isaac, etc.
Nay, it may be thou wast one of lower and meaner rank from whom God could not
expect so much service: so babes have it revealed, not the wise; Base things of
the world are chosen, not many noble and great: Naaman the Syrian is cleansed,
and not many lepers in Israel; who would think that Rahab the harlot should be
named with Abraham, in James 2. 25?

Fourthly, The Lord found thee when thou did not seek him: he overcame thy
opposition and resistance, waiting that he might be gracious, Isaiah. 30. 18.
if he had taken thy denial and let thee alone, if he had not overcome the
evasions and Tergiversations of thy sturdy spirit, by pursuing thee with fresh
forces, till he had brought every thought within thee into captivity, unto the
obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. had he not stricken thee down (as Paul was)
until he made thee say, Lord what will thou have me to do: what might have
become of thee? had he not hedged thee in with thorns, and laid mustard on the
breast, to wean thee from thy sweet sins.

Lastly, When God has taken this course, and won over and made the heart
willing, then a man accounts his own gain, his arguments of confidence, his own
righteousness, all dross, and dung, for the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus,
in Phil. 3. 7, 8. when the Lord has given such a taste and sweetness, then a
man desires it himself, and is pleased with that with which he was displeased
before: when the heart is thus overcome, then it submits; he stands fair in
his own eyes no more; his own face pleases him no longer; he rebels no more,
but submits to the righteousness of God, To. 10. 3. and so receives Christ as
the greatest treasure in the world; therefore free grace is a great obligation;
it binds strongly by the constraint of love.

Fourthly, I close all with a motive to examination; whether you be partakers
of this drawing, now before the Sacrament; you are called, the Lord invites you
to his table; he invites his friends, his children; these he calls by the word;
every ordinance breathes unto you little else but Christ Jesus; for all
sanctifying, strengthening, and corroborating grace; from whence come they?
surely in Hosea 14 8. from me is thy fruit found: all your strength arises from
the greater and further reception of Christ Jesus; therefore examine, whether
this work of God has been on you, to draw you to Christ Jesus: faith is not a
vulgar grace, it is not an easy thing, it comes from divine omnipotency and
power; as we say of the resurrection, whereby a dead man rises from the grave;
it is a work of the power of God; and therefore Christ confuting the Sadduces
that denied it, said, you err, not knowing the Scriptures, and the power of
God: I am (says Christ) the resurrection and the life: No man is alive, till
he take hold of, and believe in, the Lord Jesus? now can a dead man be raised
from the dead, and not be sensible? do you think faith is not a sensible work;
yes, as it is a powerful work, so it is sensible to man; yet I confess men may be
deceived, as women are by false tumors and swellings; so there are many
delusions, whereby a man may take himself to be in a state of grace, when he is
not; because there is a false faith as well as a true: it is the point of
examination pressed by St Paul in 2 Cor. 13. 5. because of such moment, examine
your selves, whether you be in the faith; whether Christ be in you; many think
of a Christ without them; you are all glad to know that Christ gave himself for
you; that he gave himself to be the blood of atonement; but is he yours by the
blood of sprinkling? the Scripture puts this to the trial, by words that
intimate Christ within men, Galath. 4. 19. my little children of whom I travel
in pain, till Christ be formed in you: and Ephesians. 3. 17. Christ dwells in our
hearts by faith: Gal. 2. 20: Christ lives in me: these phrases do difference
the Jew outwardly, from the Jew inwardly, and teach in like proportion; that he
is not a Jew that has the outward character, and not the circumcision of the
Spirit, To 2 28. and let that obligation sit on you; in the 2 Timothy 2. 19. Let
every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity; for else its not
the sacraments will serve turn, in 1 Cor. 10. 4, 5. they eat of the same
spiritual meat (with us:) But God was not well pleased with them; they were
wicked: and therefore examine your selves, what work of God you have found upon
your hearts; whether you are renewed by the Holy Ghost: in Tit. 3. 5. God is
said to save man by the washing of regeneration, v. 6. that being justified by
his grace you might be made heirs of eternal life. To move you, consider;

the conditional compact; that whosoever believes shall not perish; but it is,
the Spirit that witnesses to ours, that we are sons of God.





John 6. 37. He that eats me shall live by me, this in this chapter, so much
spoken of, is not sacramental, but it is spiritual eating; for it was spoken
before the institution of the supper; but it speaks of the kernel of it, the
eating of Christ his body by faith. And so much for this text.

THE DIFFERENCE Between a True Inward Christian And the Outward Formalist.
DISCOVERED In three Sermons on Romans 2. 28, 29.

By Mr RICHARD VINES, Late Preacher of Gods Word at St Laurence Jury, LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, 1662.

THE DIFFERENCE Between a True Inward Christian And the Outward Formalist.
Romans 2. 28, 29. For he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is that
Circumcision which is outward in the flesh: But he is a Jew that is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit, and not in the
Letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God.
THe Apostle before he makes entrance upon the Doctrine of Justification, which
is one of the Cardinal Points of the Christian Religion, does convince, and
conclude, that both Jews and Gentiles, and so consequently all mankind are
(...), under sin, Romans 3. 9. draws up the conclusion, (...), we have shown
cause before, or charged all men to be under sin; teaching all Masters of
conviction the necessity of that method, to cut off the branch which is to be
ingraffed from the tree where it had its first birth, before it can be fit for
coalition with a new stock, and for participation of the root and fatness of
the Olive Tree; first make a man a sinner, my meaning is, make him miserable;
and when the struggling fish, that is stricken with the hook, is tired or
choked, you may more easily draw him to the shore. The great Rule to be
observed in the conviction of gainsayers, is to disarm them of their Armor,
those inward reasonings and strong holds wherein they trust; then it is an
ea^ier thing to bring them in, when that wherein they trusted is (...) down
about their ears; Think not (says S. John) to say within your selves, We have
Abraham to our Father; think it not, speaking to the inward reasonings of the
Jews at that (...): The Apostle imitating this course, ^oth, as concerning the
heathen Gentile, grant in Chap 1. that they did, or possibly might know God, by
the footsteps that he had left of himself in the Creation, and the government
of the world; but that knowledge amounted to no more than of his Being or
Properties, not of his Worship, especially that which you call positive; and so
they neither glorified him as God, nor showed that wisdom which as
Philosophers they professed; for professing themselves (...), they became
foolish, ver. 22. As for them that assert the Sun and Moon to be Preachers of
Christ the Mediator to the Heathen, I think I may join them together with that
Philosopher who had a conceit that the heavens do make an harmony by their
motion, which Music, I dare say, he never heard: As concerning the Jew, the
Apostle brings him in, cap. 2. ver. 11. pleading his difference from the
Gentile; and it is granted, cap. 3. ver. 1. that much every way is the
advantage of the Jew, and the profit of Circumcision; For Circumcision verily
profits if thou keep the Law, cap. 2. ver. 25. but if, as we say of some
Planets, their great light be joined with ill Aspects and irregular motion; so
if you that have a form of knowledge and truth in the Law, if thou be a breaker
of the Law, and live contrary to thy own Principles, then thy circumcision is
made uncircumcision; for an honest heathen that is uncircumcised is better than
thou, and shall condemn a dishonest, though circumcised Jew, ver. 26, 27. and
the reason is, because God measures not men by their external accomplishments,
which they have by being Churches, and the privileges of them, but by the
inward power of godliness, accompanying their outward profession; For he is not
a Jew that is one outwardly etc.

In which words there is,

First, A distinction.

Secondly, A description or definition.

Thirdly, An estimate or valuation.

Caesar pictured in the Table; is not Caesar; so he is not a Jew that is one
outwardly.

Secondly, The description of both is, the Jew that is no Jew, is one that is
so by (...) (...) or visible profession, or if you will o^ten^^tion o^
Religion; but he is nothing (...) in secret, or inwardly, if he have not that
which in our Covenant is expressed in these words; the law written in his heart
and put into his mind: the circumcision, that is not circumcision, is the
visible mark they carry in the flesh, but no inward purity of heart and
mortification of lust; the one of these is in the letter, the other in the
spirit. What is the meaning of this phrase? How comes this word, not, in the
letter to signify outwardness in opposition to Spirit or inward grace: so it
signifies in the new testament, or in Scripture; and I think peculiarly (...)
signifies a line made by a pencil, as well as a letter made by pen; and so may
signify a mere (...), a portraiture, or mathematical body, that consist of
lines of no depth and substance, an outward form and nothing else; or a writing
with Ink, as the Epistle, 2 Cor. 3. 3. the Epistle of Christ not written with
Ink, but by or with the Spirit; and so the Scripture that knows another
writing, viz. by the Spirit in the heart does fitly oppose thereunto that other
manner of delineation which is outward by pen or pencil, and so circumcision by
a mark in the flesh is said to be in the letter; not that the Apostle decries
the ordinances of the Jews, or their profession in sensu composite, but only
in sensu diviso, when the form goes without the power for even Christianity,
which is not so outward in all respects as Judaisme was, has a form of
doctrine, a form of worship, or else no sacraments, and (...), a form of godly
conversation; so its called, whatsoever they that call themselves
Antiformalists, but are indeed Formalists, do quibble to the contrary.

Thirdly, The valuation that is made of both these: the Jew or the circumcision
outwardly, that is, (...) may have the praise of men: The Apostle before his
knowledge of Christ valued himself at a great rate by those things that were but
outwardly, as a visible Churchmember past all contradiction: but the Jew (...)
or the circumcision of the heart, the power and purity of Godliness within,
has the commendation of, and acceptance with God: I shall need say no more,
for the general opening of these words; only before you go any further, change
the scene, and lay the measure to your silves; he is not a Christian that is
one outwardly in form: whose baptism is the sprinkling of his face with water:
but he that is a Christian indeed, reputatively; and as to Church Membership,
thou may have praise of men for thy profession; for man sees, (...) (...) the
outside, but God measures the real members of his covenant by their faith, for
its his peculiar (...), the Father that sees in secret, Math. 64.

The observations to be made upon the words shall be short and plain; and the
Uses we will take altogether at the close.

Romans 3. 1. what advantage then has the Jew, or what is the profit of
circumcision? I Answer, as the Apostle does, much every way* but when I have
said all, all saving grace is discriminant and differencing, and so should all
saving doctrine be, sharp but wholesome, cutting but convincing, teaching others
what they should be, by showing what manner of men they are that have the
praise of God. As to a visible station in Church order, the Apostle
distinguishes 1 Cor. 5. 12. between (...) those that are without, and those
that are within, that is within the pale of the Church; both the Christian
outwardly and inwardly may be so; but then we must come to a closer distinction
of these that are all within the Gospel field or pale, and that close
distinction is given in this text between Christians that are so outwardly or
also inwardly: for want of distinguishing doctrine to take the precious from
the vile, and to show you who are Israel, and who only of Israel, it comes to
pass many times, that the bone is given to the child, and the bread to the
dog; the souls are slain that should not die, and saved alive that should not
live, Ezck. 13. 19. So necessary is it to distinguish, and to use
distinguishing doctrine, (...)
and there is a great want of such hearers as are willing to be distinguished,
that had rather ask what marks do ye tell me of my self, then what notions do
ye show me of your own; that do not measure their membership with Christ, and
their standing in the Church, equally with one measure (if they do, they may be
deceived) because one may be in the one and out of the other; therefore I shall
ever blame my self and others also in my place, that shall be more sollicitous,
that the hearers should know us, then that they should know themselves: this
there is a great necessity of showing, who you are, or that you are not what
you seem to be; for he is not a Jew, etc.

be nothing, that is, as to his own benefit or Gods acceptance, is his
outwardness and formality in Religion; and the formality that abounds in our
Churches, and the outwardness in Religion goes far to prove, that we are
Christians and no Christians: For God in all times when Religion appeared most
outwardly carried on, did both aim at, and expect an inwardness and call
holiness in his people: The Jew lays his claim, and pretends to be somebody,
verse. 17. of this Chapter: Behold (says the Apostle) thou art called a Jew,
and restest in the Law, and make thy boast of God* and know his will^ etc.
But thou art nobody, if there be no inward work upon and within thee, nor is
thy circumcision worth any thing: It is acknowledged their very ordinances were
shadowish, and consisted of outwardness more than the Gospel called the
simplicity of Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 3. but yet so far as I conceive, there was a
kernel in the shall, and a spiritual glory under the vail of Moses; but they
having a double vail between their eye and the inwards of things represented in
their ordinances, (...) a real obscurity in the ordinances themselves, that
was the vail on Moses fact, and the other vail on their hearts, were content
(such was their childishness and servility of spirit) (...), to lick the
outside of the Glass into which they could not put in their head.

I will not enumerate many particulars, some I shall instance in; they drank of
a rock that followed them, and eat of (...) that fell down upon them; and were
healed by a serpent on a pole of fiery ^^ing: but they saw not Christ, where
indeed he was; For Christ was represented and held forth in all these, and yet
they did not see him; their circumcision they magnified as an honorable (...)
of separation from other nations, their passover (as to the institution was an
excellent ordinance) concerning which, when their children demanded the
meaning, was but a memorial of Egypts slavery; they looked no further then the
respect it had to that; but concerning Christ, the lamb of God not any thing;
their sacrifices and purifyings were built upon, as very expiations and
lustrations of sin, or uncleanness; a strange blindness! and what either did
the heathens less or more expect of theirs; the law given them for a
Schoolmaster unto Christ, what did it teach them, but works of their own
righteousness (as the Apostle calls them,) which unto this day they hold unto
still, as a Schoolmaster of works against Christ: and though they found out a
Messiah for their glory, yet they looked not for such an one as should be
God-man, a mediator to expiate their sins and redeem their souls; and therefore
when he came (which they deny) he was as great a stranger to them, and they as
great enemies to him, as those that had had no Schoolmaster to commend him unto
them: and if any man will farther see their perverse interpretations,
adulterations, and prevarications of their own scriptures, wrying their necks
about, that they should not so much as look a squint toward Christ, whom we
acknowledge: let him read one of their great and most esteemed Maimonides, of
whom they say, that from Moses the great Lawgiver to this Moses, there arose
none like unto him, etc. so much of their outwardness.

And now let me speak to the Analogy; I may say as the Apostle; what then, are
we better then they? we the outward Christians that profess the Christian
Religion, though that be meant of Gentiles, and may we not make the same
answer? no, in no wise, Romans 3. 9. I may not speak in disparagement of the
Jewish ordinances, though I know out of Christ; the Apostle calls them weak and
beggarly elements; I know whose stamp they bear, though that excellent
Historian be no fit Judge in this matter, Tacitm.
that says, that Pompey when he went to view the Temple at Jerusalum, to see
what was the so magnified rites, found nothing but vacuum s^d^m and inania
sacra, an empty chair and some kind of empty rites; nor will I enter the
comparison between Gospel Ordinances and theirs; the Apostle has given
judgment already in it, in 2 Cor. 3. 10. that which was made glorious had no
glory in this respect; nor will I deny but that the Jews were nationally a
holy people; I take it to be a holy nation, not here and there one holy man: In
Deuteronomy. 7. 6. For thou art a holy people, the Lord has chosen thee to be a
special people to himself, above all that are on the face of the earth. And
this was a holiness of separation by Covenant: and truly what is this? Wood
may be called holy, stones holy, and metal holy, when they are separate to the
use of Religion and the service of God. But I may compare the Jew outwardly,
with the Christian outwardly, and with great reason lay the charge at his door
that is but outward under such spiritual ordinances, as he had not; the worst
is, we are content to be outward, and careless of the inward work. Where is
that inward holiness of heart, and the saying knowledge of Christ Jesus? Is it
not envied in them that have it? yea, are we not more envenomed since these
unhappy times wherein we live, against the power of inward godliness, then
before (and yet there was a sufficient enmity,) cutting out Religion, so, as
may serve parties and interests: for whereas there are strifes, and envyings,
and divisions among you, are ye not carnal and walk as men, 1 Cor. 3. 3? The
preacher shreds colloquint into the pot: the hearer like the wanton fish, in
summer, catches at the silken fly that has a hook in it! Oh, that the very
reading of this Text would startle you to go home, and lament over your selves;
and with earnest prayer to call upon God: Lord make me to know wisdom in the
hidden part; give me the leavings of the outward Jew, the circumcision of the
heart in the spirit, whose praise is not of man, but God.

verse 17. And thy Circumcision profits, if thou keep the law, verse. 24. else
thou art no Jew, and thy circumcision is made uncircumcision: there are
disciples, and disciples (...) indeed, John 8. 31. there is the distinction: as
there was a severance of Jew from Gentil; and also of the Jew inwardly from the
outward: so there is of Christians from heathens, and also of Christians in
power from Christians in the form of godliness; for the Kingdom of God
consists not in meats and drinks, but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in
the Holy Ghost.

Religion is an inward thing of the heart, in the spirit: the principles, the
motives that carry it on, the manner of performance, the graces, the comforts,
the s^alings, the experiences, the communion are inward things; there is (...)
the hidden man of the heart, which makes a Christian inwardly (...), as the
Apostle calls it in 1 Pet. 3. 4. It is in the hidden man that grace begins: Its
spoken of women there, that are most affected with the outward dress; the life
of your bodies does not begin in the legs, but in some of the vitals, the
heart, the liver, the brain, and as it begins there, so it rules and governs
there; that motion is but violent that comes from a foreign motive; all duties
of worship and obedience that are outward, if they be not actuated by some
inward grace, are not profitable to you, not pleasing to God: Its true there is
a confession that is made with the mouth unto salvation as well as faith in the
heart unto righteousness, Romans 10. 10.
(that text I believe teaches this point) that there is more goes to salvation
then to justification, but we are comparing the outward and inward Christian;
the (...) is seen what it is in that forementioned place: that that is of great
worth and much set by, it lies under the bark; its the framing and moulding of
the heart to softness, and a planting the Lord Jesus in you. This is that which
makes you to be Christians; Christians indeed.

From all this that has been said, what follows now, if we will make use of
it?

Samaritan, our Savior asserts the pre-eminence of the Jew; salvation, Joh. 4.
faith he, is of the Jews, and so I might speak, and follow it profitably,
that such is our profession above the Papist. But I am speaking now of the Jew
outward and inward: the Jew reckoned himself a Jew by his descent from Abraham,
and by his profession of that religion established by Moses, whereof he had not
the power: and pray what do you Christians reckon yourselves by, what is your
faith that you pretend to have to Christ, but a kind of traditional story from
our Ancestors; or taken up from common report milkt into you, when you sucked
the breasts, by custom and education, without any work of the Gospel on your
hearts. Can you say, that the Gospel Ministry has wrought faith in me? (I will
not tie things strictly, though this be common and ordinary) there being not
one of a hundred sometimes that can say, now I believe in Christ, not because I
have learn^ it by custom and common report, but because the Gospel has been to
me, and in me, the power of God unto salvation; it is a rare thing: The Faith
you have (how ever you come by it, look you to that) is that kind of easy and
dogmatical says of assent to the truth of the Scriptures: We know God spoke by
Moses, but neither receives Christ as Savior, Lord, and Sovereign, nor brings
forth any fruit to holiness, nor works by love. Did not the Jew honor the
great Names of Abraham and Moses, but were neither true Disciples of the one,
nor Children of the other? And do not we denominate our selves by the Name of
Christ, without any membership with him, or real union?

Did not the Jew observe the Laws of his Religion with mighty zeal and
strictness as ever Nation did? but neither sought nor felt any inward virtue
therein, resting in the work done, and with great confidence promising to
himself salvation: And are you so zealous and strict in the outward of your
Religion as the Jew was? oh, no; of a more loose and lukewarm temper in this
point than ^e: Yet do not you rest in the work done, and promise your selves to
be saved, with as much confidence as the Jew? I speak by way of comparison: If
we be never so sollicitous to bring our children to be baptized, and we must
have it so, its a badg of our Religion; but are we any thing sollicitous to
plant grace in their hearts, when they are come to years of discretion? to
plant the work of Regeneration, as well as give them the outward mark? Examine
your conscience thoroughly, and see whether or no you go beyond the Jew
outwardly. And to the Sacrament you will come, and pretend zeal in it; but do
you any thing but observe a fair decorum for that day or time? but where is the
inward reason of that Ordinance? where is the Lord Jesus received and sealed to
your comfort? No, you rest in the work done, and promise your selves salvation
thereupon, with such a confidence as will deceive you, be sure of it.

Did he abhor Idols, yet commit sacrilege? And thou (says the Apostle) that
abhorrost Idols, do thou not commit sacrilege? that is one of the main
points that he insists upon with his outward Jew: What are we better, that cast
off Popery, and starve the Gospel Ministry? eye to eye cannot be more like than
you would find if you trace your selves.

Had he a form of knowledge and truth, so as to be a teacher of others, and a
Preacher of the truth, and yet took his own liberty of the sins he taught
against, and so caused the name of God to be blasphemed amongst the Gentiles,
as the Apostle says to the Jew? And is ^ot the Name of God blasphemed by
profane people, through our outwardness? are not we lovers of our selves,
covetous, proud, boasters, etc. having a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof? 2 Timothy 3. 2. etc. I might go on, and rather make a parallel than
a difference between these two; and therefore as the Apostle concludes this Jew
to be no Jew, so we may of this Christian; and if those that preach the Gospel
will do any good among a formal people, they must take their Christianity from
them; you have a ground for it; the Apostle took away Judaism from the Jews;
you must tell them that it is not Christianity will profit and bring them to
heaven; if they be saved they must be convinced of this; and then that Rule
will follow, He that thinks himself somewh^t, when he is nothing, deceives
himself, Gal. 6. 3. and many thousands are so deceived amongst you.

some brokenness and softness of heart, the heart of stone taken away, some
newness of spirit, something of Christ Jesus: Had the Jew found out the
entrails of his Religion, he had found Christ there over and over; but he
dreamed of a National salvation, (as I may almost say,) by virtue of a Covenant
that had Inwards in it, but he saw little: Let me say to you, You have
spiritual Ordinances, look for Christ in them, he is the kernel of all
Ordinances: Go to God and pray, Lord it is thy Covenant-promise to put thy Law
into the Inwards of thy people, Jer. 31. 33. and that there called Inwards, the
Apostle calls the writing of the Law in the heart and mind, Heb. 8. 10. There
are some (that are otherways great men) that when they come to die, whither do
they fly? Bear me witness, I die in the Protestant Faith; I die in the Faith
and Confession of the Church of England; (which I have pitied them in;) for
that shows the rightness of the Faith which they profess, but not the
savingness of their Faith and profession as to them, except they look, as the
Jews did, for a National salvation, because they are all of the true
profession. Others there are, that when they have incorporated themselves into
such a Body, whereof the Characteristical mark is a separate opinion from other
men, then they think they are come into a state of salvation, that they have
been in Egypt all this while, now they are come to Canaan: 1 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
Alas poor souls! you will find something else wanting, as the Apostle says.
Others there are that depend much upon a holiness of their own making,
Pharisaically, Papistically; I never like this frame; let the holiness that God
has appointed stand, and let us stand to that; and when all is said that I can
say unto you, here must be the great work, to find an inward work of holiness
in your souls, though the Ordinances or form be of God, as the Jews were, much
more when the holiness is of your stamping; and therefore look for this inward
work, that ye be not only the Epistle of Christ written with ink in Letter, but
in the Spirit of the living God, 2 Cor. 3. 2. There are two places that I will
give you to set home this Exhortation, from the most glorious Church that we
read of in all the New Testament, of highest elevation for variety of spiritual
gi^ts and abilities, and they had greatest blots too; which was the Church of
Corinth; to them the Apostle gives this Item in 1 Cor. 10. 5. Brethren, I would
not have you ignorant that our Fathers (speaking in an Ecclesiastical sense)
did all eat of the same spiritual meat, honored with Sacraments extraordinary,
the Rock, the Manna, and both were Christ; Yet with many of them God was not
well pleased; and he gives the reason of it, for they were tempters of Christ;
they had such sins upon them which you may charge upon your selves, mutatis
mutandis; and yet this Church, though they were so high, he humbles them with
such an exhortation as might shame them, that is, to a strange thing, Examine
whether ye be in the Faith. and had Christ within them, 2 Cor. 13. 5. We are (I
know not how many forms) above that question; and yet be sure, though
profession be never so high, that is the main thing to be inquired for, I^
Christ in you* you can talk of Christ without you, but, as gallant as you are,
you must prove your selves, if Christ be in you, and know that he is in you,
except you be (...), Reprobates; you are saved by a Christ in you.

The third Use of this Point is for reproof; and I will willingly (though I do
it sorrowfully) put my self into the number of the reproved. Let every man
therefore reprove himself for the exceeding great outwardness in Religion that
abounds amongst us; there is fire wanting in us: time was (and it was indeed
the worst of times) when Christians, the professors of Christian Religion in
England, were practical, and exceedingly addicted to practical holiness;
keeping a sweet inward communion with God, and among themselves: their
conferences were savoury, and their inward experiences communicated were
excellent, edifying and building up: and Christ was (...) set out to sale in
all markets: he was the penniworth held out in all Christian meetings; but in
these days (I may not wish for persecution) I may say, that the stomach (they
say) makes better digestion in cold, than in hot weather: so when times are
troublesome and unsafe, the heat goes inward to make good digestion: now there
is necessity to call men to inwardness; this and that opinion; this and that
conceit; such a controversy; blowing of a feather up and down between man and
man; matters of no concernment (as he said; and he was a very observing man,)
do so take us up, that the tree of knowledge is in greater request then the tree
of life, exceptis paucissimis omnis c^tus Christianorum sentina vitiorum.

We may see our outwardness easily, and for it tax our selves; our sabbath
discourses what are they, but tales or news: We preachers, preach our parts,
and you pray your gifts. Nay St James says, sometimes you pray your lusts: we
study our religion, that we may conform to rising times, parties, customs: we
set our dials by the countenances of mortal men, and which way that looks we
set our profession; our worship is but a carcass, because we are but carcasses
in it; not answerable to that God who is a spirit, whom we should serve in
spirit and truth: we confer our notions or some lighter ware when we meet
together; we are seldom or rare in the duties of self-examination, run over
the daily circuit of our devotion, that we have chosen to perform in our
families* as a post-horse runs his stage; our fastings are but disguised
self-seeking; and our Religion it self a kind of Policy: What need I go on to
instance in those things that you take to be so odious: by these few we may be
convinced of our outwardness.



And comparatively did set the price and the praise upon the inward work: the
hidden man was always in Gods account the (...) thing of great price, 1 Pet.
3. 4. For as the Apostle distinguishes between such trivial questions that bred
quarrels between Christians in his time; and such things as the Kingdom of God
consisted in, Romans 14. 17. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; For he that in these
things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men: So the same
Apostle speaking of the outward ordinances appointed unto and observed by the
Jew (as Circumcision) which was their principal glory, the seal of their
Covenant (standing the initial solemnity, the bond of their obedience to the
whole Law) does yet tell them, that the inward circumcision, the purity of the
heart, the inward work of the spirit upon their spirit, was as to their
salvation, and as to acceptance and praise with God, far above that which had
such esteem with men; for though I know that Religion has an outward part, and
an inward; an outward part of positive worship, as the Religion of the Jews
had, and ours has; and an outward part of moral and practical holiness and
righteousness: James 1. 27. Pure Religion and undefiled, is to visit the
fatherless and widow in their affliction, etc. as both theirs and ours: and
though God require our bodies, which are our outward part, to be a living
sacrifice presented to him, Romans 12. 1. yet are the Intrails, and the Fat, the
inwards of Religion, (that without which all the rest is but a carcass) of
principal esteem with God; the soul denominates and gives being to man: yet his
body is an essential part; but the body without the soul is both lifeless, and
by reason of the retinue of death loathsome; so it is the regenerating and
renewing graces that give to us the life and beauty of a Christian, yet so as
outward duties of worship and of moral life are parts of Religion also; but
without an inwardness of spirit and a hidden man to accompany it, they are all
dead works, and have no beauty in them. This then is that I say, that Religion
is an inward thing: Godliness heals our outward ways by putting a bia^ within
the bowl, and the change is from within; it give^ new principles, new motives,
new manner of performance of duties: the graces, the comforts, the sealings,
the experiences, the communion with God and Christ, are all inward things: We
judge of life by outward manifestations, breathing, moving; but the seat of
life is within.

This point is attested to by the testimony of three worlds: the heathen world,
the Jewish, and the Christian world.

dregs do most settle: they (the heathens) have a Theology and a form of
worship of their gods full of folly and vanity; but the wisest and soberest of
them have confessed, that if God be a spirit, he must be worshipped by a pure
spirit; si sit animus, then puramente colendus; so Persius, who (as the Apostle
says) was one of the Heathen prophets; Give me (says he) Compositum jus,
jusque animi, a due composure, and honesty of mind: and for my outward
sacrifice, far litabe, I Will perform, that with a few grains of Barley or meal:
and you may understand by Cicero, 2. De natura deorum; and by Seneca, as
Lactanctius cites him, what uncontrollable conviction this has, even with
natural men, that honesty of mind, and moral life is more pleasing to God, then
Hecatombs.

Circumcision of the heart, Jer. 4. 4. and how they comparatively undervalue
the outward forms in respect thereof, Isaiah 66. 3. To him will I look that is
of a contrite heart; but otherwise the killing of an Ox is as the slaying of a
man, and the offering of a lamb, as he that cuts off a dogs neck: Mic. 6. 7, 8.
Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, etc. He has showed thee O man
what is good, to love mercy, to do justice, and walk humbly with thy God: And
these outward ordinances of worship were never intended to continue for ever,
as you interpret the word ever; for your ever has sometimes an indefinite
time, therefore called ever; as the Exodus 21. 6. and Deuteronomy. 15. thy servant for
ever, viz. till the Jubilee: but all your typical ordinances had their date and
period. God intended to shake them down; that remaining things, the everlasting
Gospel might take place, which cannot be shaken, nor are to be removed, Heb.
12. 27. Its said, Heb. 9. 9. those outward and carnal ordinances were imposed
till the time of reformation or correction, and so long they had an excellent
end, and use; but even then the circumcision of the flesh was but, as Philo
says, a symbol of circumcision of spirit: and as the Apostle says of your
manna and rock, it was but Christ; and so of your outward worship; the shell is
valued for the kernel, the bone for the marrow, while the kernel and marrow is
in them; and now these typical symbols, though they be mortua and mortifera, as
to their use, dead and deadly; yet they are the word of God, and may and do
teach very much Gospel; as the anatomy of a dead man teaches how the parts lie
in a living man; yet they continue not of further use to you: and it may easily
appear, that God did intend to draw off this outwardness of worship, by his
taking off, as you account, fine things in the second temple, which were found
in the first, and the Scripture promising a greater glory in the second temple
than of the first, cannot be understood otherways, then that the outward glory
was exchanged and recompensed by spiritual glory through Christ, Hag: 2. 9. and
consequently, that the carnal and outward should pass into spiritual glory,
which was both manifest, when both the temple, the seat of this outward
service, was demolished, and the law the dignity of your nation led and shown
in triumph by the Roman Conqueror.

As for the attestation of the Gospel Christian that God aims at inwardness,
and spiritualness, especially, I should but make expense of time, and your
patience, to prove it; for it is the whole scope and drift of the Gospel, and
that covenant which is said to contain better promises then the former, has
this as the first; I Will write my law in their heart, and put it in their mind;
that is, in their inwards, Hebr. 8. 9. 10. But instead of lighting a candle to
the sun, I shall endeavor shortly to make a brief Anatomic of this Jew or
Christian, that is one inwardly, and how he is distinguished from him that is
so outwardly.

The new man, Ephesians. 4. 24. The inward, Rom 7. 24. 2 Cor. 4. 16. A dead man may
have inward parts, but he has not an inward man, because there is no soul; so
an outward Christian may have inward parts, a dead knowledge, a dead heart,
dead affections, but no inward man, because there is no work of grace in him;
and this is called an inward man, because as corruption spreading over the
whole man is called the old man, so this inward renewing grace spreading into
and over the whole man, the mind, will, affections, is called an inner man; and
this inner man is that which knows God, believes in Christ, loves, fears,
thirsts after grace, delights in Gods Commandments; and has a continual
opposition to the old man, counter-lusting, counter-desiring, and
counter-standing it: Christ dwells in your hearts, says the Apostle; The holy
Spirit is within you, says Christ; but as the soul never is in a dead body,
because where it dwells, life is; so Christ never is in a man that is dead;
where he is, life is, there is an inward man; he that has not in him this
inward man, cannot be a Christian inwardly.

I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, Jer 31.
33. A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit (...) put into you, Ezekiel. 36.
26. I will put my Law into their minds, and write it in their hearts, Heb. 8.
10. These are Covenant-promises, performed to all that are Covenant people: In
this inward work we have but the Ministry, but the writing is by the Spirit, as
it is said, 2 Cor. 3. 3. Ministered by us, but written by the Spirit of the
living God.

quod dat esse, gives being to a Christian, that cannot be, but in a true
Christian.

forma dat distingui; this inward work diff^renceth him from all sorts of them
that are nominates and Christians outwardly.

First, He is distinguished from the carnal Jew or Christian, that professes
Christ, but lives in sin; for though the outward Jew, or Christian may hate
some sins; Thou abhorrest Idols, thou hate Popery, and do many good works,
yet that is out of some peculiar and particular indisposition to a particular
sin, and some particular approbation or liking of some good works; but this
hate of any sin, or this inclination to a performance of any good works,
arises not from an inward nature or gracious principle, as it does in him that
is a Christian inwardly; and the reason is, that contrariety to sin which is in
a true Christian, arising from this inward gracious Nature, is to the whole
species or kind of sin, and is irreconcilable to any sin whatsoever; as
contrarieties of Nature are to the whole kind, as light is contrary to all
darkness, and fire to all water; so that this contrariety to sin, arising from
the inward man, is universal to all sin; though not an universal victory, yet
there is an universal contrariety; victory argues strength, contrariety argues
nature; hence it is that an outward Christian may hate one sin and love
another, becsuse there is not a gracious Nature in him which would be contrary
to all: And so also he may do good works, but not out of a Nature that is in
him; for if it were from an inward Nature, there would be an universal sympathy
with, and inclination toward God, and all that is of God, his Children, his
Commandments, 1 John 5. 12 3. Therefore (says the Apostle) I delight in the
Law of God according to the inner man, Romans 7. 22. not a particular good
inclination, but the Law in the whole of it: It Is the victory of a Christian
over corruption may not be full, the performance of good may not be perfect;
but the inward Nature of a Christian is to be judged by the universal
contrariety of his inward man to all sin, and his universal inclination to God
and holiness; and that universal contrariety will beget a combat against all
sin; and that universal inclination to God, an endeavor to all good; but
whether that combat be victorious, or that performance be perfect, though it
may be much to show the strength of a Christian; yet it shows not his inward
nature; but the other, this universal contrariety to sin, can be in no man but
him, that has an universal sympathy with God, and his whole law, and image in
his children; they are both in him that is a Christian inwardly, and they argue
an inward nature of grace in him; in which nature he differs from the carnal
Christian, who may oppose some sins, and do some good works out of other
principles and reasons.

Secondly, This inward Christian, is distinguished from a moral man, that to
his dogmatical faith and profession of Christ adds moral virtue; for there is
as great difference between grace and virtue, as between the sweet flowers
spread upon a dead carcass, and inward life: a man be full of virtue (...), and
empty of grace; as a room exquisitely painted without light: moral virtue is
like flowers of needle work, that are made by art, but never grow from any
living root: natural temper, disposition, education, produce moral virtues; but
now this inward man of a Christian is, as I may say, made up of Christ: the
knowledge, faith, love, the tastes and relish of Christ are the ingredients
that make up this inward man ^ all his graces are but extracts out of Christ:
It is the knowledge of Jesus Christ that alters the properties of moral
virtues, and turns them into Evangelical graces, fruits of the Spirit; as the
reasonable soul makes the sensitive operations, which otherwise are in bruits
to be the act of a man: I know a Christian may have more roughness of nature,
and more sturdiness of passions then is in many a moral man; he that has more
Christianity may have less morality; as there is more perfection of animal and
sensitive faculties in some bruits, then in some men: I had rather fight
against sin by a little of Christ in me, then beat lusts and passions quite out
of the field by the strength merely of moral virtue; because fighting against
passions by the faith and love of Christ argues a Gospel inward life, which is
better then a freedom from vice by a company of dead virtues.

Thirdly, This inward man is distinguished from all those common gifts and
workings which may be in an outward Christian; for there may be a large
knowledge, a kind of dogmatical faith, a mercenary love of God, a worldly
sorrow for sin, a desire of salvation, and grace, as a bridge to heaven; but
there is great difference between gifts and grace: there is no grace but has a
counterfeit, that goes under that same name; and that is it which deceives men:
for likeness is the mother of error, and it is that makes examination so hard:
knowledge, faith, love, repentance, are to be distinguished; for there are that
bear the name of these, but are not; therefore this light oar is to be
distinguished from true metal; the Spirit works many things in those whom it
unites not to the head; and many have large gifts by dispensation from Christ
that have no grace by virtue of their union with him, as heat from the body
into the clothes one wears; but they do not argue union with the head. Now
there is a peculiar knowledge of God, which is by his teaching, which a man may
rather feel than discribe; there is a love of Christ himself, not only of his
benefits; there is a repentance that rises out of love; and not out of slavish
fear, and there are desires of grace for service, and not only for a bridge to
heaven; this is the mark of true grace as distinguished from common: it casts
out self-love; and as it comes from union, so it draws the soul into union and
acquaintance with Christ himself: the most intimate corruptions of men are
p^ide and self, which are not mortified by outward and common graces; nor does
common grace draw into union with Christ, but is wholly upon benefits and
reward; to seek God for God, or love Christ for himself, is above the power of
all common shining glorious parts or (...), and (...) proper and peculiar to
this inward man.

Fourthly, A Christian inwardly is distinguished from the outwardly formed, who
in the form of Godliness is as well dressed as the true Christian, frequents
ordinances, complies in ritual and formal duties, has greater parts and
abilities than this Christian inwardly we speak of; but yet the inner Christian
differs from the outward. 1. In the principle that carries him, which is
regenerating grace, a well of wa^er that springs up in him to everlasting life.
2. In the motive that impels and constrains him, the love of Christ; the sweet
peculiar relishes of that love: 3. In the manner, which is with delight in God,
in his law, and the commandments are not grievous. 4. In the ends he aims at,
which are not the base respects of self-love, but the walking with God in
communion, and the enjoyment of God his God: but as for the Christian
outwardly, he has no principle, no root in himself, Matthew. 13. 21. his motives
are foreign springs and plummets, as your (...); his manner of performance is
but artificial and unsavory; his ends are like Jehu's, that is, his own; and
so his faith that he brags of, is but want of temptation; his assurance is but
confidence in the flesh; his quietness, is but want of examination of his
bottom; his joy is the blaze of thorns; his desi^es are but the eructations of
self-love. I have thus shown you him that is a Christian inwardly; and now for
the use.



Those that now they hold, as Circumcision, sabbath, difference of meats, rules
of marriage, etc. They are the ruins of the ruins of their state; and though
they were the ordinances of God, are now become their own superstitions, of no
more use then heathen Ceremonies, and observations; unless to teach them that
whiles they hold them, Christ shall profit them nothing: And for the Jew
inwardly, he is not, nor can be; for their Ordinances as now cannot work or
convey renewing grace, no more than heathen Rites: Indeed salvation was of the
Jews, as Christ says; and there was a spirit sparingly conferred on some; but
now to expect any Regeneration, any kernel in the husks now left, any new
creature should be in them, that receive not but call Christ Anathema, or
consequently should have the spirit or any saving grace, is as much as to say,
that a statue of stone may beget a living man: And therefore that Doctrine of
the Rabbis, That (one calls Pestilent) whosoever professes Judaism, howsoever
he live, shall have part in the world to come, which Justin Martyr thus
expresses, that all Abraham's seed, (...), etc.

Christ himself, savouring the things of the Spirit, his graces, his vvays;
enquire after inward experiences, and what difference there is between the
Word preached, and the Word engro^^ed, between Baptism of washing, and that
which is cleansing within; for the Ordinances are but as a mould, that casts a
man into the very shape of themselves, and forms an impression spiritual like
themselves.

not? I cannot but wonder there is no hedge: God stir up some Phineases to be
zealons for God, and his Church, and truth, before not only Government, but
Doctrine too, and truth of Religion be disputed and baffled out of doors. For
your parts, I cannot exhort you better than to mind the inwards of Religion,
self-denial, faith, love of God, and to be built up in them; hold the vitals,
hold the head; and though all the world reel into pieces, you have that will
save your own souls.

David sweetly, Psalm. 51. 6. Thou desire truth in the inward parts, and in
the hidden part thou have made me to know wisdom: You that have this inward
man, adorn that, 1 Pct. 3. 3^4. Let it not be the adorning and plaiting of the
hair; but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, in a meek and quiet spirit that is of price with God; this is the
Gentlewomans Looking-glass. Again, When men judge you, this will comfort you,
in 1 Gor. 4. 5. The Lord will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and
then every man shall have praise of God. When afflictions break the outward
man, 2 Cor. 4. 16. the inward man shall be renewed. When endeavors fail, and
performances of duty prove uncomfortable, yet this will comfort, Romans 7. 22. I
delight in the Law of God according to the inner man. He that has an inward
man has work, has comfort; work to take him up if he follow it, that he shall
not attend to wild fancies and conceits; and comfort to refresh him in all
times and conditions; and the least is not, that His praise is of God.

FINIS.

