The Vindicator Vindicated: OR, A SUR-REJOYNDER On behalf of Sir Thomas Player,
etc. Against the Calumnies of H. B. alias N. R. alias P. K. alias S. P. in a
late Pamphlet Learnedly Entitled An ANSWER in Defense of a REPLY.
IT IS not without some violence to my own Inclinations, that I come once more
to take notice of this man's Impertinencies; Excuse me therefore Readers, if I
appear not over-serious Where I have to do with one so completely Ridiculous;
For why must we needs use syllogismes to confute the Brayings of an Ass, or
come forth with Sword and Buckler to Duel the Knight of the Windmills, and
Attacque a Scarcrow of Beanstalks and Bulrushes? In truth were it not to remove
certain mistakes too boldly spread by Ill-designing people, and too unwarily
swallowed by some well-meaning Citizens, (more than out of any regard to the
merits of his trifling Pamphlet,) I should have left the Angry man to talk
alone, and enjoy the glory of the last word, which he shows himself so eager to
obtain, though in spite of Reason, and with the entire forfeiture of all the
small Remains of his Discretion.

Our pretended Citizen begins this second paper in the style of Splitting-Dick;
as if he would have us take him for some small Label of the Law or smatterer in
Clerkship; But he offers at it so woodenly, that the veriest Fac-simile-Dulman,
the sillyest Three halfpenny Hack in all Chancery Lane would be ashamed on it.
The said H. B. for further Answer Taken to the Exceptions in the said
Vindication, answers and says, If either of the Giants in Guild Hall can make
sense of this, I Will burn Wests Presidents, and give him my Green Bag into the
Bargain. Nay so accomplished he appears in his own Craft as not to understand
the very terms used in the process of a Suit in Equity. For his first Libel
which he meant for an Answer he called a Replication; and this, which
(according to his reckoning) should have been a Rejoinder he misnames an Answer.

But his Defects of Wit and Law, are made up with a surplusage of Confidence
and Ill Nature; The first cast of his skill being an Ill-favored squint on Sr.
Tho. P. who, he says, might as reasonably have taken him for a Jew, as a
Priest or Papist. What Sr. T. took him for, or whether he ever vouchsafed him
the honor of his generous thoughts, is to me unknown. It Is indeed somewhat
improbable that he should be a Priest, because commonly that Tribe show
themselves cunninger Knaves, and write with more Art and Learning; but that he
may be a kind of Mungrel, an indifferent wellwiller to the Red-Letter, a
mercenary Tool that would be an Advocate for Popery for ten Groats, there are
still some violent suspicions. For why should we not suppose him a Janus in
opinion, that wears a couple of names, H. B. in the Front, but N. R. in the
Rear of his Pamphlet, and yet it is probable neither of them so much as the
initial letters of his true Appellation? If he be one of our principal
Citizens, and really of the Church of England as he alleges, why all this
Shuffling and Masking? Or who but one that is a favourer of Papists at least,
would go about to divide us in such a juncture with groundless surmises, and
scandalize so Noble a Gentleman, only for his zeal to the Protestant Religion?
It Is true, he would cloak himself under the Church of England; but how many of
late pretend to her Honorable Livery, only that they may wound her more
unsuspectedly? Tuta frequensque via est sub Amici fallere Nomen.

He would by this maliciously insinuate as if Sr. T. were Author of the paper
called The Vindication, but can he hope to make any people in their wits
believe it? In vain, Sir! in vain you aspire to the Honor of such an Opponent,
Aquila non capit Muscas, That Gentleman has other business than to trouble
himself with Domitians fly-flap, or regard the barkings of every Cerberus. The
Vindication was written, as the Notes of his Speech were printed, wholly
without his Consent or Privity; For being satisfied with the Testimony of a
good Conscience, he valued not your slanders, yet 'twas thought a duty owing to
Truth and the Honor of the City (which in general you had aspersec) That the
same should be exposed by a meaner hand, who has no other obligations to that
worthy Knight than what every true Protestant must gratefully own. Our Author
next observes, That in the Opinion of the Fanatics, the Popish Plot cannot be
suppressed without their Help. Tell us, O thou Man of mickle Observations, when
they told you so? and yet I am glad to hear, they are so ready to help toward
it, when it is Necessary; The water being disturbed (he says) they put in their
Hooks and Lines and Nets to catch the Fish, the Government. It Is a dainty
Allegory, the very Cream of his Rhetoric, and so let it pass. But why was not
he so Loyal (especially when I challenged him to it) to discover some of these
dangerous Hook-and-Line-Men? We all do, or should know, it is the old Fisherman
at Rome, and his Journey-men, that are now busily Angling; and sure when an
Inundation is so palpably threatened, it will become every good Subject that
asserts the Kings Legal Prerogative, and the established Religion, to endeavor
to support the Banks, and I wish some whose Duty and true Interest it is to
maintain them, did not go about to undermine them, and by unseasonable Breaches
let in the Popish Torrent.

In his last he charged Sir T. P. with three foolish Ill-designs; now he says
but two, and undoubtedly next Edition they will be dwindled into none at all.
Yet for public satisfaction I cannot but take notice of two things
industriously spread to that Gentleman's disadvantage; 1. That he should be
concerned in promoting Mr. J. for Sheriff. 2. That he broke promise in not
appearing before the Lieutenancy Sept. 18. Now if both these should happen to
be found mistakes, what have they next to object?

As to the first, It Is most certain, and ready to be proved, That Sir T. was so
far from having any hand in that design, that he endeavored all he could to
discourage it; and as soon as ever he heard the least intimation thereof,
(which was but on the Friday Evening) earnestly desired several of Mr. J.'s
friends to desist, telling them, If they had an intent to prejudice the said
Mr. J. as much as in them lay, they could not take a more expeditious course to
effect it. Now if they would afterward proceed, is it not most unreasonable,
that he should be burdened with the acts of others, or misrepresented by
reason of an Accident, which (though unluckily happening the same day) he was
so remote from advancing, that he opposed it?

And here by the way, Though I am wholly a stranger to Mr. J. nor intend to be
his Advocate, yet finding Sr. T. unjustly reflected upon, on his account, and
Jenkisme here reckoned up as one of the Cities new Heresies, I could not but
inquire what might be the reasons, that he should thus become the subject of
every Lampoon, and Coffee-house Censure; and I protest I can find nothing, but
that he is a regular Conformist to the established Church, and a Citizen of
unblameable Conversation; only some years since he made a motion in the Common
Council (whereof he was a Member) expressing some apprehensions of what we are
since generally sensible, and supposing some Inconveniences might attend
overlong Parliaments, desired they would become suitors to the chief
Magistrates of the humbly City to petition his Majesty to call a new one, if he
thought fit. The matter of this request is thought to have been since Justified
by Authority, signifying the ill consequences of such tedious Session. Or
suppose it a Crime, might not a smart imprisonment atone for Rashness, or time
and further experience extenuate the Guilt, but that it must still remain an
Immortal stain (as our Author speaks in another Case) never to be deleted? --
But leaving Mr. J. to be his own Compurgator, (whose concerns are foreign to
our present business) we return to the matter in hand.

The second objection against Sir T. P. is about his supposed Breach of
promise, which if well examined, there will perhaps as little be found therein,
as in the former; nor is this meant to cast the least reflection on the
Honorable Gentlemen of the Lieutenancy, for since even a General Council is on
all hands acknowledged liable to error in matters of Fact, it is not impossible
they might be misinformed, or their Clerk, by a popular Rumor, led into a
mistake, as to that particular mentioned in the Gazetted Declaration, That then
and there he promised to meet; for it is credibly affirmed, that the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor, only referred or wished him to come at such a time;
in which case he was certainly left to his own Liberty, nor ought to be taxed
with such a formal violation of his Word, as some pretend, when he was never
engaged further than Prudence and future consideration of Circumstances should
advise him.

This will be sufficient answer to his second and third Paragraphs to men of
sense, though perhaps not to H.B. who does nothing there but with false and
malicious imputations, render himself (to use his own Bull-phrase) at the same
time both Idle and Officious.

From Folly he next advances to two or three notorious Falsehoods in a Breath,
That the Vindicator should affirm the City is not obliged by the Acts for
settling the Militia, that the City have the absolute Command (for so he must
mean, or nothing to the purpose) of their Militia, and that all the Burghers in
the World have such command of theirs; whereas all that was alleged was, That
the Act it self gives the Honorable City of London a particular Latitude
beyond other places, in some respects, and in regard of extraordinary duties;
not in the least denying the Militia every where throughout England to be
absolutely in the power of the King, who, 'twas proved, had allowed of the
City-guards, etc.

But would you know what troubles the man? He cannot for his Gutts, reconcile
the matter for one that is Chamberlain of London to be a Parliament man. The
Reason I pray? Because the unlimitedness of that privilege made use of, may
tend to the ruin of Orphans, etc.

I Answer, 1. What is this to the Vindicator? How comes it in here by head and
shoulders, being wholly Extrinsick to the matter in debate? 2. Is not this not
only impertinently to forestal the freedom of Elections, but also to arraign
the Prudence of the whole City, that knew well enough not long since how to
reconcile it? Nor has any thing that I know of, or he can allege, since
happened, that should justly cause them to alter their sentiments. 3. Does he
not here give us reason to judge that he looks upon our Parliaments little
better than Routs, since he bespeaks them Guilty of such Injustice, as to
protect one of their members, if he should (that is, if he could) violate such
a Public Trust? Can it be imagined the Honor of an English Parliament (where
we hope shall never sit any Pensionary Bankrupts) would ever suffer it? but
would upon Application, abandon such a Delinquent to the utmost severity of Law.


Lastly, To knock this objection on the Head, can he be supposed to be a
Citizen, and versed in their usages, that makes it? Whence is it possible this
Imaginary mischief should arise? Is the Chamberlain alone, or so much as
principally concerned in disposing Orphans estates? Wherein is he liable to be
sued by the Creditors of the Chamber? and if he mispend or fail in respect of
the City, has he not given sufficient Security, who are liable to answer the
Trust reposed? Where is then the danger?

But H. B. begins to draw his breath faintly, and now comes ridiculously to his
General Traverse, Without That, etc. Now I appeal to all the World whether he
has cleared himself, or so much as touched, several things home-charg'd upon
him, viz. his reflecting on the Government of the City as Arbitrary, Their
unjust screwing out of money (as he would have it) in election of Sheriffs,
Their undoing young men by Livery-Fines, etc.

His Demurrer is of the same stamp, the man begs hard for his Charges, prithee
who suborned thee to write two such paultry Pamphlets as would not bear their
own Expenses? even let thy Clients pay the Costs, for infallibly they are
Nonsuited.

As to the Bead-roll of harsh Terms which he musters up at the Fag-end of his
Pamplet, it cannot be Imagined what he means by it, unless to prove (what the
Vindicator seemed to question) that he is fit for the dignity of a Scavenger,
by showing his dexterity in Kennel-raking? yet it must be observed, that most
of those Epithetes were nothing relating to H. B. but fixed on the Popish
Traitors, who enough deserve them, others are his own Appellations of himself,
and the rest no more than what his attempts render him obnoxious unto; such
ill-weeds must like Nettles be handled roughly, else they will sting us, and I
know not why we may not call a Spade, a Spade. But Conscius ipse sibi de se
putat omnia dici. So much for the Worshipful H.B.

Now to you the worthy Members of this Honorable City I humbly address; If Sr.
T. P. have hitherto demeaned himself as a Loyal Subject to his King, as a
Faithful Servant to this City, as a zealous Patriot for the Protestant
Interest, and that of the Public, if his late Calumniated Application was but
in pursuance of his office (several persons coming to call in their moneys on
the late Juncture, and he, for the satisfaction of them and others, only
modestly stating their apprehensions) if it be lawful in all Communities from
the greatest Monarchy to the meanest Ships-Crew, for any person humbly to give
notice of threatened dangers, and this practiced all the world over without
Reprehension, yea received with thanks for the good will, though proved
mistaken, where is then his offense? how comes he to suffer in any good man's
esteem? or why should he be given up a Sacrifice to the clamours of the
debauched, the Revenge of Popish Incendiaries, the malice of Whisperers, or the
groundless Ill-impressions of the Ignorant? He that has laudably discharged an
eminent Trust amongst you, and for you, sure deserves your Confidence in a
greater: As both better knowing the Grievances and Interests of your City, and
more experienced in the duty you are to choose him to. I am not fit to Advise
you, but will not cease to pray that you may Elect such as may be fit to serve
you and the nation in so weighty a work. A Work that requires men of parts and
of Resolution too. Every Rich man (though a competent Estate be absolutely
necessary) nay every honest man (though none else are) may not be proper for a
Senator: There may be some that scarce understand the Question, but would give
an I or No at random, when a single vote may almost be worth a Kingdom. There
are some that like Glasses may be blown into any shape with a Flattering or
Threatening Breath. I am confident you would not dishonor your selves with such
a Choice -- May the Almighty Counselor direct you so now and ever as may most
tend to his Glory, the safety of his Vicegerent our Gracious Sovereign, the
preservation of the Protestant Religion, the Honor of the City, and the
Public Weal of the Nation.

FINIS.

