VINDICIAE REVINDICATAE: BEING AN ANSWER TO Mr. Baxters Book, ENTITLED,
Catholic Communion doubly Defended, by Dr. Owen 's Vindicator, and Richard
Baxter.

AND Mr. Baxter's Notions OF THE Saints Repentance AND Displeasure in Heaven,
Considered.

By a Lover of Truth and Peace, in Sincerity.

Sicut noxium est, si unitas desit bonis; ita Perniciosum est, si sit in malis.
Greg. mor. Lib. 33. Non tam Authoritas in Disputando, quam rationis momenta
querenda sunt. Cicero. LONDON: Printed by George Larkin at the lower End of
Broad-street, next to London-Wall. 1684.

AN EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
IT is none of the business of this Epistle, to beg thy favorable and
indulgent Respects for the Author and his Work; which is almost as beggarly as
beging the Question: But least of all to crave that thou would not be so
suspicious and severe, as not to take all Citations by which I represent my
Author upon my own word, without giving thy self the Trouble, and me the sad
Apprehensions of a diligent Scrutineer that will see with his own Eyes

I am not much in love with Apologies in Epistles to the Reader: But if I must
in civility treat thee a little that way, it shall be only to tell thee, that
if I could have found any particular faults in the following Tract deserving
thy Censure before their Printing off; thou should not have found them
there. And that I suppose thou will read me as a man liable to Mistakes and
Passions, of which thy self art not altogether incapable; and yet neither nthee
nor me to be justified.

As to the Reverend and Learned Author with whom I have here to do, and for
whom I have a Veneration for his real worth, and many of his Works sake: I
doubt not but he knows how to put a difference betwixt the Liberty of the
Pulpit and the Press; and the Countenance of a Complement, and a Controversy.
If this have somewhat in the manner that is almost necessary to ease my
weariness in writing, and thine in reading it, and I do a little indulgere
genio, pardon me this wrong.

I intended to have joined with this Tract, my thoughts of Mr. Baxters Notions
of a Parochial Assembly, being a particular Church organical of Divine
Institution, independent on the Diocesan; and as such to be Communicated with.
But this I have reserved for a Tract by it self, and 'til I have seen Mr.
Baxters Answer (which I hear is in the Press) to a Book entitled, Mr. Baxters
Judgment and Reasons, etc. which has matter in it worthy perusal, relating to
the same Argument.

ERRATA. Page 9. l. 25. read in the Pew. p. 9. l. 36. read may go to. p. 17. l.
8. read may not be said. p. 31 and 32. for 5th dispute, read 5 Disputations.

AN ANSWER TO Mr. Baxters Book, ENTITLED, Catholic Communion doubly
Defended, by Dr. Owens Vindicator, and Richard Baxter.
SECT. I. No Consent of Dr. Owens Vindicator to the Catholic Communion
defended by Mr. Baxter.
Reverend Sir,
I Having read your answer to a Book, Entitled, A VINDICATION of the late Dr.
Owen, etc. though I am not over strongly addicted to the Scribbling Humor; yet
(Considering all Circumstances according to my small Prudentials) I was
determined (after some Hesitations) to a public reply. And some Passages in
your Answer, look as if you expected it.

The Title of your book in the Frontispiece, Scil. CATHOLIC COMMUNION DOVBLY
DEFENDED, BY DR. OWENS VINDICATOR, AND RICHARD BAXTER: has so much of Riddle in
it, that, I confess, I am not the Oedipus who can reconcile it: Nor did that
manner of ^ign at the door, direct me to look for an Answer (much less a
^ontroversial Answer) to my Vindication, as the Entertainment ^^thin. But
however Singular you have been in mis-matching the ^^^le, and the Book; Mr.
Baxter, and Dr. Owens Vindicator as ^o-authors: I shall digest them as they
come to hand, as well as I can. And in the mean time, You might hold me
excused, if I should in my Title have followed so great an Example; only that
it be with somewhat more of Congruity. But I am not disposed to make my Reader
gaze at such an unusual Spectacle.

I have Sir, no light Quibling Design in this Reply, nor to put Tricks upon a
Person I so much Reverence, and in a cause so serious. Nor did I expect from
the Gravity, and Sincerity of Mr. Baxter, such a stumble at the Threshold.

CATHOLIC COMMUNION are two great words, and in pl^in downright Construction,
are the epitomy of two Articles of our Christian Creed, the Holy Catholic
Church, and the Communion of Saints. And were you as plainly to be understood,
I must acknowledge that, in Intituling me to the defense of it, you put an
honor upon me, which I am more ambitious, than capable of deserving.

But it is a hard Case, that while we agree herein, and applaud the terms
Catholic Communion; when you explain your sense (I think at least that) it
goes beyond Catholic Communion: though that seem a contradiction in adjecto by
excess, as Roman Catholic by defect.

For the genuine sense of Communion, I leave to you, and Dr. Sherlock to beat
out, after such a dust raised, wherein it is vanished out of sight. I wish you
had treated him more calmly, it would have been never the less Christian, or
promotive of Catholic Communion; But the Catholicism of our Communion, you
will needs have extending to an actual pressential joining with the Parochial
Assemblies, in their Worship by the Lyturgy; the Office of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper included: yet, not according to the National, Diocesan
Constitution, established by Law, but as with a particular, divnely instituted,
and complete Church, independent on the Diocesan. I am sure Sir, that the
defense of such a Catholic Communion, was none of my intention; and I am as
sure, that you find no such sense in my expressions. But if I must be for a
while a fel^ de se, and represented as one, who under the pretense of
vindicating Dr. Owen, have betrayed the cause I pretended to defend, by siding
with his opposite in the very Case Controverted; a little patience will
discover another scene, wherein Mr. Baxter and the Vindicator will appear as if
Mr. Baxter had forgotten his Title, and had a privilege to dispose of me
according to his present fancy.

Having gotten over your general Title, I have the prospect of another, which
seems to be restrained to your first section. And it is, The Consent of Dr.
Owens Vindicator to the Catholic Communion defended by Richard Baxter.

Here Sir you make a very hopeful abatement of what you stood upon in your
general Title, there you will have me defend, here you come down to Consent.
This is at least half a retractation at the next word; yet when I have examined
what you have to show for the latter, it will appear to be a mere ungrounded
Chimaera.

You are pleased to distribute the matter of my Book under four heads. I shall
pass by the first at present, and consider the second as most proper for me to
do in this place; and that you word thus.

II. Your Consent to the main of the Cause which I defend, and your dissent
from the persons whose words I confute: of this I shall thankfully take notice.
Here is not Assent and Consent, but Consent and Dissent. The last was certainly
not Argumentandi, but ornandi gratia; for if I consent to what you defend, I
must needs dissent so far from what you Confute; but in fine, it will be
neither the one, nor the other in what you express. Yet I must observe how the
Market falls from defend, to Consent to the Catholic Communion, defended by
Richard Baxter. And now it is come to Consent to the main of the Cause which you
defend. Yet Sir, though I take no pleasure in difference, and contradiction; I
fear it is not yet an agreement.

Of this Consent you say you shall thankfully take notice, and accordingly in a
few words following, you thank me again and again, for the particulars of my
aforesaid Concession, or Consent. But worthy Sir, considering how courtly and
friendly you have committed a rape upon my sense and words; and then come off
so handsome, and smoothly with thanks for my Consent: I call to mind a much
parallel Case, in the History of the Council of Trent, by Friar Paul the
Venetian (mihi) page 322. Lib. 4.

Christopher Strassen one of the Ambassadors from the Elector of Branderburg,
a Protestant Prince, to the Council of Trent; made a long Oration, showing the
good affection and reverence of his Prince toward the Fathers: without
declaring what his opinion was in point of Religion. The Synod answered, (that
is the Speaker in its name) That it heard with great Content, the Ambassadors
discourse, especially in that part, where that Prince does submit himself to
the Council, and promises to observe the Decrees. --

The answer which the Council gave was much marvelled at, in regard of the fair
and advantageous manner of Contracting, pretending ten thousand by virtue of
the promise, when the bargain was but of ten; for there was no more proportion
than between these two numbers, in the reverence promised by the Elector, and
the obedience pretended by the Synod to be given. It was replied for defense,
That the Council did not regard what was, but what should have been said. And
that this is an usual and pious allurement of the Holy Church of Rome; which
yielding to the infirmity of her Children, makes show to believe that they
have performed their duty.

Now to your proofs page 1. you say, That you thank me that I say page 3. I do
not pretend (in what follows) to maintain against you, that it is unlawful to
use a Form of Prayer, or comply with an imposed Lyturgy, or under some
Circumstances, to join in the use of ou^ (...). Neither shall I undertake to
justify altogether the Twelve Arguments you have Printed as Dr. Owens, in order
to refuting them.

I pray Sir compare your premises, with your Conclusion. I do not in such a
Book maintain such and such things against you; Ergo I Consent to them, I
defend them. I can tell you where you have resented such a gross fallacy
against your self very highly. And unless you winked hard, and very
opportunely; you could not but see in my Book such other reasons given for my
not maintaining those things against you in that Book, as would have more then
sufficiently have prevented, or cured you of such a mistake. And you cannot but
know that they were in the midst between those words you cite. For you left out
seven lines containing those reasons, and then patched together what went
before, and what followed after the said reasons, immediately as if it had been
my continued discourse. But whatever my Sentiments be of the abovesaid; I
shall hardly declare my assent, and consent to all of them, or the rest of
their fellows; 'till it be to better purpose, or by the temptation of a
Benesice.

You say also in the same page, that you are pleased with my exposition of the
Doctors words, and that upon the account of my restrictions of their sense. I
have no reason to be displeased with this: yet I think it very sit for me to
say that they will not bear the improvement you make of them, scil. I only here
desire the men and women that have been with me, and professed that they thought
the Doctors Arguments unanswerable against the lawfulness of joining in the use
of the Liturgy, to take notice of what his worthy Vindicator says.

Sir I must desire those persons to take notice also, of what I have said, that
you think not fit to repeat; and they will find my sense of another
Countenance. Some People will take the mere Title Page of some answers for a
sufficient determination, others will look only into the Answerer, and it may
be no further than a few pages or passages. If such be mistaken, let them thank
themselves; I see it is necessary to look into what both Parties say, let them
be who they will: if a Baxter, and some other men of fame so far mistake.

But so far as your last passage cited, is grounded upon the restriction; I put
on the sense of the said Doctors Position; It is so far from warranted thereby,
that it is greatly weakened. For if that Position, and the Arguments be taken
with those restrictions I said may be put upon them, they are much the more
unanswerable for that.

You say, page 3 But I think ten to one of the people commonly accounted
Dissenters throughout England are of my mind, and are for Parish-Worship rather
than either none, or worse. But by Dissenters I suppose you mean those of the
Doctors mind, or your own. I believe Sir, notwithstanding your thanks for my
Charity and Reconciliation, you give in the next words, your Censure is too
hard, and uncharitable, of those of the Doctors mind, and mine. I cannot
imagine they should be so atheistieally or maliciously disposed as to choose no
worship or worse (all circumstances considered) rather than that of the Parish.
If any adhere to a worse rather than that by mistake: I cannot call that their
Choice. Dear Sir, I wish also you would either use more Accuracy your self
(especially in the case of Censures) or sorbear exacting it from others, under
the penalty of I know not how many distinctions, to discover their confusion;
though they are well enough understood by the willing. I beseech you Sir, who
can tell what you mean by Parish-Worship? If all Parish Worship, I believe you
are not for it your self rather than none pro hic and nunc, Scil. the faults
(you say) are in the Lyturgy, and more especially in the Offices of Baptism and
Burial, the bowing at the pronouncing the word Jesus, and toward the Altar, or
the East. If of some part of the Parish Worship, I am sure they are not of my
mind, or the Doctors either, that will rather have none than that, Scil.
reading the Scriptures Preaching, Prayer, Singing Psalms. And the Doctor was
for Church Worship too (you know) though not for ringing a Bell to proclaim
where) whatever it cost. And you do not say rather than none more public or
private not Parochial locally, but simply none; which excludes not only family
with four added, but single solitary worship; and all these ad semper ex part
post. Yet thus roughly am I and the Dissenters of my mind represented, as
contradistinguished from those of yours, if I take you at the worst your
expressions will bear, which I am far from, though they insinuate a great deal
too much.

But now we are come to what I told you near the beginning of this Reply; What
is become of my Consent to, and Defense of the Catholic Communion defended by
Richard Baxter in the Titles? Why, this Consent, and united Defense is come to
this, in the very same Case, and in the main of it, Mr. Baxter and ten to one,
etc. are of one mind, and the Doctor and I of another.

Page 3. you repeat a passage of min^ thus, and you add page 30. And if (as you
allow) the practical determination depends on the Circumstances of the persons.
you reduce the controversy to a far narrower room than was by most supposed:
And every one being best capable of understanding his own Circumstances, it
will not bear great heat and importunity from another.

From hence you interrogate, But whence comes those wrong suppositions of the
most) if after twenty years Communion with the Parish-Churches, I venture on
the Censorious so far, as to give my reasons for my own practice, and defend
those reasons, and that practice against contrary writings? And such wise men
as you are so reconcilable, and see how narrow the Controversy is; Whence
comes it that most think it to be what it is not, against such frequent plain
expressions? You and I may conjecture at the cause.

I must acknowledge, and I do it freely, which is more than you had in the
Vindication, That I do not hold that worshipping God by a form of Prayer is
simply unlawful, for the Reasons I mentioned, page 25. so that you and I differ
not here in Thesi. And I also declare it my Judgment that those who differ from
one another (in the cases controverted) ought not to deal out bitter Censures
and Reflections for that cause: but to maintain brotherly Love, and Evangelical
Peace; yea, and Church Communion too, so far as it may be without sinful Terms,
or notorious Scandal, or what is rationally suspected to be such. And I am so
far from these heats and importunities, that (whatever my sense of your
practice may be) I have been thought, and said to be a kind of an indifferent
Lukewarm Person (if not of your mind) for Contradicting, and endeavoring to
cure a bitter, and over-hot Censoriousness. But Dear Sir, I beg your Excuse if
I answer your Question as well as I can, I am not dainty to affirm, that all
sides are too guilty of Partiality, and over-doing. And you have less reason to
blame those who think the differences very wide and weighty, and much greater
then you sometimes render it, (For there is a great deal of difference between
your High Water, and low-water-mark) when they see you so much concerned not
only to defend your own practice, but to reduce others to it; and condemn those
who dissent from you as no mean Malefactors, stigmatize them as Separates, such
as unchurch all but themselves, proud Ignorants, and very bitter Contemptuous
Language; as if with Hannibal your passage must be made, though with Fire and
Vinegar. Indeed Sir, your Style is too hard, and heavy for fine work. Love,
Reconciliation, and Peace, must be fished for with a Calm, not a Storm. What
you say, page 32. Humility and Love would conquer: all the World, is what I
have said often, and thought a Thousand times. It were happy if such Notions
were practiced by all that seriously profess Godliness, whether they are high
or low in outward Tranquillity: this would Represent Christianity in its proper
Colors, and turn the Churches shame, into the true Glory of Grace, and
Peaceableness.

SECT. II. Mr. Baxter has not proved the Charge of Errors on Dr. Owen, alias
the Manuscript, sufficiently.
I Shall next Consider what you say, to render my Confutation of your Charge of
certain Errors on the Doctor, insufficient supposing the Manuscript to be his,
as you Printed it.

My Construction, and Sense of the Position you dispute not, but are well
satisfied with Expressly.

Page 2. You repeat the first Error Charged on the Doctor, but (I thank you)
you have here reduced the said Error to the words and sense of the Mistake,
though not the Order, and it is, It is not in our Power to make use of any part
of it, [the Lyturgy you mean] as we shall think fit. You add, and I maintain
that, though man has not put that in our Power, God has put it in our power
to join in the good part of tolerable Worship, without owning the Faults, (or
else we must join with none) you deny not this, page 27. but say, that he meant
it of man's man's giving us Power, (which I never denied) but it is God that we
serve.

Answ. But if he meant and said it too of the Power or Liberty given by man;
and I proved it, and consequently, that the first Error you charged him withal
was without ground, and your farther discourse not to the question, as I told
you, page 27. I had what I pretended to.

But now you insist on what you say you maintained, and say I denied not that.
But Sir, this is another Province. And Reader, if the Reverend Author mistakes
as to what he now says he there maintained, and in saying I denied not the
sense he gives here, I beg his and your pardon, if I transcribe more then I am
otherwise willing: and I shall do it fully Word for Word.

I cannot think he bears himself upon saying I denied it not page 27. It is all
one if I denied it page 28. which I did, if there where any thing like the
sense he intimates; as for the words they are not in the Book I answered.

He says Page 7. in his Answer to the Manuscript, Though man gives us no such
power, God does; as it is in my power to believe all that one speaks truly
and well, and not that which he speaks amiss. I am not bound to own all that
any Preacher or Priest shall say in the Church; God put it into the Disciples
power, to beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, and yet to hear them. Proving
all things, is not approving all things.

What is in all this of joining in the good part of public tolerable Worship
by a Lyturgy? And how he maintained it by these Arguments, which are nihil ad
Rombum, I cannot imagine, and think my Reader as little.

The first instance, As it is in my power to believe all that one says truly
and well, and not the contrary. I am sure it is not very sound as expressed,
for our power is far short of this; we have not such comprehensive
understandings, but our belief may be imposed on inevitably by falsehoods, in
the appearances of truth; else our errors were much more culpable then
sometimes they are. And I thought we had been disputing of actual joining in
Worship, and not of hearing any assertory Discourse.

The second instance, of what a Preacher or Priest shall say in the Church, we
are not bound to own all that. Do you mean Sir, in Preaching or Praying in the
Pulpit, or the Reading Pew? It Is all in the Church, and it is all saying. I am
herein of your mind Sir; but if you intend it of the Liturgy read there, it is
but idem per idem; it is in your power or liberty not to join in all, because
you are not bound to join in all. You will not take such Logic for good Coin
from an Antagonist.

Third Instance, God put it in the Disciples power to beware of the Leaven of
the Pharisees, and yet to hear them. This the Text tells you plainly to be mean
of their false Doctrine they Preached, not of their Liturgy for Prayer and
Praise; and you say, Christ bid hear them; would you have us go to the Liturgy
only to hear it, or only as we should go to a Sermon? and not worship by it?
And if we may take your own opinion in the matter, it is doubtful whether they
had any Liturgy; or if they had, it was a Scripture one; certainly here was no
bad leaven in that. But of this more hereafter.

Your 4th Argument or Instance, Proving all things, is not approving all
things, is ejusdem sarinae, and deviates from the question toto Caelo. Though
proving of pretended truth, brought into the Church, be a duty; and holding
fish that which is good, is to be the consequent practice: Yet Sir, this
concerns primarily the Credenda. But suppose it reach also to the facienda; it
is as little to the purpose. For a stinted Printed Published Liturgy, may and
ought to be proved before it be used in Worship, and not like Saul's Armor
clapped on David's back to sight in before he had proved it. Certainly Sir, you
would not have people attend to the Worship by the Liturgy, in the Parish
Assembly, and instead of having their affections and devotions stirred up, and
carried on to God by the Liturgy, to be putting the scruple to their
Consciences, whether they are Praying or Sinning. This proof should be made
before they come there, which they may do at home when they have nothing else
to do, and not remain a matter of doubt when it might before hand have been put
out of doubt. I hope, nay I am sure, that you approve not the practice of many
Ministers, who gave their assent and consent to the Liturgy on black Barth. (a
day to be remembered) before ever they had seen so much as the first leaf of it;
nor could, because it came not out time enough. This proving before using in
Worship, you commended once as an advantage of a stinted form, which
Ministerial, conceived, extempore Prayer has not, but that is forgotten here.

In the same page, and next words you add; You say, when men pray, they bid us
pray -- In extempore Prayer, both are required to what is good; and then reply,
True: And I may join with the good of an extempore Prayer, without owning any
evil in it.

Answ. This is Alexander-like; cut the knot you cannot, or will not untie.
Rather than allow me to speak argument or sense; you will mangle a sentence so,
as I never met with any do the like before, I mean a good man and a good
Scholar. When men pray, they bid us pray, what then? in extempore Prayer, both
are required to what is good; both what? I assure you Reader, my Author will
not help you to make it sense, if you rifle over his whole answer for it. But
seeing my whole sentence is but short, take it entire to a letter as my Author
had it in my Book. When men Preach, they bid us hear, and the ear tri^s words:
but when they pray, they bid us pray. And by the Liturgy our Amen is required,
and not our Opinion or Scrutiny: In extempore Prayer both are required to what
is good; Now I will trust my Reader to find out the sense and the reason too.
And though I can forgive my Author a thousand such wrongs, I must not excuse
them. As to my Authors reply, it is by Concession True; and by repetition of
what was to be proved, which is instar nihilli. Now to my Author again.

In the next lines you say, indeed you say page 28. [ The Mass is not more
twisted in all the parts of it by Law, than the Liturgy; nor left less to our
power to pick and choose. If this union do render the far greater pollutions,
the Heresy and Idolatry of the Mass infections to the whole Worship: who can
prove that the pollutions of other worship, when we are likewise commanded not
to distinguish, or divide; does not in their degree and kind, diffuse the taint
alike.]

I thank you Sir, for quoting thus much fairly, which yet seems to come not
very freely; yet a good part of the Argument is left behind, and I shall take
leave to add a snip of it more, which follows in the very next words [ Mental
dividing or culling by secret disapprobation, and not joining in our hearts, is
all you pretend to; unless you did allow (which you do not determine) Mr.
Humphrey Fens manner to say a loud Amen to every Prayer of the Liturgy, except
the Prayer for the Bishops, and to that to dissent by a singular silence.] Now
Sir, instead of answering my arguments, you fall to making a Profession what
you will do in several cases; but at last you venture to say, It is not the
Conjunction, but the kind of the thing that makes it unlawful.

Do you not here roll Sis^phus's stone? The Argument returns upon you again [
There are good things in the Mass, yea, good Prayers directed to God only by
Jesus Christ] shall we therefore go to Mass, and fall a picking and culling in
our minds, and all is well?

You tell us not what kind of things in Conjunction make it unlawful, although
I put you upon it page 29. of my Vindication in these words (but I did but
surdo narrare) Nor have you proved that no other sin but Idolatry and Heresy
may justify refusing to worship by the Mass; nor that far less sins than they
may not do it: Nor that the Liturgy has not (some way or other) such sin
cleaving to it, as is like the Leprosy, that could not be scraped, washed, or
fired ou^.

Now Sir, I pray speak out; and give us leave to go to Mass, (if that be
required, and the Church of England should comply with it (which God forbid)
with your mental distinctions; or tell us what sins twisted and mingled with a
Worship may render joining therewith unlawful.

But to be more faithful to your reasonings, than you have been to mine; I
shall recite, and examine them without picking and culling at all; much less to
your disadvantage; only I shall tell my Reader by the way, that amongst all
your superabundart distinctions, you give us not one that will include the
kinds of the things joined in a mode of worship, that make it unlawful to be
used, exclusive of those which do not, or that look like it; and so you leave
us as you found us. Let us examine what you have done; it is in page 2.

Answ. God is the master of his Worship; very right! And 'twere well if there
were no more. I do what he bids me, though man contradict it. This is much
better, because practical. But shall we take it for an answer to my argument?
(as you call it) your answer is of doing what God bids you, tho man contradict
it: the question is, of doing what man commands, mixed inseparably with what
God contradicts. Take it at the best as to the question, it is but this: I will
go to Liturgy, to Mass (for that is the question) and join in that part which
God requires (let it be mixed with what it will) whatever men say to the
contrary. This is the plain sense of your answer. But I believe far better
things of you; you explain your self thus.

If God bid me hear, and believe the Scriptures, and man say hear also, and
believe the Apocrypha. I will openly profess I obey God, and you no further
than you contradict not God. All this is good, but not in this place, because
impertinent. What are we the wiser for it? What is that to the question? What
you will profess in such a case? Tell us what you will do, in the case before
us, and give us a reason for it too. What man that would but be thought to fear
God, would not profess such a general dangerless Profession in high Change, in
a Popish Country? Yet he will hardly merit the Chair in this debate, for such
a resolution.

You proceed, Rather than not hear the Scriptures, I will hear also the
Apocripha, but not believe it to be Gods Word. But if they bid me hear the
Alcoram also, I will withdraw.

Answ. What this is to the Purpose, I cannot tell. If you will do this, and
much more; the Question stands just where it did, excepting only the Authority
of your inclination or Example. But if the Rectitude of what you say you will,
and will not, may be examined, I may ask you,

1. What necessity there is, that you should hear the Apocrypha, or not hear
the Scripture? 2. Whether you mean that you will rather hear the Apocrypha
read, as a part of Gods Worship, rather than forbear to hear the Scripture
read, with other Concommitants in the Lyturgy, at the same time, and place? 3.
Though in the mean time, you believe not the Apocrypha to be Gods Word: Do you
believe that it is not intended it should be believed to be Gods Word? or
insinuated to be so? 4. If any other writing, no more Gods word than the
Apochrypha, and containing matter as liable to Exception, and standing as
Candidates for the honor of Gods word; should be joined to the Scripture, and
read just in the manner as they are, bearing their part in Gods Worship. (for
Instance, The works of Seneca History of the Nine Worthies, Popish Legenda, of
their Saints Miracles, Aesops Fables,) Would you rather join in this Worship,
with your mental Reservations and Distinctions, then forbear or withdraw?
Lastly, If there be not some, yea many things in the Alcoran, as true, and as
good as many things in the Apocrypha? And not many things more false and worse
in the Alcoran, than some things in the Apochrypha?
And if the Books forementioned, may not claim a Parity? Judith, Bet and the
Dragon, Tobit, with the History, Legends, and Fables? When all these Queries
are resolved, which stand as fair for your Embraces as what you assent unto, we
may the better understand you, but not the Question.

Next you say somewhat in room of a Proof, That it is not the Conjunction, but
the kind of the thing that makes it [the Worship] unlawful, viz. An honest
weak man, an Antinomian, an Anabaptist, a Presbyterian, or whoever you dissent
from in tolerable cases, may mix his opinion, and faulty Expressions and
Methods with his Prayer and Scrmen; as intimately as evil is mixed in the Moss;
and yet you will not refuse Communion with him.

Answ. All you aim at by this, is but argumentum ad hominem, and such a one
too, as is but a facto ad jus: but here is neither. The Case with that in
Question is, impar and Congressus. It Is true, if what yo^ say of me here be
true; that I do not reject Communion for such kind of Faults in the
Administrator of the Worship and his Administration: and I will allow you that
as easily, as that a man must not put away his Wife for every fault: But yet I
must add, that you put the Case ill, and strain it off the Tenters, to make it
reach yours. For, there may be such faults mixed, does not reach to there is,
there must be, there shall be such faults; which you know is said of the
Lyturgy, by them you oppose. Again, the faults in a Sermon are not ad rem, much
less ad idem.

Nor are they that concern the more direct Worship, as Prayer and Praises, as
intimately mixed as in the Mass; which you please to instance in to make the
worst on it, or our Lyturgy either, as to what faults are in the matter; for
they are not imposed on us to hear and worship by, either by Law, nor as
necessary terms of Communion, nor are they all justified as no faults, nor are
they bound to commit them by Law, nor are they known to us before we join, that
such faults will be; (except what common infirmities may infer) nor are they
perpetuated by a Law, nor is it a Crime, much less a Penal, a capital one, to
Reform them, to advise of, yea reprove them for such faults. (Except the Errors
of Opinion) they are confessed to be faults particularly, be wailed as their
Sin and Burden. And they pray and endeavor to do their work for matter and
manner of Expression with greater Perfection: This may be said of the honest
that yet are E^^on^ous and weak. But tell me of one of our Ministers of the
Lyturgy that does, or dare make public Confession, of one fault in matter or
form in the Lyturgy; and pray to God to Reform it, and help them to do it
better? or where does the Lyturgy direct o^ such a Confession and Prayer? And
yet (...) the whole of necessary legal Ministry, with one of the Homilies added
once in a long while.

But Sir, you might have remembered what I said, Page 29. (but it was not for
your turn) There is no Pari^y in a Word or Sentence, exceptionable in a
Conceived Prayer extempore, with the Lyturgy in its entire form, with all known
or doubtful Circumstances. Many may be sound who in Conceived extempore Prayer,
do not pollute them with failings in the matter; and others that have Errors in
their minds, do not put them into the Words of their Prayers. So that Communion
with these more able Orthodox men, is nothing so dangerous, nor liable to your
Recrimination.

There remains one thing more, in which you sum up your sense of you
Argumentations in this Paragraph, and it is by a Similitude which proves
nothing. But if it may help us to understand your meaning, I will not Envy my
Reader the sight of it. It is lawful (say you) to drink beer that has bad
water mixed, rather than none: But not to drink that which has Poison equally
mixed.

Answ. Here is a Ratherism, and a downright Negative. The first (if I can
understand you) is meant of our Lyturgy, the latter of the Popish Mass. But to
follow your Similitude, must one of these be our Election? must we take this
bad mixture, or not drink at all, and consequently die of a sullen Humor, or a
Palate more nice than wise? You can tell a better way than either; and that
is, to drink that which is more pure, wholesome, and relishable, if it may be had
for Love or Money. And you believe Sir, they may have better that will but go
to the Cost on it, though sometimes you express Peter's pity, Be it far from
thee, this shall not be unto thee, Mat. 16.23. And you know what thanks he had
for it from his Master.

For the latter, you are more out, or more short, or both. It is not lawful to
drink that which has Poison equally mixed: you are more out, because it is less
to the Purpose. Remember Sir, you are proving that it is the the kind that is in
Conjunction, which makes the Worship unlawful; and now you are come from the
quale to the quantum; and in truth to both: Poison, the quale, equally mixed,
the quantum.

If I said also that it is more short, it is proveable enough; for should we take
no better heed, than to your Direction, we were in the Eyes of all Men (and
your own too, when you look on this Passage again) utterly undone. May we drink
Poison, so there be not full as much Poison as better Liquor in the Draught; or
any Poison at all? I know Sir, though you have ^o^ded it thus unhappily, your
meaning is still; we may go to the Lyturgy, rather then to the Mass. And I am
so far of your mind, but as to what you have yet said, res^at Probandum.

You proceed and say, To page 29. of my Vindication, I think if a Turk pray
against Idolatry, Murder, etc. that Prayer is materially good; But as to
goodness from a holy Principle, no Hypocrites is good. You had said in your
Answer to the Manuscript, page 7. Heathens and Turks have good Prayers, but may
we join with them? you have not told us why not; but only in Case of their
being twisted with such Heresy and Idolatry. But I had denied Heathens and
Turks having good Prayers, because without Faith in Christ, though they may be
Prayers for some good thing. This Doctrine you cannot bear, it being in
Contradiction to what had past the Warranty of your Pen; but you will bring it
over to another Trial, and you will say they may be materially good; I said so
before, but that does not so well like you; but being for the matter good, they
must be good Prayers.

I will put you a few Cases, to see how your Rule looks. Suppose a man utter
the matter of a good Petition in Sport, or Derision of Religion, as has been
sometimes in Plays; are they good Prayers? Conjuring shall have good Prayers
too, by this Rule; for sometimes it contains some matter of Petition for good.
The Heathen prayed to Bacchus for a good Vintage, to Ceres for a good Harvest;
The matter of their Prayers were good, though directed to Idols; but by your
Rule these are to be justified as good Prayers. How dear is self defense! that
will not permit an Eminent Christian Divine, to allow that there can be no good
Prayers without Faith in Christ, but it must be distinguished out of doors, to
save the Turks and Heathens good Prayers; because he had unadvisedly said, they
had good Prayers.

You Conclude this Argument saying, The Insufficiency of my Answer you no way
manifest, 'till you prove that I must join with all that is in public Worship,
or with none. If so, your Answer is unanswerable; but though I attempt no such
impossible things, I will be content to stand to the Readers Judgment (that
does not allow a name to weigh too much) if your Answer be not apparently
insufficient.

Yet Sir, beside what I have already said to difference the faults of the
Worship I have described; and that other Worship you will bring under the same
difficulty; I will add, that where Worship is according to Divine Institution.
(which does not suppose them obliged by it to be Angels, but men, men subject
to Infirmities) And these men do Profess so far as they have attained, to walk
by the rule of Gods Word, and to reform, and rise to a nearer Conformity to the
Divine Rule, as they shall be able to understand it: And their Worship contains
nothing in it, either by excess or defect, which excludes the Essentials of
Christian Worship, acceptable to God through Christ, when tendered in Sincerity.
I believe these may be joined with, without partaking with their Sins in
Worship; while I am not immediately guilty of the same Sins. This may be said
of the fore-described? And worthy Sir, I know not by what other medium to set
up a Fence against the most polluted Worship in the World, that has somewhat
good in it, and pretending God the Object. When Temptation is at the door, mere
mental Distinctions will undo all, and betray Religion Peice-meal. If you, or
any other can instruct me better, I shall be thankful for it. In the mean time,
I am well content with what I have said.

SECT. III. The Remains of what Mr. Baxter says in his Defense, against my
Discharge of Dr. Owens pretended Errors, Considered.
SIR, The Doctor, so far as concerned in the first Error by you charged on him,
being after so large an Encounter Revindicated. You making me little to do, and
next to nothing, about all the rest, you have spared me much farther travail in
that Province. I hear no more of your Proof of the other seven or eight which I
defended, to be the Doctors Errors, or any Bodies else, except in two Passages,
which I shall also Consider.

You say, page 27. Some other Practical Doctrines we differ about, as where you
report me to say, Page 30. [ I doubt not to affirm, that doing that which a Law
requires, so far as the Intention is moved by the Law, is a justifying of it.
And submitting to any Law, upon the Consideration of its Penalties, is so far a
justifying its preceptive part, as not so great an Evil as its Penal.]

These two Sentences, you charge with two faults. The first of a Defect in
Limitation, the second of a Defect in Limitation and Distinction.

These Sir, (if just) are a great Abatement of that bad Countenance you put
upon the supposed Error (which I defend) in your Answer to the Manuscript, Page
7. viz. That our Communion justifies all the Laws that impose the Lyturgy; yea
the Penal Severities: This is too gross an Error to be defended, with any show
of Proof.

Before you fall to the Proof of my foresaid Defects in the Defense, you except
against another Passage of mine in your Way; which I shall take out of the way,
before I deal with the others: it is this, ['None that I know of say it,
[Communion in the Lyturgy] is a Duty simply, or without any Dependence on
humane Sanction.] Your Design in this exception seems to me, to prevent or
sense your self against such Objections as might be made against your own
Practice, which was not to hold this Communion, when the Sanction of the Law
lay (at least) asleep. But Reverend Sir, if that be it; I shall lay, that it is
little my Business, or inclination to Censure, or judge my Brother in doubtful
Controverted matters. To his own Master he stands or salleth.

Had you told me of any one Person, Author or other, that says it is a Duty
simply, it had been somewhat like a Conviction of my saying to be culpable: But
all you say, is what your self have said, and practiced, which no way
Contradicts me neither. You say, I have largely told you, that I take it to to
be a Duty to hold such Communion where no better at least is; -- And that it is
in Obedience to Gods Commands, more than men's, that I have gone to the
Parish-Churches; And would have gone as much if the Law had not Commanded it,
but only deprived me of better. But Sir, is that a Duty simply considered, that
is obliged to, only by that great strait, no better is to be had; Worship God
thus, or not at all? Or is that no Dependence on humane Sanction, which depends
not only on the Laws (not forbidding) but depriving you of better? I think the
Sanction of the Law goes a great way, where it not only commands, but actually
and effectually destroys all other ways, but that which it prescribes. I
wonder none of our modern wits and men of the times, in Press or Pulpit, have
ever yet found in their hearts to say? that it is simply a Duty, and thereby we
are obliged to it in. Conscience toward God, without the medium of the
Magistrates Command or Compulsion. Little we hear from them but Law, Law,
Jupiter and Fulmina. You might have spared me, and your self this Trouble, had
you not been offended at your own Shadow.

Now for my defective Limitation, you say; But as to your undoubted
Affirmation, I am as much post doubt that it is not true, as you unlimitedly
express it. The intention may be moved by a Law for the Effects or Consequents
sake; and not justify the Law, but only justify the Act of the Subject. Yea
it may be moved by the formal Authority of the Lawgiver, expressed by the Law;
and yet not justify the Law.

Answ. How happily have I sped in this Argument! to have nothing Objected but a
little waist of Accuracy, which the best writer may sometimes be charged with.

Truly Sir, when I wrote what you so confidently Contradict, unless I had
limited it: I did not think of a Lecture of Juris-prudence. I wrote that which
concerned Common people to understand; and I doubt not st^ll to say, that I
wrote Common Sense, and I was very well understood, though I did not trouble
them with f^rther Limitations. But Sir, was not that a Limitation sufficient, [
So far as the Intention is moved by the Law.] But you teach me that the Intent
may be moved by a Law, for the Effects or Consequents sake, and not justify
the Law. I assure you Sir, I have rubbed my morning Eyes, and cannot yet see
the Defect.

I say, that if the intention he moved by the Effects or Consequents, as such,
( simply as such) though the Law be the Occasion, the Intention is not moved by
the Law at all. For such an Intention would not be moved by a Law Considered
without those Effects and Consequents; and it would be moved with those Effects
and Consequents, though they had no Relation to a Law at all. Therefore your
arguing from the Intention moved by the Effects and Consequents, as not
sufficient to justify the Law, is but making an Argument of your own to
confute instead of mine. But let us try if your instances will give more light.

Joseph and Mary were taxed with others, by August us Law; they were moved by
that Law, and its Effects to pay the Tax: yet justified not the Law.

Answ. All you can prove is, that they paid the Tax, the mere matter of Fact:
The Text speaks nothing (and therefore you can prove nothing) of their
Intention, or by what it was moved. Again, The Israelites might they the
Philistines that forbad them Smiths and Swords, etc. How prove you that? and if
you prove it, what follows, but an All-significant, or an insignificant and
Catera? Again, When Christ sent Peter to take a Fish, with Money in his mouth,
and pay Tribute; the Law moved his Intention, because of the Offense that would
follow the breaking of it: and yet his Answer intimates that he justified not
the Law. Indeed Sir, I wonder at your imposing, as if I and your Readers had
not read the Scripture, nor were Masters of a grain of Sense. The Scripture
says plainly, that he did it to avoid the Offense; that moved this Intention,
not a word of the Law here. And for his Answer, it imported plainly, that he
would keep his Sense to himself, that he might neither offend Caesar, nor his
Country men, nor ensnare himself. Truly Sir, I am constrained to speak plain;
half a good Argument is worth all these, and an hundred more such. You have a
heap behind, of mere unproved Dictates, very unworthy of your Pen; The
intelligent wary Reader will easily see it: and yet you conclude this Argument,
with Dear Brother I will not aggravate your Error, by its ill Consequences. I
thank you for your Love, but I need not your Favor in this Case, unless for
their cause, who will take a man's Arguments to be knocked dead beyond
Redemption, if Mr. Baxter hold up but a Straw at them.

Somewhat must be said to my Defect in the latter Sentence; of which you say,
And as to your second Information, it is not true without Limitation, that [
Submitting to a Law, on Consideration of the Penalties, is so far a justifying
its preceptive part, as not so great an evil as the Penal] You say, this is
confused work, and why? The Preceptive part of the Law, is actus precipientis,
the Commanders Act. Again, Forgive me for telling you, that you should have
distinguished the preceptive part of the Law from the matter commanded by it,
and the Evil of the Law and Lawmakers, from the Evil of the Obeyer. And what
then? And then have Concluded only, that he that obeys a Precept only to
avoid the Penalty, professes the Penalty to be worse then his Act of
Obedience: But he does not make it worse then the Law, or the Lawmakers Sin.

Answ. Reverend Sir, I am not yet so Learned, or self-conceited, as not to be
willing to learn of a far meaner Tutor: But still with this Proviso, that he
inform, but not impose on my Understanding. I could (without great difficulty)
have distinguished the pars legislativa, from the actus imperantis, and that
from the actus imperatus, and all from the Lex formata, and so on. But cui
bono? my Reader would have been little the wiser. Could my Reader so mistake,
as to imagine I meant that the evil of the Penalty was not so great as the
Lawmakers Sin? and is not the actus imperatus, included in the matter
commanded in the Sense of the preceptive part? And I think, I was distinct
enough, where my Reader might well understand, and could not by any fault of
mine, miss my meaning. But Sir, whatever Pleasure you take in it, I take
little, and (it may be) our Readers none at all, in this part of the Debate,
wherein we do but res parvas magno Conatu agitare.

You give me no more occasion to contend against you, by Answering what you
oppose to my Defense of the Doctors pretended Errors. You remember me of one
thing more in the Polemical part of my Book, but not by way of Contradiction,
Scil. Page 32. I say, ['Doth he say a word of owning Parish-churches and
Worship;] Thus much, and no more you repeat of that Section. And you Answer, If
you, or he say nothing against these, we shall leave the Diocesan to others.
But if you be the man, I have lately privately written to; I doubt not but I
have proved to you, that Parish Churches that have good Ministers, are true
particular Churches, and those Ministers true Pasters: and that any Bishops
holding the contrary, does not disprove it.

This Snap of my Defense broken off from its Fellows, your Reader will
understand little by, but I suppose, you only designed to bring in by that,
what you say you wrote privately: but I perceive you know not to whom, at least
whether it were to me, or to somebody else: However, this Notice is very
welcome. As to what you say you have proved, I do very much doubt it. If I had
had the happiness to have seen those Proofs, and they had proved convincing to
me; you had saved me the Labor of agitating that question in a following
discourse. And I take it to be so much more worth determining, as it seems to
be the very Basis of your Zeal for complete Parochial Communion.

After your Notices of what I had done in Defense of the Manuscript (which was
as much as my express design, viz. to prove that it was not such a feeble and
gross thing as you Represented it, (let it be whose it would) you observe some
things page 4. I have not done. That is, that I have not defended the rest of
the Manuscript. And page 5. you thank me for defending none of those you
innumerate. I take not your thanks amiss, though I had other Reasons for not
doing it, then such as it may be you Suppose; yet such as may be easily
supposed, if you please.

And not to suffer you to be grateful alone, I thank you also, that you said so
little to defend your charge of the first Error you charged on the Doctor, or
Manuscript, and that you said less to the second, and nothing at all to all the
rest (six or seven in number) which I discharged from that imputation. And I
thank you so much the more, as you were much more obliged (by Temptation) to
defend your own, than I was to defend another man's.

SECT. IV. Mr. Baxters Concessions to the Doctors personal Worth, and Sense of
his ill-treating the Doctors Name, thankfully acknowledged.
AS to what concerns your Intituling Dr. Owen to the twelve Arguments,
according to your Printed Edition, and some ill resented mixtures in your
Contradictions of them; your Christian and ingenuous Expressions are such, as
well deserve to be a Winding Sheet to all Offenses, which took life from your
Reflections on the Doctor. And first you say, that as to my Vindication of Dr.
Owens Personal worth, you and I are agreed, and you have nothing in that to say
against me.

This I thankfully acknowledge, and I shall not be the only Person sensible of
i^. Caesar was said to confirm his own Statues, by securing those of Pompey.

Beside diverse other Passages of the import abovesaid, you have one in page 8.
which I shall transfer hither for Reasons I shall give by and by. I do but tell
my Reasons for naming the Doctor, but I undertake not to justify either that,
or the manner of my writings, from Mistake, Imprudence, or other Faultiness. I
suppose you to be a man whom I take from my heart to be far better, and wiser
than my self: And therefore as I thank you for your gentle, friendly
Reprehensions; so I profess that my very esteem and Reverence of your Judgment
makes me suspect that I have done amiss; when I see it not in the cause it
self. That I could have difended the cause of Love, and Communion against those
Arguments; without taking notice of the Author, and without wronging the
Nonconformists, who will be charged by his Name, I did, and do wish; Bue I
thought it could not well be done: If in this I mistook, I ask pardon of God,
and man; for so I must do for my Sins known and unknown.

More to this purpose the Reader may find in this page, and page 29. Thus far I
have repeated your words, because they are powerful Persuasions to
Heart-Reconciliation, and allaying of Animosities; where Principles of
Christianity, or humanity prevail, and are attended to: And more likely to do
good that way with most, than many strong Reasons of another Countenance, if
they were to be had.

And indeed Sir, you have in this Passage expressed so much of Humility, and
Self-denial; as few of those who shall yet remain unsatisfied, would imitate
under less difficult Circunistances. And I expect some may read them here,
whose Prejudice will not permit them to seek it elsewhere. The Value you are
pleased to put upon the supposed Author, is (I confess) so great, that I should
not for Modesty sake have mentioned (much less assumed) but that (whoever you
apprehend him to be) I have reason enough to transfer it upon some far more
worthy Person then my self.

There is one thing pertaining to this head which I shall willingly dispacth in
this place; and it concerns a Request of yours, an earnest Request, Scil. pag^
7. All that I yet desire, is to be able to deny it to be his, that the next man
that hi^s the Nonconformists in the Teeth with it as the Doctors, may (...) be
told it is not his: If you can and will but tell me that you believe it not to
b^ ^is, that I may have but so much to say; I will thank you, and make it
publicly known.

Dear Sir, a far less earnest Request, yea less than a Request, would have
drawn from me a greater matter than this to gratify you. I therefore say, that
I cannot affirm, or deny it to be his, of mine own knowledge: for I never
received it from his hand, nor ever heard him own or deny it to be his, more or
less. As to what I believe of it, I shall be open, and ingenuous with you. I do
believe that much of the Substance of it was written by the Doctor, and by him
read to some few Persons (probably to have their Opinion of it, and of what use
it might be to some persons concerned in the then present difficulties, (and
not yet past) and that somebody having gotten the Copy, took Liberty to
disperse it to some others, whose Case or Curiosity moved them to desire it:
But I do not believe, that the Doctor intended it for the Press, or to be
exposed as it was, or that he ever wrote it, or owned it, or would have owned
it his; as it is in your Edition, without very Considerable Alterations.

And I having had since I wrote the Vindication, the like Opinion from some,
who were most likely to know the whole truth of this matter: I am farther
Confirmed in the belief of what I say now, and said before in the Vindication,
page 1. yet in my poor Judgment, it is enough for you that you cannot affirm it
to be his: Nor any other who shall pretend it for whatever ends. And be it his,
or not his, (seeing he did not think meet to avow it publicly) it is becoming
wise men, to let it stand, or fall, according to its own proper merit.

SECT. V. Mr. Baxters fourth Section Considered, being a Miscellaneous
Collection of various matters Contained in the Vindicator, and his
Animadversions on them.
THe Close of the first Paragraph of your fourth Sect. page 29. gives a full
Discharge to the Doctors Name, (so far as you concerned it in your Answer to
the Manuscript) in these words; I wholly follow the Rule you mention, to choose
that which does most good, and least hurt. And truly, the Reverence of your
own, and some other Judgment telling me, that it does more hurt than good, does
turn the Scales, and make me repent, that I named the Doctor.

Reverend Sir, I thank you for thus much, whoever or whatever was your Motive.
And I shall the more patiently bear the load you discharge on me; though I
shall take leave to poize it, and inquire Quo Warranto.

A Warfare, a Voyage must not be undertaken, but with expectance of some
blows, or foul Weather. After a Calm, comes a Storm, which was brewing all the
while, I now perceive; and it begins thus, page 29. I leave your charges
against me to their best Advantage to the Reader, though my Inclination as much
to open Mistakes. I may give a brief touch to your self, for your Information;
which I expect not should affect the Reader, suppose your book to lie open
before you.

Answ. It is of rare example for any, much more Mr. Baxter, toto pectore, telum
recipere; and not to expose mistakes that are to his disadvantage. But Sir,
your brief touch for my Information, I expect it to be neither brief, nor a
gentle touch, nor much to my information; except that in the best of men nature
will work. And whereas you say, you expect not that it should affect the
Reader, etc. I know not what to think of it, unless that your Readers have so
littie cern for me, that if you should clap a Cupping Glass to me, I shall have
none of their pity. But I am not Doctor Owen.

You begin to inform me by examining me, and go on mostly in that form of
information; which seems to aim rather at your own: But to be brought to the
Rack, and dicere causam is a hard Chapter said A. B. Laud, If (say you) you
thought them not good enough to be his, nor intended for public view; Why do
you wrong bim so much, and the people much more, as to divulge them with his
name?

I see Sir, you need to be better informed your self of this matter, before you
turn Informer to me. Who told you that I ever divulged them to any one person?
And I tell you, that though I had seen them about a year before; I never read
them, nor heard them read, except some part of them Cursorily once: And I never
was Master of any one Copy of them, true or false; 'til I had your Printed
Edition. I must therefore send this Quere home again to your self, to whom it
much more belongs than to me, and as the Divulger with his name, more I think
than to all the world beside.

Again, Do good men take it for a privilege, to hurt the Church,
uncontradicted?

Answ. Why ask you me this question, rather than of any other? You might have
answered it your self. Certainly none but the worst of men take it for a
privilege under that name; but many good men do hurt the Church, and take it
to be good (by mistakeing either the Church, or the hurt) Who these good men
are is, lis sub judice, all are said by one or other to do it, all justify
themselves from it. Yet they may be most guilty of this ignorant zeal, (which
is the best can be said of it) that least suspect themselves, and most hotly
charge others: I will say for mine own part, that I need scarce any thing more
to set my judgment right of my self or others than impartial self-reflection.
By the question you seem to say I am the man, and I will put it fairly to my
self. You may do as you please.

You say, It is zeal for a Sect against Unity, which corrupt nature is for.

Answ. And there is a zeal too for Unity and Uniformity, which corrupt nature
is for, and you are against. It Is too common a Cant to brand those for Sects,
that are not just of our own scantling A very easy and impertinent way of
abusing. A Cothurnus, that serves every ones turn.

Again, I doubted not but guilt would be impatient. Answ. What then? Is
impatience a proof of guilt? or every defense against wrongs, impatience? You
should not have cast this stone. You proceed:

It was your Party that wronged his name, by divulging that which you take for
his disgrace.

Answ. My Party! Is not that Mr. Baxter for one? I found Mr. Baxter, and the
Doctors Vindicator of one Party in your Titles, without doors, and within; Who
parted us since, and made me of another Party? Not I, I am sure; I am the same
I was; and that is, of no Party at all. But if you will disagree with your
self, and make Parties in one single individual, look you to that. Who of the
Party do you mean who take the Manuscript for the Doctors disgrace? O! they
were offended that it was printed under his name. And if you or any of your
friends should express offense, at your Manuscripts being Printed under your
name, which you never intended for the Press, nor Consented should be so
Published; would you allow this inference, that they were taken for your
disgrace? Beside, whatever some may think of themselves, I do not think, that
the ablest men spit such perfections, as without Correction, or more ado, may
without wrong to their names (and somewhat else too) be exposed to the worst
that an adversary can make of them.

Page 30. you say, It Is strange so knowing a man should think that bad
Arguments with avalued name, are not dangerous! Yes even against common sense,
as those for Transubstantiation. To confute your self, you add [Add to what?]
that on all sides peoples opinions are mostly, and most STRONGLY mastered by
Affections, and it is beyond all our power to Cure the disorder. And yet is
there no danger from Names?

Answ. You may cross Shins, and fight against your self when you please. I
delight in no such Combats: But its more strange, that so pious a man should
take such Courses to wrong his very Friend, and render him Cross to Truth, and
himself at once, by a half-faced Representation.

Reader, all that the Reverend Author preteds to ground these two charge upon,
is contained in a few Lines, of which by giving apart, he (I will not say
cunningly) spoils, and perverts the sense of the whole; they are in page 7. [
Dear Sir, I fear that those People, who have not the skill to answer the twelve
Arguments, will be found to want skill enough, to discover the Strength of
yours. And I confess it is matter of Lamentation, that on all sides Peoples
Opinions are mostly, and most strongly mastered by their Affections; and it is
beyond all our power to cure the Disorder.]

Now Reader, if acknowledging, and lamenting the danger also, be saying there
is no danger in valued Names, Mr. B. is right, and I am not wronged.

Truly Sir, I am sorry that you cannot yet (after all you have said) get over
your naming the Doctor, but must be looking back to a Vindication of what you
have so often, and so pathetically confessed, to be faulty. So hard a thing it is
for good men, to digest a Self (but half Constrained) Condemnation.

And I take leave to add, that the danger of deceiving by valued names, should
deeply oblige those, whose names are much valued by one sort or another, not to
speak or write hand over head, but with such wariness and Caution, that they
may be indeed guides, and not Snares to their valuers. And to others, that they
would have a care of over-valuing names, and learn to judge of things by their
proper Evidence.

Page 31. If numbering men's Errors, used to do hurt; be worse than committing
them, or defending them, I mistook. I Consent that you do so by me, so you
speak nothing but the Truth.

Answ. And did you not mistake, if it was not worse? I have thought hitherto,
that to do ill was a mistake (at least) though not so bad, as that which is
worse. I thought also, that this was one manner of treating the Doctor, wherein
you acknowledged your self Faulty: But if you retract this, as you (seem also
to) have done your other acknowledgments; I am at Liberty to recall my thanks.
But for your Consent that I should give you the same measure, upon the
Condition limiting, scil. of Truth: I shall not take you at your word; because,
I take Volenti non fit injuria, to be but a crooked Rule. Nor shall I (though
with your leave) doubly condemn my self, by doing that which I condemned in
others.

In the same page you say, I am sorry that you feign the healing Parliament to
have disowned our Repentance. They forbad Reproaching and troubling one
another; but not remembering our Sin, nor feeling when we suffer, nor asking
what caused it; to stop the like again, if not for a Cure.

Answ. Sir, you teach here a Notion very new (at least to me) scil. To affirm
that which is not true in Argumentation, (which may be through mistake) is to
feign. Much joy Sir, of this invention, I wish you. But if you be never sorry,
'till I feign or affirm that great Absurdity, I hope that from henceforth you
shall be a joyful man. If that Parliament by the Act of Oblivion did not bar
such Criminations by any Persons, much more by private Persons. (whatever
pretense they might make of causing the Criminals to repent of it, by so doing)
I spoke not their Sense, nor to my purpose: But if they did, I needed not
(according to your notion) to feign, when I had such Realities on my side.

You say also in the same page, You would put such terms upon me in dispute, as
Veron devised to put on the Protestants. I must oppose his Doctrine, only as in
the Syllables written, Accidents in Worship signify you think at least an
integral part.

Answ. I wish the Papists would never put harder Terms upon the Protestants,
than not to corrupt their Arguments, by choping and changing Words at their
Pleasure; which you have often done in the Tract I examined: I told you of many
such faults; you deny not the Fact in one, but here you justify it; and you
justify it here as an insignificant Alteration. But you know that the Doctor
thought not so, for he insisted on the sense of that insignificant Syllable,
(as you take it) And I insist on it in my Examination of your Answer, which the
Reader may understand (if he will look into my Book) to be of another
Countenance than your broken-glass Represents. What work may men make with
Arguments, if they take this Liberty, when they pretend to give the Authors own
words; by all the Tokens usual: if they shall chop and change Words, Syllables,
or some one Letter! May they not put yea, in the room of nay; and nay in the
room of yea; and make their Author speak what, and no more then they list. It Is
one thing to Commend exactness, and another to use it. But if you justify this
Liberty, we may expect you will take it for the future, and then there will be
no dealing with you.

Page 30. Its wisely done not to own the Cause I oppose, and yet not let men
know whether it be for fear of the Law, or because you are against it.

Answ. I suppose Sir you mean cunningly, a sort of Wisdom I am little
acquainted with. I am too open and fair for such Politics. I told you the
cause, page 3, page 23. and page 39. You might have given your self sufficient
reasons for it, without asking them of others, much more being told them. If
you could not see them there, it may be to as little purpose to repeat them
here.

I hope you do not think that Laws, Penal Laws, are not to be feared. What were
they else made for? You have indeed written concerning the Diocesan established
Constitution, and the manner of imposing, as a man that feared not the Laws.
But you have made such a Compensation for that, by your Zeal expressed for the
Lyturgy, and Lay-Conformity, as may plead your pardon for that wrong. I
believe, and not I alone, that by your Writings, Examples, and valued name,
serving flesh and blood with a Wind, (which is no friend to Losses and Crosses)
you have served the interest of the present Constitution, beyond all that has
been said for it by those, whose Station may promise the service of their
utmost Abilities.

But for the Cause you oppose, and oppose with so much heat, I have not found
you always of the same mind. Change of Weather has great influence on some
(and not only the most infirm) Constitions. I beg your pardon if I make a
little Retrospect to your Sentiments bypast, and sometime since.

I might begin with your Savoy-Dispute or Conference, wherein it is offered
against a Lyturgy, that Cold Prayers are like to have a cold Return. But that
being viva voce, in transient breath, I shall not so much insist on it; but
remember you of what you said elsewhere, for Example.

But we think it was not the Jesuits that first said, Out of the Abundance of
the Heart, the Mouth speaks. It Is natural for the Heart to lead the Tongue.
And men are more affected by words which come from Affection, than by those
that do not. And reading words written by another, when we speak to God, is not
so natural a Signification of Desire, or other Affection; as speaking them from
the present Dictate of the Heart; for any Child can do the one, and it is not
the usual Signification of Seriousness in other Actions.

Ministers should be better acquainted than the People, how to speak to God and
man. It is their Office, and therefore, it belongs to them to choose the
Words, which are fittest: and to set up a Ministry that can do neither, is to
befriend the Prince of Darkness against the Kingdom of Light, and to be a
deadly Enemy to the Church and Souls; and to sit up a Ministry that need not do
it, is the way to set up a Ministry that cannot. Let the Ministers be bound to
no more than to read, and a few years will transform them to such as can do no
more than read. Baxters second Defense of the mere Nonconformists, page 15.

I doubt not, but there are some pious Persons among you, I Censure not farther
than Experience constrains me. But I know that the Common Sense of most that
are serious in practical Christianity, is against your formal ways of Worship;
and against the Course that you have taken in this Land. And the Spirit of
Profaneness Complyeth with you, and doteth on you, in all places that ever I was
acquainted in. Bear with plain Truth: It is in a Cause of Everlasting
Consequence. There is somewhat in a graciou Soul, like Health in the Body, that
disposes it to Relish wholesome food, and perceive more difference between it,
and mere Air, or toyish Kick-shaws, than it can easily express. Baxters fifth
Dispute of Church Government Pref. page 17.

Compare this with Mr. Baxters Answer to Dr. Owens twelve Arguments, Page 42.

And if it be the disuse of your Common Prayer, that you separate from us for,
I would know of you, Whether you would have denied Communion with all that
lived before it had a Being? If this be your Religion, I may ask you, Where was
your Religion before Luther, before King Edwards day? If you say in the
Mass Book, (And what else can you say) I ask you then, where was it before the
Mass Book had a Being? Baxters fifth Dispute, etc. Pref. page 30.

Could men have been content to have made Gods Laws the Center, and Touchstone
of the Churches Unity, all had been well. But when they must make Cannons for
this Vesture, and that Gesture, and the other Ceremony; and determine in what
Words all men shall pray, and how many words he shall say, or how long he shall
be; and so make standing Laws upon mutable Circumstances; and this without any
Necessity at all, but only to Domineer, etc. Baxters fifth Dispute, page 9.

They [the Pharisees] used long Prayers, as a Cloak for their Oppression.
Query, Whether they were a Lyturgy or not? If yea, so let it pass in their
Character. If not, Then it is scarce like that there was any other Lyturgy than
the Scripture in those times; else it is most likely that the Pharisees would
have used it. Apology for Nonconformists, page 95.

But to set up a new sort of Jurisdiction in the Church, by Legislation to make
Forms and Ceremonies Obligatory; and by Executions to punish Pastors that will
not practice them is, --

Lastly, By this means you will harden the Papists, that by their inventions
and impositions have divided the Church, and been guilty of so much imposition
and Tyranny. For, how can we condemn that in them that is practiced by our
selves? And though in number of inventions they exceed; yet it is not well to
concur with them in the kind of unnecessary Impositions, and so far to justify
them in their injury to the Church.

If none of these or other reasons, will allay the imperious Distemper of the
proud; but they must needs ( by an usurped Legislation) be making indifferent
things become necessary to others, and domineer over men's Consciences, and the
Church of God: We must leave them to him, that being Lord and Lawgiver of the
Church, is jealous of His Prerogative, and abhors IDOLS, and will not give
His Glory to another, and that delights to pull down the proud, and humble
them that Exalt themselves. Baxters 5th Dispute of Church Government, page 378.

That to that very Question [Whether they know of any thing in the Lyturgy,
with which they could not comply without Sin] we after gave in a Paper of eight
particulars in the Lyturgy, which we undertook to prove flat sin. Apology for
mere Nonconformists, page 155.

Moreover, the same reasons that prevail with us, will prevail with others when
we are dead. They will be as fearful of Lying, and Perjury, and of swearing
Allegiance to Church-Vsurpers, as we have been. There will still be a People
seriously Religious, that are Christians in good sadness, and really believe a
Life to come. There is no hindering it; God will have it so, and who can
gainsay Him? And these men will be as loath in point of Order and Decency, to
have Religion dwindled into a lifeless form of Words and Ceremonies; and to
take the Chaff and straw for the Corn; as ever we have been before them: And
the History of our Sufferings, will but animate them, id. ibidem, page 19^.

These are not all I have to allege of yours, of the same Color. Whether you
will count your Writings of this Nature, or those which contradict them for
your Disgrace, I cannot tell. I am sure both cannot (if considered together)
much raise the value of your Authority in this Controversy. And I think, if I
had been minded to have vindicated all the twelve Arguments you brand as so
faulty, I could have produced, to justify most of what you say is most
unjustifiable, not only by your Authority, but your Reasons also, made ready to
my hand: but that was not my undertaking in that Tract. If any doubt of my
fidelity in these Citations, I give them the books, and pages, wherein they may
find them to a Word. My Credit is impaired, if not forfeited, by a wilful or
negligent Failure. But if it should be demanded, how Mr. Baxters Judgment and
Zeal could thus vary and oppose to such a Degree? I can give them no farther
light than this. That these Cited Passages were Printed in the years 1659, 61,
or 62, and 81. But that against the twelve Arguments in 84.

I am heartily averse to writing any thing in reply to you, that savours of
wrangling; especially in Personal Concerns: But if you will necessitate me by
such Reflecting Queries, to answer so as is unpleasing to us both; I cannot
help that. There is one behind, which I must not omit, which contains a Charge
that (if true) renders me so great a fool, and so foul an Offender, as to be
utterly unfit to be concerned in any thing that requires either Judgment, or
Common Honesty: But if it be false (as indeed it is) I leave you, and the
Reader to make the right Construction.

You say, Page 30. If the work [the Manuscript] be faulty, why do you not join
with me to save men from it? and why did your private Letter own it his
Conjunct with Fame? I offered you to stop it. Is it disingenuity in me, to tell
you of twenty untruths in your Letter; and many notorious: [you say in your
Printed answer to the unknown Author, they are Untruths in matter of Fact,
which aggravates their Faultiness] and ingenuity in you to be offended for
being told of them, rather than for writing them? This is to comply with the
World that takes the Detecter for the only Sinner.

To the first I say, fair and softly. Let your own Act. In opposing the
Manuscript be first excused, or excusable (at least in my Opinion) before I am
persuaded to join with you in it. I may add, what needed this, if you believed
the Title you give to the Book I now answer? or had not forgot it before you
writ Page 30?

To the second, you lay to my charge things that I know not. You say it to and
of the Author of the Vindication. In your Postscript of your Answer to the 12
Arguments, he was to you the unknown Author, but in your Answer to my
Vindication, you are so well, or so ill informed of the Author of that so
faulty Letter, that without any doubting you fix it on me. I gave you no reason
for it; nor could any other. And that Opinion you express frequently of the
Author of the Vindication, does not well agree with the great imprudence you
charge on the private Letter. But in short Sir, I affirm (who have the best
means to know it) that I wrote not that, nor any other Letter to you these many
years last past; neither had I any knowledge of the Agitations you speak of.
And should I have said in a Letter to you, that the Manuscript was the Doctors,
and afterward in Print said I did not believe it, (as you print it) and have
blamed you for imputing it to him; I had played a very disingenuous and
inexcusable part; Trepan'd you into a Mistake, and then exposed it. But as the
Case stands, I shall only say, that your charging me therewith was but an
inexcusable Slander, or the indifferent thing (supposing the Letter as bad as
you represent it) of laying the Punishment of one man's guilt, on the next that
stood in your Way. Yet Sir, I believe this was no wilful wrong done by you, but
a Mistake for want of due Consideration. But this it is to be a Nameless
Author; instead of no Name, to get a bad one.

SECT. VI. Of Repentance in Heaven, and the Displeasure of Gloryfied Saints
there, at their Mistakes defended on Earth, asserted by Mr. Baxter.
SOmewhat, Reverend Sir, I must say to your third Section, page 15. but as
little as the thing will bear, it being but accidental to the present business,
though you spend eleven pages upon in. I had asserted, that if Dr. Owen were
undoubtedly displeased at his mistakes, being defended by any one on Earth, now
he in a glorified Soul in Heaven, he must undoubtedly have the knowledge of
such a Defense. And that affirming such a knowledge, would deprive us of our
best Weapon against the Idolatry and Superstition of the Papists, in their
invocation of Saints.

In Answer to this page, 16. (beside some sportive Passages) you extend the
Knowledge of the I Saints in Heaven, an far as reminiscence, and rational
Conclusions from what (...) that supplies them with will go. And I think Sir,
you have therein said, all that can be said with Reason, (as for what God in
mediately, or by Angels may reveal to them, is no ground to us; unless we
understood it better) but seeing you go no farther than strong Probabilities,
as to the present instance: your undoubtedly is not without doubt, and I am
safe enough yet.

But Sir, I think you venture too hard, to argue from those Topics of the
Saints judging the World, and the Extention of a Sunbeam. The first may be done
Congruously enough, by their accompanying Christ in that Action, and applauding
his Justice in its Execution; which they may know to be such, by the ability
and intogrity of such a Judge; beside the Book of Evidence, that shall then be
opened.

But if this be any thing to your purpose, you must suppose them to know all
that is done in the World in all the parts of it. Now to make this feasible,
your other Notion falls in as pat as can be. Nor that they live as unconcerned
Strangers to Earth, when a Sunbeam can reach so far, page 16. You seem here to
fancy that the Souls in Heaven ought rationally to be concluded, to have a
Prospect of terrene things, as extensive, and penetrating as the Sunbeams at
least. But yet considering, that the dense Body of the Earth does so interpose,
that it must be beholding to its Circular motion, to visit with its direct
beams all the inhabitants of this earthly Globe; that will not serve your turn,
unless you fancy also their station and motion equally (at least) Corespondent.
But by this, and what follows, you seem your self a little affected with the
Vertigo. For, you provide these, with other Antidotes, least I faign them to
have News-books, Gazets, and Post-letters hence.

But Sir, this Caution belongs rather to those, who will needs have them so
exactly knowing of our Concerns here below; and you seem to be in some danger
of in, since you have already begun the Correspondence, by a thing in the form
of an Epistle from Dr. Owen in Heaven, in your Postscript to your Answer to the
twelve Arguments.

Of much the same humor, is your sorrow and desperation of my change of my
Opinion of the uncertainty of the Saints knowing what, and when we pray; [for
so I expressed my Opinion] to be my best Weapon against the Popish Superstition
of praying to Saints. Yet for all this, you will hope, that I do not pray to
Dr. Owen for so much as I believe he knows.

Answ. No, nor to Mr. Baxter neither, if he were in Heavon, and as knowing as
he. For, though I shall still retain this Weapon as our best, we have store of
others good enough against that Foppery. I presume you will hold me excused for
answering you in your kind: Hanc veniam -- petimusque vicissim.

That the Saints in Heaven have displeasure, which you affirm in Contradiction
to me; I am now to consider. You begin very warily, page 16. and confine it to
Displicence, the contrary to that Complacence which is in the will: saying, As
pleasedness and dis-pleasedness are in the Passions, and signify joy and
trouble, you have here nothing to do with them (having expressly excluded
sorrow) but in the Will. So that it seems we are agreed that there is no
displeasure as in the Passions, which is the same sense with the vulgar Word
Affections. But here you first suppose that I must not imagine you should
Contradict your self. For this, I crave you pardon! it is more than possible.

To make sure work, you fetch your arm about and will prove that in God himself
there is displeasure, (which is the word you must allow, or you contradict not
me) and then the Consequence is undeniable, that gloryfied Souls are not less,
but more capable of it. While you bring Scripture to prove this, who dare
contradict it? and in this you are not sparing; for you fill up your nineteenth
page with Scripture Quotations, to Convince me that the Scripture says God is
displeased. A Child in his Psalter knows this; your Concordance would (without
much pains-taking) have furnished you with five times as many.

But what earnings do you make of all these Scripture Quotations? Do any of
them say that this displeasure is Confined to his Will, and has nothing to do
with sorrow, the Affections or Passions? Does not the Scripture say, that God
was grieved, pained at the very Heart, angry, yea, in fury? do not these
express displeasure or displicence, as in the Passions; contrary to joy and
Peace? The Scripture also speaks of Gods Eyes, Arm, Hand; you cannot make these
flourishes of Scripture, but only to make a show to the most ignorant: You know
Sir, that it is not to be taken in proprio sensu. God speaks to men, therefore
speaks after the manner of men; make your inference now, and what will you get
by it. God speaks of himself to men after the manner of men; Ergo we may speak
of men after the manner of God. To as much purpose, you tell us of all the
foreign Reformers, and of Hildersham, Dod, Greenham, Bolton, Rogers, Sibbs,
Preston, page 20. All these said God was displeased in the Scripture Sense; not
one of them (that you prove) said it in your sense: nor can you (I believe)
produce one of them, that ever said that the Saints are displeased in Heaven.

As to these Expressions of Gods Displeasure, Grief, Anger, etc. they relate to
the Acts of Gods Providence, which are ad extra, which in men are the Signs and
Effects of such Affections or Passions: But it follows not, that they are
indications of the same things in God; which if they are in him, must be
infinitely and essentially so.

As for School men's Disputes, and the Notions of Metaphysical Authors of this
matter, if I were better acquainted with them than I am, I should not here
concern my self much with them, who too often do insanire cum ratione about
little things, much more about God whose Perfections are so above humane
Comprehension. But to reduce this dispute to a narrow Compass; I agree with
you, that as in the Divine Understanding all Sin is evil, and disapproved or
disliked; so there is in the Will of God somewhat answerable to it; But by what
Name to call it, I am not resolved by all the Conduct I have yet met with. Nor
am I satisfied to call it milling, which you make univocal (or near it) with
Displicerve as many of the Schoolmen do; because it sounds too harshly, as if
that might be, the being of which God does will; and so Gods Volition or Will
by Consequence be Crossed or Contradicted. And if you Construe your displeased
by displicence, and that by Nolition, (except as Nolition may be in the
Understanding) I can see no reason (pardon my dullness) to receive it.

And whereas you say, page 19. The. Hebrew Phrase which we transtate by
displeasing to God or man, is often [it was Evil in his Eyes.] which speakoth a
Positive Act of the Understanding de malo: And that there was no answerable Act
of the Will, let him say that dares: I am not so daring as to say by what name
it must, or may be called; yet seeing I have said in the Book, and place you
here oppose, though in Heaven there is dislike and dis-approbation; (which you
your self agree to be much of your sense of displeasure) you might have abated
very many of your Reflections. And I now say, that God willing the Punishments
of Sin, is an Act of his Will; and the Punishments Executed the Effects of that
willing, or Act of his Will. And I hope you will not deny, but this is very
answerable to the Act of Gods Understanding de malo; and I may be excused
saying more as to the Act of Gods will de malo. Thus far we shall not much fall
out.

All your discourse here of displeasure in God, has been to make way for this
Consequence, that a glorisied Soul in Heaven may be displeased, exempli gratia,
Dr. Owen's. But what if it appear, that you have mistaken, yea expressly
excluded the Question (you ought to have put) hither to? And you your self
mistook in your Expression, and not I in my Exposition? I think this will
appear by your Comparative. You say, I doubt not but by defending it, [the
Doctors Mistake] you far more displease him than me.

Here is only term without Explication, by which the Apprehensions of an evil
by Dr. Owen in Meaven, and Mr. Baxter on Earth, is expressed; and that is
[displeased] and all the difference of this displeasedness eexpressed, is but
Secundum magis and minus, Dr. Owen more displeased than Mr. Baxter; but the
displeasure is of the same identical Species, (excepting sorrow) but if sorrow
be excepted, all the rest that is included in the Displeasure is Confirmed;
Exceptio firmat do non exceptis. And that includes (as it is or may be in Mr.
Baxter at the said mistake) Anger, Wrath, Bitterness, Perturbation; and if you
can excuse your self totally of Sinful Hatred of the Persons that displease
you, it is more than many a very good man can do in the like Case. None of
these are excepted by excluding Sorrow: yea such is the Vitiousness of corrupt
Nature, that the best of men do (while prevailed on by these Passions) take too
much pleasure in them. I hope now you will not say, that the Saints in Heaven
may be affected with such displeasure.

If you will needs speak Mysteries, in a case where no such things are
necessary, or to the Purpose; and limit your sense of your Expressions no
better, you may excuse your Readers mistaking you, while they construe your
meaning by your words, which you seem to frame with exact Consideration.

And now Sir, give me leave to look back on that very harsh Conclusion, you
make by all the links (good or bad) of the Chain of your Consequences, from my
saying, that the Saints have no displeasure in Heaven, in Contradiction to Mr.
Baxter: for that is all that is mine, the rest is your own, and you must answer
for them. I look (say you, page 22.) to hear ere long, from Press and Pulpits,
that the Nonconformists teach, that no Rebellion, Treason, Perjury, or
Wickedness, is at all displeasing to God, to Christ, to Angels, or to any Saint
in Heaven. Though they call Adulterers, Murderers, and such others to
Repentance, and mouring for Sin; and separate from others as too bad for their
Communion. Indeed at the same time, they tell all the Wicked, neither God, nor
any in Heaven is displeased with them.

Do you indeed look for this! I am verily persuaded not any of the most angry
Adversaries of the Nonconformists, with all their Wit, would from that Passage
have thought of such a horrible Charge, as having the least shadow of rational
dependence thereon. But now you have taught it them, and they have Mr. Baxters.
Authority to do that, which I believe they will be ashamed to do
notwithstanding. O Sir, to what Extremities, and beyond Extremities do you run
things! I believe in this fit of Displeasure you had little Sorrow. What will
become of the Saints Rest, if such Displeasure be found amongst the Saints in
Heaven? Does this speak you to be a meet man to Reconcile, make peace, and heal
the Churches Wounds; who know not how to breathe in a Controversy, but it must
come to a Hurricane? The Lord be merciful to his Church, and every part of it,
and deliver them from such Products of impatience of Contradiction, and from so
over-valuing any Person, as to dote on his Conduct, without trying, and
especially Considering what Spirit he is of.

You seem to heal all again in the next Paragraph, by mollifying my Error (as
you call it) as merely Verbal. Thus you blast, overthrow, wound, arm
Adversaries with venomous Weapons; add to the griefs of the already afflicted;
and then cure all in a Trice, with a breath: as if these things were at your
beck, and must move exactly to the Tune of your present fancies or Passions.

I shall now consider, what you say of Repentance in Heaven. You begin thus: My
third supposed Error is much like the former; saying, that though Heaven have
no Sorrow, it has great Repentance: In this all Protestants are falsely said to
be against me.

Answ. You have in these words a double Mistake in matter of Fact. I neither
said it was an Error, nor that I supposed it to be an Error. (though it may be
such notwithstanding) Nor did I say, that in this all Protestants are against
you. So that what you make the ground of this part of the Controversy, is all
Mistake. Yet you go on, and tell your Reader that I am puzzled at it as a
dangerous Doctrine: though your next line acknowledges, that I attempt not in
one Syllable to blame any thing but the Word. And had I not reason for so
doing, and to say as I did, that it does and will sound very offensively; and
most by far, will either not understand you, or misunderstand you? Do you think
that School Subtilties, and those Reconciling Notions which you are so stored
with, are the Talents of most that may happen to read your Book? And that they
can tell what to make of Repentance in Heaven and without Sorrow? you have said
somewhat to inform or exercise their intellects in this, but not one Word in
that Book.

And now Sir, I take my self to be as little obliged to Answer, or Consider
what you say farther, (as Contradicting any thing said by me) as you had to
write it; and that is none at all. But because (much like the former) you
contrive from these mistakes of your own, a very black (I had almost said a
Malevolent) Conclusion; I shall observe now you setch it about. Your Conclusion
is this, page 25. I doubt not but those aforesaid, [Vide page 22.] that are
disposed to Obloquy, will take occasion from your Words, (yea the Papists from
your intituling all Protestants to it) to say the Nonconformists (or the
Protestants) hold that Murder, Rebellion, Persecution, and all Sin is so small
a matter to their Saints in Heaven, that they do not so much as repent of it,
or will, or wish they had never done it: therefore, they either justify it, or
are Neuters to it.

Do you think the men you speak of have such a high Opinion of your Logical
Concluding Faculty, as to charge men with holding all that you say are the
Consequences of their Opinion? They are wiser than so for their own sakes. Or
may they not as well conclude much of the like nature, from our (or your)
Saints in Heaven, not being sorry for any of these Crimes? You said you looked
for such Reflections, page 22. here you doubt not of them. But pardon me if I
say, that I expect the men you speak of are masters of so much Reason, Truth
and Candor, that they will rather say, That in these Conclusions, Mr. Baxter
consulted not the Premises nor himself.

Now Sir, I shall Consider how you came by your dismal Conclusions, (supposing
I had charged you with Error in that Expression; and had also said, that herein
all Protestants are against you; both which you said of me untruly) And I fear,
that your hammering to mend one hole, has made more than two; the usual issue
of overdoing.

First, you tell me of Gods being said to repent in Scripture. Now least I
should not believe it, or take one Scripture Authority for no sufficient
Conviction; you direct me by Quotations to fifteen. I thank you for this great
Charity and necessary pains. But what is all this to the Purpose? Dare you say
that proprie dictum God repents, or deny that spoken of him it is a
denomination from the Changes he makes ad extra; as the Effects of his eternal
and immutable Will, without any change in himself? You tell me at next word,
that it is not spoken of God, as if he had any Mutability as man has. And yet
you add, as mighty unwilling to acknowledge your Scripture instances
impertinent here: But God being infinitely more perfect, the Phrase is farther
fetched, and less proper of God than of man: Therefore it is not the name that
he blames, seeing he owneth the word of God.

Reverend Sir, I observe you go here all by Comparatives: Mutability as man
has; infinitely more perfect than man, further fetched: All which I should
have taken no notice of; but because of the following words, that the phrase of
God repenting, is less proper of God than of Man. This plainly renders it your
opinion, that Repentance is proper to God (as contradistinguisht from
figurative) though in a less degree, and farther fetched, than when spoken of
man: which opinion whether it be not utterly untrue, and unspeakably dangerous,
I refer to the Judicious Reader. I would you had told us how much less proper,
and how much farther fetched, when spoken of God. To what you conclude, It is
not therefore the name, etc. I say I blame not the word repentance it is true;
but your (at least) indiscreet, if not impertinent use and misapplication of it.

You acknowledge, that I had prevented your labor in transcribing other
Authors, that use (...) and (...) usually for a mere change of the mind,
purpose and practice, without any signification of sorrow. And I also told you,
that if you had said the Saints in heaven were grown wiser, had a better
understanding, and did disapprove of what they in this life thought good and
true; This might (if nothing else) have stopped your torrent of dismal
consequences, for they who do so, are far from justifying or being Neuters as
(you express it) as to Murder, Rebellion, Persecution and all sin as a small
matter, etc.

But yet you say page 23. But let us willingly take the Scripture use, which
speaks of Repentance in heaven, and on Earth. Answ. We have nothing to do in
this Controversy, with repentance of any on earth: but of the Saints in heaven.
And you tell us at the bottom of the same page, that we find no talk in
Scripture of any in heaven repenting but God. Can I wish a fairer adversary?
That shall more willingly and expressly yield the Cause? But by the next
Paragraph you repent all this again, and say; All those acts of Repentance
Souls have in heaven: which rise to the number of five. So that you can talk of
what Souls do in Heaven, that by your own confession within five lines before,
the Scripture is utterly silent in. Have you any Revelation peculiar to your
self of those things?

I must also Reverend Sir, enter my dissent to some other passages upon the
subject of Repentance in this life, to which you are pleased to direct me page
24. in that you say, But usually we have cause of sorrow, as well as of
Repentance; and must join them together: But where the Gospel frequently
promises Repentance, Pardon and Life together; and Preaches both Repenting
and Believing in order to present joy; there is little mention of sorrow in the
Converts, save for the murdering of Christ, or some great (...) Answ. Is this a
safe limitation to say usually, which excludes sorrow from our Repentance even
in this life very often, if not mostly, ^s no duty? Your after-instances
restrain it to the murdering of Christ, or some great sin. Then it seems we
ought to repent, (That is, Change our mind and will, and wish we had not done
what we did (which you call the prime and common sense of Repentance within a
few lines) of all sin; but be sorry (in repenting) only for some great sin. But
how great you tell us not, except the murdering of Christ must be taken for its
measure.

Yet here you argue from the negative, a non dicto ad non factum. There might
be great sorrow, where we have it not expressed; and where we find the Gospel
Preached, affecting with present joy, there might be room enough for sorrow
afterward.

But you go on to fortify this notion from 2 Cor. 7. 9, and 10. I rejoice not
that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to Repentance; for godly sorrow
works Repentance to Salvation, not to be repented of; You then demand, Is the
sense godly sorrow works, godly sorrow? I answer no: and yet you are never
the nearer your end; for one part of Repentance may very well contribute to
another. And this other part, Emendation, being the more excellent part, may
very well take the denomination of the whole. Conviction is not Conversion, yet
Conversion includes Conviction; not only as an inseparable adjunct, but also as
an essential part. And if it should be said, Conviction works Conversion to
life; this would not conclude, that Conversion does not include Conviction.
This is spoken of Repentance in this life, to which you have led me by going
out of the way.

But to tell you my thoughts of Repentance of Souls in heaven, I am of opinion,
that there is none there: I take Repentance, and so do you, to consist in its
primary principal parts, in the change of the Understanding and Will; and this
differs so little from the sense of the word Conversion, as is hardly if at all
distinguishable. It may be said of the Saints in heaven, that they are
Converted, but not that there is any Conversion there: The like of Repentance.
Because the acts of Conversion and Repentance are in via, and may properly be
called the transitus or passage of the Soul, from all the corruptions of
nature, to Consummate grace, which is not attained in this life. But when Grace
is Consummate; the work of Repentance and Conversion is over, because there is
no more sin to Convert or Repent from. And you allow all that (...), to
fortify this sense; in your saying p. 24. to prove, that (...) for sin is not
always a necessary adjunct of Repentance, Heb. 6 and 1. It is not called
Repentance for dead works, but from dead works; if this will serve your turn,
to shut out sorrow from Repentance here, it will serve mine much more to shut
Repentance out of heaven; for there can be no repenting from dead works, so as
to make any change after they are lodged in that perfect state, and have no
dead works to repent from.

I conclude with a few passages of your own, which makes you seem so generous,
as to give freely; though you will hardly yield to have the same things forced
from you. But we find no talk in Scripture of any in heaven repenting but God:
No wonder; how little has God told us of the particular state and action of
separated Souls, before the Resurrection; When it pleases God so sparingly to
mention their present state, (yea, and their Immortality in the Old Testament)
shall we feign that he must tell us of all their thoughts? Page 25. But your
last and best words on this argument are, I only hence conclude, that we must
not take on us to know more than we do of separate Souls, nor to make a
measure, or manner of blessedness for them of our own heads, nor to apply every
Text to them that is spoken of the state after the Resurrection. There is
enough besides to feast our joyful hopes. Answ.

Cur in Theatrum Cato severe yenisti?
An ideo tantum veneras ut exires?
You seem to have fallen out, that we might shake hands at Reconciliation. You
have here (if we may take your sense by your words) repented of your undoubted
repentance and displeasure to the Saints in heaven; for to say there is such
things there, is to feign to our selves, and of our own heads; for of these the
Scripture no where speaks. I thought we should meet at Hedge or Style. It Is
better parting in san Weather then in a Storm. And therefore

FINIS.

