A VINDICATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE GENTLEMEN OF THE Inner Temple

Si sapimus Patruos tunc, tunc igonoscite -- Juvenal. CAMBRIDGE, Printed in the
Year 1662.

To the Gentlemen of the Inner Temple, and especially to his Choycest Friend
DEMOPHILUS.
Dear Demophilus,
I Must ingeniously confess unto thee, that these crude Conceptions (and which
perhaps from some Censurers may have the Epithet of Fanatical) are altogether
destitute of those common Apologies, for most Publications. It was not the
irresistible importunity of soliciting Friends that ravished this Paper from
the private confinement of a Study, and prostituted it to a public view.
Neither was it a necessary obedience to the commands of some Honorable Sir, or
Noble Patron, that influenced my pen: Nor yet self-vindication, or the
prevention of false and surreptitious Copies, No, I grant Demoph. it is that
General Itch of Scribbling, that has set my pen a scratching. And thou
should no more wonder that in this Age one should be a Writer, than that a
man should have the Plague in a general Infection. Nor could the sense of my
own disabilities and infirmities hold my hand, For since the wisest of men has
comprehended all under that diffusive Genus of Vanity, so as the Character of
Madness and Folly, is as compatible to Aristotle's Politics, as Tom Thumbs. I
knew no reason why I might not publish my Follies too, when I had so many
precedents for my failings: And in this I thought my self beyond the reach of
reprehension, for whosoever would convict me of Folly, must in the same Act
condemn himself of Madness; since then my fancy prompted me, and my leisure
from severer studies gave me an opportunity of employing my pen, I thought it
could not better be employed, then in endeavoring a token of my Gratitude and
Affection to that Society, and those Gentlemen I am so highly obliged to. I am
not so presumptious as to imagine I can merit any thing from them, the highest
my hopes aim at, is, that perhaps this weak spark may have the Fortune to
kindle a Nobler flame, which like the Pillar of Fire to the Israelites, may
Light us through this Wilderness of Confusion and Disorder we now live under,
to the happy Canaan of a civil and equitable Government. To use Arguments to
persuade a man to engage in this Quarrel, would discommend the Cause, as if the
Justice and Gallantry of the Attempt had not Rhetorique enough in it to awake
the most Drowsy Spirit. Is it Noble and Honorable to engage for ones Country?
Did Humanity and an innate Compassion prompt Moses for to rescue the distressed
Israelite from the insulting Egyptian? Has Shame and Disgrace any influence
on a Generous Spirit? Then what greater Renown can be expected, then from a
Victory over so potent and continually encroaching an Enemy? What greater a
mercy can we show to our selves and successors, then to restore us and them to
those Rights and Privileges, Law, Nature, and Reason have indulged unto us? Nay
then we need not blush, as formerly, and be forced, when asked what Government
we live under, either to affect an ignorance, to our own disparagement, or
forge an Utopian platform, or else proclaim that sad Truth, that in those
places where the Laws are studied and professed, there is a Government void of
Law and Reason; Vexatious and Oppressive Gentlemen* from these hard
Inconveniences you may soon be freed, those benefits you may quickly be Blessed
with, if you will have but as much Affection for your selves, as you have had
Favor and Patience toward your Enemies. Let your Charity fix its self on its
proper Center at home, Trust not the Songs of Sirens, Nor rush into the Arms
of those fawning Sileni, that kill with their Embraces. What, has His
Majesty's Happy Restoration Blessed the whole Kingdom with the Enjoyment of a
Hopeful prosperity, and must We alone be Banished from this Felicity? When the
Nation is freed by this great Jubilee from a Rump Bondage, must a Rump
Parliament be still our Masters? When popular Fury sacrificed it to Revenge,
did this Phoenix arise from those Ashes? Methinks when I have been at
Westminster, and seen those Traitors Heads, and after return to our own Hall, I
suspect my Dreaming fancy gulled me, Solicitor Cook, (or a Solicitor very
like him) Bradshaws, Scots, and Iretons, sure they live, nay, they live and
rule within our Walls, or else there is Transanimation. For all the Actions of
those men, (except their Murders) are here reiterated, And the best Account
can be given of our Inn^ of Court Govtrnment, will be from this parallel; Their
Practice is the best Glass to Represent our Politics. Perhaps the sower
Catoes may frown on this truth, and me for speaking of it, we know Veritas
odium parit; but as I was never fond of their Favor, so I shall not be
fearful of their Displeasure: For My part I have passive Obedience enough to
Magazine my Breast against the severest Censures their incensed thoughts can
frame; it is the Duty I owe to those Noble and Ingenious Persons I have had the
Honor to converse with which has urged me thus far, and to suffer for their
sakes, I shall rather number it among my Joys, then rank it with my
Afflictions, for I have always prized the Love of my Equals above the favors
of my Superiors. And Dear Demohpil. I have not counted it the smallest Benefit,
nor the least part of my Happiness, that my good genius has conducted me into
an Acquaintance and Intimacy with you, One whom Nature has Blessed with
Ingenuity, Candor, Fidelity, Prudence, and all those Ingredients requisite to
the Composure of a true Friend, and I wish heartily I could give the World a
more public Acknowledgment how much I owe unto you, and though I am something
diffident what may be the hard Fortune of this poor Scribble, yet I cannot but
be so vain as to applaud my self for wise, in this particular Application of it
to you, being one who has so much Affection for me, as not to be
Hypercritical, and has so large a stock of Wit and Learning, as may patronize
it from the Attempts of the strongest Opposers. And then I should be proud of
my good Service to the Society, if I were instrumental in bringing so smart a
pen as yours to Vindicate their Cause, and this weak Essay would have the
Honor to be a foil to your polite and sinewy tract, and indeed I should
rejoice, that since I have no parts capable of it, that my imperfections may be
serviceable unto you, and give some Testimony of that Gratitude I am ever bound
to show for the Happiness I am Blessed with, that I can subscribe my self

Your Affectionate And Hearty Friend, Publicola Anticlassicus.

A VINDICATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE GENTLEMEN OF THE Inner Temple, etc.
THat the Church has had its Persecutors and Opposers we all know; And that
the Temple should meet with Disturbances and Discomposures none of us should
wonder. If the one had her Convulsions, we may allow the other an Ague fit. But
that the Priests who live by the Altar should extinguish the Incense, and
demolish the Altar, this may lawfully raise our Admiration: And this is our
Case. Our High Priests and infallible Popes are not like those in the Old Law,
who would strike their Trident into the Pot and go away contented with their
share: But with Ely's Sons they cry out, nay Give us all, or we will take it by
force; Rather than they will loose one jot of their Power, the House must loose
all its peace. I cannot but blush at these things, and heartily wish I had no
cause to relate them; every stroke my Pen makes gives a scratch in my own
breast, and my desires are that I might withdraw my eyes from these things, and
going backward cover the nakedness of these men, who are so drunk with their
own prosperity, that they cannot forbear reeling into the greatest
extravagances. But it is a ridiculous Modesty to hide that themselves make so
palpable.

For why should I be ashamed to speak that which they have not bin ashamed to
act. The way then to vindicate the Society is to separate the Innocent Sheep
from the Gray-bearded Goats, and lay the Sin at the right door, and then
perchance the sense or shame of it may cause Amendment. That the World
therefore may more plainly see into the justice of our Cause, I shall unbowell
the whole matter, and show you the naked state of our Business. Our Case is
truly and impartially thus,

The Gentlemen of the Bench in a Parliament at Allhallon-tide last make an Act
for keeping of Christmas, and in order to that choose some of the Noblemen of
the House (according to Custom) grand Officers. In the close of the Term the
fickle Gentlemen wheel about, and begin to see a vanity in keeping that
Festival, and therefore make a thing called an Act, whereby they dissolve (for
so the words of the Act are) the Commins from the Saturday before Saint Thomas
day, till the Saturday after Epiphany. And whosoever comes into Commins in that
time is to be expelled the House, and forfeit his Chamber. In the same
Parliament they make another Act (and it is pity these two should be parted)
whereby it is enacted, That when any one is expelled the House, or put out of
Commins, or does advise any one to go out of Commins, or assist and abet him
that is put, or those that do put themselves out of Commins, shall be incapable
of being called to the Bench or Bar, and have what other punishments shall be
thought fit to be inflicted on him or them so offending. This being done in the
last gasp of the Term when there were but few in Commins, and the rest of the
Gentlemen dispersed, they could not have any opportunity of redress. In the
Vaecation the Gentlemen being stirred up by this Alarm, meet, and were
informed by many grave and prudent persons, that they had an undoubted right to
keep Christmas, which could not be impeded by any Act of the Bench whatsoever,
and that the Government of the House did then devolve it self on them, and that
the neglect of this privilege might prove a great weakening, if not the utter
ruin of it. Upon these grounds the Gentlemen fixed their resolutions of a
Christmas. But that they might proceed with all possible modesty and prudence,
they attend upon that Gentleman called the Solicitor, lay open their
Grievance, inform him of their intentions, and (which pleased him very much)
beseech his advice. He professed his ignorance of the making that Act, and the
deep resentment He had of it, heartily wishing he were Master of so much power
as to revoke it, or that he were so happy as to have had a House in in the Town
fit for our reception, that we might keep Christmas with him. He told us he
had known such Acts as these sometimes observed, and sometimes rejected, so
that there were Presidents on both sides. These smooth words, and this loose
way, and not ^rohibiting, we interpeted a tacit consent, and close
encouragement; so that then (think^ng our selves happy in so ingenious and able
Patron) we put our Resolutions into prac^^ce, and go on in celebrating that
Solemnity. But this last Term coming into Commins, we soon found what small
correspondency ^s in some Persons between their thoughts and words, and that
cool expressions are often attended with actions of another temper; For the
Master of the Bench did expel one Gentleman, and put two out of Commins. The
rest of the Gentlemen owning the Inte^est of these Heroical persons that
suffered for their sake, and standing up in the vindication of their
priv^ledges, there ensued this Contest and clash. And this is the true Original
and ^ight state of our present Condition. In this Case I shall first handle it
abstractly, and show that the Bench have no Authority that can ^nable them to
make such an Act. Second^y, That conceding them such a Power, yet ^aking the
whole matter as it is clothed with ^ll the circumstances, this particular Case
will not be within the reach of that Act. So that the penalty inflicted was
unjust and ille^al. To prove the first I shall enquire, (and think my self
happy if I meet with a resolution, and turn proselyte to the Informer) How this
superlative Authority came vested in them. All the ways I can imagine are
these three, either by the Nature or constitution of the Society, or by
stipulation or paction, or else by Custom. But I can find no firm foundation
their Government can have on any of these.

And first for the nature of the Society.

For the nature of the Society it is undoubtedly voluntary; for it never was
incorporated; nay until King James his time we never had a Grant of the
Fabric, but were merely Tenants at will under the King; And that these were
only places of reception for the convenience of converse and other occasions to
those that intended the study of the Law, is evident from the Names of Inn, or
Hospitium, which is Domus quae Bud. in Solenc. ff. de offic. procons.
liberaliter and sine prohibitione venienti hospiti patet. Like to thse were
the ancient Hostells in Cambridge, Caj. Histor. Cant. page 47. And the Halls in
Oxford. And the Gild's or those that associated themselves Sir Hen. Spelman,
Glos. voce gild.
on a religious account. But none of these Societies were ever presumed to
attempt the imposing of Laws on their Fellows without their consent; For indeed
what can be more absurd than to imagine, where there is a parity, that the
Smaller part can have a Despotical power over the Greater, and make what Laws
they please, and the other lie under a necessity of obedience. Nay how
frivolous would this Law (if it can be called a Law) be, when no real
punishment can be inflicted on the Offender; for he may when he pleases
withdraw himself, and lawfully bid defiance to that Statute. So that their Laws
will have a different effect from the Laws of the whole World beside; For
whereas other Laws do (or should) amend a Commonwealth, ours can produce
nothing but the Houses destruction; for if they are distasteful to us, we may
all of us if we please retreat out of their reach, and so the society must fall.

But the thing is so clear, that I shall have more charity than to think any
man's judgment so weak as not to grant this Proposition, That it is impossible
for absolute Authority and Equality to consist in the same Person with respect
to the same Subject. And now I shall proceed. But first I will remove an
Objection out of my way that I may pass more freely. It Is this, some may say
those distinctions of Bench, Bar, and under the Bar, show a perfect
inequality and absolutely destroy the former supposed parity. To this the
Answer is plain, These are only distinctions in respect of priority of time,
and standing, not of power and jurisdiction. And consequenrly being only
gradual, have not the energy in them as to put such a vast difference between
us as that of Lord and Vassal, and certainly that trafition is too nimble, and
the consequence invalid to pass and conclude from a priority in time, a
superiority of power and dominion, especially if that old Maxim holds true
Gradus non variat speciem. But again, those small remains and vestigia that we
have of what our former Condition was, give light enough to see this fallacy.
For the style of all the ancient Orders of the House runs, the Fellows of the
Society of the Inner. Temple, and even at this day their own Acts are so
worded, Be it enacted that none of the Fellows of this House come into Commins
at Christmas. Now I pray what means this Fellowship? wherein consists this
(...), this community, etc? What is it only in reverend compliance, and humble
submission to all their Masterships commands? an implicit Faith in all their
Acts? If so, it is ill done their Masterships do not undeceive the world, and
show them how the doting Philosophers, and Alciat, Cujace, Grotius and those
ignorant Lawyers misinformed them in saying Socii in sua societate sant
aequales. And (as being their Servant I am bound) I do humbly advice them out
of a tender respect to their good, to do it quickly; for till then many that
are only honest plain men may think, that the Puny of the House being included
in that name of Fellow as well as the gravest Bencher, ought in the Government
of the House, wherein his interest is concerned as much as the other, to have a
Fellowship or Community equally with him, and not to have his Purse disposed,
or his Chamber seized for the breach of an Act, to the making of which he never
gave consent, neither by himself nor Representative. And this I think is the
true and only notion of the word Fellow, except their Masterships take it in
the catachrestical sense, as when we say a proud silly Fellow, and that is
nothing to our purpose.

As for Stipulation or Paction, that this gave birth to their Power; I think
themselves do not affirm it. If they do fix it here, it is necessary they
should show where; when, by whom, and upon what ground this Paction was made.
For if they do not this, they must pardon us if we be so favorable to our
Ancestors, as to think them wiser than to part with their Liberty on a trivial,
or no account. But supposing they could prove such a Contract, yet we are out
of the reach of it; for the Society being voluntary those Persons could only
oblige themselves, and they dying their Paction perished with them. For to
impose it on Posterity; what power had they? I am sure the Law of the Land
could give them none, they had no Patent to enable them, and to take such a
power to themselves I think they could not, certainly it is against the Civil
law, L^ ult. de Collegiis, ff: So that this Compact could have the countenance
of no Law, except that of Solons, which give liberty to men to make a Society
for robbing and plundering (...) Bodin de Rep. l. 3. c. 7.

The whole stress therefore of their Authority is upheld by Custom, but I am
afraid we shall find it too weak a support for so large a Power as they have
usurpt. For let us look into the nature of Custom, and we shall find it be
conversant only about Particulars, and never to dilate it self to an
Universality. For example, such a Town or place has by a tacit consent of the
People time out of mind, used to do such or such a thing, this is lawful; but
who ever heard of such a Place or Person where by Custom they may do what they
please. A man by Custom may hunt in my Grounds, but who can imagine a Custom
whereby he may do what he will upon my Lands? We shall not deny the Gentlemen
of the Bench what they can rationally pretend to. We are so good Moralists as
to have a Reverence for Gray hairs, and give Age its due respect, and God
forbid but that they should have priority and precedence, let the Pharisee have
the first place in the Synagogue; Nay let them manage the Affairs of the
House. But they must pardon us if we endeavor to stop their Custom when it
comes to invade our Purses, and take away our Money without our consent; drive
us out of the Society and dis-seize us of our Freehold, disgrace us in the face
of the Nation, and injuriously throw us into Prison. That the smaller part of a
Society can do these things, and Custom legitimate, it I cannot think: I am
sure it is the Opinion of a very learned Man, and no mean Lawyer, That for One
Person, or the Smaller part of a Society to have a Jurisdiction over the rest,
is an absolute destruction of the Society, Si universos coe^cendi jus habet,
non Collegium sed dominatus in summo principe, Bod. de Rep. l. 3. c. 7. Nay
farther, he shows in this Chapter, That if the Major part or two parts of three
should make a Law to oblige themselves to decide all Controversies among
themselves, or concerning any thing that reflects on the private interest of
the Fellows, it would be insignificant, except it had the consent of every
individual Person. Nay these things being against the Law of the Land, that a
private Society can by any Custom make them lawful is a thing impossible, and
the attempt of it may make them Collegium illicitum an unlawful Assembly; And
this the law of the xii. Tables agrees to, where speaking even of Incorporated
Societies it says, Pactionem quam velint, sibi far, dum ne quid ex publica
lege corrumpant. And again, to make up this Custom there is wanting an
uninterrupted praescription and tacit consent. For there never passed ten,
(nay I dare boldly say five, nor three years without a sharp questioning and a
loud exclaiming against their Encroachments. Nay those small Index's, the
remains and ruins of our shipwracked Liberties sufficiently show, that these
things were not so ab initio; what means it that the Gentlemen of the Bar have
a Liberty to come into the Parliament, but as it were into Pythagoras School,
or like Mutes attending a Caball of Bashaws, they must not dare to whisper?
What do these Persons (the generality of whom, are grave and sage men) only
come to see how the Senators sit, or to learn to propose a Question? I should
be apt to believe they had (before Craft and the Ambition of a sole Dominion
thrust them out) as free a Vote as the best Bencher; and that which increases
my Suspicion is, that the fear of this, least any Noble Spirit should attempt
to snatch at this lost liberty makes them never to debate things in the
Parliament, but in a clancular way they agree upon it at the Bench-table, or a
private Chamber, and when they come to the Parliament chamber, the proper place
to discuss them, as soon as they are set, the Treasurer says, All that are of
Opinion, that (suppose it the Question) the Author of this Pamphlet shall be
hanged, drawn and quartered for his High Treason against the Bench, let them
say, I. As soon as the Echo has answered the Business is agreed, and they
rise, and so there is an end of an Inner Temple Parliament. What does the
ancient Custom of having one of the Bench, one of the Bar, and one under the
Bar to sit upon the Accounts, but loudly speak the prudence and care of our
Ancestors that none of us should be prejudiced one penny? But what a vast
difference is there between the subtilty of these days and the sincerity of
those times? For that Noble Gentleman who has suffered (how justly all the
World speaks) so much, and bin the Martyr of this Cause, had the first cloud of
the Benches distaste raised against him for naught else but asserting this
ancient, constantly practiced, and just Custom. Wherein he did like a good
Phineas stand in the Gappe, and made the Plague cease for that time. But their
displeasure did not so, but festering into a rank Malice, has showed it self
in the severest way Anger and an high fury could invent. Let any man but read
Fortescue, where he discourses of the Innes of Court, and show me the least
sign of a Lording Bench in those days; He says, Ibi vix unquam sedicio,
jurgium, aut murmur resonat, and tamen delinquentes non alia quam poena solum a
communione Societatis suae amotione plectuntur, Fortesc. de laud. leg. Ang. c.
49. Here you see the calm peace of our Golden age, when pride and ambition had
not prompted Men to engrosse Power. There was then no Fineing, no Seizing of
Chambers, no hurrying to Prison, nor expulsion out of the House, it was only
am^tio a communione Societatis, it was not extrusio e Societate. Thus then it
is plain, that the power which the Bench take is only usurpt, for it is
contrary to the Nature and Constitution of the Society; It has no ground on
paction or contract, Nor is it in the power of Custom to confirm it, nay as
far as we can guess, it is opposite to the more Ancient Customs of the House;
And consequently, the Acts made by, and grounded on this power, being unjust,
illegal, and tyrannical, the breach of them is no offense, and to impose and
inflict a punishment for the non-observance of them, is to add injustice to
injustice, and aggravate their Crime.

Thus I have done with the First Part, I shall now proceed to the Second, and
show how that granting them power to make that Act; yet upon the whole matter,
the Case will be so circumstantiated, as to take off the penalty, so that the
rigorous prosecuting it, is either wholly unjust, or at the best but summum
jus. That this may the better appear, we must look back on the previous
Circumstances.

The last Christmas was Twelvemonth we had the Thanks of the Bench for keeping
Christmas, and that usually sum of Money allowed out of the Treasury given us.
At the Parliament on Allhollantide last, which is the proper Parliament for
that Solemnity, they vote a Christmas, and give a being to it, by choosing some
of the best Persons of Honor of the Society for Grand Officers. Afterward
they stifle that Embrio themselves first formed. Here I shall humbly enquire,
Whether the keeping that Festival, or our manner of keeping it, be unfit or
undecent, if so, their Masterships were very much to blame to give us thanks
last year, and more to blame to have any thoughts to revive it again, as the
first Order plainly shows they had. But about the latter end of November it was
when their eyes were enlightened, and they made this damning Act, where we may
observe the time and manner of promulgation of it, which was in the very
conclusion of the Term, when few Gentlemen were in Commins, and then it is
fixed at the Screen for an hour or two, and so taken (whether for the rarity or
the shame of it I know not) and locked up where we must never see it more. Now
that such an Act as this, which did contravene a constant Custom, should have
such a clancular surreptitious promulgation as this, is something strange, for
there is very few of us that know, except it be by report, that there is such
an Act, and none can tell (having only a reading of it) what Salvo's may be in
it, and what the extent of it is. The Gentlemen thinking they had as much right
to govern then, as the Bench in Term time, and that an Act of theirs was no
more obliging to them in this respect, than an Act of a Christmas Parliament
was to the Bench, and supposing that rule to be true, consuetudinem
praescriptam alia consuetudine praescripta contraria tolli, gloss. si que in l.
nemo s^ temporalis. They resolve on keeping of Christmas, and that they might
avoid the Censure of rashness and heat, which is often incident to youth, they
resolve to proceed soberly, and therefore attend the Solicitor, and inform him
of their proceedings; he gave them his Answer as I informed you before in the
state of the Business; We desired the Keys, he refusing them, we were forced
to break open the doors and take possession of our right, and how the affairs
of that time were managed; how free from disturbance and those inconveniences
which usually attend such a confluence, we leave to those Gentlemen, persons of
no mean Quality, that daily honored us with their Company, to speak
impartially. In short then I shall propose this Quaere, That when the Gentlemen
had thanks for their former Christmas, and that this last Christmas had its
beginning from the Bench it self, though afterward in a close and undermining
way they suppressed it, so that the Gentlemen could not have a legal redress
then, notwithstanding that they proceeded in vindicating their Privileges with
all moderation, they go to the Solicitor, he giving them no absolute
prohibition, they execute their intentions, but with such quietness and
freedom from disorder, as might from moderate persons have merited
Commendations; and having ended that, and put a period sooner then usual to
the Solemnity, that they might not in the least transgress, they return with
calm and composed Spirits into Commins; I say, I should ask any Rational man,
whether for these Actions the Gentlemen deserved to have two of them put out of
Commins, another not only expelled the House, dispossessed of his Chamber,
which is his Freehold, defamed and disgraced with an industrious Malice, but
sent where passion and fury hurries him to Prison, without letting him open his
mouth in his own defense, or objecting the least suspicion of Crime, as if that
Clause in Magna Charta, Nullus liber homo capiatur vel Imprisonetur, had some
tacit Exception, which excludes a Gentleman of the Temple from the benefit of
it. Now who can imagine this punishment to be Adaequate to the Offense? Who is
so blind as not to see a vast desparity between the one and the other: Nay one
more conclusion we may lawfully draw from these premises, which is this, That
the Gentlemen of the Bench have a far larger respect and care of their own
Grandeur and Honor, then the Credit, Reputation and Peace of the House: For,
what else speaks this violence and earnestness? Had they any bowels of
compassion or pity, certainly these dissensions and discomposures would move
them? Had they any love or affection for the Society, they could not choose but
recede from these punctilio's of Honor, nay even give up some of their power,
that there might be a happy composure and an amicable correspondence between
us? But I have always observed, that where there is any thing of Honor or
Profit, that we must have no share in, that is our Lords and Masters Lot, not
fit for Boys; but if there is any thing of Danger or Cost, oh then the Young
Gentlemen must be consulted with, and of this I will give you own pregnant
instance. In the worst times of our late unhappy troubles, Mr. Johnson the
Minister going to a living in the Country, Mr. Tombs comes with a Letter of
Commendation from the Committee of Safety to the Bench, to choose him into the
vacant place; It happens they had no Affection for the man, but refuse him they
dare not, for fear the Westminster Juncto should prove Benchers to them, and
serve them as they serve us, to escape the Horns of this Dilemma, they find
this expedient: They say, we have but single Votes, it is the Young Gentlemen
being more numerous, as they please; well, the Gentlemen are called, and Vote,
Mr. Tombs is exploded, the Benches work is done, and the Gentlemen may set
their hearts at rest for any more choosing a Minister, for when he comes really
to be chosen, then the Tune is new set; What, Boys have an Election, do they
know how to choose a Minister, or what belongs to sound Doctrine? Thus you see
the kindness of these Gentlemen, that in those sullen and captious times, when
the least suspicion was enough to have ruined a Man, and there were many of as
good, if not better Fortunes than themselves, whom they cared not to sacrifice
to those ravenous Times, so they might but escape free themselves. This
ungentile, nay I had almost said unhuman Demeanor, with their generally slight
and supercilious Carriage toward us, indeed does something move my choler,
but I have patience enough, when I think these Actions are sufficient
punishment to themselves, and the Infamy which cleaves to them carries sting
enough to excuse a Satyr.

To conclude therefore I shall give you a short Character of the Government of
the House, as stands now, that as you have seen what it ought to be, so now you
may see what it is. It is a kind of Judaical, Presbyterian, Fanatical Regimen,
which savors something of a Sanhedrim with the Nasi; it has a huge smack of a
rigid excommunicating Classis with a Superintendent; it smells very strong of a
Rump-Parliament; it is a Company of Grave men to whom supersides a Judas or
Treasurer. The foundation of their Government is Custom, by this they have
power to make Laws which bind all but themselves. By Custom Drunkenesse causes
neither Sin, nor sickness in a Bencher. By Custom he may sleep at Church, and
it is expulsion and forfeiture of Chamber for a young student to wake him, and
disturb his delightful Dreams, and all that assist, abet, or counsel him in so
horrid an Act are to be put out of Commins. By Custom he is to have at Dinner
and Supper four or five Dishes of Meat, and as much good Wine as he can
handsomely bear, with a Bottle or two to carry to his Chamber to accomplish the
Work, and besides Commins for a Man or two, and all this for fourteen or
sixteen shillings a week, and that to be paid when his Mastership thinks fit;
when as the Custom is, That a young Student must pay nine shillings a week for
Loins of Mutton, Pottage and Small beer. By Custom he is to have Chambers for
him and his Wife, but if she multiply much (and it is a discredit to the Society
if she don't) if a Naboth be the next Wall to this Ahab it is but expelling him
the House, and begging the Vineyard, and so he may enlarge his Quarters. If any
of these Customs chance to be questioned, who do you think is the Judge? why
the Reverend Butler is called, and when the Colossus is advanced, the mouth of
the Bench opens, and asks him, if this has not been the constant Custom of the
House. The inspired Oracle answers, I my self can safely swear, 'thas been the
Custom for this Forty year, and my Predecessor swore it had been so e're since
the Conquerors days. Then the charming Orator with a composed Countenance,
having ordered his Gown and his Gloves gravely begins thus,

Open your Eyes (O ye Lads) and see the way your Forefathers trod in, and
cannot you be contented to trot after them* those Worthies hasted upon the
Cariere of Honor and Admiration in observing those Customs I exhort you to, and
will you creep a Foot-pace in that perfect path? Let it never be said that the
Gentlemen of the Inner Temple, whose Loyalty to the great Majesty of Britain
has been so eminently visible should now dishonourably quit their Allegiance to
their Benchers, who (if that Topique a Majore ad Minus be valid) merit
Reverence purely Analogical to that of their Sovereign? it is ill done, it is I
protest, to you to be seen in any thing (though a Trifle) which may revive the
Name of Rebellion, were it but in Case of a Servant to his Master; but in yours
unspeakably facinorous, better the greatest extravagances better Plum-pottage
on a Candlemas day, better any thing cast into your Dish, than Disobedience,
that is the Colloquintidae that spoils all the Mess, that battering Ram that
demolishes the fairest Fortifications your oother Endowments have at any time
erected. Methinks (Gentlemen) your own Ingenuity should prompt you to a timely
Submission; methinks the black, the red, the gray hairs of their Reverend
Masterships of the Bench, should have enough of Trope in them to persuade you
to it. 1. The Block heads they resemble Pitch, there is a Noli me tangere
written in their Foreheads, touch them not lest you be defiled. 2ly. The Red,
and that represents the great Orb of Light, the Sun, whom the Persians made the
singular Object of their Adoration. That Head (if man be Arbor inversa) has its
Root (be it Carrott if you please in Heaven, and that is high. 3ly. The white
hoar heads, there is Snow upon them (Sirs) there is much of the Alps in them,
and let me tell you though their Crowns be white, the emblem of good nature,
yet if you submit not the sooner you will find their Hearts of the same complexion
with those Mountains, hard and immovable. You would do well to cast your Eyes
on the greatness of one of your chief Officers, a Butler in being, but in bulk
a Bencher, it is his peremptory Opinion you are in an error. The Custom of the
House, Prescription before Adam pleads against you, your chief Butler says so,
who is in the Eye of the World a Person of very vast parts, and better able to
interpret Custom than the Mahumetan Mufti to unriddle the Alcoran. He is the
Atlas that bears up Heaven for you. Infidelity in that Boys teeth that doubt
the verity of this Oracle. Proud as you are (Sirs) every of you came behind him
when he led you into Commins, and why are you grown too good to follow him now?
To conclude, the mouths of the Bench are still as wide open to feed upon your
Cost as in the days of old; their arms expanded to receive you into favor
again: they are content (notwithstanding all your undutifulness) to indemnifie
you all next year, keep Christmas with all their Hearts; only they expect you
now acknowledge your Misdemeanors, and return to your Flesh pots and Garlique.
But why am I thus prodigal of my Rhetorique to green rash Heads, who are more
effectually reducible by a Rod than an Oration? In a word therefore (Sirs) it
is a plain Case, submit your selves, and that quickly too or we Benchers will
make you.

Dixi HIGGIN.
Now what man of Ingenuity had not rather be Author of such a Speech than
Master of 1000 l. But Gentlemen I hope you have so much discretion as to see
into the fallacy of such fair words, so much care of your Privileges and
Liberty as not to sacrifice them to the will and pleasure of One whom the puffy
and aerie name of an Orator has so swelled beyond the bounds of Reason or a
moderate Ambition, that he vainly fancies it the Duty of ye all to submit to
his Dictates, to yield Obedience to all those Laws, the extravagant Capriccio's
of an humerous Brain can invent. But the humble advice of your Servant (who
has a desire, though not a correspondent ability to serve you) is, that where
that Reason and Justice bids you submit, let no men be more foreward or ready
in Obedience than your selves: and on the contrary, when Pride and Ambition do
endeavor to oppress you, let none show more courage or spirit in asserting a
good Cause.

Flectere si nequeo Superos, Acheronta movebo. Virgil.
FINIS.

