Imprimatur,

White Hall, June 4. 1664. WILL. MORICE.

THE TRAVELS OF Sig. Pietro della Valle, A Noble ROMAN, INTO EAST INDIA AND
Arabia Deserta. In which, the several Countries, together with the Customs,
Manners, Traffic, and Rites both Religious and Civil, of those Oriental
Princes and Nations, are faithfully Described: In Familiar Letters to his
Friend Signior MARIO SCHIPANO. Whereunto is Added A Relation of Sir THOMAS
ROE's Voyage into the EAST INDIES.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Henry Herringman; and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Blew-Anchor in the Lower-walk of the New-Exchange. 1665.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROGER Earl of ORRERY, etc.
My Lord,
IT is not more commonly then truly observed, That the Preeminence of Excellent
Things is universally attended with a proportionable Result of Benefit to those
of Inferior Degree: And the same may with equal verity be affirmed of the Glory
of Great Personages. Your Names serve, not only to distinguish you, or, by the
Addition of Titles, to give you higher rank in the State; but, like the Sun
communicating Light and Life together, they animate and beautify whatever is
irradiated by them. Which general Consideration, though it could not give me
any particular Right, yet it may in some sort warrant the sutableness of
dedicating this Transcript to your Lordship's Name; A Name, which besides
having been able to revive and support a long-depr^ssed Interest in a
Considerable Kingdom, is so highly celebrated upon the account of other
Performances, as scarce to find a Parallel among those of your own, or any
other Orb. Nor is it a little ground of Confidence to me, that what I present
is neither wholly my own in any sort, nor any of it otherwise then as an
Interpreter; nor (lastly) one of those refined Pieces of Invention, which while
your Protection is implored, do with-all solicit your Judgment; But of that
kind of Writings, which containing Descriptions of Countries and their Customs,
can only please by the Variety of the Relations, and the Veracity of the
Relator. He, whom I have interpreted, was a Noble Roman, (Persons of which
Quality, as they have greater Curiosity, so they have far more Advantages in
reference to making of Observations in Foreign Countries, than they whose
chief business is Traffic) and was carried only by his own curious Genius
into those Oriental parts of the World, whereof he here gives an Account; which
is so full of delightful Variety, and considerable Remarks, that as after his
Return his Person was dignifi^d with an Honorable Office in the Court of his
own Prince; so, since his Death, his Travels have no less happily traveled,
and been naturalized in some other Languages.

The other Piece has been judged fit to be adjoined, as one of the Exactest
Relations of the Eastern parts of the World that hitherto has been published
by any Writer, either Domestic or Foreign; having been penned by one that
attended Sir Thomas Roe in his Embassy to the Great Mogol: Than whom, Inter eos
qui relationes suas de hoc Regno (sc. M. Mogolis) prodiderunt, facile fide and
dignatione princeps est Thomas Roeus, Mag: Britanniae Regis ad superiorem
Indiae Regem Legatus. Says John de Laet.
it is acknowledged by one of that Country that trades most into those parts,
none ever gave a more faithful Account thereof. It remains only, that, as by
this action I have (though with all the Modesty that becomes me) assumed an
Interest in a Great Name, so I also testify the Honor and Veneration I bear
to Great Worth and Rare Accomplishments; which I shall do summarily (and yet in
the utmost importance of the words) by professing my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships in all Humble Respect and Observance, G. Havers.

P. Scipionis Sgambati e Societate Jesu, PETRO a VALLE PATRICIO Romano, Ob
cineres Conjugis ex ASIA revectos.
AENeadum soboles Albani sanguinis haeres,
Aeneae proavi quam been facta refers!
Ille senem ex Asia fertur vexisse parentem;
Ex Asia conjux est tibi ducta comes.
Par utrique fides esset, nisi quod tua major
Est pietas, Italum gloria VALLIADE.
Ille senem extinctum Sicula tellure reliquit;
Tu Romam extinctae conjugis ossa vehis.
THE TRAVELS OF Peter Della Valle, Surnamed The Traveller.
Containing a DESCRIPTION of the EAST INDIES, etc.
LETTER I.
From Surat, March 22. Anno 1623.
IN the beginning of this year, at my departure Persia, I writ last to you from
aboard the Ship called the Whale, in which I was newly embarked upon the
coasts of that Country, and had not yet begun my Voyage. Since which time
having sailed over a good part of the Ocean, arrived at the famous Countries of
India, traveled and viewed no inconsiderable portion thereof; by convenience
of the same Ship which brought me hither, and is ready to set sail speedily
toward Mucha in the Arabian Gulf, (and the rather for that a German Gentleman
a friend of mine is embarked in her, with an intention to travel from thence,
in case he can get passage, to see Aethiopia;) with this Letter (which I
recommend to him to get transmitted into Italy, if possible, from those Ports
of the Red Sea, or by the way of Cairo, where they trade, or by some other
conveyance) I come again to give you an Account of my Adventures, and the
Curiosities which have hitherto afforded delicious repast to my always hungry
Intellect. To begin therefore: Upon Thursday the 19 of January, having
dispatched and taken order for what was needful, a little before day, after the
discharge of some Guns, as it is the custom at going off from any Coast, we
began leisurely to display our sails, moving but slowly, because we waited for
the shipboat which was still at shore; upon whose return we unfolded all our
Canvase, and though with a small gale, directed our course between the Islands
of Ormuz and Kesom, passing on the outer side of Ormuz next Arabia, in regard
the shallowness of the Channel toward Persia afforded not water enough for
such great Ships as ours. We were in company only two English Ships, namely,
the Whale, which was the Captain-ship, (in which I was embarked) commanded by
Captain Nicholas Woodcock, and another called the Dolphin, which had for
Captain, Master Matthew Willis. At noon, being near Lareck, and no wind
stirring, we cast Anchor without falling our sails, and our Captain sent his
long boat a shore to Lareck, with two Greyhounds which the English of Combru
had given him, to catch what game they could light upon. Toward night we set
sail again; but though the wind somewhat increased, yet because the boat was
not returned we struck sail a little, and staid for it, discharging also
several musket-shots, to the end those that were in it might hear and see where
we were: And because 'twas one a clock in the night, and the Boat was not yet
come, we doubted some disaster might have befaln it, in regard of the multitude
of those Arabian Thieves called Nouteks, which rob upon that Sea, and
frequently reside in this Island of Lareck: Yet at length it returned safe and
sound, and brought us abundance of Goats; whereupon we again spread our sails
freely to the wind, which was pretty stiff, although not much favorable to our
course. However, we went onwards, plying from the coast of Arabia to that of
Persia; and on Saturday morning, as we drew near the Arabian shore, we saw
three small Islands, situate near one another, and not far from a certain Cape,
the name of which, and the Islands, they could not tell me, so as that I might
set it down truly; whereby I perceived how it comes to pass that many names of
places in these parts are very corruptly written in Geographical Charts; for in
the Countries themselves, where commerce is had for the most part with rude and
ignorant people, few of them know how to pronounce the same aright. On Sunday
we went from our Ship to recreate our selves in the Dolphin, our companion,
where the Captain entertained us liberally all day. In the mean time we had a
good fresh gale, and sailing directly in the middle of the gulf, we beheld both
the coasts of Arabia Felix and Persia; and in the latter discerned a famous
white Rock, which standing in the midst of a low sandy shore, looks like a
little hill made by hand. We passed the Cape, which they call in Persian Com
barick, that is, small sand; and the next night we left behind us the point or
peak of Giasck. On Monday, the Sea being calm, the Captain and I were standing
upon the deck of our ship, discoursing of sundry matters* and he took occasion
to show me a piece of a Horn which he told me himself had found in the year
1611. in a Northern Country, whither he then sailed, which they call Greenland,
lying in the latitude of seventy six degrees. He related how he found this horn
in the earth, being probably the horn of some Animal dead there; and that when
it was entire it was between five and six feet long, and seven inches in
circumference at the root, where it was thickest. The piece which I saw (for
the horn was broken, and sold by pieces in several places) was something more
then half a span long, and little less then five inches thick; the color of it
was white, inclining to yellow, like that of Ivory when it is old; it was
hollow and smooth within, but wreathed on the outside. The Captain saw not the
Animal, nor knew whether it were of the land or the sea; for according to the
place where he found it, it might be as well one as the other: but he believed,
for certain, that it was of a Unicorn; both because the experience of its being
good against poison argued so much, and for that the signs attributed by
Authors to the Unicorn's horn agreed also to this, as he conceived. But herein
I dissent from him; inasmuch as, if I remember aright, the horn of the Unicorn,
whom the Greeks called Monoceros, is by Pliny described black, and not white.
The Captain added that it was a report, that Unicorns are found in certain
Northern parts of America, not far from that Country of Greenland; and so not
unlikely but that there might be some also in Greenland, a neighboring
Country, and not yet known whether it be Continent or Island; and that they
might sometimes come thither from the contiguous lands of America, in case it
be no Island. This Country of Greenland is of late discovery; and the first
Christian that discovered it, or went thither, was this Captain Woodcock, in
the year abovementioned; and he gave it the name of Greenland upon this
account, because whereas the other Northern Countries thereabouts are destitute
of grass, (whence the white Bears and Wolves which inhabit them live upon dead
Whales and other like things) he found this green and full of Grass, although
it be always covered over with Snow; so that when the Animals there mind to
feed, they hollow the snow with their feet, and easily find the grass which is
kept continually fresh under the same. The English now yearly sail thither,
where they take abundance of Whales; and some so vast, that when they open the
mouth, the wideness is above three Geometrical paces, or fifteen foot over. Of
these Whales the English make Oil, drawing it only out of the fat of their
paunch; and they make such plenty, that out of one single Whale, they say, they
often get 19, 20, and 21, Tun of Oil. This Greenland, by what Captain Woodcock
saw, who discovered it, from the end of seventy six degrees, to seventy eight
and a half, (the cold not suffering him to go further) was un-inhabited; he not
having found any person there but only wild beasts of many sorts. The Company
of the Greenland Merchants of England had the horn which he found, because
Captains of ships are their stipendiaries, and, besides their salary, must make
no other profit of their Voyages; but what ever they gain or find, in case it
be known, and they conceal it not, all accrues to the Company that employes
them. When the Horn was entire, it was sent to Constantinople to be sold, where
two thousand pounds Sterling was offered for it: But the English Company hoping
to get a greater rate sold it not at Constantinople, but sent it into Muscovy,
where much about the same price was bidden for it; which being refused, it was
carried back into Turkey, and fell of its value; a much less sum being now
proffered then before. Hereupon the Company conceived, that it would sell more
easily in pieces, then entire; because few could be found who would purchase it
at so great a rate. Accordingly they broke it, and it was sold by pieces in
sundry places; yet for all this, the whole proceed amounted only to about
twelve hundred pounds Sterling. And of these pieces they gave one to the
Captain who found it, and this was it which he showed me.

On the 25. of January, sailing in the main Sea with the prow Macran, (which I
conjecture to be part either of the ancient Caramania, or else of Gedrosia, and
at this day having a Prince of its own, lies upon the Sea Coast between the
States of the Persian and those of the Moghol) we discerned behind us three or
four Ships which seemed to be Frigots or Galliots, but toward Evening we lost
sight of them. The same day, and the other before, began to be seen in the Sea
abundance of certain things, which I took to be Snakes, or at least fishes in
the form of Snakes, being exactly of the form of large Eeles, long and round,
and according to the motion of the water seemed crooked as they floated along
the Sea. Nevertheless demanding of intelligent persons what they were, I
understood that they were neither those Animals, nor yet living things, but
only a kind of excrement of the Sea in that shape, void of all motion, saving
what the agitated water gave it; although by reason of the motion of the ship
they seemed to move contrary to us, whilst we saw them left behind. And they
told me, that the nearer we came to India, we should see more of these things.
The next Evening, our Captain, who was a little more merry then ordinary,
(because, the Captain of the Dolphin dining with us that day, he had drank
pretty freely in conversation) discoursing with me, as he was wont, after
Supper, spoke very frankly to me concerning their affairs of Ormuz: In
conclusion he told me, that their Treaty with the Persians stood thus; That if
they would deliver to the English the Fortress of Ormuz, with half the revenues
of the Custom-house and the City, as they desired from the beginning; then the
English would people Ormuz, and restore the trade as formerly, keeping the same
continually open with Persia; and that for this purpose, and also for guarding
that Sea against the Portugals and other Enemies, they would keep four ships in
Ormuz. That when this were agreed upon, the English would transport a good
number of people from England, and whole Families with Wives and Children, to
dwell in Ormuz, as the Portugals did before: and then they would prosecute the
War against the Portugals at Machat, and every where else. But if these things
were not agreed to, they would make War no longer against the Portugals; nor
cared they for the Traffic of Persia upon other terms. Now should these
Treaties take effect, they would in no wise be advantageous for the Catholic
Religion; and were there no more to be feared, the Portugals would thereby be
for ever excluded from recovering Ormuz; yea, all the rest which they possess
in those parts would be in great danger. Imanculi Beig, who was General of the
Persians in the late Wars, and with whom the English treated in Combru
concerning this affair, Captain Woodcock said, he inclined to the bargain; but
it was not known what the Chan of Sciraz, and (which is more important) the
King would do. On one side, I know, the Persians insisted much upon having
Ormuz wholly to themselves; accounting it a small matter to have gained, with
so much War, and loss of men, only the half, or rather less then half, the
Fortress being deducted which the English demanded for themselves; so that the
Persians would have but the same interest there as the King of Ormuz had with
the Portugals, and no more. They conceive also, that they have done little, and
perhaps ill, should they make no greater acquisition, in having only changed
the Portugals in Ormuz for the English, and Christians for Christians; that
upon easier terms it might be hoped, that perhaps the Portugals, after the loss
of Ormuz, would agree with the Persians, now there was no more to lose, and
only give the Persians that which the King of Ormuz, a Mohammedan like
themselves, enjoyed. Moreover, to the Persian, no doubt, the friendship of the
Portugals would be more profitable, in regard of the many States which they
possess in India, from whence they may with more facility and certainty
maintain the accustomed Commerce with Persia. But, on the other side, to see
the Portugals so worsted, and the English more fortunate, at least, and
courageous, if not more strong, it is a clear case that Ormuz will never be
reinhabited, nor Trade set on foot again, unless some Nation of the Franks,
which have ships and strength at sea, reside there (things which the Persians
wholly want, there being neither Mariners nor Timber in Persia, about that Sea,
to build ships) and the loss resulting to Persia by the extinguishtinguishing
of this Traffic, the charge of maintaining the Fortress of Ormuz without any
profit, and the continual danger of losing it every hour, unless the English
guard the Sea with their ships and help to defend it; these and other like
considerations may not improbably induce the King of Persia (contented to have
demonstrated his power and valor, and chastis'd his Enemies, the Portugals,
according to his desire) to grant the English as much as they demand: For he
should not yield it to them upon force, but out of his liberality; and for his
own profit give them that freely, which to retain to himself, as things now
stand, would not only be of no advantage, but of loss. Peradventure he may
also imagine now, in the pride of his victory, that as with help of the English
he has driven the Portugals out of Ormuz; so 'twill be easy for him to expel
the English too, either by the help of others, or else by his own Forces alone,
should they not comply with him. However, because these Treaties with the
Persian are managed by the Company, of Merchants who also made the War, and not
by the King of England; and hitherto it is not known, whether their King approve
the fact or no, and will prosecute or let fall the enterprise; therefore, for a
total conclusion, besides the consent of the King of Persia, they also wait the
determination of the King of England; and the greatest hope I have of the
defeating of these projects so prejudicial to the Catholics, is this alone,
that the English King will not meddle in them, and, perhaps also, prohibit his
Subjects so to do; as a person whom we know to be a Friend to Peace, most
averse from all kind of War, especially with the King of Spain, while the Match
of his Son with the Daughter of Spain is in agitation.

In the mean time we began to find the Sea sufficiently rough, Mare rubrum, and
by us at this day the Southern Ocean) and having passed not only the Cape of
Giasck, but also that of Arabia, which the Portugals vulgarly call Rosalgate,
as it is also set down in the Maps; but properly ought to be called Ras el had,
which in the Arabian Tongue signifies Capo del fine, or the Cape of the
Confine, because it is the last of that Country, and is further then any other
extended into the Sea; like that of Galicia in our Europe, which for the same
reason we call Finis Terrae. On Saturday, the 28. of January, having taken the
meridional altitude of the Sun, according to daily custom, and made such
detraction of degrees as was necessary, we found our selves twenty three
degrees five minutes distant from the Equinoctial toward the North: whence by
consequence we had passed the Tropic of Cancer twenty six minutes and a half,
according to the opinion of the Moderns, who reckon the Sun's greatest
declination where the Tropicks are, twenty three degrees thirty one minutes and
a half distant from the Equinoctial. During the succeeding days we sailed with
a brisk but favorable wind, and with a Sea not tempestuous but something
rough. Every day about the hour of noon the Sun's altitude was infallibly
observed, not only by the Pilots, as the custom is in all ships, and the
Captain, (who was a good Seaman, and performed all the exercises of Art very
well) but (which pleased me most, and which I thought worthy of great praise
and imitation) there was no day, but at that hour twenty or thirty mariners,
masters, boys, young men, and of all sorts came upon the deck to make the same
observation; some with Astrolabes, others with Cross-staffs, and others with
several other instruments, particularly with one which they told me was lately
invented by one David, and from his name called David's- staff. This Instrument
consists of two Triangles united together, one longer then the other, both
having their base arched, and between them in the circle of their bases
containing an entire quadrant of ninty degrees. But whereas the shortest
Triangle, whose Angles are less acute, contains sixty degrees divided by tens
(according to custom) in the circle of its base, which are two thirds of a
quadrant; the other longer and of acuter Angles, which extends much backward,
and opens in a wider circle at the base, comprehends no more then thirty, which
make the remainder of the quadrant; so that the longer Triangle contains fewer
degrees by half then the shorter; and he that would have the degrees larger for
the better subdividing them into minutes, may make the circle or base of the
lesser Triangle take up seventy degrees, and so there will remain to the longer
no more then twenty for the complement of the quadrant. According to this
distribution, the degrees in the longer Triangle will come to be so large, as
to be capable of the smallest division of minutes; a thing very important.
Besides, it has two Fanes or Sights, in each Triangle one, which are to be
moved backward and forward; and with these, that is, with that of the long
Triangle, the level of the Horizon is taken; and with the other of the short
Triangle, that of the Sun; with this further convenience, that the Sights being
sufficiently large, are therefore very expedient for performing the operation
with speed, notwithstanding the dancing of the ship when the Sea is rough; in
which case, if the Sights be too small, it is hard to make any observation. With
this Instrument, and several others, many of the English performed their
operations every day; such as knew not how to do them well, were instructed;
and if any one erred in computation or otherwise, his error was showed him, and
the reason told him, that so he might be trained to work exactly: The opinion
of the skilful was heard, and taken notice of; and at length all the
observations being compared together, the Pilot and the Captain resolved, and
with mature counsel determined of all; by which means their voyages are very
well managed, and almost always succeed prosperously to them. In the Portugal
ships I hear the contrary comes to pass; because the Pilots being extremely
jealous of their affairs (an habitual humor of that Nation) will be alone to
make their observations, and for the most part perform them in secret, without
any Associate to see them: Should any other person in the ship offer to take
the altitude of the Sun, or look upon the Map or Compass, or do any thing that
relates to the well guiding of the Vessel, and knowing its course, they would
quarrel with him, and by no means suffer him to do it; being averse that any
other should meddle with what they say is their office and belongs to them
alone. From their being so little communicative, and very averse to teach
others, it happens that few amongst them understand any thing of the Art of
Navigation, there being none that will teach it experimentally; and they
understand little enough, because they have no conference about the practical
part, and learn much less of the Theory. This is the reason that their ships
frequently miscarry, to the incredible detriment both of particular persons and
of the Kingdom: And which is worse, it is said that not only many of them are
lost through the ignorance or negligence of those that guide them, but also
sometime by malice: For the Portugal Pilots have got a custom when they are to
make a Voyage, to take up great sums of money at Lisbon upon interest, the most
they can get to trade withal; and they take the same by way of Venture upon
the ships which they guide: Now when by the way any small disaster befalls
them, they not only avoid it not, as many times they might do, but, if they be
of evil intention, they cunningly run the ships aground either in these Coasts
of Africa or elsewhere; so that though oftentimes the people, and also the
arms, goods, especially of the greatest value be saved, yet so it is, that
sometimes many perish or suffer excessive loss; and this only to the end, that
the shipwreck may be the occasion of their remaining gainers of the moneys
taken up at interest upon the hazard aforesaid; which moneys they carry not
with them to trade withal, but leave all at home in Portugal: A practice
indeed very pernicious, and which ought to be most rigorously punished: but the
Portugals have now no King in their Country to mind their affairs, and the
government depends upon Madrid, where perhaps they that administer it, being
more intent upon their private interests then the public, these and infinite
other disorders pass unredress'd. The English, on the contrary, and other
Europaeans which sail upon the Ocean, are most diligent and strict observers of
all exact discipline, and of what concerns the good conduct of their ships;
and because they well understand all the most exquisite points of Navigation,
and are extremely curious, as well in the Practice as in the Theory, they spare
no pains, and neglect not the doing of any thing whereby they may render their
Navigations in all places more easy and secure: Insomuch that Captain
Woodcock, upon occasion of his having staid a year and odd months with his
ship in the Persian Gulf, showed me a Chart or Platform of the whole Straight
of Ormuz, made by himself during that time with the highest exactness; for he
had not only taken the most just measures and distances of all the adjacent
places, but also sounded all the Coast with a plummet, to find all the
convenient places where great ships, such as theirs, might ride and cast anchor
when occasion should require.

On the Third of February, conceiving by our reckoning that India, in the
Evening we let down the plummet into the Sea, as we used often to do, and found
it not above seventeen fathom; whereby 'twas concluded, that we were little
more then six leagues distant from land, although by reason of the darkness of
the Air none could be yet discerned; because that precise depth of water uses
to be found in those Seas at that distance from land. The Captain, who by well
observing the Sun and the Winds, had every day diligently noted the ships way
in the Map, as the custom is, hoped that we might be near the City of Daman,
which lies within the Gulf of Cambaia, on the right hand as you enter into it,
a good way inwards; but I, without having so much minded the Maps, said, that I
conceived we were much lower, and more without the Gulf toward Bassain;
because although we had always sailed and kept the ships prow directed to Daman
by the shortest line, yet for the two or three last days we had had the Wind
for that place contrary; which although it hindered us not from holding our
course, because we helped our selves with the rudder, and siding of the sails,
yet the violence of the Wind must needs have continually driven the ship
something lower then we intended. Two hours after midnight, the current of the
Gulf of Cambaia being contrary, against which, by reason of its impetuosness,
there is no sailing for a while, but the ship must stay either for the turning
of it, (which is known when it will happen, because it regularly changes
according to the hours and days of the Moon) or for a strong Wind wherewith to
master the current; for this reason, and also that the daylight might resolve
us in what place we were, we cast anchor, and struk sail, to wait for a more
fitting time. The Sea in this place began to be very rough, which happens by
reason of the strong current which it has. The next Morning we discerned land
afar off, and, according to my conjecture, it appeared that we were lower, that
is, more to the South of Daman about twelve leagues, in a place a little
distant from Bassain, which the English call Terra di San Giovanni, but in the
Sea-Chart is noted in the Portugal Tongue with the name of Ilhas das vaccas, or
the Islands of Cows. About one a clock in the Afternoon, the Tide being become
less contrary, we set sail again by degrees, approaching still nearer the shore
of India. But a little before Night the current turning against us, we were
constrained to cast anchor once more; nevertheless after midnight it became
favorable again, and we sailed onwards by degrees till day. This slow course
through the Gulf of Cambaia, with the plummet always in hand, and sounding
every hour, it was requisite for us to hold, because the place is dangerous, in
regard of the many shelves or quicksands which are in it, and especially
because the current, which turns every six hours, now setting one way, and anon
the other, causes great hindrance. By reason of which shelves, from the time of
our entrance into the Gulf, we did not guide the ship directly toward Surat,
which no doubt would have been the shortest way by a strait line, but keeping
lower toward Daman, fetched a large compass to the South, tacking about
afterward to the North when we were near land, only to avoid the many shelves
and shallows, through which our great ships could not pass. On Sunday, the the
fifth of February, being at anchor in the Morning, we discovered near the land,
which was not very far from us, ten or fifteen Frigots or Galliots sailing
Eastwards; which probably were either Portugal or Indian Merchants of some
Cafila, (as they call a Fleet or Consort of ships) coming from Cambaia to go to
Goa, or some other place thereabouts. The night following, we heard the report
of Artillery, which we conceived to come from the City of Daman, being the
place nearest us. Wednesday night after, the Wind blew somewhat hard against
us, in regard whereof, and the strength of the current which carried us in that
narrow channel amongst shelves and quicksands, we sailed for a good while very
circumspectly, and not without some danger. On Thursday we stood right against
the mouth of the River of Surat, which City is not situate upon the shore, but
some leagues within land: And because there is no station there for great
ships, we continued sailing Northwards to the place where is the Port most
frequented by the ships of Europe; which though the best of all that Coast, yet
the Vessels of that Country, not knowing so well how to steer, make not much
use of it, because the entrance is a little difficult. On Friday the tenth of
February, in the Afternoon, the favor of the current failing us, we cast
anchor in sight of the Port of Surat at a little distance; and our boat going a
shore, the President of the English Merchants (who uses to reside in Surat, and
is superintendent of all their Trade in East India, Persia, with the other
places depending on the same, is now one Mr. Thomas Rastel) perceiving our
ships near, and being at that time at the Seaside near the landing place, came
in our boat to the ships, together with one of their Ministers, (so they call
those who exercise the office of Priests) and two other Merchants; and after a
collation and a supper lodged with us all night. He spoke Italian very well,
and made me many civil offers and complements; showing himself in all things a
a person sufficiently accomplished, and of generous deportment, according as
his gentile and graceful aspect bespoke him. He informed me, that Sigr Alberto
di Scilling, a German Gentleman, known to me in Persia, having returned from
the Court of the Moghol, and other parts of India, which he had traveled to
see, was at that time in Surat, from whence he was gone to see the City of
Barocci hard by, and would return speedily: with which intelligence I was much
pleased, because Sig: Alberto was my great friend, and I extremely desired to
see him. On Saturday Morning we conversed together for some time, drinking a
little of hot wine boiled with Cloves, Cinnamon, and other spices, which the
English call burnt wine, and use to drink frequently in the Morning to comfort
the stomach, sipping it by little and little for fear of scalding, as they do
Cahue, (Coffee) by me elsewhere described. And they use it particularly in the
Winter to warm themselves; though in India it is not necessary for that end,
because albeit 'twas still Winter, according to our division of the seasons,
yet we had more heat there then cold. After this short refection, the President
returned a shore, and I remained in the ship, not expecting to disimbarque till
we were got into the Harbor, which was a little before night, and the anchors
were cast very near the land: but because 'twas now late, and the City of Surat
was a good distance off, none of us cared to land. Nor did I go out of the ship
on Sunday, both because it was a sacred day, and because our Captain was
pleased to give an Entertainment to us and the Captain of the Dolphin, our
companion in the voyage. Monday, the thirteenth of the same month, was the day
of my Ague, whereof I had had diverse fits by the way at sea; nevertheless,
after a collation I went on shore, together with the Captain of our ship, where
we continued under certain tents pitched for convenience of the Tonnellers, (so
the English term certain of their Mariners employed to fill the Casks with
water) in expectation of Coaches to carry us to Surat; there being in those
Countries subject to the Moghol, abundance of Coaches made after their fashion,
which I formerly described when I saw some of them at Casbin, which the Indian
Ambassador gave, amongst his presents, to the King of Persia; nor remains any
thing more to be said of them, but that they are at this day much like the
ancient Indian Chariots, described by Strabo, and are generally covered with
crimson silk, Lib. 15.
fringed with yellow round about the roof and the curtains: And that the Oxen,
which also as anciently draw the same, are fair, large, white, with two bunches
like those of some Camells, and run and gallop like Horses; they are likewise
covered with the same stuff, but beset with many tufts or tassels, and
abundance of bells at their necks; so that when they run or gallop through the
streets they are heard at a sufficient distance, and make a very brave show.
With these kind of Coaches in India, they not only go in Cities, but also for
the most part travel in the Country. To the Sea side came no Coach, and
therefore the Captain went on foot to a Town a mile off, called Sohali, where
he intended to spend the day in recreating himself amongst the Franks, who have
Houses there for repositing the goods which they continually send to the Sea
side to be shipped: but I could not accompany him, because of my Ague, and
therefore staid in a Tent, well covered with Clothes upon my bed, which I
caused to be laid upon the ground, waiting till the Captain sent me a Coach,
and Carts from the City for my goods. Whilst I was lying in this place, the
violence of my fit was scarce over, when I beheld a Cavalier appear on the
shore on Horseback, clothed and armed after the Indian manner with a Scemiter
and Target, who came toward our Tent, and stood still to speak with some
person, as if he inquired for something among us: Upon his nearer approach, and
my better considering him, I perceived 'twas my great friend Sig: Alberto di
Scilling, who being returned from Barocci, whither the President had told me he
was gone, and hearing news of us, was come from Surat to the Sea side to meet
me. Whereupon, raising my self suddenly from the bed, we received one the other
with such kindnesses as are usual between two good friends, who come from far,
and have not seen one another a long time; after which sitting down together,
we recounted our adventures one to the other at length, he much condoling my
misfortunes, and regretting to find me sufficiently different from what he had
left me in Persia. Toward Evening came two Coaches and a Carr, with which we
went together to the Town Sohali, where we found the two Captains of the ships
waiting for us with a Collation ready prepared, which immediately they gave us,
entertaining us in conversation till night; and certain Indian Women of the
Town, public dancers, gave us some pastime by dancing to the sound of Drums,
Bells, and other instruments of their fashion, which were sounded by their
Husbands with very great noise, and not without disturbance of my head. A
little within night the Captains took leave of us, and returned to their ships,
and we betook our selves to rest the remainder of the night in this Town,
because it was necessary to stay till day before we could enter into Surat, the
Gates of the City being shut in the night time, at least that of the Dogana, or
Custom-house, through which we were to pass. They told us the way to the City
was seven Cos, or Coru, (for it is all one) and every Cos or Coru is half a
Fersegna, or league of Persia; so that it answers to little less then two
English Miles.

The next Morning very early we put our selves on the way Surat, and being I
conceived my abode there would be but short, and that when I should depart
thence my way would be by Sea; therefore to avoid greater trouble, both of
conveyance and of the Dogana, or Custom-house, which is known to be rigorous in
Surat, I left all my Trunks and gross luggage in the ship, and carried with me
only such few things as were requisite for daily use. The highway from the
Sea side to the City, (as it is also generally in this province of Guzarat,
wherein we were) is all very even; the soil green all the year, and about the
Town Sohali grow abundance of Trees of Indian Nuts, Tamarinds, and other
fruits. Beyond the Town the Trees are not so plentiful, unless near certain
houses; but the fields are every where either ploughed, or full of living
creatures feeding in them. We arrived at the City in good time, in the entrance
of which there is a River called Tapi, or Tapti, which was to be passed over by
boat: On the other side of which River, something on the right hand as you go
into the City, which has no walls, stands a Castle lately built, but very ill
designed. Moreover, near the place where the boats land stands the Dogana, or
Custom-house, and it took us up some time to dispatch there, because they
observe very narrowly all goods that are brought in, (although they be but
Clothes for change) to see whether there be any thing coming to the Customs;
nor will they suffer strangers to enter till they be first known and have
license, as it is also practiced in Venice. In all things they proceed with so
great wariness and good order, that it being known that I conducted with me the
Sigra Mariuccia, although a girl very young, the Capo, or President of the
Dogana, required likewise to be informed of her quality, and gave order that
she should not be conducted with any violence or other disorder: otherwise, in
lawful things, there is no difficulty, either through diversity of Religion, or
upon any other account. We were no sooner come to the Dogana, but the news of
our arrival was, I think, by Sig: Alberto's means, carried to the House of the
Dutch, many of which have Wives there which they married in India, purposely to
go with them and people a new colony of theirs in Java Major, which they call
Batavia Nova; where very great privileges are granted to such of their
Countrymen as shall go to live there with Wives and Families: For which end,
many of them, for want of Europaean, have taken Indian, Armenian, and Syrian
Women, and of any other race that falls into their hands, so they be or can be
made Christians. Last year the Fleet of the Portugals which went to India was
encountered at Sea, and partly sunk, partly taken by the Hollanders; amongst
other booty, three Maidens were taken, of those poor but well descended Orphans
which are wont to be sent from Portugal every year at the King's charge, with a
dowry which the King gives them, to the end they may be married in India, in
order to further the peopling of the Portugal Colonies in those parts. These
three Virgins falling into the hands of the Hollanders, and being carried to
Surat, which is the principal seat of all their traffic, the most eminent
Merchants amongst them strove who should marry them, being all passably
handsome. Two of them were gone from Surat, whether to the abovesaid Colony, or
elsewhere, I know not. She that remained behind was called Donna Lucia, a young
Woman, fair enough, and Wife to one of the wealthiest and eminentest
Hollanders. The President of the Hollanders called by them the Commendator, who
resides in Surat, and has the general superintendency of their affairs in all
these parts of the East, is at this time Sig: Pietro Vandenbroecke, a Gentleman
of good breeding, and very courteous; he speaks no Italian, but Spanish very
well, as being born at Antwerp: He lives in a goodly Palace, which has many
distinct apartments, with several entrances into a Court, like so many
different houses, only included within the same wall, which is entered into by
one great Gate: Here the Commendator holds the best and largest apartment to
himself; in the rest lodge some of their gravest Merchants, which are of the
Council for management of affairs, in order to their better convenience and
union, besides many others of inferior condition, which live out of this great
enclosure, dispersed elsewhere in the City, and when occasion requires, they
all repair to the Palace of the Commendator. Amongst those whose habitation was
in the Palace of the Commendator, Donna Lucia's Husband has one of the
principal, where he lives with his family and and Wife, whom, according to the
custom of India, he maintains with much splendour and gallantry. Now upon their
knowledge of our arrival, Donna Lucia presently sent her coach to bring Sig:
Mariuccia to her house, for her better accommodation with her, till we had
settled out business, and provided lodgings. I was well pleased with the motion,
because till I had well accommodated my self with a place of residence, the
Sig: Mariuccia could not be better disposed of then with this Portugal
Gentlewoman, who is a Christian, and withal secretly a Catholic, with the
privity and connivance of her Husband, although in public she makes a virtue
of necessity, and in appearance conformes to the unhappy mode of that Nation,
into whose power the fortune of war and the disaster of her Countrymen has
brought her. Sig: Alberto Scilling, had, before we came from the Seaside,
importuned me in the name of the Commendator to lodge at his house; which
favor I much thanked him for, and handsomely declined, not thinking fit to
accept it, because I had received and waved the like invitation made to me
before by the English President, who thought me the more obliged to comply with
his offer, because I came in their Ships: But I excused my self both to the
Commendator and the President; partly, because I was desirous to be at liberty
by my self, and partly, for that it was requisite for Sig: Mariuccia to be
amongst Women, of which there was none in the English House. Being got quit of
the Custom-house, I went to see for a House; and because I was a new comer, and
and had no servant that knew the City, I referred my self to the direction of
Sig: Alberto, who took this care upon himself, and soon after told me he had
sent to get one prepared and put in good order; But by what I found afterward,
he had contrived with the Dutch Commendator only to delude me; for as he was
carrying me to the place where he pretended to have taken a House for me, he
made me pass by the Palace of the Hollanders, out of the Gate whereof a
Gentleman belonging to the Commendator stepped forth, and invited me in his name
to alight from my Horse, and at least stay and dine with him that day, the
rather because Sigra Mariuccia was there; telling me that it was not convenient
for me wait in the streets undecently and tediously, whilst a House was
preparing for me elsewhere, which could not be done so speedily.
Notwithstanding which reasons, I endeavored all that possibly I could to
decline this invitation, out of respect to the English President, and with
affectionate thanks desired the Gentleman to excuse me to the Sigr Commendator,
straining my self to correspond to his courtesy with the best Complements I
had: But this availed me little; for as I was hastening to break off the
discourse and be gone, the Commendator himself came forth into the street half
undressed as he was in the house, and taking hold of my Horse's bridle, told me
that he would by no means suffer me to go any where else now it was late
without certain quarters; at least, I must needs stay and dine with him that
day. Beholding him thus on foot before me, I alighted in civility from my
Horse, and with the best words I could, endeavored to get quit from the
courteous violence which he used to me: But there was no remedy; he held me
prisoner, as I may say, and I was fain to stay dinner with him as he desired.
Moreover, when night came, being I was resolved to lodge in another House of
mine own, under pretext that none could be got though sought for all day,
(wherein I know not whether Sigr Alberto deluded me too) I was forced to accept
of a large House from the Commendator which he had taken for himself, before
his late removal to that great Palace wherein he lived with the rest of his
Countrymen; which former House remaining empty at his charge and disposal, I
was by his great importunity obliged to accept: Wherefore I went to lodge there
this night, and for the convenience of Sigra Mariuccia, they sent thither one
of their Wives, a young Christian Woman of Armenian race, though born in India,
with some other women-servants. Now lest the English President should take this
ill, I purposed to prevent him with terms of courtesy; and the next Morning
after a short, and the last fit of my Tertian, I went to give him a visit, and
make my excuses to him by representing to him the reasons of what had passed
with the Hollanders, without any voluntary fault of mine: But upon my enquiry
at his House, and sending my message to him, I was answered that he was not at
home, although we perceived by certain signs that he was, but fairly declined
to receive my visit. Wherefore understanding afterward that he was much
incensed not only against me, but also against the Holland Commendator,
conceiving that he had unhandsomely stolen and usurped me from him, (as he
said) in regard of the interest he had in us, upon the account of our being
brought thither in their ships; and that he had a more particular displeasure
against Sigr Alberto, knowing him to have been the principal occasion of all, I
thought it expedient to appease him by all means, and upon what ever terms of
satisfaction: Nevertheless I did not judge it meet to venture another repulse
by going to visit him, but sent him a Letter in justification of my self, with
all the civil expressions I could devise. At first he was something backward to
receive it, doubting perchance that I had written angerly to him, in regard of
my preceding visit: yet at length, upon the request of some mediators whom I
made use of, he took it, read it, and remained very well satisfied with my
proceedings, in which there was nothing but gentleness. The Commendator
likewise, being one of an excellent nature, used all means he could to give the
President satisfaction, and to show him that what he had done with us was to no
ill end; he went purposely to visit him, carrying Sig: Alberto with him, to the
end he might justify himself too: both of them entreated, and both of them
took the blame upon themselves; in fine, so much was done and said that the
President was reconciled with all. And because it was insisted on my behalf
that he would admit a visit from me, he consented upon this condition, that
this first time should not be simply my visit but his invitation, which
accordingly he made to us to come all together that night to supper with him,
where he treated us very splendidly, and every thing ended in jollity and
friendship as at first. And all the while that I stayed at Surat, he obliged me
continually with sundry demonstrations of his affection; particularly, by often
sending his own Coach to me, with his Interpreter, who is an Armenian
Christian, and a Catholic, called Scander, Brother to F. Agostino Bagiezzi of
Alingia, a Dominican, my acquaintance in Persia: which Interpreter being
skilled in the Country, and conversing with me in the Persian Tongue, carried
me frequently abroad to see sundry things. As for the Hollanders, the caresses
and civilities which they have done, and still continue to me, are so numerous,
that I shall have them in remembrance as long as I live. But it is time now to
speak a little of this City, and the curiosities which here and elsewhere I
have lately seen.

The City of Surat is of a handsome greatness, and, for these India, which
every where abounds with people. The Inhabitants are partly Gentiles, and
partly Mahometans; and, if I am not deceived, the former are the greater
number: However, they live all mixed together and peaceably, because the Gran
Moghol, to whom Guzarat is now subject, (having sometimes had a distinct King)
although he be a Mohammedan (but not a pure one, as they report) makes no
difference in his Dominions between the one sort and the other: and both in his
Court and Armies, and even amongst men of the highest degree, they are of equal
account and consideration. Yet the Mahometans, as the Masters, especially those
of the Mogholian Race, which now is the Imperial in these parts, seems to have
some little more of authority. But forasmuch as I have formerly surveyed and
observed the manners of the Mahometans both in Turkey and Persia, I now turn my
mind to those of the Gentile-Idolaters in India, which are more new to me; and
with such observations in reference to both, as shall seem worthy of notice, I
shall not fail to acquaint you. In the first place, I shall give you the
relation of a Nuptial Pomp, which I saw one day pass by my house in this
manner; A long train of men with Drums and Trumpets before them marched in the
day time first, carrying covered baskets full of sundry things, which were
either a Present sent from the Bridegroom to the Bride, or rather the attiring
of the Bride, which uses to be publicly shown in the East. Then followed on
foot likewise some black Women-slaves, well clothed, being given to the Bride
either by the Father or the Husband. Lastly, to conclude the Pomp, came a
Palanchino, a kind of Litter, wherein persons of quality are wont to be carried
in India. It was not of the ordinary form, which hang downwards upon one pole
between the bearers before and behind; but it was to be carried on high upon
poles by four men, one at each corner, and it was covered all over with silk,
yet no body was within it; so that I know not what it served for, unless happily
it was intended to transport the Bride to her Husband; this different fashion
being for greater solemnity made use of, in such an occasion as Marriage. At
night the married couples passed by, and, according to their mode, went round
about the City with a numerous company. They were four, all very small
Children, two boys and two girls; (for in India most Marriages are made at that
age) and because they were not big enough to ride on Horseback alone,
therefore they were held up by so many well-grown men who sat upon the saddle.
Before them went many Torches and Musical instruments, with a great troop of
people on foot accompanying them. But the persons of quality followed in
Coaches, of which there was a good number, and going one by one they made a
very long train; whereby it was known that the married Children were of
considerable quality.

Of remarkable things without the City, there is on one side Surat is not
accounted among the greatest, but the least in India; where indeed they are
numerous, and the most magnificent and goodly structures, or rather, the only
structures in this Country which have any thing of magnificence or
handsomeness. They are made in diverse places by Princes, Governors of
Countries, or other wealthy persons, for the public benefit, and as works of
Charity; because the soil, suitable to the Climate, is sufficiently hot, and
abounds not in water: Rivers are not in all places; and other running waters
and springs there are scarce any, especially in the more inland parts remote
from the Sea; Rain likewise very seldom through the whole year, saving in that
season called by them Pausecal, which signifies, The time of rain, being about
three months, beginning about the middle of June; and during which time, the
Rain is continual and very great: whence some upon this account call these
three months Winter, although the weather be then hottest, as well in India as
in all the rest of the northern Hemisphere. And this, no doubt, proceeds from
the Providence of God; since, were it not for this great rain, India would be
in regard of the great heat and drought at this time, unhabitable; as likewise
the whole torrid Zone, in which most of India lies, was believed by the
Ancients, who had no knowledge of these mavelous rains, which render it not
only habitable, but also fertile and most delitious. Now, for that the Country
is in some parts so scarce of water, many Cities and inhabited places have no
other but the rainwater gathered in these great Cisterns; which are so
capacious, that one of them suffices a City for a whole year and more: And it
not only affords drink to men and animals, but also they wash clothes and
beasts in it when occasion requires, and make use of it to all purposes;
whereby it comes to pass that in some places the water they have is not over
clear; and the rude Indians care not for such delicacies, but it is enough for
them if they have what is barely needful. The Cistern, or Lake of Surat, has a
great Trench adjoined to it on one side, long, large, and deep, over which
certain small bridges are built; and it falls into another less Cistern a good
way off, which though but small here comparatively, would yet be a very large
one in our parts; it is built with many sides of stone like the former, as also
the banks of the Trench are. Between the great Lake and the less, upon the
Trench, stands a small Cupola, or arched Structure, made for the sepulture of
some principal Mahometans of the Country; and, as they say, of two brethren who
killed one the other, and of their Wives. It Is no long time since this Cistern
was made, according to the common report, by a private man of this City, but
sufficiently wealthy; whose Daughter, they say, or rather one descended from
him, is still living, and I know not by what sinister hap of fortune, very
poor, so that she has scarce bread to eat: Wherein I observed a great
ingratitude of the Citizens of Surat, in suffering his heir to want food, who
for their public benefit had been at so great expense. This Poole of Surat is
called Gopi Telau, that is, the Poole of Gopi, which was his name who made it
at his own charge. And although the King, who in those days ruled over
Guzarat, did what he could to have it called after his own name; yet that of
the Builder has been justly retained by the vulgar, and remains to this day.
It Is not improbable, Lib. 2. c. 9.
that this Gopi, who made this Piscina of Surat, is the same whom Giovanni di
Barros in his second Decade of Asia frequently mentions with the title of
Melik, and relates to have been in those times, a little above a hundred years
ago, a great friend to the Portugals; styling him often Lord of Barocci, and
once, in the last book, Lord of Surat; Lib. 4. c. 6. Lib. 6. c. 2. Lib. 10. c.
1.
but I rather believe that he was only Governor of either of these Cities
under the then Mohammedan Kings of Cambaia, (as he speaks) that is, of Guzarat;
of which Province Cambaia is a principal, and in a manner the Maritine City,
more known then the rest to the Portugals by trade; whence they have given its
name to the whole Kingdom, although not Cambaia, but Ahmedabad, more within
land, is properly the Royal Seat. It Is therefore possible that Melik Gopi,
mentioned by Barros, made this Cistern when he was Governor of Surat, it being
the work and expense of such a person. Nor do the vulgar mistake in saying that
he was a private man, since under the Mohammedan Princes, who never allow any
hereditary Lord in their Territories, the Governors of their Cities, and all
other Ministers, (whom they choose indifferently out of all sorts of people,
and not seldom out of the lowest plebeians, and are always removable at
pleasure) may with reason be called private persons, although advanced to
whatever high dignity.

On an other side of the City, but out of the circuit of the Persia near Ormuz,
called there Lul, but here Ber. The Gentiles of the Country hold it in great
veneration for its greatness and age, visiting and honoring it often with their
superstitious ceremonies, as dear and dedicated to a Goddess of theirs called
Parveti; whom they hold to be the Wife of Mahadeu, one of their greatest
Deities. On the trunk of this Tree a little above the ground, they have rudely
engraven a round circle, which really has not any feature of a humane
countenance, but according to their gross application represents that of their
Idol. This face they keep painted with a bright Flesh-colors, and this by a
sacred rite of Religion; as the Romans also died the face of Jupiter with
Vermillion, as Pliny testifies: Round about it are fastened Flowers, and
abundance of a plant whose leaves resemble a Heart, called here Pan, but in
other places of India, Betle. These leaves the Indians use to champ or chaw all
day long, either for health's sake, or for entertainment and delight, (as some
other Nations for the same reasons, or rather through evil custom, continually
take Tobacco:) And therewith they mix a little ashes of sea-shels, and some
small pieces of an Indian Nut sufficiently common, which here they call Foufel,
and in other places Areca; a very dry fruit, seeming within like perfect wood;
and being of an astringent nature they hold it good to strengthen the Teeth:
Which mixture, besides its comforting the stomach, has also a certain biting
taste wherewith they are delighted; and, as they chaw it, it strangely dies
their lips and mouths red, which also they account gallant; but I do not,
because it appears not to be natural: They swallow down only the juice after
long mastication, and spit out the rest: In Visits, it is the first thing
offered to the visitants; nor is there any society or pastime without it. He
that is curious to know more of it, may consult the Natural Historians who have
written of the exotic Simples of India, particularly Garcias ab Horto,
Christopher Acosta, Nicolaus Monardes, translated all together into Latin by
Carolus Clusius. I shall only add, that the fame I had heard in Persia of this
Indian Masticatory, (especially from an Italian Friar who had been in India,
and told me 'twas a thing not only of great nutriment, and very good for the
stomach, but moreover of an exquisite relish) made me desirous to try it. As
for its other qualities I can say nothing; but there is no great matter in the
taste, nor should I make much difference of chawing these leaves of Pan, or
those of our Cedars. But to return to my Relation; Those flowers and leaves
about the Idol's face carved in the Tree, are frequently changed, and fresh
constantly supplied; and those which at times are taken away, are given as a
sacred thing to the people who come from all parts to visit it. In the same
rude sculpture of a humane face, they have put certain eyes of Silver and Gold
with some jewels, which were given by some persons who foolishly believed
themselves cured of maladies of the eyes, by virtue of the Idol: Before whom,
upon a little hillock, stands continually one of their Gioghi, who among the
Indians are a sort of Hermits; and sometimes I have seen a Woman too standing
there. On high, there hangs a Bell, which those that come to make their foolish
devotions, first of all ring out, as if thereby to call the Idol to hear them;
then they fall to their adoration, which is commonly to extend both hands
downwards as much as possible, being joined together in a praying posture;
which lifting up again by little and little, they bring to their mouths as if
to kiss them; And lastly, extend them so joined together, as high as they can,
over their heads: Which gesticulation is used only to Idols and sacred things;
for to men, even to Kings themselves, they make the same Salutation (which in
the Persian-Tongue they call Teslim, and in their Indian, Sumbaia) only with
the right hand. This ceremony being performed, some make their prayers only
standing, others prostrate themselves with their whole body grovelling upon the
earth, and then rise again; others only touch the ground with the head and
forehead, and perform other like acts of Humility. After which, they go about
the Tree, some once, others oftener, and then sprinkle before the Idol either
Rice, or Oil, or Milk, or other such things which are their Offerings and
Sacrifices without blood; for to shed blood, even for Sacrifice, is not their
custom; but to kill any sort of Animal is counted a great sin. Such as are of
ability, give moreover some Alms to the person attending the service of the
Idol; from whom in requital they receive the flowers and leaves which are about
the Idol, and that with great devotion, kissing them, and in token of reverence
laying them upon their heads. A-side of this Tree, stands a very small Cupola,
or Chapel, with a very narrow window for entrance; I saw not what was within
it, but I was informed that Women who have no Children go in there sometimes,
and after they have been there become fruitful by the virtue of the place; but
as in false Religions every thing is imposture, so it is the opinion here, that
the attendants of the Idol play fine pranks in this particular, either
beguiling simple young Women, or satisfying the more crafty; whom indeed they
sometimes cause to become pregnant, but it is by natural means without miracle,
the Priests within the Chapel supplying the defects of their Husbands.
Moreover, on another side of this Tree, stands a square low Post, on which
certain figures of Idols are engraven: and at the foot thereof, there is a
little kind of trench or hole, where also they pour Milk and Oil, and make
diverse other Oblations. They are very solicitous in keeping the Tree with every
bough and leaf of it, not suffering it to be injured by animals or men, nor in
any wise violated and profaned. They tell a story of an Elephant who one day by
chance eat but one single leaf of this Tree, for which being punished by the
Idol, he died within three days: Which story I understood to be thus far true,
namely that the event was in this manner; but 'twas thought that for the
reputation of the place, the attendants of the Idol either poisoned or knocked
the Elephant on the head; in which Arts the Gioghi and Priests of the Gentiles
use to be very dextrous.

The Commendator of the Dutch, came one day to give me a Surat. The plot was
level, well contrived and divided with handsome straight Walks: on either side
whereof, were planted rows of sundry Trees of this Climate, namely, Ambe, or,
as others speak, Manghe, before described by me in my last Letters from Persia,
in the maritine parts whereof I saw some Trees of this kind; Foufel, whose
leaves are like those of the Palm Tree, but of a livelier and fairer green;
Narghil, like the Palm in the leaves also, and is that which we call Nux
Indica: and others, different from what are found in our parts. The plots
between the several walks was full of herbs and flowers, partly such as we
have, and partly not; amongst the rest they showed me a Flower, for bigness and
form not unlike our Gilly-flower, but of a whitish yellow, having a very sweet
and vigorous scent, and they call it Ciampa. In a convenient place there is a
square place, raised somewhat from the ground, and covered with large sheds, to
fit there in the shade, after the manner of the East: and here we entertained
our selves a while, and had a Collation; other things in the garden worthy of
remark I saw none. As for the plants and strange simples of India, and the
whole Torrid Zone, (in these things very different from ours) I shall say
briefly once for all, that they are such and so many, that to write fully of
them would require express volumes, and make as big as those of Dioscorides and
Pliny, all of things unknown to us. Nevertheless, the curiosity of the
Portugals, and other Europeans who trade in these parts, has hitherto been so
small that I know not any that have spoken and observed any thing in this kind,
besides the three Authors above mentioned. And they have written of very few
things, although of those few they have written faithfully and well; and I, who
have read them all with diligence, have made some not unprofitable Notes upon
them, which I keep in Manuscript by me, and you may see one day; when it shall
please God to bring us together. As for the Dutch Commendator, and the English
President also, who came frequently in this manner to carry me abroad; I must
not forbear to say, that both of them live in sufficient splendour, and after
the manner of the greatest persons of the Country. They go abroad with a great
train, sometimes also of their own men on Horseback; but especially with a
great number of Indian servants on foot, armed according to the mode, with
Sword, Buckler, Bows, and Arrows. For it is the custom of servants in India,
whether Mahometans or Gentiles, to go always armed not only upon a journey
but also in the City, and to serve in the house all day with the same weapons
by their sides, and never to lay them off, saving at night when they go to
sleep. Moreover, these Governors of the two Frank or Christian Nations which
reside in Surat, use to have carried before their Coach or Horse when they
ride, a very high Bannerol or Streamer by a man on foot; (which likewise is the
custom of all men of quality here) and likewise to have a sadled Horse lead by
hand before them: And not only they who are public persons, but any private
person whatever, of whatever Country or Religion, may in these parts live with
as much grandeur and equipage as he pleases: and such is the liberty here, that
every one may do, if he will and be able, as much as the King himself. Hence,
generally all live much after a genteel way; and they do it securely, as well
because the King does not persecute his subjects with false accusations, nor
deprive them of any thing when he sees them live splendidly, and with the
appearances of riches, (as is often done in other Mohammedan Countries) as
because the Indians are inclined to these vanities, and servants cost very
little, in regard of the multitude of people, and the small charge wherewith
the common sort are maintained; for a simple Servant, who is not an Officer,
commonly in the best houses, between wages, victuals, and clothing, stands not
in more then three Rupia a month, amounting to about the value of a Venetian
Zecchine, or ten shillings sterling. Of Slaves there is a numerous company, and
they live with nothing; their clothing is only white linen, which though
fine, is bought very cheap; and their diet for the most part is nothing but
Rice, (the ancient food of all the Indians, according to Strabo) of which they
have infinite plenty; Lib. 15.
and a little fish, which is found every where in abundance: So that every
body, even of mean fortune, keeps a great family, and is splendidly attended;
which is easy enough, considering the very small charge, as I said, and on the
other side the very considerable gains of traffic wherein most men are
employed, and the incomes of the Land, through its incredible fruitfulness, I
dare say, unmeasurable. Upon this occasion I must not forget, that amongst the
Indian Men, both Mahometans and Pagans, agreably to what Strabo testifies, they
did of old wear only white linen, Lib. 15.
more or less fine according to the quality of the persons, and the convenience
they have of spending: which linen is altogether of Bumbast or Cotton, (there
being no Flax in India) and for the most part very fine in comparison of those
of our Countries. The Garment which they put next to the skin, serves both for
Coat and Shirt from the girdle upwards, being adorned upon the breast, and
hanging down in many folds to the middle of the Leg. Under this Cassack from
the girdle downwards, they wear a pair of long Drawers of the same Cloth, which
cover not only their Thighs, but legs also to the Feet; and it is a piece of
gallantry to have it wrinkled in many folds upon the Legs. The naked Feet are
no otherwise confined but to a slipper, and that easy to be pulled off without
the help of the Hand; this mode being convenient, in regard of the heat of the
Country, and the frequent use of standing and walking upon Tapistry in their
Chambers. Lastly, the Head with all the hair, which the Gentiles (as of old
they did also, by the report of Strabo) keep long, contrary to the Mahometans
who shave it, is bound up in a small and very neat Turbant, Lib. 15.
of almost a quadrangular form, a little long, and flat on the top: They who go
most gallant, use to wear their Turbant only stripped with silk of several
colors upon the white, and sometimes with Gold; and likewise their girdles
wrought of Silk and Gold, instead of plain white. I was so taken with this
Indian dress, in regard of its cleanness and easiness, and for the goodly show
me-thought it had on hors-back, with the Scemiter girt on, and the buckler
hanging at a shoulder belt, besides a broad and short dagger of a very strange
shape tied with tassell'd strings to the girdle, that I caused one to be made
for my self, complete in every point, and to carry with me to show it in Italy.
The Mohammedan Women, especially of the Mogholians, and Soldiers of other
extraneous descents, who yet are here esteemed, go clad likewise all in white,
either plain, or wrought with Gold-flowers; of which work there are some very
goodly and fine pieces. Their upper Garment is short, more beseeming a Man then
a Woman, and much of the same shape with those of Men: Sometimes they wear a
Turbant too upon their heads, like Men, colored and wrought with Gold:
Sometimes they wear only fillets either white or red, or wrought with Gold and
Silver; for other colors they little use. Likewise their Clothes are
oftentimes red, of the same rich and fine linen; and their Drawers are also
either white or red, and oftentimes of sundry sorts of silk-stuff, stripped with
all sorts of colors. When they go along the City, if it be not in close
Coaches, but on foot or on horseback, they put on white veils, wherewith they
cover their faces, as it is the custom of all Mohammedan Women: Yet the Indian
Gentile Women commonly use no other color but red, or certain linen stamped
with works of sundry colors, (which they call Cit) but all upon red, or
wherein red is more conspicuous then the rest; whence their attire seems only
red at a distance. And for the most part they use no garment, but wear only a
close Wastecoat, the sleeves of which reach not beyond the middle of the Arm;
the rest whereof to the Hand is covered with bracelets of Gold, or Silver, or
Ivory, or such other things according to the ability of the persons. From the
waste downwards they wear a long Coat down to the Foot, as I have formerly writ
that the Women do in the Province of Moghostan in Persia, near Ormuz. When they
go abroad, they cover themselves with a Cloak of the ordinary shape like a
sheet, which is also used by the Mohammedan, and generally by all Women in the
East; yet it is of a red color, or else of Cit upon a red ground, that is, of
linen stamped with small works of sundry colors upon red. Those that have
them, adorn themselves with many gold-works, and jewels; especially their Ears
with pendants sufficiently enormous, wearing a circle of Gold or Silver at
their Ears, the diametre whereof is oftentimes above half a span; and it is made
of a plate two fingers broad, and engraven with sundry works, which is a very
disproportionate thing. The Pagan Women go with their faces uncovered, and are
freely seen by every one both at home and a broad: Nevertheless they are
modest, and honored much more then the Mahometans; and amongst them it is a
certain thing that there is not any public Courtisan; but amongst the
Mohammedan Women there are infinite, who go every day publicly to houses, and
where they please; to play on Music, sing, dance, and do what else belongs to
their profession. But of these things, enough for this time.

Persia with a great desire to go to Cambaia, in regard of what I had heard of
it; being told that in that City, which is one of the ancientest of India, the
Pagans are very numerous, and above measure observers of their Rites; so that I
might probably see more remarkable Curiosities there of those Idolaters then
elsewhere: Sig: Alberto Scilling had the same desire; so that upon my imparting
my mind to him, and his consenting thereunto, both of us desired the Dutch
Commendator, that when any of his Nation went to Cambaia, as they used to do
sometimes about their affairs, he would do us the favor to advertise us
thereof, that we might go thither in their company. The Commendator promised to
do us this kindness as soon as possible, nor was it long before we were
advertised of an opportunity: The Commendator's Steward, who takes care of the
like businesses, came to know of us how many Coaches we should need; Sig:
Alberto spoke to him for one for himself, and I for two, intending to carry
Siga Mariuccia with me, because I thought not fit to leave her in Surat without
me, although she had the company of good Women. I offered the Steward money for
the Coaches, but he refused then to take it, saying that it was not the
custom, and that at our return, accounts should be made up; for so they were
wont to deal with those Hackney-men, with whom the Nation has always long
account for such matters; and I, who understood things no otherwise then by
this information, suffered my self to be persuaded. Now, on Monday the 23d of
February, being the day for our setting forth, besides the three Coaches for
Sig: Alberto and me, and two others full of Dutchmen who were to go this
journey with us, all in very good order for habits and arms, and also with a
Trumpeter with a silver Trumpet to recreate the Travelers, the Commendator
himself came to my house with many others of his followers in their
City-Coaches, to conduct me forth and set me in the way. He accompanied me to a
certain place without the City, where, in the shadow of a small Chapel, we
conversed together for a good while, and were entertained with sundry fruits,
particularly with Grapes, which here in Surat we have often eat ripe, sweet,
and good in February, yet green of color, like the Vva-Lugliatica, or early
July-grape of Italy; and I believe there is plenty enough to make Wine. Whilst
we were in this place, a Post came to the Commendator from Agra and from the
Court, with news that Sciah Selim, King of the Country, had sent one of his
principal Chans, called Asaf Chan, to Agra, to remove the Royal Treasure thence
before the arrival of Sultan Chorrom, one of the same Kings Sons, lately
rebelled against his Father, and then reported to be upon his march with his
Army thither: And from Agra it was signified, that things were in great danger
of alterations through this war ra^s'd between the Father and the Son, with
great danger of the whole State of India. This notable Passage happening in my
time, will give me occasion to write many things worthy of memory, usually
attending the like Conjunctures; and being present in the country, peradventure
I shall hereafter be an eyewitness, or at least have certain intelligence of
sundry occurrences. In the mean time, to the end what I shall have occasion to
speak of these Revolutions may be better understood, I shall here give such
account of the State of the King and his people, as may suffice to give light
to all the rest.

Sciah Selim, (who, as I have formerly writ to you, is King of India, between
Indus and Ganges, and whose Countries are extended Northwards as far as the
cliffs of mount Taurus, or Imaus, where it divides India from Tartaria;) is
that great Monarch, whom in Europe you commonly call the Great Moghol: Which
Name is given him, because of his being derived from a Race of Tartars called
Moghols, who are of the City of Samarcand, and the Province of Giagata, which
is the ancient Sogdiana; as it is manifested by the Persian Geography, where to
this day that Territory is denoted and distinguished by the ancient name of
Soghol. Teimur Lenk, called by us Tamerlane, as Mir Aliseir reports, a famous
Author of those times, who writ his History in the Persian-Tongue handsomely
and with great exactness, descended by a collateral line from the near kindred
of Cnighiz Chan, the most puissant King of Chataio, known also in Europe to our
Histories, and by S. Antonino, who writes largely concerning him, Part 3. tir.
19. c. 8. and elsewhere.
named with a little corruption Cingis Cham. This Cnighiz warring with his
neighbors, and destroying many other Principalities, became at length Lord of
a Vast Dominion, and in a manner of all Tartaria, (which comprehends both the
one and the other Scythia) and at his death divided the same between his Sons.
To Giagata, the second Son, fell the Country of Samarcand, with all Sogdiana,
and sundry other adjacent Territories; and He, from his own Name called it
Giagataio, and all the Nations who remained under his Government Giagataians: A
very ancient custom of the Scythians to give the Princes Name to Counties and
their Subjects, as appears by Diodorus Siculus. Lib. 2.
In process of time, a Descendant of Giagata reigning still in these parts,
Teimur Lenk, though extracted from the noblest blood of the Kings, yet remote
from the Royal Stock by a long series, lived in Samarcand his own Country, a
man rather of valor then of great fortune. But it falling out that the King at
that time was slain for his evil deportments, by the Grandees of the Country;
in which conjuncture Teimur Lenk was elected and placed in the Sovereignty: He,
not contented with the sole Kingdom of Giagataio, being increased in strength
and power, made afterward those great Expeditions which the World beheld: Of
which nevertheless, little sincere fa^e arrives to us; there being no Europaean
who has written truly thereof, saving briefly in the Spanish-Tongue Ruy
Gonzales de Clavijo, who was sent thither Ambassador by his King Don Henry the
Third of Castile. In like manner Teimur at his death left that his great
acquired Empire, divided amongst many Sons and Nephews, who falling at variance
afterward, and their Successors continuing the same, ruined one another with
sundry wars; and God knows whether in Tartary there be left at this day any
Prince of that Race. A Cadet, or Younger Brother of them, who had no share
among the Tartars, came over the Mountains to seek his fortune in India, within
the Court of a Prince then reigning in one part of it: Where being once
introduced, by great alliances and services he raised a great House; and in
time, various Revolutions brought it to pass that one of his Successors came to
be possessed of that Kingdom, and to found the Royal Family now regnant; of
which, with very great augmentations of Dominion Sciah Selim, now living, is
the fourth King, as his own Seals testify, the impression whereof I keep by
me, wherein is engraven all his pedigree as far as Tamerlain, from whom Sciah
Selim reckons himself the eighth descendent. When Sciah Selim was born, he was
at first called Sceichu; because the King Ekbar his Father, having before had
no children, conceived he had obtained him by the prayers of a certain Sceich,
(so they call a Religious Man) to whom he bore great reverence. But after he
was come to ripe age, his Father changed his Name, as here they sometimes do,
into Sciah Selim, which, in the Arabian Dialect, the learned Language to all
Mahometans, signifies Re Pacific, a Peaceable, or Peacemaking King; conceiving
this Name to agree to his Nature: The Father dying, Sciah Selim being advanced
to the Kingdom, changed his Name once again (as it is the custom of many
Oriental Princes on such an occasion) with more Magnificent Titles, (for their
proper Names are nothing but Titles and Epithets) and would be called Nur
eddin, Muhammed, Gihon ghir, which partly in Arabic, partly in Persick,
signifies, The Light of the Law, Mahomet, Take the World; in regard of the
profession which he makes in public of the Mohammedan Sect; though really in
secret, by what they report, he little cares for Mahomet and his Law, or any
other Religion; accounting, according to the vain opinion of some in these
parts, that a man may be saved in every Law. Nevertheless, the Name Sciah
Selim, tenaciously inhering in the memory of people, remains still to him, and
in common discourse he is more frequently called by this then any other Name.
He had two Brothers: One, who took a part of the Province Dacan, was called by
his proper Name Pehari, and by surname Sciah Murad: The other, who died in the
City Berhampor, was named Daniel, and sirnam'd Sombol Sciah, but both dyed
without Heirs; whereupon their Dominion returned back to Sciah Selim. I know
not whether by one or more Women, this King had four Sons; the first, is called
Sultan Chosrou; the second, Sultan Peruiz; the third, Sultan Chorrom, now in
rebellion, (to whom, when he returned from a war which he had prosperously
managed in Dacan, his Father gave the title of Sciahi Gihon, which is
interpreted, King of the World;) and the fourth Sultan Scehriar, is yet a youth
of small age. It Is possible, others besides these have been born to him; but
being dead, either in Childhood or long ago, there is no mention made of them
at present. He has one Wife or Queen, whom he esteems and favors above all
other Women; and his whole Empire is governed at this day by her counsel. She
was born in India, but of Persian Race, that is, the Daughter of a Persian, who
coming, as many do into India, to the service of the Moghol, happened in time to
prove a very great man in this Court, and, (if I mistake not) Chan or Viceroy
of a Province. She was formerly Wife in India to an other Persian Captain who
served the Moghol too; but after her Husbands death, a fair opportunity being
offered, as it falls out many times to some handsome young Widows, I know not
how Sciah Selim had notice of her, and became in love with her. He would have
carried her into his Haram, or Gynaeceo, and kept her there like one of his
other Concubines, but the very cunning and ambitious Woman, counterfeited great
honesty to the King, and refused to go into his Palace; and, as I believe, also
to comply with his desires, saying, that she had been the Wife of an Honorable
Captain, and Daughter of an Honorable Father, and should never wrong her own
Honor, nor that of her Father and Husband: and that to go to the King's Haram,
and live like one of the other Female-slaves there, was as unsuitable to her
noble condition. Wherefore, if his Majesty had a fancy to her, he might take
her for his lawful Wife, whereby his Honor would be not only not injured, but
highly enlarged; and on this condition she was at his service. Sciah Selim, so
disdaign'd this haughty motion at first, that he had almost resolved in
despite to give her in Marriage to one of the Race which they call Halalchor,
as much as to say Eater-at-large, that is, to whom it is lawful to eat every
thing; and for this cause they are accounted the most despicable people in
India. However, the Woman persisting in her first resolution, intending rather
to dye then alter it; and Love returning to make impetuous assaults on the
King's Heart, with the help too, as some say, of Sorceries practiced by her
upon him, if there were any other charms (as I believe there were not) besides
the conditions of the Woman which became lovely to the King by sympathy; at
length he determined to receive her for his lawful Wife and Queen above all the
rest. And as such she commands and governs at this day in the King's Haram with
supreme authority; having cunningly removed out of the Haram, either by
Marriage or other handsome ways, all the other Women, who might give her any
jealousy; and having also in the Court made many alterations by deposing and
displacing almost all the old Captains and Officers, and by advancing to
dignities other new ones of her own creatures, and particularly those of her
blood and alliance. This Queen is called at this day Nurmahal, which signifies,
Light of the Palace; A Name, I believe, conferred on her by the King, when he
made her Queen. She has a Brother, who is still in great favor with the King,
and of great power, and is the Asaf Chan, whom I mentioned above, and one of
whose Daughters is one of the Wives of Sultan Chorrom now in rebellion; whence
some, not without ground, suspect that the present rebellion of Sultan Chorrom,
is with some participation of Asaf Chan, and of Numrahal her self; perhaps upon
design that the Kingdom may fall to him after the death of the Father. Sultan
Scehriar has also to Wife a Daughter of Nurmahal by her first Husband, for by
the King she has hitherto no Children: Wherein appears the prudence of this
Woman, who has so well established her self with alliances in the Royal
Family. But to return to the King's Children, Sultan Chosrou the eldest, who
was a Prince of much expectation, well beloved, and, as they say, a friend in
particular of the Christians, being at the government of I know not what
Country, rebelled against his Father, under pretext that the Kingdom by right
belonged unto him, because indeed King Ekbar his Grandfather, at his death
left it to him his Nephew being then born, and not to Selim the Father who was
his Son; being displeased with his Son Selim, for that one time in his life he
attempted to rebel against him. So easy are Insurrections amongst these
Infidels, and so little faith can Fathers have in Sons, and they in their own
Fathers: With this pretense Sultan Chosrou, once raised a great Army against
his Father; but coming to a battle he was routed and forced to surrender
himself freely to his Father: Who chiding him with words rather gentle then
otherwise, asked him to what end he made these tumults, knowing well that he
held and kept the whole Kingdom for him? Yet his deeds were sharper then his
words; for in the first place, he caused all the chief Captains who had
followed him in the war to be cruelly slain, and showing them so slain to
Chosrou, as in his return with Triumph he made pass along with himself in the
middle of a long row of them barbarously mangled in several manners, and to
behold some of his faithfullest Confidents sewed up in beasts skins, and be so
left miserably to rot; he bad him see in what sort of people he had confided.
Moreover, he suffered him no longer to live freely, but committed him to the
safe but Honorable custody of certain Grandees of his Court: And, which was
worse, he caused his eyes to be sewed up, as it is sometimes the custom here; to
the end to deprive him of sight without excaecating him, that so he might be
unfit to cause any more commotions; which sewing, if it continue long, they say
it wholly causes loss of Sight; but after a while, the Father caused this
Prince's eyes to be unrip'd again, so that he was not blinded but saw again,
and it was only a temporal penance. Yet he was not delivered from prison, in
which he lived so closely for two years, that only one person was suffered to
be with him in the prison to serve him. Nurmahal, who had apprehended that
Sultan Chosrou would succeed his Father in the Kingdom, and desired to
establish her self well, had frequently offered her Daughter to Sultan Chosrou
before she married her to Sultan Scehriar; but he, either for that he had
another Wife he loved sufficiently, and would not wrong her, or because he
scorned Nurmahal's Daughter, would never consent: Insomuch that whilst he was
in prison, and was told by reiterated messages that if he would marry
Nurmahal's Daughter, he should be immediately set free; nevertheless he would
not be brought to do it. His Wife, on the contrary, who loved him as well as he
loved her, obtained to be the person allotted to serve him in the prison, and
accordingly went thither and lived with him so long as he was there, never
ceasing to persuade him to marry Nurmahal's Daughter, that so he might be
delivered from those troubles; that for her part, she was content to live with
him as a slave, provided she saw him free and in a good condition; but he could
never be prevailed with. Thus he lived in prison with his faithful and dear
Wife, till, the malice of his persecutors and his Father's anger being wearied,
about two years after he was taken out of prison, but still held in a more
honorable custody. For these things, Sultan Chosrou remained always much in
the hatred of Nurmahal; who despairing to marry her Daughter to him, gave her
to Sultan Scehriar, as is abovesaid. Sultan Peruiz, the second Son, is now
Governor of the Kingdom of Bengala at the mouth of Ganges, and lives
peaceably, nor is any news heard of him. Sultan Chorrom, the third Son, had and
has under his Government that part of Dacan, which is subject to the Moghol,
but now is about to usurp the Kingdom of Guzarat, where I writ these things.
Sultan Scehriar has no Government yet, but it is said that he is lately made
Captain of eight thousand Horse: Now touching the rebellion and the beginning
of it; Sultan Chorrom, after the alliance that he made with Asaf Chan, so
wrought by the means of his Father in law, and Numerhal his Aunt, that the King
granted him the prisoner Sultan Chosrou into his own power, taking him out of
the hands of him that kept him, and committing him to him to keep, yet with
order to use him very well and have great care of him. And this, because
Chorrom refused to go to his government, and to the war whereunto they sent
him, unless he carried Sultan Chosrou with him, alleging that it was not
convenient that he should be absent from the Court whilst Sultan Chosrou his
competitor and back-friend stayed there; when he had got him into his hands, he
went to his government, and there kept and treated him honorably a year or two:
but afterward, out of the intention which he always had to remove him out of
his way to the succession of the Kingdom, he being absent (as some say) sent
him poisoned meats, appointing certain of his Captains who kept him, to make
him eat those meats by any means, either fair or foul. The Captains punctually
executed this order; but because Sultan Chosrou, becoming suspicious by their
importunity to have him eat, would by no means taste of those meats, saying
plainly, that they intended to poison him; the Captains, since there was no
other remedy, and perhaps having order, leaped all upon him, and he defended
himself bravely, till at length having felled him to the ground, they strangled
him with a Bow-string. Others say, that Sultan Chorrom himself slew him with
his own hand publicly. Be it as it will, Sultan Chosrou died of a violent
death; and Sultan Chorrom was either by himself, or by mediation of others the
Mutherer. Sciah Selim upon hearing this news, being highly displeased with
Sultan Chorrom, calls him to Court to give account of the fact. Sultan Chorrom
would not obey the Summons, but gathering together his Forces, which
nevertheless are not great to withstand his Father; and raising not only those
of his own jurisdiction, but also diverse other neighboring Cities not
comprehended therein, (as Cambaia and other such, from which he has removed
the Governors placed there by his Father, and appointed others at his own
devotion) with the assistance and counsel of some pety Gentile Princes, he
removed his Camp toward Agra, as is above intimated. In which commotions, and
the death of Sultan Chosrou, it is not only suspected that there is some
conspiracy of Asaf Chan and Nurmahal, his ancient enemies in secret, but also
that the King of Persia is of intelligence with them, who about the same time,
or a little before, on his side made the war of Candahar: in which the
coldness which the Moghol showed, proceeded, no doubt, either from his not
being well informed, because perhaps Nurmahal, and Asaf Chan, who were his
chief Counselors, suffering not true intelligence to be signified to him; or
perhaps, because the evil carriage of Sultan Chorrom has hitherto necessitated
him to stand in suspense. It Is true, the last Advertisements from Agra, that
the King, as I said, sent Asaf Chan to remove the treasure from thence, argue
that the King still entrusts him; and consequently, either that he is not in
fault, or that his fault is not yet known. The doubt will be best cleared by
Time. Sultan Chosrou left a little Son behind him, whose name is Sultan
Bulachi: But my journey now calls me elsewhere.

The Commendator having read the Letters from Agra, and Cambaia. Having
traveled two Cos, we ferri'd over the same River of Surat; and then proceeded
four other Cos, which in all were six, and at Night took up our lodging at a
Town called Periab: But we rested little, because soon after midnight we put
our selves upon the way again. Our journey from Surat to Cambaia, was always
with our faces toward the North. The next Morning early, we made a Collation
by the side of a Piscina, or Lake, which we found by the way of a long and
narrow form, of which kind there are many in these parts. Having traveled
sixteen Cos, which was from Surat in all two and twenty, before Evening we
arrived at the City of Barocci, or Behrug, as they call it in Persian; under
the walls whereof, on the South side runs a River called Nerbeda, which we
ferri'd over. The City is encompassed with a wall of moderate bigness, built
high upon a rising hill. For the circuit it is populous enough, as generally are
all the parts of India. It Is considerable for a very great Trade of fine Cotton
Cloth, or Callico, made more plentifully there then in other places, and
dispersed not only through Asia, but also into our Europe; so that the English
and Dutch (which two Nations have Houses of constant residence here) freight
five or six great ships therewith every year; and for the better imbarking it,
make it up in very great balls, each as big as Roman Coach; and every piece of
Cloth, little bigger then one of our Towels, being carried to Aleppo, will not
be sold for less then three or four Piastre, and in Italy at least for six
Crowns. Whence you may infer, what wealth comes out of this small City alone,
which for compass and buildings, is not greater then Siena in Tuscany, although
it is above three times as populous; and you may also consider to what sum the
Prince's Customs arise. A few Cos from the City, is a Mine of Calcidonies and
Agates, white and green; but these stones are carried less into Barocci then to
Cambaia, although it be further from the Mine, because there is a Seaport, and
a greater concourse of foreign Merchants; and in Cambaia they are wrought into
little Globes, either round or oval, to make Coronets or Neck-laces, and also
little Cups, and diverse other curious vessels for ornament. The Sea comes not
up to Barocci even at the highest tides, but is about as many miles distant as
it is from Surat. When we passed over the River, our Dutch Trumpeter sounding
his Instrument, gave notice of our coming to his Country men residing in
Barocci; and they, at the Summons, came immediately to the bank-side to meet us;
from whence we went with them to lodge in the Dutch House there. Late in the
Evening they carried us to see a Patache, or small Indian ship which they were
building, and was not yet finished, in which they treated us till night,
drinking of Tari, which is a liquor drawn from the Nut-trees of India, whitish
and a little troubled; of taste, somewhat sowrish and sweet too, not unpleasing
to the palate, almost like our Poignant or Brisk-wine; yet it inebriates as
Wine does, if drunk immoderately. The next day, which was Wednesday Feb. 22. we
departed from Barocci late in the Forenoon. Six Cos off, we made a Collation
near a water without lighting out of the Coach, having brought provision with
us for this purpose from Barocci. Afterward upon the way we met the Wife and
Family of the Governor of Cambaia, removed from that charge by the Rebel
Sultan Chorrom, who had placed another there at his devotion; and this, being
driven from thence, returned to Surat, where his house and usual habitation
was. His Wife was carried upon an Elephant, in a covered and very convenient
litter. Three other Elephants followed unladen, saving with the men upon their
necks who guided them; then abundance of Coaches, partly covered and full of
women, partly uncovered with men in them; then a great number of Soldiers,
Horse and Foot; and, in brief, a great train suitable to the quality of the
person and the custom of India, which is to have a very numerous attendance
whoever it be. After this we foarded a small River, which I believe, was of
salt water, which, they say, is called Dilavel; and before night having
traveled eighteen Cos, we staid to lodge in a great Town called Giambuser. On
Thursday, two hours before day, we arose to go along with a great Cafila, or
Caravan, which was there united; nevertheless we departed not so soon, but were
fain to wait in the Coach till almost day; because the City was locked up, and
none was suffered to go forth without paying a Toll, as likewise was paid in
many other places the same day, though of small value. The Cafila was so great,
and the Coaches so many, that in certain narrow places we were fain to stay a
good while before we could go forwards; just as it happens in the streets of
Naples and Rome at solemn pomps. Having traveled about five Cos, an hour after
Sunrise, we came to an arm of the Sea, or, to speak better, to the inmost part
of the Gulf of Cambaia, directly where the River Mehi falls into the Sea: In
which place, the flux and reflux of the Sea is more impetuous and violent, and
with a more rapid current, then perhaps in any other part of the world, at
least any whereof I have knowledge. But before I proceed further, it is needful
here to correct an enormous error of many of our Geographers, even Moderns,
which has likewise given occasion of mistake to sundry Historians. In almost
all the Mapps which hitherto I have seen, the River Indus is always described
falling into the Sea at the inmost recess of the Gulf of Cambaia; which is a
grievous error, and as wide from truth as the whole Country of Guzarat is
broad, (and it is no narrow one): for Indus, which is discharged into the Sea
with two very large mouths, sufficiently distant, runs not on the East of
Guzarat, as it should do if it entered into the Sea at the Gulf of Cambaia;
but rather on the West, and so far from the Gulf of Cambaia, that all Guzarat,
and perhaps some other Countries lie between. Wherefore the River which
disembogues in the inmost part of this Gulf, is not Indus, but this Mehi which
I speak of, a River of handsome but ordinary greatness, and has not the least
correspondence with Indus. Now, being come to the side of it, we were fain to
foard over this Water, and not without danger: For there is a plain of about
five Cos, which is all over-flow'd at high Tide; and when the water is lowest,
in three or four places there are waters sufficiently broad and deep to be
foarded; and should the Sea happen to come in whilst a man is in that passage,
he would infallibly be drowned. And besides, even in those places which are
always foardable, when the Water is a little higher, or the current more
furious then ordinary (for it is not always equal, but more or less, according
to the times of the Moon) it often carries away people, and sometimes with such
violence, that an Elephant cannot bear up against it, but is swept away by the
Water. Therefore they wait certain fit hours to pass this foard, namely, when
the Sea is at the lowest Ebb; which, if I mistake not, in all other places of
the World is wont to be when the Moon is either rising or setting in the
Horizon; as, on the contrary, when the Moon is in the middle of Heaven, the
Tide uses to be at the highest. But in the Gulf of Cambaia, I know not upon
what reason, perhaps because it is much within the Land, and far from the great
mass of the Ocean, it happens at another different hour, yet well known to the
Country People. The more cautious, wait also the most fitting days in the
month; because at the New Moon and Full Moon the Waters are always greater and
higher; and, without comparison, highest and most impetuous of all, about the
Aequinoxes and Solstices: In the quarters of the Moon the Tides are moderate,
and in other intermediate days, lower then the rest. So that we being come to
this place a few days before the New Moon, were come in a good time, and
likewise in a seasonable hour, the Cafila, or Caravan, having set forth from
the City in such a moment as was exactly convenient for ordering matters right;
for the owners of the Coaches, and the others employed in this journey, are
well instructed of every thing, and know what they have to do. So being united
in a great troop, the better to break the stream, we passed over all that space
of five Cos, which was moist yet firm ground; saving that in four places where
we foarded the running-water of the River, which nevertheless is salt there,
the great strength of the Sea overcoming that of the River. Of the four streams
which we waded, the first was inconsiderable, the other three came higher then
the belly of the Oxen which drew the Coaches, into which nevertheless the Water
entered not, because their floar, and especially the wheels are very high; and
you sit, according to the manner of the East, as upon plain ground, without
hanging the Legs downwards, but keeping them bowed under you. For greater
security, they hired sundry men on foot, who held the Coaches on either side
steadfast with their hands, that so in regard of their lightness, they might not
float and be carried away; and also to carry our bundles high on their heads,
that so the same might not be wetted if the Water should come into the body of
the Coaches. The men who go on foot in this passage, either strip themselves
naked, covering only their privities with a little cloth, or pulling up their
coat, which, as I said, is of plain white linen, and serves both for garment
and shirt; and also tucking up their breeches made of the same, they care not
for wetting themselves. It Is certainly an odd thing to behold in this passage,
which is very much frequented, abundance of people go every day in this manner,
some in Coaches and Charriots, others on Horseback and a foot, men and also
women naked, without being shie who sees them; a spectacle, no doubt,
sufficiently extravagant. This wet passage being over, there remain two other
Cos, but of firm and higher ground, (which is not overflowed, although it be
plain and the Seashore) to arrive at the City of Cambaia, whither we came
before dinnertime, having traveled that day, in all, twelve Cos. And here
likewise we went to lodge in the House which belongs to the Dutch Merchants, by
whom we were received with great kindness, and treated continually with
exquisite cheer; for such was the order of the Commendator concerning us in all
places.

Cambaia is a City indifferently large, though most of its greatness India for
provision of Water, which falls in such plenty during those three months of
the great Summer rains. In our Countries they would be ordinary Houses, but in
these parts they are counted good, and perhaps, the best of the whole Province;
and they are made shady and cool, as the heat of the place requires. The City
has no formed Port, because it stands in a low Plain, but it is called a Port,
by reason of the great concourse of Vessels thither from several parts; which
nevertheless for the most part are Frigots, Galeots, and other small ones of
that make, which go either by oar or sail; because great ones cannot come near
the Land by a great way. The people of Cambaia are most part Gentiles; and
here, more then elsewhere, their vain superstitions are observed with rigor.
Wherefore we, who came particularly to see these things, the same day of our
arrival, after we had dined and rested a while, caused our selves to be
conducted to see a famous Hospital of Birds of all sorts, which, for being
sick, lame, deprived of their mates, or otherwise needing food and cure, are
kept and tended there with diligence; as also the men who take care of them,
are maintained by the public alms; the Indian Gentiles, (who, with Pythagoras
and the ancient Egyptians, (the first Authors of this opinion, Lib. 2.
according to Herodotus) believe the Transmigration of Souls, not only from
Man to Man, but also from Man to brute beast) conceiving it no less a work of
Charity to do good to beasts then to Men. The House of this Hospital is small,
a little room sufficing for many Birds: Yet I saw it full of Birds of all sorts
which need tendance, as Cocks, Hens, Pigeons, Peacocks, Ducks, and small Birds,
which during their being lame, or sick, or mateless, are kept here; but being
recovered and in good plight, if they be wild, they are let go at liberty; if
domestic, they are given to some pious person who keeps them in his House. The
most curious thing I saw in this place, were certain little Mice, who being
found Orphans without Sire or Dam to tend them, were put into this Hospital;
and a venerable Old Man with a white Beard keeping them in a box amongst
Cotton, very diligently tended them with his spectacles on his nose, giving
them milk to eat with a Bird's feather, because they were so little that as yet
they could eat nothing else; and, as he told us, he intended when they were
grown up, to let them go free whither they pleased. From this place we went out
of the City to the Seaside, to see a Garden sometimes belonging to the Kings
of Guzarat. It Is small, adorned with the same Trees as that which I saw in
Surat, with some also of ours, as the Figtrees and Coleworts of Europe, which
in India are accounted rare things. There is a running-water which at the
entrance falls from a great Kiosck, or covered place to keep cool, standing
upon a great Piscina, or Lake, contiguous to the Garden on the outside; and
serving like that of Surat, to the common uses of the City. Besides which, in
this Garden there is nothing worth notice: Going from hence we went to see upon
the same Lake a Meschita, or Temple of the Mahometans, whereunto there is
continually a great concourse of people with ridiculous and foolish devotions,
not only Mahometans, but likewise Gentiles. In the street before the Gate,
many persons sitting on the ground asked Alms, to whom the passers-by cast some
Rice; others, certain other Corn, but no Money: Within the Meschita, in a
narrow dark place by a walls side, is a kind of little Pyramid of Marble, and
this they call Pir, that is, Old, which they say is equivalent to Holy: I
imagine it the Sepulcher of some one of their Sect accounted such. The people
enter in with great crowds, especially Women, who use to be more forward in
these things then others: All who go in, strew Flowers or Rice there; to which
end stand diverse near the Gate that sell Flowers to whosoever pleases for such
Offerings: But this is rather a Custom of the Gentiles then Mahometans; and the
Gentiles being more numerous and ancient in Cambaia, it is no wonder that some
Rite of theirs has adhered to the Mahometans. A little distant from this
place, we saw another Sepuchre adored too of some Mohammedan (for the Gentiles,
who burn their dead, have no Sepulchers) built with a great roof four square,
supported by diverse pillars, and under it a place open on all sides like a
Porch; this also many persons came to kiss and venerate. Beyond the
abovementioned Garden upon the Seaside, we saw another Sepulcher of a Mohammedan
of quality, having a high round Cupola, like a Tower, which is ascended by a
little ladder, and there you have a most goodly prospect upon the Sea and Land,
to a great distance. These things being seen, we returned home the same way we
came: The next Morning, going about the City, we saw another Hospital of Goats,
Kids, Sheep, and Weathers, either sick or lame, and there were also some Cocks,
Peacocks, and other Animals needing the same help, and kept altogether quietly
enough in a great Court; nor wanted there Men and Women lodged in little rooms
of the same Hospital, who had care of them. In another place, far from hence we
saw another Hospital of Cows and Calves, some whereof had broken Legs, others
more infirm, very old, or lean, and therefore were kept here to be cured. Among
the beasts there was also a Mohammedan Thief, who having been taken in Theft had
both his Hands cut off: But the compassionate Gentiles, that he might not
perish miserably, now he was no longer able to get his living, took him into
this place, and kept him among the poor beasts, not suffering him to want any
thing. Moreover, without one of the Gates of the City, we saw another great
troop of Cows, Calves, and Goats, which being cured, and brought into better
plight, or gathered together from being dispersed and without Masters, or being
redeemed with Money from the Mahometans who would have killed them to eat,
(namely, the Goats and other Animals, but not the Cows and Calves) were sent
into the field to feed by Neat-herds, purposely maintained at the public
charge; and thus they are kept till being reduced to perfect health, it is found
fitting to give them to some Citizens, or others who may charitably keep them.
I excepted Cows and Calves from the Animals redeemed from slaughter; because in
Cambaia, Cows, Calves, and Oxen, are not killed by any: And there is a great
prohibition against it, by the instance of the Gentiles, who upon this account
pay a great sum of Money to the Prince; and should any, either Mohammedan or
other be found to kill them, he would be punished severely, even with death. At
Night we had Music at home, made by some Mohammedan Women Singers and Dancers,
(for among the Gentiles none practice such Arts) who with their Indian
Instruments, which a^^ Drums, Bells tied to the Arms, and the like, all of
great noise, gave us divertisement, playing, dancing, and singing whilst we
were at Supper; but their Music being too full of noise, was to me rather
distasteful then pleasing. The next Morning we saw in the City a Temple of
Idols, one of the best which the Gentiles have in Cambaia. The form of it is
perfect square, with walls round about, supporting a flat roof, which is also
upheld in the middle by four pillars disposed in a square too; within which,
upon the little space remaining, is advanced somewhat higher then the roof, and
yet of a square form, a kind of Cupoletta, or little Chapel. In the principal
part of this Temple stand in three great Nieches so many great Idols, made of
white Marble, and naked, (as the Indians paint all their Idols:) They are in a
sitting posture, yet after the manner of the East, as they use to sit upon the
ground with the Legs gathered under; but they sit in a place somewhat higher
then the floare, as it were upon a large Pedestal. These Nieches are enclosed
with doors made with lattices, that so the Idols may be seen without opening
them; but they are opened upon occasion for any that are minded to go in: They
were so for us, but we entered not, because the Nieches are so small that we saw
every thing well enough from the doors. The principal Idol in this Temple, is
that which stands in the middle Nieche, called Mahavir, from whom the Temple is
denominated: Who this Mahavir is, and whether he be all one with Mahadeu, as I
have some suspicion, I do not yet know; because the Indians who talked with us,
either in the Portugal or Persian-Tongue, being all Factors or Merchants, and
consequently unlearned, could not give us any account of these things; besides,
they speak those Languages ill, and are not intelligible saving in buying and
selling: With other learned Gentiles, to whom alone their Indian Speech is
familiar, we could not discourse for want of Language; wherefore of all these
things, and all the particularities of their Religion, I reserve my self to be
further informed at Goa, if it shall please God; where I shall have better
convenience and more time, and meet with some learned Brachman, perhaps turned
Christian, and able to give me a more certain Relation hereof either in
Portuguez or Latin; and if he be a Christian, he will, no doubt, give it me
more truly then the Gentiles, who I believe, talk with us concerning their own
matters neither willingly nor sincerely. Wherefore referring my self to the
better intelligence which I hope to have there, I shall here only relate what I
saw with mine own eyes, and something more which I attained to understand,
without suspicion of error. Before the Idol without the Nieche hung a Bell, (as
it is the custom in all their Temples) which, as I said before, all those who
come to make their prayers ring at their first entrance. Within this and the
other Nieches on the sides, were one or two lighted Candles. In the other sides
of the Temple, something higher then the pavement, were in the wall certain
little Nieches, in each of which stood an Idolet, or little Idol, some in the
shape of Men, others of Women. One there was which had many Arms on a side, and
many Faces; and this they said was called Brachma, one of their chief false
Deities. Another had the head of an Elephant, and was called Ganescio: They
say, he is the Son of Mahadeu, who finding him one day with Parveti his Wife,
but his own Mother, and not knowing who he was, killed him out of jealousy,
cutting off his Head; but afterward understanding that he was his own Son, he
repented him of his error, and resolved to bring him to life again: Wherefore
meeting with an Elephant, (as he had purposed to do with what he first happened
upon) he cut off his Head and placed it on his dead Son's Shoulders: Whereupon
Ganescio revived, and thenceforward lived immortal with an Elephants Head. But
behold another delusion. One there is with the Head, I know not, whether of a
Tiger or Lion, probably it is that Narosinha, which I formerly writ that I saw
in Combru, in the maritine parts of Persia. Some of these Idolets sat upon
sundry Animals, as Tigers and the like, and even upon Rats; of which things the
foolish and ignorant Indians relate ridiculous stories: But I doubt not, that
under the veil of these Fables, their ancient Sages (most parsimonious of the
Sciences, as all Barbarians ever were) have hid from the vulgar many secrets,
either of Natural or Moral Philosophy, and perhaps also of History: And I hold
for certain, that all these so monstrous figures have secretly some more
rational significations, though expressed in this uncouth manner: As we know in
ancient time among the Gentiles of our Countries there was, in the figures of
quadrifronted Janus; of Jupiter Ammon, with the Head of a Ram; of Anubis, with
the Head of a Dog, and many other extravagances not only of the Grecians and
Egyptians, but also of the Romans. The Sieling, Pillars, and Walls of this
Temple were adorned with Painting, especially red, which how dear it is to the
Indians, I formerly intimated. The doors of their Houses, namely, the Posts,
Architraves, and Bars that fasten it, are all colored so; adding some mixture
of white limes to the red; for of white too they are so enamored, that all Men
are generally clothed with it. A custom peradventure derived to them from
Egypt where it was in use, Lib. 2.
as Herodotus writes; and whence perhaps Pythagoras himself learnt it, who went
clothed in white, as we find noted by Aelian, and others. Var. Hist. l. 12. c.
32.
And I observe, that in many particulars the manners of the present Indians
much resemble those of the ancient Aegptians; but since the Egyptians who
descended from Cham the Son of Noah, were a very ancient people, I rather
believe that the Indians learnt from the Egyptians, then the Egyptians from
the Indians; and it is known, that from Egypt there was always Navigation and
Commerce into India by the Southern Ocean. The red color, amongst these
Indians is, besides by the Women, worn also by the Sami, who are a kind of
religious persons; with red, the Gioghi who live like Hermits and go about
begging, sometimes paint their bodies in many parts; and also with red blended
with yellow, that is, with some parcel of Sanders or Saffron, almost all the
Indian Gentiles dye their foreheads, and sometimes their garments;
accordingly, as Strabo reports from the testimony of Onesicritus, Lib. 15.
they did likewise in the time of Alexander the Great. Lastly, they wear red
Turbants upon their Heads, and their Girdles are oftener wrought with red then
any other color. After having seen the Temple of Mahavir, we went to visit an
old Brachman, accounted very learned amongst them, with whom we discoursed as
well as we could by an interpreter, because he understood no other Language but
the Indian. We found him amongst many Scholars, to whom he was giving a
Lecture: He showed us his Books written in an antique Character, which is the
learned amongst them, not common to the vulgar, but known only to the learned,
and used by the Brachmans; who, in distinction from other vulgar Characters,
used variously in sundry Provinces of India, call it Nagheri. I have, and shall
carry with me two small Books of it, which I sometimes bought in Lar. This
Brachman is called Beca Azarg; of which words, Beca is his proper Name, and
Azarg his Title of Honor. Amongst other Books, he showed us that of their
sect; in which, though it was bound long ways, as it is the fashion of their
Books, yet the lines were written cross the paper, after the manner of some of
our Musick-Books: He affirmed to us for certain, that it was a work of
Pythagoras, which well agrees with what, Philostratus says, De Vita Apoll.
lib. 3. cap. 6.
Jarchas told Apollonius, namely, that they Indians believed the same
concerning the Soul which Pythagoras had taught them, and they the Egyptians;
which is quite contrary to what, I said before, was my opinion, which of these
two Nations first taught the other. But Diogenes Laertius, who writes
Pythagoras's Life copiously enough, Lib. 8.
making mention of his going into Egypt, and how he conversed likewise with
the Chaldaeans and Magi, yet speaks not a word that ever he went into India, or
had communication with the Brachmans. Wherefore, if Pythagoras taught any thing
to the Indians, as Jarchas said, he did it not in person but by his books,
which possibly were carried into India. Moreover Beca Azarg added, that their
Brachma, esteemed one of the chief amongst their false Gods, (from whom they
are denominated Brachmans) is all one with Pythagoras: A curious notion indeed,
and which, perhaps, would be news to hear in Europe, that Pythagoras is
foolishly adored in India for a God. But this, with Beca Azarg's good leave, I
do not believe: Either he did not expressly speak thus, and by the fault of the
Interpreters we did not understand him aright; or, if he did affirm it, perhaps
he came to be mistaken by having heard Pythagoras named by some Europaeans for
the Author of that foolish opinion of the Transmigration of Souls. Be it as it
will, I cannot believe that Pythagoras and Brachma are all one; because though
Pythagoras be very ancient, for he flourished in the Consulship of Brutus, who
expelled the Kings out of Rome; yet I hold the Rites and opinions of the
Brachmans much more ancient. For when Diodorus relates the contest of the two
Wives of Ceteus, an Indian Captain in the Army of Eumenes, Lib. 19.
each of whom would be burnt with her Husband slain in battle, speaking of the
Laws, Customs, and Rites of the Indians, he calls them, even at that time,
Ancient things. And though Pythagoras and the Consulship of Brutus may precede
not only Eumenes, who was one of Alexander the Great's successors, but
Alexander himself by about two ages, according to the Chronology of Bellarmine,
which to me seems good enough; yet the space of two hundred years or somewhat
more, is not such as that those things may be called Ancient, which had their
beginning within so short a term; as it should be infallibly, if Pythagoras,
whom they take to be their Brachma, were the first Author to the Indians of
their Learning, and consequently of their Rites, Customs, and Laws. But since I
have already made frequent mention of the Brachmans, and perhaps shall have
occasion to do the same hereafter; to the end it may be understood what they
are, I shall here subjoyn so much as I have hitherto attained to know
concerning them, and all the other Indians.

The whole Gentile-people of India is divided into many pedigree, as the Tribes
of the Jews sometimes were; yet they inhabit the Country promiscuously mingled
together, in every City and Land several Races one with another. It Is reckoned
that they are in all eighty four; some say, more, making a more exact and
subtle division. Every of these has a particular name, and also a special
office and employment in the Commonwealth, from which none of the descendents
of that Race ever swerve; they never rise nor fall, nor change condition:
Whence some are Husbandmen, others, Mechanic, as Taylers, Shoemakers, and the
like; others, Factors or Merchants, such as they whom we call Banians, but they
in their Language more correctly Vania: Others, Soldiers, as the Ragia-puti;
And thus every one attends, and is employed in the proper Trade of his Family,
without any mutation ever happening amongst them, or Alliance of one Race
contracted with another. Diodorus and Strabo, (almost with the same words, as
if the one had transcribed the other) affirm, Lib. 2. Lib. 15*
that anciently the Races of the Indians were seven, each addicted to their
proper profession; and for the first of all, they place that of the
Philosophers, who, no doubt, are the Brachmans. Into seven kinds of men with
their particular, and by Generation perpetuated Offices, Herodotus in like
manner writes, (and Diodorus confirms it, Lib. 2. Lib. 1.
though he disagrees in the number) the people of Egypt was divided in those
days; whereby it is manifest what correspondence there was between Egypt and
India in all things. Nor do I wonder at the division into seven Races only,
because what is observed at this day, must then also have happened, namely, that
the so many Races which they reckon, are reduced to four principal; which, if I
mistake not, are the Brachmans, the Soldiers, the Merchants, and the
Artificers; from whom by more minute subdivision all the rest are derived, in
such number as in the whole people there are various professions of men. In the
substantial points of Religion all agree together, all believe the
Transmigration of Souls, which according to their merits and demerits (they
think) are sent by God into other bodies, either of Animals more or less clean,
and of more or less painful life; or else of men more or less noble and
handsome, and more or less pure of Race, wherein they place not a little of
their vain superstition; accounting all other Nations and Religions, besides
themselves, unclean; and some more then others, according as they more or less
differ from their Customs. All equally believe that there is a Paradise in
Heaven with God, but that thereinto go only the Souls of their own Nation,
more pure and without any sin, who have lived piously in this world: Or in case
they have sinned, that after diverse Transmigrations into various bodies of
Animals and Men, having by often returning into the world undergone many pains,
they are at length purged, and at last dye in the body of some man of Indian
and noble Race, as the Brachmans, who amongst them are held the noblest and
purest; because their employment is nothing else but the Divine Worship, the
service of Temples and Learning, and they observe their own Religion with more
rigor then any others. It Is true, the Brachmans, who amongst the Indians, in my
opinion, much resemble the Levites of the Jews, are divided too into several
sorts, one more noble then another, and, according to nobility, more rigorous
also in matter of eating, and in their other superstitious Ceremonies; for some
of them are Astrologers, some Physicians, some Secretaries of Princes; and so
of other sorts of Scholars which I know not well: but the most esteemed and
most sublime amongst the Brachmans, and consequently, the most rigorous of all
in point of eating and other observances, are those who perform the Office of
Priests, whom they call Boti. Ordinarily they never admit into their Sect any
man of another Religion; nor do they think that they do ill herein, or contrary
to the zeal of saving Souls; since believing the Transmigration, they conceive
it not necessary to salvation to change Religion, although one be of a false
Sect; but judge that if this Soul shall be worthy to have pardon from God, it
shall after death, and after being purged sundry ways, pass into, and be born
in the body of some Indian amongst them, and live excellently; and so by this
way at last arrive at Paradise and live with God, although in the beginning it
was in the world in the body of the worst sinner and miscreant whatever. With
people of other Religion they never eat, nor will have any communication of
food, and, as much as possible, they avoid even to touch them; conceiving
themselves polluted by communicating with others. And herein they are so
scrupulous, that even amongst the Indians themselves, one of more noble Race,
not only neither eats, nor makes use of the same clothes, or vessels, nor
communicates in any thing with one less noble, but also endures not to be
touched by him; which if it fall out by chance that he be, he must purify
himself from the defilement by washings, and other arrogant Ceremonies. And
hence it is a pretty sight to behold the great respect which upon this account
the ignoble bear to the more noble then themselves, and how upon meeting in the
street, the ignoble not only give place, but dance wildly up and down for fear
of rushing against the noble, and polluting them in any measure; which, if they
should not do, the Noble, and especially the Soldiers, would make them do it
to the Music of blows. From this averseness to communicate one with another,
particularly, in the use of eating and drinking-vessels, concerning which they
are most strict, is sprung a strange Custom, which I was delighted not only to
see, but also sometimes out of gallantry to imitate in conversation. It happens
very often during hot weather, both in Traveling and in Towns, that people
have need of refreshing themselves, and drinking of a little water; but because
every one has not a drinking-vessel of his own ready, to avoid defiling or
being defiled by his companion's cup; there is a way found out whereby any
person may drink in that, or any other whatever, without scruple or danger of
any either active or passive contamination. This is done, by drinking in such
manner that the vessel touches not the lips or mouth of him who drinks; for it
is held up on high with the hand over the mouth, and he that lifts it up
highest, and holds it farthest from his mouth, shows himself most mannerly; and
thus pouring the liquor out of the cup into the mouth, they drink round while
there is any left, or so long as they please. So accustomed are the Indians to
drink in this manner, that they practice it almost continually with their own
vessels for delight, without the necessity of shunning communication with
others; and they are so dextrous at it, that I remember to have seen one of
them take with both hands a vessel as big as a basin, and lifting it up above a
span higher then his mouth, power a great torrent of water into his throat and
drink it all off. Having been frequently present at such occasions, that where
ever I came the Indians might not be shie of reaching me a cup of water, I
purposely set my self to learn this manner of drinking, which I call drinking
in the Air, and at length have learned it; not with cups as big as basins, like
his abovesaid; but with a handsome cruze, like those we use, or with a little
bottle or drinking glass made on purpose, I do it very well: Sometimes in
conversation we drink healths all' Indiana, after this fashion, with consent
that all do reason in the same manner; and he that cannot do it right, either
wets himself well, or falls a coughing and yexing, which gives occasion of
laughter. But to return to the opinions of the Indians; As for good works and
sins, they all agree with the Doctrine of Morality, and the universal consent
of Mankind, that there are differences of Virtue and Vice in all the world.
They hold not only Adultery, but even simple Fornication a great sin; nor do
they account it lawful, as the Mahometans do, to have commerce with femal
slaves, or with others besides their own Wives. Yea, slaves of either Sex they
no-wise admit, but hold it a sin; making use of free persons for their service,
and paying them wages, as we do in Europe: Which likewise was their ancient
custom, as appears by Strabo, Lib. 15.
who cites Megasthenes and other Authors of those times for it. They detest
Sodomy above measure, and abhor the Mahometans whom they observe addicted to
it. They take but one Wife, and never divorce her till death, unless for the
cause of Adultery. Indeed some, either by reason of the remoteness of their
Wives, or out of a desire to have Children, in case the first Wife be barren;
or because they are rich and potent, and are minded to do what none can forbid
them, sometimes take more Wives; but it is not counted well done, unless they be
Princes, who always in all Nations are privileged in many things. When the
Wife dies, they marry another if they please; but if the Husband dye, the Woman
never marries more; were she so minded, nor could she find any of her own Race
who would take her, because she would be accounted as bad as infamous in
desiring a second Marriage. A very hard Law indeed, and from which infinite
inconveniences arise; for not a few young Widows, who in regard of their
Reputation cannot marry again, and have not patience to live chastely, commit
disorders in private, especially with men of other Nations and Religions, and
with any they find, provided it be secret. Some Widows are burnt alive,
together with the bodies of their dead Husbands; a thing which anciently not
only the Indian Women did, Lib. 15. cap. 15.
according to what Strabo writes from the Relation of Onesicritus; but also the
chaste Wives of the Thracians, as appears by Julius Solinus. But this burning
of Women upon the death of their Husbands, is at their own choice to do it or
not, and indeed, few practice it; but she who does it, acquires in the Nation a
glorious name of Honor and Holiness. It Is most usual among great persons, who
prize Reputation at a higher rate then others do; and in the death of
Personages of great quality, to whom their Wives desire to do Honor by burning
themselves quick. I heard related at my first coming, that a Ragia, that is, an
Indian Prince, (one of the many which are subject to the Moghol) being slain in
a battle, seventeen of his Wives were burnt alive, together with his body;
which in India was held for great Honor and Magnificence. I have heard say,
(for I have not seen any Women burnt alive) that when this is to be done, the
Wife or Wives who are to be burnt, enclose themselves in a pile of wood, which
is laid hollow like the rafters of a house, and the entrance stopped with great
logs, that they may not get out in case they should repent them when the
kindled fire begins to offend them: Yea, diverse men stand about the pile with
staves in their hands to stir the fire, and to power liquors upon it to make it
burn faster; and that if they should see the Woman offer to come out, or avoid
the flames, they would knock her on the head with their staves and kill her, or
else beat her back into the fire; because 'twould be a great shame to the Woman
and all her kindred, if she should go to be burnt, and then through fear of the
fire and death, repent and come out of it. I have likewise heard it said, that
some Women are burnt against their own Will, their Relations resolving to have
it so for Honor of the Husband; and that they have been brought to the fire in
a manner by force, and made besides themselves with things given them to eat
and drink for this purpose, that they might more easily suffer themselves to be
cast into the fire; but this the Indians directly deny, saying, that force is
not used to any; and it may be true, at least in Countries where Mahometans
command; for there no Woman is suffered to be burnt without leave of the
Governor of the place, to whom it belongs first to examine, whether the Women
be willing; besides, and for a License, there is also paid a good sum of money.
Nevertheless, it is possible too that many Widows being in the height of their
passion taken at their word by their kindred who desire it, go to it afterward
with an ill will, not daring to deny those that exhort them thereunto,
especially if obliged by their word; nor to discover their own mind freely to
the Governor. Things, which amongst Women, through their natural fearfulness
and modesty, easily happen. And I would to God that in our Countries, in sundry
cases, as of marrying or not, and the like matters, we had not frequent
examples which Women not seldom give of great resolutions, not forced in
appearance, but indeed too much forced in reality, for avoiding displeasure and
other inconveniences. In the Territories of Christians, where the Portugals
are Masters, Women are not suffered to be burnt, nor is any other exercise of
their Religion permitted them. Moreover, the Indian-Gentiles believe that there
is a Devil in the world, almost of the same conditions wherewith we conceive
him; but they think too, that many wretched Souls unworthy ever to have pardon
from God, as the last of the great punishments which they deserve, become
Devils also; than which they judge there cannot be a greater misery. The
greatest sin in the world they account shedding of blood, especially that of
men; and then, above all, the eating of humane flesh, as some barbarous Nations
do, who are therefore detested by them more then all others. Hence the
strictest amongst them, as the Brachmans, and particularly the Boti, not only
kill not, but eat not, any living thing; and even from herbs tinctured with any
reddish color representing blood, they wholly abstain. Others, of a larger
conscience eat only fish. Others, the most ignoble and largest of all, though
they kill not, nevertheless they eat all sort of Animals good for food, except
Cows; to kill and eat which, all in general abhor, saying, that the Cow is
their Mother, for the Milk she gives, and the Oxen she breeds, which plough
the Earth, and do a thousand other services, especially in India, where through
the paucity of other Animals, they make use of these more then any for all
occasions. So that they think they have reason to say, That Cows are the prop
of the world, which perhaps would signify by that Fable, common also to the
Mahometans, and by me formerly mentioned; That the world is supported upon the
Horns of the Cow. Moreover, they have these creatures in great Veneration; for
Cows being kept well in India, and living with little pains and much ease,
therefore they believe that the best Souls, to whom God is pleased to give
little pain in this world, pass into them. All the Indians use many washings,
and some never eat without first washing the whole body. Others will not be
seen to eat by any one; and the place where they eat, they first sweep, wash,
and scour with water and Cow Dung. Which, besides cleanliness, is to them a
Ceremonial Right, which they think has the virtue to purify: But having
observed it too in the houses of Christians, I find that indeed it cleanses
exquisitly, and makes the floores and pavements of houses handsome, smooth, and
bright. And if the Cows and Bulls whose dung they use, eat grass, it gives a
pretty green to the pavement; if straw, a yellowish: But for the most part the
floores are red, as those of Venice are, and I know not with what they give
them that color. But these and other Ceremonies which I have not seen my self,
and know only by Relation, I willingly pass over. I shall conclude therefore
with saying that by the things hitherto mentioned, it appears that in the
substance of Religion, and what is most important, all the Races of the Indians
agree together, and differ only, perhaps, through the necessity, which is
caused by the diversity of humane conditions in certain Rites and Ceremonies,
particularly, of eating more or less indistinctly. Wherein the Ragiaputi,
Soldiers, with the wonted military licentiousness, take most liberty, without
thinking themselves prejudiced as to the degree of Nobility. Next to them, the
meanest and most laborious professions are more licentious in eating then
others, because they need more sustenance; some of which drink Wine too, from
which the others more strict, abstain to avoid ebriety; and so from all other
beverage that inebriates. But those of other Races whose employments admit more
rest and a better life, are also more sparing and rigorous in the use of meats,
especially the Brachmans, as I said, dedicated wholly to Learning and the
Service of Temples, as the most noble of all. In testimony whereof they alone
have the privilege to wear a certain Ensign of Nobility in their Sect, whereby
they are distinguished from others; it is a fillet of three braids, which they
put next the flesh like a Neck-chain, passing from the left shoulder under the
right arm, and so round. This fillet has a mystery, and is given to all
persons of that Race, and to a few of one other for a great favor, with many
superstitious Ceremonies, of which I forbear to speak, because I have not yet
any good information thereof. There was a long dispute in India, between the
Jesuits and other Fathers, whether this fillet, which the Portugals call Linha,
was a badge of Religion, or only an Ensign of piety; and whether it was to be
permitted, or not, to Indian Converts, who were very loath to lay it aside. Much
has been said, and with great contest by both parties, and at length the cause
is carried to Rome, and I was informed of it two or three years ago in Persia.
For I remember Sig: Matteo Galvano Gudigno, a Canon and Kinsman to the then
Archbishop of Goa, passed by Sphahan, and continued there many days; being sent
by the same Archbishop, who favored the side contrary to the Jesuits,
purposely to Rome with many writings touching this affair, which he out of
courtesy communicated to me. I know not whether the final determination of it
be yet come from Rome; some say it is, and in favor of the Jesuits: But at Goa
we shall know these things better. The truth is, the Jesuits prove, (on one
side) that the honor of wearing this Ribban is frequently granted not only to
the Indians, but also to strangers of different Nation and Sect; as to
Mahometans, who (by condescension of that King, who among the Indians has
authority to do it, as Head of their Sect in spirituals) have in recompense of
great and honorable services enjoyed this privilege, without becoming
Gentiles, or changing their Religion, but still persisting to live Mahometans;
which indeed is a strong Argument. On the other side, they prove that many
Brachmans and others of the Race priviledg'd to wear it, intending to lead a
stricter life, and abandon the world by living almost like Hermits; amongst
other things, in humility lay aside this Ribban, being a token of Nobility;
which it is not likely they would do, if it were a Cognizance of Religion; yea,
they would wear it the more. But this second Argument seems not to me so
cogent, because, amongst us Christians, if a Knight of the order of Calatrava,
or the like, which are Ensigns of Nobility, in order to a more holy life enter
into some Religion, either of Friars, Monks, or other Regulars; it is clear that
taking the Religious Habit, he lays aside the body of his Knighthood,
although it be that Cross, than which there cannot be a greater Cognizance of
Christian Religion; albeit it is worn by those Knights as a token of Nobility
too. It Is enough, that the Jesuits think their opinion abundantly confirmed by
the two abovesaid Reasons, namely, that it is rather a sign of Nobility then a
Cognizance of Religion. And although the same is conferred with many
superstitious Ceremonies, yet they will not have it taken away, alleging for
example, that the Crosses of our Knights, however Ensigns of Nobility, are
given with many Ceremonies and Rites of our sacred Religion, the more to
authorize them. Whence it appears that the use of this Ribban may be without
scruple permitted to the Indians, provided these superstitious Ceremonies be
laid aside, and especially the End, in which alone consists the sin; changing
it in that manner as the ancient Christians changed many Festivals and
superstitions of the Gentiles into Festivals of Martyrs, and other pious
Commemorations. And this may be done by applying ( e. g.) the signification of
the three Braids to the most Holy Trinity, or in some such manner, turning it
to a pious and lawful use. Nevertheless those of the contrary party impugn this
opinion with no bad Reasons; they say, it is a thing in it self, of its own
nature, wholly unlawful to Christians, as being perfectly a
Gentile-superstition; which is proved by the Ceremonies and words used in
conferring it; and that for the three Braids, it is well known, they hold and
wear them in honor of three of their chief false Gods; and that although they
be Ensigns of Nobility in the wearer, yet they are withal, and principally a
manifest Cognizance of their Religion; as Crosses are amongst our Knights,
wherewith who ever has the same on his breast, not only ostentates his
Nobility, but also firmly profess the Christian Faith. That the Gentile-Kings
having honored with this Ensign some Mohammedan, their Vassal, and remaining a
Mohammedan, is no more then as if in our Countries we should grant to some Jew
the privilege of wearing a black Hat without becoming a Christian; which may
be done by way of dispensation, and yet it cannot be denied but that the
wearing a black one, or a yellow, is, besides the matter of credit, a
Cognizance also of the Religion or Sect which a man professes. Many other
Reasons they allege, which I do not well remember, and which, no doubt, will
be narrowly examined at Rome. What the determination will be, I shall know more
certainly at Goa; and for the present thus much may suffice concerning the
Opinions and Rites of the Indian-Gentiles.

Saturday the 25th of February, upon occasion of a Cafila, or Caravan, which
was setting forth from Cambaia to Ahmedabad, which is the Royal Seat and Head
of the whole Kingdom of Guzarat, we, namely, Sig: Alberto Scilling, and my
self, with our attendants, were desirous to see that City; and since the
insecurity of the ways allowed us not to go alone, we resolved to go with the
Cafila. And because at the same time another Cafila was setting forth for
Surat, in which some of the Hollanders, residing at Cambaia, went with their
goods which they carried thither in order to be shipped; we all went out of the
Town together, and in a place without the Gate and the Suburbs, were the ways
divided under the shade of certain great Trees of Tamarinds, which the Indians
call Hambele, (where also are certain Sepulchers, and a Mohammedan Meschita or
Temple, unroof'd and without walls about, saving a little wall at the front,
and a place marked where prayers are to be made; of which sort of Meschita's
many are seen in India, especially in the Country) we entertained our selves a
good while with the Dutch, being diverted with Music, singing and dancing by
the same Women, which we had the night before at our house. At length taking
leave, they took their way toward Surat, and Sig: Alberto and I with our
company toward Ahmedabad, going a little out of the way to see another very
famous Temple of Mahadeu. The Fabric is small and inconsiderable; within there
is no other Idol but that of Mahadeu, which is no other but a little column or
pillar of stone, thicker below then at top, and which diminishing by degrees,
ends at the top in a round. Whatever it is that would signify thereby, the name
of Mahadeu they in their language, is properly interpreted Great God. But we
had enough to laugh at, when we heard that this Idol was held by the Country
people for a worker of miracles; and amongst other of his miracles, they relate
that he grows every day, and becomes bigger hourly; affirming, that many years
since he was no higher then a span, or little more, and now he is above two,
and perhaps three; and thus he continues increasing every day: a folly not to
be believed but by such fools as themselves. Having seen this Temple, we
overtook our Cafila at a Town called Saima, three miles distant from Cambaia,
where we all lodged that night. The next Morning being Sunday, the Cafila,
which consisted of above a hundred Coaches, besides footmen and horsemen, and
great laden Wagons, set forth three hours before day; and staying not to rest
any where, according to the custom of the East, (which is to make but one bout
of a days journey) having traveled fifteen Cos by noon, or little later, we
lodged at a Town called Matter, where we saw an infinite number of Squirrels
leaping amongst the trees every where; they were small, white, and with a tail
less, and not so fair as those of our Countries. On Monday, about two hours
before day, we resumed our Voyage. When it was day, we saw upon the way every
where abundance of wild Monkies, of which almost all the Trees were full. They
put me in mind of that Army of Monkies, which the Soldiers of Alexander the
Great, beholding upon certain Hills a far off, and taking to be Men intended to
have charged, had not Taxilus informed them what they were, as Strabo relates.
Lib. 15.
We found abundance of people too upon the way begging alms with the sound of a
Trumpet, which almost every one had and sounded, and most of them were armed
with Bows and Arrows; two things sufficiently uncouth for beggars, and indeed,
not be suffered by Governors, since these Ruffians under pretext of begging,
rob frequently upon the way when they meet persons alone and unarmed; which
having weapons themselves, they may easily do. This County was almost all
woody, the ground unmeasurably dusty, to the great trouble of Travelers; the
Highways were all enclosed on the sides with high hedges of a plant always
green and unfruitful, not known in Europe; and having no leaves, but instead
thereof covered with certain long and slender branches, almost like our
Sparagus but bigger, harder and thicker, of a very lively green; being broken,
they send forth Milk like that of immature Figgs, which is very pernicious to
the flesh wherever it touches. The Fields were full of Olive Trees,
Tamarind-trees, and other such which in India are familiar. About noon, having
traveled twelve, or, as others said, fourteen Cos, we arrived at Ahmedabad,
and our journey from Cambaia hither was always with our Faces toward the North
East. Being entered into the City, which is competently large, with great
Suburbs, we went directly to alight at the house of the English Merchants, till
other lodging were prepared for us, where also we dined with them. After which
we retired to one of the houses which stand in the street, which they call
Terzi Carvanserai, that is, the Taylers Inn. For you must know that the
Carvanserai, or Inns in Ahmedabad, and other great Cities of India, are not, as
in Persia and Turkey, one single habitation made in form of a great Cloister,
with abundance of Lodgings round about, separate one from another, for
quartering of strangers; but they are whole great streets of the City
destinated for strangers to dwell in, and whosoever is minded to hire a house;
and because these streets are locked up in the night time for security of the
persons and goods which are there, therefore they call the Cavanserai.
Notwithstanding the wearisomness of our journey, because we were to stay but a
little while at Ahmedabad, therefore after a little rest we went the same
Evening to view the marketplace, buying sundry things. It displeased me
sufficiently that the streets not being well paved, although they are large,
fair, and strait, yet through the great dryness of the Earth they are so dusty,
that there is almost no going a foot, because the foot sinks very deep in the
ground with great defilement; and the going on Horseback, or in a Coach, is
likewise very troublesome in regard of the dust; a thing, indeed, of great
disparagement to so goodly and great a City as this is. I saw in Ahmedabad,
Roses, Flowers of Jasmin, and other sorts, and diverse such fruits as we have in
our Countries in the Summer; whence I imagined, that probably, we had repassed
the Tropic of Cancer, and re-enter'd a little into the temperate Zone; which
doubt I could not clear for want of my Astrolabe, which I had left with my
other goods at Surat. On Tuesday following, which to us was the day of
Carnaval, or Shrove-Tuesday, walking in the Morning about the Town, I saw a
handsome street, strait, long, and very broad, full of shops of various Trades;
they call it Bezari Kelan, that is, the Great Merkat, in distinction from
others, than which this is bigger. In the middle is a structure of stone
athwart the street, like a bridge with three Arches, almost resembling the
Triumphal Arches of Rome. A good way beyond this bridge, in the middle of the
same street is a great Well, round about which is built a square Piazzetta, a
little higher then the ground. The Water of the Well is of great service to all
the City, and there is always a great concourse of people who come to fetch it.
Going forwards to the end of the Market, we came to the great Gate which stands
confronting the street, and beautified with many Ornaments between two goodly
Towers; it is the Gate of a small Castle, which they call by the Persian word
Cut. Nor let it seem strange, that in India in the Countries of the Moghol, the
Persian Tongue is used more, perhaps, then the Indian it self, since the
Mogholian Princes being originally Tartars and of Samarcand, where the Persian
Tongue is the natural of the Country, have therefore been willing to retain
their native Speech in India; in brief, the Persian is the Language of the
Moghols Court, most spoken and used in all public writings. Near this Castle
Gate, in a void place of the street are two pulpits handsomely built of stone,
somewhat raised from the ground, wherein it is the custom to read the King's
Commandments publicly, when they are be proclaimed. Thence turning to the
right hand, and passing another great Gate, and through a fair Street we came
to the Royal Palace; for Ahmedabad is one of the four Cities, amongst all the
others of his Dominions, where the Grand Moghol by particular privilege has a
Palace and a Court; and accordingly he comes sometimes to reside there. This
Palace has a great square Court, surrounded with white and well polished
walls. In the midst stands a high Post to shoot at with arrows, as is also
usual in the Piazzaes of Persia. On the left side of the Court as you go in,
are the King's Lodgings, a small and low building. What it is within side, I
know not, for I entered not into it; but without, it is as follows: Under the
King's Windows is a square place enclosed with a rail of colored wood, and the
pavement somewhat raised; within which, when the King is there, are wont to
stand certain Officers of the Militia, whom they call Mansubdar, and they are
almost the same with our Colonels: their Command extends not to above a
Thousand Horse; nor are they all equal, but from a thousand downwards, some
have more, some less, under them. Within this enclosure of the Mansubdary,
under the King's Balconies, stand two carved Elephants of embossed work, but
not large, painted with their natural colors; and in the front of the Royal
Lodgings, are other such Ornaments after their mode, of little consideration.
Some said, that a while ago in one of the Balconies stood exposed to public
view an Image of the Virgin Mary, placed there by Sciah Selim, (who, they say,
was devoted to her) and to whom, perhaps, it was given by one of our Priests,
who frequent his Court out of a desire to draw him to the Christian Faith; but
the Image was not there now, and possibly, was taken away by Sultan Chorrom his
Son, (reported an Enemy of the Christians and their affairs) since his coming
to the Government of those parts of Guzarat. The station of the greater
Captains, and of higher dignity then the Mansubdary, as the Chans and others of
that rank, is in the King's Balconies; or near hand above there within the
Rooms: The inferior Soldiers, that is, such as have only two or three Horses,
stand upon the ground in the Court without the above mentioned enclosure. In
the front of the Court is another building, with an enclosure also before it,
but less adorned; it is the place where the King's Guard stands with all its
Captains: And the same order, I believe, is always observed in the Moghol's
Court, in whatsoever place or City he happens to be. Within this Court is
another on the left hand, surrounded with other buildings for necessary
Offices, but not so well built nor polished. Having seen what we could of the
Royal Palace, we returned by the same way we came to the street of the great
Market. From whence we went to see a famous Temple of Mahadeu, to which there
is hourly a great concourse of people, and the street which leads to it is
always full, not only of goers and comers to the Temple, but also of beggars
who stand here and there asking Alms of those that pass by. The building of
this Temple is small, the entrance narrow and very low, almost under ground;
for you descend by many steps, and you would think you were rather going into a
Grotto then into a Temple; and hence there is always a great crowd there. On
high hung a great number of Bells, which are rung every moment with great noise
by all those who come to worship. Within the Temple continually stand many
naked Gioghi, having only their privities (not very well) covered with a
cloth; they wear long Hair disheveled, dying their Foreheads with spots of
Sanders, Saffron, and other colors suitable to their superstitious Ceremonies.
The rest of their bodies is clean and smooth, without any tincture or impurity;
which I mention as a difference from some other Gioghi, whose Body are all
smeared with colors and ashes, as I shall relate hereafter. There is, no
doubt, but these are the ancient Gymnosophists so famous in the world; and, in
short, those very Sophists who then went naked, and exercised great patience in
sufferings, Lib. 15.
to whom Alexander the Great sent Onesicritus to consult with them, as Strabo
reports from the testimony of the same Onesicritus. Many of them stood in the
Temple near the Idols, which were placed in the innermost Penetral or Chancel
of it, with many Candles and lamps burning before them. The Idols were two
stones, somewhat long, like two small Termini, or Landmarks, painted with
their wonted colors; on the right side whereof was a stone cut into a figure,
and on the left another of that ordinary form of a small pillar, according to
which, as I said before, that they use to shape Mahadeu: And before all these,
another like figure of Mahadeu, made of Crystal, upon which the Offerings were
laid, as Milk, Oil, Rice, and diverse such things. The assistent Gioghi give
every one that comes to worship some of the Flowers, which are strewn upon,
and round about the Idols; receiving in lieu thereof good sums of Alms. Coming
out of this Temple, and ascending up the wall of the City, which is hard by, we
beheld from that height the little River called Sabermeti, which runs on that
side under the walls without the City. Upon the bank thereof, stood exposed to
the Sun many Gioghi of more austere lives, namely such, as not only are naked,
like those above described, but go all sprinkled with ashes, and paint their
bodies and faces with a whitish color upon black, which they do with a certain
stone that is reduced into powder like Lime: Their Beards and Hair they wear
long, untrim'd, rudely involved, and sometimes erected like horns. Painted they
are often, or rather daubed with sundry colors and hideous figures; so that
they seem so many Devils, like those represented in our Comedies. The ashes
wherewith they sprinkle their bodies are the ashes of burnt Carcasses; and
this, to the end they may be continually mindful of death. A great crew of
these with their Chief or Leader, (who conducts them with an extravagant banner
in his Hand, made of many shreds of several colors, and to whom they all
religiously obey) sat by the Rivers side in a round form, as their custom is;
and in the field there were many people, who came, some to walk, and others, to
wash themselves; the Pagan Indians holding their Rivers in great Veneration,
and being not a little superstitious in bathing themselves therein. From the
same place, I beheld a little Chapel built upon two small figures of Mahadeu,
not upright, but lying along upon the ground, and carved in basse relief, where
also were Lamps burning, and people making their Offerings. One of the Gioghi,
laying aside all other care, remained continually in this Chapel with great
retiredness and abstraction of mind, scarce ever coming forth; although it was
very troublesome abiding there, in regard of the heat of the lights; and
inconvenient too, by reason the Chapel was so little that it could scarce
contain him alone as he sat upon the pavement, (which was somewhat raised from
the Earth) with his Legs doubled under him, and almost crooked. Returning home
by the same way of the great Bazar, or Market, I saw Carvanserai, or Inns made
with Cloisters like those of Persia; one greater and square of the ordinary
form, and another less, narrow and long. Of diverse other streets, in which I
saw nothing observable, I forbear to speak.

The same day after dinner, having taken leave of certain Armenian and Syrian
Christians, who live in Ahmedabad with their Wives and Families, we put our
selves upon the way to return to Cambaia, with the same Cafila, with which we
came; and which every week departs thence at a set day. At our setting forth we
met with a little obstacle, for by reason of the new Commotions between the
Moghol, and his Son Sultan Chorrom, who was become Master of these parts of
Guznet, there was a fresh prohibition in Ahmedabad, that no Soldiers Wives,
nor other person of quality should go out of the City by Land; and this, as I
conceive, lest the rumors of the troubles should cause the people of the City
to remove into other Territories, and abandon the faction of the Rebel Sultan
Chorrom; which they could not do if their Wives were restrained, because
Husbands are in a manner necessitated to abide where their Wives and Houses
are. So that by reason of this prohibition, I could not have got away, having
my Sigra Mariuccia with me, unless I had obtained express leave in writing from
the Governor; in order to which it was needful for me to make it appear that
we were strangers and not people of the Country, and to pay some small sum of
Money, besides going backward and forward, whereby we lost much time. Having at
length obtained permission, and being got out of the City, we went a little
without the walls to see a great Artificial Lake which is there, made of stone
with stairs at several angles about it; its Diameter was, by my conjecture,
above half a mile. It has about the middle an Island, with a little Garden, to
which they go by a handsome Bridge of many Arches very well built; upon which,
I believe, two Indian Coaches may go a breast. Indeed these Indian Lakes are
goodly things, and may be reckoned amongst the most remarkable structures of
the world. Having seen this, we went to overtake our Cafila, which was arrived
at a Town seven Cos distant from Ahemdabad, called Barigia, or Bariza, (for the
Indians very much confound these two Letters g and z in their speaking.) We
came late to the said Town, by reason of our hindrances at our departure from
Ahmedabad; but certain Horsemen appointed, as I conceive, to guard the way,
having met us in the night, would needs accompany us thither that so we might
go safely; for which service they were contented with a very small gratuity
which we gave them.

March, being Ash Wednesday, we set forth by break of day; and having traveled
fifteen Cos, an hour or little more before night, we came to lodge in a
competently large Town called Soznitra, where I saw Batts as big as Crows. The
next day, March the second, beginning our journey early, we traveled twelve
Cos, and a little after noon arrived at Cambaia. The Dutch Merchants there
understanding by others that we were coming with this Cafila, came to meet us a
little without the Gate, and with their accustomed courtesies conducted us to
lodge in their House. March the third, we went out of the walls to the top of
the Tower of that Sepulcher, which I said we saw near the Garden of the King of
Guzarat, to behold from thence, (being a great prospect upon the Sea) the
coming in of the Tide, which indeed was a pleasant spectacle. 'Twas New Mood
this day, and so a greater Tide then usual, and we went to observe it at the
punctual time of its being at the height, which those people know very well;
because at that time it increases in less then a quarter of an hour, to almost
the greatest height it is to have, and flows with greatest fury; contrary to
what happens in other Seas. Now at the due time we saw the Sea come roaring a
far off, like a most rapid River, and in a moment overflow a great space of
Land, rushing with such fury that nothing could have with-stood its force; and
I think it would have overtaken the swiftest Race-horse in the world. A thing
verily strange, since in other places both the rising and the falling of the
Sea in the flux and reflux is done gently in full six hours, and with so little
motion that it is scarce perceived. After this we went to see another goodly
Cistern, or Lake, without the City, formerly not seen, of a square form, and of
a sumptuous marble structure, with stairs about it like the others which I had
seen elsewhere. Afterward we saw in one of the Suburbs or Hamlets near the
City, called Cansari, a Temple of the Gentiles, peradventure the goodliest that
I have seen, with certain Cupola's, and high Balconies of tolerable
Architecture, but no great model. This Temple belongs to that Race of Indians
who shave their heads (a thing unusual to all others who wear long hair, like
Women) and such are called Vertia. The Idol in it sat on high over an Altar at
the upper end, in a place somewhat dark, ascended by stairs, with lamps always
burning before it. When I went in, there was a Man at his Devotions, and
burning Perfumes before the Idol. At some distance from this, stands another
Temple of like structure, but more plain and of a square form; within it were
seen abundance of Idols of several shapes, whose Names and Histories, the
shortness of time, and my unskilfulness in their Language allowed me not to
learn. Without the Gate of these Temples, I beheld sitting upon the ground in a
circle, another Troop of those naked Gioghi, having their bodies smeared with
Ashes, Earth, and Colors, like those I had seen upon the River of Ahmedabad;
they made a ring about their Archimaudrita, or Leader, who was held in such
Veneration not only by the Religious of their Sect, but also by the other
secular Indians, for Reputation of Holiness, that I saw many grave persons go
and make low Reverences to him, kiss his Hands, and stand in an humble posture
before him to hear some sentence; and He with great gravity, or rather with a
strange scorn of all worldly things, hypocritically made as if he scarce
deigned to speak and answer those that came to honor him. These Gioghi, are
not such by Descent but by Choice, as our Religious Orders are. They go naked,
most of them with their bodies painted and smeared, as is above mentioned; yet
some of them are only naked, with the rest of their bodies smooth, and only
their Foreheads died with Sanders and some red, yellow, or white color; which
is also imitated by many secular persons, out of superstition and gallantry.
They live upon Alms, despising clothes and all other worldly things. They
marry not, but make severe profession of Chastity at least in appearance; for
in secret it is known many of them commit as many debaucheries as they can. They
live in society under the obedience of their Superiors, and wander about the
world without having any settled abode. Their Habitations are the Fields, the
Streets, the Porches, the Courts of Temples, and Trees, especially under those
where any Idol is worshipped by them; and they undergo with incredible patience
day and night no less the rigor of the Air then the excessive heat of the Sun,
which in these sultry Countries is a thing sufficiently to be admired. They
have spiritual exercises after their way, and also some exercise of Learning,
but (by what I gather from a Book of theirs translated into Persian, and
intitl'd, Damerdbigiaska, and, as the Translator says, a rare piece) both
their exercises of wit and their Learning, consist only in Arts of Divination,
Secrets of Herbs, and other natural things, and also in Magic and
Enchantments, whereunto they are much addicted, and boast of doing great
wonders. I include their spiritual exercises herein, because according to the
aforesaid Book, they think that by the means of those exercises, Prayers,
Fastings, and the like superstitious things, they come to Revelations; which
indeed are nothing else but correspondences with the Devil, who appears to, and
deludes them in sundry shapes, forewarning them sometimes of things to come:
Yea sometimes they have carnal commerce with him, not believing, or, at least,
not professing that it is the Devil; but that there are certain Immortal,
Spiritual, Invisible Women, to the number of forty, known to them and
distinguished by various forms, names, and operations, whom they reverence as
Deities, and adore in many places with strange worship; so that some Moorisco
Princes in India, as one of these three pety Kings who reigned in Decan,
Telengane, and Meslepaton, (Cutbsciach, as I remember) though a Moor; yet
retaining some relics of ancient Gentilism, makes great Feasts and Sacrifices
to one of these Women in certain Grottoes under high Mountains which are in his
Country; where it is reported, that this Woman has a particular and beloved
habitation; and He of the Gioghi, that by long spiritual exercises can come to
have an apparition of any of these Women, who foretells him future things, and
favors him with the power of doing other wonders, is accounted in the degree
of perfection; and far more if he happen to be adopted by the Immortal Woman
for her Son, Brother, or other Kinsman; but above all, if he be received for a
Husband, and the Woman have carnal commerce with him; the Giogho thenceforward
remaining excluded from the commerce of all other Women in the world, which is
the highest degree that can be attained to; and then he is called a spiritual
Man, and accounted of a nature above humane, with promise of a thousand strange
things, which for brevities sake I pass over. Thus does the Devil abuse this
miserable people. As for any thing more concerning these Gioghi, I refer you to
what I have formerly written of them, and the Sami, who are another sort of
Religious Indians who wear Clothes, as I saw them in Bender of Combru. And of
the Sciences of the Gioghi, and their spiritual exercises, especially of a
curious way, rather superstitious then natural, of Divining by the breathing of
a Man, wherein they have indeed many curious and subtle observations, which I
upon trial have found true. If any would know more, I refer him to the Book
above mentioned, which I intend to carry with me for a Rarity into Italy; and
if I shall find convenience, I shall one day gratify the Curious with a sight
of it in a Translation.

March, I went out of Cambaia to a Town two miles off, called Hagra, to see a
famous Temple, built of old by the Race of the Banions, and belongs to them;
but yet the Brachmans possess it, and have care of it, as if it were descended
to them. This Temple is dedicated to Brahma, who, as I said before, they hold
to be the same with Pythagoras, although of the origin of Brama, and how he
was produced of the first Cause, or else of the first Matter, and how they take
this for one of the Elements, and a thousand other extravagances; they tell
long Fables, which do not agree to Pythagoras a mere man; but for all this they
confound the two Names, and it is no great matter to reconcile them herein,
after the same manner that our ancient Gentiles agreed in their Jupiter, taken
sometimes for one of the Elements, and sometimes historically for an ancient
King one of Saturn's Sons; and in diverse other like names, in reference to
History and Philsophy they had double, allegorical and mysterious
significations. Concerning the Genealogy of Brama, and the other fabulous
Indian Gods, and what belongs to their vain Theology, I refer the Reader to the
Books of Father Francesco Negrone, or Negraore, as the Portugals call him, who
writes fully thereof in his Chronicles of the things done by those of his Order
in India, written in the Portugal Language; and I think he is the first, and
perhaps, the only Modern Writer who has given account of this matter in
Europe. The said Father having been assisted therein, for information by most
fit and sufficient Interpreters, namely, the Fathers of his own Religion, good
Divines, skilled in the Indian Tongue, and perfectly intelligent of these
matters; who also read and interpreted the very Books of the Indians to him,
and were likewise his interpreters in the discourses which he had often with
the learned Indians concerning their Religion, as himself frequently told me.
Besides which, he wanted not other helps, because being appointed
Historiographer to his Order, he was abundantly supplied with what was needful
to that Office; he conversed long in the Kingdom of Bisnaga, where the Religion
and Sciences of the Indians have their Principal Seat; as also in the Island of
Zeilan, which many take to be the ancient Tabrobana, and in other Countries for
this very purpose. He made many peregrinations expressly to see places and
things conducing thereunto, and was assisted by the Viceroys themselves and
Governors of Provinces, subject to the Portugals, who sent him into all places
accompanied oftentimes with whole bands of Soldiers, where the ways were not
secure; in brief, without sparing cost, pains, or diligence, he professedly
intended this business for many years together, with all kind of convenience
and authority. Lastly, he was some years since sent by his Order into Europe,
in Order to print his Works; and in the year 1619, as I came through Persia, I
saw him at Sphahan; and during his short abode there by means of a Friend got a
sight of his Papers, but had not time to read them, as I desired. He went
thence directly to Rome, whither I gave him some Letters to certain Friends and
Relations of mine to be civil to him there, as I know they were; and after some
years sojourning at Rome, whilst I was at Bender of Combru, I heard that he was
coming from Rome toward Turkey, in order to return to India, where I hope to
see him again; and if he bring his Books printed with him, I shall read them,
and what I find remarkable therein which may be serviceable to these writings
of mine, I shall make mention of the same in its proper place, Father Joam de
Lucena a Jesuit, in his History of the Life of San Francesco Xavier, written in
the Portugal Tongue, makes mention likewise of the Religion and Customs of the
Indian-Gentiles, and seems to speak thereof with good grounds, although in some
few particulars, if I mistake not, he is capable of a little correction. Yet
that which troubles me most, is, that it clearly appears by his Book that he
knew much more of the Customs of the Indians then he has written: which
perhaps he would not write, either because they were obscene and impious, or
pertain'd not to his purpose. I saw Father Negrone since at Goa, but he brought
not his Book printed; either because his Fathers, as some say, would not have
it printed; or --. Yet he says, he has sent it to be printed in Portugal in
that Language, and expects it by the next Ship; if it comes, I shall see it.
But having in Goa discoursed with him more largely then I did in Persia, I find
him very little versed in matters of ancient History and Geography, as
generally the Friars of Spain, and especially Portugal are not, addicting
themselves little to other Studies, besides what serves to Preaching;
wherefore, without good skill in ancient History, Geography, and other Humane
Learning, I know not how it is possible to write Histories well, particularly,
concerning the Customs of the Indians; of which also he has had no other
information but by interpreters; in which way I have by experience found that
many errors are frequently committed. Nevertheless we shall see what light may
be had from F. Lucena's Book, although it be short, concerning the Religion of
the Indians.

Brahma in the Town of Naghra, which is little considerable for building but in
great Veneration for ancient Religion, there are many Idols of white Marble.
The biggest is the Chief, and has the worthiest place: In the middle is the
Statue of Brahma, or Pythagoras, with many Arms and Faces, as they ordinarily
pourtray him, namely, three Faces, for I could not see whether there were a
fourth or more behind; it is naked with a long picked Beard, but ill cut as well
as the rest of the figure, which for its bigness has a very great Belly, I
know not whether through the Artificers fault, who seems to have been little
skilful; or else because the Indians, as I have also heard of the people of
Sumatra, account it a great Beauty and perfection to have a great Belly. This
figure of Brahma stands upright, and at his Feet two other less carved figures,
which, as they say, are his two Sons, Sunnet and Sunnatan. On each side of
Brahma stand likewise two Statues of Women, somewhat less then Brahma himself,
and they call them his Wives, Savetri, and Gavetri. On the left side of this
narrow Temple, stand two other figures of the same bigness, being two naked Men
with long Beards, whom they pretend to have been two religious persons, I know
not whether Doctors or Disciples of Brahma or Pythagoras; one is called
Chescuer, the other Ciavan de Chescuer. On the same side downwards are many
other Idolets, as one with an Elephants Head, and diverse others formerly by me
mentioned. All which Idols are served, adored, perfumed, offered to, and washed
every day as for delight, (for the Indians account it delight to wash often) by
the Brachmans, who assist at their service with much diligence. I must not
forget, that the Banians say, this Town Naghera was the King's Seat and
principal City, anciently the Head of the whole Kingdom of Cambaia, and that
the City now properly called Cambaia, and raised to greatness by the ruin of
this old, is a modern thing; whence I have sometimes suspected that the Indian
Character called Naghra, used by the learned, was denominated from this City
wherein it was anciently used; but it is only a Conjecture; and I have learnt
by long and much experience, that in the derivation and interpretation of
Names, especially of Places, there is no trusting to the resemblance of Words;
because by reason of the diversity of Languages, and the casual Conformity of
Words which signify things sufficiently different, according to the variety of
Places, gross errors are easily admitted. Nagher in the Indian Language
signifies a Great City. Coming from Naghra, I saw some naked and besmeared Men,
of deportment almost like the incinerated Gioghi, who were of a Race of Indians
accounted by themselves the most sordid and vile Race of all in India; because
they eat every thing, even the uncleannest Animals, as Rats and the like;
whence ^^ey are called in Persian, Hhalal-chor, which signifies a Man that
accounts it lawful to eat any thing; the Indians call them Der, and all people
in general abhor not only to converse with, but even to touch them. Concerning
Religion, I have heard nothing particular of them, but believe them Gentiles as
the rest, or perhaps, Atheists, who may possibly hold every thing for lawful,
as well in believing as in eating. They are all sufficiently poor, and live for
the most part by begging, or exercising the most sordid Trades in the
Commonwealth, which others disdain to meddle with; but they, either because
their Rite teaches them so, or necessity inforces them, are not at all shie of.
March the fifth, We visited the King's Garden again, and many other Gardens,
where we tasted diverse fruits, and beheld several Flowers of India unknown in
Europe; amongst the rest, one very odoriferous which I kept in a Paper, which
they call Ciompa. Without the City we saw the Saltpits, and also the Field by
the Seaside, where the Indians are wont to burn the bodies of their dead;
which may be known by the relics of many fires and pieces of bones not wholly
burnt, which are seen scattered about the same. The next Morning early, we
returned to this Field, and saw several Bodies burnt, and particularly observed
the Funeral of one Woman from the beginning to the end. They carry the Corpse
wrapped in a cloth of Cit, of a red color for the most part, and much in use
among the Indians for other purposes. They carry it not upon a Biere, as we do,
but tied to and hanging down like a sack, from a staff laid cross two Men's
shoulders. They make the funeral pile of wood, laid together in form of a bed,
of equal length and breadth, and sufficient to receive the Body; upon which,
beginning then to lament with a loud voice, they lay the carcass naked and
supine, with the Face and Feet toward the Sea; which I believe, is likewise
observed (where the Sea is not) toward Rivers, Lakes, and Cisterns, the
Indians having a particular devotion to the Water; nor do I know, that herein
they have respect to any Region of Heaven. They cover the privities with a
piece of wood, anoint the Hands and Feet, put a coal of fire in the Mouth; and
then all things being prepared, they set fire first at the Throat, and
afterward to the whole pile round about, beginning first at the Head, but with
their Faces turned another way, as Virgil says our Ancestors did; Then
sprinkle Water on the ground round about the pile, which they continually stir
up with staves in their Hands, and blow with the motion of a cloth, to the end
the flame may not spread, but burn more speedily. The body being consumed by
degrees, they reduce the fire into a round form, and when all is burnt, they
leave the ashes, and sometimes a piece of a bone not wholly consumed there in
the same place: The cloth wherein the body was wrapped before it was committed to
the pile, they give in Charity to some poor person present. Such as have where
withal, are burnt with odoriferous and precious wood, in which the rich sp^^d
much; but they that cannot reach so high, use ordinary wood. Children under two
years of age are not burnt but buried, as we saw some in the same Field. Nor
let the Reader wonder, that in the same day and hour we happened to see so many
dead persons; for, besides that Cambaia is a large City and very populous, as
all the Cities and Lands of India are; the Gentiles are wont to perform this
Ceremony of the dead only in the Morning, at a set hour, and in that place; so
that all that dye in the whole City, during the twenty four hours of the day,
are brought to that place at the same hour. The same day we had News of a
Jesuit's coming to Cambaia from Goa, with a Cafila of Portugal Frigates, which
was going for Agra: Whereupon in the Evening, Sig: Alberto Scilling and I, in
company of a Venetian Merchant, went to visit him at the house where he lodged;
and having told him that we were to go the next day for Surat, I desired him to
give a letter to the Jesuits of Daman and Bassaim, where I hoped to touch upon
the way to Goa; which he very courteously condescending to do, we went again
the next Morning to see him before we departed.

March the seventh, In the Morning we visited the Father Jesuit, Fratelli,
Brothers, or young Friars. He gave me Letters to F. Antonio Albertino, an
Italian, and Rector of their College in Daman, and to the Father Rector of
their College of Bassaim, desiring them that since I could not imbarque at
Cambaia in the Cafila of the Portugals, because I was to return to Surat, where
I had left my goods in the Ships, they would favor me and assist me to get
convenient passage for Goa in the said Cafila, either at Daman or Bassaim,
where I intended to meet it as it returned. I on the other side gave this
Father a Letter to their Fathers Resident at Agra, to whom I had written
formerly from Persia, desiring them to send me some correct Copy of the Persian
Books, written by their Fathers in that Court, in order to get the same printed
at Rome; and by Sig: Alberto Scilling, I had understood that my first Letter
was received there, and that the said Fathers of Agra knew me by report, and
the relation of diverse who had seen me in Persia, particularly of this Sig:
Alberto. In this other Letter from Cambaia, I acquainted them with my Voyage to
Goa; and desiring them to write to me there, and remember to favor me with
those Books. Having dispatched the Father Jesuit, we returned to the Dutch
House to have a Collation; and here we were entertained a good while with good
Music by an Indian, who sung tolerably well, and played upon a certain odd
instrument used in India; which pleased me well enough, because it was not so
obstreperous Music as the ordinary of the vulgar Indians, but rather low and
very sweet, and the Musician was skilful according to the mode of the Country,
having lived at the Court of Tisapor, in the service of Adilsiah. His
Instrument was made of two round Gourds died black and vernish'd, with a hole
bored in one of them, to reverberate the sound. Between the one Gourd and the
other, about the distance of three spans, was fastened a piece of wood, upon
which they both hung, and the strings which were many, partly of brass, and
partly of steel, were extended, passing over many little pieces of wood like so
many bridges; and these were the frets, which he touched with the left Hand to
diversify the sounds, and the strings with the right, not with his Fingers or
Nails, but with certain iron wires fastened to his Fingers, by certain rings
like thimbles, wherewith he did not strike the strings strongly, but lightly
touched them from the top downwards, so that they rendered a sound sufficiently
pleasant. When he played, he held the Instrument at his breast by a string that
went round his neck, and one of the Gourds hung over his left shoulder, and the
other under his right arm, so that it was a pretty sight. Collation and Music
ended, we were conducted about two Cos out of the City by the Dutch Merchants,
and took the same way by which we came. We passed over the five Cos of wet
ground, with the four Currents of Water, of which the second was the deepest
(having waited a while for a fit hour) in company of a numerous Cafila of
Coaches, Carts, Horsemen and Footmen, in the same manner and circumstances as
I writ before; only the Water was now much higher then we had found it at our
coming, so that it came into all the Coaches, and we were fain to stand upright
and hold fast by the roof of the Coaches, bare legged too, because the Water
came above the bottom of the Coaches to the middle of the leg. The Oxen and
Horses could scarce keep their Heads above Water, and the Coaches being light,
if Men hired purposely had not gone along in the Water to hold them steady, and
break the course thereof by holding great stumps of wood on that side the Tide
came furiously in, without doubt, the Water would have swept them away. In this
place on the left hand toward the land in the moist ground, we beheld at a
distance many Fowls, as big or bigger then Turkies, go up and down, rather
running then flying. They told us, they were the same which the Portugals call
Paxaros Flamencos, from their bright color; and I think, they are those of
whose beaks Mir Mahhammed in Spahan, makes bow-rings for the King; although he
erroneously takes it for the beak of the Cocnos, or Phoenix, which good Authors
describe, not a water Fowl, but rather an inhabitant of high Mountains. Having
at length passed this dangerous foard, and following our way we came at night
to lodge at Giambuser, the same Town where we had lodged formerly. March the
eighth, We put our selves upon the way again, and foarded the little salt water
Dilavel, and at night arrived at Barocci, and were as formerly entertained in
the House of the Dutch. But upon the way, before we entered the City, we saw a
handsome structure standing upon a famous Sepulcher of I know not well who, but
seems to be some great person's, and is worshipped by the Moors as a sacred
thing. This Fabric is pleasantly seated amongst Trees, something elevated upon
the side of a little Lake, or Great Cistern. In the chief part of it, besides
the principal Sepulcher, which stands apart in the most worthy place, are many
other Sepulchers of white Marble, of an oblong form, with many carvings and
works tolerable enough; it is likely they are the Tombs, either of the Wives and
Children, or of the other kindred of the Principal, because they seem all of
the same work and time. Round this greater structure stand other less, with
Sepulchers of Moors in them, who cause themselves to be buried there out of
devotion to the place; whence I gather that the principal Sepulcher is not
only of some great person or Prince as it intimates, but also of one that died
with some opinion among the Moors of Sanctity. I know not who told me that it
was the Sepulcher of a famous Tartarian King, who came to have dominion in
those parts; but I credit not the Relation, because I had it not from a good
hand. March the ninth, We departed from Barocci, ferrying over the River, and
at night lodged at Periab, where we had quartered before as we went. March the
tenth, Having gone the short way which remained, and passed the River of Surat
by boat, we came to that City about Noon, where I repaired to the House before
assigned me by the Dutch Commendator, and there found the Daughter of one of
the Armenian or Syrian Merchants, seen by us at Ahmedabad, who was come thither
with a Brother of hers, in order to be married shortly to one Sig: Guilielmo, a
Hollander, to whom she had been promised in Marriage at Ahmedabad, and who also
was in the same House, which was capable of him and more. I understood at
Surat, that Sultan Chorrom had taken and sacked the City of Agra, except the
Castle, and that his Army and himself had committed very great Cruelties there
in spoiling and discovering the Goods and Money of the Citizens; particularly,
that he had tortured, and undecently mangled many Women of quality, and done
other like barbarities, whereby he rendered himself very odious to the people.
Concerning Asaf Chan, it was said, that he was held in custody by the King, as
suspected of Rebellion, although his affairs were spoken of with much
uncertainty; and that the King was hastening to come against his Son, but was
not yet far off, and moved slowly.

March the one and twentieth, Conceiving the return of the Portugal Cafila from
Cambaia to Goa to be near hand, and desiring to make a Voyage with the same;
since in regard of the greatness of my luggage, and the length of the way I
could not go by Land, and 'twas not safe going by Sea, by reason of the
continual incursions of the Mahabar Pirates; I dispatched a Messenger to Daman,
a City of the Portugals, a little way from Surat, to F. Antonio Albertino,
Rector of the College of Jesuits, with the Letter which their abovementioned
Father had given me in Cambaia; and giving him account of my self and my
intention, I desired him to send me from Daman one of those Light Vessels which
they call Almadiae, and are of that swiftness that they are not at all afraid
of Pirates, to carry me from Surat to Daman, where I desired to meet the
Cafila: For I could not go by a Boat of Surat, since the Mariners of Surat
would not have taken my Goods aboard which were in the English Ships, without
first carrying them into the City to make them pay Custom; whereby I might have
been put to a great deal of trouble of going backward and forward, as also upon
the account of the Moorish Books which I had with me, and relics of Sig:
Maani. Wherefore to prevent these intricacies, I prayed the Father to send me a
Boat from Daman to take me in not at the City, but at the Port where the Ships
ride, and where I intended to be with my Goods ready upon the shore of Sohali.
And to the end this Portugal Boat might come securely and not fear, I sent him
two safe Conducts, one from the English, and the other from the Dutch; although
there was no necessity of them, because Boats come many times secretly from
Daman, without such safe Conduct to sell Commodities to the English Ships.
March the fifteenth, Was the first day of the Feast of the Indian-Gentiles,
which they celebrate very solemnly at the entrance of the Spring, with dancings
through the street, and casting Orange Water and red Colors in jest one upon
another, with other festivities of Songs and Mummeries, as I have formerly seen
the same in Sphahan; where also reside constantly a great number of Banians and
Indian-Gentiles. Yet the solemnity and concourse of people was greater then in
Persia, as being in their own Country, and a City inhabited in a great part by
Gentiles and wealthier persons. Otherwise, I saw nothing at Surat during these
three Festival Days, but what I had seen already at Sphahan, and have mentioned
in my Writings from that place. March the eighteenth, Being invited to the
Dutch House, we there saw the Contract of Sigra Mariam, the Daughter of the
abovesaid Armenian or Syrian Merchant, Resident Ahmedabad with Sigr Guiglielmo
a Dutchman, which was followed by a sumptuous Dinner, at which were all the
Christian Dames of Europe that lived at Surat to attend upon the Bride; namely,
one Portugal Woman taken in the last Ships, which were surpised by the Dutch,
and married likewise to a Dutch man; Mary Bagdadina, Wife to another Hollander,
and with them also my young Mariam Tinatin; and another born in India, and
contracted to a Dutchman; of which Nation, many upon the encouragement of
certain privileges granted them by the State, marry Wives in India of any
kind, either white Women or black, and go to people New Batavia, which they
have built in Java Major, near a place which they call Giacatora; and they that
cannot light upon Free-women for Marriage, buy slaves and make them their
lawful Wives to transport thither. At this entertainment were present also the
President of the English, with all those of his Nation, all the Dutch
Merchants, the Brides Brother, Sig: Alberto Scilling, my self, and in short,
all the Europaean Christians that were in Surat.

March the one and twentieth, A Post came to the Dutch Agra, with fresh News,
that Sultan Chorrom, had besides the former, given a new sack to the said City,
and the Soldiers committing the like and greater Cruelties, exasperated
perhaps, at their being valorously repulsed, in assaulting the Castle with loss
of many of their Companions. March the two and twentieth, This Morning the
Messenger whom I had sent to Daman, returned to Surat with the answer which I
expected. F. Antonio writ me word that there was but one of those Light Vessels
belonging to Daman, and it was now at Surat, being lately come thither, the
Master of which was one Sebastian Luis; wherefore he advised me to agree with
him for my transportation, and in case he were already gone, then I should
advertise him thereof at Daman, and they would speedily send him back; for
which purpose they kept the safe Conducts, which I had sent for security of the
Vessel. But having presently found the abovesaid Sebastian Luis, I have agreed
with him to bring his Boat out of the River to the Seaside, and take me in at
the Port which is some distance from the mouth of the River, where I have
appointed to meet him to morrow morning. It remains only that I take leave of
the Dutch Commendator and the English President, from whom I have received
infinite Obligations during all my residence here, particularly to the Sigr
Commendator; the remembrance whereof shall continue with me during Life. I
hope, God willing, to write to you speedily from Goa, and in the mean time
humbly kiss your Hands.

LETTER II.
From Goa, April 27. 1623.
I Now salute you (my dear Sig: Mario) from Goa; in India indeed I am, but no
Indian. Having passed through the Syrian, and afterward the Persian Garb, I am
again transvested into our Europaean. In Turkey and Persia you would not have
known me, but could not mistake me in India, where I have almost resumed my
first shape. This is the third transformation which my Beard has undergone,
having here met with an odd Barber, who has advanced my mustachios according
to the Portugal Mode, and in the middle of my chin shaven after the Persian
Mode, he has left the Europaean tuft. But to continue my Diary, where I left
off in my last Letter, which was about my departure from Surat. March the three
and twentieth, Having taken leave of all Friends, a little after Dinner I set
forth to depart, but met with so many obstacles in the Dogana, or Custom-house,
that they detained me till almost night before I could get away. The occasion
was this; In the Pass given me, (without which none can depart) the Governor
three times expressly prohibited my Persian Servant Cacciatur to go with me; and
this for no other cause but for that himself, (foolishly, or rather cunningly,
as appeared afterward) out of a pretended vain fear, as he said, when we came
first to Surat, lest he should be known what he was by some of the Persians,
who are there in the service of the Great Moghol, and not knowing that in India
there is Liberty of Conscience, and that a Man may hold or change what Faith he
pleases, not the least trouble being given to any person touching Religion in
the Dominions of the Moghol; not knowing these things, I say, and fearing to
confess himself a Christian before any that might know him in Persia for a
Moor, had declared in the Dogana, when he was examined thereupon, that he was a
Musliman, which they interpret a Moor, although the word properly signifies
safe or saved, that is, of the right Faith; and therefore by Christians
(understanding it in their own sense) when considerable respects oblige them to
conceal themselves, perhaps is not unlawful to be assumed. Now Cacciatur being
hereupon taken for a Moor, and not daring to deny it or discover himself more
clearly, but, as I believe, intending to be a Moor really, and to do what
afterward he did; they would not suffer that he should go along with me into
the jurisdiction of Christians, where they conceived he would be in danger of
being perverted. And although innumerable Moors go daily into the neighboring
Territories of the Portugals, nor are they wont to be forbidden; yet, my
Cacciatur, I know not upon what account, they prohibited very strictly, I
believe by his own procurement. When I had read this prohibition in my Pass, I
sent him out of the City beforehand, with order to cross the River at another
place a good way off, and meet me at the Seaside, where being among the
English, he would be out of all all danger; but through the negligence of a Man
of the Country whom he took to direct him, either by his own will, as it is most
likely, because he knew not the way; or else, not having found Boats to pass
the River elsewhere, as he said, he was directed to cross it at the same place
near the Custom-house, where we did; whereupon being seen by the Officers, he
was seized upon, and they would not suffer him to come by any means. I used
much instance, and tried diverse ways, alleging by a writing that he was bound
to serve me longer, and was to go to Goa to be paid his wages there, according
to agreement: But all to no purpose, they still answering, (though with great
courtesy indeed) that the accord was good, and that Cacciatur did not break
it, being for his part ready to go, but that they made him stay by force, as in
zeal for Religon 'twas reasonable for them to do; that, had I been going into
some Territory of Moors as I was of Christians, they should not have kept him
from me; and therefore, in short, I must be contented to leave him behind, and
pay him for his service done in Surat; otherwise they could not give a Pass to
my self. Perceiving there was no remedy, I returned to the Dutch-House, and
having consulted with the Commendator what to do, I agreed with Cacciatur, (who
was willing not to be left at Surat, after I had threatened to cause him to be
slain there, in case he stayed to turn Moor) that he should show himself
desirous to stay at Surat, and in the Governor's own House too if he pleased,
assuring him under his Hand, that I had fully satisfied him, that so my journey
might not be stopped; and after I was gone without him, the Dutch Commendator,
who took this care upon him, should procure his escape, and send him by another
way to the Seaside where I took Boat; or if he could not be sent timely enough
to find me there, then he should come to Daman by Land, where he should
certainly find me. Upon this agreement we went before the Governor, with the
discharges of his Arrears in writing, and the Governor was contented to let me
go, after he had narrowly examined, whether it was true that he was paid by
me, and that his agreeing to stay in Surat was not a fiction. But we had laid
all things so together, that he did not discover the truth, or perhaps did not
care much to find it out. Wherefore leaving Cacciatur in the Governors House,
where he caused him to stay with sundry promises, about night I departed the
City, and crossed the River with Sebastian Luis in my company, who having sent
his Vessel down the River, went along with me by Land. On the other side of the
River, we waited some hours for Coaches to carry us to the Seaside, which we
were fain to hire at a Town some distance off, and were slow in coming. But as
soon as they came we got into them, and traveled the rest of the night to the
Seaside.

March the four and twentieth, At Daybreak we got to the English President
attended with all the Merchants of his Nations, who were giving order for
dispatching their Ships which were ready to set sail to Mucha, or Muchar, in
the Red Sea; namely, the two Ships, the Whale and Dolphin, wherewith I came
into India; for of the other three which I left in Bender of Kombru, they had
sold the little Frigate which was in ill plight, to the Persians, who designed
to make use of her in the enterprise of Arabia, whither they had determined to
pass alone, now the English plainly refused to join with them in the War; and
the other two great Ships having put in likewise at Surat, were soon after sent
out again with Master Thompson, who came with them from Persia, it not being
known in Surat whither. I was received by the President in his Tent, together
with my Mary Tinatim; and soon after came Cacciatur my Servant, and two Moors
of Surat, by the favor of the Commendator of the Dutch; but I know not whether
it were with his own good liking, though to us he pretended that it was. After
my departure the Commendator went to visit the Governor, and since I was gone,
and, as he said, could not carry Cacciatur out of Surat, he desired that he
would give him to him, to the end he might live in his House with other
Friends; which the Governor readily granting, the same night, by the help of
certain persons purposely disguised in Indian Habit, he sent him by a secure
way to the Seaside, where he found me in the Tent of the English President.
The same Morning I went aboard the Ship call the Whale, (wherein I came) to
visit the Captain and take leave of my Friends, with whom also I dined;
afterward I went aboard the Dolphin, to visit not only the Captain who was my
Friend, but especially my good Companion Sig: Alberto Schilling, who was aboard
there in order to go to the Red Sea, intending to pass from thence into
Aethiopia to the Court of the Abissins, in case he could get Transportation,
and were not hindered in the Turkish Ports where he was to pass, upon account of
being a Christian; the Turks not willingly granting passage to Christians
(especially Europaeans) toward Hhabese, in regard of the suspicions they have
of the intelligences and converse with our Compatriots may have to their
prejudice with that Prince. Wherefore taking leave of Sig: Alberto with many
embraces, of Master Rosel, (whom I had known in Persia, and who being come from
thence after me, was here shipped for a Trading Voyage) and of all my other
Friends in the two Ships, I came back to sup and lie on Land in the Tent of the
President. March the twenty fifth, Early in the Morning I put my Goods into the
Shallop of Sebastian Luis, and also going aboard my self, whilst the President
went to his own Ships to dispatch them, set sail for Daman; at night we cast
Anchor in a narrow arm of the Sea, which enters far into the Land, of which
sort of inlets there are many all along the coast of India, which encompassing
good portions of Land make many little Islands; and because the said arms of
the Sea are long and narrow like Rivers, and some of them have little Rivers
falling into them from the continent, (although the water is salt, and they
have no current but the ebbing and flowing of the Sea) the Portugals term them
in their Language Rios, Rivers; which I take notice of, that it may be
understood that all the Rios, or Rivers, which I shall name in the coast of
India, and not specify that they are streams of fresh water, are such arms of
the Sea as this, improperly called Rivers. This, where we staid this night, is
called Rio di Colek, or Coleque. I have better understood that all the
aforesaid inlets are not arms of the Sea, but really Rivers of fresh water; and
the Tide of the Sea at ebbing and flowing being here very strong and overcoming
that of the Rivers; hence it comes to pass that it is hardly perceived whether
they have any stream or no; and the water going far into the Land comes
likewise to be salt; but indeed they are Rivers, and form Islands by their
entering into the Sea with many mouths. They are almost innumerable upon all the
coast of India, and the Portugals very truly call them Rios, Rivers. Wonder not
at these doubts and various informations, for I could not understand things
thoroughly at first, for want of converse with intelligent persons; nor was it
easy for me to judge right in the beginning, the first appearance of things
oftentimes deceiving even the wisest, as the saltness of the water did me, in
my judgment of these Rivers; making me take them for arms of the Sea; which
mistake, was furthered by the affirmation of most of the ignorant Portugals,
who not knowing more of this coast then the shore where the water is salt,
think that the Rivers are salt water; but Time and better informations assist
my diligence in discovering the truth of things. March the twenty sixth, About
noon we arrived at Daman, but unseasonably, the Cafila and Fleet of the
Portugals being gone in the Morning, and we discerned them sailing afar off,
but it was not possible to overtake them, I advertised F. Antonio Albertino,
Rector of the Jesuits College, of my coming, and he very courteously came
forthwith to the Seaside to receive me, and carried me to lodge in the
College, which in reference to that small City is large enough and well built.
He sent Mariam Tenatim, in a Palanchino, or Indian Litter, (wherein people are
carried lying along as 'twere in a Couch, and those of Women are covered) to
the House of a Portugal Gentlewoman, and advised me that since the Cafila was
departed, I should go in the same Vessel to meet it at Bassaim, where it was to
touch; and for that day rest a little in Daman as accordingly I did.

The City of Daman is small, but of good building and has Portugals upon this
coast, being subject in spirituals to the Archbishop of Goa; but in every one
of them resides a Vicar, whom they call da Vara, that is, of the Vierge or
Mace, (which is the badg of Authority) with supreme power. Besides the Jesuits
and the Church of the Sea, (as they call the Duomo, or Cathedral) here are
Dominicans, Franciscans, and, as I remember, Augustines too; all, who have good
Churches and Covents. The City is environed with strong walls of good
fortification, and has a large Territory and many Towns under it; and because
they are frequently at war with Nizamsciah, whose State (being governed at this
day by his famous Abissine-Slave Melik Ambar) borders upon it by Land;
therefore the Portugals here are all Horsemen, and keep many good Arabian
Horses, as they are obliged to do, going frequently out to war in defense of
their Territory when occasion requires, though during my time here they were at
peace. In Daman I first tasted at the Father Rector's Table many strange Indian
Fruits, some of which are described by Carolus Clusius, and others not, which,
as I was told, were after the writing of his Books brought into East India from
Brasil, or New Spain; namely, Papaia, Casu or Cagiu, Giambo, Manga or Amba, and
Ananas; all which seemed to me passibly good, and, though of different tastes,
not inferior to ours of Europe, especially Papaia, which is little esteemed in
India; and, if I mistake not, is not mentioned by the abovesaid Writer; in
shape and taste, it much resembles our Melons, but is sweeter, and consequently
to me seemed better. Ananas is justly esteemed, being of a laudable taste,
though something uncouth, inclining more to sharpness, which, with a mixture of
sweetness renders it pleasant. And because the said Books mention it not, I
shall briefly add, that to the outward view it seems, when it is whole, to
resemble our Pineapple, both in the divisions and the color; saving that at
the top it has a kind of tuft of long strait leaves between green and white,
which the Pineapple has not, and which render it pretty to look upon; it is
also different from the Pineapple, in that the husks are not hard, but tender
like the common skin of Fruits; nor is it needful to take them off one by one,
neither is any seed eaten, as the Pine-Nuts, which are within the husks, but
the whole Fruit is all pulp, which is cut with the knife; and within it is of
somewhat a greenish color. Of temperament, it is held to be hot, and good to
promote digestion, having, in my opinion, somewhat of a winish taste and
strength; which virtue of helping digestion, is likewise ascribed in a higher
degree to Caju, whence it always uses to be eaten with fish; but of this and
the rest, because I suppose others have written of them, I shall forbear
further to speak. In Daman, I had from the Jesuits two considerable pieces of
News. First, that the two English Ships, which, as I said, were sent from Surat
before my departure thence, upon some unknown design, went to Dabul, under
pretext of Peace and Friendship, as if to traffic in that Port; and that the
Moors of Dabul had spread Carpets, and prepared a handsome entertainment for
the principals upon shore: but the English having fairly landed, suddenly got
to certain pieces of Ordnance which were there, and nailed them up; then
putting their hands to their Arms, began to fall upon the people of the City;
who upon this sudden unexpected onset, betook themselves to flight, and were
likely to receive great damage; but at length a Portugal Factor, and some few
others making head against the English, and animating the Citizens to do the
like, turned the scale of the victory, and in a short time beat out all the
English, killing many of them, and constraining the rest to fly away with their
Ships; who nevertheless in their flight took two Vessels of Dabul, which were
in the Port richly laden, but unprovided, as in a secure place; which was no
small damage to the City, and afforded a rich booty to the English. This
action, I conceive, was done by the English out of some old grudge against the
City of Dabul, or perhaps, only to force it to permit them free Trade; and
they use deal to thus with such ports as will not admit them thereunto. The
other News, was that Prete Janni, King of Aethiopia and the Abissins, was by
means of the Jesuits reconciled to the Roman Church, and become a good
Catholic, intending that his whole Country should do the same; which if true,
is indeed a thing of great consequence.

March the seven and twentieth, About noon we departed from Daman toward
Bassaim, in the same Barque or Almadia, and sailed all the day; at night, in
regard of the contrary current and danger of Pirates, who cannot easily be seen
and avoided in the dark, we cast Anchor under a place called Danie. March the
eight and twentieth, Continuing our course, in the Morning we espied some
Ships, which we suspected to be Pirates of Malabar, and therefore fetching a
compass we made but little way forwards. At night, we cast Anchor in a Bay
called Kielme-Mahi, from two Towns situate upon it, one called Kielme, the
other Mahi. On the nine and twentieth of the same month, we sailed forward
again; but the Tide turning contrary, we cast Anchor about noon, and stayed a
while in a little Island near the Continent. The sails being mended, and the
current become favorable, we set forward again; and having passed by some
Vessels, which we doubted to be Pirates of Malabar, about night we arrived at
Bassaim. But, lest the people of the Fleet, which we found there with the
Cafila, should molest our Boat, as sometimes it is usual, and take away the
Seamen for the service of the Navy, we stayed a while without the City,
casting Anchor a little wide of the shore; and in the mean time I sent notice
to F. Diego Rodriguez, Rector of the College of Jesuits at Bassaim, for whom I
had Letters from the Father Rector of their College at Daman, and some also
for others from the Brother of theirs, whom I saw in Cambaia. The F. Rector
sent presently to the Seaside where I was, F. Gaspar di Govea their
Procurator, who because 'twas said the Fleet would depart that very night with
the Cafila for Goa, immediately without entering into the City, procured me
passage in a Merchants Frigate, as more commodious for passengers, in regard
'twas free from the trouble of Soldiers which went in the Men of War,
appointed to convoy the Merchants Ships. The Captain of the Vessel wherein I
embarked, was called Diego Carvaglio, with whom having agreed for my passage, I
presently put my Goods aboard his Ship, together with Mariam Tinatin, in the
most convenient Cabin, and Cacciatur to take care of them. It being now night,
I went alone with F. Govea to their College, to visit and thank the F. Rector
and the other Fathers, who very courteously retained me at Supper; which ended,
to avoid the danger of being left behind, I forthwith returned to repose in the
Ship. Of the City Bassaim, I cannot say any thing, because it was night both at
my entrance, stay, and coming away; I can only intimate, that it is wholly
surrounded with strong walls, and, if I took good notice, seems to me greater
then Daman; but of late years many buildings were destroyed by a horrible
tempest, and are not yet re-edifi'd. I found in the College of Bassaim, F.
Paolo Giovio an Italian. March the thirtieth, In the Morning the Fleet set
sail, and going off the shore we came to the Island where they take in fresh
water over against a City, in view at a little distance, which they call
Salsette; and the place where we stayed (being a large and populous Island) is
called in the Portugal Tongue L' Aguada; and here we stayed all day, because
the wind was so contrary that we could not get off that point of Land; and for
that diverse of the Galeots and new Frigates built to be sent and armed in Goa,
were not in order to depart, and we were forced to stay their preparation.
March the one and thirtieth, At Sunrise we put to Sea for Goa, but were slow
in getting forth to the Main before we could set sail; because the Tide was
still going out, and there was so little water left that our Frigate run a
ground. At length the Tide turning, we rowed out of the streit between the City
and the Island; and being come into the broad Sea hois'd all our sails. About
midnight following, we arrived at Ciaul, but entered not into the Port,
because it stands much within Land upon a precipice, where the Sea entering far
into the Bay between the Hills and the low Shore, (into which also is
descharg'd the mouth of a River) makes an ample and secure harbor; wherefore
by reason of the darkness of the night, which in this place is no seasonable
time, the Fleet would not enter, but we rode at the Rivers mouth till break of
day.

April the first, Entering into the Port in the Morning, we cast Anchor under
the City upon the shore, where nevertheless the water is so deep, and our
Galeots came so near the bank, that we went ashore by a bridge. In the entrance
of the City and Haven, on the right hand, almost Southwards, we saw that famous
Hill which the Portugals call Morro di Ciaul, commanding the Harbor and all
the adjacent City; on the top of it stands a strong Castle, which was sometimes
possessed by the Moors of Dacan; namely, by Nizam-Schiah, to whom also the
whole Territory about it belongs; and when the said King made war with the
Portugals, the Moors did great mischief to them from the top of this Mountain,
and another which stands near the Harbor, but something more inwardly,
discharging great Artillery from thence upon the City and the mouth of the
Port, so that no Ship could enter. But at last a small number of Portugals
having routed with a signal, and almost miraculous victory, a very great body
of Moors, the same day they likewise took the said Morro; whither the routed-
Moors flying, it happened that in the entrance of the Fortress, an Elephant
wounded by the Portugals, in its flight fell down in the Gate, so that the
Moors could not shut it; and the victorious Portugals in that fury of pursuing
the Enemy, had occasion and convenience of entering: so that they took it, and
still hold it, (having improved the fortifications) and consequently, delivered
the City of Ciaul from the continual molestations, which it suffered from
thence by the Moors; and now the Citizens live in peace, and more secure.
Having landed a little way from the Dogana, or Custom-house, which stands
without the walls; the first thing I saw was the Cathedral Church, which stands
likewise without the walls upon the shore, and is the Sea not of a Bishop but
of a Vicar, as Daman, Bassaim, Ormuz, and other places are; which though they
enjoy the title of Cities, are nevertheless all subject to the Archbishop of
Goa. I went next into the College of the Jesuits, whose Church here, as also
in Daman, Bassaim, and almost all Cities belonging to the Portugals in India,
is called Saint Paul's; whence in India the said Fathers are more known by the
name of Paulists then Jesuits. Here I visited F. Antonio Pereira, who was come
from Bassaim, where I fell acquainted with him in our Fleet, in order to go
likewise to Goa. I likewise visited the F. Rector of the said College, who
caused me to stay dinner with him; and being the Fleet departed not that day, I
also lodged in the said College at night. April the second, I heard Mass early
in the Jesuits Church, and taking leave of them went to embark, but found that
my Galeot was removed to the other side of the Port under the Mountain to be
mended; and having found Sig: Manuel d' Oliveira, one of our Companions
embarked in the same Galeot, and understanding that the fleet did not depart
that day neither, I went with him to hear a Sermon in the Cathedral Church;
after which, we went to dine in the House of F. Francesco Fernandez, Priest and
Vicar, who lived sometimes at Ormuz, and after the loss of that Island was
retired hither. The Portugals call Secular Priests, Fathers, as we do the
Religious or Monasticks. In the same House dwelt Signor -- a worthy and grave
Soldier, who being a Friend to my said Companion, we conversed together till
it was late, and then our Galeot being come back we went to embark; but neither
did the fleet depart this night, as we supposed it would. April the third, A
rumor of departing being spread abroad about noon, we put out to Sea, and cast
Anchor at the mouth of the Harbor, where many other Galeots were gathered,
expecting the setting forth of the whole fleet; but neither did we depart this
day nor the night ensuing.

April the fourth, The fleet being at length in readiness, and the Sun a good
height, we set sail and departed from the Port of Ciaul. Moors of Daman, that
is, by Nizam Sciah, which Fort is called Danda Ragiapori; and at night we cast
Anchor under a steep shore called Kelsi. We did not sail in the night time,
because the Cafila was numerous, consisting, by my conjecture, of above 200.
Vessels, and in the dark some unwary Ship might easily have been taken by the
Rovers of Malabar. The next day we sailed gently along, only with the sail
called the Trinket, making but little way, that so we might go altogether and
not leave many Ships behind, which being ill provided of Tackle could not sail
fast. We cast Anchor again early in the Evening, to avoid the confusion which
might arise by so many Ships casting Anchor together; besides the danger of
falling foul one upon another in the dark. Our course was always Southerly, and
the Coast along which we passed on the left hand was all mountainous; till
having got out of the dominion of Nizam-Sciah, we began to coast along that of
Adil-Sciah. Now that it may be understood who these Princes are, I shall tell
you that on the South of the States of the Great Moghol, in the Confines
whereof India begins to be distended into a great Tongue of Land like a
Triangle, a great way Southwards into the Sea, between the Gulf of Cambaia,
and the Gulf of Bengala; the first Province of India joining to the States of
the Moghol, is the Kingdom of Daman, whereof some part is still possessed by
the Moghol. Next follows the Kingdom of Telengone, or Telenga, and many other
Provinces divided under several Princes into little Kingdoms, which they say
were anciently but one or two, and that the others who are now absolute
Princes, were sometimes his Captains or Ministers, who having by degrees pulled
down the Principal (who was, if I mistake not, the King of Bisnaga on the
South, and the King of Sceherbeder) are become equal, and all without
superiority sovereign Princes. Amongst these, the nearest to the Moghol are
three Reguli, or pety Kings, all which yet have great dominion and strength,
and are at this day of the Sect of the Moors; for the Moors having at first
been brought into India to serve as slaves, are by degrees become Masters, and
by oppressing the Gentiles in many places have much propagated their Religion.
Of these three Princes, the nearest to the Moghol, whose Territory lies toward
the Sea on the West, and Confines with the Portugals at Giaul and other places,
and who is properly styled King of Dacan, (from the greatest Province) is
called by the name, or rather surname, hereditary to all that reign in this
State, Nizam Sciah, which many interpret Re della Lancia, King of the Lance,
alluding to the Persian word Nize, which signifies a Lance; but I conceive they
are mistaken, because his name is Nizam Sciah, and not Nize Sciah, as according
to this interpretation it should be: Wherefore I have heard others, perhaps,
better interpret it, Re de' Falconi, King of Falcons, or Hawks, from the word
Nizam, which in the Indian Tongue, they say, signifies a Hawk or other Bird of
Prey. And whosoever reigns here, always retains this surname; because whilst
he was not an absolute Prince, but a Minister of that other great King of
India, this was his Title and Office under that King. The Nizam Sciah now
reigning, is a Boy of twelve years old, who therefore does not govern it, but
an Abyssine Slave of the Moors Religion, called Melik Amber, administers the
State in his stead, and that with such authority, that at this day this
Territory is more generally known and called by the name of Melick's Country,
then the Kingdom of Nizam-Sciah. Nevertheless this Melik Amber governs not
fraudulently, and with design to usurp, by keeping the King shut up, as I have
sometimes heard; but according as I have better understood since from persons
informed nearer hand, he administers with great fidelity and submission toward
the young King; to whom nevertheless, they say, he has provided, or already
given to Wife a Daughter of his own, upon security that himself shall be
Governor of the whole State as long as he lives. This Melik Amber is a Man of
great parts, and fit for government, but, as they say, very impious, addicted
to Sorcery; whereby it is thought that he keeps himself in favor with his King,
and that for works of Enchantments, (as to make prodigious buildings, and with
good luck, that the same may last perpetually and succeed well) he has with
certain Superstitions used in those Countries committed most horrid impieties
and cruelties, killing hundreds of his Slave's Children, and others; and
offering them as in Sacrifice to the invoked Devils, with other abominable
stories which I have heard related; but because not seen by my self, I affirm
not for true. The Ambassador of this Nizam-Sciah in Persia, is that Hhabese
Chan, an Abyssine also, whom I saw at my being there. Of strange things, they
relate that Nizam-Sciah, has I know not where in his Country a piece of
Ordnance so vast, that they say it requires 15000. pound of Powder to charge
it; that the Ball it carries, almost equals the height of a Man, that the metal
of the piece is about two spans thick, and that it requires I know not how many
thousand Oxen, besides Elephants to move it; which therefore is useless for
war, and serves only for vain pomp. Nevertheless this King so esteems it, that
he keeps it continually covered with rich cloth of Gold, and once a year comes
in person to do it reverence, almost adoring it; and indeed, although these
Kings are Moors, yet they still retain much of the ancient Idolatry of the
Countries, wherein Mahometism is little, or not yet universally settled. The
second of the three pety Kings, whose Country joins to that of the Moghol, but
borders upon the Sea Eastward in the Gulf of Bengala, is he who (for the same
reasons mentioned concerning Nizam-Sciah) is called by the hereditary surname
of Cutb-Sciah, which some erroneously expound Polo d' i Re, the Pole of Kings,
being deceived by the Arabic word Cutb, which signifies the Pole, and is used
by the Arabians and Persians, to denote supreme excellency; understanding ( e.
g.) by Polo de i Savii, o di Sapienza, The Pole of Wisemen, or of Wisdom, the
wisest Man in the world; by Polo di Santita o della Leg, The Pole of Sanctity
and the Law, the greatest pitch, and the highest observer of the divine Law;
and so in all other like Cases; but, I say, I believe they are mistaken; and
there seems to me more truth in the exposition of others, who interpret Re de i
Cani, King of Dogs, from Cutb, which in the Language of India signifies a Dog,
because he was Master of the Dogs to that supreme King. Under his jurisdiction
is Gulcondalar, where, I think, he has his Royal Seat, and Mislipatan, a
famous Port in the Gulf of Bengala. Lastly, the third of the three Reguli, is
he who has his Seat in Visapor, and reigns in the Country of Telongane,
bordering upon the Portugals Territories at Goa, more Southwards then the two
before mentioned. Some will have Visapor and Goa belong to the Province of
Dacan, and that Telenga much more remote toward the South. The truth is, India
and the Provinces thereof is very confused; forasmuch as the Indians themselves
being illiterate cannot distinguish it aright, and the Portugals have all their
knowledge thereof from the vulgar of the ignorant Indians, whose Language they
understand not well, and extremely corrupt in pronuntiations; therefore I
cannot speak any thing certain concerning the same, as neither have the
Portugal Writers been able to do, though persons very exact and sufficient. But
to return to my purpose, the proper name of him that now reigns is Ibrahim, but
his hereditary surname (as the others) is Adil-Sciah, or Idal Sciah, which
signifies not giusto Re, a Just King, as some think from the Arabic word Adil,
denoting Just; but rather, in my opinion, as some others say, Re delle Chiavi,
King of the Keys, from Adil or Idal, an Indian word importing Keys, he having
been in times passed Superintendent of the Keys, (of the Treasury perhaps, or
Archives) under the supreme King. Sometimes these Princes have been called
Nizam-maluk, Adil-Chan, and so the others with the words, either Melek or Chan,
in stead of Sciah, which is all one; for Melek or Maluk, (as some corruptly
read) signifies a King in Arabic, as Chan does also in Turkish, and Sciah in
Persian: And because these three Languages are sufficiently familiar, and
almost common to the Moors, therefore they have used sometimes one word,
sometimes another; but in later times it seems that those who now rule,
rejecting the words Melek and Chan, are better pleased with the Persian Title
Sciah, as being, perhaps, more modern to them; whence they are ordinarily
called now Nizam-Sciah, Cutb-Sciah, and Adil-Sciah, which are the three Princes
of whom I undertook to give an account, as persons whom I shall have frequent
occasion to mention in these Writings. And to leave nothing unsaid, I shall
add, that Nizam-Sciah, or rather his Governor Melik-Ambar, makes war
frequently and bravely against the Great Moghol, upon whom he borders:
Cutb-Sciah, I know not whether he actually makes public war against him, but
at least he fails not to assist his Neighbor Nizam-Sciah with money. The same
does also Adil-Sciah, but secretly and by underhand; not daring through I know
not what mean fear declare himself an enemy to the Moghol; I say, mean fear,
because not bordering upon him, (for the two other Princes lie between them)
and being able, as they say, upon occasion to bring into the field a hundred
thousand men, he seems justly chargeable with timerousness and cowardice;
since, methinks, he that has a hundred thousand men at his command ought not
to fear the whole world; or, if he does, he is a very Poltron: But indeed, Adil
Sciah fears the Moghol, yea, he fears and observes him so much that he pays
him an annual Tribute; and when the Moghol sends any Letter to him, which is
always brought by some very ordinary common Soldier or Slave, he goes forth
with his whole Army to meet the Letter and him that brings it, who being
conducted to the Palace sits down there, whilst Adil-Sciah stands all the time,
and the Letter being laid upon a Carpet on the pavement, before he offers to
put forth his hand to take it up, he bows himself three times to the earth,
doing reverence to it after their manner. Moreover, I have heard that this
Ibrahim Adil-Sciah who now reigns, some years ago poisoned his own eldest Son,
as suspected of being likely to become one day a disturber of the Commonwealth
and the public quiet, being displeased with him only because he once with too
much freedom persuaded him to deny the Moghol the accustomed Tribute; saying,
that with the Tribute alone which he paid voluntarily he durst undertake to
make a mighty war upon him and never pay him Tribute more; which, if true, was
certainly in this Prince a strange effect of fear. This Adil-Sciah has married
one of his Daughters to Cutb-Sciah, and with Nizam-Sciah he constantly
maintains, and frequently renews alliance; so that they are all three fast
friends, and firmly united together. I have also heard that Adil-Sciah uses to
wear his Beard very long, contrary to the other two, who are shaven after the
mode of Persia and India. They say the present Ibrahim Adil-Sciah is infirm, by
reason of a great hurt received by a Wolf in his hips, so that he cannot ride
on Horseback; and hence perhaps it is that he is so peaceable and timorous,
infirmities undoubtedly much dejecting the spirits of Men. All these three
Princes are Moors, as I said before, although their Countries abound with
innumerable Gentiles. Cutb-Sciah alone, as I have heard, is Sciani, of the Sect
of the Persians; but the other two, I conceive, are Sonni, as the Turks and the
Moghol; which yet I affirm not, because I have not perfect certainty thereof.
The King of Persia cherishes all these three Princes sufficiently, and they
have great correspondence by interchangeable Ambassies and Presents; all which
is only in reference to make greater opposition to the Moghol upon whom they
border, and whose greatness is equally prejudicial to them all. And so much
may suffice concerning them.

April the fifth, We set sail again, and in the Afternoon passed Dabul, which
belongs to the Dominions of Adil-Sciah, and stands hid amongst Hills in a low
Plain; so that it is scarcely seen. After which, we passed within two Leagues of
a Point or Promontory which the Portugals call Dabul falso, because it deceives
such as come from far by Sea, making them take it for the Point of Dabul, to
which it resembles. At Night we cast Anchor near another shore which they call
the Gulf or Bay, or, as the Portugals speak, A Enceada dos Bramanes, because
the Country thereabouts is inhabited by many Brachmans. April the sixth, We set
sail, and first passed by Ragiapur, then by Carapetan. About two hours before
night, we cast Anchor in an Enceada, or Bay, which they call Calosi, or
Calosci, not far from the Point of Carapetan. April the seventh, In the Morning
we passed by Tambona, which was the Country of the Mariners of our Ship, and
toward Evening by the Rocks which the Portugals call Los Illeos quemados, that
is, The burnt Rocks, because they appear such by their color and inequality;
and we continued sailing all Night, every Ship going as they pleased, without
caring for the company of the Fleet; now that by reason of the great nearness
of Goa, we were in safety. April the eighth, Arriving before Day at the shore
of Goa, we began to enter into the salt River, or Rio, as they speak, of salt
water which the Portugals call Barra di Goa; upon the mouth of which River,
which is sufficiently broad, stand two Forts, one on each side, with good
pieces of Artillery planted upon them to defend the Entrance.

Goa, at this day the Head of all the Dominion of the Portugals in India, is
situate here in one of these Islands, of which, as I said before, there are
innumerable upon all the Coast of India, made by the several Rivers which
divide them from the main-land. The City is built in the inmost part of the
Island toward the Continent; and therefore the whole Island is plentifully
inhabited with Towns and places of Recreation, and particularly, upon the
River; which is on either side, adorned with Buildings and Houses, surrounded
with Groves of Palm Trees, and delightful Gardens. The greatest part of the
Island is enclosed with a Wall, with Gates at the places for passage,
continually guarded for security against the attempts of Neighbors, and also
to prevent the flight of Slaves and Thefts; since only that River being
crossed, you enter presently into the Territory of Adil-Sciah and the Moors;
but it is otherwise toward the Seaside, for all the Coast which is beset with
other small Islands and Pen-insula's, for a good space belongs to the
Portugals, being inhabited with Towns and diverse Churches. The City which lies
on the right hand of the River, as you enter into the inmost recess is
sufficiently large, built, partly, on a Plain, and, partly, upon certain
pleasant Hills, from the tops whereof the whole Island and the Sea are
discovered with a very delightful prospect. The buildings of the City are good,
large and convenient, contrived for the most part for the benefit of the wind
and fresh Air, which is very necessary in regard of the great heats, and also
for reception of the great Rains of the three Months of Pausecal, which are
June, July, and August; which not upon account of the heat (although it be very
great at that time, but greatest of all in May, when the Sun is in the Zenith)
but of the great Rain, the Portugals call the Winter of the Earth. Nevertheless
the buildings have not much ornament or exquisiteness of Art, but are rather
plain, and almost all without beautifyings. The best are the Churches, of which
many are held here by several Religions, as Augustines, Dominicans,
Franciscans, discalceated Carmelites and Jesuits, with double, and very
numerous Covents; and indeed, half of the Religious that are here, would
suffice for a City bigger then Goa: But besides these, there are also many of
Secular Priests, and Parishes, and Chapels; and lastly, the Sea or Cathedral,
which nevertheless is neither the fairest, nor the greatest Church of that
City, there being many others that exceed it. The Sea of Goa at the time of my
being there was not finished, but scarce above half built, and thence seemed to
me small and less stately; but having since seen the entire design of the
structure, I conceive, that when it is finished 'twill be a very goodly Church.
The people is numerous, but the greatest part are slaves, a black and lewd
generation, going naked for the most part, or else very ill clad, seeming to me
rather a disparagement then an ornament to the City. Portugals there are not
many, they used to be sufficiently rich; but of late, by reason of many losses,
by the incursions of the Dutch and English in these Seas, they have not much
wealth, but are rather poor. Nevertheless they live in outward appearance with
splendour enough, which they may easily do, both in regard of the plentifulness
of the Country, and because they make a show of all that they have: however, in
secret they endure many hardships; and some there are, who, to avoid submitting
to such Employments as they judge unbecomming their gravity, being all desirous
to be accounted Gentlemen here, lead very wretched lives, undergoing much
distress, and being put to beg every Day in the Evening; a thing which in other
Countries would be accounted unhappy and more indecent, not to say shameful,
then to undertake any laudable profession of a Mechanic Art. They all profess
Arms, and are Soldiers although married; and few, except Priests and Doctors
of Law and Physic, are seen without a Sword; even so the Artificers and
meanest Plebeians: as also silk clothes, are the general wear almost of every
body. Which I take notice of, because to see a Merchant and a Mechanic in a
dress fit for an Amorato, is a very extravagant thing; yet amongst them, very
ordinary; the sole dignity of being Portugals sufficing them (as they say) to
value themselves as much as Kings and more.

But returning to my purpose, whilst we were coming to the Barra, to dispatch
away Ruy Freira de Andrada, whom with five or six Ships (a small preparation
indeed) he sent to the relief of Mascat, and to make war against the Persians;
having likewise appointed diverse other Ships to be sent after him from Ciaul,
Dio, and other Ports of the Portugals; which if they go, may be sufficient for
some considerable exploit: but the Orders of the Viceroy in other places, God
knows how they will be executed in his absence. The sudden departure of Ruy
Freira, made me sorry that I had not the opportunity to see him and speak with
him, as I extremely desired, and perhaps, it would not have been unacceptable
to him. Arriving at the City, we cast Anchor under the Dogana, or Custom-house,
where all Ships commonly ride, to wit, such as are not very great; for these
stay either at the bar in the mouth of the River, or in some other place
thereof where they have the deepest water. Being come thither, I presently gave
notice of my arrival to F. Fra: Leandro of the Anuntiation, whom I had known in
Persia, and who was here Provincial Vicar of the discalceated Carmelites of
India and Persia. I also advertised the Fathers Jesuits thereof, for whom I
brought sundry of their Generals Letters from Rome, written affectionately to
recommend me to them. F. Fra: Leandro came forthwith to visit me in the Ship,
where after some discourse for a while together, he undertook to procure us a
House and so departed; having also offered me his own Covent with that same
courtesy and confidence as was formerly between us. A little after, it was
very great contentment to me to see and know F. Antonio Schipano, your Kinsman,
now a very old man, who was saluted by me upon your account; and so for this
time I gave him a succinct Relation of you, putting him in mind of your
Childhood. He came to visit me with F. Vincenzo Sorrentino of Ischia, whom I
had formerly seen in Persia, and who not living then with the Jesuits, came
with the Spanish Ambassador as his Chaplain in that Voyage. These two Fathers
being Italians, were sent by F. Andrea Palmeiro, Visitor of the Jesuits, and
then their Superior in Goa, both to complement me in his Name, and to give him
more exact information of me, whom he had never seen, nor so much as known by
Fame, saving what his General's Letters signified to him. Wherefore after they
had visited me, and understood what was my intention to do, they went to give
account thereof to the Father Visitor, saying, that they would return again, as
accordingly they did a good while after, offering me in the Name of the F.
Visitor their Covent of Professed House, where they prayed me to go and lodge,
at least till I were provided of a House; adding, that they would also provide
a convenient residence for Mariam Tinatin, who was with me. I thanked them, and
accepted the favor as to my self, and this with the approbation also of F.
Fra: Leandro, whom I acquainted therewith. But because it was late that day,
and there was not time to dispatch my Goods at the Dogana, I did not land, but
remained in the Ship with intention to do so the next day. April the ninth,
Early in the Morning F. Fra: Leandro sent a Palanchino, or Sedan, to fetch
Mariam Tinatin, that she might go to Mass at his Church, and afterward repair
to the House of a Portugal Gentlewoman, called Sigra Lena da Cugna, living near
the discalceated Carmelites, and much devoted to them, whose House also stood
right over against that which he intended to take for me. And this was done,
because the Portugals who in matter of Government look with great diligence upon
the least motes, without making much reckoning afterward of great beams, held
it inconvenient for the said Mariam Tinatin to live with me in the same House;
although she had been brought up always in our House from a very little Child
and as our own Daughter. For being themselves in these matters very
unrestrained, (not sparing their nearest Kindred, nor, as I have heard their
own Sisters, much less Foster-children in their Houses they conceive that all
other Nations are like themselves; wherefore in conformity to the use of the
Country, and not to give offense, it was necessary for us to be separated; the
rather too, because strangers who amongst the Portugals are not very well
looked upon, and through their ignorance held worse then in our Countries
Heretics are, may easily expect that all evil is thought of them, and that all
evil may easily befall them in these parts; so that it is requisite to live with
circumspection. And this may serve for advice to whoever shall travel into
these Regions. F. Fra: Leandro sent also to invite me to Mass at his Church;
and being it was a Holy Day, and the Jesuits were not yet come to fetch me, as
they said they would, I determined to go thither, leaving Cacciatur in the Ship
to look to the goods. I was no sooner landed, but I met F. Sorrentino, who in
the Name of his Jesuits was coming to fetch me, and also with a Palanchino to
carry Mariam Tinatin I know not whither. She was gone already, and so I made an
excuse for her, and likewise for my self to the Jesuits, only for that day,
being I was upon the way with the Carmelites; and although it somewhat troubled
them, yet I went to F. Leandro, having agreed to return to the Ship; and the
next day after my Goods were dispatched at the Dogana, which could not be done
now because it was Sunday, I should then go to receive the favor of the
Jesuits as they commanded me. Wherefore proceeding to the Church of the
Carmelites, which stands at the edge of the City upon a pleasant Hill, with a
very delightful prospect, I heard Mass there, and stayed both to dine, sup, and
lodge with them. April the tenth, Early in the Morning I went to the Ship,
landed my Goods, dispatched them at the Custom-house, and having carried them
to the House of Sigra Lena da Cugna, where Mariam Tinatin was, I went to
quarter (till the House taken for me were emptied, cleaned, and prepared) in
the Covent of the Professed House of the Jesuits, where I was received by the
Visitor, the Provincial, the Provost, and the rest, with much courtesy, and
with their accustomed Charity and Civility. I found there many Italian Fathers,
of which Nation the Society makes frequent use, especially in the Missions of
China, Japan, India, and many other places of the East; besides the two
above-named, I found of Italians F. Christoforo Boro, a Milanese, called Brono
in India, (not to offend the Portugal's ears with the word Boro, which in their
Language does not sound well) a great Mathematician; and another young Father
who was afterward my Confessor; F. Giuliano Baldinotti of Pistoia, designed
for Japan, whither he went afterward. Moreover, in the College which is
another Church, and a distinct Covent, F. Alessandro Leni, an ancient Roman,
and Friend of my Uncles, with whom, especially with Sig: Alessandro, he had
studied in our Casa Instituta, or Academy; F. Giacinto Franceschi a Florentine;
all who, with infinite others of several Nations, Portugals, Castilians, and
others, were all my Friends; and particularly, F. Pantaleon Vincislao a German,
well skilled in Mathematics, and a great wit, Procurator of China; F. Per
Moryad, the Viceroy's Confessor, and F. Francesco Vergara, both Castilians; F.
Christoforo di Giavanni a Portugal, learned in Greek and Arabic; F. Flaminio
Carlo of Otranto, Master in Divinity. Of Friars I also found many Italians,
namely, in the College of Friar Joseph Masagna, a famous Spicerer, and a Man
of much business in the Professed House, a Neapolitan, a Venetian, and a
Thuscan, called Friar Bartolomeo Pontebuoni, a good Painter, and also a Man of
much employment, who were all my great Friends. April the eleventh, my
Birthday, The Jesuits showed me all their Covent, which is indeed a large and
goodly Building, and though not much adorned according to our custom, yet
perhaps, is the best thing that is in Goa; as also the front of their Church.
April the fourteenth, which was Holy Friday, Being present at Holy Service in
the Quire of the Jesuits, (because I was still in my Persian Habit, the
Portugal Clothes which I had bespoken being not yet made, and therefore I
appeared not in public) Sig: Constantino da Sa, (a Portugal Cavalier, or
Hidalgo, designed General for the Island of Zeilan, whither he was preparing to
go speedily with his Fleet) coming also to hear the Office in the Quire, saw me
there, and understanding who I was, was pleased to take notice of me, and after
the Office was ended, came together with the Fathers very courteously to
complement me, offering himself to serve me, (as he said) in the Island of
Zeiland, if I pleased to go thither: Whereunto I also answered with the best
and most courteous words I could. This Sig: Constantino had been sent with an
Armado of many Ships to relieve Ormuz when it was besiedg'd; but not arriving
there till after the place was taken, he returned back with his Fleet to Goa.

April the sixteenth, being Easter Day, I first resumed an Europaean, to wit, a
Portugal Habit, as it is the fashion at Goa, amongst the graver sort, after I
had worn strange garbs for many years together, and ever since the death of my
Sigra Sitti Maani, clothed my self and my servant in mourning. April the
seventeenth, F. Vincislao Pantaleon, my Friend above-named, (who was skilled in
the China Language, having been many years in these parts, and intended to
return thither) showed me the Geographical Description of all China, written
very small, or rather printed in a China Character after their way very
handsomely. On which occasion, I must not omit to note that the Chinese, as
the said Father showed me in their Books, are wont in writing to draw the line
or verse of their writing, not as we and the Hebrews do cross the paper, but
(contrary to both) from the top to the bottom, beginning to write at the right
side of the paper, and ending at the left; which to all other Nations seems a
very strange way. Moreover, their Letters are not properly Letters, but great
Characters, each of which denotes an entire word; whence the Characters are as
many as there are words in the Language, and they reckon to the number of
eighty thousand; a thing indeed not only strange and superfluous, but also, in
my opinion, unprofitable; yea, disadvantageous, and only for vain pomp; for in
learning these Characters they spend many years unprofitably, which might be
employed in the acquisition of other better Sciences, without being always
Children, (as Hermes Trismegistus said of the Greeks;) yea, in their whole life
they cannot learn them all; so that there are none among themselves, or, if
any, they are very rare and miraculous, who can write and read all the words,
and know all the Characters of their own Tongue, which is certainly a great
imperfection; although they say, that he who knows four thousand Characters,
may speak and write well enough; and he that knows six or eight thousand, may
pass for eloquent. The Japoneses seem to me more judicious in this point,
having for ordinary, and more facile use, invented a^ Alphabet of few Letters,
written likewise from the top downwards, wherewith they write all words, and
all their own Language, and also that of China: But in the Sciences and more
weighty matters, the learned amongst them most commonly make use of the
China-Characters, which, as mysterious and sacred, are venerable to all these
Nations; and although they have all several Languages, yet they do and can make
use of the same writing; because being the said Characters are not Letters, but
significative of words; and the words although different in sound, yet in all
these Languages are of the same signification and number; it comes to pass that
diverse Nations adjacent to China, as these of Japan, Cauchin-China, and other,
(although different in Language) yet in writing, making use of the
China-Characters, at least in matters of greatest moment, understand one
another when they read these Characters each in their own Tongue, with the
different words of their proper Language; which indeed, in reference to the
commerce and communication of Nations, is a great convenience. April the seven
and twentieth, This Morning, being the first Thursday after the Dominica in
Albis, there was a solemn Procession at Goa of the most Holy Sacrament, for the
Annual Feast of Corpus Christi, as the custom is. But in Goa it is kept out of
the right time upon such a day, because the right day of the Feast falls in the
Months of great Rain; so that at that time the Procession cannot be performed,
and therefore they anticipate it in this manner. The Procession was made by the
whole Clergy, with a greater show of green boughs then clothes, and with many
representations of mysteries by persons disguised, fictitious animals, dances
and maskerades; things which in our Countries would more suit with Villages
then great Cities. Two Ships are now departing by the way of Persias, and
therefore I have made use of this opportunity; favor me to kiss the hands of
all my Friends in my Name, amongst which I reckon in the first place with the
Signori Spina, Sigr Andrea, Sig: Dottore, and Sig: Coletta; upon whom, and your
self, I pray Heaven for all felicity; recommending my self to your prayers also
for my safety.

From Goa, April 27. 1623.
LETTER III.
From Goa, October. 10. 1623.
Goa farther into India more Southwards to Canara, upon occasion of this
Viceroy's dispatching Sig: Gio Fernandez Leiton, Ambassador to Vanktapa Nieka,
a Gentile-Prince of that Province; and conceiving that my journey will begin
within three or four days, I have therefore determined to write this Letter to
you, that it may be conveyed by the first occasion of the Ships which are now
preparing for a Voyage from India into Europe; for I know not certainly, how
far I shall tarvel, nor how long I shall stay out before my return to Goa,
whether months or years. As little do I know what other opportunity, or
convenient place I shall meet withal to write to you; nevertheless I shall
omit none that offers it self, and in the mean time present you with the
continuation of my Diary. Having been here in Goa too much shut up in the House
of the Jesuits, On the first of May, I parted from them after many civil
treatments and favors received of them, according to their most affectionate
hospitality; and went to the House prepared for me right over against that of
Sigra Lena da Cugna, which stands between the Covents of the Barefooted
Carmelites, and the Converted Nunns of S. Mary Magdalene, in a remote but not
inconvenient place, nor far from the commerce of the City, and the more
acceptable to me, because near the residence of Mariam Tinatin. May the third,
The City of Goa, lying, as they say, in the Altitude of fifteen degrees and
forty minutes, agreeably to the good Rule of Astronomy and the Tables of Tycho,
according to which, F. Christoforo Brono told me, this City is in a Meridian
different from that of Francfurt, about four hours more Eastward; yet the Sun
came to be in the Zenith of Goa, that is, in the declination of the Zenith at
eleven a clock of the night following the said day, (speaking sutably to the
Spanish and Portugal Clocks.) Yet at this time it was the height of Summer, and
the greatest heat of the year, as we found by experience. For there may be said
to be two Summers and Winters every year in Goa, and these adjacent Regions;
because the Sun passes over their heads, and departs from them twice a year,
once toward the North, and once toward the South. May the eleventh, A Portugal
Gentleman coming from the Court of Spain by Land, to wit, by the way of Turkey,
and, as they said, in a very short time, and with Letters from the Court dated
in the end of the last October, brought news amongst other things of the
Canonization of five Saints made together in one day, namely, of S. Ignatio,
the Founder of the Jesuits; S. Francesco Xaverio, a Jesuit, and the Apostle of
the East India; S. Philippo Neri, Founder of the Congregation della Vallicella,
whom I remember to have seen and spoken to in my Childhood, and whose Image is
still so impressed in my memory, that I should know him if I saw him; S.
Teresia, Foundress of the Barefooted Carmelites; and S. Isidoro, a Countryman
of Madrid. We had also news of the death of the Duke of Parma, Ranuccio
Farnese, and how the Cardinal his Brother was gone to the Government of that
State during the minority of the succeeding Duke. The Currier who went into
Spain with the tidings of the loss of Ormuz, this Portugal Gentleman said he
met him at Marseilles; and concerning the Marriage between Spain and England,
he brought no intelligence of any conclusion; so that I belive, the news of
Ormuz, lost chiefly by the fault of the English, will occasion much difficulty
in the Treaty of that Marriage. May the seventeenth, Four Italian Barefooted
Carmelites arrived in Goa, being sent by their Fathers at Rome into Persia; but
having heard at Aleppo how the Fathers of Persia were troubled by the fate of
those new Christians who were discovered and slain the year before, and
especially that they had nothing to live upon; they not knowing what to do, and
being terrified with the Relations of diverse Merchants who aggravated things
sufficiently, and being so advised by some, who, perhaps, like not the coming
of such Fathers into Persia, resolved to come into India, and to Goa to the
Vicar Provincial, whither they brought no fresh News from Rome, having departed
from thence Eleven Months before. They came almost all sick, having suffered
much in the Deserts of Arabia, and other places of the journey, where they had
felt great scarcity; and for all this they would needs observe their Lent and
Fasts by the way, sustaining themselves almost solely with Dates, which is a
very hot food; and withal the alteration of the Air, very hot too, and unusual
to them in the hight of Summer, was the occasion of their being all sick. Two
of them arrived this day, and the two others the day after; because they came
from Mascat in several Ships, Of these four Barefooted Carmelites, within a
few days three dyed, and one alone after a long and dangerous sickness escaped.
May the eighteenth, The Bells of all the Churches of Goa rung out with a great
noise; and they said, it was for the News of the King's Health then brought
from Spain; but I said, I wished they had first recovered Ormuz, and then rung
the Bells with joy for both. A vain people!

May the twentieth, The Barefooted Carmelites would needs Teresia, and not
confound the same in one day with that of the Jesuits; they sent two Portugal
Children on Horseback richly clad in riding habit, as Curriers, to declare
with certain Verses to the Viceroy of Goa the Canonization of the She-Saint;
after which the same Boys went up and down the City with a Trumpet before them,
scattering other Verses to the people with the same tidings, the Bells of
theirs, and all other Churches of the City ringing in the mean time for joy,
being enjoined thereunto by the Bishop's Order. At night themselves, and diverse
of their Friends, made Fireworks throughout the City. And in favor of them
the chief Portugals, went the same night up and down the streets in a great
Troop, clad in several disguises, after the manner of a Mascherade. I also bore
a part in the solemnity, out of my devotion to the new Saint; and according to
the liberty which every one took of habiting himself as he pleased, I put my
self into the garb of an Arabian Gentleman of the Desert, which was accounted
very brave and gallant; I accompanied with Sig: Antonino, Son of Sig: Antonio
Paraccio, my friend, a youth of about twelve years old, who was one of those
who went in the day time to the Viceroy, and I clothed him in a Persian Habit
of mine which I had brought from Persia, or rather like a noble Chizilbase
Soldier, very odd and brave; so that we two were a sufficiently delightful
spectacle to the whole City. May the one and twentieth, In the Morning the
Barefooted Fathers sung in their Church a solemn Mass in gratiarum actionem
for the abovesaid Canonization of Santa Teresia, upon whose praises an
Augustine Father made an eloquent Sermon; the Viceroy and a multitude of
people being present thereat.

May the three and twentieth, The Sun entering into Gemini, I observed that the
Rain begun in Goa, and it happens not alike in all the Coast of India; for it
begins first in the more Southerly parts of Capo Comorni, and follows
afterward by degrees, according as places extend more to the North; so that in
Cambaia, and other more northern parts, it begins later then in Goa; and the
further any place lies North, the later it begins there. Whence it comes to
pass that in the Persian Ephemerides, or Almanacks, they use to set down the
beginning of Parscecal, or the time of Rain in India, at the fifteenth of their
third month, called Cordad, which falls upon the third of our June; because
they have observed it in the more Northern parts of India, as in Cambaia,
Surat, and the like, where the Persians have more commerce then in other more
Southern places. In Goa likewise, for the most part the beginning of the Rain
is in the first days of June; yet sometimes it anticipates, and sometimes falls
something later with little difference. It Is observed by long experience that
this Rain in India, after having lasted some days at first, ceases, and there
return I know not how many days of fair weather; but those being passed, it
begins again more violent then ever, and continues for a long time together. By
this Rain, as I observed, the heat diminishes, and the Earth which before was
very dry and all naked, becomes clothed with new verdure, and various colors
of pleasant flowers, and especially the Air becomes more healthful, sweet, and
more benign both to sound and infirm. The arm of the Sea, or River, which
encompasses the Island of Goa, and is ordinarily salt, notwithstanding the
falling of the other little fresh Rivers into it, with the inundation of great
streams which through the great Rain flow from the circumjacent Land, is made
likewise wholly fresh; whence the Country People who wait for this time, derive
water out of it for their Fields of Rice in the Island of Goa and the
neighboring parts, which being tempered with this sweet moisture, on a sudden
become all green. June the first, I spoke first to the Viceroy of Goa, Don
Francesco da Gama, Count of Bidigucira, Admiral of the Indian Sea, and
Grandson of that D. Vasco de Gama who discovered East India, in which this Don
Francesco was sometimes Viceroy, and was once taken captive in Africa with
King Sebastian. I delayed seeing him so long, because I was busi'd for a Month
after my arrival in changing my Habit and providing a House, so that I went not
abroad; besides, that the Viceroy was likewise employed many days after in
dispatching the Fleets which went to China and Zeilan; and after they were
gone, he retired to a place out of Goa, to recreate himself for many days; so
that I had no opportunity sooner. I presented to him two Letters from Rome,
which I brought directed to his Predecessor in my recommendation, one from Sig:
Cardinal Crescentio, and the other from the Duke of Albaquerque then Ambassador
at Rome for the Catholic King; and he, without reading them, in my presence
said, that without that recommendation he should have expressed all fiting
Civilities to me, and that he was glad to see and know me, with many other
Complements and courteous offers. He had no long discourse with me, because
many other Portugal Gentlemen of the Council, and other persons of the
Government expected to have Audience; but when I went away, he told F. Morigad
the Jesuit his Confessor who introduced me, that at a more convenient
opportunity he desired to talk with me more at length of the things of Persia,
and that he would send for me; and in the mean time desired a writing in
discourse which I had made a few days before concerning the Wars of Persia, of
which his said Confessor who had seen it, had given him notice; wherefore I
gave it to him with my own hand, as I had written it in my Native Tuscan
Tongue, and F. Morigad gave him the Translation of it, made by himself into the
Portugal Tongue, being the Viceroy did not understand the Italian.

June the ninth, In the College of the Jesuits was pronounced, Banians were
brought to Goa, signifying that the Moghol had enounter'd with his Rebel Sultan
Chorrom, and routed him; and that Sultan Chorrom after his defeat was retired
to a strong hold in the top of a Mountain, which they call Mandu, and that his
Father had besieged them there. June the four and twentieth, being the Feast of
Saint John Baptist, The Viceroy with many other Portugal persons of quality,
as it is the yearly custom in Goa, rode through the City in Habits of Masquert,
but without Vizards, two and two alike, or three and three; and having heard
Mass in the Church of Saint John, he came into the street of Saint Paul, which
they are wont to call La Carriera de' Cavalli, and is the best place in Goa.
Here, after many Companies of Canarine Christians of the Country had marched by
with their Ensigns, Drums and Arms, leaping and playing along the streets,
with their naked Swords in their Hands, for they are all Foot; at length all
the Cavaliers run, two carriers on Horseback, one downwards from the Church of
Saint Paul toward the City, and the other upwards, running matches of two to
two, or three to three, according as their attire agreed, with their Morisco
Cymiters, and at last they came all down marching together in order, and so
went to the Piazza of the Viceroys Palace, and so the solemnity ended. I stood
to see this show in the same street of Saint Paul, in the House of one whom
they call King of the Islands of Maldiva, or Maladiva, which are an innumerable
company of small Islands, almost all united together, lying in a long square
form toward the West, not far from the Coast of India; of which Islands one of
this Man's Ancestors was really King, but being driven out of his Dominion by
his own people, fled to the Portugals and turned Christian, with hopes of
recovering his Kingdom by their help. Yet the Portugals never attempted any
thing in his behalf, and so he and his descendents remain deprived of the
Kingdom enjoying only the naked Title which the Portugals being now allied to
him still give him; and because many Merchants Ships come from those Islands to
trade in the Ports of the Portugals, they force the said Ships to pay a small
matter of Tribute to him as their lawful Sovereign: of which, though the
Governors of Ports, to whom upon necessity he must entrust, purloin above half
from him; nevertheless he gets at this day by it about three thousand Crowns
yearly, and therewith supports himself. The like Fates have befallen many other
Princes in India, who hoping in the Portugals, have found themselves deluded.
Wherein Reason of State is but ill observed by the Portugals, because by this
proceeding, they have discouraged all others from having confidence in them;
whereas had they assisted and protected them, as they ought and might easily,
and with small charge have done upon sundry fair occasions, they would by this
time have got the love of all India; and themselves would by the strength and
help of their Friends, undoubtedly, have become more potent, as also, without
comparison, more feared by their Enemies. June the nine and twentieth, This
year the Moors began their Ramadhan, according to the Rules of my Calculation.
July the five and twentieth, being the Feast of Saint James, the Protector of
Spain, was solemnis'd with the same gallantry of Cariers and Dresses, as are
above described, saving that the Viceroy heard Mass in the Church of St. James.

In the Evening, I went with Sig: Ruy Gomez Boraccio, a Priest Antonio Baroccio
to the Church of Saint James, which stands somewhat distant without the City,
upon the edge of the Island toward the main Land of Adil-Sciah, which is on
the other side of a little River, or Arm of the Sea. For which reason, the
Island is in this as well as many other dangerous places fortified with strong
walls; and here there is a Gate upon the pass, which is almost full of people,
going and coming from the main Land, and is called by the Indians Benastarni,
by which name some of our Historians mention it in their writings concerning
these parts, as Osorius, Maffaeus, etc. which Gate, as likewise many others,
which are upon diverse places of passage about the Island, is guarded
continually with Soldiers, commanded by a Captain who has the care thereof,
and for whom there is built a fine House upon the walls of the Island, which in
this place are very high, forming a kind of Bastion, or rather a Cavaliero, or
mount for Ordnance; not very well designed, but sufficiently strong, wherein
are kept pieces of Artillery for defense of the place. We went to visit the
said Captain, who was then Sig: Manoel Pereira de la Gerda, and from the high
Balconies of his House and the Bastion, we enjoyed the goodly prospect of the
Fields round about, both of the Island and the Continent, being discernable to
a great distance. The Captain entertained us with the Music of his three
Daughters, who sung and played very well after the Portugal manner upon the
Lute, after which we returned home. About the Church of Saint James are some
few habitations in form of a little Town, which is also called Santiago; and
the way from thence to the City is a very fine walk the Country being all
green, and the way-sides beset with Indian Nut-trees, (which the Portugals call
Palms, and their fruit Cocco) the Gardens and Houses of Pleasure on either side
contributing to the delightfulness thereof, being full of sundry fruit trees
unknown to us; as also because in Wintertime the very walls of the Gardens are
all green with moss, and other herbs growing there; which indeed is one of the
pleasantest sights that I have seen in my days, and the rather because it is
natural and without artifice. The same happens, I believe, not in this Island
only, but in all the Region round about. In the field adjoining to the City,
near the ruins of a deserted building, once intended for a Church, but never
finished, is a work of the Gentiles, sometimes Lords of this Country, namely,
one of the greatest Wells that ever I beheld, round, and about twenty of my
Paces in Diametre, and very deep; it has Parapets, or Walls breast-high round
about with two Gates, at one of which is a double pair of stairs leading two
ways to the bottom, to fetch water when it is very low. July the six and
twentieth, I went out of the City to a place of pleasure in the Island, where
was a Church of Saint Anna, to which there was a great concourse of people,
because it was her Festival. This Church stands very low, built amongst many
Country dwellings, partly, of the Islanders who live there, and partly, of the
Portugals who have Houses of Pleasure there to spend a month for recreation.
The place is very delightful amongst Palmetoes and Groves of other Trees, and
the way leading to it is extremely pleasant, all covered with green. After I
had heard Mass here, Sig: Giovanni da Costa de Menecas, a Friend of mine whom I
found there, carried me to dine with him at the House of a Vicar or
Parish Priest of another Church not far distant, and of small Building, which
they call Santa Maria di Loreto, where we spent the whole day in conversation
with the said Vicar and other Friends. At night because it rained, I caused my
self to be carried home in one of those Carriages which the Portugals call
Rete, being nothing else but a net of cords tied at the head and feet, and
hanging down from a great Indian Cane; in which Net (which is of the length of
a Man, and so wide that opening in the middle, (for the two ends are tied fast
to the Cane) it is capable of one person) a Man lies along very conveniently
with a cushion under his head, although somewhat crooked, to wit, with the feet
and head advanced toward the Ligatures, and the middle part of the body more
pendulous under the Cane, which is carried upon the shoulders of two men
before, and two behind; if the person be light, or the way short, two Men only
bear it, one before, and the other behind. These Nets are different from the
Palanchini and the Andor; for in these from the Cane hang not nets, but litters
like little beds, upon which a Man sits with his legs stretched forth, or half
lying along upon cushions, and so is carried very conveniently. Moreover, the
Palanchini and the Andor, differ from one another; for that in the latter, the
Cane upon which they carry is strait, as it is likewise in the Nets; but in the
Palanchini, for greater ease of the person carried that he may have more room
to carry his head upright, the said Cane is crooked upward in this form, and
they bend Canes for this purpose when they are small and tender, and these are
the most convenient and honorable carriages; and because there are not found
many good Canes and fit to bear such a weight, therefore they are sold dear, at
a hundred or six score Pardini a piece, which amount to about sixty of our
Crowns. Besides, as well the Palanchini as the Andor, and the Nets, are covered
for avoiding the Rain with dry Coverlets made of Palm leaves, to wit, those of
the Indian Nut, and other such Trees, sufficiently handsome, which being cast
over the Cane, hang down on each side, having two windows with little shutters;
They keep out the water very well, and the Coverlets may be taken off when one
is minded to go uncovered, and carried by a servant. Yet I never saw any go
uncovered in Goa, either in Andor or Nets; but out of the City in the Country,
many. I have spoken more at length of these Carriages, because they are unknown
in our Countries, although I remember to have seen in Italy the Effigies of a
Net or Rete, engraven in certain Maps of the World, and, if I mistake not,
amongst the ways of traveling in Brasil, where I believe they are used; and
indeed this mode of Carriage is very usual in India, not only in Cities, but
also in journeys and those of sufficient length; wherefore to make experience
of it, I was minded to have my self carried this day after the manner which I
have described; nor must I omit, that the Men who bear such Carriages are
satisfied with a very small reward. Going in Palanchino, in the Territories of
the Portugals in India, is prohibited to Men, because indeed it is a thing too
effeminate; nevertheless, as the Portugals are very little observers of their
own Laws, they began at first to be tolerated upon occasion of the Rain, and
for favors or presents; and afterward become so common, that they are used
almost by every body throughout the whole year.

On the tenth of August, I believe, the Sun was in the Zenith Goa, returning
from the Northern signs, and passing to the Southern; yet for the day and
precise hour, I refer my self to a better Calculation, according to the good
Books which I have not here with me. On the eleventh of the same Month, I saw
at Goa a Carnero, or Weather without horns, which they told me was of the Race
of Balagat, not great but of strong limbs, harnessed with a velvet saddle,
crupper, head-stall, bridle, stirrups, and all the accoutrements of a Horse;
and it was ridden upon by a Portugal Youth of about twelve years old, as he
went and came from his own House to the School of Giesu, which low School of
Reading and Writing, the said Fathers keep for more convenience of Children,
not at the College which stands in the edge of the City where the higher
Schools are, but at the Church of Giesu, which is the Professed House, and
stands in the middle of the City, whither the abovesaid Youth rode daily upon
his Martin; and I observed, that the beast being used to the place, knew the
way so well that he went alone at night from the House to the School to fetch
the Youth, without any body holding or guiding him before the servant which
drove him, as they do many Horses. I took the more notice of this trifle,
because it seemed a new thing to ride upon such creatures; for although in our
Countries, Dogs and Goats are sometimes seen with saddles and Horse furniture,
running, leaping, and capring, yet it is only for sport, and with puppets upon
the saddle; but this Martin was ridden upon by such a boy as I have mentioned,
although the beast was but of a very ordinary bigness. On the sevententh of
August, the Gentile-Indians kept a kind of Festival, to which a great number of
them came to a place in Goa, which they call Narve, or as the vulgar corruptly
speak Narva, as it were for pardon or absolution, and many came in pilgrimage
from far Countries to wash their bodies here, plunging themselves into the Arm
of the Sea, Men and Women together all naked, without any respect at all, even
persons of quality, and casting Fruits, Perfumes, and other things into the
water, as it were in Oblation to the Deity of the water of this place, with
other Ceremonies, Devotions, and the like; which I relate not more
particularly, because I was not present at them, because the great Rain kept me
from going to see them, as it also was the cause that the concourse of the
Gentiles was not very great. Nevertheless I could not but speak thus much in
general of it, as being a considerable thing amongst them. This Feast, and
their Devotion, lasts two days, but the first is most remarkable.

August the one and thirtieth, A Galeon coming from Mascat, Goa this year since
the Rain, and the shutting up of the mouth of the Port) brought News how Ruy
Freyra having been a few Months before at Mascat with the little Fleet which
he had of sixteen Ships, was gone to attempt Soher, which place being formerly
abandoned by the Portugals, was now fortified by the Persians with a strong
Garrison; and that after he had landed, he assaulted the Fort, but could not
take it, though many Moors were slain in the encounter and about twenty five
Portugals; amongst which, were three or four Captains, Men of Valor and Esteem:
in which action, some conceived, that Ruy Freyra had not done well in hazarding
and losing so many people upon a place of small importance; but he continuing
to besiege it, it was delivered to him upon Articles, the Garrison which was
within marching away with their Arms and Baggage; after which he razed the
Fortifications, and attempted another place of that Coast of Arabia, which they
call Galfarcan; and having taken it, out of indignation, as I believe, for the
many good Soldiers which they had killed of his at Sohar, and to cast a
terror, left no person alive, sparing neither sex nor age. Which cruel manner
of proceeding I cannot approve; because on the one side, it will alienate the
minds of the people of that Country; and on the other, it will incite Enemies
to fight against more obstinately and valorously, as knowing they are to expect
no quarter. This is as much as has been done hitherto in those parts about
Ormuz, the doing of greater matters requiring new and greater supplies from the
Viceroy; but they say likewise, that Ormuz and Kesciome are extremely well
fortified by the Moors. September the six and twentieth, Sig: Don Garcia de
Silva y Figueroa, Ambassador in Persia from the Catholic King in my time, who
by reason of sundry accidents, and the oppositions of the Portugals to him as
to a Castilian, (as himself says) or, (as other say) because it was his own
mind to do so; since the year before being sent away in a Petache or Shallop
according to his own desire, he returned back for fear of a tempest, (though
without reason) had never returned home into Spain to his King; but when I
arrived in India, I found him at Goa, where we became acquainted together; and
coming to visit me one day, amongst other things whereof we discoursed, he told
me that he had heard a while since that the Prior of Savoy, to wit, the Duke of
Savoy's Son who is a Prior, was made Viceroy of Sicily, and Generalissimo of
that Sea for his Catholic Majesty: Which was News to me, and, as a rare and
unaccustomed thing for the Spaniards to place Italians in governments of States
in Italy, I was not unwilling to take notice of. September the thirtieth, At
evening the Dominicans with the Friars of the Society del Rosario, made a
goodly Procession in Goa, with abundance of Coaches, and Images clothed after
their manner, and richly adorned with many Jewels; all the streets where it
passed being strewn with green herbs and flowers, and the windows hung with
Tapistry and rich Carpets; to which show, which is yearly made for the Feast of
the Rosary, which is upon the first Sunday of October, the whole City was
gathered together. This great Procession they make the Eve before the Feast
after Vespers, and in the morning of the Feast they make another less one,
only about the Gate of the Church, but with the same pomp, and besides with
the most Holy Sacrament. October the tenth, The Viceroy of Goa dispatched Sig:
Gio: Fernandez Leiton my Friend, Ambassador to the Gentile-Prince, whose
Dominion in the Kingdom of Province of Canara, more Southernly then Goa,
borders upon Onor, and the other Territories of the Portugals in those maritime
parts. This Prince Venk-tapa Naieka, was sometimes Vassal, and one of the
Ministers of the great King of Vidia-Nagar, which the Portugals corruptly call
Bisnaga; but after the downfall of the King of Vidia-Nagar, who a few years
ago by the Wars raised against him by his Neighbors, lost together with his
life a great part of his Dominion, and became in a manner extinct; Venk-tapa
Naieka, as also many other Naieki, who where formerly his Vassals and
Ministers, remained absolute Prince that part of the State whereof he was
Governor; which also, being a good Soldier, he has much enlarged, having
seized by force many Territories of diverse other Naieki, and pety Princes his
Neighbors; and in brief, is grown to that reputation, that having had War
with the Portugals too, and given them a notable defeat, he is now held for
their Friend, and for the establishment of this Friendship they send this
Embassage to him in the Name of the King of Portugal, the Ambassador being
styled, Ambassador of the State of India; and though he is sent by the
Viceroy, nevertheless, as their custom is, he carries Letters written in the
name of the King himself, to do the more honor to Venk-tapa Nieka to whom he
is sent. This is the first Ambassador sent to this Prince in the King of
Portugal's Name; for before in Occurrences which fell out, an Ambassador was
sent only in the name of some one of those Captains, and Governors of the
Portugal Territories, which had business with him; and this was sent in answer
to an Ambassador of his who has been long at Goa, negotiating with the
Viceroy the establishment of the said Friendship. The Ambassador of Venk-tapa
Naieka is a Brachman, called Vitula Sinai, and having taken his leave of the
Viceroy, the two Ambassadors departed together at this time. I having been
some days before informed of this intended Embassy, and being desirous to see
some Country of the Gentiles, where themselves bore sway, and observed their
Rites without any subjection to Christians or Moors, or Princes of different
Religion, as in those Lands which I had hitherto seen; I offered my self to
accompany my Friend Sig: Gio: Fernandez Leiton in this Embassy, and he has
been pleased to testify very great liking of my company. So that I am to take
Ship with him within three days, which will be the thirteenth or fourteenth of
this present month of October. I hope I shall find matter wherewith to feed
our Curiosity, and to give you an entertainment. In the mean time I heartily
salute all our Friends at Naples, and most affectionately kiss your Hands.

From Goa, October 10. 1623.
LETTER IV.
From Onor, October. 30. 1623.
Goa, and arrived at this Port of Onor, I shall give you some account of what
has happened in my observation during the few days since the last that I writ to
you, October the tenth; which because I understood lay still at Goa, with the
two Ships which were to go thence for Persia, I have thought fit to send this
to accompany it, and, I hope, you will receive both of them together; and that
not without some small delectation with my News, inasmuch as I am pleased in
writing to you from several places, and (when I can get opportunity) from those
very places which afford the novelties and matters whereof I write, which
therefore may possibly be more grateful in the reception, as being native of
the Country. I took Ship with our Portugal Ambassador, and Sig: Gio: Fernandez
Leiton, about Evening October the fourteenth; and departing from Goa, we
removed to a Town called Pangi in the same Island, but lower near the place
where the River enters into the Sea, and whither the Viceroys use to retire
themselves frequently to a House of Pleasure which they have there, besides
many other like Houses of private persons upon the River likewise; and where
also at the mouth of the Sea, or Bar, as they speak, which is a little lower,
almost all Fleets that depart from Goa are wont to set sail. We might have
performed this journey by Land along the Sea-cast, passing along the other
Lands of Adil-Sciah, till we came to those of Venk-tapa Naieka: But to avoid
expenses, and occasions of disgust with many Governors of those Territories
subject to Adil-Sciah, who sometimes are little courteous, and impertinent, the
Viceroy would have us go by Sea; and for more security, sent five of those
light Frigates or Galeots, which the Portugals call Sangessis, to accompany us
as far as Onor,, where we were to land. So that we were in all ten Ships or
Galeots, to wit, one which carried the Portugal Ambassador and us; an other in
which the Venk-tapa Naieka's Ambassador the Brachman went; three others laden
with the baggage of the two Ambassadors; (and particularly, with Horses and
other things which the Viceroy sent for a Present to Venk-tapa Naieka, and
other Horses which I know not who carried thither to sell;) and the five Ships
of War, whereof Sig: Hettor Fernandez was Chief Captain or General.
Nevertheless we departed from Goa the aforesaid Evening only with our own
Ship, the rest being already fallen down lower toward the Sea, and the
Ambassador Vitula was above a day at Pangi expecting us, where we arriving the
abovesaid night, did not land because it was late, but slept in the Vessel.

October the fourteenth, We went a shore in the Morning at Pangi, and the two
Ambassadors saw one another upon the Seaside, where I being present with them,
Sig: Gio: Fernandez told the Brachman Ambassador who I was, and that I went
with them out of curiosity to see his King: wherewith he testified great
contentment, but was much more pleased with the Pendant which I wore at my left
ear, as I have used to do for many years past for remedy of my weak sight;
because wearing Pendants at the ears is a particular custom of the Indians,
especially of the Gentiles, who all wear them in both ears: And because this is
among the Portugals a thing not only unusual, but ignorantly by some of the
ruder sort of them held for unlawful, only because it is used by Gentiles,
therefore the Ambassador marvelled that I being of the Portugals Religion
nevertheless used it; but being told that it was not forbidden us by our Law,
but only customarily disused, and that in Europe it was used by many, he
commended the custom, and bid the Portugals see how well I showed with that
Pendant, and better then they who wore none; so powerful is use to endear
things to the eye, and make that fancied and esteemed by some, which others
through want of custom, dislike, or value not. This day we departed not,
because one of the Frigates of the Armado which was to accompany us, was
unprovided with Seamen, for which we were fain to stay till the day following,
and then were not very well provided. The cause whereof was, for that there was
at this time a great scarcity of Mariners in Goa, because the Governors of the
maritime parts of the Continent subject to Idal-Sciah, would not permit their
Ships to come, as they were wont, to supply Mariners for the Portugal Armado;
which seemed an argument of some ill will of that King against the Portugals,
of which, were there nothing else, theirs being weaker, and more confused in
their Government then ever, and all things in bad order, was a sufficient
ground; for remedy of which, they took no other course, but daily loaded
themselves with new, unusual, and most heavy Impositions, to the manifest ruin
of the State, taking no care to prevent the hourly exorbitant defraudations of
the public Incomes, which otherwise would be sufficient to maintain the charge
without new Gabels: but if such thefts continue, both the public Incomes and
the new Gabels, and as many as they can invent, will be all swallowed up.
Nevertheless, the Portugals are heedless according to their custom, and out of
a fatal blindness making no reckoning of these signs, which show the evil mind
of their Neighbor Adil-Sciah, think he knows nothing of these disorders, and
that this withholding of his Subjects is only an impertinence of his
Officers. What the event will be, Time will show.

But to return to my purpose, Not being to depart this day, Baldassar d'
Azevedo, who lived constantly in a fair House there by the Seaside, a little
distant from the Villa, or Fort, where the Viceroys lodge in Pangi. Whilst we
were recreating our selves, Sig: Fernandez bethinking himself of what, perhaps,
he had not thought of before, asked me whether I had the Viceroy's License to
go with him this Voyage; and I telling him that I had not, because I did not
think it needful, he replied, that it was needful to be had by any means if I
intended to go; otherwise, he could not venture to carry me, for fear of giving
malevolous persons occasion to criminate him, by saying, that he had carried me
a stranger, and without the Viceroy's License, into suspected places, where
matters of State were to be handled; in brief, knowing the matter blameable,
and the wonted Cavils of many of his own Nation, and being admonished by many
and great troubles befallen others, and particularly, a Kinsman of his very
innocently for very slight causes, and much inferior to this; he told me
resolutely, that without the Viceroy's License it was no-wise good, either for
him or me, that I should go. Wherefore being we were not to depart that day, he
advised me to return to the City, and procured the said License, if I intended
to go, and he would stay for me till the next Morning; but without the License
I must not return to take Ship, nor would he by any means venture to carry me.
I, who well understood the procedures of the Portugals, and what rigor they use
in their Government, and to what suspicions and malevolences they are prone,
which cause a thousand ill usages and injustices, was sensible that Sig:
Fernandez had reason, and that the not having gotten this License was an
inadvertency, because I accounted it not necessary; but to obtain it of the
Viceroy, who knew me well, and had shown himself courteous to me, I looked
upon as not difficult. Wherefore being loath to lose my intended Voyage, as
soon as I had dined with these Gentlemen, I went by boat to the City, and
having first given account of my business to Sig: Antonio, and Sig: Ruy Gomez
his Brother, (to whose House I repaired, having left that which I had hired,
and removed my goods to that of the said Sigri Barocci) I went with the same
Sig: Ruy Gomez to speak to F. Marejao a Jesuit, and the Viceroy's Confessor
and my Friend, whom I desired (as the fittest person to do it, in the short
time left me) to get me a License from the Viceroy. He went immediately to
speak to the Viceroy about it, and had the fortune to find him before he
entered into a Congregation or Council which was to sit till night; and the
Viceroy presently writ a License for him with his own hand, directed to the
Ambassador Gio: Fernandez, wherein he told him, that whereas I desired to go
along with him, he might carry me, and show me all kind of Civility and Honor
as a deserving person, with other like courteous and high expressions. Having
gotten my License, I went with F. Ruy Gomez Baraccio, to visit the Bishop of
Cocni, who in the vacancy of the Sea administered the Archbishopric of Goa,
and whom I had not yet visited; and understanding that he was desirous to know
me, and was a Prelate of great merit, not only as to Ecclesiastic matters,
but also in point of Government and War, (for he took diverse strong places,
and performed other exploits in India for the service of his King, with great
valor) I would not depart without first visiting him, and making my self known
to him. This Prelate is called Fra Don Sebastiano di San Pietro, and is an
Augustine Friar. We discoursed above an hour together concerning things of
India, Persia, and other matters, and I recommended to him with the F.
Confessor the Augustine Fathers of his Religion in Persia, giving him an
account of their necessities, and how he might help them.

Night being come, I went to make a Collation in the House Barocci, and when it
was grown dark, I returned to imbark in the Ship which expected me, and went to
the Town of Pangi to find Sig: Gio: Fernandez and my other Companions, who were
very glad at my return with the Viceroy's License, so favorable and courteous
to me, because they were loath to have gone without me; and so I slept with
them that night in the same House. My charge, Mariam Tinatin, went not with me
this journey because it was not expedient, being I was to return to Goa, but
stayed still in the House of Sigra Lena da Cugna; only Cacciatur went with me
to serve me. October the fifteenth, A little before night we were ready to set
sail, had not we been necessitated to stay for certain Mariners till the next
Morning, when we went to hear Mass in a Church of Saint Agnes belonging to the
Augustine Friars, and standing in the Island of Goa; after which, being
embarked, we stayed a while longer waiting for the Brachman Ambassador, for
what reason I know not, unless, perhaps, he was minded to make us stay for him,
as we had made him stay for us. At length being got out of the mouth of the
River, we continued sailing all night, but with a small wind. Our course was
always Southward almost directly, and we coasted along the land at a little
distance. October the sixteenth, In the Morning we discerned four Ships of
Malabar Rovers, near the shore (they call them Paroes, and they go with Oars,
like Gale^ts or Foists) we gave them chase for above an hour, intending to
fight them, but we could not overtake them; only we lost much time and much of
our way. Night came upon us near certain ^^ocks, or uninhabited little Islands,
which they call Angediva, which signifies, in the Language of the Country, Five
Islands, they being so many in number. We found fresh water in one of them,
they are all green and have some Trees. We set sail from thence the same night,
but had little or no wind and violent rain. October the seventeenth, Continuing
our course the next day with a very small gale, we saw the bound of the States
of Adil-Sciah and Venk-tapa Naieka, which is only a brackish River, such as
are frequent upon the Coast of India. The wind was but small still, so that all
this day we could not arrive at Onor; but when it was night, because it is no
good entering into the Port of Onor in the dark and with ebbing water, as it was
now, we cast Anchor, and remained all night under an uninhabited small Rock,
which they call the Rock of Onor. After mid-midnight the Tide began to flow,
but yet we stirred not. October the eighteenth, About break of day we moved
along, and by the help of Oars finished the remainder of the way, arriving at
Onor in good time. This whole Voyage from Goa to Onor, is not above eighteen
Leagues, but it took us up so much time, because we had only a very small wind.

Onor is a small place by the Seaside, but a good Port of indifferent
capacity, which is formed by two arms of Rivers, which (I know not whether both
from one or several heads) running one Southward, and the other Northward, meet
at the Fortress, and are discharged with one mouth into the Sea. The
habitations are rather Cottages then Houses, built under a thick Grove of
Palms, to wit, those which produce the Indian Nuts, called by the Portugals,
Coco; and by the Arabians, Narghil. But the Fortress is of a competent circuit,
though the walls are not very well designed, being just as the Portugals found
them made by the people of the Country. It stands upon a high Hill of free
stone, and being very capacious, not only the Captain lives there, but most of
the married and principal Portugals have Houses in it, very well accommodated
with Wells, Gardens, and other conveniences. The streets within the Fortress
are large and fair, besides a great Piazza sufficient to contain all the people
of the place in time of a siege. There are likewise two Churches, one dedicated
to Saint Catherine, and the other to Saint Anthony; but ordinarily there is but
one Priest in Onor, who is the Vicar of the Archbishop of Goa; and therefore
in Lent other religious persons always go thither. Out of the Fort, in the
Country, is the Bazar or Market, but a small one and of little consideration;
nothing being found therein but what is barely necessary for sustenance of the
inhabitants. Our Ambassador Sig: Gio: Fernandez lodged with us, not in the
Fort, but without in the House of a private man; and, I believe, it was because
he had rigorous Orders from the Viceroy against the Captain; and Commission to
redress many Disorders which he had committed in his Government, especially to
compose matters between him and the people of the Country; as also between him
and the Vicar, betwixt whom there were great Disorders, the fault of which was
charged upon the Captain. When we were settled in our House, first the Vicar
called F. Henrico Rabelo, and afterward the Captain called Sigr Don
Christoforo Fernandez Francisco, with almost all the principal persons of the
place, visited Sig: Gio: Fernandez, who presently beginning to treat of
business, and presenting to the Captain the Viceroy's Letters and Orders, the
Captain being terrified therewith on the one side, and on the other, obliged by
the civil terms of Sig: Fernandez, forthwith offered himself ready to give the
Viceroy satisfaction in whatever he commaded, and began immediately to put the
same offer in effect; releasing one whom he held Prisoner, and performing other
things which Sig: Fernandez appointed him. October the nineteenth, The Captain
inviting the Ambassador and all the company to dine in the Fort, we went first
to visit him, and afterward to hear Mass in Saint Catharine's Church, which is
the Vicar's See; which being over, the Ambassador visited a Gentlewoman who was
a Kinswoman of the Vicar's, and then retired in private with the Captain, not
without manifest signs that his re-pacification was rather upon necessity then
out of good will. Causa mali tanti, foemina sola fuit. The original of most of
the Disorders between the Captain and the Vicar, they say, was occasioned by
the Captain's Wife, who had banished out of Onor a servant of his whom he had
employed as his Instrument to other Women, and who had been formerly punished
for the same fault. In the mean time we walked up and down, but saw nothing
worth mentioning; and at at dinnertime we went to the Captain's House where we
all dined, namely, Sig: Gio: Fernandez the Ambassador, the Chief Commander of
the Fleet, called Hettor Fernandez, F. Bartolomeo Barroso the Ambassadors
Chaplain, Sig: Consalvo Carvaglio and I, who came in the Ambassador's Company.
The Entertainment was sumptuous and very well served; dinner ended, we returned
to our House.

October the twentieth, In the Evening the Chaplain and I Palanchino a mile out
of Onor to see a fine running water, which issuing out of the Earth in a low,
or rather hollow place, as it were the bottom of a Gulf, falls into a Tanke,
or Cistern built round with stone; and this being filled, it runs out with a
stream watering the neighbouring-fields. The water is hot, to wit, not cold;
and therefore the Country People come frequently to bathe themselves in it for
pleasure. The Cistern is square, every side being five or six yards, and the
water would reach to a man's neck; but by reason of the ruinousness of the
walls in some places, it is not very clean. Within it are small fishes, which
use to bite such as come to swim there, yet without doing hurt, because they
are small; and the place being low, is consequently, shady, and so affords a
pleasant station at all times. The Gentiles have this Cistern in Devotion, and
call it Ram-tirt, that is, Holy Water, Water of Expiation, etc. The Portugals
call it O Tanque da Pedre, that is, the Cistern of the Father, or Religious
person, from the Gentile-Monastick who uses to remain there. We stripped our
selves, and spent a good while in swimming here. The fields about Onor through
which we passed were very pleasant Hills and Valleys, all green, partly with
very high herbage, partly with wood, and partly with Corn. October the one and
twentieth, I took the Altitude of the Sun, and found it distant from the Zenith
24. degrees 20. minutes, upon which day the Sun, according to my manuscripts,
was in the 27th degree of Libra, and declined from the Aequinoctial to the
South 10. degrees 24, 56, which deducted from 24. degrees 20, in which I found
the Sun, there remain 13. degrees 55, 4; and precisely so much is Onor distant
from the Aequinoctial toward the North. In the Evening the Ambassador Vitula
Sinay, who was lodged beyond the River more South of Onor, came to the City to
visit the Captain in the Fort. The Captain with all the Citizens, and Sig: Gio:
Fernandez, with us of his Company, went to meet and receive him at the place
where he landed; three pieces of Ordnance being discharged when he entered into
the Fort. October the four and twentieth, was the Davali, or Feast of the
Indian-Gentiles, and, I believe, was the same that I had seen the last year
celebrated in Bender di Combru in Persia: The same day, if I mistake not in my
reckoning, the Moors began their new year 1033. In the Evening, I went to see
another great Town of Gentiles, separate from that stands upon the Sea near
Onor, and they call it the Villa de' Brahmani, because most of the inhabitants
are Brachmans, whereas they that live by the Seaside are Fishermen, and of
other like profession. This Town of the Brachmans stands about a Canons-shot
within land, remote from the Fortress of Onor toward Hordete or Greco. The
inhabitants keep Cows or Buffalls, and live upon other Trades. In the entrance
of the City is built for public use a handsome square Cistern, or Receptacle
for Water, each side of which contained about a hundred of my paces in length;
it is filled with rain water, which lasts for the whole year.

October the five and twentieth, came News to Onor how on Thursday night last,
October the nine and twentieth, Venk-tapa Naieka lost his chief Wife, an aged
Woman, and well beloved by him; her name was Badra-Ama, Daughter of a nobleman
of the same Race of Lingavant, which Venk-tapa himself is of. Badra was her
proper name, Ama, her Title, denoting Princess or Queen. We stayed all this
while at Onor, because as soon as we arrived there, Vitula Sinay writ to
Venk-tapa Naieka his Master, giving him an account of our arrival; and so it
was necessary to stay for his Answer and Orders from the Court: we also waited
for men to carry us upon the way, (the whole journey being to be made in
Litters or Palanchinoes) together with our Goods and Baggage, which were
likewise to be carried by men upon their shoulders. And the Davali, or Feast of
the Gentiles, falling out in the mean time, we were fain to stay till it was
passed; and I know not whether the Queens Death and Funerals may not cause us
to stay some time longer. I will not suppress one story which is reported of
this Lady. They say, thar twelve or thirteen years since, when she was about
five and thirty years old, it came to her ears that Venk-tapa Naieka her
Husband, being become fond of a Moorish Woman, kept her secretly in a Fort not
far from the Court, where he frequently solac'd himself with her for two or
three days together; whereupon Badra-Ama, (first complaining to him not only
of the wrong which he did thereby to her, but also more of that which he did to
himself, defiling himself with a strange Woman of impure Race, (according to
their superstition) and of a Nation which drank Wine, and eat Flesh, and all
sort of uncleanness in their account) told him that if he had a mind to other
Women, he need not have wanted Gentile-Women of their clean Race, without
contaminating himself with this Moor, and she should have suffered it with
patience; but since he had thus defiled himself with her, she for the future
would have no more to do with him; and thereupon she took an Oath that she
would be to him as his Daughter, and he should be to her as her Father: After
which she showed no further resentment, but lived with him as formerly, keeping
him company in the Palace, tending upon him in his sickness, and other things
with the same love as at first, helping and advising him in matters of
Government, wherein she had always great authority with him; and, in short,
excepting the Matrimonial Act, perfectly fulfilling all other Offices of a good
Wife. Venk-tapa Naieka, who had much affection for her, notwithstanding the
wrong he did her with his Moor, endeavored by all means possible to divert her
from this her purpose, and to persuade her to live a Matrimonial Life still
with him, offering many times to compound for that Oath by the alms of above
20000. Pagods, (Pagod is a gold coin, near equivalent to a Venetian Zecchine,
or English Angel) but all in vain, and she persever'd constant in this
Resolution till death; which being undoubtedly an act of much Constancy and
Virtue, was the cause that Venk-tapa Naieka loved her always so much the more.

October the eight and twentieth, Vitula Sinay sent to tell our Venk-tapa
Naieka therewith, who being still so afflicted for the death of his Wife, that
he went not forth in public, nor suffered himself to be seen; when they t^ld
him of this matter, he stood a while without answering, and at length said
only, that they might come when they please: Whereupon his Courtiers seeing
him in this mood, would not reply further to him concerning provisions of the
journey to be sent to the Ambassador, persons to convey his Goods, and other
such things; wherefore Vitula Sinay said, that Sig: Gio: Fernandez might
consider what to do, whether to put himself upon the way toward the Court
without further waiting, or to have him write again, and stay for an Answer;
for he would do which he pleased. Sig: Gio: Fernandez, as well for the credit
of his Embassy as to avoid charges, was desirous to have provisions for the
journey, Men to carry his Goods, and other greater conveniences, although in
public, and with us of his company, he did not testify so much, being willing
to have it thought that Vitula Sinay did this Office for him at the Court upon
his own motion, and not at his request; yet, I know, that in secret he used
great instance with Vitula Sinay, both by Writing and by Speech by the
mediation of an Interpreter, that he would write again to the Court, and set
forth to Venk-tapa how that he was the Ambassador of so great a King, the first
Monarch of Christians, (for so I heard him tell the Interpreter, though he
spoke with a low voice) and that it was not seemly for him to go in that
manner, but that people should be sent to him for his journey, and persons to
receive him, and commands given to Venk-tapa's Ministers that he might pass
through his Territories with that convenience and decency which was requisite;
that since he was now within two or three days journey of the Court, he would
stay another week at Onor, and longer if need were, till a better Answer came;
and that, if he thought it expedient, Vitula Sinai himself might go before to
do this Office, as he that might do it best, and who ought to arrive at the
Court before him the Ambassador, who afterward might come thither alone by
easy journeys after he had sent him an Answer. The same night the Interpreter
returned with this message to Vitula Sinay, who was lodged on the other side of
the River in his own King's jurisdiction. October the nine and twentieth, After
we had heard Mass in Saint Antonie's Egypt, Sig: Gio: Fernandez was minded to
go in person to visit Vitula Sinay, and speak to him about the abovementioned
matter; wherefore entering with us into one of those boats, which they call
Mancive, going with twenty or four and twenty Oars, only differing from the
Almadies, in that the Mancive have a large covered room in the poop, severed
from the banks of rowers, and are greater then the Almadies which have no such
room; we passed out of the Port, and thence from the mouth of the River
Southward, went to land upon the continent, where Vitula Sinay having been
advertised of our coming, expected us under the shade of certain little Hills
and Trees, of which all this Country is full. This was the first time that I
set foot in any place of the Gentiles, where they bear sway themselves. Sig:
Gio: Fernandez spoke a long while and alone with Vitula Sinay, both of them
sitting upon a Carpet spread upon the grass; and at length, the discourse being
ended, the Ambassador took boat again and returned to Onor. Upon the way he
told us, that Vitula Sinay said, that in either case, of his writing again, or
going in person to the Court, and waiting for a new Answer, many days would be
lost; therefore it seemed best to him that we should all put our selves upon
the way without further waiting; and that to carry his (the Ambassador's)
Goods, they had appointed ten Men according to his King's Order; wherefore Sig:
Fernandez told us, he was resolved to go by all means, and seeing the ten men
allowed him to carry his Goods were not sufficient, they alone requiring twenty
five, besides those of the rest of his company, he would hire the rest at his
own charge, and rid himself of this perplexity. By this change of opinion after
this interview, I understod that Vitula Sinay had spoken in such sort that Sig:
Fernandez perceived that this coldness of sending him greater accommodations
for his journey, was not so much through the King's melancholy for his Wife's
death, and the present confusion of the Court, as for some other cause; and the
alleging loss of time in waiting for a new Answer, was but an excuse of
Vitula; but, in fine, the truth could be no other, then that they would not
give him any greater Provisions, or because Venk-tapa was not well pleased with
this Embassy, etc. And to confirm this, I know that before Sig: Fernandez
departed from Goa, Venk-tapa Naieka writ thither to his Ambassador Vitula
Sinay, that if they sent this Embassy to urge the restitution of the State and
Fortress of Banghel, which he had lately taken from a certain small
Indian-Prince, neighbor to Mangalor, who lived under the Portugal's
protection, (for whose defense, two or three years before, the Portugals had
made war with Venk-tapa Naieka, and received a notable defeat by him) it was
in vain, and that Sig: Gio: Fernandez, (now first known to him) might forbear
to undertake this journey, for that he was fully resolved not to restore it,
nor yet to give seven thousand Pagods yearly to that Prince, as he had promised
upon agreement, if he went not to live out of those Territories taken from him
either in Goa or in Magalor, or elsewhere, he pretending at least a purpose to
return to live with that annuity in the lands, once his own, privately, in
hopes, perhaps, to raise some new commotion one day. So that Venk-tapa Naieka,
knowing that one of the principal businesses of this Embassy was that of the
Prince of Banghel, which little pleased him; and seeing also that this year the
Ships from Portugal were not yet arrived, which every year fetch Pepper out of
his Dominions, and bring him in a great sum of money, by agreement made by the
Portugals, who every year were either to take it or pay for it; and neither the
Ships nor the money coming this year, they could not easily pay him for the
Pepper this year, nor yet for a great part of that of the last; for which, by
reason of the loss of their Ships they still owed him: And lastly, observing
the Portugals weakened and low, so that they not only stood in need of him, but
now, in some sort, began to submit themselves to him with this Embassy which
they sent to him, and the disgrace of their passed defeat; 'twas no strange
thing, that being become insolent thereupon, as it is the manner of the
Barbarians, and designing to carry it high over them, he not only showed no
great liking of the Embassy, but made little account of it; and, in a manner,
despised it; that so he might keep himself and his affairs in greater
reputation.

October the thirtieth, Sig: Gio: Fernandez being resolved to depart the next
day, sent some Horses before, upon this, with some of his Family. The same
Evening, one from Goa brought News of the arrival there of some Portugals of
the Fleet which came this year from Portugal, consisting of four great trading
Ships, two Shallops, and four Galeons of War; which last come in order to be
consigned to Ruy Freira for the War of Ormuz; the loss of which place, and the
deliverance of Ruy Freira out of prison being already known at the Court of
Spain, but not the loss of the Ships of the Fleet the last year. The Portugals
arrived in Goa, according to the abovesaid intelligence, came in one of the
Galeons of the Fleet which is coming, which being separated from the rest,
touched at Mozambique, and there being old and shattered was lost, only all the
People and Goods were saved, and came in other Ships to Goa; and being the rest
of the Fleet delays so long, it is conceived to have held a course without the
Island of Saint Lorenzo, which uses to take up more time. They relate also,
that the Marriage between Spain and England is concluded, and that the Prince
of England is now in Spain, being come thither incognito before the conclusion
of the Marriage which was shortly expected. It being already very late, I shall
not longer deferr concluding this Letter, because it is requisite for me to go
and take a little rest, that I be may fit for my journey to morrow Morning, if
it please God; to whom I heartily commend you, and with my accustomed affection
kiss your Hands.

From Onor, October 30. 1623.
LETTER V.
From Ikkeri, November. 22. 1623.
I Write to you from Ikkeri, the Royal City and Seat of Venk-tapa whither I am
come, and where I am at present; I shall give you an account of the Audience
which our Ambassador has had of this King, who, in my judgment, should rather
be called a Regulus or Royolet, although the Portugals and Indians give him the
honor of a Royal Title; being he has in effect neither State, Court, nor
appearance befitting a true King. I shall describe to you every particular that
is not unworthy your Curiosity, and adjoyn some other of my Relations and
Descriptions of the Idolatrous Gentiles, their vain Superstitions and
Ceremonies about their Idols, Temples, Pagods. What I shall now set down, mine
own Eyes have witnessed to; and I shall not fear being too tedious in
describing things, perhaps, over minutely in these Letters; since I know you
are delighted therewith, and out of your great erudition can make reflections
upon the Rites used in these parts of the world, which in many things are not
unlike the ancient Egyptian Idolatry. For I am persuaded to believe, not
without the authority of ancient Authors, that the worship of Isis and Osiris
was common to Egypt and this Region, as in Philostratus I find Apollonius
affirming, that in India he saw the Statues not only of the Egyptians, but
also of the Grecian gods, as of Apollo, Bacchus, and Minerva. But to return to
the particulars of my journey; October the one and thirtieth, After one a clock
in the Afternoon, we departed from Onor with Sig: Gio: Fernandez in a Mancion
or Barge, and the rest of the Family in a less Boat. Vitula Sinay who was to go
with us, we left in a readiness to set forth after us, I know not, whether by
water or by Land. We rowed up the River which runs Southward to Onor, against
the stream, making use both of Sail and Oars; and a little before night having
gone about three Leagues, we came to Garsopa and there lodged. This place was
sometimes a famous City, Metropolis of the Province and Seat of a Queen: in
which State, as likewise in many others upon the Coast of India, to this day, a
Woman frequently has the sovereignty; Daughters or other nearest Kinswomen
begotten by what ever Father succeeding the Mothers; these Gentiles having an
opinion, (as it is indeed) that the Issue by the Woman-side is much more sure of
the blood and lineage of the Ancestors, then that by the Man-side. The last
Queen of Garsopa fell in Love with a mean Man and a stranger, into whose power
she resigned her self, together with her whole Kingdom. In which act, (setting
aside her choosing a Lover of base blood, upon which account she was blamed and
hated by the Indians who are most rigorous observers of Nobility, and
maintainers of the dignity of their ancestors in all points) as to giving her
self up as a prey to her lover, she committed no fault against her honor; for
in these Countries it is lawful for such Queens to choose to themselves Lovers
or Husbands, one or more, according as they please. But this Man who was so
favored by the Queen of Garsopa, having thoughts as ignoble as his blood, in
stead of corresponding with gratitude to the Queens courtesy, designed to
rebel against her, and take the Kingdom from her; which for a while he
executed, having in process of time gained the affection of most of her most
eminent Vassals. The Queen seeing her self oppressed by the Traitor, had
recourse to the Portugals, offering them her whole State, on condition they
would free her from imminent ruin. But the Portugals, according as they had
always in India done by their friends, (whereby they have been many times the
ruin of others and themselves too) did not succor her till it was too late,
and then very coldly. On the other side the Traitor, (as his ill Fate, or
rather God's just anger, would have it) called to his assistance against the
Queen and the Portugals, his Neighbor Venk-tapa Naieka, now Master of those
Countries. Venk-tapa Naieka taking advantage of the occasion, entered suddenly
into the Kingdom of Garsopa with great diligence and force, so that shortly
becoming Master of the whole Country and the City Royal, having driven out the
Portugals who came to defend it, he took the Queen Prisoner, and carried her to
his own Court; where being kept, although honorably, she ended her days
afterward in an honorable prison. But the Traitor under-went the punishment
of his crime, for Venk-tapa Naieka caused him to be slain; and for more secure
keeping that State in his power, caused the City and Royal Palace of Garsopa to
be destroyed, so that at this day, that lately flourishing City is become
nothing but a Wood; Trees being already grown above the ruins of the Houses,
and the place scarcely inhabited by four Cottages of Peasants.

Foufel, Ambe, and such like, all watered with innumerable Rivolets and Springs
of fresh water; the sides of the River all shady, beset with Flowers, Herbs,
and sundry Plants, which like Ivy creeping about the Trees and Indian reeds of
excessive height, (called by the Country People Bambu, and very thick along the
banks) make the wood more verdant; through the middle whereof the River strayes
with sundry windings. In short, the River of Garsopa, for a natural thing,
without any artificial ornament of buildings or the like, is the goodliest
River that ever I beheld. Our boats being large, could not go to the ordinary
landing place at Garsopa, because the River, which is discharged into the Sea
with one stream, is there divided into many, which fall from several Springs
upon some neighboring Hills, so that the water is but little. Wherefore we
landed at some distance from Garsopa, which stands on the Southbank of the
River, and walked the rest of the way on foot, and our goods were carried upon
the Men's shoulders, whom we had hired for that purpose. Before we got to our
lodging, it was night, and we were fain to wade over one of the arms of the
River which took me up to the middle of the thigh; the bottom was stony, and
not so dangerous to us, (who were free) in reference to falling, as to the poor
men who carried burdens upon their heads; so that I wondered not he who
carried the hamper of my clothes fell down with it, and wetted it in the water.
At length we lodged not within the compass of Garsopa, which was somewhat
within land, but near it upon the River, in a place covered with a roof amongst
certain Trees, where many are wont to lodge, and where the Pepper is weighed
and contracted for, when the Portugals come to fetch it: for this is the
Country wherein greatest plenty of Pepper grows; for which reason the Queen of
Garsopa was wont to be called by the Portugals, Reyna da Pimenta, that is,
Queen of Pepper. The River is called by the Portugals the River of Garsopa, but
by the Indians in their own Language, one branch is termed, Ambu nidi, and the
other, Sara nidi. From the River's mouth, where it falls into the Sea, to
Garsopa, the way, if I mistake not, is directly East.

November the first, After dinner we departed from our station, Garsopa
sometimes stood, we walked a good way Southwards, or rather South South-west,
always through an uneven, woody Country, irrigated with water and delightful,
like the banks of the River which I described. Then we began to climb up a
Mountain, which the Country People call Gat, and divides the whole length of
this part of India, being washed on the East with the Gulf of Bengala, and on
the West with the Ocean or Sea of Goa. The ascent of this Mountain is not very
rough, but rather easy and pleasant like the other soil, being thick set with
Groves of Trees of excessive greatness; some of them so strait, that one alone
might serve for the Mast of a Ship. With all, the Mountain is so watered with
Rivulets and Fountains, and so clothed with Grass and Flowers, that,
me-thought, I saw the most delightful place of the Appennine in Italy. If there
be any difference, the Gat of India has the advantage in this place, because
the height is much less then that of our Appennine, the ascent more easy, the
wood more beautiful and thick, the waters not less plentiful and clear; If Gat
yields to it in any thing, it is in the frequency of inhabited places, the
sumptuousness of buildings; and lastly, in the beauty which the industrious art
of the inhabitants adds to the Appennine; the Indian Gat having no other,
besides what liberal, yet unpolished, Nature gives it. About three hours after
noon we came to the top of Gat, where a little beneath the highest cliff is
found a kind of barred Gate, with a wall in a narrow pass, which renders the
place sufficiently strong; a little further than which, in the top of all, are
found earthen Bulwarks, and lines, which guard the passage; and in this place
is a sufficient Fortress, being a mile and half in circuit. It was sometimes
called Garicota, but now Gavarada Naghar; we lodged about a Musket Shot without
the Fort, in a plane and somewhat low place, where are some Houses like a
Village, and amongst them a Temple of Hamant, who is one of those two Scimions
who were employed by Ramo for recovering his Wife Sita, as their Fables relate;
for which good work, and their other miracles, the Indians adore them. Here I
saw his Statue in the Temple with burning lights before it, and a consecrated
Silver Hand hung up by some devout person, perhaps, cured of some evil of his
Hands. Below this place where we lodged, amongst the little Valleys of the
Hill, is a fair and large Cistern, or Receptacle of water, which falls
thereinto from a River descending from the Mountain, and the overplus running
into the lower Valleys. At night we heard Music at the Gate of the
abovementioned Temple, diverse barbarous Instruments sounding, and amongst the
rest certain great Horns of metal, fashioned almost into a semicircle; I asked
the reason of this Festival, and they told me, The Idol was to go presently,
accompanied with a great number of Men and Women, in pilgrimage to a place of
their devotion near San Tome, a months journey and more; and that it was to be
carried in a Palanchino, as the custom is, and in procession with sundry sounds
and songs, almost in the same manner, as amongst us Christians, the Bodies or
Images of Saints are carried in procession when any Community or Fraternity go
in pilgrimage to Loreto, or Rome, in the Holy year. At this time assisted at
the service of the Idol, amongst others, a Woman, who, they said, was so
abstinent that she did not so much as eat Rice; they held her for a kind of
Saint, upon a fame that the Idol delighted to sleep with her, which these silly
souls accounted a great spiritual favor; and happily, it may be true, that some
Incubus-Devil has to do with her, and deceives her with false illusions,
telling her that he is her God; of which kind of Women, there are many among
the Moors. Diverse come to ask her about future things, and she consulting, the
Idol gives them their answer; one of these interrogations was made to her
whilst we were present. Others came to offer Fruits and other edibles to the
Idol, which one of the Priests presented to it, murmuring his Orisons; and
taking half of the things offered, (which after presentation to the Idol,
remains to the servants of the Temple), he restores the other half to him that
offered them; and were it but one Indian Nut, he splits it in two before the
Idol, and gives half to him that brought it; who takes the same with reverence,
and is afterward to eat it with devotion as sacred food, and tasted of by the
Idol.

In the Evening, by the Captain of the Fort (who was a Moor Dacan, and
sometimes an Officer under one Melik a Captain of Adil-Sciah, in the Frontiers
of Goa, but being taken Prisoner in a War between Adil-Sciah and Venk-tapa
Naieka, and afterward set at liberty, remained in the service of Venk-tapa;
and has been about five and twenty years Governor of this Fortress, and is
called Mir-Bai) was sent a Present of Sugar Canes and other refreshments to
eat, to Sig: Gio: Fernandez; whom also the same night Vitula Sinay, who
traveled with us, but apart by himself, came to visit, and entertained with
the sight of two young men, who fenced very well a good while together, only
with Swords made of Indian Canes. On which occasion, I shall not omit that
amongst the Indians, it is the custom for every one to manage and make use only
of one sort of Arms, whereunto he accustoms himself, and never uses any other,
even in time of War. So that some Soldiers fight only with Swords, others
with Sword and Buckler, others with Lances, others with Bows and Arrows, and
others with Muskets; and so every one with his own Arms, never changing the
same, but thereby becoming very expert and well practiced in that which he
takes to. The way from Garsopa to Govarada Naghar was about five or six miles,
and no more.

November the second, Early in the Morning Vitula Sinay first visited Sig: Gio:
Fernandez, and afterward the Captain of the Fort, accompanied with a great
number of his Soldiers with several Arms, but most had Pikes, Lances in the
form of half Pikes, and Swords; only two had Swords and Bucklers: one of them
had a short and very broad Sword like a Cortelax, but the edge-part bowed
inwards after a strange fashion. Those two with Swords and Bucklers came before
the Captain, dancing and skirmishing after their manner, as if they fought
together. The visit was received in the Porch of the little Temple above
mentioned, and lasted a good while. Vitula Sinay, who spoke the Portugal-Tongue
well, served for interpreter between our Ambassador and the Captain, and
handsomely intimated to the Ambassador, that when he returned back it was fit
to give a Present to this Captain, and visit him in the Fort; that the custom
was so; and he had already done the like to the Ambassador; that since he did
it not now, he had already made an excuse for it, by telling him that the
baggage was gone before, and that he did not go to visit him, because he had no
Present to carry him, but he would do it at his return. In the end of this
visit, Vitula Sinay caused a little Silver basket to be brought full of the
leaves of Betle, (an herb which the Indians are always eating, and to the sight
not unlike the leaves of our Cedars) and giving it to the Ambassador, he told
him that he should present it to the Captain, the custom being so in India, for
the person visited to give Betle-leaves to the visitant, wherewith the visit
ends. The Ambassador did so, and the Captain without taking any of these
leaves, whether it were the custom, or that being a Moor he did not use it,
(which yet I believe not) gave it to certain persons of quality, who stood
beside him, and had accompanied him; neither did any of them touch the leaves,
but the basket went from hand to hand till it was carried away as full as it
was presented; which being done, the Captain first, and then Vitula Sinay, took
leave and departed.

After we had dined, about noon or soon after, our Ambassador or be mistaken in
any part of the lesson, who corrected and taught them, they being all Scholars
without the assistance of any Master; they answered me, and said true, that it
was not possible for all four of them to forget or mistake in the same part,
and that they thus exercised together, to the end, that if one happened to be
out, the others might correct him. Indeed a pretty, easy, and secure way of
learning.

Having seen this Curiosity, and our baggage being laden, we Vitula Sinay set
out together with us. We traveled first Eastward, then Southward, but many
times I could not observe which way our course tended; we went upon the ridge
of a Hill, and through uneven ways, sometimes ascending, and sometimes
descending, but always in the middle of great thick Groves full of Grass and
running water, no less delightful then the former Fields. A little more then
half a League from the Fort, we found a Meschita of the Moors, built upon the
way with a Lake or Receptacle of water, but not very well contrived by the
Captain of the said Fort, which his King had allowed him to make as a great
favor; for the Gentiles are not wont to suffer in their Countries Temples of
other Religions. Here we found our Ambassador, who stayed for us; and we
tarried likewise here above an hour in expectation of our baggage, much of
which was still behind. At length continuing our journey, and having rested a
good while in another place, night came upon us in the midst of a Wood, so
shady, that although we had very clear Moonlight, yet we were fain to light
Torches, otherwise we could not see our way. The Torches used in India are not
like ours, but made of metal in form of those wherewith the Infernal Furies are
painted, the fire of which is fed with Bitumen, and other dry materials which
are put into the mouth or hollow at the top, into which also they frequently
power a combustible liquor, which the Man that holds the Torch carries in his
other hand in a metalline bottle, with a long slender neck very fit for that
purpose; for when he is minded to recruit the flame, he distills a little
liquor into it, the length of the neck securing his hand from hurt. By the
light of these Torches we traveled a great part of the night. At length being
unable to overtake the Horses which were led before, and the baggage being
behind, for fear of losing our way, we stayed under a great Tree, where some in
Palanchinoes, and others upon the ground, spent this night inconveniently and
supper-less, having nothing else to eat but a little Bread, which we toasted at
the fire, that we might eat it hot; and with the same fire which we kindled, we
allayed the coldness of the night, which in the top of these Indian Mountains
is very cold in regard of their height; yet it was not sharper to us this
night, then it uses to be at Rome in the beginning of September, even in
temperate years.

November the third, As soon as it was day we followed our way, and in a short
time came to a Village of four Cottages, called Tumbre, where the Horses were
lodged, and we also stayed till the baggage came up, which was much later then
we; and we stayed the longer to rest the people that traveled on foot: for all
the servants, and I know not how many Musketeers, which our Ambassador carried
with him, were on foot. Vitula Sinay lay there likewise this night, but was
gone before we came thither. From Garicota to Tumbre, is about a League and
half; for in this Country they measure the way by Gau's, and every Gau is about
two Leagues, and they said that from Garicota to Tumbre, was not one Gau.

Gentiles in the places where they are wont to eat, as I have formerly
observed. I took it for a superstitious Rite of Religion; but I since better
understand that it is used only for elegancy and ornament, because not using,
or not knowing how to make such strong and lasting pavements as ours, theirs
being made slightly of Earth and so easily spoiled, therefore when they are
minded to have them plain, smooth, and firm, they smear the same over with
Cow Dung tempered with water, in case it be not liquid, (for if it be, there
needs no water) and plaining it either with their hands or some other
instrument, and so make it smooth, bright, strong, and of a fine green color,
the Cows whose dung they use, never eating any thing but Grass; and it has one
convenience, that this polishing is presently made, soon dry, endures walking,
or any thing else to be done upon it; and the Houses wherein we lodged, we
found were preparing thus at our coming, and were presently dry enough for our
use. Indeed it is a pretty Curiosity, and I intend to cause trial to be made of
it in Italy, and the rather because they say for certain, that the Houses whose
pavements are thus stercorated, are good against the Plague; which is no
despicable advantage. Only it has this evil, that its handsomness and
politeness lasts not, but requires frequent renovation, and he that would
have it handsome, must renew it every eight or ten days; yet being a thing so
easy to be done, and of so little charge, it matters not for a little trouble
which every poor person knows hows to dispatch. The Portugals use it in their
Houses at Goa, and other places of India; and, in brief, it is certain that it
is no superstitious custom, but only for neatness and ornament; and therefore
it is no wonder that the Gentiles use it often, and perhaps, every day in places
where they eat, which above all the rest are to be very neat. It Is true, they
make a Religious Rite of not eating in any place where people of another Sect
or Race, (in their opinion, unclean) has eaten, unless they first repolish the
same with Cow Dung, which is a kind of Purification; as we do by washing it
with water, and whitening the wall, (not as a Religious Rite, but through
Custom) in Chambers where any one has died. I said, where people not only of
different Religion, but also of impure Race have eaten; because the Gentiles
are very rigorous and superstitious among themselves, for a noble Race not to
hold Commerce of eating with others more base; yea, in one and the same Race,
(as in that of the Brachmans which is the noblest) some Brachmans, (as the
Panditi, or Boti, who are held in great esteem amongst them) will not eat in
the Company, or so much as in the House of a Brachmans, Sinay, or Naieke, and
other Nobles, who eat Fish, and are called by the general name Mazari, and much
less esteemed then those who eat none; yet the Brachmans, Sinay, or Naieke, or
other species of Mazari, who are inferior, eat in the House of a Pandito, or
Boto, without being contaminated, but rather account it an honor.

After dinner, we departed from Tumbre, traveling through unequal ways and
lands like the former, but rather descending Barenghi, which in that place runs
from West to East, and is not fordable, although narrow, but requires a boat to
pass it. On the Southern bank, on which we came, were four Cottages, where we
took up our station that Night, enjoying the cool, the shadow, and the sight of
a very goodly Wood which clothes the River sides with green; but above all
where we lodged, on either side the way, were such large and goodly Trees, such
spacious places underneath for shade, and the place so opacous by the thickness
of the boughs on high, that indeed, I never saw in my days a fairer natural
Grove; amongst other Trees there was abundance of Bambu, or very large Indian
Canes, twined about to the top with pretty Herbs. The journey of this day was
three Cos, or a League and half. This River, they say, is one of those which
goes to Garsopa. Vitula Sinay we found not here, because he was gone before.

November the fourth* We began in the Morning to pass our Goods over the River;
but because there was but one, and that a small boat, it was ten hours after
noon before we had got all of them over; then following our journey through
somewhat oblique and uneven ways like the former, we found many Trees of
Myrobalanes, such as are brought into Italy preserved in Sugar. It has leaves
much like that which produces Gum Arabic, by me formerly described; different
only in this, that in that of Gum Arabic, the branch consisting of many
leaves, is much less, round or oval, and seems one leaf made up of many other
long and narrow ones: But in this Myrobalane Tree, the branch is sufficiently
long, and the small leaves composing it in two rows on either side, are
somewhat larger; nor is the Myrobalane Tree prickly like that of Gum Arabic.
The fruit is round, hard, of a yellowish green, smooth, shining, of little
pulp, but a great stone, almost round and furrowed with six circular lines.
Being raw it has an acid and astringent, but, in my judgment, no pleasant
taste; but preserved, becomes good. They say it is refrigerative and purges
Choler.

Ahineli. We lodged in the Porches of a Temple of Idols, which had two Porches,
one within, the other without, both low after their manner, with very large
Pent-houses strengthened with great Posts; the Pavement raised high and dung'd,
but not lately; the walls white, sprinkled in the corners and ends, with a sort
of Rose-Oyle, ill colored; for so is their custom always in their Religious
Structures. The Idol was called Virena Deuru, the latter of which words
signifies God, or rather Lord, being attributed also to Men of quality; he
stood at the upper end in a dark place with Candles before him; of what figure
he was I could not see well, by reason of the darkness, but they told me 'twas
a Man: In the body of the Temple, were many other wooden Statues of less Idols,
placed about in several places, as 'twere for ornament; some of which were
figures of their Gods, others not of Gods, but for ornament, of several shapes.
Many of these figures represented dishonest actions. One was of a Woman,
lifting up her cloths before, and showing that which Modesty obliged her to
cover: Another was of a Man and a Woman kissing, the Man holding his Hand on
the Woman's Breasts: Another had a Man and a Woman naked, with their Hands at
one another's shameful parts, those of the Man being of excessive greatness,
and sundry such representations fit indeed for such a Temple. But these were
not figures of Gods. Of Gods there was a Brahma with five Heads, and three Arms
on a side, sitting astride a Peacock, which in their Language they call Nau
Brahma, that is, the Peacock of Brahma; another God was called Naraina, with
four Arms on a side: Another with an Elephant's Head, and two Hands to an Arm,
whom they call Ganesu, and others Bacra-tundo, that is, Round-mouth; for one
and the same God has diverse names: Another called Fuena, had the shape of a
Man, holding a naked Sword in his right Hand, and a Buckler in his left:
Another had a Man under his Feet, upon whose Head he trampled; and so, many
others of various sorts. I observed that all these Idols had the same cover of
the Head, high, with many picks or peaks, all ending in one long peak, a
strange and majestical Diadem not used now in India; it might have been of
wreathed Linen, or Gold, or other solid matter; wherefore I imagine that it is
a very ancient covering, at this day dis-us'd; unless happily it be some ensign
of Divinity, which I rather think, because I remember to have seen at Rome
almost the same Diadems upon the Heads of some Egyptian Statues, and, if I
forget not, they were called Tutuli, and the Idols of Tutulati, as amongst us
the Diadems of the Saints, or, as some make it, three Crowns one upon another,
like the Regno, or Pontifical Crown of our Pope. In the middle of the Temple
was another darker enclosure, wherein stood fastened in the ground certain
slender staves, with others cross them in two rows, making a little Steccato or
Palisado of a long form; and these were to hang Lamps and Tapers upon, at more
solemn d^yes and hours. A Barber whom we had with us, an Indian- Gentile, but a
Native of the Country of Adil-Sciah, who was named Deugi, and understood
something of the Portugal-Tongue, could not well tell me the names of those
figures and Idols of the Temple, when I asked him; because, he said, they were
not things of his Country, where they had other things and Gods, and that every
Country had particular ones of their own. Within the circuit of this Temple,
but on one side of the Court as you go in, were three other little Cells
separate from the body of the great Temple, two of which were empty, perhaps
not yet well accommodated, but in the other was an Idol of an Ox, which our
Barber knew, and said was also of his Country, and that they call it Basuana;
it was half lying, or rather sitting upon the floor with the Head erect; like
which Ox, or Basuana, stood another in the upper part of the Temple before the
Tribunal of the Idol Virena, as if it stood there for his guard. In the Evening
the Ministers of the Temple ring a kind of Bell or Shell which was within the
Temple, striking it with a staff; and it made a tolerable sound, as if it had
been a good Bell: at which sound, some from without assembling together, they
begin to sound within the Temple very loud two Drums, and two Pipes or Flutes
of metal; after which many Tapers being lighted, particularly, at the Steccato
abovementioned, and put in order a little quilt, with a Canopy of rich Stuff,
which is always ready in the Temple for carrying the Idol, they put the
principal Idol Virena into it, not that of ordinary wood in the middle of the
Temple, but the other at the upper end, which was of the same bigness, about
two spans round between the figure and ornaments about it, but all painted with
various colors, gilded and decked with white Flowers. Then one of the
Ministers marched first sounding a Bell continually as he went, and after him
others, and at length two with lighted Tapers, after which followed the Idol in
his Canopy, with a Minister before him carrying a Vessel of Perfumes, which he
burnt; and thus they carried him in Procession: First, into the Court without
the Temple, going out of it on the left Hand, as you enter, which to them as
they came forth was the right, and returning by the other opposite. After which
going out of the Gate of the Court into the street, they went in the same
manner in Procession, (still sounding their Bells) I know not whither, but it is
likely they went to some other Temple to perform some kind of Ceremony; for in
the Town there was more then one. Being at length returned, and the Procession
re-entring the Court with a great train of Men and Women of the Town, they went
thrice about the inside of the Court, as they had done once before they went
out: But in these three Circumgyrations they observed this Order, that the
first time they walked as they had done in the street; the second, more
leisurely, and those that sounded the Flutes, left off, and sounded another
kind of shriller and sweeter Pipe; the third time, they walked more slowly then
before, and leaving off the second Pipes, sounded others of a far lower note.
Which being done, those that carried and accompanied the Canopy of the Idol,
stood still in the entrance of the Temple right against the Upper End, and one
of the Priests or Ministers standing at the Upper End directly opposite to the
Idol, (who was held standing on his Feet by help of one of the Minister's
Hands, who for that purpose went always on one side near him;) began to salute
the Idol a far off with a dim Taper in his Hand, making a great circle with the
same from on high downwards, and from below upwards, directly over against the
Idol, which he repeated several times; and in the end of the circles, which
were always terminated in the lower part, he described a strait line from one
side to the opposite, and that where the circle began; nor did he seem to me
always to begin the circles on the same part, but sometimes on the right, and
sometimes on the left, with what Order I know not. This being done within, the
same Priest came to the Entrance where the Idol stood, passing directly through
the midst of the Palisado of Lights, (through which, I believe, that for
others, and another time, it is not lawful to pass; because out of these
Ceremonies when any one entered to perform other Services, I saw him always go
without the Palisado on the sides) coming along, I say, sounding a Bell, and
being followed by a Boy who carried a Basin of water with Santalus, or Sanders
after him, (the same wherewith, I conceive, they are wont to paint their
foreheads) and also with Drums and Flutes sounding all the while; he went in
this manner three times round the Idol, beginning his circuits from the left
side. When he had thus done, standing on the same side of the Idol where he
began, and laying aside his Bell, he offered the Basin of water to the Idol,
and dipping one Finger in it, laid the same upon the Idol's Forehead, or
thereabouts; and if I was not mistaken, taking a little in his Hand, he also
died himself and the other Minister who upheld the Idol on the Forehead
therewith, after which he went to power the remainder of the water in the Basin
upon the ground without the Temple, but within the enclosure or Court. Then he
took a wax-Candle, and therewith described within the Palanchino or Carriage
before the Idol many circles with lines at the end; and putting out the Candle,
took the Idol out of the Palanchino, and carrying it through the railed
Steccado in the middle of the Torches, placed it on its Tribunal at the Upper
End where it usually stands. In the mean time one of the Ministers distributed
to all the bystanders a little quantity of certain Fitches mingled with small
slices of Indian Nut, which, I conceive, had been offered to the Idol; and they
took and eat the same with signs of Devotion and Reverence. He offered some
likewise to our people, and there wanted not such as took them; the Drums and
Fifes sounding in the mean time: which at length ceasing, and the Candles being
put out, the Ceremonies ended, and the people returned to their Houses. Such
Men as were not Officers of the Temple, assisted at these Ceremonies in the
first entrance, where we also stood: but the Women stood more within in the
body of the Temple, where the rows of lights were. For the better understanding
of all which description, I shall here delineate the Platform of the Temple
with its enclosure and Porches, as well as I could do it by the Eye without
measuring it.

The Platform of an Indian Temple.


1. The Street. 2. The Stairs of the Entrance. 3. An high Wall of Earth before
the Outer Porch. 4. The Outward Porch with an high Earthen Floor. 5. Two small
Idols in two Nieches on the out side of the ends of the Porch. 6. The Gate,
level with the Earthen Wall. 7. The Inner Porch with an Earthen Floor higher
then that of the Gate, the Wall, and the Outer Porch. 8. A Void Space between
the Porch and the Temple. 9. Part of the First Entrance of the Temple, lower
then the plane of the Gate and the said Void Space. 10. Part of the same, but
one Step higher. 11. The said Step, dividing the first Entrance in the middle.
12. The body of the Temple, situate between the first Entrance and the
Penetrale or Chancel, the pricks denoting the rows of Torches. 13. A little
door to go out at. 14. The Penetrale or Chancel, where the Oval denotes the
Statue of Boue or Basuana upon the ground. 15. The Inmost part of the Chancel,
where the Idol Virena stands. 16. A high Earthen Wall encompassing the Temple,
17. Three little Cells; in the first of which, the Oval represents the Statue
of Boue or Basuana. 18. An open square-Court or Enclosure surrounding the
Temple which stands in the middle of it. 19. The Walls thereof. 20. The Houses
of such Men and Women as keep the Temple.

The same Evening was brought to our Ambassador a Letter Vitula Sinay, who
writ, that arriving at the Cour on Friday before, he had spoken with his King,
who being well pleased with the Ambassador's coming, had prepared the same
house for him, wherein the King of Belighi was wont to lodge when he was at his
Court; and that he would make him a very honorable Reception; that therefore as
soon as we arrived at the Town Ahinala, (where we now were) the Ambassador
should send him notice; which was accordingly done, by dispatching the
Messenger presently back again; and we waited for his return.

November the fifth, At daybreak the Ministers of the Temple where we lodged,
sounded Pipes and Drums for a good while in the Temple, without other Ceremony.
The like they did again about Noon, and at Evening; but at night they made the
same Procession with the Idol, and the same Ceremonies which are above
described. This day came to the Town a Captain from the King with many
attendants, and having visited the Ambassador, took diverse of those Idols which
stood in the first Entrance, and carried them away with him to be new made,
because some were old and broken. Late in the night came another Letter from
Vitula Sinay, which signified to us that we should move forwards to a Town very
near the Court called Badrapor, where some persons from the King were to meet
us, and accompany us to the Court; although the Ambassador had writ to him
before, that he cared not for being accompanied at his Entrance, but only when
he should go to see the King. I style him King, because the Portugals
themselves and the Indians do so; although in truth Venk-tapa Naieka, not only
because his Predecessors were a few years ago Vassals and simple Naieka's (that
is, feudatory Princes, or rather Provincial Governors) under the King of
Vidianugher; and though at this day he reign he absolutely by Usurpation, is in
effect no other then a Rebel; and God knows how long his House will abide in
greatness; but also much more by reason of the smalness of his Territory,
(though it be great, in respect of other Indian Gentile-Princes) deserves not
the Appellation of King; and the less, because he pays Tribute to Idal-Sciah,
who although a greater Prince, is but small neither for a King, and pays
Tribute to the Moghol. In short, Venk-tapa Naieka, although now absolute,
should, in my opinion, be called a Royolet rather then a King: But the
Portugals, to magnify their affairs in India, or else to honor the persons
that rule there, (which is not displeasing in Spain, and the Court of the
Catholic King, who is of the same humor) give the Title of King to all these
petty Indian Princes, many of whom have smaller Dominions then a small
feudatory Marquis in our Countries; and (which is worse) that of Emperor to
some, as to him of Japan, of Aethiopia, and of Calicut, who is very
inconsiderable; the quondam-Prince of Vidianagher, or Bisnaga, (as they speak)
having in a strange and unusual manner multiplied the number of Emperors,
beyond what the fabulous books of Knights Errant have done: Albeit, in truth,
there was never found but one Emperor in the world, the Roman Caesar, who, at
this day, retains rather the name then the substance, in Germany.

November the sixth, Two hours before noon we went from Ahinala, and having
traveled through a Country like the former, but plain, about noon we came to
the Town Badra; where* according as Vitula Sinay had writ to us, we thought to
lodge that night, and accordingly had laid down our baggage, and withdrawn to
a place to rest; but after two hours being there, we found our selves
surrounded by abundance of people, (for it is a large Town, and they go almost
all armed) who out of curiosity came to see us; whereupon the Ambassador,
either having received an Answer from Vitula Sinay, or not caring for a pompous
entrance, raised us all again; and after a small journey further we arrived at
Ikkeri, which is the Royal City of Venk-tapa Naieka where he holds his Court;
having traveled since morning from Ahinala to Ikkeri but two Leagues. This
City is seated in a goodly Plain, and, as we entered, we passed through three
Gates with Forts and Ditches, but small, and consequently, three Enclosures;
the two first of which were not Walls, but made of very high Indian Canes, very
thick and close planted in stead of a Wall, and are strong against Foot and
Horse in any, hard to cut, and not in danger of fire; besides, that the Herbs
which creep upon them, together with themselves, make a fair and great verdure,
and much shadow. The other Enclosure is a Wall, but weak and inconsiderable:
But having passed these three, we passed all. Some say, there are others
within, belonging to the Citadel or Fort where the Palace is; for Ikkeri is of
good largeness, but the Houses stand thin and are ill built, especially without
the third Enclosure; and most of the situation is taken up in great and long
streets, some of them shadowed with high and very goodly Trees growing in Lakes
of Water, of which, there are many large ones, besides Fields set full of
Trees, like Groves, so that it seems to consist of a City, Lakes, Fields, and
Woods mingled together, and makes a very delightful sight. We were lodged in
the House, as they said, wherein the King of Belighi lodged; I know not whether
Kinsman, Friend, or Vassal to Venk-tapa Naieka, but probably one of the
abovementioned Royolets; and to go to this House we went out of the third
Enclosure, passing through the inmost part of the City by another Gate opposite
to that by which we entered. The House indeed was such as in our Countries an
ordinary Artisan would scarce have dwelt in, having very few, and those small
and dark Rooms, which scarce afforded light enough to read a Letter; they build
them so dark, as a remedy for the great heat of Summer. However, this must
needs have been one of the best, since it was assigned to the said King first,
and now to our Ambassador; although as we passed through the midst of the City
I observed some that made a much better show.

At night they brought the Ambassador a couple of bed-steads Goa and other
places of India; but some others were covered with Leather.

November the seventh, Vitula Sinay came in the morning to visit our
Ambassador, and in his King's Name brought him a Present of Sugarcanes,
Fruits, Sugar, and other things to eat, but not any Animal; and, if I was not
misinformed, (for I was not present) he excused his Kings not sending him Sheep
or other Animals to eat, by saying, that he was of a Lingavant or Noble Race,
who neither eat nor kill any Creatures; as if he should have sinned and defiled
himself, by sending any to the Ambassador who would have eaten them. With this
Present he sent a piece of Tapistry, not as a Gift, but only for the
Ambassador to make use of in his House, and it was used in such sort that at
length it had a hole in it: The Ambassador, as not prizing it, having given it
to his Interpreter to sleep upon; as indeed, he seemed not very well pleased
with it or his Donatives; for, speaking of the Reception which Venk-tapa Naieka
made him, he would often say, (according to the natural and general custom of
his Nation); Let him do me less honor, and give me something more, and it will
be better. However, I believe Venk-tapa Naieka, who is not liberal, will abound
more in Courtesy to the Ambassador then in Gifts. Vitula Sinay said, that the
next day the Ambassador should be called to Audience three hours after noon;
wherefore Himself and all his Attendants continued undressed till dinnertime.
I knowing the custom of Courts, and that Princes will not wait but be waited
for, and that the hours of Audience depend upon their pleasure, not upon his
who is to have it, dressed my self in the morning leisurely, that I might not
afterward confound my self with haste; and though in such solemnities others
clothed themselves in colors, and with ornaments of Gold, yet I put on only
plain black Silk as mourning for my Wife. Before we had dined, and whilst we
were at Table, they came to call us in haste to Audience, saying, that Vitula
Sinay and other great Persons were come to conduct us to the King. The
Ambassador finding himself unready and surprised, was forced to desire them not
to come yet, making an excuse that we were still at dinner; and, the Table
being taken away, he and all the rest retired to dress themselves in great
confusion; and greater there was in getting the Horses sadled, preparing the
Presents which were to be carried, and providing other necessary things in
haste, for nothing was ready; but the Ambassador and all his Servants were in a
great hurry and confusion, calling for this and the other thing, which seemed
to me not to have too much of the Courtier. The persons who came to fetch us,
stayed a good while without, but at length were brought into the Porch of the
House, that is, into the first Entrance within the Court, where Visits are
received; without seeing the Ambassador or any of his Attendants, who were all
employed in the abovesaid confusion, at a good part of which these persons
were present.

At length the Ambassador being dressed came forth with the Vitula Sinay, and
another great Person sent by the King to accompany him; he was a Moor by Sect,
but of Indian Race, very black, and Captain General in these parts of Banghel,
from which charge he was lately returned, and his Name was Muse Bai. With these
came also a Son of his, a Youth of the same color, but of a handsome Face, and
clothed odly after the Indian Fashion, that is, naked from the girdle upwards,
having only a very thin and variously painted cloth cast cross one Shoulder,
and another of the same sort girt about him, and hanging down loose; he had a
little Bonnet upon his Head, like those of our Gally-slaves, but wrought with
diverse colors; his Hands, Arms, Neck, and Nose, were adorned with many
ornaments of Gold, and he had a guilt Poniard at his girdle, which showed very
well. His Father was clothed all in white, after the manner of India, to wit,
of such as wear Clothes, and go not naked from the Waste upwards; upon his
white vestment he had a shorter sur-coat of Velvet, guarded with Gold at the
bottom, loose and open before, which is the custom only in solemnities. He had
no Sword, but only a Poniard on the right side, the hilt and cheap gilded,
and, as I believe, of Silver; upon his Head he had a little Cap of the same
form, made of Cloth of Gold; for in these Countries it is the fashion for Men to
cover their Heads either with such Caps, or with white Turbants, little and
almost square. Vitula Sinay and some other personages who came with them to
accompany the Ambassador, were all clothed with white garments of very fine
Silk, and other rich Silken sur-coats upon the same, to honor the solemnity;
and upon these they had such colored clothes as in Persia they call Scial, and
use for girdles, but the Indians wear them cross the shoulders covered with a
piece of very fine white Silk, so that the color underneath appears; or else
wear white Silk alone. As soon as we came forth of doors, Muse Bai presented to
the Ambassador one of these colored Skarfs enclosed in white Silk to wear
about his Neck; and the Ambassador gave him a piece of I know not what Cloth,
and in the mean time a public Dancing-Woman whom they had hired, danced in the
presence of us all. Then we all took Horse, the Ambassador riding upon a good
Horse of his own which he had brought from Goa, with a saddle embroidered and
adorned with Silver Fringe; and another Horse with trappings being lead before
him, both which he had brought from home, with intention, perhaps, to sell them
here at his departure; for Horses here yield a good price, and he had been
formerly at Ikkeri purposely to sell Horses, and so became known to Venk-tapa
Naieka. There was also another good led-Horse, which the Viceroy sent as a
Present to Venk-tapa Naieka; that which they had given to Vitula Sinay, he had
carried to his House, and it appeared not here. All the rest of us rode upon
Horses of the place, which are of a very small size, and were sent to us for
that purpose, accoutr'd after their manner, with saddles pretty enough to look
upon, but to me very inconvenient; for they have bows and cruppers very high,
and are all of hard wood, without any stuffing, but with sharp wreathed edges,
covered with black or red Cloth, laid with lists of Gold or yellow, or other
color; in the cruppers are many carved ornaments almost of this figure (),
besides certain extravagant tassels hanging down to the stirrops; and, were
they not so hard, they would be neither unhandsome, nor unsafe to ride upon.

The Pomp proceeded in this manner: Many Horsemen went foremost, who were
followed by diverse Foot armed with Pikes and other weapons, some of them
brandishing the same as they Portugal manner, but with coarse stuff of small
value; and amongst them rode a servant of the Ambassador's, better clad after
their fashion, as Captain of the Guard. Then followed the Ambassador in the
middle between Vitula Sinay and Muse Bai; and after him we of his retinue, to
wit, the Chaplain, Sig: Consalvo Carvaglio, Sig: Francesco Montegro, who lived
at Barcelor, and whom we found at Ikkeri about some affairs of his own; but
because he wanted a horse, he appeared not in the Cavalcade. After us came some
other Horsemen; but, in sum, there was but few people, a small show, and
little gallantry; demonstrative signs of the smallness of this Court and the
Prince. In this manner we rode to the Palace which stands in a Fort or Citadel
of good largeness, encompassed with a great Ditch, and certain ill built
bastions. At the entrance we found two very long but narrow Bulwarks. Within
the Citadel are many Houses, and shops also in several streets; for we passed
through two Gates, at both which there stood Guards, and all the distance
between them was an inhabited street. We went through these two Gates on
Horseback, which, I believe, was a privilege, for few did so besides our
selves, namely, such only as entered where the King was; the rest either
remaining on Horseback at the first Gate, or alighting at the Entrance of the
second. A third Gate also we entered, but on Foot, and came into a kind of
Court, about which were sitting in Porches many prime Courtiers, and other
persons of quality. Then we came to a fourth Gate guarded with Soldiers, into
which only we Franchi or Christians, and some few others of the Country were
suffered to enter; and we presently found the King, who was seated in a kind of
Porch on the opposite side of a small Court, upon a Pavement somewhat raised
from the Earth, covered with a Canopy like a square Tent, but made of boords
and gilded. The Floor was covered with a piece of Tapistry something old, and
the King sat after the manner of the East upon a little Quilt on the outside
of the Tent, leaning upon one of the pillars which up-held it on the right
hand, having at his back two great Cushions of fine white Silk. Before him lay
his Sword, adorned with Silver, and a little on one side almost in the middle
of the Tent, was a small eight-corner'd Stand, painted and gilded, either to
write upon, or else to hold some thing or other of his. On the right hand, and
behind the King, stood diverse Courtiers, one of which continually waved a white
fan made of fine linen, as if to drive away the flies from the King. Besides
the King, there was but one person sitting, and he the principal Favorite of
the Court, called Putapaia, and he sat at a good distance from him on the right
hand near the wall.

As soon as we saw the King afar off, the Ambassador and we Putapaia sat, but
on the left side, at which we entered. The rest of us stood a good while before
the Tent, on the left side also. Vitula Sinay approached to a Pillar opposite
to that on which the King leaned, and there served as Interpreter, sometimes
speaking with the King, and sometimes with the Ambassador. Muse Bai stood also
on our side, but distant from the King, and near one of the Pillars of the
Porch. The King's first words were concerning the Health of the King of Spain
and the Viceroy; and then the Ambassador subjoined the causes of his coming,
namely, to visit him, and continue the Amity which his Highness held with that
State of the Portugals, (who use that style to these Indian Kings, as they did
also to their King of Portugal when they had one, whence this custom first
arose, and is still continued; although now when they name their King of Spain,
so much a greater Lord then the King of Portuagl, they use not the term
Highness, but Majesty, after the manner of Europe.) The Ambassador added that
in token of this Amity, the Viceroy sent him that Present, not as any great
matter, but as a small acknowledgment; That their King had sent him a
considerable Present from Spain, which his Highness knew was lost at Sea; That
yet by the Ships which were coming this year he should receive another, as he
might see in the Viceroy's Letter which he presented to him. And hereupon the
Ambassador arising from his Seat, went to present the same to him almost
kneeling upon one knee; and he without moving a whit, took it and gave it to
Vitula Sinay, who gave it to another, probably, the principal Secretary,
without reading or opening it. The Ambassador had brought a Letter to him
likewise written in the King of Spain's Name, but did not present it now;
because the Portugals say, that the first time of going to Audience, they are
only to make a Visit, and not to treat of business. Then they drew forth the
Present before the King, which was some pieces of cloth, within one of those
wooden gilt boxes which are used in India; a Lance of the Moorish shape, to
wit, long and smooth like a Pike, the point of Iron gilt, and the foot
embellished with Silver, a gallant Target, and the Horse abovementioned covered
with a silken Horse-cloth; which Horse was brought into the Court where the
King sat. After he had received and viewed the Present, and taken the Iron of
the Lance in his hand, which the Ambassador said was of Portugal; they caused
the rest of us to sit down near the outer wall of the Porch on the left side,
upon a rough Carpet stripped with white and blew, (of that sort which the Turks
and Persians call Kielim) spread upon the pavement of the Porch. The
Ambassador, although he sat, yet never put on his Hat before the King, (for so
the Portugal Nobles are wont to do before the Viceroy, namely, to sit, but not
to be covered) nor did the King speak to him to cover himself, but let him
continue uncovered; wherein, to my thinking, he committed an error; for going
as he did in the name of the State, which amongst them is as much as to go in
the King of Spain's Name; why should he not be covered before so small a
Prince? And the error seemed the greater, because he was the first that went
Ambassador to Venk-tapa Naieka in the name of the State; and consequently, has
made an ill president to such as shall come after him. And in introducing such
prejudicial customs, a public Minister should have his eyes well open: but the
truth is, the Portugals of India understand little, are little Courtiers, and
less Politicians, how exquisite soever they be accounted here, as this Sig:
Gio: Fernandez is esteemed one of the most accomplished, and, I believe, not
undeservedly. At night, I could not forbear to advertise some of his
Countrymen hereof in a handsome way, it not seeming fit for me, a stranger and
the younger man, to offer to give him a Lesson. However, he never put on his
Hat, and Civility obliged us to the same forbearance; but indeed, it was too
much obsequiousness for such a Prince; as also for the Ambassador to tell him
of the other times that he had been privately at that Court, and kissed his
Highnesse's Feet; with other like words little becoming an Ambassador.
Nevertheless he spoke them, professing himself much the servant of Ven-tapa
Naieka, out of hope that he, as Vitula Sinay had promised him at Goa, would
write to the King of Spain in his favor, by which means he should have some
remuneration. Indeed, the Portugals have nothing else in their Heads but
Interest, and therefore their Government goes as it does.

Caravaglio, Montegro, and my self) I handsomely took the last place; because
knowing the nature of the Portugals, I would not have them think that I a
stranger went about to take place and pre-eminence of them in their
solemnities; and they conformably to their own humor, not only used no
Courtesy to me, as well-bred Italians would have done, by saying to me, Amice,
ascend superius; but I saw they were greatly pleased with my putting my self
in the last place, Caravaglio taking the first, the Chaplain the second, and
Montegro the third. I, little caring for this, or for showing and making my
self known in the Court of Venk-tapa Naieka, laughed within my self at their
manners, and with the observation recreated my Curiosity, which alone had
brought me into these parts. The King's discourse to the Ambassador was
distended to diverse things, and, as he was speaking, he frequently chaw'd leaves
of Betle, which a Courtier reached to him now and then, and, when he was minded
out a lump of the masticated leaves, another held a kind of great Cup to his
Mouth, for him to spit into. The King asked concerning the slowness of the
Ships this year, as that which disgusted him, in regard of the Money they were
to bring him for Pepper. He inquired of several things of India, and desired to
know some kind of News. The Ambassador told him all the News we had at Onor,
which were uncertain, being only the Relations of some vulgar persons, and
therefore, in my judgment, too immaturely uttered; affirming, for certain, the
coming of the Fleet with a great Army, the Alliance between Spain and England,
the passage of the Prince of England into Spain; and moreover, (Good God!) the
reduction of all England to the Catholic Faith by the public command of that
King, with other such levities usual to the Portugals, who are very ignorant of
the affairs of the world and of State. The King further spoke long concerning
things transacted with him in the War of Banghel, particularly, of the Peace
that concluded it; for which, probably, being disadvantageous to the Portugals,
he said, ^e heard that many blamed him the Ambassador, who negotiated it with
his Ministers; and that they not only blamed him for it, but said, he would be
punished by the King of Spain, who was offended with it; whereat being sorry,
as his Friend, he had sent several times to Goa to inquire tidings concerning
him. The Ambassador answered, that 'twas true, there had been such accusations
against him and greater, some alleging that his Highness had bribed him; but
that they were the words of malevolent persons, which he had always laughed at,
knowing he had done his duty, and only what the Viceroy had appointed him;
and that in Spain they give credit to the informations of the Viceroy, and not
to the talk of others, as well appeared by the event. Venk-tapa proceeded to
say, that that Peace was very well made for the Portugals, and that much good
had followed upon it; intimating that they would have made it with
disadvantage, if it had not been concluded in that manner as he concluded it:
As if he would have said, It had been ill for the Portugals, with manifest
signs of a mind insulting over them, and that the business of Banghel was no
more to be treated of. Then he asked the Ambassador, How old he was? How many
Children he had? Putting him in mind of his using to come, when a very Youth,
to Ikkeri with his Father to bring Horses, and showing himself very friendly to
him. Nor did the Ambassadar lose the occasion of desiring him that he would
favor him with his Letters to the King of Spain, pretending to hope for much
upon account of them; a thing which I should not commend in an Ambassador,
because he may thereby come to be thought by his natural Prince too partial to,
and too intimate with, the Prince with whom he treats; and also by this means
disparages himself, as if he need to beg the mediation of foreign Princes to
his natural Lord, and of such Princes too with whom he negotiates in behalf of
his own; which by no means seems handsome. Then Venk-tapa Naieka inquired
concerning the rest of us, and Vitula Sinay answered his Questions; telling him
of me, that I was a Roman, and that I traveled over so great a part of the
World out of Curiosity, and that I writ down what I saw; with other things of
the same nature. Venk-tapa Naieka asked me, Whether I understood the Language
of the Moors? I answered that I did, together with the Turkish and Persian; but
I mentioned not the Arabic, because I have it not so ready as the other two,
to be able to make use of it before every body. He seemed sufficiently pleased
in seeing me, and understanding that I was born at Rome, and came thither so
great a Traveller; highly esteeming the ancient fame of Rome and the Empire,
and its new Grandeur and Pontificate of the Christians. These and other
Discourses, which I omit for brevity, lasting for some time, he caused to be
brought to him a piece of Silk embroidered with Gold, such as the Indians wear
cross their shoulders, but with us may serve to cover a Table or such like use;
and calling the Ambassador before him, whither we accompanied him, gave it to
him, and caused it to be put upon his shoulders; whereupon we were dismissed,
and so going out to Horse again, we were reconducted home with the same
solemnity and company.

Cole, Cole, Cole, which I know not what it signifies, but, I believe, it is a
word of joy. Singing in this manner, they went along the street eight or ten
together, being either friends or neighbors, followed by many other women, not
dressed in the same fashion, but who were either their Mothers or their
Kins-women. I imagined it was for some extraordinary Festival, and I was
willing to have followed them to see whither they went, and what they did; but
being in the company of others, I could not handsomely do it, nor had my
Companions the same Curiosity, as indeed the Portugals are not at all curious.
I understood afterward that they went to the Piazza of the great Temple, which
is moderately large, and there danced in circles, singing their songs till it
was late; and that this was a Festival, which they keep three days together at
the end of a certain Fast in Honor of Gauri, one of their Goddesses, Wife of
Mohedaca; and therefore it is celebrated by girls.

November the ninth, Walking about the City, I saw a beam raised a good height,
where, in certain of their Holy Days some devout people are wont to hang
themselves by the flesh upon hooks fastened to the top of it, and remain a good
while so hanging, the blood running down in the mean time, and they flourishing
their Sword and Buckler in the Air, and singing verses in Honor of their Gods.
Moreover, in a close place opposite to the Temple, I saw one of those very
great Carrs, or Charriots, wherein upon certain Feasts they carry their Idols
in Procession, with many people besides, and Dancing-women, who play on musical
instruments, sing, and dance. The four wheels of this Carr were fourteen of my
spans in diameter, and the wood of the sides was one span thick. At the end of
it were two great wooden Statues, painted with natural colors; one of a Man,
the other of a Woman naked, in dishonest postures; and upon the Carr, which was
very high, was room for abundance of people to stand; and, in brief, it was so
large that scarce any but the widest streets in Rome, as Strada, Giulia, or
Babuino, would be capable for it to pass in. I saw also certain Indian Friars,
whom in their Language they call Giangama, and perhaps, are the same with the
Sages seen by me elsewhere; but they have Wives, and go with their faces
smeared with ashes, yet not naked, but clad in certain extravagant habits, and
a kind of picked hood or cowl upon their heads of died linen, of that color
which is generally used amongst them, namely, a reddish brick-colour, with many
bracelets upon their arms and legs, filled with something within, that makes a
jangling as they walk. But the pretiest and oddest thing was, to see certain
Soldiers on Horseback, and considerable Captains too, as I was informed, who
for ornament of their Horses wore hanging behind the saddle-bow two very large
tassels of certain white, long, and fine skins, (they told me they were the
tails of certain wild Oxen found in India, and highly esteemed) which tassels
were about two yards in compass, and so long as to reach from the saddle-bow to
the ground; two, I say, hung behind the saddle-bow, and two before of equal
height, and two others higher at the head stall; so that there were six in all:
between which the Horseman was seen upon the saddle half naked, and riding
upon a Horse which leaped and curvetted all the way; by which motion those six
great tassels of skin, being very light and not at all troublesome, but flying
up and down, seemed so many great wings; which indeed was a pretty odd
spectacle, and made me think I saw so many Bellerophons upon several
Pegasus's. The same Evening I saw the companies of girls again, and following
them I found that they did not go into the Piazza of the Temple, as they had
done the two nights before, but into one of the King's Gardens, which for this
purpose stood open for every body, and is nothing but a great field planted
confusedly with shady and Fruit Trees, Sugar Canes, and other Garden plants.
Hither almost the whole City flocked, Men and Women, and all the companies of
the flowered Virgins, who putting themselves into circles, here and there
danced and sung; yet their dancing was nothing else but an easy walking round,
their snappers always sounding; only sometimes they would stretch forth their
legs, and now and then cowre down as if they were going to sit, one constantly
singing, and the rest repeating the word Cole, Cole. There wanted not other
Done ballatrici, Dancing-women, who exceeded the former in skill and
dexterity: But in conclusion, they gathered into several companies to supper,
with the other Women that accompanied them; so did the Men also, some with
their Wives, and some alone, of which there wanted not who invited us, not to
eat with them (for they communicate not with strangers at the Table) but to
take some of their fare; which we thanked them for, but accepted not, being
delighted only to see them feast so together, dispersed in several places of
the Garden; this being the night that the Fast ended.

Goa brought the Ambassador a Letter from the Viceroy, with another for Vitula
Sinay, and a third from the Captain of Onor. The Ambassador imparted his
intelligence to none, but forbad the Post to let it be known that he had
brought Letters; whence I conceived, that the News was not good, otherwise it
would have been presently published; only I heard some obscure talk of the
Malabarians, but I would not inquire further into the matter, as that which did
not belong to me; especially amongst the Portugals who are very close and
reserved toward strangers.

November the tenth, I saw passing along the street a Nephew of Venk-tapa
Naieka, his Sisters Son, a handsome youth, and fair for that Country; he was
one of those that aspire to the succession of this State, and was now returning
from the fields without the Town, whither he uses to go every Morning. He is
called Seda-Siva Naieka, and was attended with a great number of Soldiers both
Horse and Foot marching before him, and behind with many Cavaliers and Captains
of quality, himself riding alone with great gravity; He had before him Drums,
Cornets, and every sort of their barbarous instruments: Moreover, both in the
Front and in the Rear of the Cavalcade, were, (I know not whether for
magnificence or for guard) several Elephants carrying their guides upon their
backs; and amongst them was also carried his Palanchino or Litter.

November the eleventh, The Ambassador went again to Audience, to present to
Venk-tapa Naieka the Letter writ to him in the King of Spain's Name* and
declare what that King required of him. He went alone without any of us, or of
the Portugals his Companions, either not willing that we should be present at
the debating of business, or because he went in a Palanchino, and had his two
Horses led before him, but there were neither Palanchino's nor Horses enough in
the House for the rest of us. With those that came to fetch him, came also a
public Dancing-woman, who performed a pretty piece of Agility in his presence;
for standing upon one foot, when the Drums and other instruments sounded, with
the other she swiftly turned round in the Air a large Iron Ring, about a span
in Diametre, without letting it fall off her great Toe, and at the same time
with one hand tossed two Cymbals or brass balls, catching one in her Hand
whilst the other was aloft, and so alternately, and very nimbly without ever
letting them fall; which indeed was great dexterity, to be employed at the same
time with the foot and the hand, standing firm all the while on the other foot
without support, and yet attending to the Music, and this for a good space
together: during which an old Man with a white beard and bald head, who brought
her, stood behind her, crying all the while Ahud, Ahud, Ahud, which in their
Language signifies as much as Good, Good, Good. The Ambassador returned quickly
from Audience, but made not a word of any thing. The King frequently sent him
things to eat; particularly, fruits out of season, to wit, brought to him from
far distant places, amongst which we had Ziacche, (which I take to be the same
with Zatte, which is a kind of Gourd) a fruit very rare at this time; and also
Indian Melons, which how good soever, are worth nothing at any time, the
Climate not being for such fruits.

November the twelfth, I took the height of the Sun at Ikkeri, and found the
Meridian Altitude 31. degrees. He was now in the 19th degree of Scorpio, and
consequently, declined from the Aequinoctial toward the South 17. gr. 29.23.
which subtracted from the 31. degrees in which I found the Sun, there remain
13. gr. 30.37. and such is the Elevation of the Pole at Ikkeri; which must be
also as many degrees, to wit, 13. gr. 30.37. distant from the Aequinoctial
toward the North. At dinner the Ambassador told us, that the King of Spain's
Letter which he had presented the day before to Venk-tapa Naieka concerned not
any business, but was only of complement, and particularly, to give him much
thanks for having of late years refused to sell Pepper to the English and
Dutch, who had been at his Court to buy it; and also for the good Amity he held
with the Portugals, which he desired might increase every day: That of the
affairs of Banghel, or any others, he said nothing, referring all to the
Viceroy, and the Ambassador whom the Viceroy had sent to him: Wherewith
Venk-tapa Naieka was very well pleased, and he had reason; for during the
present State of the Portugals affairs, I certainly think they will not speak a
word to him of Banghel, nor of any thing else that may be disgustful to him.

The same day the Ambassador had been at Court; being invited to see solemn
Wrestling at the Palace. We did not accompany him, for want of Horses and
Palanchinoes; but at night he told us, Vitula Sinay asked much for me, wishing
I had been present at this Wrestling, which was exercised by Persons very stout
and expert therein; because he had heard that I writ down what I saw
remarkable. However, Caravaglio, Montegro, and my self not going thither, went
out of Ikkeri half a League Northwards, to see another new City which Venk-tapa
has begun to build there. It Is called Sagher, and is already pretty well
inhabited, with Houses all made of Earth after their manner. The Palace is
finished, and Venk-tapa frequently goes to it; as also a Temple built upon a
great Artificial Lake, a House for his Nephews and other Grandees, with all
conveniences thereunto, particularly, great Stalls for Elephants, of which he
keeps here above eighty; we saw many of them here, some for War, large and
handsome. A Market was kept this day in Sagher, as it is the custom every
Sunday, and at Ikkeri every Friday. There was a great concourse of people, but
nothing to sell besides necessaries for food and clothing, after their manner.
The way between Ikkeri and Sagher is very handsome, plain, broad, almost
totally direct, here and there beset with great and thick Trees which make a
shadow and a delightful verdure. As we returned home at night, we met a Woman
in the City of Ikkeri, who, her Husband being dead, was resolved to burn her
self, as it is the custom with many Indian Women. She rod on Horseback about
the City with open face, holding a Looking-glass in one hand, and a Lemon in
the other, I know not for what purpose; and beholding her self in the Glass,
with a lamentable tone sufficiently pitiful to hear, went along I know not
whither speaking or singing certain words, which I understood not; but they
told me, they were a kind of Farewell to the World and her self; and indeed,
being uttered with that passionateness which the Case required and might
produce, they moved pity in all that heard them, even in us who understood not
the Language. She was followed by many other Women and Men on foot, who,
perhaps, were her Relations; they carried a great Umbrella over her, as all
Persons of quality in India are wont to have, thereby to keep off the Sun,
whose heat is hurtful and troublesome. Before her, certain Drums were sounded,
whose noise she never ceased to accompany with her sad Ditties or Songs; yet
with a calm and constant Countenance, without tears, evidencing more grief for
her Husband's death then her own, and more desire to go to him in the other
world than regret for her own departure out of this: A Custom, indeed, cruel
and barbarous, but withal, of great generosity and virtue in such Women, and
therefore worthy of no small praise. They said, she was to pass in this manner
about the City, I know not how many days, at the end of which she was to go
out of the City and be burnt, with more company and solemnity. If I can know
when it will be, I will not fail to go to see her, and by my presence honor her
Funeral, with that compassionate affection which so great Conjugal Fidelity and
Love seems to me to deserve.

November the thirteenth, I took the Altitude of the Sun at Ikkeri, and found
it 31. gr. 40. The Sun was now in the 20th degree of Scorpio, and declined
Southwards 17. gr. 45, 40. which taken from 31. gr. 40. leave 13. gr. 54, 20.
The former time, I found Ikkeri to be in 13. gr. 30, 31; but now I found it to
be in 13. gr. 54, 20. between which there is only the difference of 23, 43,
which is a small matter: And therefore I account my observation right; for the
small variation between the two times is no great matter, in regard the
declination of the Sun not being punctually known, may cause the difference. At
night, walking in the City, I saw in the Piazza of the great Temple (which I
understood was dedicated to an Idol called Agore Scuara, who, they say, is the
same with Mahadeu, although they represent him not in the same shape with that
I saw of Mahadeu in Cambaia, but in the shape of a Man, with but one Head and
Face, and sixteen Arms on each side (in all thirty two); which is not strange,
since our Ancients called many of their Idols by names sufficiently different,
and portrayed them in several shapes; and wherein also I understood there was
an Idol of Parveti, who is the Wife of Mahadeu, though the Temple be not
dedicated to her): I saw, I say, in the Piazza one of their Friars or Giangami,
clad all in white, sitting in an handsome Palanchino, with two great white
Umbrellaes, held over him, one on each side, (which two were for the more
gravity) and a Horse led behind, being followed by a great train of other
Giangami, clad in their ordinary habits. Before the Palanchino, marched a
numerous company of Soldiers, and other people, many Drums and Fifes, two
strait long Trumpets, and such brass Timbrels as are used in Persia, Bells and
diverse other Instruments, which sounded as loud as possible, and amongst them
was a troop of Dancing-women adorned with Girdles, Rings upon their Legs,
Neck-laces, and other ornaments of Gold, and with certain Pectorals or
Breast-plates, almost round, in the fashion of a Shield, and butting out with a
sharp ridg before, embroidered with Gold, and stuck either with Jewels or some
such things which reflected the Sunbeams with mavelous splendour; as to the
rest of their bodies, they were uncovered, without any Veil or Head-tire. When
they came to the Piazza, the Palanchino stood still, and the multitude having
made a ring, the Dancing-women fell to dance after their manner, which was much
like the Moris-dance of Italy, only the Dancers sung as they danced, which
seemed much better: One of them, who, perhaps, was the Mistress of the rest,
danced alone by her self, with extravagant and high jumpings, but always
looking toward the Palanchino: Sometimes she cowr'd down with her hanches
almost to the ground, sometimes leaping up she struck them with her Feet
backwards, (as Coelius Rhodiginus relates of the ancient dance called Bibasi)
continually singing and making several gestures with her Hands; but after a
barbarous manner, and such as amongst us would not be thought handsome. The
Dance being ended, the Palanchino with all the train went forward, the
Instruments continually playing before them. I followed to see the end, and
found that they went into the ch^^f street, and so out of the City by the Gate
which leads to Sag^er, stopping in diverse places of the street to act the same,
or the like dances over again; and particularly, in the Entrance of the said
Gate, where, amongst many Trees and Indian Canes which make the City-Wall,
there is a small Piazza, very eeven, and shaded about, like a Pastoral Scene,
and very handsome. At last the Giangamo with his Palanchino and train, entered
into certain Gardens without the Gate, where his House stood; and after the
last Dance he remained there, and the rest went away. They told me, this Honor
was done him, because they had then cast water upon his Head, and performed
some other Ceremony, equivalent to our ordaining one in Sacris, or creating a
Doctor. As I was going along the streets to behold this Pomp, I saw many
persons come with much devotion to kiss the Feet of all those Giangamoes, who
on Foot followed the principal Giangamo who was in the Palanchino; and because
they were many, and it took up much time to kiss the Feet of them all,
therefore when any one came to do it, they stood still all in a rank to give
him time; and whilst such persons were kissing them, and for more reverence
touching their Feet with their Foreheads, these Giangamoes stood firm with a
seeming severity, and without taking notice of it, as if they had been
abstracted from the things of the World; just as our Friars use to do when any
devout persons come out of reverence to kiss their Habit; but with Hypocrisy,
conformable to their superstitious Religion.

Returning home, I met a Corpse going to be burned without Lingavani, whom they
also put into the Earth sitting) as those that are burned; and that he, whom I
saw, was to be burned, we gathered from the Fire and Oil which they carried
after him in vessels. The night following there was a great solemnity in all
the Temples, by lighting of Candles, singing, Music, dancing, about twenty
Dancing-women, who went in Procession with the Idol into the Piazza, dancing
before the great Temple; but, as I was told, they began very late, namely, at
the rising of the Moon, which was about an hour before midnight; so that I was
gone to bed before I knew of it, although in the Evening I saw the lights in
the Temple. But though I saw nothing, yet I heard of it as I was in bed, being
awakened by the noise; and hearing the same was to be acted over again the next
night, I purposed with my self to see it.

November the fourteenth, I went at night to the Temple to see whether there
was any extraordinary solemnity; but there was nothing more then usual, nor did
the Idol come forth: only in the great Temple and its Enclosure or Court, into
which they suffer not strangers to enter, they made their accustomed
Processions with musical instruments, singing, and other Ceremonies, which, I
conceive, were the same with those I saw in Ahineli: only they are celebrated
here every night, because as it is a more eminent Church, so consequently the
service is more pompous; besides that, they told me Venk-tapa Naieka had a
great and particular devotion to the Idol Agoresuar, who is here worshipped.

On the fifteenth of the same month, came first in the daytime and afterward
at night to our House twelve or fifteen public Dancing-women, who by
consequence, are also public Strumpets, although very young, being conducted
by certain of their men. In the day time they did nothing, but talked a little;
and some of them made themselves drunk with a certain Wine made of dried
Raisins, or a sort of Aqua Vitae and other mixtures, called in India, Nippa; I
say some of them, because certain others of less ignoble Race, as they are more
abstinent in eating, so they drink not any thing that inebriates. At night,
they entertained us a good while with Balls, or Dancing, after their mode,
accompanied with singing, not unpleasant to behold; for they consist of a
numerous company of Women, all well clothed and adorned with Gold, Jewels, and
Tresses of several fashions, who sing and snap their wooden instruments. They
begin all their Balls slowly, and by degrees growing to a heat, at last end
with furious and quick motions, which appear well enough: Amongst their other
Dances two pleased me well, one in which they continually repeated these words
-- and another wherein they represented a Battle, and the actions of slaughter;
in the conclusion, the Master of the Ball, who directs all, and was one of
those that brought them, dancing in the midst of them with a naked Poniard,
wherewith he represented the actions of slaughter as the Women did with their
short sticks. But the end of this show was more ridiculous: For when they were
dismissed, they not only were not contented with the largess of the
Ambassador, although I added as much of my own to it, but went away ill
satisfied, testifying the same by choleric yellings, which to me was a new
Comedy.

November the sixteenth, I was told that the abovementioned Woman who had
resolved to burn her self for her Husband's death, was to dye this Evening. But
upon further enquiry at the Woman's House, I understood that it would not be
till after a few days more, and there I saw her sitting in a Court or Yard,
and other persons beating Drums about her. She was clothed all in white, and
decked with many Neck-laces, Bracelets, and other ornaments of Gold; on her
Head she had a Garland of Flowers spreading forth like the rays of the Sun; in
brief, she was wholly in a Nuptial Dress, and held a Lemon in her Hand, which
is the usual Ceremony. She seemed to be pleasant enough, talking and laughing
in conversation, as a Bride would do in our Countries. She and those with her,
took notice of my standing there to behold her, and conjecturing by my strange
Habit, what the meaning of it was, some of them came toward me. I told them by
an Interpreter, that I was a Person of a very remote Country, where we had
heard by Fame, that some Women in India love their Husbands so vehemently, as
when they dye to resolve to dye with them; and that now having intelligence
that this Woman was such a one, I was come to see her, that so I might relate
in my own Country that I had seen such a thing with my own Eyes. These people
were well pleased with my coming, and she her self, having heard what I said,
rose up from her seat, and came to speak to me. We discoursed together
standing, for a good while. She told me that her Name was Giaccama, of the Race
Terlenga, that her Husband was a Drummer; whence I wondered the more; seeing
Heroical Actions, as this ^ndoubtedly ought to be judged, are very rare in
people of low quality. That it was about nineteen days since her Husband's
death, that he had left two other Wives elder then she, and whom he had married
before her, (both which were present at this discourse) yet neither of them was
willing to dye, but alleged for excuse that they had many Children. This
argument ga^e me occasion to ask Giaccama, (who showed me a little Son of her
own, about six or seven years old, besides an other Daughter she had) how she
could persuade her self to leave her own little Children? And told her, that
she ought likewise to live rather then to abandon them at that Age. She
answered me, that she left them well recommended to the care of an Uncle of
hers there present, who also talked with us very cheerfully, as if rejoicing
that his Kins-woman would do such an action; and that her Husbands other two
remaining Wives would also take care of them. I insisted much upon the tender
Age of her Children, to avert her from her purpose, by moving her to compassion
for them, well knowing that no argument is more prevalent with Mothers then
their Love and Affection toward their Children. But all my speaking was in
vain, and she still answered me to all my Reasons, with a Countenance not only
undismayed and constant, but even cheerful, and spoke in a such manner as
showed that she had not the least fear of death. She told me also, upon my
asking her, that she did this of her own accord, was at her own liberty, not
forced nor persuaded by any one. Whereupon I inquiring, Whether force were at
any time used in this matter, they told me, that ordinarily it was not, but
only sometimes amongst Persons of quality when some Widow was left young,
handsome, and so in danger of marrying again (which amongst them is very
ignominious), or committing a worse fault; in such Cases the Friends of the
deceased Husband were very strict, and would constrain her to burn her self
even against her own will, for preventing the disorders possible to happen in
case she should live; (a barbarous, indeed, and too cruel Law.) However, that
neither force nor persuasion was used to Giaccama, that she did it of her own
free will; in which, as of a magnanimous action, (as indeed it was) and amongst
them of great honor, both her Relations and her self much gloried. I asked
concerning the Ornaments and Flowers she vore, and they told me, that such was
the Custom, in token of the Masti's joy (they call the Woman, who intends to
burn her self for the death of her Husband, Masti) in that she was very shortly
to go to him, and therefore had reason to rejoice; whereas such Widows as will
not dye, remain in continual sadness and lamentations, shave their Heads, and
live in perpetual mourning for the death of their Husbands. At last Giaccama
caused one to tell me, that she accounted my coming to see her a great good
fortune, and held her self much honored, as well by my visit and presence, as
the Fame which I should carry of her to my own Country; and that before she
died she would come to visit me at my House, and also to ask me, as their
custom is, that I would favor her with some thing by way of Alms toward the
buying of fuel, for the fire wherewith she was to be burnt. I answered her,
that I should much esteem her visit, and very willingly give her some thing;
not for wood and fire wherein to burn her self, (for her death much displeased
me, and I would gladly have dissuaded her from it, if I could) but to do
something else therewith, what her self most liked; and that I promised her,
that so far as my weak pen could contribute, her Name should remain immortal in
the World. Thus I took leave of her, more sad for her death then her self,
cursing the custom of India, which is so unmerciful to Women. Giaccama was a
Woman of about thirty years of age, of a Complexion very brown for an Indian,
and almost black, but of a good aspect, tall of stature, well shaped and
proportioned. My Muse could not forbear from chanting her in a Sonnet, which I
made upon her death, and reserve among my Poetical Papers.

The same Evening Lights being set up in all the Temples, and Betle-leavs,
dying them with Sanders, carrying them abroad in Procession, and such other
things as the Country People account delights and observances. In rehearsing
Prayers, I think they are little employed, and as little in Learning. I once
asked an old Priest, who was held more knowing then others, gray, and clad all
in white, carrying a staff like a Shep-herds crook in his Hand, What Books he
had read, and what he had studied? Adding that my self delighted in reading,
and that if he would speak to me about any thing, I would answer him. He told
me, that all Books were made, only that Men might by means thereof know God,
and God being known, to what purpose were Books? as if, he knew God very well.
I replied, that all thought they knew God, but yet few knew him aright; and
therefore he should beware that himself were not one of those.

November the seventeenth, By Letters brought from Barcelor, with News from
Goa, we heard that the Prince of England was gone incognito into Spain to
accomplish his Marriage with the Infanta; and that his arrival being known, and
the King having seen him, preparations were making for his public Reception.
That the Fleet was not yet arrived at Goa, except one Galeon; and that the News
from Ormuz was, that Ruy Freyra was landed in that Island, and having
entrenched himself under the Fort, held the same besieged with that small
Armado he had with him: Whence 'twas hoped, that great supplies being to be
sent to him from Goa, and the enmity of the English ceasing in consideration of
the Marriage between the two Crowns, and consequently, their assistance of the
Persians, Ormuz would shortly be recovered; and indeed, in respect of the
abovesaid circumstances, I account it no hard matter.

November the twentieth, In the Evening, either because it was the next night
after Monday, or that 'twas their weekly custom, or perhaps, for some
extraordinary solemnity, Tapers were lighted up in all the Temples of Ikkeri; a
great noise was made with Drums and Pipes, together with the Dancings of the
Ministers of some Temples before the Gates, as is above described.

Wherefore I went to the great Temple, where, being the Palanchino, one at each
end, small, and so decked with Flowers and other Ornaments, that I could scarce
know what they were. Yet, I think, that in the back-end was Agorescuer, to whom
the Temple is dedicated; and the other Parveti, or some other Wife of his.
First marched the Trumpets, and other instruments of diverse sorts, continually
sounding; then followed amongst many Torches a long train of Dancing-women, two
and two, bare-headed, in their dancing dress, and decked with many Ornaments of
Gold and Jewels. After them, came the Palanchino of the Idols, behind which
were carried many Lances, Spears with silken Streamers, and many Umbrella's
garnished with silken tufts and fringes round about, more stately then those
used by others, even the King himself; for these are commonly the Ensigns of
Grandeur. On each side the Palanchino went many rows of Women, either public
Dancers or Whores; but because these were not to dance, they went barefaced
indeed, (as the Pagan Women here little care for covering their Faces) but with
a cloth bound about their Heads, and hanging down both behind upon their
Shoulders, and before upon their Breasts. Some of them next the Palanchino,
carried in their Hands certain little Staves, either of Silver, or Silvered
over; at the end of which hung thick, long, and white tufts of the hair of
Horses tails, with which (as it is the custom of great Persons in India to use
them) they went fanning the Air, and either drove away the Flies from the Idols
in the Palanchino, or at least performing this Office as a piece of Grandeur,
as with us the same is done to the Pope, with fans made of the tails of white
Peacocks, when he goes abroad in Pontificalibus. Neither were there wanting
about the Idols many of their Priests or Ministers of the Temple who
accompanied them; particularly, one who seemed the chief and Archimandrita of
the rest; besides, abundance of Torches whose light dispelled the darkness of
the Moon-less night. In this order they came into the Piazza, and there after
they had made a large ring, the dancing began; first, two Ballatrici, or
Dancing-women, one from one side of the circle, and another from another, yet
both with their Faces always turned toward the Idols, walked three steps
forward, and then three backward; and this they did innumerable times. I
suppose, it was a way of saluting the Idols. After the said two Dancers alone
had done thus, two others from the several sides joined with them, and they did
the same again, three and three. This Salutation, or Preamble of the Ball,
being many times repeated, they began to dance, namely, two that danced better
then the rest, one on the right side of the circle, and the other on the left,
both with their Faces, never with their back toward the Palanchino of the
Idols, though often in the Dance they retired backwards as well as went
forwards. Their dancing was high, with frequent leapings and odd motions,
sometimes inclining their posteriors as if they meant to sit down, sometimes
rising very high, and displaying the Coat wherewith they are covered from the
girdle downwards, and almost holding one Arm stretched out before them,
wherewith they now and then made as if they were thrusting or fencing; besides
other mad gestures which were all accompanied with words which they sung, and
sometimes with cries more apt to give horror then delight. Hence, while all the
other Dancing-women, (that is, those who were uncovered and loose for dancing)
danced all in a company together further distant from the Idols, snapping their
little sticks and singing, being guided by a Man who danced with them and was
their Master. But the other Dancers who were clothed, stood about the Idols,
but danced not, nor ever moved from their place; only they accompanied the
Show, very fine with Ornaments of Gold and Jewels, and some of them having
Flowers, others, leaves of Betle, or other Odoriferous Herbs in their Hands.
This Dance being ended, the Procession went forwards with the same Pomp, and a
numerous Train of Men and Women of all sorts. They went round about the
outermost walls of the Temple, which is surrounded with very large streets,
inhabited for the most part by the said Dancers, or public Strumpets. The
circuit of the Procession began from the right Hand as you come forth of the
Temple, which comes to be the left as you enter in; and in the same manner I
saw the Procession begin at the Temple of the Town Ahinela, which I have
described above; so that it must needs be one of their usual Ceremonies. This
stopped at the several places of the streets through which it past; and at every
such stopping, the abovementioned Dancings, Preambles, and other Circumstances
were again repeated; whence the Show lasted a good while, and concluded at
length with the last Dance in the Piazza before the Temple-Gate; which ended,
the Procession with the Idols re-entered the Temple, where being replaced
according to their accustomed Ceremonies, the solemnity ended, and all the
people departed.

Monday at night, and every New Moon, and every Full, as also upon certain
other extraordinary solemnities with more or less Pomp proportionably to the
Festivals: And he added, that the night following there would be a greater
solemnity then this, because the New Moon, and another of their Feasts were
then co-incident, and that the King himself would be there; Wherefore I
resolved with my self to see it.

November the one and twentieth, This night were an infinite company of Torches
and Candles lighted, not only in all the Temple, but also in all the Streets,
Houses, and Shops of Ikkeri, which made a kind of daylight over all the City.
In each of the Temples was its Idol, which in some was a Serpent; and they had
adorned the outward Porches not only with lights, but also with certain
contrivances of papers, on which were painted Men on Horseback, Elephants,
people a fighting, and other odd figures; behind which papers, lights were
placed in certain little Arches, like those which we make in our Sepulchers;
these, with other gay Ornaments of Silk hung round about, made a sufficiently
pretty Show. In the great Temple, not only the inside, in the middle whereof is
a very high and slender Cupola, (which appears without too) but also all the
outer walls, and all those round about the Piazza which lies before it, as also
the Houses of the adjacent sides were all full of lights. The concourse of
people of all sorts and degrees, both Men and Women was very great; and they
appeared to go about visiting all the Temples. When it was very late, the King
came to the great Temple, accompanied only with his two Nephews, to wit,
Seda-Siva Naieka, (whom I had formerly seen) Son of one of his Daughters, and
Vira-badra Naieka, a young boy his Son's Son, and is he whom he designs for his
Successor, if his other kindred elder then he, to wit, the abovesaid
Seda-Siva, and two other of Venk-tapa's Nephews by another of his Brothers whom
he keeps prisoner, do not disturb him. The King came in a Palanchino a great
pace, his two Nephews on Horseback, and so did Vitula Sinay who rode by the
King's side, with appearance of a great Favorite. Likewise Putapaia came in a
Palanchino, and other of his Grandees, some in Palanchino's, and some on
Horseback, following him at a great distance, with some number of Soldiers
and Servants on Foot; but, in sum, the whole train was not very considerable.
The King stayed in the Temple about an hour, being entertained with Music,
Dancing, and other things which I could not see, because I was without. At
length he came forth, and with the same company, and running in as much haste
as he came, returned home; the like did all the other people of whom the Piazza
was full, some on one side, some on the other.

After the King was come out of the Temple, they carried the Bazar, or Market,
in the view of a large and goodly street, where, besides the show of lights
which was gallant, I stayed a good while with my Companions, (for all the
Ambassador's Family was come abroad this night to see the solemnities; the
Padre Capellano not excepted, but disguised) to see two great companies of
Dancing-women dance, they all being sent for thither by a great Captain, (who,
perhaps, had the care of the solemnities of this Temple) after the King was
gone from the great Temple, they danced here a good while, in numerous
companies; after which, we returned home, it being after midnight.

November the two and twentieth, Ven-tapa Naieka had already given our
Ambassador an answer concerning the affairs which he negotiated, and the
Ambassador had prepared a dispatch to be sent to the King of Banghel; also
another for the Viceroy of Goa, giving him an account of his negotiation; when
a Currier arrived from Banghel with new Letters, both for Venk-tapa Naieka and
the Ambassador: Whereupon consultation was held, what Answer to return him,
which was soon concluded on the part of Venk-tapa Naieka to this effect, (being
no other then what he had before resolved upon) namely, that he would pay the
King of Banghel 7000 Paygods yearly, according to the Treaty of the Peace,
provided the said King would come and live in his Court, or in some other place
of his Country, (excepting such Lands as were formerly his, for fear he might
make new insurrections) or else in Goa, or any of the adjacent places, namely,
in the Island of Salsette, or some place there without the City; but however,
such wherein he may be subject to the Viceroy of Goa; so that Venk-tapa might
be secure that the said Banghel would live peaceably without making new
commotions. But in case (as he seemed to intend) he would live neither in
Venk-tapa's Country, nor in that of Goa, but would continue in Cagnoroto where
he was at present, (which is a place beyond Mangalor Eastwards, and belongs to
another small but free Prince, allied to Banghel, whither, being near to his
quondam-Territories, he had betaken himself) or else would remove here and
there like a Fugitive and Invader, disquieting these Countries; then Venk-tapa
was resolved not to give him any thing at all. Therefore let him either accept
the abovesaid Offer, or never speak more to him, for he would not hear him.
That he has been moved to make this offer of paying him the said sum, by the
instance of the Portugals, who had interposed in his behalf by this Embassy:
And that for Banghel's assurance that he would perform this, he gave the
Ambassador (and accordingly he did so) a Copy of the Letter containing these
promises, which he writ to the said King of Banghel, to the end the Ambassador
might send it to the Viceroy, and be a witness of what he promised and was to
observe. He has further told the Ambassador, that this King had formerly writ
to him that he would come and live in his Dominion, and repented of what he had
done heretofore through evil counsel; that yet, for the future, he would be at
his devotion, receiving that Pension which he had promised him, and the like:
Nevertheless he had now changed his mind, and refused both to come into his
Dominion, and to go into that of Goa: That therefore seeing him so unconstant,
he had much reason not to trust him, and, in short, would neither trust him,
nor give him any thing saving upon the abovesaid terms; and that not for his
own sake, but in regard of the instance which the Portugals made for him: That
this was his last Answer, and that nothing more was to be expected or hoped
from him. From Spain, they say, Orders are sent to the Viceroy to re-establish
Banghel by all means in his State, and to make war upon Venk-tapa, unless he
restore the same entirely. However, being that Country is remote, and in the
time that is spent in the going and coming of dispatches, many things may
happen which may render it necessary for the Viceroy in the present
conjuncture to proceed in sundry particulars differently from what Orders he
receives from Spain, and to have authority in this business of Banghel to
deliberate of Peace or War, as shall to him seem most expedient, endeavoring
to comply no less with the time and the State of things, than the
advertisements from Spain: Therefore the King of Spain, in the Letter which he
writ to Venk-tapa Naieka, making only general complements to him, referrs all
matter of business to the Viceroy, to guide himself therein as he shall think
most fit. Accordingly the Viceroy, though he knows the King of Spain's
intention and order to make war upon Venk-tapa; yet it not seeming to him a fit
time, whilst the Portugals are engaged in the war of Ormuz, and also in
Malacca, (which is reported besieged either by the King of Acem, (which is
Sumatra), or by him and the Dutch together) and much perplexed in a thousand
other intricacies in India; has therefore given Order to the Ambassador to
seem satisfied with whatever Answer Venk-tapa Naieka gives, and to return
without making further instance; it sufficing the Viceroy to have made this
complement for the service of the King of Banghel, and shown that he has done
therein what was in his power; as well-knowing that Venk-tapa would not be
moved by the Embassy alone, and that the conditions he requires of the King of
Banghel, upon which to give him what he had promised, are but excuses; being
certain this King will not venture himself in his Dominions, (as neither is it
reasonable) much less go and subject himself in the Territories of Goa, and so
will not admit of the Proposals. Wherefore seeing it is not time now to
constrain Venk-tapa Naieka to greater things by war, he dissembles till a
better occasion, for fear of drawing this new Enemy upon him at an unseasonable
conjuncture; and orders the Ambassador to depart with show of good Friendship.
The Ambassador has accordingly done so, and seeming satisfied with Venk-tapa's
Answer, has added other Letters to those formerly written to the King of
Banghel, certifying him of Ventapa's Resolute Mind; that he must either accept
of the Agreement, or must speak no more of any; and that he only expects at
Ikkeri this his last Resolution before his return to Goa. He has written the
same to the Viceroy of Goa; and the dispatches being sealed, he has ordered
both Curriers to depart, and also a Brachman called Mangasa, together with the
Currier, to the King of Banghel, sending likewise with them a Christian of
Barselor, named Lorenzo Pessoa, who was at Ikkeri with Montegro, that he might
either in Mangalor, Banghel, or other places thereabouts procure Mariners for a
Ship remaining at Barselor unprovided of Men; giving the said Pessoa a License
to hire some, which he had obtained of the Ministers of Venk-tapa Naieka, to
levy them in his Territories if need were. Being by this time sufficiently
informed of remarkable things in Ikkeri, I am desirous of diverse others,
especially, to see the person of the Queen of Olaza, whose History and many
valiant exploits I read, when I was in Persia; for which I have a fair
opportunity by accompanying these Men sent from the Ambassador, of whom when I
have taken leave, I shall (God willing) depart to morrow.

LETTER VI.
From Mangalor, December. 9. 1623.
Ikkeri as much as was there remarkable and being very desirous of seeing
Barselor, Mangalor, and also principally the Q. of Olaza, whose Dominion and
Residence is contiguous to Mangalor; as well for that she is Sovereign of those
parts, (a matter in other Countries not ordinary) and a Princess famous in our
days, even in the Indian Histories of the Portugals, as because she is a
Gentile in Religion, as likewise all her Subjects are; (whence, I conceived, I
might possibly see some considerable curiosity there) I laid hold of the
occasion of going thither in company of these Men who are sent by the
Ambassador, by whose favor, being provided of a good Horse, (in regard there
were no Palanchino's to be hired in Ikkeri) and a Man to carry my baggage upon
his Head, I prepared to set forth the next Morning.

November the three and twentieth, Before my departure from Ikkeri, I was
presented from Vitula Sinay, (of whom I had before taken leave) with a little
Book written in the Canara-Language, which is the vulgar in Ikkeri and all that
State. It is made after the custom of the Country, not of paper, (which they
seldom use) but of Palm-leavs, to wit, of that Palm which the Portugals call
Palmum brama, i. e. Wild-palm, and is of that sort which produces the Indian
Nut; for so do those commonly in India, where Palms that produce Dates are very
rare. In the leaves of these Palms they write, or rather, ingrave the Letters
with an Iron style made for the purpose of an uncouth form; and, that the
writing may be more apparent, they streak it over with a coal, and tie the
leaves together, to make a Book of them after a manner sufficiently strange. I
being desirous to have one of these Books to carry, as a curiosity, to my own
Country for ornament of my Library, and not finding any to be sold in the City,
had entreated Vitula Sinay to help me to one; but he, not finding any vendible
therein, caused a small one to be purposely transcribed for me, (there being
not time enough for a greater) and sent it to me as a gift just as I was ready
to take Horse. What the Book contains, I know not, but I imagine it is Verses in
their Language, and I carry it with me, as I do also (to show to the curious)
diverse leaves not written, and a style or Iron Pen, such as they use, together
with one leaf containing a Letter Missive after their manner, which was written
by I know not who to our Ambassador; of whom taking leave with many
complements, as also of Sig: Carvaglio, the Chaplain, Montegro, and all the
company, I departed from Ikkeri a little before noon, going out at the same
Gate whereat I had entered; and having no other company but a Veturino, or
Hackney-man, and a Pulia who carried my luggage, without any other servant; for
as for Galal the Persian, alias Cacciatur, I was constrained to dismiss him for
some uncommendable actions, and send him back from Ikkeri to Goa. I will not
omit to tell you, that this my brave God-son, (whom I had brought so carefully
out of Persia, and trusted so much, and who alone of all my ancient servants
remained with me) one day cunningly opened a light box or basket, ( Canestri
the Portugals call them) wherein I kept my Clothes, and which, after the
fashion of the Country, was not of wood, but of hoops lined with leather, and
closed with little Pad-locks, like those which are used at Rome for Plate; and
they are thus contrived that they may be of little weight, because in these
parts, carriages and baggages for travel are more frequently transported upon
Men's shoulders then upon beasts backs; and one of these baskets or Canestri is
just a Man's load. Now the good Cacciatur having opened mine, without hurting
the lock, or meddling with the linen which he found therein, took out only all
the little money which I then had, and had put into it, to avoid carrying its
weight about me; it was in one of those long leathern purses, which are made to
wear round the waste like a girdle, and was full of Spanish Rialls, a Coin in
these parts, and almost in all the world current enough. His intention, I
conceive, was to leave me (as they say) naked in the Mountains in the center of
India, and peradventure, to go into some Territory of the Gentiles or
Mahometans, there to pass a jovial life upon my expense. But it pleased God,
the theft being done in my Chamber, where none but he resorted, we had vehement
suspicion of him; and therefore the Ambassador making use of his Authority,
caused him to be laid hold on, and we found the theft in his breeches tied to
his naked flesh; and thus I recovered my money. I was unwilling any hurt should
be done to him, and withal, to keep him longer; nevertheless that he might not
go into the Infidel-Countries, lest thereby he should lose his Religion and
turn to his native errors, I sent him away with some trusty persons to Goa,
giving him Letters also to Signora Maria, but such as whereby they might know
that I had dismis'd him, and that he was not to be entertained there, though
otherwise indempnifi'd. By this Story you may see how much a Man may be
deceived in his trusting; how little benefits prevail upon an unworthy nature;
and withal, you may consider to what misfortunes a Stranger is subject in
strange Countries; so that if I had had nothing else, being thus deprived of
all, I should have been left to perish miserably amongst Barbarians.

But leaving him to his Voyage, I departed from Ikkeri, and Badrapor, I left
the road of Ahineli, and by another way more toward the left hand, went to
dine under certain Trees near a small Village of four Houses, which they call
Bamanen coppa. After dinner we continued our way, and foarded a River called
Irihale, not without being wet, by reason of the smallness of my Horse; and
having traveled near two Gau's (one Gau consists of two Cos, and is equivalent
to two Portugal Leagues) we lodged at night in a competent Town, the name
whereof is Dermapora. In these Towns I endeavored to procure me a servant, as
well because I understood not the Language of the Country, (for though he that
carried my Goods could speak Portugal, yet he could not well serve me for an
Interpreter, because being by Race a Pulia, which amongst them is accounted
vile and unclean, they would not suffer him to come into their Houses, nor
touch their things; though they were not shie of me, albeit of a different
Religion, because they looked upon me as a Man of noble Race); as for that I
found much trouble in reference to my diet: For these Indians are extremely
fastidious in edibles, there is neither flesh nor fish to be had amongst them;
one must be contented only with Rice, Butter, or Milk, and other such
inanimate things, wherewith nevertheless they make no ill-tasted dishes; but,
which is worse, they will cook every thing themselves, and will not let others
either eat or drink in their vessels; wherefore instead of dishes they gave us
our victuals in great Palm leaves, which yet are smooth enough, and the Indians
themselves eat more frequently in them then in any other vessels: Besides, one
must entreat them three hours for this, and account it a great favor; so that,
in brief, to travel in these Countries requires a very large stock of patience.
The truth is, it is a most crafty invention of the Devil against the Charity so
much preached by our Lord Jesus Christ, to put it so in the heads of these
people, that they are polluted and become unclean, even by touching others of a
different Religion; of which superstition, they are so rigorous observers, that
they will sooner see a person whom they account vile and unclean, (though a
Gentile) dye, then go near him to relieve him.

November the four and twentieth, In the Morning before day, the Brachman
Nangasa, and the Ambassador's other Men, being in haste, advanced before; but
I, desirous to go more at my own ease, remained alone with my Pulia and the
Hackney-master; as I might well enough do, since the Highways of Venk-tapa
Naieka's Country are very secure. The road lay over pleasant clifts of Hills,
and through Woods, many great streams likewise occurring. I descended the
Mountain Gat by a long precipice, some of which I was fain to walk a foot, my
Horse having fallen twice without any disaster, and by a third fall almost
broke my Knee to pieces. I dined, after I had traveled one Gau and a half, in
a good Town called Colur, where there is a great Temple, the Idol whereof, if I
mis-understood not, is the Image of a Woman; the place is much venerated, and
many resort to it from several parts in Pilgrimage. After dinner, my Horse
being tired, I traveled not above half another Gau; and having gone in all
this day but two Gau's, went to lodge at a certain little village, which they
said was called Nalcal. Certain Women who dwelt there alone in absence of their
Husbands, courteously gave us lodging in the uncovered Porches of their Houses,
and prepared supper for us. This Country is inhabited not only with great
Towns, but, like the Mazandran in Persia, with abundance of Houses scattered
here and there in several places amongst the woods. The people live for the
most part by sowing of Rice; their way of Husbandry is to overflow the soil
with water, which abounds in all places; but they pay, as they told me, very
large Tributes to the King, so that they have nothing but the labor for
themselves, and live in great Poverty.

November the twenty fifth, I traveled over great Mountains and Woods like the
former, and foarded many deep Rivers. Having gone three Cos, we dined in two
Houses of those people who sow Rice, whereof the whole Country is full, at a
place called Kelidi. In the Evening, my Pulia being very weary, and unable to
carry the heavy load of my baggage further, we stayed at some of the like
Houses which they called Kabnar, about a mile forwards; so that the journey of
this whole day amounted not to a full Gau.

November the twenty sixth, I passed over clifts of Hills and uneeven and woody
places. At noon I came to a great River, on the Northern bank whereof stands a
little village named Gulvari, near which, the River makes a little Island. We
went to this Island by boat and foarded over the other stream to the far side.
Thence we came by a short cut to Barselor, called the Higher, i. e. within
Land, belonging to the Indians, and subject to Venk-tapa Naieka, to difference
it from the Lower Barselor, at the Seacoast belonging to the Portugals. For in
almost all Territories of India near the Seacoast, there happens to be two
places of the same Name, one called the Higher, or Inland, belonging to the
Natives; the other, the Lower near the Sea, to the Portugals, wherever they
have footing. Entering the Higher Barselor on this side, I came into a fair,
long, broad, and strait Street, having abundance of Palmeto's and Gardens on
either hand. The soil is fruitful and well peopled, encompassed with weak walls
and ditches, which are passed over by bridges of one or two very great stones,
which show that there is good and fair Marble here, whether they were dig'd
thus out of the Quarry, or are the remains of ancient Fabrics. It stands on
the South side of the River, which from the Town Gulvan fetches a great
circuit, seeming to return backwards; and many Travelers, without touching at
the Upper Barselor, are wont to go to the Lower Barselor by boat, which is soon
done; but I was desirous to see both places, and therefore came hither.

Having dined and rested a good while in Higher Barselor, I took boat and rowed
down the more Southern stream; for a little below the said Town, it is divided
into many branches, and forms diverse little fruitful Islands. About an hour and
half before night, I arrived at the Lower Barselor of the Portugals, which also
stands on the Southern bank of the River, distant two good Cannon-shot from the
mouth of the Sea; having traveled this day in all, one Gau and a half. The
Fort of the Portugals is very small, built almost in form of a Star, having no
bad walls, but wanting ditches, in a Plain, and much exposed to all sort of
assaults. Such Portugals as are married, have Houses without the Fort in the
Town, which is pretty large, and has good buildings. I went directly to the
House of Sig: Antonio Borges, a former acquaintance, who came from Goa to Onor,
together with us, and to whom the Ambassador at Ikkeri had recommended me. I
found sitting before his House in the streets the Captain of Barselor, called
Sig: Luis Mendes Vas Conti. We discoursed together for a good while, and he
seemed a gallant man, though but young. Here was an Armado, and a Cafila of
Ships, which came from Goa, and went to Mangalor and Cocin, or further; they
were to depart the next day, and therefore I prepared my self to go with them
to Mangalor. This night I supped at the House of Sig: Antonio Borges, with some
other Portugals who came in the Fleet; and went to lodge by his direction in
another good House, together with some Soldiers of the same.

November the seven and twentieth, That I might not go alone, without any body
to serve me in the Ship, I took into my service a Christian of Barselor,
recommended to me by Sig: Antonio, and named Manoel de Matos, with whom alone I
went aboard about noon, having first dined with many Portugals of the Fleet in
the House of Sig: Rocco Gomes, the chief Portugal in Barselor, who entertained
us at his Gate in the street very well. Among others that dined with us, there
was one Sig: Neittor Fernandez, by me elsewhere mentioned, who came from Goa to
Onor with us; the Captain Major of the whole Armado, Sig: Francesco de Lobo
Faria, who commanded a Galley and six other Ships, besides the Cafila of
Merchants. I imbarqu'd in the Ship of Sig: Neittor Fernandez, who in the street
expressed much courtesy to me. Being gone a good way upon the Sea, and it
being now night, the Captain Major of the Galleys sent our Ship back to fetch
certain of his Men, and the other Ships which were not yet got out of the Port
of Barselor; whereinto we designing to enter in the dark, and not hitting the
narrow channel which was to be kept, struck upon land, and, the wind growing
pretty stiff, were in great danger of being over-set and lost; and the more, for
that when we perceived it, and went to strike fail, we could not for a good
while, because the ropes, either through moistness, or some other fault, would
not slip; so that the Ship being driven forceably against the ground, not only
became very leaky, but gave two or three such violent knocks, that had she not
been new, without doubt she had been split. The Seamen were not only
confounded but all amazed, nothing was heard but disorderly cries; the voice of
him that commanded could not be heard, every one was more intent upon his own
then the common safety; many of the Soldiers had already stripped themselves to
leap into the Sea; some tied their Money at their backs, to endeavor to save
the same together with their lives, making little account of their other goods;
diverse made vows and promises of Alms, all heartily recommended themselves to
God; one embraced the Image of our Lady, and placed his hope in that alone. I
could not induce my self to believe, that God had reserved me after so many
dangers to such a wretched and ignoble end, so that I had I know not what
secure confidence in my heart; nevertheless seeing the danger extreme great, I
failed not to commend my self to God, his most Holy Mother, and all the Saints.
By whose favor at length, the sail being let down by the cutting of the rope,
and the Sea not rough, (for, if it had, it would have done us greater mischief)
the Mariners freed the Ship, having cast themselves into the Sea, and drawn her
off from the ground by strength of Arm; the remainder of the night we spent in
the mouth of the Haven, soliciting the other Ships out, and mending our own.

The whole Fleet being set forth before day, we returned,

November the eight and twentieth, We sailed constantly Southwards, coasting
along the Land which lay on the left hand of us. Half way to Mangalor, to wit,
six Leagues from Barselor, we found certain Rocks or little desert Islands,
which the Portugals call Scogli di Santa Maria; one of which we approached with
our Ship, and many of our Men landed upon it to take wild Pigeons, (of whose
nests there is great abundance) wherewith we made a good supper. Afterward
continuing our course, we passed by Carnate; and at night safely entered the
Port of Mangalor. This Port is in the mouth of two Rivers, one more Northern
runs from the Lands of Banghel; the other more Southern from those of Olaza,
which stands beyond the River Southwards, or rather beyond the bay of
salt water; which is formed round and large like a great Haven, by the two
Rivers before their entrance into the Sea, whose flowing fills the same with
salt water. Mangalor stands between Olaza and Banghel, and in the middle of the
bay right against the Mouth of the Harbor, into which the Fort extends it self,
being almost encompassed with water on three sides. It Is but small, the worst
built of any I have seen in India, and, as the Captain told me one day when I
visited him, may rather be termed the House of a Gentleman than a Fort. The
City is but little neither, contiguous to the Fort, and encompassed with weak
walls; within which, the Houses of the inhabitants are enclosed. There are
three Churches; namely, the Sea or Cathedral within the Fort; our Lady Del
Rosario, La Misericordia, and San Francesco without. Yet in Mangalor there are
but three Ecclesiastical Persons in all; two Franciscan Friars, and one Vicar
Priest, to whose charge, with very small revenews belong all the other
Churches. I went not ashore because it was night, but slept in the Ship.

November the nine and twentieth, Early in the Morning I landed at Mangalor,
and went together with Sig: Neittor Fernandez, and others of our Ship to dine
in the House of Sig: Ascentio Veira, a Notary of the City. After which, I was
provided of an empty House belonging to a Kins-man of his, by Sig: Paolo
Sodrino, who was married in Mangalor, and came for Goa, in our Ship. The next
night the Fleet departed from Cocin, but I remained in Mangalor with intention
to go and see the Queen of Olaza.

November the thirtieth, After hearing of Mass in the Church Del Rosario, I
visited the Captain of Mangalor, not in the Fort, but in a covered place
without the Gate, which is built to receive the cool Air of the Sea, and where
he was then in conversation. He was an old Man all gray, by Name Sig: Pero
Gomes Pasagna.

December, in the Morning I went to see Banghel, by the Indians more correctly
called Bangher, or Banghervari; it is a mile or little more distant from
Mangalor, toward the South and upon the Sea; and the King that ruled there,
and in the circumjacent lands being at this day driven out, it is subject to
Venk-tapa Naieka. A Musket Shot without Mangalor, on that side, is a small
River which is passed over by a ruinous stone bridge, and may likewise be
forded; it is the boundary of the Portugals jurisdiction. The abovesaid mile is
through cultivated fields, and then you come to Banghel, which is a rich soil,
and sometimes better peopled then at present; whence the Houses are poor
Cottages of earth and straw. It has been but one strait street, of good
length, with Houses and Shops continued on both sides, and many other sheds
dispersed among the Palme-to's. The King's House stood upon a raised ground,
almost like a Fort, but is now wholly destroyed, so that there is nothing left
standing but the posts of the Gate; for when Venk-tapa Naieka took this
Territory, he demolished whatever was strong in it. The Bazar, or Marketplace
remains, although not so stored with goods as it was in the time of its own
King; yet it affords what is necessary, and much Areca or Fofel, whereof they
make Merchandise, sending the same into diverse parts, that of this place being
better then others; here are also in the Bazar, some Goldsmiths who make
knives and cizzers adorned with Silver very cheap, and other like toys, of
which I bought some, and having seen all that was to be seen returned on foot,
as I came, though somewhat late, to Mangalor.

December the second, This Morning I went to see Olaza, which is about the same
distance from Mangalor as Banghel is, but the contrary way toward the South,
and stands on the other side of a great River, which was to be passed over by
boat. The Queen was not here, and seldom is, but keeps her Court commonly in
another place more within land; yet I would not omit to see Olaza, the rather
because in the Portugal Histories it gives name to that Queen, as being that
Land of hers which is nearest and best known to the Portugals, and perhaps, the
richest and fruitfullest which she now enjoyes. I found it to be a fat soil,
the City lying between two Seas, to wit, the Main-sea and the Bay, upon an arm
of Land which the Port incloses; so that the situation is not only pleasant,
but might also be made very strong if it were in the hands of people that knew
how to do it. It is all open, saving on one side toward the mouth of the Haven
between the one Sea and the other, where there is drawn a weak wall with a
ditch and two inconsiderable bastions. The Bazar is indifferent, and besides
necessaries for provisions, affords abundance of white and stripped linen
cloth, which is made in Olaza, but course, such as the people of that Country
use. At the Towns end is a very pleasant Grove, and at the end thereof a great
Temple, handsomely built for this Country, and much esteemed. Olaza is
inhabited confusedly, both by Gentiles who burn themselves, and also by
Malabar-Moors. About a mile off Southwards, stands the Royal House or Palace
amongst the abovesaid Groves, where the Queen resides when she comes hither
sometimes. It Is large, enclosed with a wall and trench, but of little moment.
In the first entrance it has a Gate with an open Porch, where the Guard is to
stand; and within that a great void place like a very large Court, on the far
side whereof stands the House, whose inside I saw not, because the Court was
not there; yet for this place, it seemed to have something of wild Majesty;
behind, it joins to a very thick wood, serving both for delight and security in
time of necessity. The way from the Palace to the City is almost wholly beset
with Houses. Having seen as much as I desired, I stayed not to dine, but
returned to Mangalor; there being always a passage-boat ready to carry people
backwards and forwards.

December the third, Arriving not timely enough to hear Mass Del Rosario, I
went to San Francesco, where I heard Mass, and a tolerably good Sermon, made by
an old Father called Francesco dos Neves. In the Evening, I prepared to go to
see the Queen of Olaza at her Court, which was the design of this little
peregrination. And not finding Sig: Paolo Sodrino my friend at Mangalor, I was
helped to a boat by Sig: Luis Gomes a Native of Cananor, but who had lived long
at Mangalor. I went up the River which comes from the Territories of Olaza, but
another more Northern, different from the abovementioned little one, over
which I passed by a bridge to Banghel, and falling into the Port of Mangalor. I
took with me also a Brachman called Narsu, a Native of Mangalor, to serve me
for an Interpreter with the Queen, (although my Christian Servant spoke the
Language well) partly, that I might have more persons with me to serve me, and
partly, because the Bachman being a Gentile, known and versed in this Court,
might be more serviceable to me in many things: than my own Servant; so having
provided what was needful, and prepared victuals to dine with upon the River by
the way, which is somewhat long, I determined to set forth the next Morning.

December the fourth, Before daylight I took boat at Mangalor, in which there
were three Watermen, two of which rowed at the Prow, and one at the Poop with
a broad Oar, which served both for an Oar and a Helm. Having passed by
Bronghel, we entered into the great Northern River, in which on the left hand
is a place where passage-boats laden with Merchandise pay a Tole to the
Ministers of Venk-tapa Naieka, to whom the circumjacent Region is subject.
Rowing a great way against the stream, the water whereof for a good space is
salt, at length we stayed to dine at a Town called Sale, inhabited for the most
part by Moors, and situate on the right bank as you go up the River. This Town
with others round it, is subject to an Indian-Gentile Lord, called Ramo Rau,
who in all has not above 2000 Pay-gods of yearly Revenew, of which he pays
about 800. to Venk-tapa Naieka, to whom he is Tributary. Nevertheless he wears
the Title of King, and they call him Omgiu Arsu, that is, King of Omgiu, which
is his chief place. Having dined and rested a while, we continued our Voyage,
and after a good space entered into the State of the Queen of Oloza, to whom
the Country on either side the River belongs. The River is here very shallow,
so that though our boat was but small, yet in many places we struck against the
ground; at length about Evening we arrived at Manel, so they call the place
where the Queen of Olaza now resides, which is only a Street of a few Cottages
or Sheds rather then Houses; but the Country is open, fair and fruitful,
inhabited by abundance of little Houses and Cottages here and there of
Husbandmen, besides those united to the great Street called the Bazar, or
Market; all which are comprehended under the name of Manel, which lies on the
left side of the River as you go against the stream.

Bazar to get a Lodging in some House, we beheld the Queen coming alone in the
same way without any other Woman, on foot, accompanied only with four or six
foot-Souldiers before her, all which were quite naked after their manner,
saving that they had a cloth over their shame, and another like a sheet worn
cross the shoulders like a belt; each of them had a Sword in his hand, or at
most a Sword and Buckler; there were also as many behind her of the same sort,
one of which carried over her a very ordinary Umbrella made of Palm-leavs. Her
Complexion was as black as that of a natural Ethiopian; she was corpulent and
gross, but not heavy, for she seemed to walk nimbly enough; her Age may be
about forty years, although the Portugals had described her to me much elder.
She was clothed, or rather girded at the waste with a plain piece of thick
white Cotton, and barefoot, which is the custom of the Indian-Gentile Women,
both high and low, in the house and abroad; and of Men too, the most and the
most ordinary go unshod; some of the more grave wear Sandals or Slippers, very
few use whole Shoos covering all the Foot. From the waste upwards the Queen was
naked, saving that she had a cloth tied round about her Head, and hanging a
little down upon her Breast and Shoulders. In brief, her aspect and habit
represented rather a dirty Kitchin-wench or Laundress, then a delicate and
noble Queen; whereupon, I said within my self, Behold by whom are routed in
India the Armies of the King of Spain, which in Europe is so great a matter!
Yet the Queen showed her quality much more in speaking then by her presence;
for her voice was very graceful in respect of her Person, and she spoke like a
prudent and judicious Woman. They had told me that she had no teeth, and
therefore was wont to go with half her Face covered; yet I could not discover
any such defect in her, either by my Eye or by my Ear; and, I rather believe,
that this covering the Mouth, or half the Face, as she sometimes does, is
agreeable to the modest custom which I know to be common to almost all Women in
the East. I will not omit, that though she were so corpulent as I have
mentioned, yet she seems not deformed, but I imagine she was handsome in her
Youth; and indeed, the report is, that she has been a brave Lady, though
rather of a rough then a delicate handsomeness. As soon as we saw her coming,
we stood still, laid down our baggage upon the ground, and went on one side to
leave her the way to pass. Which she taking notice of, and of my strange habit,
presently asked, Whether there was any among us that could speak the Language?
Whereupon my Brachman Narsu stepped forth and answered, Yes; and I, after I had
saluted her according to our manner, went near to speak to her, she standing
still in the way with all her people to give us Audience. She asked who I was,
(being already informed, as one of her Soldiers told me, by a Portugal who was
come about his businesses before me from Mangalor to Manel, that I was come
thither to see her) I caused my Interpreter to tell her, that I was Un
Cavaliero Ponentino, A Gentleman of the West, who came from very far
Countries; and because other Europaeans than Portugals were not usually seen in
her Dominions, I caused her to be told, that I was not a Portugal but a Roman,
specifying too that I was not of the Turks of Constantinople, who in all the
East are styled and known by the Name of Rumi; but a Christian of Rome, where
is the Sea of the Pope who is the Head of the Christians. That it was almost
ten years since my first coming from home and wandering about the world, having
seen diverse Countries and Courts of great Princes; and that being moved by the
fame of her worth, which had long ago arrived at my Ears, I was come into this
place purposely to see her, and offer her my service. She asked, What Countries
and Courts of Princes I had seen? I gave her a brief account of all; and she
hearing the Great Turk, the Persian, the Moghol, and Venk-tapa Naieka named,
asked, What then I came to see in these Woods of hers? Intimating that her
State was not worth seeing, after so many other great things as I said I had
seen. I replied to her, that it was enough for me to see her Person, which I
knew to be of great worth; for which purpose alone I had taken the pains to
come thither, and accounted the same very well employed. After some courteous
words of thanks, she asked me, If any sickness or other disaster had happened to
me in so remote and strange Countries, How I could have done being alone,
without any to take care of me? (a tender Affection, and incident to the
compassionate nature of Women). I answered, that in every place I went into, I
had God with me, and that I trusted in him. She asked me, Whether I left my
Country upon any disgust, the death of any kindred or beloved person, and
therefore wandered so about the world, (for in India and all the East some are
wont to do so upon discontents either of Love, or for the death of some dear
persons, or for other unfortunate accidents; and if Gentiles, they become
Gioghies; if Mahometans, Dervises and Abdales; all which are a sort of
vagabonds, or despisers of the world, going almost naked, only with a skin
upon their Shoulders, and a staff in their Hands, through diverse Countries,
like our Pilgrims; living upon Alms, little caring what befalls them, and
leading a Life suitable to the bad disposition of their hearts). I concealed my
first misadventures, and told the Queen that I left not my Country upon any
such cause, but only out of a desire to see diverse Countries and customs, and
to learn many things, which are learnt by traveling the World; men who had
seen and conversed with many several Nations, being much esteemed in our parts:
That indeed for some time since, upon the death of my Wife, whom I loved much,
though I were not in habit, yet in mind I was more then a Gioghi, and little
cared what could betide me in the World. She asked me, What my design was now,
and whither I directed my way? I answered, that I thought of returning to my
Country, if it should please God to give me life to arrive there. Many other
questions she asked, which I do not now remember, talking with me standing a
good while; to all which, I answered the best I could: At length she bid me go
and lodge in some house, and afterward she would talk with me again at more
convenience. Whereupon I took my leave, and she proceeded on her way, and, as I
was afterward told, she went about a mile off to see a work which she had in
hand of certain Trenches to convey water to certain places, whereby to improve
them. I spoke to the Queen with my head uncovered all the while; which
courtesy, it being my custom to use to all Ladies my equals, only upon the
account of being such, I thought ought much rather to be used to this who was a
Queen, and in her own Dominions, where I was come to visit and to do her Honor.

After she was gone her way, I with my people entered into a Moor of the
Country, and near the Palace; but I caused my diet to be prepared in an other
house of a neighbor Moor, that so I might have the convenience of eating
flesh, or what I pleased; which in the houses of Gentiles would not be
suffered. The inhabitants of Manel are partly Gentiles, and partly
Malabar-Moors, who have also their Meschita's there; which was of much
convenience to me. The Name of the Queen of Olaza is Abag-deui-Ciautru; of
which words, Abag is her proper Name; Deui signifies as much as Lady, and with
this word they are also wont to signify all their gods; nor have they any
other in their Language to denote God but Deu, or Deuru, which are both one,
and equally attributed to Princes; whereby it appears that the gods of the
Gentiles are for the most part nothing else but such Princes as have been
famous in the world, and deserved that Honor after their deaths; as likewise
(which is my ancient opinion) that the word [God] wherewith we by an
introduced custom denote the Supreme Creator, does not properly signify that
First Cause, who alone ought to be adored by the World, but signified at first,
either Great Lord, or the like; whence it was attributed to Heroes and signal
persons in the world, suitable to that of the Holy Scripture, Filii Deorum,
Filii Hominum; and consequently, that the gods of the Gentiles, though adored
and worshipped both in ancient and modern times, were never held by us in that
degree wherein we hold God the Creator of the Universe, and wherein almost all
Nations of the world always held and do hold him; (some calling him, Causa
Prima; others, Anima Mundi; others, Perabrahmi, as the Gentiles at this day in
India:) But that the other gods are and were always rather but as Saints are
amongst us; of the truth whereof, I have great Arguments, at least amongst the
Indian- Gentiles; or if more then Saints, yet at least Deifi'd by favor, and
made afterward Divi, as Hercules, Romulus, Augustus, etc. were amongst the
Romans. But to return to our purpose, they told me the word Ciautru, (the last
in the Queen of Olaza's Name) was a Title of Honor peculiar to all the Kings
and Queens of Olaza; and therefore possibly signifies either Prince, or King,
and Queen, or the like. As for this Countries being subject to a Woman, I
understood from intelligent persons of the Country, that in Olaza Men were and
are always wont to reign, and that it is a custom received in India amongst the
greatest part of the Gentiles, the Sons do not succeed the Fathers, but the
Sons of their Sisters; they accounting the Female-line more certain, as indeed
it is, than the Male. Yet that the last King of Olaza, having neither Nephews
nor other Legitimate Heirs, his Wife succeeded him; and she also dying without
other Heirs left this Abag-Deui, who was her Sister to succeed her. To whom,
because she is a Woman and the descent is certain, is to succeed a Son of hers,
of whom I shall hereafter make mention; but to him, being a Man, not his own
Sons, but the Son of one of his Sisters, hereafter likewise mentioned, is to
succeed.

Not to conceal what I know of the History of this Queen, I Banghel, who now is
a fugitive, deprived of his Dominions, but then reigned in his own Country
which borders upon hers. Yet, though they were Husband and Wife, (more for
Honors sake then any thing else) they lived not together, but apart each in
their own Lands: in the Confines whereof, either upon Rivers, where they caused
Tents to be erected over boats, or in other places of delight, they came to see
and converse with one another; Banghel wanting not other Wives and Women, who
accompanied him wherever he went. It Is reported, that this Queen had the
Children, which she has, by this Banghel, if they were not by some other
secret and more intimate Lover; for, they say, she wants not such. The
Matrimony and good Friendship having lasted many years between Banghel and the
Queen, I know not upon what occasion discord arose between them, and such
discord that the Queen divorced Banghel, sending back to him, (as the custom is
in such case) all the Jewels which he had given her as his Wife. For this, and
perhaps for other causes, Banghel became much offended with the Queen, and the
rupture proceeded to a War: during which, it so fortuned that one day as she
was going in a boat upon one of those Rivers, not very well guarded, he sending
his people with other boats in better order, took her and had her in his power:
Yet, with fair carriage and good words, she prevailed so far that he let her go
free and return to her Country. In revenge of this injury, she forthwith
raised War against Banghel, who relying upon the aid of the neighboring
Portugals, because he was confederate with them, and (as they say of many
Royolets of India) Brother in Arms to the King of Portugal, the Queen to
counterpoize that force called to her assistance against Banghel, and the
Portugals who favored him, the neighboring King Venk-tapa Naieka, who was
already become very potent, and feared by all the Neighbors, and under his
protection and obedience she put her self. Venk-tapa Naieka sent a powerful
Army in favor of the Queen, took all Banghel's Territories and made them his
own, destroying the Fort which was there; he also made prey of diverse other
pety Lords thereabouts, demolishing their strength, and rendering them his
Tributaries; one of which was the Queen of Curnat, who was also confedrate with
the Portugals, and no friend to her of Olaza: he came against Mangalor, where
in a battle rashly undertaken by the Portugals, he defeated a great number;
and, (in short) the flower and strength of India, carrying the Ensigns, Arms,
and Heads of the slain to Ikkeri in triumph. He did not take Mangalor, because
he would not, answering the Queen of Olaza, who urged him to it; That they
could do that at any time with much facility, and that 'twas best to let those
four Portugals remain in that small place, (which was rather a House then a
Fortress) in respect of the Traffic and Wares which they brought to the
benefit of their Countries: After which he came to a Treaty with the Portugals,
by which he restored the Colors he had taken from them, and by their means
Banghel surrendered the Fort, which Venk-tapa, as I said before, demolished;
besides other conditions which are now under consideration, according as is
abovementioned in my Relation of the Ambassie to Ikkeri. This was the War of
Banghel, in which the Queen got the better of him and the Portugals, of which
she was very proud; yet with-all, her Protector Venk-tapa Naieka who is very
rapacious and little faithful, sufficiently humbled her, and she got not much
benefit by him, saving quiet living; for besides his subjecting her to his
obedience in a manner, she was necessitated, whether by agreement or violence I
know not, to resign to him Berdrete, which is the best and richest City she
had, together with much Land in those Confines of Venk-tapa, and of the inner
part of her Country, which amounted to a good part of her Dominions; however,
at present she lives and governs her Country in Peace, being respected by all
her Neighbors. This Queen had an elder Son then him that now lives; he was
called Cic-Rau Ciaueru, and died a while since. The Portugals say, that she her
self caused poison to be given him, because the young man being grown up, and
of much spirit, aspired to deprive her of the Government, and make himself
Master: Which is possible enough: for diverse other Princes in the world have
procured the death of their own Children upon jealousy of State; so prevalent
is that cursed enormous Ambition of ruling. Yet such an impiety not being
evident to me concerning the Queen, I will not wrongfully defame her, but
rather believe, that the young man died a natural death, and with regret to
her. So neither do I believe what the Portugals incensed against her further
report, namely, that she has attempted to poison this second Son; but it
succeeded not, he being advertised thereof by his Nurse who was to give him the
poison; since I see that this Son lives with her in the same place and house
peaceably, which would not be, if there were any such matter: Nor can I
conceive, why she should go about to extinguish all her own Issue in this
manner, having now no other Heir born of her self.

December the fifth, The Queen of Olaza's Son, who though he govern not, (for
the Mother administers all alone, and will do as long as she lives) yet for
honor's sake is styled King, and called Celuua Rairu, (of which words, Celuua
is his proper name, and Rairu his title) sent for the Brachman my Interpreter
in the Morning, and discoursing long with him, took a particular information of
me, telling him that he understood I was much whiter then the Portugals who
used to trade in that Country, and of a very good presence, and consequently,
must needs be a person of quality. In conclusion, he bid him bring me to him
when my convenience served; for he was very desirous to see me and speak with
me. This Message being related to me, I let pass the hour of dinner, (because,
having no appetite, and finding my stomach heavy, I would not dine this day)
and when it seemed a convenient time, I went (with my Interpreter) clothed in
black after my custom; yet not with such large Breeches down to the heels, as
the Portugals for the most part are wont to wear in India, in regard of the
heat, (for they are very commodious, covering all the Leg, and saving the
trouble of Stockins, so that the Leg is naked and loose) but with Stockins and
Garters and ordinary Breeches, without a Cloak, (though used by the
Portugal-Souldiers in India, even of greatest quality) but with a large Coat or
Cassock, open at the sides, after the Country fashion. The Palace, (which may
rather be called Capanna Reale, a Royal Lodge) is entered into by a Gate like
the grate or lattice of our Vine-yards at Rome, ordinary enough, seated in the
midst of a field, which like them is divided by a small hedge from the
neighboring fields. Within the Gate is a broad Walk or Alley, on the right
side whereof is a spacious plot sown, at the end of which, the Walk turns to
the right hand, and there upon the same plot stands the Royal Mansion, having a
prospect over all the said great green field. In the middle of this second
Walk, you enter into the House, ascending seven or eight wooden stairs, which
lead into a large Porch, the length of which is equal to the whole forepart of
the House. This Porch was paved with Cow Dung after their manner, the walls
about shining, and painted with a bad red color much used by them. The
forepart of it, which is all open, is up-held by great square posts, of no
great height, (for it is their custom to make all buildings, especially Porches,
but low in respect of the breadth and length, with very broad Pent-houses;
which is, I believe, by reason of the great heat of the Country, where they
have more need of shadow and coolness, than of air or light. Directly opposite
to the stairs in the middle of the Porch, was another small Porch, which was
all the entrance into the inner part of the building. Within the little Porch
was a small room long and narrow, where the King sat near the wall on the left
side; and he sat upon the ground after the Eastern manner upon one of those
coarse clothes, which in Persia and Turkey are called Kielim, and serve for
poor people; nor was it large, but only so much as to contain the Person of
the King, the rest of the room being bare, saving that it was pollish'd with
Cow Dung. Beside the King, but a little farther on his left hand, sat upon a
little matt, sufficient only to contain him, a Youth of about fifteen or
eighteen years of age, called Bale Rairu, who was his Nephew, and is to succeed
him, being the Son of his deceased Sister, who was Daughter to the present
Queen. The Father of this Youth was a neighbor Gentile Prince, whom they call
the King of Cumbia, (or perhaps more correctly, Kunble) called by his proper
name Ramo-Nato Ari; of which words, Ramo-Nato is the proper name, and Ari the
title. They said he was still living, though others at Goa told me afterward
that he was dead. But being this young Bale Rairu was not to succeed his
Father, but had Right of Inheritance in Olaza, therefore he lived not in his
Father's Country, but here at Manel with his Grandmother and his Uncle. None
other sat with the King, but three or four of his more considerable servants
stood in the room talking with him; and in the great Porch, without the little
one, stood in files on either side other servants of inferior degree, two of
which nearest the entrance ventilated the Air with fans of green Taffeta in
their Hands, as if to drive away the flies from the King or the entrance; a
Ceremony used, as I have said elsewhere by Indian Princes for Grandeur; and
they told me, the green color was a Ceremony too, and the proper badg of the
King of Olaza, for the King of Banghel uses Crimson; other Princes, white, as I
saw used by Venk-tapa Naieka; and others, perhaps other colors: A small
company indeed, and a poor appearance for a King; which called to my
remembrance those ancient Kings, Latinus, Turnus, and Evander, who, it is
likely, were Princes of the same sort. Such as came to speak with the King,
stood without in the Porch, either on one side, or in the middle of the little
Porch; either because the room was very small, and not sufficient for many
people; or rather, as I believe, for more State. The King was young, not above
seventeen years of age, as they told me, yet his aspect spoke him elder; for he
was very fat and lusty, as I could conjecture of him sitting, and besides, he
had long hairs of a beard upon his cheeks, which he suffered to grow without
cutting, though they appeared to be but the first down. Of Complexion he was
dusky, not black, as his Mother is, but rather of an earthy color, as almost
all the Malabars use to be. He had a louder and bigger voice then Youths of his
age use to have, and in his speaking, gestures, and all other things he showed
Judgment and manly gravity. From the girdle upwards he was all naked, saving
that he had a thin cloth painted with several colors cast cross his shoulders.
The hair of his head was long after their manner, and tied in one great knot,
which hung on one side wrapped up in a little plain linen, which looks like a
nightcap fallen on one side. From the girdle downwards I saw not what he wore,
because he never rose from his seat, and the Chamber was something dark;
besides that, the painted cloth on his shoulders hung down very low. His Nephew
who sat beside him was not naked, but clad in a whole white garment; and his
Head was wrapped up in a greater volume, white, like a little Turbant.

When I came before the King, his Men made me come near to Moors) as if
applauding me, said, Ah Chodia, Chodia, which in the Persian Tongue signifies
Lord, and is meant of God; inferring that I worshipped the true God, whom they
Moors pretended to know, in opposition to the Idols of the Gentiles of the
Country; And they used the Persian word Chodia, because that probably the Sect
of Mahomet came into these parts from Persia, (which is not very remote from
India) as also from Arabia; or perhaps, because the Indians of the Territory of
Idal-Sciah and Dacan, being in great part Moors, use much the Persian Tongue
which is spoken in the Courts of those Princes no less then their natural
Language; whence these other Indians more inwards to the South have, by reason
of neighborhood, communication both in Religion and Speech. The King told me
several times that he had very great contentment in seeing me, and that no
Europaean of my quality had ever been in his Country; that my person well
showed of what quality I was: Nor was he mistaken herein; for what other would
ever go out of Europe into his Country? unless some Portugal Merchantello of
those who come hither for the most part to seek wood to make masts and sails
for Ships; these Woods abounding with very goodly Trees. I told him, I was
sorry I had nothing worthy to present to him; that in my Country there wanted
not gallant things for his Highness; but it being so many years since my
departure thence, and my Travels so far, I had nothing left as I desired; yet,
as a memorial of my service, I should venture to give him a small trifle of my
Country: Whereupon I caused my Interpreter, (who carried it) to offer him a
little Map of the World, which I had brought with me out of Italy; telling him
what it was, and how all the Countries, Lands, Seas, and Islands of the world
were exactly delineated in it, with their Names set to each place in our
Tongue, and all that was necessary to make him understand what it was. The King
was hugely pleased with it, and desired to see several Countries, where they
lay, and how great they were, asking me sundry questions about them; but being
he understood not our Letters written therein, he satisfied himself with the
sight only, and with showing it to all the bystanders as a curious and
ingenious piece of Art. Then he asked me, whether I could eat in their Houses,
or of their meats; for he desired to give me something to eat: I answered that
I could, and that the purity of our Religion consisted not in the eating or
touching of things, but in doing good works. He earnestly desired me, that I
would stay a while till some meat were prepared for me; for by all means he
would have me eat something in his House, and himself see me eating. I told
him, that if his intention were only to give me meat, the time was already
past, nor was I disposed to eat; but if it were to see me eat, I could not eat
in that place after the fashion of my Country, not having there the
preparations necessary thereunto, so that his Highness should not see what,
perhaps, he desired; and therefore I beseech'd him to excuse me: Nevertheless
he was so urgent for it, that, not to appear discourteous, I consented to obey
him. And, till the meat came, the King commanded some of his Servants to
conduct me to sit down by them in the Porch, where I might sit after our
manner, but not in the King's sight.

Hereupon I withdrew with some of his Men to entertain me, and in the mean
time the King remained talking with the rest of them concerning me, commending
me much for several things, but above all, for a good presence, for speaking
truly and discreetly, like a Gentleman, and for my civil deportment. But before
I proceed further, I will here present you with a rough and unmeasured draught
of the King's House, and the place wherein he was; so far as may suffice for
the better understanding of what is already spoken, and is to follow after.



1. At the foot of this design is the Gate of the Palace. 2. The Walk leading
to it, and included within the House. 3. A great plain and sown field. 4. The
turning of the Walk before the House, where the short lines intersecting the
outward line toward the field, represent the Trees planted at equal distances
and in order. 5. Seven or eight wooden Stairs leading up to the Porch. 6. The
Porch of the House, in which the little squares near the outer lines are the
wooden pillars which support it, and the ambient lines the walls. 7. The King's
Servants standing on either side without the little Porch of the Chamber. 8. I
Pietro Della Valle, when I first talked with that King, standing. 9. The Room
wherein the King was. 10. The King sitting on the ground upon a little coarse
Cloth. 11. The King's Nephew sitting on the ground upon a little matt. 12. The
King's Servants standing. 13. I Pietro Della Valle sitting in the said room on
the ground upon a little low Table, whilst I eat and discoursed with the King a
very long time together; the place marked with the number 13, being that where
they set the meat before me. 14. A small open Court. 15. A small mount or bank
in the said Court, leading from the more inward Chambers to that where the King
was. 16. Inner Chambers and Lodgings, which, what they were, I saw not; but
they were of very bad earthen buildings, low, and coverd with thatch-like
Cottages, that is, with Palm-leavs; which are always to be understood when I
speak of Cottages or Houses covered with thatch in India. 17. I Pietro Della
Valle sitting between two of the King's Servants upon the side of the Porch,
(after having spoken the first time with the King) entertaining me while the
meat was preparing.
The meat was not long in preparing, and being now in order, the Portugal, and
was wont to accompany me, asked me, Whether it would not be more convenient for
me to ungird my Sword, and put off my Cassack? I answered, that my Cassack gave
me no trouble, nor was there occasion to lay it off; but my Sword might be laid
aside, and therewith ungirding it, I gave it him to hold: which I did, the
rather because all Princes being commonly suspicious, I imagined the King would
not like my entering in with Arms; and he that goes into another's House, to
visit him and do him honor, is not to disgust, but to comply with him in all
points. So I entered without a Sword, but yet with shoes and stockins on,
though with them it be unusual; for none should enter into that place but
barefoot, and the King himself is so there, according to their custum: Nor did
I scruple their taxing me of uncleanliness, as undoubtedly they would have done
in Turkey and Persia, if I had entered into their rooms with shoes or slippers
on, because there all the rooms are covered with Carpets, but there was not any
in these of the King, only the pavement was gloss'd with Cow Dung. Wherefore
as to have put off my shoes, (besides that they are not so easily slipped off as
Pantofles, nor does it show well) would have been an exorbitant and unnecessary
humility; so to enter with them on, was to me convenient and decorous, without
any lyableness to be accused of uncleanliness, being the floor was not
covered; if it had been so with Carpets or the like, as it is usual in Turkey
and Persia, then, (to avoid seeming slovenly by soiling the place with my dirty
shoes, and my self by sitting upon them, which indeed is not handsome) I should
have caused my shoes to be pulled off; for which purpose, I had accordingly
caused a pair of slippers of our fashion to be brought along with me, in case
there should have been need of them; our kind of shoes being not so easy to be
put off by shaking the foot alone without the help of the hand, as those which
for this end are used by all the Eastern people. Entering in this manner, and
saluting the King as I passed, I went to sit down at the upper end of the
Chamber, (as it is above described) where they had prepared a little square board
of the bigness of an ordinary stool, which might serve for a single person, but
raised no more then four fingers above the ground; upon this I sat down,
crossing my Legs, one over the other; and that little elevation helped me to
keep them out from under me, with such decency as I desired. Right before the
seat upon the bare floor, (the Indians not using any Tables they had spread
instead of a dish, (as their custom is, especia^ly to us Christians, with whom
they will not defile their own vessels; it not being lawful for them ever to
eat again in those wherein we have eaten) a great Leaf of that Tree, which the
Arabians and Persians call Mouz; the Portugals in India, Fichi d' India, Indian
Fig Trees; and upon the said leaf they had laid a good quantity of Rice boiled
after their manner, only with water and salt; but for sauce to it, there stood
on one side a little vessel made of Palm-leavs, full of very good butter
melted. There lay also upon another Leaf one of those Indian Figgs, clean and
pared; and hard by it a quantity of a certain red herb, commonly eaten in
India, and called by the Portugals Bredo, (which yet is the general appellation
of all sort of herbs). In another place lay several fruits used by them, and,
amongst the rest, seven of the Bambu, or great Indian Cane; all of them
preserved in no bad manner, which they call Acciao; besides one sort pickled
with Vinegar, as our Olives are. Bread there was none, because they use none,
but the Rice is instead of it; which was no great defect to me, because I am
now accustomed to want it, and eat very little. The King very earnestly prayed
me to eat, excusing himself often that he gave me so small an entertainment on
the sudden; for if he had known my coming beforehand, he would have prepared
many Caril, and diverse other more pleasing meats. Caril is a name which in
India they give to certain Broths made with Butter, the Pulp of Indian Nuts,
(instead of which, in our Countries Almond Milk may be used, being equally
good, and of the same virtue) and all sorts of Spices, particularly, Cardamoms
and Ginger, (which we use but little) besides herbs, fruits, and a thousand
other condiments. The Christians who eat every thing, add Flesh or Fish of all
sorts, sometimes Eggs, which, without doubt, make it more savory, especially,
Hens or Chickens cut in small pieces: With all which things, is made a kind of
Broth, like our Guazzetti, or Pottages, and may be made many several ways; this
Broth with all the abovesaid ingredients, is afterward poured in good quantity
upon the boiled Rice, whereby is made a well-tasted mixture, of much substance
and light digestion, as also of very little pains; for it is presently boiled,
and serves both for meat and bread together. I found it very good for me, and
used it often, as also the Pilao elsewhere spoken of, and made of Rice boiled
with butter and flesh fried therein, besides a thousand other preparations of
several sorts which are so common to every body in Asia; and I account it one
of the best and wholsomest meats that can be eaten in the world, without so
many Artificial Inventions as our gutlings of Europe (withal, procuring to
themselves a thousand infirmities of Gouts, Catarrhs, and other Maladies,
little known to the Orientals) daily devise to the public damage. But to
return to my Relation, the King told me, he would have given me a better
entertainment, but yet desired me to receive this small extemporary one, and
eat without any respect or shiness of those that were present; for thereby he
should understand that I liked it. I answered, that the Favor and Courtesy
which his Highness showed me, was sufficient: But as for eating, the time being
now past, I did it only to obey him; and so, to comply with him, although I
had little will to eat, I tasted lightly here and there of those fruits and
herbs, wherewith my Hand was but little soiled, which upon occasion I wiped
with my handkerchief, being they use no other Table-linnen, nor had laid any
for me. The King seeing that I touched not the Rice, spoke to me several times
to eat of it, and to power upon it some of that butter which stood by it
prepared. I did not, because I would not grease my self, there being no spoon;
for the Indians eat every thing with the Hand alone, and so do the Portugals; I
know not, whether as having learnt so to do in India of the Indians; or,
whether it be their own natural custom; but they too, for the most part eat
with the Hand alone, using no spoon, and that very ill-favouredly; for with the
same Hand, if need be, they mingle together the Rice, the Butter, the Caril,
and all other things how greasy soever, daubing themselves up to the wrist, or
rather washing their Hands in their meat before they eat it; (a fashion indeed
sufficiently coarse for people of Europe): and thought at their Tables, which
are handsome enough, there want not knives, spoons, and silver forks, and some
few sometimes make use thereof; yet the universal custom is such, that few use
them, even when they lie before them. The truth is, they wash their Hands many
times during one dinner, to wit, as often as they grease them, but they wipe
them not first; for neither do they make use of napkins, whether they have any
before them (as for the most part they have) or not; but besides the trouble of
washing so often, in my judgment, there is but little neatness in washing
their anointed Hand after that manner; and, I know not, whether the washing
cleanses or defiles more: I being inured to the neatness of Italy, could not
conform to slovenliness: and, let them cover this barbarous custom with what
pretense they please, either of military manners, or what else they think fit;
it is little trouble for a civil Man to carry, even in the War and Travels,
amongst other necessary things, a spoon, knife, and fork, wherewith to eat
handsomely: The Turks themselves, as barbarous as they are, yet are so much
observers of this, that amongst them there is not the meanest Soldier, but
who, if he has not other better convenience, at least carries his spoon tied
to the belt of his sword. In short, the King frequently urged me to eat of the
Rice, and I as often denied with several excuses; at last he was so
importunate, that I was fain to tell him, I could not eat that meat in that
manner, because I had not my Instruments. The King told me, I might eat after
my own way, and take what Instruments I would, which should be fetched from my
House. I replied diverse times, that there was no need, and that my tasting of
it was enough to testify my Obedience: However, by all means he would have
what was necessary fetched from my House. So I sent my Brachman and my
Christian Servant with my key, and they, the King so enjoining, went; and
returned in a moment, for my House was directly over against the Palace. They
brought me a spoon, a silver-fork and a clean and fine napkin, very handsomely
folded in small plaits; this I spread upon my knees which it covered down to my
feet, and so I began to eat Rice, pouring the butter upon it with a spoon; and
the other things with the fork, after a very cleanly manner, without greasing
my self, or touching any thing with my Hands, as it is my custom. The King and
all the rest admired these exquisite, and to them unusual, modes; crying out
with wonder Deuru, Deuru, that I was a Deuru, that is, a great Man, a God, as
they speak. I told the King, that to eating according to my custom, there
needed much preparation of a table, linen, plates, dishes, cups, and other
things; but I was now traveling through strange Countries, and treated my
self, alla Soldatescae, after the Soldiers fashion, leading the life of a
Gioghi, and consequently, had not with me such things as were necessary. The
King answered, that it sufficed him to see thus much, since thereby he easily
imagined how all my other things would be; and that, in brief, he had never
seen any Europaean like me; and that it was a great contentment to him to see
me. He desired me several times to eat more, perceiving that I rather tasted of
things to please him, than to satiate my self. He caused diverse other Fruits
pickled with Vinegar and Salt to be brought me, by a Woman who came from the
inner rooms through the little Court; as also for my drink, (in a cup made
likewise of Palm-leavs) a kind of warm Milk, to which they are accustomed, and
which seemed to me very good.

Both before and after, and whilst I was eating, I had much France; and that
for Territory and Riches, Spain had most of all; with many other circumstances
too long to be rehearsed. Which discourse led me to tell him, as I did, that
the King of Portugal, as they speak, that is, the King of Spain, so much
esteemed in India, paid Tribute to our Lord the Pope for the Kingdom of
Naples, which he held of his Holiness in homage; for which he had a great
conceit of the Pope. Amongst the Moorish Princes, I said concerning the Moghol,
whom he much cried up to me, that we held him indeed for the richest in
treasure, but otherwise had greater esteem of the Turk and the Persian* because
though the Moghol has not an infinite number of people, and, without doubt,
more then others, yet they were not people fit for war; and that Sciah, amongst
the rest, did not value him at all, as manifestly appeared in the late war. Of
Sciah Abbas, the King professed to account him a great Prince, a great
Soldier, and a great Captain; and I related to him, how I had been for a great
while together very familiar with him, and that he had done me many favors,
having me with him in diverse notable occasions: whereto he answered, that he
did not doubt it, and that, being such a person as I was, there was no Prince
but would highly favor me. He asked me also concerning the commodities of our
Countries, and of those which are brought from thence into these Oriental
parts; and (being that in India they are accustomed to the Portugals, who, how
great Personages soever they be, are all Merchants, nor is it any disparagement
amongst them) he asked me, whether I had brought from my Country any thing to
bargain with all, either Pearls or Jewels, for I knew very good ones came from
thence? I answered him, that in my Country the Nobles of my rank never
practiced Merchandise, but only conversed with Arms or Books, and that I
addicted my self to the latter, and meddled not with the former. He asked me,
how I was supplied with Money for my Travels, in so remote Countries? I
answered, that I had brought some along with me, and more was sent me from time
to time by my Agents, either in Bills or in ready Money, according as was most
expedient in reference to the diversity of places. He asked me, whether I had
either a Father or a Mother, Brothers or Sisters, Wife or Children, remaining
by that Wife, who, I said, was passed to a better life? I answered, that I had
not; whereupon he said, it was no wonder then that I pleased my self in
wandering thus about the World, being so alone and destitute of all Kindred. And
indeed, the King did not ill infer; for had any of my dearest Relations been
living, as they are not, perhaps, I should not have gone from home, nor ever
seen Manel or Olaza; but since it is God's Will to have it so, I must have
patience. The King told me, that if I could procure a good Horse out of my
Country, he would pay very well for it, for the Indians have none good of their
own breed; and the good they have, are brought to them either from Arabia or
Persia, and the Portugals make a Trade of carrying them thither to sell, even
the greatest Persons, as Governors of places, and Captains General, not
disdaining to do the same. I standing upon the point of my Italian Nobility,
which allows not such things, answered the King, that to sell Horses was the
Office of Merchants, not my profession; that I might present some good one to
his Highness, there being in my Country very good ones, and would gladly do it,
if it were possible. The King was much pleased with this Answer of mine, and
said to his Men, that I spoke like a right Gentleman, plainly and truly; and
did not, like many, who promise and say they will do many things, which
afterward they perform not, nor are able to do. He asked me concerning
Saffron, which is much esteemed among them; they use it mixed with Sanders to
paint their foreheads withal, as also for Perfumes, for Meats, and for a
thousand other uses. I answered, that I might be able to serve his Highness,
that it was a thing that might be transported; and that in my Country, there
was enough, and that, if it pleased God I arrived there alive, I would send him
a Present of it, with other fine things of my Country, which perhaps, would be
acceptable to him. And indeed, if I arrive in Italy, I intend to make many
Complements, with this and diverse other Princes, whom I know in these parts;
for by what I have seen, I may get my self a great deal of Honor amongst them
with no great charge. Ever now and then, the King would talk with his Servants,
and all was in commendation of me and my discreet speaking, and especially of
my white complexion, which they much admired, although in Italy I was never
counted one of the fair, and, after so many Travels, and so many sufferings
both of Body and Mind, I am so changed that I can scarce acknowledge my self an
Italian any longer. He prayed me once with much earnestness and courtesy,
(out of a juvenile curiosity) to unbrace one of my sleeves a little and my
breast, that he might see whether my body were correspondent to my face. I
laughed, and, to please him, did so: When they saw that I was whiter under my
clothes (where the Air and Sun had not so much injured me) than in the face,
they all remained astonished, and began to cry out again that I was a Deuru,
that I was a Hero, a god, and that blessed was the hour when I entered into
their House, (I took my self to be Hercules, lodged in the Country of Evander)
and the King being much satisfied with my courtesy, said, that he knew me to
be a Noble Man by my civil compliance with his demands; that if I had been some
coarser person, I would not have done so, but perhaps, have taken ill, and been
offended with those their curious Questions.

As for the Ceremonies of eating, I must not omit, that after he saw that I had
done eating, notwithstanding his many instances Lagne, (so they call in India,
especially the Portugals, the Indian Nuts before they be ripe, when instead of
Pulp they contain a sweet refreshing water, which is drunk for delight; and if
the Pulp, (for of this water it is made) be begun to be congealed, yet that
little is very tender, and is eaten with much delight, and is accounted
cooling; whereas when it is hard and fully congealed, the Nut remaining without
water within, and in the inner part somewhat empty, that matter of the Nut
which is used more for sauce then to eat alone, is, in my opinion; hot, and not
of so good taste, as before when it was more tender.) Of these Lagne he caused
four to be given me, besides I know not how many great bunches of Moul, or
Indian Figs, which, though a small matter, are nevertheless the delights of
this Country; wherefore as such I received them, and thanking the King for
them, (who also thanked me much for my visit, testifying several times that he
had had very great contentment in seeing me) at length taking my leave, I
departed about an hour or little more before night.

I intended to have visited the Queen also the same time, but I Manel, both
that I might dispatch as soon as possible, and withal not show any dis-esteem
of the Queen by visiting her, not only after her Son, but also on a different
day, I resolved to go and find her where she was, although it were late; being
also persuaded so to do by that Brachman to whom I gave my Sword when I went to
eat, and who sometimes waited upon the Queen; and the rather, because they told
me, she was little at home, but rising at break of day, went forthwith to her
Works, and there stayed till dinner; and as soon as dinner was done, returned
thither again, and remained there till night. By which action, I observed
something in her of the spirit of Sciah Abbas King of Persia, and concluded it
no wonder that she has always showed her self like him, that is, active and
vigorous in actions of war and weighty affairs. Moreover, they said that at
night she was employed a good while in giving Audience, and doing Justice to
her Subjects: so that it was better to go and speak to her there in the field
while she was viewing her Workmen, then in the house. Accordingly I went, and,
drawing near her saw her, standing in the field, with a few Servants about her,
clad as the other time, and talking to the Laborers that were digging the
Trenches. When she saw us, she sent to know wherefore I came, whether it were
about any business? And the Messenger being answered that it was only to visit
her, brought me word again that it was late and time to go home; and therefore
I should do so, and when she came home she would send for me. I did as she
commanded, and returned to my house, expecting to be called when she thought
fit; but she called not for me this night, the cause whereof I attributed to
her returning very late home, as I understood she did.

December the sixth, I understood the Queen was gone abroad very early to her
Works before I was up, without sending for me. Wherefore desiring to dispatch,
I sent the Brachman my Interpreter to her, to remember her, that I desired to
do her Reverence, having come into her Country only for that purpose, and to
know when she pleased the time should be: The Brachman did the Message, and she
answered, that I should not wonder at this delay, being she was employed all
the day at those works; but however, she would send for me when she came home.
She asked the Brachman many questions concerning me; and because some of her
people extolled me much, and particularly, for Liberality, saying, that I had
given so much for a House, so much for Hens, so much for other things; She
wondering thereat, said, Do we here toil and moil so much for a fano, (which is
a small piece of Money) and does he spend in this manner? The Brachman returned
with this Answer, and I waited all this day for the Queens sending, but in
vain. In the mean while, not to lose time, I went to see a Temple at the end of
the Town, standing on a high place, and ascended to by some few ill-favored
stairs; they told me it was dedicated to Naraina, yet very ill built, like the
rest of the Edifices, being covered with Palm-leavs for the roof; and, in
short, such as suited with such a Town. Then descending down the street, which
leads to the neighboring River, I saw likewise upon another Hill a little
square Chapel, which instead of walls was enclosed with pales of wood, and
covered with a roof. My Interpreter told me, it was built by this Queen, and
that there was in it an Idol dedicated to the Devil, to whom out of their fear
of him, that he may do them no evil, these wretched people do reverence. I
hearing of a thing so strange, though not new to my ears, said, I would go see
it, that I might affirm with truth I had with my own eyes seen the Devil
worshipped. The Brachman, my Interpreter, dissuaded me as much as he could,
alleging that many Devils dwelt in that place, and might do me some mischief.
I told him, that I was not afraid of the Devil, who had no power over me, that
himself needed to fear him as little as I; and therefore I desired him to go
along with me cheerfully. When he saw me resolute, he accompanied me to the
foot of the Hill, and showed me the way; but it was not possible for me to get
him further: he remained at a distance, and said he would by no means approach
near that place, for he was afraid of the Devil. Wherefore I went forward
alone, and said, If that Caitif the Devil could do any thing, let him hurt me:
for I was his Enemy, and did not value him; and that if he did not, it was a
sign he had no power. Speaking thus, and invoking the Name of Jesus, (at which
Heaven, Earth, and Hell ought to bow the knee) I mounted up the Hill, and being
come to the Chapel, and finding no body there, I opened the door and went in.
I saw the Idol standing in the middle upon the plain ground, made of white
unpolished stone, exceeding a humane stature, and not of that shape as we paint
the Devil, but like a handsome Young Man, with a high round Diadem upon his
Head after their fashion. From each Arm issued two Hands, one of which was
stretched out, the other bended to the body. In the anterior right Hand, he had
a kind of weapon, which, I believe, was one of those Indian Ponyards of this
form () of which I keep one by me: In the Interior left Hand he had a round
thing, which I know not what it was, and in the other two Hands, I cannot tell
what. Between the Legs was another Statue of a naked Man with a long beard, and
his Hands upon the ground, as if he had been going upon them like Animals; and
upon this Image the Devil seemed to ride. On the right Hand of the Idol was a
great trunk of a Tree, dead but adhering to the root, low, and seeming to be
the remains of a great Tree that had grown there. I imagine that this Tree was
the habitation of the Devils, who are wont to be in this place, and to do much
mischief; to remedy which the Queen founded this Chapel here, and dedicated
this Idol to Brimor, (which they say is the name of a great Devil, King of many
thousands of Devils) who dwelt here: The same was afterward confirmed to me by
others of the Country, all confessing that it was Buto, i. e. the Devil; for so
they term him in their Language. When I had seen all, and spit several times
in the Idol's face, I came away and returned home, upbraiding the Brachman with
his Cowardice, and telling him that he might see whether my Religion were good
or no; since so powerful and feared a Devil could not hurt me when I went to
his very house, and did him such injuries: Whereunto the Brachman knew not what
to answer. Concerning Idols, they told me, at Manel, that the Queen of Olaza
and all her Family, as 'twere upon an Hereditary Account, adored and held for
her principal God, an Idol called Putia Somnata, which they said was the same
with Mahadeu, and which they delineated also of a round figure, like the little
pillar of a Landmark, circular at the top after this manner, as I have
elsewhere noted that they pourtray Mahadeu in Cambaia, and the Sun in other
places.

The same day, December the seventh, Being returned home before noon, I took
the Altitude of the Sun at Manel with an Astrolabe. I found him to decline from
the Zenith 35 degrees; he was this day in the fourteenth degree of Sagittary.
His Southern Declination was 22 degrees 30.34. which subtracted from 35
degrees, (the Altitude which I took, leave 12 degrees 29.36. which is the
Declination of the Aequinoctial, Southwards from the Zenith of Manel, and also
the height of the Northern Pole in that place. So that Manel, where the Queen
of Olaza now resides, lies 12 degrees 29.36. distant from the Aequinoctial
toward the North. At night, having waited all the day, and not hearing of the
Queens sending for me, as she had promised, I thought not good to importune her
further, but imagined she was not willing to be visited more by me. Wherefore I
gave Order for a Boat to carry me back to Mangalor the next day. Of the Queens
not suffering her self to be visited more by me, certain Men of the Country who
conversed with me, gave sundry Reasons: Some said, the Queen imagined I would
have given her some Present, as indeed I should, which would require a
requital; but, perhaps, she had nothing fit to requite me with in these
wretched places, or was loath to give: So that to avoid the shame, she thought
best to decline the visit. Others said, there was no other decent place to give
Audience in, but that where her Son was; and for her to come thither, did not
show well; as neither to send for me into some other unhandsome place, nor yet
to give me Audience in the Street, when it was no unexpected meeting but
designed, for which reason she avoided speaking with me. The Brachman, not my
Interpreter, but the other who held my Sword, had a more extravagant, and (in
my opinion) impertinent conceit, to wit, that there was spread such a Fame of
my good presence, fairness, and handsome manner of conversation, that the Queen
would not speak with me, for fear she should become enamored of me, and be
guilty of some unbecomming action, at which I heartily laughed. 'Twas more
probable, that she intended to avoid giving people occasion to talk of her, for
conversing privately with a stranger that was of such Reputation amongst them.
But let the Cause be what it will, I perceived she declined my visit, and
therefore caused a Boat to be provided, which (there being no other) was not
rowed with Oars, but guided by two Men with Poles of Indian Cane or Bambu,
which served well enough for that shallow River.

The next day, December the eighth, A little before Noon, without having seen
the Queen or any other, I departed from Manel. In a place somewhat lower, on
the left bank of the River, where the Queen receives a Toll of the Wares that
pass by, (which for the most part are only Rice, which is carried out, and
brought into her Country) I stayed a while to dine. Then continuing my way, I
arrived very late at Mangalor, where the Shops being shut up, and nothing to be
got, I was fain to go supperless to bed. Occasion being offered for sending
this Letter to Goa, whence the Fleet will depart next January, I would not omit
it; so that wherever I may happen to reside, the Letter may at least arrive
safe to you, whose Hands I kiss with my old Affection.

LETTER VII.
From Goa, January 31. 1624.
IN this my excursion and absence from Goa, (which was short, Ikkeri and Manel,
described in my last to you, I had the fortune to go as far as Calecut, to the
other Royal Seat of Vikira, called by his proper Title, il Samorino, where I
have erected the Pillars of my utmost peregrination toward the South. Now in
my Return, before I describe to you the Court of this Samorino and his
Princesses, following the Order of my Journeys, I shall first inform you of my
going to the famous Hermitage of Cadiri, and visiting of Batniato, called King
of the Gioghi, who lives at this day in his narrow limits of that Hermitage,
impoverished by Venk-tapa Naieka.

December the tenth, Being yet in Mangalor, I took the Altitude of the Sun,
whom I found to decline from the Zenith 35 degrees and 20 minutes. He was now
in the 18 degree of Sagittary, and declined toward the South 22 degrees 55.28.
which, detracted from the 35 degrees 20. wherein I found him, there remain 12
degrees 24.33. and so far is Mangalor distant from the Aequinoctial toward the
North, and has the Northern Pole so much elevated. At this time the heat at
Mangalor is such as it is at Rome in the month of June, or the end of August.

December the eleventh, I went in the Morning about half a League from Mangalor
to see the Hermitage, where lives and reigns the Archimandrita of the Indian
Gioghi, whom the Portugals (usually liberal of the Royal Title) style King of
the Gioghi, perhaps because the Indians term him so in their Language; and in
effect he is Lord of a little circuit of Land, wherein, besides the Hermitage
and the habitations of the Gioghi are some few Houses of the Country people,
and a few very small Villages subject to his Government. The Hermitage stands
on the side of a Hill, in this manner.

On the edge of the Plain, where the ascent of the Hill begins, places with
little fillets; it is about 60 Palms high, and one and a half thick from the
bottom to the top, with little diminution. On this Pillar are placed about
seventeen round brazen wheels, made with many spokes round about like stars:
they are to support the lights in great Festivals, and are distant about three
Palms one from another. The top terminates in a great brazen Candlestick of
five branches; of which the middlemost is highest, the other four of equal
height. The foot of the Pillar is square, and has an Idol engraven on each
side; the whole Engine is, or at least seems, all of a piece. The Temple, to
wit, the inner part where the Idol stands, is likewise all covered with brass:
They told me, the walls of the whole Enclosure, which are now covered with
leaves, were sometimes covered with large plates of brass; but that Venk-tapa
Naieka carried the same away, when in the war of Mangalor his Army pillaged all
these Countries; which whether it be true or no, I know not. The walls of a
less Enclosure (wherein according to their custom the Temple stands) are also
surrounded on the outside with eleven wooden rails up to the top, distant one
above another little more then an Architectical Palm; these also serve to bear
Lights in Festival occasions; which must needs make a brave Show, the Temple
thereby appearing as if it were all on fire. This Temple is dedicated to an
Idol called Moginato; of what form it is I know not, because they would not
suffer us to enter in to see it.

Having viewed the Temple, I ascended the Hill by the stairs, Gioghi and their
King; the place is a Plain, and planted with many Trees, under which are raised
many very great stone-pavements a little height above the ground, for them to
sit upon in the shadow. There are an infinite number of little square Chapels
with several Idols in them, and some places covered over head, but open round
about, for the Gioghi to entertain themselves in. And lastly, there is the
King's House, which is very low built; I saw nothing of it, (and believe there
is nothing more) but a small Porch, with walls round about colored with red,
and painted with Elephants and other Animals: Besides, in one place a wooden
thing like a little square bed, somewhat raised from the ground, and covered
with a Cloth like a Tent; they told me it was the place where the King used to
reside, and perhaps also to sleep. The King was not here now, but was gone to a
Shed or Cottage in a great plain field, to see something, I know not what,
done. The Soil is very good, and kept in tillage; where it is not plain, by
reason of the steepness of the Hill, it is planted with high goodly Trees, most
of which bear fruit: And indeed, for a Hermitage so ill kept by people that
know not, or cannot make it delightful, it seemed to me sufficiently handsome.
I believe, it was built by the Kings of Banghel whilst they flourished, for it
lies in their Territory, and that the place and the Seignory thereof was by
them given to the Gioghi; who, as they have no Wives, so the Dominion of this
Hermitage and the adjacent Land, goes not by Inheritance but by Elective
Succession. I thought to find abundance of Gioghi here, as in our Covents, but
I saw not above one or two; and they told me, they resort not together, but
remain dispersed here and there as they list, abide in several places in
Temples where they please, nor are subject to their King in point of Obedience,
as ours are to their Superior, but only do him Reverence and Honor; and at
certain solemn times great numbers of them assemble here, to whom during their
stay, the King supplies Victuals. In the Hermitage live many Servants of his
and Laborers of the Earth, who till these Lands, whereby he gets Provision.
They told me, that what he possesses within and without the Hermitage, yields
him about five or six thousand Pagods yearly, the greatest part whereof he
expends in Feasts, and the rest in diet, and in what is needful for the
ordinary service of the Temple, and his Idols; and that Venk-tapa Naieka had
not yet taken Tribute of him, but 'twas feared he would hereafter.

Gioghi, and found him employed in his business after a mean sort, like a
Peasant or Villager. He was an old man with a long white beard, but strong and
lusty; in either ear hung two little beads, which seemed to be of Gold, I know
not whether empty or full, about the bigness of a Musket-bullet; the holes of
his ears were large, and the tips much stretched by the weight; on his head he
had a little red bonnet, such as our Galley-slaves wear, which caps are brought
out of Europe to be sold in India with good profit. From the girdle upwards he
was naked, only he had a piece of Cotton wrought with Lozenges of several
colors cross his shoulders; he was not very low, and, for an Indian, of color
rather white then otherwise. He seemed a man of judgment, but upon trial in
sundry things, I found him not learned. He told me, that formerly he had
Horses, Elephants, Palanchinoes, and a great equipage and power before,
Venk-tapa Naieka took away all from him, so that now he had very little left.
That within twenty days after, there was to be a great Feast in that place, to
which many Gioghi would repair from several parts; that it would be worth my
seeing, and that I should meet one that could speak Arabic and Persian, and
was very learned, who could give me satisfaction of many things; and extolling
the qualities of this Giogho, he told me that he had a very great Head (to
signify the greatness of which, he made a great circle with his arms) to wit,
of hair, ruffled and long, and which had neither been cut nor combed a great
while. I asked him to give me his Name in writing, for my Memory; since I was
come to see him. He answer^d me, (as the Orientals for the most part do to such
curious demands) To what purpose was it? and, in fine, he would not give it me;
but I perceived 'twas through a vain and ignorant fear, that it might be of
some mischief to him. Nevertheless at my going away, I was told by others that
he is called Batniato; and that the Hermitage and all the adjacent places is
called Cadira.

Having ended my discourse with the King, I came away, and, Mangalor; and
arrived at home a good while before night.

December the eighteenth, I prepared my self to go to Carnate to see that
Queen; whose Territory and City is, as I have said elsewhere, two or three
Leagues distant from Mangalor, upon the Seacoast toward the North. The City
stands upon a River which encompasses it, and over-flowes the Country round
about, it was wont to be very strong both by Art and situation; but during the
war of Mangalor, Venk-tapa Naieka coming with a great Army to subdue and
pillage all these Countries, sent for this Queen to come and yield Obedience to
him. The Queen, who, as I have heard, is a Lady of much Virtue and Prudence;
being unwilling to render her self to Venk-tapa, summoned her Captains
together, told them, that she was ready to spend and give them all the Money
and Jewels she had, and not to be wanting on her part to her utmost power, if
they would prepare themselves to defend the State: But these Ministers, either
through Cowardice or Treachery, would not attempt a defense* Whereupon the poor
Queen, who as a Woman could do little by her self, (her Son also being very
young) seeing her people disheartened, resolved by their advice to surrender her
self to Venk-tapa Naieka; and accordingly prepared to go to him with a good
Guard of Soldiers. Which he hearing, sent to her to come alone without other
company then her Attendants; which she did, not voluntarily, but constrained
thereto by her hard Fortune, and the little Faith of others. Venk-tapa received
her honorably, and took her into his Friendship and Protection; but withal he
caused the City to be dismantled of the strong walls it had, to prevent her
rebelling against him afterward, and left her, as before, the Government of
the State, tying her only to Obedience, the payment of a Tribute, and the
professing of a noble Vassallage to him. When they dismantled the City, the
Queen (they say) unable to endure the sight, retired into a solitary place a
little distant, cursing in those her solitudes the Pusillanimity and Infidelity
of her own people, no less then the unfortunateness and weakness of the
Portugals her defenders, to whom she had been always a faithful Friend. At this
time she lives with her young Son, either in Carnate, or some other place
thereabouts.

Being moved by the Fame of this Queens Virtue, I was desirous Mangalor a Fleet
of Portugal Ships, which they call l' armata del Canara, because it coasts
along the ruins of the Province Canara; or else l' armata della Colletta, for
that it is maintained with the Money of a New Impost laid upon, and collected
by the Portugals in their Indian Plantations. The General of this Fleet was
Sig: Luis de Mendoza, a principal Cavalier or Fridalgo, (as they speak) young,
but of very good parts. The Captain of one of the Ships was Sig: Airs de
Siqueira Baraccio, formerly my Friend at Goa, whom I expected that I might
return thither in his Ship. Whereupon hearing of his Arrival, I went to seek
him, and finding him already landed, I understood by him that this Fleet was to
go to Calecut, in order to carry thither two Men of Samori King of Calecut,
(Samori is a Title given to all those Kings, like our Emperor or Caesar) which
Men he had a little before sent to Goa in the same Fleet, in another Voyage
which it had made upon those Coasts, to try the Viceroy about a Peace; (for he
had been many years, if not at War, yet at enmity with the Portugals) saying,
that if the Viceroy inclined to Peace, he would afterward send Ambassadors
with more solemnity, and treat of Articles. Now these Men were returning to
Calecut with the Viceroy's Answer; and, as Sig: Airs said, the Fleet would
depart from Mangalor the same night, yet would return very shortly, because the
General had Orders not to stay at Calecut above four and twenty hours, only
till he had landed these Men, and understood what Resolution the Samori gave in
Answer, without giving him more time to think thereupon. That in their return
the Fleet would touch at Mangalor, and all the other Ports of that Coast, to
take with them the Merchants Ships laden with Rice, (which were now prepared,
or a preparing) and convoy them according to their custom to Goa, where, by
reason of scarcity of provision, they were much desired. Hearing this News, I
was loath to lose the opportunity of seeing Calecut, (the King whereof is one
of the most famous among the Gentile Princes of India, and is likely to be at
Peace but a little while with the Portugals) and therefore resolved to go
aboard the Ship of Sig: Airs the same day, putting off my Journey to Carnate,
whither I had hopes to go at my return. Accordingly dismissing the Palanchino,
and the Men that were to carry me, together with the Servant I had taken at
Barselor, (because he was not willing to go further with me), I went aboard
alone without any Servant, assuring my self I could not want attendance, and
whatever else was needful in the Ship; wherein I found Sig: Manoel Leyton, Son
of Sig: Gio: Fernandez Leyton, embarked as a Soldier (which course of life he
was now first entered upon), besides many other eminent Soldiers, who were
afterward very friendly to me, and with whom I spent many days in good
conversation.

December the nineteenth, We departed from Mangalor, and Monte Deli; and the
next day, ( December the twentieth) by another, called Monte Fermoso. At night,
we anchored under Cananor, but entered not the Port, having sailed from
Mangalor hither always Southwards eighteen Leagues.

December the one and twentieth, Once in the Morning, and once in the Evening,
we met with Paroes, which are very light Ships of the Malabar Rovers, of whom
this Coast was full; for at Mangalor ends the Province of Canara, and that of
Malabar begins: We made ready our Arms both times to fight them, but they fled
from us, and recovered the mouths of the Rivers, whereof that Coast is full,
where by reason it was their own Territory, and well guarded in those narrow
and difficult places, we could not pursue them to take them; only we
discharged some Guns against them at distance to no purpose, which were
answered from that Land with the like; we might easily have attempted, if not
to take that which we saw in the Evening, yet at least to shatter it a far off
with our Cannon, if the General had not had regard to the Land they recovered,
which belonged to the Samori, to whom upon account of the Peace in agitation,
he was willing to have respect. At night we came to Anchor under Calecut, which
is twelve Leagues Southwards beyond Cananor.

December the two and twentieth, Early in the Morning the Samori's two Men
landed at Calecut, and with them a Portugal common Soldier, but well clad and
attended, whom the General sent to the King with the Viceroy's Answer, which
was; That the Viceroy was contented to treat of a Peace, and would gladly
conclude it; but on condition that the Samori made Peace too with the King of
Cocin, the Portugals Confederate, whom it was not fit to leave out of the said
Peace; and the rather, because the greatest differences between the Portugals
and the Samori were touching the King of Cocin, whom the Portugals justly
defended as their faithful Friend, and had always, to the damage of the
Samori, his perpetual Adversary, much supported; That if the Samori were
contented to make Peace with both, he should send his Ambassadors to Goa with
power to treat of the conditions, and they should be received very well. Within
a short time the Portugal returned to the Fleet; for the City of Calecut stands
upon the shore, and the Samori's Royal Palace is not far off: And together with
the Portugal, the Samori sent to the General a Portugal Boy, eight or ten years
old, called Cicco, who in certain Revolutions of Cananor, had been taken
Prisoner, and was brought up in his Court; he sent him well clothed, and
accompanied not only with many persons, but also with Pipes and Drums, that he
might visit the General in his Name, and give him a Present of Refreshments to
eat, namely, Indian Figgs, Lagne, and other fruits. His Answer to the business
was, that the Peace should be first made between himself and the Portugals, and
afterward the Interests of the King of Cocin should be taken into
consideration; withal, desiring the General that he would vouchsafe to stay a
while till he had better advised with his Ministers, and deliberated about
sending Ambassadors to Goa in the same Fleet; with other Reasons, which were
judged rather excuses to put off the time, and hold the Portugals in a Treaty
of Peace, till some very rich Ships of his which he expected from Meccha were
returned, left the Portugals should molest them at Sea; than real intentions
for a Peace, especially with the King of Cocin, with whom he has long and
intricate discords, not so easily to be terminated. The Portugals also
demanded, that the Samori would remove a Garrison which he had placed in
certain Confines, where they for their own security, and the defense of the
King of Cocin, were fain to keep a Fort continually, with a great Garrison and
at much expense: And because he showed not much inclination thereunto, it was
not without cause judged that his Treaties were Artifices, to hold the
Portugals in suspense; wherefore the General sent him word, That he had express
Order from the Viceroy not to stay longer at Calecut then twenty four hours,
and so long he would stay: If within that time the Samori took a Resolution
suitable to the Viceroy's Propositions, he would carry his Ambassador with a
good will; otherwise, he intended to depart the next night, all the
intermediate day being allowed his Highness to determine. With this Reply he
re-manded the young Child Cicco, honored with some small Presents, and the
other Men that came with him, without sending any of his Portugals on purpose,
or going ashore to refresh himself and visit the Samori, as he was by him
invited; the Viceroy having given him secret Instruction not to trust him too
far, because these Kings Samori had never been very faithful toward the
Portugals. Nevertheless the General forbad not any Soldiers to land that were
so minded, so that many of them went ashore, some to walk up and down, some to
buy things, and some to do other business; as also many people came to the
Fleet in little boats, partly, to sell things, and partly, out of curiosity to
see the Portugals, who in regard of their almost continual enmity with the
Samori, seldom used to be seen in Calecut.

December the two and twentieth) whilst we were aboard in the Port of Calecut,
I took the Sun's Altitude with my Astrolabe, and found him to decline at Noon
from the Zenith 34 degrees and 50 minutes. The Sun was this day in the
thirtieth degree of Sagittary; whence according to my Canon of Declination,
which I had from F. Fra Paolo Maria Cittadini, he declined from the
Aequinoctial toward the South 23 degrees and 28 minutes, which according to
that Canon is the greatest Declination; if it be not really so, the little that
is wanting may be allowed for the anticipation of four hours, if not more, that
the Noontide falls sooner at Calecut than in any other Meridian of Europe,
according to which my Canon of Declination shall be calculated; so that if from
the 34 degrees 50 minutes in which I found the Sun, you substract the 23
degrees 28. which I presuppose him to decline from the Aequinoctial toward the
South, the remainder is 11 degrees 22. and so much is the Elevation of the
North Pole in this place; and consequently, the City of Calecut lies 11 degrees
22. distant from the Aequinoctial toward the North. After dinner, I landed
also with the Captain of my Ship, and some other Soldiers; we went to see the
Bazar, which is near the shore; the Houses, or rather Cottages are built of
Earth and Palm-leav's, being very low; the Streets also are very narrow, but
indifferently long; the Market was full of all sorts of provision, and other
things necessary to the livelihood of that people, conformable to their Custom;
for as for Clothing, they need little, both Men and Women going quite naked,
saving that they have a piece either of Cotton or Silk hanging down from the
girdle to the knees, and covering their shame; the better sort are wont to wear
it either all blew, or white stripped with Azure, or Azure and some other
color; a dark blew being most esteemed amongst them. Moreover, both Men and
Women wear their hair long, and tied about the head; the Women, with a lock
hanging on one side under the ear becommingly enough, as almost all
Indian-Women do; the dressing of whose head, is, in my opinion, the gallantest
that I have seen in any other Nation: The Men have a lock hanging down from the
crown of the head, sometimes a little inclined on one side; some of them use a
small colored head-band, but the Women use none at all. Both sexes have their
arms full of bracelets, their ears of pendants, and their necks of jewels; the
Men commonly go with their naked Swords and Bucklers, or other Arms in their
hands, as I said of those of Balagate.

The Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Calecut, and the Inland Nairi for the most
part, by profession Soldiers, sufficiently swashing and brave: But the
Seacoasts are full of Malabari, an adventitious people, though of long
standing; for Marco Polo who writ four hundred years since, makes mention of
them; they live confusedly with the Pagans, and speak the same Language, but
yet are Mahometans in Religion. From them, all that Country for a long tract
together is called Malabar, famous in India for the continual Robberies
committed at Sea by the Malabar Thieves; whence in the Bazar of Calecut,
besides the things abovementioned, we saw sold good store of the Portugals
commodities, as Swords, Arms, Books, Clothes of Goa, and the like Merchandises
taken from Portugal Vessels at Sea; which things, because stolen, and in
regard of the Excommunication which lies upon us in that case, are not bought
by our Christians. Having seen the Bazar, and stayed there till it was late, we
were minded to see the more inward and noble parts of the City, and the
outside of the King's Palace; for to see the King at that hour we had no
intention, nor did we come prepared for it, but were in the same garb which we
wore in the Ship. Accordingly we walked a good way toward the Palace, for the
City is great, and we found it to consist of plots beset with abundance of high
Trees, amongst the boughs whereof, a great many of wild Monkies; and within
these close Groves, stand the Houses, for the most part at a distance from the
common Ways or Streets; they appear but little, few of their outsides being
seen, besides the low walls made of a black stone surrounding these plots, and
dividing them from the Streets, which are much better than those of the Bazar,
but without any ornament of Windows; so that he that walks through the City,
may think that he is rather in the midst of uninhabited Gardens, than of an
inhabited City: Nevertheless it is well peopled, and has many Inhabitants,
whose being contented with narrow buildings, is the cause that it appears but
small. As we walked in this manner, we met one of those Men who had been at Goa
with the Viceroy; and because he saw us many together, and imagined there was
some person of quality amongst us, or because he knew our General, he invited
us to go with him to his King's Palace; and going before us as our guide,
conducted us thither. He also sent one before to advertise the King of our
coming, and told us, we must by all means go to see him, because his Highness
was desirous to see us and talk with us: Wherefore, not to appear discourteous,
we were constrein'd to consent to his Request, notwithstanding the
unexpectedness of, and our unpreparedness for, the visit.

in the middle, were planted diverse great Trees for shadow: The King's chief
apartment, and (as I believe, by what I shall mention hereafter) where his
Women were, was at the end of the Court, opposite to the left side of the
Entrance. The Edifice, in comparison of ours, was of little consideration; but,
according to their mode, both for greatness and appearance, capable of a Royal
Family. It had a covered porch in that form, as all their structures have, and
within that was a door of no great largeness leading into the House. Here we
found Cicco the Portugal youth, become an Indian in Habit and Language, but, as
himself told us, and as his Portugal Name, which he still retained among the
Gentiles, demonstrated, no Renegado but a Christian; which I rather believe,
because indeed the Indian-Gentiles admit not, nor care to admit other strangers
to their Religion, as I have elsewhere noted; for conjoyning so inseparately,
as they do, their Religion to the Descents or Races of Men, as a Man can never
be of other Race then what he was born of; so they also think that he neither
can nor ought to be of any other Religion, although in Habit, Language, and
Customs, he accommodate himself to the people with whom he lives. With the
said Cicco we found many other of the King's Courtiers who waited for us, and
here we conversed with them a good while before the Gate, expecting a new
Message from the King, who, they told us, was now bathing himself, according to
their custom, after supper. Nor was it long before Order came from the King for
us to enter, and accordingly we were introduced into that second Gate; and
passing by a close room like a chamber, (in which I saw the Image of Brahma
upon his Peacock, and other Idolets) we entered into a little open Court,
surrounded with two rows of narrow and low Cloisters, to wit, one level with
the ground, and the other somewhat higher. The pavement of the porch was also
something raised above the plane of the Court, so much as might serve for a Man
to sit after our manner. The King was not in this small Court, but they told us
we must attend him here, and he would come presently: Whereupon we betook our
selves to sit down upon that raised pavement of the porch, the Courtiers
standing round about us; amongst which, the Portugal Cicco, and another Indian
Man, (who, as they said, was a Christian, and being sometimes a slave to the
Portugals, had fled hither for Liberty, and was entertained in the King's
Guard) served us for Interpreters; but not well, because the Man spoke not the
Portugal Tongue so much as tolerably, and Cicco having been taken when he was
very young, remembered but little of his own Language.

No sooner were we seated in this place, but two Girls about of Gold and very
rich Jewels. Their color was somewhat swarthy, as all these Nations are, but
in respect of others of the same Country, clear enough; and their shape no less
proportionable and comely, than their aspect was handsome and wel-favour'd.
They were both the Daughters, as they told us, of the Queen, that is, not of
the King but of his Sister, who is styled, and in effect is, Queen; for these
Gentiles using to derive the descent and inheritance by the line of the Women,
though the Government is allowed to Men, as more fit for it, and he that
governes is called King; yet the King's Sister, and, amongst them, (if there be
more then one) she to whom, by reason of Age, or for other respects it belongs,
is called, and properly is Queen, and not any Wife or Concubine of the King,
who has many. So also when the King, (who governes upon the account of being
Son of the Queen Mother) happens to dye, his own Sons succeed him not, (because
they are not the Sons of the Queen) but the Sons of his Sister; or in defect of
such, those of the nearest Kins-women by the same Female line: So that these
two Girls, whom I call the Nieces of the Samori, were right Princesses or
Infantaes of the Kingdom of Calecut. Upon their entrance where we were, all the
Courtiers present showed great Reverence to them; and we, understanding who
they were, arose from our seat, and having saluted them, stood all the time
afterward before them bare-headed. For want of Language we spoke not to them,
because the abovesaid Indian-slave was retired at a distance upon their
coming, giving place to other more noble Courtiers: And Cicco stood so demurely
by us, that he durst not lift up his eyes to behold them, much less speak;
having already learnt the Court-fashions and good manners of the place.
Nevertheless they talked much together concerning us, as they stood, and we
also of them, and all smiled without understanding one another. One of them
being more forward could not contain, but approaching gently toward me, almost
touched the Sleeve of my Coat with her hand, making a sign of wonder to her
Sister, how we could go so wrapped up and entangled in clothes as we seemed to
her to be: Such is the power of Custom, that their going naked seemed no more
strange to us, than our being clothed appeared extravagant to them. After a
short space the King came in at the same door, accompanied with many others. He
was a young Man of thirty or five and thirty years of Age, to my thinking; of a
large bulk of body, sufficiently fair for an Indian, and of a handsome
presence. He is called (as a principal Courtier, whom I afterward asked, told
me) by the proper name of Vikira. His Beard was somewhat long, and equally
round about his Face; he was naked, having only a piece of fine changeable
cotton cloth, blew and white, hanging from the girdle to the middle of the Leg.
He had diverse bracelets on his Arms, pendants at his Ears, and other ornaments
with many Jewels and rubies of value. In his Hand he carried a painted staff,
(if it were not an Indian Cane) like a Shep-herd's staff, upon which fixed in
the earth, just as Shep-herds are represented in our Comedies, he stood leaning
for a while. When he was saluted by us, he received us smiling, and with much
courtesy; and whilst his two Neeces stood by him leaning against a high banck
to sit upon, we stood orderly in the Court just before the King; and the whole
Court and the Porches being full of other Courtiers who came in, partly, with
the King, and partly, by some other little entrances. I will not omit the
manner how those that entered saluted the King; for I saw more then one do it,
and particularly, a Youth who entered a good while after the King by one of
those little Gates; to whom in particular the King spoke much, and of whom he
seemed to make great account. In his salutation he advanced his joined Hands
over his Head, then parting them a little, so extended and exalted, he smote
them lightly together twice or thrice, to wit, the palm of one Hand with the
four longest Fingers of the other joined together; which whole action he
repeated twice or thrice. Such as had weapons, lifted up their joined Hands
above their Heads, with their Swords, Ponyards, Bucklers, or other Arms in
them; and instead of striking with their Fingers, as by reason of their Arms
they could not, they bowed down their Hands so conjoined, and made the points
of their Swords touch the ground. No less full were the higher Cloisters round
about of Women, who stood there to behold us; amongst whom stood apart in the
most eminent place the Queen, Sister to the King, a Woman of ripe Age, clothed
in blew Cotton as to her lower parts, and abundantly adorned with Jewels.

The King desiring to talk with us, caused the youth Cicco to draw near, and
afterward called for the Indian Slave abovementioned; Cicco, either out of
excessive Reverence, or for that he had forgotten the Portugal-Tongue, durst
not undertake to interpret. He asked our Captain who he was, and how called?
The Captain would not confess himself Captain of a Ship, and so become known,
but counterfeiting another Name, said, he was a private Soldier, and Companion
to the rest of us; which the King seemed not to believe. He enquired likewise
concerning the other Soldiers present; and above all, very particularly
concerning me, pointing at the pendant which I wore in my Ear, almost like
their Custom of India, and looking upon me for it with some wonder, as a thing
which he knew not-usual among the Portugals; whereupon I told him who I was, to
wit, of what Country, and something I said briefly concerning the curiosity of
my Travells; that I had run through so many Countries only to see the world,
and was at length come to his Court, being no Portugal, but of Rome, a
different and remote Nation from Portugal; with all which he seemed well
pleased. He bid us several times put on our Hats; but our Captain, whose
example 'twas fit for us to follow, being resolved not to make himself known,
not only would not do it, but refused it both by gestures and words, which I
liked not well; for shaking his Head and smiling, he answered that he would
not, that they should not cause him to commit that false Latin, what ever else
he did; that indeed it was not a thing to be jeasted in, with other such
gallantries; he conceiving, as I believe, that herein consisted all the
punctuality of this Audience on his part: So that none of the rest of us
covered himself; but it would not have been ill done, if the favor had been
with better Answers then by saying, as the Captain did twice or thrice, (with
greater Courtship, as he thought) that it was hot, and therefore he would not
put on his Hat, which his smiling betrayed to be but an excuse; though he
conceived he thereby showed himself an excellent Courtier, Then the King began
to speak to our Captain, (whom he well perceived to be the Chief of the
company) concerning the Peace; yet saying no more then what he had signified to
our General, and desiring him to persuade the General not to depart so soon
from Calecut, but to stay till he had consulted better with his Ministers, and
had time to give a better and more determinate Resolution. The Captain answered
cuningly, that these matters did not belong to him, who was a private Soldier,
and was come thither only to see the City and the Palace, whither he had been
unexpectedly invited by his Highness; that as to the Peace, it was to be
treated of with the General, who had already answered his Highness as far as he
could, according to the Orders given him by the Viceroy; nevertheless that in
Obedience to his Highness, he would deliver this Message to him in the Evening.
The King saw that a Soldier of ours had one of those Harquebuzes, which the
Portugals call Baccamarti, which are very short, of a large bore, and with a
Fire-lock after the English-fashion. He asked to have it brought to him to look
upon; whereupon a Courtier taking it out of the Soldier's Hand reached it to
the King, not giving it into his Hand, (for it is not lawful for them to touch a
thing at the same time with the King) but (because it would neither have been
handsome to have laid it down on the ground for the King to take it up)
therefore he took this course; He set the but-end of the Harquebuz upon the
ground at a little distance from the King, and then giving the bore-end a
gentle cast from himself, made it fall into the Hands of the King, who held
them ready for that purpose. The King taking the Harquebuz in his Hand,
presently shaked the powder out of the pan upon the ground, lest any disaster
should befall him, (for he perceived it was charged) then lifting it up to his
Eye, he looked through the sight, showing thereby that he was a good
markes-man, as they told us afterward he was. He looked much upon the
Fire-lock as a thing unknown to them, for their Guns have only match; and
being he seemed much taken with this piece, I told the Captain it would be
handsome to present it to him, and indeed had it been mine, I should willingly
have given it him. The Captain spoke to the Soldier, who, incapable of such
noble thoughts, answered that he would give it to the King if he might have
forty Piasters for it, which was above twice the value. So that the King not
offering to buy it, nor the Captain to lay out so much Money in order to
present it to him, the pleasuring him therewith was waved; nor was it otherwise
offered to him, as in my opinion Civility required. Nevertheless the King never
let it it go out of his Hand so long as we were with him. Afterward he showed
us a little Parrot standing in an open Cage under the Cloister, he endeavored
to cause it to speak in our presence; and because our Interpreters were not
very good, he sent to call an eminent Servant of his, who spoke the
Portugal-Tongue better, to come and interpret in this Conversation.

The Signori Portoghesi my Companions, little accustomed to Portugals did not
like this shutting of the door, and began presently to mutter amongst
themselves, and to suspect that the King intended to detain them prisoners
there, or to put some trick upon them; and what would the General and others
say in Goa, for their coming to put themselves in a Cage thus, without the
order and leave of their General, only upon mere curiosity? I advised them to
be quiet, telling them that it was not befitting a King to do such an act, nor
was there any occasion why the King should be so treacherous; that we were not
so many, nor so considerable that the doing thereof would be of any profit to
him, or damage to the Portugal Nation. That it was fit the doors should be shut
whilst the King was there in that manner giving Audience to so many strangers
together, armed, and of so little confidence with him as we were: That on the
contrary, he had done us much Honor in inviting and admitting us to his
presence with all our weapons, there being no Ambassador, nor public person,
or so much as known amongst us. This partly quieted them, although they very
ill endured to see themselves shut up. I told them further, that it belonged to
the King to dismiss us when he pleased, and that, should we be late, the
General would excuse us for our delay, at least, if not for our too-great
Curiosity, which yet was no high crime as the case stood, almost all the
Soldiers being come a shore this day. Nevertheless they twice or thrice
demanded of the King that he would let them go, alleging that it was already
late to return aboard, as indeed it was; but the King always excused it, and
would not dismiss them, saying, That we must stay till the Man he had sent for
was come, because he was desirous to talk a little better with us, and that he
would send us aboard in his own Boats, at any time when it should be needful;
for, there being no formed Harbor at Calecut, but an open shore, the Ships
rode at a good distance from the Land.

Portugals in the enterprise of Cognale, perhaps not in the days of this
Samori, but of his Predecessor: So that he said, he was very well known to the
Viceroy, and the chief Captains of Goa versed in those parts. Upon the
entrance of this Man, the King called our Captain to come up to him upon the
raised pavement of the Porch; he refused at first twice or thrice, but at
length was prevailed with by the instances both of the King himself, and of
this Brachman. Here the King fell largely to discourse with him, and with us
about the Peace, about his desire to have the Fleet stay a while longer for
establishing a firm Friendship with the Portugals, and about diverse other
things; many of which were the same that he had spoken before. In short, the
Audience lasted till night, the two little Ladies his Neeces, being present
almost all the time, (for they went and came now and then) and the Queen in the
upper Cloister; in beholding of whom, to speak truth, I was more attentive than
in all hearing these discourses, which I well saw were of little importance,
and therefore I cannot relate more punctually. At length it growing dark, upon
our Captain's importunity the King dismissed us, and the door being opened, we
were suffered to go forth; but first he caused many branches of Indian Figs and
Lagne, to be brought and presented to us; the Courtiers giving them to our
Captain and the other Soldiers, not by stretching forth the Hand, but by
tossing them in the Air, as their custom is, I believe, to avoid being
contaminated by our contact. The King did the like, when at our departure he
restored the Harquebuz to its owner; for he cast it after the same manner into
the Hands of one of his Courtiers as it was cast to him, but gently, and with
much care lest it should fall, bowing himself almost to the ground for that
purpose, as it was necessary to do by reason of the shortness of the piece.
These Ceremonies, of not being touched, and the like, of which in public
demonstration they are so rigorous, yet in secret and when they please, they do
not so exactly observe. And 'twas told us of this King, that he is a great
drinker of Wine, though rigorously prohibited by his Religion, and that he has
sometimes eaten and drunk at the same Table with Portugals very familiarly; and
that he is a Man of very affable humor, and a great friend to a jovial life,
as also his carriage toward us demonstrated. Besides the Lagne and Figs which
he appointed some of his Servants to carry for us even to the Boats, he gave
our Captain a wild Pig alive, which he caused to be brought from some inner
rooms of the Court, and being tied with a rope to be carried likewise to the
Seaside, whither also he sent many, and some of the principal of his
Courtiers, to accompany us. A little after us he sent again to the General, one
of those two Men which had been at Goa, (to wit, he who conducted us to the
Palace, and was present at the whole Audience) to visit the General in his
Name, carry him new refreshments of Fruits, and desire him not to depart so
soon. But before I proceed further, for the better understanding of what I have
already written, I will here present to your view a rough and unmeasured
Platform of the Samori's Palace, and the place where he gave us Audience.



1. The little Piazza without the first Gate of the Palace. 2. The first Gate
guarded with Balisters. 3. A great Court within the first Gate, which should be
longer in proportion to the breadth, but is drawn thus in regard of the
scantness of the paper, it has lodgings about it in several places. 4. The
King's House, and the Apartment of his Women. 5. The Porch of the said House.
6. The second Gate. 7 A dark Room locked up 8. A Door leading into the little
Court. 9. Several Lodgings. 10. The little Court. 11. The place whence the wild
Swine was brought. 12. The King denoted in several places, according as he
moved whilst he was speaking. 13. The King's two Neeces. 14. A great Man of the
King's, who served for Interpreter. 15. The Queen in the higher Cloister. 16.
Our Company, with a greater number of Courtiers on each side of us, than the
place allows to be here denoted. 17. Our Captain in the close of the Audience,
and when he received the Lagne.
Being dismissed by the Samori, as is abovesaid, we returned to the Seaside
to go aboard, it being now night; but because there were but two or three very
small boats, in each of which not above two or three could go at a time, in
regard the Sea was somewhat rough, and we were many, it came to be above one a
clock in the night before we all got aboard. Our Captain was one of the first,
and he went presently to give an account of what had passed this day between us
and the Samori to the General, who was minded to depart forthwith; but
understanding that the Soldiers were not yet all embarked, and particularly,
the Captain telling him that I was still on shore, he gave order to move but
slowly in expectation of me. In the mean time the Samori's Messenger went to
him to desire him to stay a little longer; whereupon the General, though he
knew it would be of little importance in reference to the Treaty of Peace, yet
not to appear discourteous, and perhaps also upon account of some expediency in
order to our Navigation, he determined to stay all this night in the Port of
Calecut. The Messenger returning ashore with this answer, found me alone of all
the Fleer, still there, where some of the principal Nairi kept me company all
the while, and left me not till they saw me in the Boat, using much diligence,
to dispatch all others as soon as possible; and in the mean time that we
waited, which was above an hour, holding me by the hand, and expressing many
other caresses and demonstrations of kindness to me.

Before I leave Calecut, I shall here observe one strange custom of the people
of these parts. The Gentil Nairi have no peculiar are transferred. The same is
observed among Princes and their Wives; the Queens, who are the King's Sisters,
use to marry other neighboring Kings, and go into their States to have
children, who are to succeed in the Kingdoms of their Uncles, and by this means
are of Royal blood both by Father and Mother. These Princesses are held in
great esteem by the Kings their Husbands; yet if they are minded to try other
men, they are not prohibited, but may and oftentimes do so, making use of whom
they fancy for their pleasure, but especially of some Brachmans or other of
their Husband's principal Courtiers, who with their privity and consent are
wont to converse and practice with them most intrinsecally in the Palace. The
King, and all others, as I have said, commonly go naked; only they have a cloth
wherewith they are girded, reaching to the mid-leg. Yet when upon any occasion
the King is minded to appear much in Majesty, he puts on only a white Vestment
of very fine Cotton, never using either Cloth of Gold or Silk. Others also when
they please may wear the like garment but not in the King's presence, in which
it is not lawful for any to appear otherwise then naked, saving the Cloth
abovementioned. The Arms which every one wears, must not be laid aside at any
time, especially not before the King; and, as I have elsewhere noted, every one
keeps to one sort of Arms, which he first takes to, without ever changing. When
two Kings happen to war together, each Army takes great heed not to kill the
contrary King; nor so much as to strike his Umbrella wherever it goes, which is
amongst them the Ensign of Royalty; because, besides that it would be a great
sin to have a hand in Royal blood, the party or side which should kill or wound
him, would expose themselves to great and irreparable mischiefs, in regard of
the Obligation the whole Kingdom of the wounded or slain King has to revenge
him with the greatest destruction of their enemies, even with the certain loss
of their own lives if it be needful. By how much such Kings are of greater
dignity among them, so much longer this obligation of furious revenge endures.
So that if the Samori should be killed or wounded by the Army of the King of
Cocin, who is his enemy, but of greater dignity; the people of the Samori stand
obliged to one day of revenge, (others say three days) during which, every one
is obliged to act their utmost to the utter destruction of those of Cocin, even
with the manifest hazard of their own. But if the King of Cocin, who has a
greater repute, for honor at least, if not for power, should happen to be
slain or wounded, by the people of the Samori; the fury of revenge is to last
in those of Cocin all the time of their lives, (others say once a year) which
would cause a great destruction of both sides. They call this term of time, or
manner of revenge, Amoco; so that they say, the Amoco of the Samori lasts one
day; the Amoco of the King of Cocin lasts all the life, and so of others. Of
the Malabars who live mixed with the Nairi in the Maritime Parts, and are Moors
in Religion and all other Customs; I heard only this Remarkable, That by a
received and universal practice amongst the Women, they will never lie under
the Men in the Act of Coition; which, because a thing extraordinary, I would
not omit to mention.

December the twenty third, A good while after Sunrise we Calecut, but had the
wind all day against us, and made but little way. At night we cast Anchor,
because there is seldom wind enough for sailing in the night time; and being we
coasted along the shore, we might cast Anchor at any time we pleased.

December the twenty fourth, We had the wind contrary again, making very little
way; so that we cast Anchor many times, and in the Evening, because it was
Christmass-Eve, the Litanies were sung in all the Ships; and afterward we had
Collations of Sweetmeats, and celebrated the Feast as well as the place
afforded. In our Ship, some Soldiers, who were employed to make a sort of
sweet fritters of Sugar, for sport put into many of them certain powders which
caused giddiness; so that almost all the Soldiers that ate of them, after the
Collation seemed drunk, and were constrained to betake themselves to sleep,
which they did all night much more then that time and place required; for, had
Enemies come, the greatest part of the Soldiers being in this manner, I know
not how we should have done.

December the twenty fifth, By break of day we arrived at Cananor, where we
presently landed to hear the divine Offices. Cananor is a little place upon the
shore, but near a Promontory, which makes a kind of Haven. The City is
surrounded with walls, not very strong and well made, but in some places I know
not by what negligence decayed. It has four Churches, to wit, La Sede, or the
Cathedral; La Misericordia, which is a Confraternity, and much like our Monte
della Pieta, Santo Spirito, and other such; it has correspondence with an
other: There are of them in all the Plantations of the Portugals, and they do
many good works; for almost all the pious works, which amongst us are done by
diverse Houses and Societies, this one place of La Misericordia does amongst the
Portugals; as, keeping of things Deposited; transmitting Bills of Exchange safe;
relieving the poor, the sick, and imprisoned; maintaining exposed Children;
marrying young Maids; keeping Women of ill Lives when converted; redeeming
Slaves; and, in short, all works of Mercy, whereof a City or Country can have
need. A pious thing indeed, and of infinite benefit to the Public; the rather
because they are in all Territories of the Portugals, and hold correspondence
together, even those of India with those of Portugal; so that they all seem but
one body extending its members and influences incredibly profitable to several
Countries. This pious Place is governed by Secular Confreres; to which
Confraternity none are admitted but worthy Persons, upon certain decent
Conditions, and to a set number. So that the good Works which they do, and the
great sums expended therein every year, accrue to the benefit not only of the
Confreres, but of the Public in general, with much Charity; so that I do not
account my time lost in making this little Digression. The third Church of
Cananor is San Francesco, where the Friars of that Order reside; and the
fourth, if I remember right, is Santa Maria della Vittoria. Without Cananor is
an entrenched Fort, contiguous to the walls of the City, and under the
Portugals jurisdiction: But about a musket shot distant, or more, is a great
Village, which they call the Bazar, where all sorts of Provisions and other
Merchandises are sold; the Building is like that of Calecut, and perhaps
better; yet this is under the jurisdiction of the Gentiles, (though the
Inhabitants are in great part Malabar-Moors) and by derivative Authority from a
King of this Country whom they call the King of Cananor, and who resides far
from the Sea; it is governed by a famous Malabar-Moor, named Aga Begel, whose
House I saw, but not himself, having spent this whole day in walking up and
down Cananor, and the Bazar of the Gentiles; for I dined with our Captain on
shore in the House of a Portugal married there: At night having viewed all, and
bought abundance of dried Indian Figgs, and many Vessels of Conserves of the
Pulp of young Indian Cane or Bambu, (which is very good to eat after this
manner) of green Pepper, Cittrons, and other Fruits wont to be pickled by them
in Vinegar, and vendible here, very good, and in great plenty, at length we
returned a Shipboard.

December the twenty sixth, We set sail from Cananor; but for

December the twenty ninth, We passed before Cagnarotto, whence some Men came
in a Boat from the King of Banghel, (who lives there in Sanctuary with the King
of that place his Friend and Kinsman) to visit and present our General in the
Name of their Lord.

December the thirtieth, About noon we entered the Port of Mangalor. I had a
desire to go to Carnate to see that Queen, and had already given Money for a
Boat to carry me thither, being I might sooner and better go so then with a
Palanchino; but this journey was disappointed as well as my former, I know not
by what unhappy destiny; for I understood that the Fleet was by all means to
depart from Mangalor the next day, so that I could not have time to go and
return; and if I lost the opportunity of this Fleet, God knows when I should
have another of passing to Goa, whither other considerations of my business
required me to repair as soon as might be. So I deferred my going to Carnate,
but with no small regret; for being deprived of the knowledge of that Queen,
who was reported to me for a Lady of great Worth and Valor. Whilst we stayed
ashore, I went to the Church of San Francesco to visit those Fathers, where I
found the General of our Fleet, Sig: Luis de Mendoza, whom I had never seen
before. I found him a very complete and gallant Cavalier, and, having been bred
in the Court of Spain the Queens Page, a much better Courtier then other
Portugal Cavaliers of India, who have not seen other Countries, are wont to be.

December the one and thirtieth, I heard Mass in the fore-noon and dined a
shore with the Brother of Signor Tome de Barrios, my Friend in Goa, at the
House of the Padre Vicario of Mangalor, named --, and known to me likewise at
Goa. In the Evening I went aboard, and when it was dark we went out of the
mouth of the Port to put our selves before the whole Cafila, which here began
to join with our Fleet, very numerous indeed, consisting of above a hundred and
fifty Ships, laden with Rice, which were going to Goa, from whence all that
Provision is dispersed abroad; of which Cafila, our Ship being Captain of the
Vant-guard, it behooved us to go first; but being the Cafila was so great, we
cast Anchor just without the mouth of the Port, there expecting the day, and a
sign to be given us by the General with his Canon: For it was requisite for all
to keep as close together as possible, to the end that so many Ships of
Merchandise, (disarmed and without Soldiers, saving the Convoy of the few
Ships of our Fleet, some of which went before, some in the middle, and some
always behind) might go secure from the assaults and surprises of Pirates; and
indeed, to guard so many disarmed and laden Ships, that took up so much room at
Sea, with so few armed Vessels, was no easy matter. But so it was, that we
above all the rest were to take particular care that no Ship got before us, or
separated from the Company, lest some disaster might befall them.

On the first of January, 1624. We set sail from Mangalor toward Goa, with the
whole Cafila, which increased hourly; other Merchant Ships joining with us at
all the Ports by which we passed, we giving them a sign with our Canon, and
many times waiting for them till they came out. This first day we sailed not
above three Leagues, and anchored under Carnate, but not in such a place and
time that I could go to see the Queen as I desired.

January the second, We set forth again very early, but a contrary North-West
wind arising caused us to anchor among the Rocks, which they call Scogli di
Santa Maria; whence some Men that went on shore, brought me some Jasmen, of a
very goodly Scarlet-colour, of which sort I had never seen any Jasmen before,
in any other place of the world; but for smell, it had little or none at all.

January the third, We set forth again at our usual hour, and the wind began to
blow from the land, which in that place is on the East. We passed by Barselor,
and, a League beyond, anchored at the Rock of Camboli, where we waited for the
Cafila of Barselor; we not entering there our selves, that it might dispatch the
sooner.

January the fifth, Whilst we stayed at Camboli expecting the coming forth of
all the Cafila of Barselor, in the Morning we discovered twelve Ships coming
toward us from the South; and knowing that they were not Merchants but Men of
War, and having no News of any Armado that was to come from Goa at this time,
we judged them to be Paroes of Malabar-Pirats, as indeed they appeared; for the
said Paroes are almost like the Ships of the Portugals, but somewhat lighter.
And because we saw them make directly up to us, we prepared for fight, and
sailed forwards to meet them; assuring our selves, that if they were Paroes,
they came to assault us; since they could not but know that the Ships of our
Armado, which alone were fit for fight, were fewer then theirs, and that the
other Merchants Ships of the Cafila, whom we convoyed, could serve for nothing
else but either to fly away, if they were able, or to increase their booty in
case our few armed Vessels should be beaten. The Ship wherein I was, being the
Captain of the Vant-guard, was far before the rest, and alone toward that part
whence the abovesaid Ships were coming. Having betaken our selves to our Arms,
(which yet was not done without some confusion, because the things in the Ship
were out of order, and the Soldiers unprovided of Powder, which was to be
fetched out of the place where it was kept and distributed thus hastily in
small quantities, being our store was but small) we consulted a while what to
do, whether to wait for our other Ships which were behind, and so join all
together in encountering the Enemy; or else to begin the fight, as we were,
alone, till the rest came up to us. The first course seemed safest and most
considerate; the latter was more magnanimous, but with-all temerarious, because
we were so distant from our company, that before they could come to succor us,
our Ship might be wholly destroyed; as being but one it might very easily be by
so many, especially in that extreme furious way of fighting practiced here,
wherein there is great use of fireworks. Yet our Captain and the rest of us
thought it was no time to demurr longer and consult; because the Enemy was so
near, that to wait for our Company would have little advantaged, but might much
have prejudiced us, giving them thereby presumptions of our weakness and fear:
Wherefore we all cried out to go on; that since we were come to this pinch,
'twas better to incurr our loss alone with a valorous temerity by doing our
duty, then to hazard the loss of the whole Armado and its Reputation, if the
Enemy perceiving us timorous and weak should take heart against us from our
imprudent fear: That as it was our duty to go forwards, so it was the duty of
our Companions to follow us and succor us, and not let us perish alone; that
this care belonged to them; that if they did otherwise, the fault would lie
upon them, not upon us; that (in fine) let us give the onset, and leave Heaven
to take can of the rest. Thus resolved, we desperately sailed forward. Our
Companions that were nearest would have done the like; but the General, who was
far behind in another place of the Cafila, shot off a Piece to command all to
stay for him, reasonably conceiving it the best way to attaque the enemy
altogether; whereupon all the other Ships of the Fleet which were behind us,
stood still awhile; but we alone, seeing our selves so far engaged and so near
the Enemy, whatever the others did, would by no means stay but continued our
course. Which Sig. Francesco Pesciotto Captain of one of the nearest Ships,
beholding, and misliking that we should charge thus alone, and he quietly look
on at a little distance, he lost all patience, and began again to make up after
us, though a far off; the same did all the rest soon after, conceiving it the
best way. We were now within Falcon-shot (for greater Pieces then Falcons these
Ships carry not) but forbore to fire till a nearer approach might make the shot
more certain; which seemed also to be the Enemie's design: when being come so
near as to speak and be heard, and standing ready to give fire both to the
Ordnance and Musket, by the voices and cries on either side we found each other
to be friends: for these Ships were an unexpected and extraordinary Fleet of
Portugals sent to Cocin to convey securely from thence to Goa certain moneys of
the Confraternity della Misericordia, and other Provisions. Hereupon the feud
ceasing, the mortal thunder was turned into joyful salutations, with cheerful
noise of Drums and Trumpets; at the sound whereof the Morning beginning to
clear up, seemed also to hasten to rejoice with us and part our erroneous fray.
I have mentioned this passage at large, to the end the successes,
inconveniences, counsels and resolutions ensuing suddenly thereupon may be
known; from all which, prudent adviso's for other occasions may be deduced; and
also to make known to all the world the demeanor of the noble Portugal Nation
in these parts; who indeed, had they but as much order, discipline, and good
government as they have valor, Ormuz and other sad losses would not be now
lamented, but they would most certainly be capable of atchieving great matters.
But God gives not all things to all.

It being now broad day, we set sail with the whole Cafila; but

January the sixth, We had the wind still contrary, and having saild three
other leagues, at the usual hour we cast anchor near the Rocks of Baticala.

On the seventh, the said wind blowing somewhat favorably, about noon we
passed by Onor, and without staying discharged only one Gun to give notice for
the Ships to come forth of the port, if any were there that would accompany us;
for greater diligence was not needful, because few come from thence. In the
Evening the usual contrary North-west wind arising, we came to an anchor, a
little distant from Mirizeo. At the second watch of the night, a good stiff
South Wind arose; and in the forenoon next day we passed by the Rocks called
Angediva, and at night came to an anchor somewhat Southwards of Capo falso.

January the ninth, the wind was contrary, our way short; and because we could
not proceed forwards, we cast anchor near Rio del Sale; also the next day, for
the same reason we could get no further then an Enieda (as they speak) or Bay,
called Mormogon, in the Island of Salsette contiguous to that of Goa on the
South, but greater and divided from the same only by a River. This Island of
Salsette is full of very fair Towns, and abundance of Houses. Above all, the
Jesuits have the goodliest places, and it is counted that perhaps a third part
of the Island is theirs; for besides three good Towns which belong wholly to
them, they have also dominion and government in all the other Towns too which
are not theirs; they have Churches everywhere, Lands and store of Goods; and I
believe all the Parishes are governed by them in Spirituals with supreme
Authority; whence this people acknowledge more Vassallage (upon the matter) to
the Jesuits then to the King himself. The case is the same in another Island
called Bardeos, adjacent also to that of Goa, but more Northward, which is
under the government of the Franciscans. Nor is it otherwise in almost all the
other Territories of the Portugals; so that it may justly be said that the best
and perhaps too the greatest part of this State is in the hands of Clergymen.

Mormogon in good time, and knowing that we were not to depart the night
following, our Captain with some others of us went ashore to see a Place and
Church of the Jesuits called S. Andrea, which they told us was hard by: yet we
found it not so near, but that we walked about a league to get to it, because
we knew not the right way, but mistook it, and were fain to leap over very
broad and deep ditches of water, into one whereof one our Company happened to
fall, to the great laughter of the rest, besides many other inconveniences. We
found the Church large, neat and well built, with a fair square Court or Yard
before it, surrounded with handsome Stone-walls, and within with some great
Trees, under which were Banks raised to sit upon in the shadow. On one side of
the Church was a very fair and well built House for the Padre Rettore, who has
the present superintendency thereof; which Church and Building would be very
magnificent not only for this place but for the City of Rome it self. We stayed
a good while discoursing with the F. Rector, who told us sundry news from Goa,
and invited us to Supper; but fearing to arrive too late at the Fleet if we
stayed to sup here, we waved the Courtesy, and taking leave of him at Sunset
returned to the place where we had left our Ships; and though we had a Guide to
conduct us by the best and nearest way, yet we got not thither to imbarque till
after two hours within night.

January the eleventh, at our departing from the Port of Mormogon this day, in
which we were to arrive at Goa, the General, who was wont to go in the
Rear-guard, being now minded to go in the middle of the Armada, commanded our
Ship, (hitherto Captain of the Vant-guard) to remain behind all the rest for
guarding the Rear-guard: where great diligence was to to be used, both that no
straggling Ship might be in danger of being surpised by Rovers, or any of the
Merchants Vessels slip aside to avoid paying Custom at Goa, and go to unlade in
other places of Counterband. Wherefore having sailed the little remainder of
the way, and caused all the other Ships to enter, which were in number more
then two hundred and fifty; we at length entered the Bar or Mouth of the Rio of
Goa, where we anchored under a Port hard by, without going further to the City;
it being the custom for no Fleets to arrive in the City without the advice and
License of the Viceroy. Here we found the Ship, which alone was to go this year
to Portugal already laden and ready to sail; as also some Galeons in readiness
likewise, whether to be sent to Ormuz or elsewhere I know not. Sig. Airs de
Siqueida Captain of our Ship, having got leave of the General, went to Goa with
a Manciva or Boat which came to him for that purpose; and I with Sig. Francesco
Pesciotto Captain of another Ship, Sig. Manoel Leyera and some few Soldiers
accompanied him. We arrived at Goa when it was dark night, because it is three
leagues from the mouth of the Bar to the City, almost directly from South to
North; so that there is a considerable difference between the altitude of the
Pole at Goa, and the mouth of the Bar. Having landed, every one went to his own
home; and I, who had no house ready for me, nor yet any servant, went alone, as
I was, to lodge in the House of Sig. Antonio Baracio my friend, according as
himself and Sig: Ruy Gomes his Brother had promised I should when I departed
from Goa. As I was going thither I was unexpectedly met by the said two
Brothers, who received me with their wonted courtesy. My Bed and Goods which I
had in the Ship were soon after brought to the same place by the procurement of
Sig. Airs. I understood here that my quondam servant the honest Cacciatur
coming hither from Ikkeri to Goa after his false dealing with me, had attempted
to put a trick upon Signora Maria also, but it did not succeed. He feigned that
I had sent him beforehand to take order for a house against my return, and was
importunate for money to prepare and provide things necessary. My letter he
ventured not to present but pretended a misfortune at Sea, whereby it was lost,
with other such inventions. Hereupon Signora Maria suspected him, and, without
my Letters, gave no credit to him, as neither did Signora Maria da Cugna. So
that seeing his devices to get money from them, proved ineffectual, he came no
more in sight; and we believe is gone into the Territories of the Moors amongst
the Mahometans, having heard no more news of him.

January the twentieth, a Proclamation was put forth by the Viceroy for all
Portugal Soldiers (they call all such as have not Wives, Soldati) and also all
Dispacciati, though married, to prepare to go to Ormur; it being given out that
the Viceroy intended to pass thither in person with a great Armada and
Galeons. Amongst the Portugals, those are called Dispacciati, who having ended
their services, which every one is obliged to perform for eight years, only
with that small pay and maintenance which is given to Servants (which indeed is
very slender), upon petition to the King in Spain and representation of the
faithfulness of their services, according as the same are greater or less, are
dismissed by the King with some honorable and profitable Charge, as Captain of
a Fort, and the like; to enjoy the same for three years or some other
determinate time. Which Charges they enter not upon as soon as the same are
granted, but when it falls to them of course according to the time of their
dismission: whereby it comes to pass that some never enjoy them as long as they
live, nor yet their sons sometimes, unless very late, (in case the favor
extend to their sons too) because all the said Charges or Offices go by
seniority, every man' time beginning from the day of their dismission; and
oftentimes it happens that forty or fifty are dismissed at the same time with
him, all who must first enjoy the same Office or else die to make way for him.
In brief, it is an invention of the Kings of Portugal, much for their own
interest; for not having much to give in recompense of services, they by this
means pay the greatest part of those that serve them with hopes alone; which
also prove very well to them; the men of this nation being of such an humor
that they not only are contented with these bare hopes, and hold themselves
well requited for many great and toilsom service, but make great account
thereof; for these Reversions, which are to fall God knows when, are the estate
and support of many, the portions of many Daughters, and in brief, in respect
of the little other estates they have in India, one of the best and most
considerable advantages that they possess, besides their being of much
reputation and honor. Now to all such as were in this manner dismissed was
this Proclamation directed, obliging them to go to Ormuz with the Viceroy
under penalty of losing all their Reversions. But for all this, intelligent men
did not believe that the Viceroy would undertake this Expedition, both because
they did not hold him a man likely to take up such a resolution, and because
there were not such preparations made in Goa for his voyage, as was requisite.

January the two and twentieth, a Galeot under the command of Sig. Manoel de
Paiva, our friend, arrived at Goa from Sindi, in which were many persons that
had come to Sindi with other Ships from Mascat; amongst the rest there was a
considerable Soldier belonging to Ruy Freira, who brought certain news of his
own knowledge, how the said Ruy Freira having held Ormuz closely besieged for a
long time, and brought the Defendants to great distress for want of all things;
at length, no relief coming to him, no provisions wherewith to continue the
Siege, (his Victuals failing him) was constrained to raise the Siege and return
to Mascat with all his Army; yet with intention to make new provisions, and get
new succors and ammunitions, and then to return again to besiege the place;
which in the mean time the Moors omitted not to supply with all sort of
necessaries for a long time, to repair the fortifications and reinforce it
with fresh Soldiers. All which considered, I hold the retaking of Ormuz very
difficult, both in regard of the courage the enemy has resumed by this action,
and because the same scarcity of Victuals will happen frequently, and in a
short time to the besiegers no less then to the besieged, being the Island
affords nothing of it self, and our provisions must be fetched from greater
distance then those of the enemies: wherein not much diligence being used on
our part, I doubt not but it will be very difficult for them to hold the Siege
long; and when they intermit the same never so little, as they have done now,
that short time is sufficient to secure the place from famine; because having
the Continent so near hand, and provisions there in much plenty, it may be in
one day alone supplied for many months. As for taking it by battery or
otherwise; the Portugals being so few and little skilled in such Arts, and on
the other side the enemies so numerous and indefatigable in undergoing toil and
pains, I hold it very difficult. The Viceroy of Goa, who had been so cold in
sending succors to Ruy Freira; because he would not that he should take Ormuz,
but only hold it straightened till himself went in person to reap the fruit of
others labors; that so he might with the glory of this victory cover the
passed neglect he had committed in the shameful loss of the Ships in the Voyage
when he came into India: now hearing this news, and how Ormuz, which he thought
he had in his clutches, was by the retreat of Ruy Freira (who would infallibly
write into Spain of the wrong done him in not sending him any forces or succor
during a year's time that he had been upon the attempt, and heinously charge
the Viceroy for it) escaped out of his hands, and become very difficult to be
taken, was infinitely troubled thereat; and indeed I know not how he can excuse
himself to his Master for so great negligences; and some have heard him lament
himself much, and say that it was his own fault. However it were, the talk of
his going to Ormuz became very cold upon these news; and if it was not believed
at first, after this it was held wholly desperate; although to encourage others
to the expedition, he still kept up the report. The same Ship brought news, how
Ruy Freira, whilst he was at the Siege of Ormuz with his few Ships, sent two to
the straight of Mecha, to see whether they could get any booty which might
serve to support his forces; another to Sindi to fetch provisions, and
advertise the Mogul's Ministers there not to send any Ships into Persia,
otherwise he should take them; yet neither those of Mecha, nor this of Sindi
ever returned to him; neither did this Captain send him any thing from Maschat:
so that he was constrained to remove his quarters. Besides, during his being
before Ormuz, he had sent some other Ships to fall upon the Country of those
Arabians whom they call Nactrilu, living upon the Coasts of Persia in the gulf
above Mogostan; and that this enterprise succeeded well enough* they having
made great destruction, and taken much spoil: but afterward the Captains of
the same Ships being greedy of prey, contrary to the order of Ruy Freira, and
against the judgment of one of them who was the head of all the rest (little
obedience is an ordinary thing among the Portugals, and causes infinite
disorders) designed to set upon another place, whose Governor, who was an
Arabian Sceich, at first attempted to make them forbear with good words, saying
that he was their Vassal, etc. but when he saw, that courtesy prevailed not
against their rapacity, he got his men together, and made head against them; so
that assaulting them in a convenient place as they were out of order, he
defeated them, killing many, and amongst those, diverse Captains and Soldiers of
valor; which was no small loss. It was further related, that during the Siege
of Ormuz, the besieged being in great streights for all other things, and which
was most important, of water also, which within failed them and was corrupted;
yet Ruy Freira could not hinder them from ferching plenty of very good water as
often as they pleased at a place of the Island without the Garrison, which they
call Trumbak; where, not through want of Soldiers, (for he might have had
Arabians enough and others of those Countries) but for want of money to pay and
support them, he could never place a guard to prevent the enemies from fetching
as much water as they pleased. They said lastly, that Ruy Freira was at Massat
soliciting for aid, and preparing to return to Ormuz as soon as he should be
provided of what was needful.

Sindi who had lately dwelt in Ormuz and came to Sindi by sea from Guadel,
which is a Port of the Kingdom of Kic and Macran, and was come to Guadal by
land from Sphahan. He was a sagacious person, and affirmed to me for certain
that the Prince of Kic and Macran was a friend and obedient to the Persians,
and that there passed through his Country infinite Cafila's of Merchandise
which came from India to Guadel by Sea, and from thence were transported into
Persia upon Camels; and that this way was not only frequented since the taking
of Ormuz which was declined during that War, but was also very secure and
afforded much profit to the said Prince of Macran, because at Guadel he
received diverse Customs of the abovesaid Merchandises; and before this pass was
open, he had no profit at all. Yet this Jew could not tell me, whether this
friendship and obedience of the Macranite to the Persian, was because the
Prince, who reigned there, was dead and succeeded by his younger Brother, who
many years ago had fled into Persia to this Sciah, as I have elsewhere
mentioned in this Diary; or else because the two Brothers never agreed together,
and that he who reigned still, either for his own interest upon account of the
said pass of the Cafila's, or through fear since the taking of Ormuz, or
perhaps forced by War or other like Accidents, had disposed himself to be
friendly and obedient to the Persian.

January the twenty fifth, The Jesuits of the College of Saint Paul, (this day
being the Feast of their College) began to make part of their Solemnities,
which were to be made for joy of the Canonization of their Saints Ignatio and
Sciavier; the Celebration of which was deferred till now, that more time might
be allotted for preparation. They came forth with a Cavalcade of all their
Collegians divided into three Squadrons under three Banners, one of which
represented the Asiaticks, one the Africans, and another the Europaeans; those
of each Squadron being clothed after the manner of their respective Countries.
Before the Cavalcade, went a Chariot of Clouds with Fame on the top, who
sounding her Trumpet with the adjunction of Music, published the News of the
said Canonization. Two other Chariots accompanied the Cavalcade, the hindermost
of which represented Faith or the Church; the other in the middle was a Mount
Parnassus, with Apollo and the Muses representing the Sciences professed in the
said College; both which Chariots, were also full of very good Music and many
people. Moreover, they removed from place to place amongst the Cavalcade five
great Pyramids upon wheels, drawn by Men on foot, well clothed after the Indian
fashion. Upon the first were painted all the Martyrs of the Order of Jesuits;
upon another, all the Doctors and Writers of Books; upon another, figures of
Men of all such Nations in their proper habits, where the said Order has
foundations, to represent the Languages in which the Fathers of it preach:
Another had abundance of Devises relating to all the Provinces of the said
Religion; and lastly, another had all the Miracles both of Sant' Ignatio, and
San Francesco Sciavier. All of these Pyramids had Epitaphs, Statues, and other
Ornaments both at the pedestal and at the top; so that passing in this manner
through the principal streets of the City, they planted and left the said
Pyramids in several places; one before the Sea or Archiepiscopal Church; one
before the professed House of Giesu; one before the Church of San Paolo, where
at first they kept the College; but by reason of the badness of the Air,
removed it from thence, yet the Church remaining to them, which was sometimes
much frequented and magnificent, but at this day is but meanly provided for; so
that they are still in contest with the City about it, who unwillingly consent
to this changing of the College.

The last they left before the new College, the Church whereof they are wont
to call San Rocco, and by the other Name also; but the Jesuts, resolute to keep
their College by reason of the fairness of the place, notwithstanding the
opposition of the Augustine Friars, who by long and intricate suits, use their
utmost endeavor to hinder them from it, only to the end not to have them
Neighbors, under pretext that they deprive them of the fresh Air, and the
prospect of the Sea: The Jesuits, I say, resolute to abide there, prevailing
hitherto, both against the City, which re-calls them back to San Paolo Vecchio,
for greater convenience of the Students, and against the Augustines, and
against the King himself, who has many times ordained their removal and the
destruction of their new College; nevertheless maintain themselves in
possession of their new and sumptuous Fabric, which also they daily enlarge,
and nominate San Paolo Nuovo; for in India they will have all their Colleges
dedicated to Saint Paul, the Doctor of the Gentiles.

January the nine and twentieth, I went together with the Signori Baracci my
entertainers and other friends, to see and spend a day at Guadalupe, which is a
place of Recreation in the Island of Goa, distant from the City about two
leagues, populous and full of Houses and Gardens of several Portugal Signori,
who for pleasure go to dwell there some time of the year, as you at Rome do to
Frascati which is the ancient Tusculanum. Guadulupe lies at the foot of a
certain Precipice in a plain soil upon a spacious Lake, which at one time of
the year is quite dried up and sown with Rice, so that the prospect is always
very lovely; because the Lake is either full of water, in which grow abundance
of pretty Flowers and aquatick Plants; or else it is all green with Rice, which
is sown before the Lake is totally dry and grows up to maturity before the
Water return; so that it makes a very pretty Show, and the more because this
Water being collected in great rain, is fed also by a small but constantly
running River; and though so kept there for many months, yet causes not any bad
affection of the Air; but through the goodness of the Climate the Air is always
better here then any where else. Nor is the Sea far distant, to wit the shore
of the other more Southern River which forms the Island of Goa on the other
side opposite to the City; and the mouth of that River which makes a secure and
spacious Harbor, where sometimes even the greatest Portugal Ships ride, and in
old time the City stood there, so that they call the place at this day Goa
Vecchia, or old Goa. As we returned, we saw abundance of Villages and Palmeta's
full of all sort of fruits, and many fair and well-kept Churches, as San
Lorenzo, and others within a small distance; so that I had reason to judge this
place to be held the most delicious of Goa.

January the thirtieth, Being in Guadalupe, in the Garden of the House where we
were, which belonged to Signor Simon Gomes our Friend, and Kinsman to the Sigg:
Baracci, I saw a Canella, or Cinnamon Tree, of which some are found in Goa, but
strangers. It Is as big a Tree as any, not a shrub as I imagined; some of the
leaves, which have a taste of Cinnamon, and are pleasant to be masticated, I
keep among my baggage, to show the same in Italy; as also some of the Tree
Trisoe with its odoriferous Flowers, which blow every day and night, and fall
at the approach of day, as I my self saw and observed of one that was planted
before the Gate of our House. This Flower is very like the Jasmin of Catalonia,
but the Canella -- has a yellow one, which is used by the Country People
instead of Saffron with their meats, and upon other occasions. Moreover, I saw
and observed in the Lake two sorts of Flowers, one great, the other very small,
both white, with something of yellow in the midst; the lesser has no green
leaves on the stalk to be seen, and the inner part of the white leaves is full
of thick and long Down: The greater Flower has smooth, long, and strait
leaves, and grows on a Plant whose leaves are large, and almost perfectly
round, swimming on the surface of the water, totally expanded almost like those
of a Gourd. Both these Flowers have a strange property; in the night they are
always closed, in the day always open, displaying themselves at the rising,
and closing at the setting of the Sun; besides, that they are of a very
excellent fragrant smell. I could not keep any to show, because they are so
tender and so full of moisture, especially the lesser sort which is the
fairest, that they fade presently upon being kept in papers, as the Custom is.
The Indians call them -- and tell a Fable of Brahma's being born of one of
these Flowers, and afterward reentring into one again, wherein he has spent
ten thousand years. You see what fine Stories we have here; I leave them with
you and kiss your Hands.

LETTER VIII.
From Goa November. 4. 1624.
MY last I writ to you by the Ship which departed from Goa to Portugal the
first of February, and was the only Ship of that Kingdom that was sent hither
this year: On which Day the Bells rung at Goa, and many rejoycings were made,
particularly, in the Churches of the Jesuits, the Augustines, the Dominicans,
upon News brought of many Martyrs lately Martyred in Japan, amongst which were
many Religious of the abovesaid Orders; and particularly of Jesuits, were
Martyred three Italians, to wit, F. Carlo Spinola, a Genouese of principal
quality: F. Camillo Costanzo, a Calabrese, or rather a Neapolitan, of a Family
whose Estate lies in Calabria: And F. Pietro Paolo, a Neapolitan likewise, if I
mistake not.

February the eighth, A Council of State was held concerning the Viceroys
going to Ormuz; in which, I know not what was resolved, because some talked one
thing, and some another; but as for the Soldiers, it was determined that all
should go, and he that refused was imprisoned, as some were to my knowledge.

February the tenth, As a beginning of the solemnities for the Canonization,
the Jesuits sung a Vespers in the Church of the Profest-house of Giesu. The
night following, they caused a numerous Maskerade of young Students, not
Collegians but Outliers, to pass through the streets on Horseback, clothed in
several rich habits, and following a Standard whereon was pourtrayed the
Effigies of the Saints. The next day there was a solemn Mass in the same
Church, and a Sermon made by the F. Visitor, Andrea Palmuro, at which the
Viceroy was present. In the Evening upon a very great Theater, erected without
the Church in the Piazza, for representing many days together the Life of San
Francesco Sciavier; they caused a Squadron of young men masked in the habits of
Peasants, to dance many gallant Balls with Music.

On the twelfth of February, in the presence of the Viceroy and of all the
Nobility and People of the City, (for whose convenience scaffolds and seats
were erected in the Piazza round about the Theater both for Men and Women) the
first Act of the abovesaid Comedy or Tragedy, (as they said) of the Life of
Santo Sciavier was represented. Of which Tragedy, which was represented by
about thirty persons, all very richly clothed and decked with Jewels; the vast
and no less extravagant Machin whereinto they entered to act the rare Music,
gallant Dances, and various contrivances of Charriots, Ships, Galleys,
Pageants, Heavens, Hells, Mountains, and Clouds, I forbear to speak, because I
have the printed Relation by me.

On the eighteenth of February, The Viceroy being indisposed, the proceedings
were superseded. But in the three following days, by two Acts a day, the whole
Tragedy was rehearsed. It comprehended not only the whole Life, but also the
Death of San Francesco Sciavier, the transportation of his Body to Goa, his
ascension into Heaven; and lastly, his Canonization.

On the seventh of the same month, Mass was sung in the College of San Paolo
Nouvo, and a predication made by F. Flaminio Calo an Italian, upon the
Beatification of the Blessed Luigi Gonzaga, who was also a Father of the
Society. In the Evening, the Portugals of quality passed about the streets in a
Maskerade, accompanied with Chariots and Music; about twelve of us went out of
the House of Sig: Antonio Baraccio, all clothed in the same Livery, which I
took care to get made according to my Fancy, and I ordered it after the
fashion of the ancient Roman Warriers, just as the ancient Emperors use to be
pictured; the colors were Carnation and White, with several Impresses on the
breast, every one after his own Fancy; it appeared very well by night, and
was the best and greatest Body of the whole Maskerade. I bore for my Impress a
Blaze of Flames, with this Italian Word of Tasso, Men dolci si, ma non men
calde al core. Which Impress I have been wont to use frequently since the death
of my Wife Sitti Maani; the Work of my clothes was wholly together Flames,
only distinguished here and there with Tears which showed my grief.

February the eighteenth, In the Morning solemn Mass was sung, and a Sermon
made upon the Canonization of the Saints in San Paolo Vecchio. In the
Afternoon, Lists and a Ring being prepared before the Church of Giesu, many
great Portugal Gentlemen richly clothed, came as to run Carreers both at the
one and the other, giving Divertisement to the Ladies who stood beholding them
on Balconies and Scaffolds. The like they did afterward in the street of San
Paolo Vecchio.

February the nineteenth, A very solemn Procession was made from San Paolo
Vecchio to Giesu, through the principal streets of the City; which Procession
exceeded all the rest, in number of Pageants, Chariots, and Ships, and other
Engines filled with people who represented several things, and good Music,
accompanied with several Dances on Foot, and many other brave devices: Of all
which things I speak not, because I have a printed Relation thereof by me. In
the end of the Procession, was carried by many of the Fathers in their Copes
the Body of San Francesco Sciavier, enclosed in a fair and rich Silver Coffin,
with a Silver Canopie over it made very gallant, and the Effigies of the Saint
behind: Then came a great Standard with the pourtraytures of the Saints,
carried likewise by some of the Fathers; and after that, all the Crosses of
their Parishes of Salsette, and only one company of the Friars of Saint
Francis. Of the other Religions that are in Goa, none appeared here; because
they said they would not go in the Processions of the Jesuits, since the
Jesuits went not in those of others. With this Procession, which ended about
noon, ended also the solemnities for the abovesaid Canonizations.

February the twenty fifth, Thi^ day being the first Sunday of Lent this year,
the Augustine Fathers, according to custom made de i Passi, in reference to the
steps which our Lord made in his Passion, being carried to several places. They
carried in Procession a Christ with the Cross on his shoulders, and many went
along disciplining themselves, being clothed with white sackcloth, gallant and
handsome, very gravely, according to the humor of the Nation. In several places
of the City certain Altars were placed, where the Procession stood still; and
after some time spent in singing, the Christ turned backwards, representing
that passage, Conversus ad Filias Jerusalem, dixit illis, Nolite flere super
me, etc. At which turning of the sacred Image, the people who were very
numerous, and filled the whole streets, lamented and uttered very great cries
of Devotion. At length, the Procession being come to the Church, Della Gratia,
where it ended; after the Augustine Nunns (whose Covent stands near that of the
Friars in the same Piazza) had sung a while, an Image of del volto Santo, of
our Lord's Countenance like that at Rome, was shown to the people gathered
together in the said Piazza, from a window of one of the Bell-turrets which are
on either side the front of the said Church; and so the Solemnity ended. But
the abovementioned Altars in the streets are every Friday during Lent adorned
in the same manner, and visited by the people every day, and also many hours of
the night; just as the Church of Saint Peter at Rome is visited every Friday of
March; and they call this visiting, Corror os Passos, that is, going about and
visiting the steps of our Lord; which serves the people, during this time of
Lent, no less for devotion then for pastime.

March the first, There was also another Procession in Goa of the
Disciplinanti, which I went not to see; the like is made every Friday during
all Lent, and therefore I shall not stand to describe it. I believe there is no
City in the world, where there are more Processions made then in Goa all the
year long; and the reason is, because the Religious are numerous, and much more
then the City needs* they are also of great authority and very rich, and the
People being naturally idle, and addicted to Shows, neglecting other Cares of
more weight, and perhaps more profitable to the Public, readily employ
themselves in these matters; which, however good, as sacred and parts of divine
worship, yet in such a City as this which borders upon Enemies, and is the
Me^ropolis of a Kingdom lying in the midst of Barbarians, and so always at
War, and where nothing else should be minded but Arms and Fleets, seem
according to worldly Policy unprofitable and too frequent, as also so great a
number of Religious and Ecclesiastical persons is burdensome to the State, and
prejudicial to the Militia. In the Evening of every Friday of Lent, there is a
Sermon upon the Passion, in the Church of Giesu; and so likewise in other
Churches, but upon other days and hours. At the end of these Sermons certain
Tabernacles are opened, and diverse figures, representing some passages of the
Passion, (according to the subject of the Sermon) are with lighted Tapers
showed to the People; as one day that of the Ecce Homo; another day, Our Lord
with the Cross upon his shoulders; and the last day, the Crucifix; and so every
day, one thing suitable to the purpose. Oftentimes they make these figures move
and turn, as they made the Robe fall off from the Ecce Homo, and discover the
wounded Body; at which sight the devout People utter prodigious Cries, and the
Women force themselves to shreek out; and the Signore, or Gentlewomen, are so
zealous, that they not only cry out themselves, but make their Maids do so
too, and beat them even in the Church if they do not, and that very lowdly,
whether they have a will to it or no. Strange devotion indeed!

Mar^^ the third, Ten Ships of War were at length sent from Goa to the bar or
mouth of the Sea, in order to depart (as they did) within two or three days
toward Ormuz to Ruy Freira; the General of which was Sig: Sancho de Toar,
Brother to Veedor da Fazenda, who was Treasurer and Captain of one of the
Ships. Our Friend Sig: Michel Pereira Boralho, who was sometimes Captain of the
Galeons, went also; his Brother Giovan Boralho, was killed under Ruy Freira, in
the battle with the English at Giask last year, being Admiral of that Fleet,
which next the General is the prime charge, having been many times before
Capitan Maggiore, as they speak, or General, in the Straight of Ormuz; I make
particular mention of him upon account of his relation to Sig: Michel our
Friend. But such a succor for Ormuz after so long a time* is indeed a very
inconsiderable matter. Yet, they say, other Ships are preparing to be sent
after these.

March the one and twentieth, I took the Altitude of the Sun at Goa with my
Astrolabe, and found him decline at noon from the Zenith toward the South
fourteen degrees, and forty minutes. He was this day in the thirtieth degree of
Pisces, and consequently, in the Aequinoctial without any Declination; so that
without making any Substraction or Addition to this number, Goa, that is, the
City, will lie just so many degrees (14. gr. 40.) from the Aequinoctial toward
the North, and also have the Northern Pole elevated as many.

March the eight and twentieth, News was brought to Goa how the great Moghol
had caused all the English that were at his Court to be slain, and imprisoned
all the rest that were at Surat. As for those that were slain, some say it was
by the Moghol's Order in way of punishment, and that they were hanged and
otherwise executed; Others say, it was by chance, as they endeavored to defend
themselves by Arms, when he sent only to arrest them prisoners, as he did
those of Surat; and this seems most likely. Be it as it will, this Accident may
easily disturb their Commere something in that Country. The occasion is
reported thus. A few days, or months ago, the English in Surat apprehending
themselves aggrieved to a considerable sum by the Mogol's Ministers, (whether
by exaction of Customs, or in Accounts, I know not) to repair the loss by
force, since otherwise they could not, made reprisal of some of the Moghol's
ships, which were come abroad full laden; and being the Mogol's people were not
able to deal with the English at Sea, they were constrained for recovering
their surprised Vessels, to grant the English every thing demanded, and
satisfy them so far as they pretended to be aggrieved. Which thing coming
afterward to the King's knowledge, he caused all of that Nation to be
apprehended wherever found in his Dominions, hereupon happened the slaughter
abovementioned. For my part, I think the English have not managed their
business discreetly in this case; for how is it possible for a few strangers
and inmates to contest with, and get the better of, a great King in his own
Country? And upon rising (...) ^he like differences, I should account it the
best course to accord them with good words, and amicably with the said King, by
complaining of his Ministers, and procuring him to provide in such cases as
well as may be; and this course may succeed happily: Otherwise, if redress can
be obtained, then, before a manifest feud, 'twere best to get out of his power,
and war upon him securely, not in his own Country where there are so many
people, and the King, undoubtedly, has more power then any other. I believe,
the English made this attempt, upon supposition that the Moghol has great need
of the Sea, and that to the end his Ships might have free passage therein,
without being molested by the English, he would suffer what they pleased. But
herein, in my opinion, they are grossly mistaken; because the Moghol is a very
great and wealthy King, whose Revenews arise from his own Lands, and not from
the Sea; and to whom that little which is to be had from the Sea, (how great
soever it may be) is nothing, and nothing he accounts it; because it accrues
rather to some small Captain of his, as the Governor of Surat, and the like,
then to the King himself: So that, What is he concerned for it? But indeed he
will be concerned for such an injury done to him in his own jurisdiction, as
the English have done by making reprisal of Ships, which Princes much inferior
to the Moghol would not have suffered from any admitted as Friends into their
Countries. Besides, the grievances alleged by the English were but pretenses,
and the Moghol's Ministers had their Reasons for them; wherefore the case ought
to have been heard before falling to violence; and let the matter be how it
will, 'twas just for him to be Judge in his own Country, and that this respect
should be shown him, if the English would have taken this course; if not, or if
he would not do them Justice, they were always at liberty to go out of his
power, and so make War against him by Sea upon better terms. Concerning the
Affairs of the Moghol with his Son, they said that Sultan Chorrom having been
twice routed, was at last retreated with some few followers into the Dominions
of Cutab-Sciah; and that his Father had given over pursuing him, and being
retired to his own Court, left him there in quiet; that Cutab-Sciah did not
assist him out of awe to the Father, nor yet drive him out of his Territories
out of respect to himself, but let him enjoy the possession of a certain small
circuit in his Country to which he had retired.

Hollanders which come to Surat; perhaps because the Hollanders are minded to
set up a Traffic thither too, as I understood from a good hand last year at
Surat. In the mean time other Ships and Galeons are preparing at Goa to be sent
to Ormuz.

April the tenth, Three Galeons fraighted with Victual departed from Goa to Ruy
Freira for the war of Ormuz, as two other Ships had done a few days before
besides the abovementioned ten; and order was given for three other Galeons to
go from Mozambique with people sufficient to arm all the six; because the
former three of Goa carried no Soldiers but only Seamen. They carried also
from Goa a Petard, wherewith they said they intended to attempt the little
false Gate of Ormuz which stands toward the Sea; and several other
preparations of War.

On the twenty ninth of the same month, being the day of S. Pietro Martire,
who, they say, was the Founder of the Inquisition against Heretics, the
Inquisitors of Goa made a Solemnity before their House of the Inquisition which
is in the Piazza of the Cathedral, and was sometimes the Palace of Sabaio
Prince of Goa when the Portugals took it, whence it is still called la Piazza
di Sabaio. After solemn Mass had been sung in the Church of San Dominico, as
Vespers had been the day before, in presence of the Inquisitors, who coming to
fetch the Friars in Procession, repaired thereunto in Pontificalibus; in the
evening many carreers were run on hors-back by the Portugal-Gentry, invited
purposely by the Inquisitors; and a day or two after (for this Evening was not
sufficient for so many things) there was in the same Piazza a Hunting or
Baiting of Bulls after the Spanish fashion; but the Beasts being tame and
spiritless afforded little sport; so that I had not the curiosity to be present
at it. This is a new Festival lately instituted by the present Inquisitors,
who, I believe, will continue it yearly hereafter.

May the tenth, a Packet-boat from Mascat arrived at Goa with Letters dated
April the twenty fourth, confirming what had some days before been rumor'd,
that the King of Persia had taken Baghdad, and the Persians were about to go
against Bassora by Sea, but were diverted from their design by the Portugal
Fleet which they heard was preparing to succor that City; besides some Ships
of theirs which they continually keep there in favor of the Turks against the
Persians to guard the Mouth of the River, which is Euphrates and Tigris joined
together. The same Boat brought news also that twelve Ships were already
departed from Mascat under the conduct of my friend Sig. Michele Pereira to
begin a new Siege of Ormuz; and that Ruy Freira waited for the Galeons that he
might go thither too with the greater Fleet. If it be true, that Sciah-Abbas
has taken Baghdad, I am confident that at the long run Bassora will fall into
his hands too: if the Portugals may hinder him by sea, they cannot by land; and
it is a clear case, that if he has Baghdad, he intends also to have the port of
Bassora, which is of great importance. That he has taken Baghdad may very well
be true, during the present ill State of the Turkish Affairs, after the late
tumults in that Court, and the death of Sultan Suleiman who was lately murdered
and his formerly deposed Uncle Sultan Mustafa restored to the Empire, as I was
lately assured here, by an Armenian who told me that he was at Constantinople
in the time of these Revolutions; and that Sultan Mustafa was very loath to
reassume the Government by reason of the ill deportment of the Ministers; and
that he would have no more Women or Concubines, but had married and dismissed
all that were in the Seraglio; that, if any woman came into his presence, he
ran at her with his Poniard, professing to lead a chaste and religious life, not
meaning to have other Successors then his Brother's two Sons, the elder of
which is Sultan Mahomad Son of Sultana Kiosme, who, I always believed, would
by his Mother's Arts one day come to rule, and now without doubt, whether she
be living or not, (if the abovesaid relations be true) will at least reign
after his Uncle Mustafa. Now forasmuch as in these violent mutations of
Empires, the Government always suffers deterioration, because without some
evil disposition of the Government such violences in Royal Families cannot
arise; therefore, I say, perhaps this ill posture of affairs has afforded the
Sciah occasions making himself Master of Baghdad, especially if the Tyrant
Bechir Subasci, who had in a manner usurped it to himself, have given it into
his power; (which is an easy thing even in the good State of the Turkish
Affairs) being perhaps afraid of Sultan Mustafa, who, they say, is very prudent
and wholly intent to reform the Disorders of the Empire without caring to
attend foreign enterprises; whence perhaps having an eye too upon the
Disorders of Baghdad, he was about to raise a strong Army for removing the said
Tyrant, who by this means became necessitated to yield it to the Sciah.
Nevertheless in these matters I have some doubt, because the same Armenian told
me, that Sultan Mustafa had made peace with the Persian for twenty years; and
if the taking of Baghdad be true, it is a breaking of the peace; which amongst
the Moors, and considering the Customs of Sciah Abbas is not impossible. At
present I suspend my belief, and desire to have more certain and particular
informations of these matters, of which in Goa there is little plenty.

Nicolao de Silva Veador da Jazenda, or Treasurer at Mascat, to one of the
Inquisitors, wherein he signified to him that he understood by the Letters of
the French Consul at Aleppo, that at Rome Gregory XV. was dead, and a new Pope
already chosen, Card. Masseo Barberini, about fifty four years old, who had
assumed the name of Urban VIII. The same Letter further advertised that in
Spain the Marriage between the Prince of England, and the Infanta was
celebrated upon the day of our Lady's Nativity in September; and that the
Infant Don Carlo was to accompany her into England, and from thence pass to
his Government of Flanders; that in England the Catholics had public Churches
open, and enjoyed Liberty of Conscience: That in Italy the business of the
Valtolin had been referred to his Holiness; but Pope Gregory died without
determining it: That the King of Spain kept a great Army ready in Milan about
it; and that a League was made against him in Italy by other Princes; that some
said Don Carlo of Spain was to marry the Heiress of Lorrain; and other like
news, which being of things either uncertain or future, I make small account
of, till I see the issue.

May the seventeenth, By a Merchants Ship from Bassora, we had more certain
intelligence by Luigi Medices, of Ramiro the Venetian Consul at Aleppo, that
Pope Gregory XV. died on the twenty ninth of July 1623. having been sick only
five days. The Relation of the Conclave says that the Pope died on the eight
of July, the Cardinals entered into the Conclave on the nineteenth, and that on
the sixth of August Urban VIII. was created Pope. That Card. Montato died a
little before the Pope, and Card. Ludovisio was made Vice Chancellor in his
stead; and the Chamberlainship, being vacant by the death of Aldobrandino, was
conferred upon the young Cardinal of the same name. That the new Pope Urban was
sick for some days after his Election; but afterward recovering was crowned
upon the day of S. Michael the Archangel. That besides the Pope, almost all the
Cardinals fell sick through the inconveniences of the Conclave in so hot a
season; and many of them died, as Pignatelli, Serra, Sauli, Gozzadino, and
Sacrati; and the Card. Gherardi and Aldobrandino remaining still grievously
sick; and that of the Conclavists there died about sixty; which indeed was a
great number, for a Conclave that lasted so short a while. That Telli (Tilly)
the Emperor's General, had given a great rout to Alberstat; and the Emperor's
Affairs in Germany passed very well. That 'twas true, a confederacy was made
against Spain about the business of the Valtolin between France, Venice, and
Savoy, but that it will proceed no further, because Spain had deposited the
Valtolin in the hands of the Pope. That the Prince of Vrbin was dead, and
consequently that State would fall to the Church; which is a thing of much
importance. That at Venice the Doge Pruili was dead, and a new Doge already
elected, one Contarini an eminent Person. That there was a great Plague, and
that the King of France had subdued almost all the Garrisons of the Heretics,
except Rochel, which he also hoped shortly to reduce to obedience. That the
Espousals were passed between the Infanta of Spain and the King of England's
Son, with hope that he is already a Catholic. That they have given her in
dower the pretensions of Holland and Zealand, and money, on condition that
Liberty of Conscience be granted in England and four Churches for Catholics
built in London, which was already executed, public Writings thereof going
about in print; besides diverse other Affairs of Europe of less consideration.

May the nineteenth, One Ventura da Costa, a Native of Canara was married. He
was a domestic servant to Sig: Alvaro da Costa, a Priest and our Friend, Lord
of a Village near Goa; for whose sake, who was willing to honor his servant's
wedding in his own House, I and some other Friends went thither to accompany
the Bride and the Bridegroom to the Church of San Blagio, a little distant in
another Village, which was the Parish of the Bride, where the Ceremonies were
performed in the Evening for coolness sake. The Company was very numerous,
consisting of many Portugal Gentlemen, such, perhaps, as few other Canarini
have had at their Marriages. The Spouses came under Umbrella's of Silk
garnished with silver, and in other particulars the Ceremonies were according
to the custom of the Portugals; only I observed, that according to the use of
the Country, in the Company before the Married Persons, there marched a party
of fourteen or sixteen men odly clothed after the Indian fashion, to wit, naked
from the girdle upward, and their Bodies painted in works with white Sanders,
and adorned with bracelets and necklaces of Gold and Silver, and also with
flowers and turbants upon their heads, in several gallant fashions and
streamers of several colors hanging behind them: From the girdle downwards,
over the hose which these Canarini use to wear short like ours, they had
variously colored clothes girt about them with streamers, or flying laps,
hanging down a little below the knee; the rest of the leg was naked, saving
that they had sandals on their feet. These fine fellows danced all the way both
going and returning, accompanying their dances with chaunting many Verses in
their own Language, and beating the little snappers which they carried in their
hands, after the fashion of the Country, formerly taken notice of at Ikkeri.
And indeed the dances of these Canarini are pleasant enough; so that in the
Festivities made at Goa for the Canonization of the Saints Ignatio and
Sciavier, though in other things they were most solemn and sumptuous; yet, in
my conceit, there was nothing more worthy to be seen for delight, then the many
pretty and jovial dances which intervened in the Tragedy. The Married Couple
being returned from Church to the Bride's House, we were entertained with a
handsome Collation of Sweetmeats in the yard, which was wholly covered over
with a Tent, and adorned with Trees and green boughs, the Company sitting
round, and the Married Couple on one side at the upper end upon a great Carpet
under a Canopy. After which we all returned home, and the Husband stayed that
night to sleep in his Wife's House.

May the twentieth, A Galley of the Fleet expected from Mozambique arrived at
Goa. It brought Sig: Don Nugro Alvares, (sometimes General there, and Supreme
Governor of all that Coast of Cafuria, comprising under his Government the
Rivers of Coama, Mombace, and as much of Africa as the Portugals have from Capo
di Buono Esperanza, to the St^eight of Meka) and with him a Jesuit that was a
Bishop, one of those that were to go into Aethiopia. The Patriarch designed
thither, being also a Jesuit, remained behind in another Galeot, as likewise
did the Ships of the last years Portugal Fleet, which came on by little and
little. (...) brought News of the miserable wrack of a Ship called San
G^^^^nni, which two years before set forth from Goa for Portug^^ ^^ry rich; and
meeting with the Dutch by the way, after a long fight being totally shattered,
ran a ground upon the Coast of Cafuria; so that, saving the people remaining
after the fight, and the Jewels, all was lost: Which people, after this
disaster, refusing both the offer of good entertainment made them by the Lord
of the place, who was a Friend to the Portugals, all upon advice sent to
Mozambique they might have passage thither; and also his counsel to travel far
within Land, where he said, they would have less trouble in passing many
Rivers, which otherwise they would meet with, and find an unarmed, and more
hospitable people; but unadvisedly after the inconsiderate humor of the
Portugals resolving to go by land to Mozambique, and travel always far from the
Sea amongst barbarous inhospitable people who eat humane flesh; and with-all,
not ^ehaving themselves well with them in their passage, but out of a foolish
temerity giving many occasions of disgusts, they were assaulted in many places
by the said Cafiri, often spoiled and robbed, and many of them killed; so that
of the Women that were with them, some were taken, others stripped naked, till,
after a thousand inconveniences and sufferings, and, as some say, about eight
months traveling on foot, during which they were fain to wade through
abundance of Rivers, at last no more of the company arrived at Mozambique but
twenty seven persons; all the rest being either slain by the way, or dead of
hardships, excepting some few that were kept slaves by the Cafiri; amongst
which, was a Portugal Gentlewoman of quality, whom they kept to present to
their King, without hope, I believe, of ever being delivered. A misery indeed
worthy of compassion. The Jewels sent from Goa to be sold in Portugal, were
almost all saved and deposited at Mozambique in the Misericordia; some say to
be restored to the owners, and others say, at the instance of the King's
Officer, who pretends the King's Right to them as shipwrackt goods; yet most
conclude, that the case will not be so judged, but that they will be restored
to the owners, upon payment of some small matter to those that saved them.

May the three and twentieth, I visited the abovementioned Goa, at the
College of San Paolo Novo. He was called Dom Joanno da Rocha, and nominated
but not consecrated Bishop of Heliopoli.

On the twenty sixth, I visited in the Covent of our Lady della Gratia, F. Fra:
Manoel della Madre di Dio, formerly known to me in Persia, and now Prior of the
Covent of Sphahan, who the day before arrived at Goa in a Shallop which had
been long expected and judged lost, having been seven months in coming from
Mascat. He said, he came about Affairs of his Order and the Covents of Persia,
(for besides that which I left at Sphahan, they have since made one at Sciraz,
and another at Bassora, and daily multiply) yet with-all it was rumored, that
he was sent by the King of Persia, to treat with the Viceroy about According
the matters of Ormuz; and I believe it, although he spoke nothing of it
himself; otherwise, methinks it is not likely they would have let him come out
of Persia without the King's express License, or that the King would have
granted it in time of War, unless he had come about some particular business
of his. He informed me that all my friends in Persia were well, and so did a
Letter of F: Fra: Giovanni to his Provincial at Goa, wherein mention was made
of me, giving me intelligence of the welfare of all my Friends, and how Sitti
Laali my Cousin, had brought forth a Son whom she had named Avedik, from Chogia
Avedik his Father's Uncle; which News was stale, for I knew it before my coming
out of Persia; and indeed, all the Letters F. Manoel brought were of a very old
date; to me he brought none, because my Friends there conceived I was gone out
of India into Europe.

May the seven and twentieth, A Ship of the Portugal Fleet that was coming from
Mozambique, arrived in the Port of Mormogon; it entered not into the River of
Goa, because the mouth of the River, by reason of the lateness of the season
was unsecure, and began to be stopped; for every year all the mouths of the
Rivers and Ports of this Coast are filled with sand during the time of Rain,
wherein the West wind blows very tempestuously, and are opened again in
September when the Rain ends. The Port of Mormogon, as I have elsewhere said, is
in the same Island of Goa, in the other mouth of the more Southern River, where
sometimes old Goa stood, by which goods are conveyed by Boat from the Ships to
the City, but by a longer way, going behind round the Island.

May the twenty eighth, In the Evening at the time of Ave Maria, the Bells of
almost all the Churches of Goa, saving that of the Jesuits, were rung for the
Beatification of two Friars, of the Order of San Domenico, whereof this Ship
had brought News.

May the twenty ninth, Another Portugal Ship of the Fleet arrived, and within
two or three days after, all the other Ships expected from Mozambique; and in
one of them, the Jesuit designed Patriarch into Aethiopia, whither he with two
Bishops, whereof one was dead by the way, and many other Jesuits, was sent at
the instance of the King of the same Country, who, they say, is called Sultan
Saghed, and professes himself a Roman Catholic already, with great hopes of
reducing all that Kingdom to the Church in short time. As for the progress
which the Jesuits affirm daily to be made in those Countries, being I know
nothing of them, but by the information of others, I refer you to their Annual
Letters; and it suffices me to have touched here what I saw concerning the
same, to wit, the expedition of this Patriarch, Bishops, and many Fathers who
were sent thither by several ways, attempting to open a passage into those
Countries, lest such Commerce might be hindered by the Turks who are Masters of
some of those Passes; So that the F. Visitor of the Jesuits told me, they had
this year sent many people for Aethiopia, not only by the Arabian Gulf, and
the Territories of the Turks bordering upon it, but also by Cascem a Country of
Arabia governed by Arabians themselves; by Mozambique and Mombaza, Countries of
the Portugals, in the Coast of Africa; by Cafaria, Angola, and Congo; that so
by these several ways they might send enough, being the King demanded at least
two hundred of their Fathers. And it is manifest, that if the Conversion goes
forward, as they presuppose, the Country is so large that there will be work
enough for a greater number of Fathers and Religious Catholics.

June the second, We accompanied, with a solemn Cavalcade, Andrea de Quadro,
from the House of his Godfather Sig: Gasparo di Melo, Captain of the City, to
the Jesuits College; where, by the hands of the same Fathers, was given him the
degree of Master of Arts, that is, of Philosophy; the said Fathers having by
Apostolical Authority jurisdiction in India to confer the said degree, and that
of Doctorate; for which reason I here have taken notice of this action.

June the seventh, I visited in the said College the Patriarch of Aethiopia
one of the society, named Don Alfonso Luigi de Santi; he told me much News from
Rome, and of several of my Relations whom he knew; but it was stale News. The
Patriarch and his Fathers had been informed of me, both by the Fathers of Goa,
and by a Portugal Soldier called Pero Lopez, whom I knew in Persia, and who
went to Rome with my Letters, where he lodged many days in my House, from
thence passed into Spain, and at length returned into India; and came from
Mozambique to Goa, in the same Ship with the Patriarch. To gratify whose
desires of seeing me, upon their informations, I visited him; he not only
showed me many courtesies, and offers of serving me, with like ceremonious
words, but himself and all his Fathers entered into an intimate Friendship with
me, conditioned to hold mutual correspondence of Letters from Aethipia to Rome,
and where ever else I should happen to be. We discoursed of many things, and he
inquired of me concerning his Voyage, and how Fathers might pass at any time
into Aethiopia from other parts, particularly, from Egypt. I informed him of
the Aethiopick Language, and some good Books for learning it, etc.

June the sixteenth, If I mistake not in Computation, for which I refer my self
to better diligence (which I shall use with their Ephemerides of this year, in
case I can procure the same) the Moors were to begin their Rasandhan or Fast of
their 1633 year of the Hegira.

June the twenty fourth, Being in a Window to see the careers of the Cavaliers
who ran in the Street before the Viceroy according to the yearly custom in Goa
upon S. John's Day, I happened to meet with Sig. Luis de Mendoza General of the
Fleet wherewith I went to Calecut, and Sig. Bento or Benedetto, or Freites
Mascarenhas, in a Portugal Habit, who a few years before was taken by Pirates of
Algiers, and carried a slave to Barbary; whence being redeemed and returned
into his own Country, he was favorably looked upon by his King, and sent again
into India Captain of a Galeon. This Cavalier, besides the relation of his own
misadventures told me how Qara Sultan (who in my time was sent Ambassador from
the King of Persia into Spain in answer to the Embassy of Don Garcia de Silva
Figueroa, and travailed in the same Ship, before it was taken by the Pirates)
died by the way, having first substituted another of his company to perform his
charge; which other Ambassador was taken with the said Ship, and carried a
slave into Argiers; whereof notice being given to the Persian Ambassador at
Constantinople, order was expected from thence what to do with him; which not
coming before this Gentleman was delivered he could not tell what the issue
was, but left him still a prisoner in Argiers.

August the fifth, The Indians were to celebrate their solemn Festival of
Washing and other Ceremonies accustomed to be performed at Narva, and mentioned
by me in the last years relation to be celebrated on the seventeenth of the
same Month. And because this year the Feast Day fell twelve days sooner in our
year then in the last, I perceived that the Indian year must be Lunar; or if it
be Solar, as I think I have heard, it cannot be just or equal, but to be
adjusted requires some great and extravagant intercalation. I went not to Narva
to see the Feast, because the place lies beyond the River in the Territory of
the Moors, who at this time stood not upon good Terms with the Portugals.
Neither did the Gentiles of Goa go thither, for the same reason; and if I was
not mis-enformed, they expected a safe conduct from Idal-Sciah from Vidhiapor,
to go thither another day.

August the ninth, Two hours and forty minutes before Noon (if the Calculation
and Observation of Christofero Borano or Boro be true) the Sun was in the
Zenith of Goa, and began to decline toward the South.

August the twenty fourth, On which day the Feast of St Bartholomew uses to be
celebrated, certain Officers deputed for that purpose with other Principal
Persons entrusted with the superintendency of the Fields and Agriculture,
offered to the Cathedral Church, and afterward also to the Viceroy, the
first fruits of the Fields, to wit, of Rice newly eared, which is the most
substantial of the fruits of the Territory of Goa. I was told likewise that
they made a Statue of an Elephant with Rice-straw, which I know not whether
they carried about with them or set up in some Piazza. This custom is practiced
annually upon the said day, because at that time precisely the said fruit
begins to ripen.

August the twenty seventh, One Galeon (of four that were coming from Mascat,
whither they had been sent last April with Provisions) arrived at Goa; they
came, by the Viceroy's Order, to transport, if occasion required, new succors
to be sent to Ormuz. This Ship related, that the other three were possibly
returned back again to the straight of Ormuz, for fear of some Dutch Vessels
which hovered thereabouts; but this being driven out to Sea, and having lost
its company in the night, was forced to come directly forwards. It related
further, that Ormuz had been again besieged a good while by the Captains of Ruy
Freira, to wit, first by Michel Pereira Boraglio our friend, and afterward by
another, whom he sent thither by turns, because thereby the task would be
easier to the besiegers: but that, at the parting of these Galleys from Mascat,
Ruy Freira himself was upon the point to go to the said Siege with all the Men
and Vessels with oars he had, which were about twenty or twenty five Galeots,
and many less Morisco Vessels called Ternata's: a small preparation indeed to
take Ormuz withal.

September the second, a little before daylight, The safe arrival of the
annual Portugal Fleet was congratulated by all the Bells of Goa. It consisted
of two Merchant's Ships, lesser and lighter then the Carracks which use to come
other years; one Galeon laden also with Merchandise, and ordered to return with
the same Ships, in case it should not be necessary at Goa for the war; and five
other Galeons equipped for war which were to remain at Goa with all the Soldiery
which was numerous and good, to be employed as occasion should require. The
General of this Armada was Sig. Nugno Alvares Botelho; the Admiral Sig. Giovan
Pereira Cortereal, to whose diligence the happy and speedy arrival of this
Fleet is attributed; the like not having come to pass in many years, and that
through the fault and greediness both of the Pilots and Merchants: for before,
without keeping order or rule in the voyage or obedience to the General, every
one endeavored to have his Ship arrive first and alone. But this Sig. Gio.
Pereira Cortereal having written and presented a printed Discourse about this
matter to the King, his Majesty approved the same and gave strict charge that
his Prescription should be observed with all exactness; and hence proceeded the
good success of this Voyage. This Fleet brought news, that the Prince of
England was departed from Spain without effecting the marriage between the two
Crowns, because the Parliament of England would not consent to it: which
considering all the preceding transactions seems to me a strange case, and
perhaps the like has scarce happened between Princes; unless possibly there be
some unknown mystery in the business: That the Frosts having obstructed the
mouth of a River in Holland had caused a great inundation, which broke the
banks or dikes whereby they keep out the sea, and done much damage to the
Country: That twelve Ships which set forth from thence for India, being beset
by the Spanish Fleet of Dunkirk, were partly sunk and partly shattered, so that
they could not come to India. That the Catholics, in August last, upon the
precise day whereon Urban VIII. was created Pope, had obtained a signal victory
in Germany against the Heretics. That great Fleets were preparing in England,
Spain, and France, for unknown designs. That the King of Spain was at Sevil,
and the Queen had brought him forth a Daughter who was dead; but the Daughter
of the Conte di Vidigueira, present Viceroy here in India, had brought him
forth a Son; at which the Queen was much displeased with the King. And that in
Portugal it was expected that the Archduke Leopold should go to govern that
Kingdom.

September the fifth, the other three Galeons, which I said were to come from
Mascat, arrived at Goa. The cause of their delay was, as was rightly
conjectured, that they had discovered an English Ship upon those Coasts, and
spent some time in giving her chase, but in vain, through the fault perhaps of
the Portugal Captain who was loath to fight her: for one of them made up to her,
and fought a while with her Artillery, but perceiving her companions came not
to do the like, gave over, and having given and received many shots, let her go
without doing her hurt, and returned to her company. The English Ship showed
much bravery; for seeing three Vessels coming against her, she waited to give
them battle without flying. The abovesaid Galeons brought Letters which
signified that Mascat was molested with wars by the neighboring Arabians;
which, I conceive, may be upon some confederacy with the King of Persia,
thereby to divert the Portugals from the Siege of Ormuz. That Ormuz was well
provided with Men and Victuals; that nevertheless they hoped it would be taken,
if good succor were sent from Goa, particularly of Galeons to fight with the
Dutch Ships which were expected to come to the Ports of Persia to assist Ormuz,
and recruit it with fresh soldiers. Of the English there is no speech, because
considering the late transactions in Spain, it is not known whether there will
be War or Peace with them henceforward, though perhaps the Viceroy may know
something in private.

September the twenty ninth, A Jesuit, whose name I know not, was consecrated
here in their Church of Giesu, Archbishop of Angamali, and as they speak in
the Portugal Language, da Serra, that is, of the Mountain, where live the
Christians whom they call di San Tome, of the Chaldean Rite, and sometimes
subject to the Schismatical Patriarks of Babylonia, but now of late years (by
the diligence of the Portugals) Catholics, and obedient to Rome; his residence
is in Cranganor, five leagues from Cocin Northwards.

October the one and twentieth, Proclamation was made by the Viceroy's Order
for the Soldiers to come and receive Pay, in Order to their going to Ormuz.
The Armado wherein they were to go, was very long in preparing through want of
money; which the Viceroy was very diligent to raise, both from the Merchants,
and also from the Gentiles, who consented to pay a certain Annual Sum, (or
else a greater once for all) that License might be granted them to celebrate
Marriages in Goa, according to their own Rite, which ordinarily was not allowed
them. But all these courses were not sufficient to dispatch the Fleet with that
diligence which was desired; and in the mean time it was said, that many Dutch
or English Ships infested the Ports of Ciaul, Bassaim, and Dabul, without
control; by all which it appears to me, that matters in India go every day
from bad to worse.

October the one and thirtieth, News came to Goa that Melik who a good while
had succesfully warred against Adil-Sciah, at length in a victory had taken one
Mulla Muhhamed, General of Adil-Sciah's Army, and much favored by him; who by
his ill ^^meanor toward the said Melik, (even so far as to endeavor to g^^ him
poisoned) was the occasion of the present War, wherein Melik's chief intent
was to revenge himself of the said Mulla Muhhamed: Whom being thus taken, they
say, he beheaded and caused him in that manner to be carried about his Camp
with this Proclamation; That this Traitor Mulla Muhhamed, the cause of the
War, and present discords between Adil-Sciah and Nizam-Sciah, (to whom this
Melik is Governor) otherwise Friends and Allies, was thus in the Name of his
Lord Adil-Sciah, as a Traitor and disturber of the public Peace, put to death.
By which act Melik meant to signify that he had no evil intention against
Adil-Sciah, but only took up Arms for the mischiefs done him by Mulla
Muhhamed, whom he desired to remove from the Government of Adil-Sciah and the
world. Yet it was not known how Adil-Sciah received this action, and what end
the business would have. In this War, they say, the Moghol favored Adil-Sciah
against Melik, and supplied him with 20000. Horse: but, be that how it will,
Adil-Sciah has hitherto always gone by the worst, and sometimes been in great
danger; Melik, who is a brave Captain, having overrun all the State almost to
the Gates of Vidhiapor, which is the Royal City of Adil-Sciah, where he has
sometimes been forced to shut himself up as 'twere besieged. A few months
before, Adil-Sciah put one of his principal Wives to death, for intelligence
which she was said to hold with Melik, and for having been a party in promoting
this War, out of design to remove Adil-Sciah from the Government, as one
become odious to his own people, either through his covetousness or inability
(being infirm) and place his Son in his room, who therefore was in danger too
of being put to death by his Father, when the conspiracy was discovered.
Further news came that Adil-Sciah had deposed from the government, and
imprisoned the Governor of the maritime Territories bordering upon Goa, who
had lately given the Portugals so many disgusts; which seemed to signify that
he was minded to give them some satisfaction: that he had given the place to
Chogia Riza or Rezeb a Persian, lately Governor of Dabul, who being in greater
employments at Court will send a Deputy, and from whom being prudent, and
formerly a friend to the Portugals, they hope better dealings.

November the first, The Confraternity della Misericordia made a solemn
Procession in the evening (as they use to do yearly upon this day) going with
two Biers from their own Church to the Church of our Lady de la Luz, to fetch
the bones of all such as had been executed this year, and buried under the
Gallows; which they carry in Procession, first to this latter, and then to
their own Church to bury, where also they make solemn Exequies for them.

November the second, In the Evening the Dominicans made their solemn
Procession del Rosario with much Solemnity, and so also the next morning,
having deferred the same fr^^ the first Week of October till now, because the
rain (...) disturb it in October. This day news came to Goa, that a Ship
belonging to the Mogul's subjects, at her departing for Gidda from the Port of
Diu, had there given security to return to the same Port to pay the usual
Customs to the Portugals which would have amounted to above five thousand
Scierifines; but the Ministers of Diu contented with small security, which was
no more then four thousand Scierifines: yet when the said Ship came back very
rich, she would not touch at Diu, little caring to discharge the small
security, but put in at a place upon that Coast belonging to the Mogul between
Diu and Cambaia. The Portugals, understanding this, sent the Armada of Diu
consisting of small Vessels with Oars, to fetch her in to Diu by force; and the
Ship refusing to obey, they fell to fighting. In the fight those of the Ship
killed amongst others the chief Commander of the Portugal Armada; yet the
Armada so beset the Ship that they first forced her to run on shore, and then
burned her. It was not true that the General was slain; the Ship was taken
indeed, but empty; the Moors having had time to save most of their wealth upon
Land, but however they suffered much damage. By this accident it may be
doubted whether some disgust be not likely to ensue between the Mogul and the
Portugals; and I know not whether it may not somewhat retard the Portugal
Armada and Cafila which was ready to set sail for Cambaia.

November the fourth, The Armada of Colletta departed from Goa to fetch
provision; it was to go to Cocin, and therefore the newly consecrated
Archbishop of Serra, imbarqu'd in it to go to his residence; so also did F.
Andrea Palmiero, Visitor of the Jesuits, my friend, to visit that his Province;
and F. Laertio Alberti an Italian, with many other Jesuits who came out of
Europe this year to go and reside there. The same day, an Almadia or small Boat
of Ciaul came to Goa with news of a Vessel arrived there from Mascat, and also
a Ship from Bassora; both which reportted that Ormuz was in much distress by
the Siege, so that many Moor's, soldiers, escaped out of the Town to Ruy
Freira; after whose arrival, the Siege proceeded prosperously for us, with good
order and much hope; yet in case the succors were sent from Goa, which Ruy
Freira very importunately desired. At Bassora, they said, all was quiet. This
will be the last that I shall write to you from Goa, being ready to depart out
of India (if it please God) within a few days, and desirous to return to my
Country, where I may see and discourse with you the first object that I
propound to my self at my revisiting our dear Italy. However I shall not omit
in my way to acquaint you with my adventures, to the end my Letters may forerun
me, and be the harbingers of my arrival. I reserve many things to tell the Sig.
Dottore, and Signor. Colletta, and those other Gentlemen my friends, who, I am
confident, accompany my prayers to God for my prosperous arrival; from whom
wishing of you all happiness, I rest, etc.

LETTER IX.
From Mascat January 19. 1625.
HAving determined to return to my Country, not by way of Portugal but by that
of Bassora, and from thence by land to Aleppo, which seemed to me the best and
shortest; and having accordingly obtained license of the Viceroy, (who in this
and other matters has always done me many favors) which license was
necessary, because in Goa it is rigorosly prohibited to all to go into Europ by
this way of Turkey; and being prepared with every thing necessary by the
opportunity of the Cafila and Armada which went from Goa for Cambaia, in which
there was one Ship which was to go from Ciaul to Bassora, I resolved to
embarque in a Ship of the Armada that was to go to Ciaul, intending there to go
aboard that which was to go to Bassora. In order whereunto having taken leave
of all my friends, and at last got the Viceroy's license, who was then at
Pangi, and gave me certain Letters of importance written to his King, which I
was to consign to the Portugal Agent at Rome, that he might transmit the same
to his Master; on the fifteenth of November about evening, I went down the
River in a Mansina or Wherry to the mouth of the Sea, and there went aboard the
Ship I had taken, whereof Francesco Gomez was Captain.

In this Voyage there came with me Marian Tinatin, Eugenia Cingala her servant,
a Venetian Merchant, my Friend named Marc' Antonio Lanza, whom I took for my
company, with his servant named Giovanni, Michael a servant given me by Sig:
Antonio Baracho, to accompany me to Rome, a trusty person, to whom he had
therefore given liberty; and another servant of his, named Giovan Boracho, who
was to accompany me only to Ciaul, whither also his Master Antonio intended
shortly to follow him.

November the sixteenth, Before day we set sail, and met the Armada of Chebore,
Diu Bossaria, and Ciaul, (Countries on the North of Goa) sailing to Goa; at
night we cast Anchor short of the Rocks, called Los Ilheos quemados. Our course
was always Northwards, the Land always winding from us on the Right Hand.

November the twentieth, We set sail about daybreak, and at three a clock
after noon cast Anchor a little short of Ciaul, because the wind was contrary,
in a Bay, where there is a Village called Pascet; here we stayed three days in
expectation of some ill-arm'd Vessels of the Cafila, which lagg'd behind.

On the four and twentieth at night, We entered the Port of Ciaul, which is
within the jaws of a fair River. I sent my servant to look for a House, and in
the mean time remained for this night in the Ship, but the next day we landed
with all our Goods.

November the nine and twentieth, News came to Ciaul that Surat to Ormuz, with
intent to help the Persians against the Portugals; it being suspected that they
have made some agreement with the King of Persia, to have a share of that
place, and to inhabit it. Some said the Ships were four; others, that seven
more were preparing at Surat, with a Petache for the same design, either all
Dutch, or Dutch and English together. Be it as it will, the arrival of
Enemy-Ships at Ormuz, before the Portugal Armada, I account very prejudicial to
the Portugals design upon the place; for it is difficult for Ruy Freira to
hinder them only with an Armada of Oars from relieving it, which may be done in
one day; and being done, it is sufficient to prolong the War and the Siege for
another year. And if it be true, that so many Ships of those Heretics are
going not only to Ormuz, but also to Mascat and all the Coasts of India, I
look upon it as a matter of dangerous consequence; it being rumor'd not without
ground that they are agreed with the Persians to make War upon Mascat, and to
do great matters against the Portugals, which God forbid.

December the second, I went to view a Town of the Moors, subject to
Nizam-Sciah, and his Governor Melik Ambar, and because near Ciaul, called
Ciaul di Riba, that is, Upper Ciaul. The way leading to it is fair and
handsome, amongst Groves of Palms and other Fruit Trees, and it stands on the
same bank of the River more Northwards with Ciaul of the Portugals. It Is a
large Town well inhabited both by Moors and Gentiles, especially near the Bazar
or Marketplace, where the Shops afford plenty of all things necessary for Food
and Clothing, according to the fashion of the Country, as also very fine Cotton
Clothes of several sorts, with other commodities which are brought thither from
the more inward parts. Beyond the Bazar, the Houses stand not so close
together, but scattered here and there amongst Gardens, or rather woods of
Palms and other Fruit Trees, which are very thick, tall, and handsome,
affording shadow to the streets all the way, which are broad, long, green, and
very delightful. A little distant from the Bazar is a great Artificial Lake or
Cistern, surrounded, as their custom is, with stone stairs; they call it Tanle
Nave Nagher. The Moors for the most part dwell near the Bazar toward the
River, which passes not far off, and is navigable seven or eight leagues
upwards: Here also the Mahometans have their Meschita's, hot Baths, (which the
Gentiles use not, because they wash themselves publicly in their Cisterns),
and places of Sepulture; a Dogana, or Custom-house; and lastly, a Divan, or
Court of Justice, and whatever belongs to their Government.

Most of the Gentiles, who are the greatest part, live in Houses remote Bazar,
amongst Gardens and Trees, where in several places they have sundry Temples of
their Idols, as one principal, which I saw, of Zagadanba a Goddess, who, they
say, is the same with Leksemi, Wife of Visenu; another good one dedicated to
Amrut Suer, who, they say, is the same with Mahadeu, and is figured by a round
stone like him of Cambaia. Other Temples I saw of Neraiena, and others of their
Idols; but the greatest and chiefest of all, both for esteem and devotion,
stands remote from the Bazar upon the way to Ciaul of the Portugals, and is
dedicated to Rami, or Ramisuer; it adjoynes to a great Artificial Lake or
Cistern, each side whereof is about 73 of my paces, environed after the usual
fashion with banks and stairs of stone, leading down to the surface of the
water; there are also round about it very broad walks shadowed with high,
thick, and goodly Trees, which make the place opacous and very lovely. In the
front of the Temple next the Cistern, under a Cupolet supported by four
Pilasters, is the statue of an Ox or Bull sitting with all the four Legs
gathered under it, being the same that I saw in Canara, called Basuana, but
here Nandi; they told me, it was a Male, and different from Gaietry Vasca,
which was the Wife of Rama. The head and breast of this figure looks toward
the Gate of the Temple, the back and tail toward the Cistern; and the Gentiles
who come to visit this Temple, first go down to wash their Face, Hands, and
feet in the Cistern, and then come to kiss and touch with their Head in token
of Reverence, (or at least with their Hands reverently bowed down after their
manner) the tail of the said Nandi; after which they put off their Pantofles,
and so enter the Temple barefoot to pray and worship after their manner; of
which I have elsewhere spoken. Some go round about the Temple before they
enter, beginning from the right side, and coming about to the left, as I said
before they did also at Canara in their Processions and Ceremonies. Others
offer Fruits and other things to the Idols, or else strew grains of Rice before
them in Oblation: The like they do to the Statue of the Ox Nandi, and also to a
Sprig of Basil, planted there upon a square Pedestal of earth, on one side of
the little Chapel of Nandi. There stand also upon the Lake, and other-where
about the Temple, many other little Chapels enclosed with walls, having
several Idols in them. In one behind the Temple stands the Idol of the Scimione
Haniment, in his usual and ridiculous Figure of an Ape, and sitting like a Man;
and indeed, it is strange that these wretched people are not ashamed to worship
such things. This Haniment was one of those Scimioni, or Apes which helped Rama
to recover his Wife, for which service they merited Divine Honors; and
therefore 'twas reason he should here have a place near the Temple of Rama,
which resembles the subjoyned Platform.



1. The Street or Highway. 2. The Gate leading to the Cistern. 3. The place
about the same. 4. Gardens and Groves about the said Street. 5. The Cistern or
Artificial Lake. 6. Stairs about it. 7. Another Gate leading out of the Street
or Highway to the Temple. 8. The open space where the Temple stands, enclosed
toward the Street with walls, and elsewhere with Gardens. 9. The Statue of
Bue Nandi, under his Cupolet upon a pavement somewhat raised from the ground.
10. A Pedestal with a sprig of Basil. 11. The Entrance of the Temple. 12. A
little Porch of the same. 13. The Temple-Gate. 14. The Temple, empty within,
saving that it has a few wooden figures of Idolets, or other things. 15. A
walled Enclosure or Penetral within the Temple, which I saw not, wherein is the
Statue of Rama. 16. The little Chapel of the Idol Haniment. 17. Little
Chapels of other Idols, to which certain Gioghi, who stand there to beg Alms,
sometimes repair. 18. Other little Houses, perhaps, belonging to the Ministers
of the Temple. 19. A great Tree with a round bank of Earth about it, where
oftentimes some Gioghi sit reading and contemplating after their manner; of
which sort of Trees many are planted in this enclosed space.
I was one day at this Temple, (whither I often went for Mainati, that is,
Washers, both Men and Women to wash their clothes here, and, in brief, I took
much pleasure, and sometimes dined and spent the whole day here, enjoying the
shadow of the Trees, and the coolness of the Lake. It would be too long to
speak here of the Idols of these Gentiles, how many, and what they are; perhaps
I shall one day communicate something to the world about the principal of them
in another Language.

December the seventh, My Friend Sig: Antonio Baracho arrived at Ciaul as I
expected; he came by the Viceroy's Order to make provision for the Galeoons
which were sending to Ormuz, being seven well armed Ships, daily expected to
arrive there.

December the ninth, Sig: Antonio having dispatched his business at Ciaul, and
taken Order for my imbarquing in the above mentiond Vessel that was going to
Bassora, whereof one Antonio Giovanni was Captain; and his much business which
he had to do for the Armada at Bassaim, requiring haste in the Evening he
departed in the same Almadia or Shallop wherein he came: Our separation was not
without tears, and much regret on both sides; but I was something comforted, by
his promise of visiting me at Rome as soon as he could get leave to go to
Portugal about his other Affairs.

December the fifteenth, The Galeoons of the Armada of Goa arrived at Ciaul;
they were but six, and said that two more were coming after them, and that they
had Orders, in case they understood the Ships of the Enemies were already
departed from Surat to Ormuz, (as indeed they were) not to go after them,
(because it would be a vain thing to think of hindering the supplying of Ormuz
with Victuals, since it might be done if they arrived there but one day before
the Portugals) but to go directly to Surat to try what damage they could do
there. But in case the Enemies Ship were not yet gone from Surat to Ormuz, then
to go directly to Ormuz as speedily as they could, and get thither before them,
and hinder the besieged place from being succored; which 'twas impossible for
Ruy Freira to do only with his small Vessels of Oars. Now according to these
orders (the Dutch Ships being already gone from Surat to Ormuz, as is
abovesaid) it was held fit at Ciaul that the Galeoons should without more ado
go to Surat, and after they had there done what mischief they could to the
Enemies, then sail to Ormuz.

December the sixteenth, The Ship wherein I was to imbarque, being to set sail
the night following, I put my Goods aboard, and having taken leave of my
Friends, I was accompanied to the Seaside by Sig. Luigi Cabreira, from whom I
separated with many embraces, and much regret on either side. As soon as I was
in the Ship the Captain weighed Anchor, intending to set sail as soon as we
should have a good wind, although the Captain of Ciaul sent a public Notary to
the Captain of our Ship not to go out of the Port this night, the service of
the King so requiring; I believe it was, that we might stay for some other
Ships which were to go out the next morning, to the end we might go altogether
more secure from the Malabars, the greatest dangers of whom is at the going out
of Ports, about which they lie waiting, and near the Land where they ply up and
down, more then in the main Sea. We had no wind in the night, and therefore
went not out of the Port.

December the seventeenth, In the morning we set out of the almost Northwest;
having first rehearsed the Litanies of our Lady, and invoked the Divine
Assistance, and here is, propitious to our Voyage.

December the twenty third, Having hitherto sailed prosperously, we came to the
altitude of twenty three degrees and a half, under the Tropic of Cancer,
leaving the Torrid Zone, under which I had been traveling in sundry parts for
about a year and ten Months. Here the wind failed us, and we had as quiet a Sea
as uses to be at the shores of Italy in the Month of August. We began to find
the Sky, which hitherto we had seen constantly clear, (as it uses to be in
India during these Months) now interstinguish'd with clouds: and, in short, the
mutation of the Climate was manifest. The Coast of Arabia, for which we were
bound, could not be far off; but we could not get to discover it for want of
wind.

December the twenty seventh, Having hitherto been becalmed, without advancing
but rather being driven backwards by the contrary current of the water; the
Portugals, as their custom is, after reciting the Litanies, and praying to God,
and Sant' Antonio of Padua, (to whom they bear great devotion) to give us a
good wind, intended to bind a little Image of the said S. Anthony which they
carried in the Ship, as if to imprison it: for thus they use to do, when they
would obtain any favor, as if they meant to force it, threatening not to loose
it till he grant them what they demand. They intended, I say, to bind S.
Anthony that he might give us a good wind; but forbore to do it upon the
Pilot's instance, who passed his word for the Saint, telling them that he was
so honest that without being bound or captivated, he would do what they
desired. This manner of demanding of favors of S. Antonio of Padua, is much in
use amongst the Portugals, especially the meaner sort of ignorant and
superstitious Mariners; though amongst us it is a vain thing. A barbarous
Superstition indeed; but yet such as sometimes, through the faith and
simplicity of those that practice it, uses to be heard.

December the twenty eighth, We had a wind sufficiently brisk and impetuous,
yet not only not favorable but altogether contrary; so that we could neither
bear up against it, nor yet cast anchor because we were in the main Sea, which
growing rough and tempestuous, we were forced to furl our sails, and suffer the
Ship to be driven whither the wind pleased, which was Southwards, not without
fear falling upon Mombaza, or some other remote Coast of Africa, and
consequently suffering shipwreck, and a thousand other Dysasters.

December the twenty ninth, The Captain, with the others of the Ship resolved
at length to bind S. Anthony, and as chance would have it, it proved well; for
the wind changed, and we sailed prosperously in our right course all day, and
part of the night. A little before midnight we discovered the Coast of Arabia
so near that we cast anchor in haste for fear of the Shallows which are
thereabouts. In the morning we saw the Land naked both of Trees and Grass, but
rather stony in appearance and Desert, although it was part of that Arabia
which they call Happy.

December the thirtieth, We began to move forward East South-East, having the
Land on the left hand; but a sudden contrary wind arising forced us to cast
anchor again in the place where we were, not without danger; for in the furling
of the sail, through the negligence of the Seamen, it wrapped about the Mast,
the wind blowing very furiously against the fore-deck; so that had the Vessel
been less sound and strong-sided, or some of the Passengers less diligent to
help, it had been overturned and sunk, like the Ship of Orontes in the
shipwreck of Aeneas, which Virgil describes to have been lost by the like
casualty. At night, the contrary wind ceasing, we proceeded in our intended
course.

December the one and thirtieth, The wind failing, we cast anchor, but in an
unsecure place, not without danger of being split upon the shore, whither in
spite of our anchors the wind hurried us; but tacking about, we got to a more
secure place, near that from whence we had moved the day before.

On the first of January, and of the year 1625, We stood at

January the eighth, Having all the preceding days been about the Coast of
Arabia, casting anchor every day, and weighing again at night; (during which, a
Boat of Arabians brought us much fresh fish, and an Arabian came swimming to us
a great way only to beg a little Rice and Biscuit, which we gave him) at length
having a good wind this day after noon, we passed a Cape which they call Capo
falso, because it is near and resembles the Cape Raselhhad, but is not it. At
night we passed by the True Cape called by the Arabians Raselhhad, that is, the
Cape of the Confine, because it is the last and most Southern Cape of Arabia,
being, as they say, in the latitude of twenty two degrees and a half from the
Aequinoctial Northwards, and distant from Mascat, whither we were going, forty
leagues; the Portugals call it corruptly Capo di Rosalgate. Having passed this
Cape, we steered Northwest, still upon the coast of Arabia which lies all the
way on the left hand, and entered the Persian Gulf, but saw not the opposite
Continent of Persia, because for a good way inwards the Gulf is very broad.

January the seventh, Having in the night foregoing had a good wind, by
daylight we were got eighteen leagues beyond the Cape, near the place where
the City of Calatat, which Albuquerque destroyed, sometimes stood, upon a good
River, at the foot of certain little Mountains, of which almost the whole coast
consists. Here the wind failed us, and having labored with the oar all day, we
got no further then Teive, a place inhabited by Arabians. At night we were
troubled with rain, which passing through all covers, wetted us sufficiently,
and kept us from sleeping. The next day we hois'd sail, and had scarce dried
our Clothes, but more rain surpised us; and through want of wind all the day,
we did not get so far as Curiat, which lies eight Leagues forward, and twelve
short of Mascat.

On the eleventh of the same Month, having no wind, we made use of Oars, till
we came to an Anchor a little beyond Curiat; and the next day hoising sail, we
passed by an Island called Scoglio di Curiat, sailing through a narrow arm of
the Sea which divides it from the Continent, which is all stony and full of
Cliffs, like the fair Mountain Posilippo near Naples in Italy. Before night we
cast Anchor a little beyond; for our Oars helped the Ship but little; being only
serviceable to such heavy Vessels to surpass a Cape, or get into a Port, or the
like, in case of need for a short way. At night we weighed Anchor, and soon
afterward cast it again, having made but little way.

January the thirteenth, Having sailed all day, and passed the Tropic of
Cancer, we entered the Northern Temperate Region, and toward night arrived at
the Port of Mascat, which is well closed and encompassed about with little
Mountains, but lies open to the North-west, whereby it receives much damage.
The Town, whereof the least part are walled Houses, and the greatest only
sheds made of Palm-boughs, stands directly in the innermost recess of the Port,
surrounded behind with Mountains; amongst which, nevertheless, there want not
ways of access to it from the inland parts; so that, to secure their Houses
from the incursions of the Arabians, they had in my time begun to raise an
earthern wall, but plain and weak, with a few Bastions, very distant one from
another; which wall, drawn from Mountain to Mountain, incloses and secures
their Houses on that side, as the Sea does on the opposite and inaccessible
little Mountains on the two other sides. On the top of one of these Mountains,
on the right hand as you enter the Port, stands the Castle, difficult indeed to
be taken by assault or otherwise then by Famine, if well defended; for though
the wall be not very strong, yet the natural situation secures it, and it has
a Platform levelled to the Sea, whereby it defends the Port with Artillery,
and is descended to from the Castle by a covered Ladder, which is very good. On
the other side of the Port, upon another Mountain stands another Port of less
consideration, having been anciently the Castle; yet it has Artillery, and may
be of some advantage. The Town is small, but for its bigness sufficiently
peopled, especially since the loss of Ormuz, from whence many repair hither.
The people is mixed of Portugals, Arabians, Indians, Gentiles, and Jews. It
has only two Churches; one which is the Sea of the Vicar, who is no Priest
but an Augustine Friar; one of their Covent, always coming to officiate there,
and to discharge the place of Vicar and Parish Priest: the other is of
Augustine Friars, where live about four of that Order, and both are dedicated
to our Lady, with several Titles; to wit, that of the Friars Della Gratia; and
the other, Del Rosario. The Captain lives not always in the Castle by reason of
the inconvenience of its situation, but only during the hotter months of
Summer for coolness; for upon the lower ground the heat is insupportable, both
because the Climate is of it self hot, and because the dwellings lie in a low
and enclosed place, encompassed, as I said, with Mountains, which keep off all
wind, and reverberate the Sun more strongly; besides that, the Soil is dry and
saltish, which consequently increases the heat. The Captain whom I found there,
was called Sig: Martino Alfonso de Melo. I also found dwelling here a Nephew,
or Brother's Son of the Captive King of Ormuz, whose Father was also King of
the same place before this Brother of his, who is at this day prisoner in
Persia. This Nephew, they told me, was called after his Uncle's Name
Muhhamed-Sciah; and the Portugals make him be acknowledged Prince in Arabia by
all the Arabians that were lately subject to the King of Ormuz, and are now
exempt from the oppression of the Persians or Rebellion, as nearest Kinsman and
lawfullest Heir (of any now at liberty) to the imprisoned King. At the same
time of our Arrival, there was also at Mascat upon his journey Hhabese-Chan,
Ambassador of the King of Dacan, Nizam-Sciah, who was returning to his Master
from Persia, where he had been many years with Sciah-Abbas. It being night when
we arrived at Mascat, we went not ashore; only the Captain of the Ship was
sent for by the Governor to speak with him, and give him account of his
purposes.

Remaining in the Ship this night, and for my Recreation observing India) the
Austral Cross, which the Spaniards call Crucero, and is the nearest visible
Constellation to the Southern Pole, serving in the other Hemisphere as the
Pole Star of the North does in ours; so that this Cross is discerned even in
the parallel of Mascat, which is in the Elevation of 23 derees 36.7. Indeed it
appears low, but a little above the Horizon. I noted here that in these Indian
Seas this Cross is seen at the time abovesaid, (to wit, a little before day,
very erect; for it rises late in the night, and at first appears a-thwart, till
the Heaven wheeling about with a short circle, a little before day it appears
in its erect Figure, which is of this form, consisting of 4 stars disposed in
this manner, three of which are greater and more luminous, and one, to wit,
that of the Western arm, is less and more obscure when the Cross is erect. The
Canopus which is not visible in our Countries, we had here very high above the
Horizon, and it appeared in the beginning of the night.

January the fourteenth, Having procured a Lodging, about noon I landed with my
people, and went to possess it. In the Evening I visited the Veador de Fazenda,
or Treasurer, Sig: Nicolo da Silva my Friend, and known to me many years in
Persia; who at first not knowing me, was afterward much pleased to see me here
safe and sound.

January the fifteenth, I visited the Captain or Governor of Mascat, in whose
House I found lodged Sig: Don Francesco Contigno Covacio, my Friend, at Goa,
who upon some disgusts between himself and the Viceroy, came in the same
Armada that I did to Ciaul, and from thence hither, in Order to go to the siege
of Ormuz.

January the seventeenth, I was visited by the F. Provincial of the Augustines
in Manil, whom I had seen, but not conversed with at Goa, and who was going
only to Bassora. His conversation was very pleasing to me, because he was a
person of much and various Erudition, both in Mathematics and History; besides
that he was also an excellent Preacher.

January the eighteenth, At noon I took the Altitude of the Sun, whom I found
forty four degrees distant from the Zenith, being this day in the 27th degree
of Capricorn, according to Origanus, and declining from the Aequinoctial
toward the South 20 degrees 23.53. which taken from 44 degrees, leave 23
degrees 36.7. So that Mascat lies 23 degrees 36.7. distant from the
Aequinoctial toward the North; and consequently, has the North Pole so much
elevated. The same day a Petache arrived from Ormuz, bringing News of the
Arrival there of ten Ships from Surat, namely, six Europaean Men of War, and
four Merchant Ships of Moors and other people; so that with those formerly
arrived, there were at Ormuz between English and Dutch ten Ships of War, and
the Portugal Armada not yet arrived. This Petache, they say, Ruy Freira sent to
Mascat, to avoid falling amongst so many Enemies, being alone. He stayed still
there with his Vessels of Oars, yet with no hope of hindering Ormuz from being
relieved both with Men, Ammunition, and Victual at their pleasure.

January the nineteenth, I went to see a Village of the Arabians, a little
distant from Mascat, and called Kelbuh; it lies without the Mountains that
incompass the Castle and Houses of Mascat on the side toward Sohar; the way
that leads to it, is a narrow passage, and because dangerous for the letting in
of Enemies, the Portugals have wisely guarded it with a rampart, and some few
pieces of Artillery. The Town is small, consisting only of cottages or sheds
made of Palm-boughs, and so low that one cannot stand upright in them, but
only sitting upon the ground after the manner of the Moors: yet for its
bigness, it has people enough; because this miserable sort of Men very
wretchedly, but easily accommodate themselves to their own mode in any little
place.

LETTER X.
From Bassora, May 20. 1625.
OUr Ship being ready to depart for Bassora, and being to Ormuz, in order to
consign some things to the General Ruy Freira, pertaining to the service of the
Armada; after all the rest that were to go were imbarqu'd, (amongst which were
Don Francesco Contigno Covacio, who intended for Ormuz; two barefooted
Carmelites, who were for Bassora; and the F. Provincial of Maniglia in the
Philippine Islands, who was passing into Europe) I went aboard with my people
at night, January the six and twentieth. Yet the Vessel went not off till the
next day, and with no favorable wind we sailed about six Leagues, casting
Anchor at night not far from the shore.

January the eight and twentieth, Having sailed a while, a contrary wind forced
us to Anchor again; and indeed in this Persian Gulf, the wind is so
inconstant, and with-all so strong, that if it happen to be contrary, there is
little good to be done by contesting against it in this narrow Sea, but those
that sail in it must in such case either cast Anchor, or be driven backwards.
We anchored so near land, and in so little water, under a place called Sibo,
about seven Leagues from Mascat, that the contrary wind increasing, and the
Anchor not sufficing to retain the Ship, we were in great danger of being split
upon the shore, to the loss of all our goods and perhaps lives too, the Coast
being very craggy, and the Sea extremely rough. We were so near being lost,
that the Ship almost touched the ground; but a small sail, hanging on the rope
which runs from the top of the Mast to the Stern, and is called by the
Portugal's Sabaco saved us; which sail alone we could make use of, to keep off
the shore; though it being small, and the Vessel heavy, it sufficed not to move
it much. The Arabians were already gathered together in great number upon the
shore to get the booty, and perhaps also to take our persons in case the Ship
should be split; for in these troublesome times of war they were here but little
friends to the Portugals of Mascat. But at length, as it pleased God, by the
help of Oars and the diligence of Sig. Franc. Contigno Covacio (who in many
things supplied the ignorance or negligence of other Officers of the Ship) we
turn'd-about the Stern of the Ship to the Sea, and being delivered from
imminent danger, had time to hoise the Trinket to the wind, as before we could
not, because it was on the other side of the Mast, which they call
Under-the-wind, and could not be brought about without more time then our
sudden and present danger permitted. After which, because the wind so required,
and it was dangerous going ashore for water among the Arabians, we determined
to return to Mascat; and having passed the Island della Vittoria, (so called
from a notable Victory obtained by the Portugals against an Armada of Turkish
Galleys which came to make war upon Mascat) about-evening we re-entred the port
of Mascat; where our Ship falling foul upon another Ship that rode there at
anchor, we became in a new danger of suffering shipwreck or at least, some
considerable damage. Many went ashore to sleep there all night; but being our
departure was to be speedily, I only sent my servants to fetch me some
refreshment.

January the thirtieth, The Ship having taken water, and all our company
imbarqu'd, at four a clock afternoon we set sail again from Mascat, and about
Ave-Mary-time repassed the Island della Vittoria (which lies only two leagues
from Mascat) sailing between it and the Continent: as we had done before.

January the one and thirtieth, As we were sailing with a small wind, we
descried a Sail a far off, which seeing us, discharged a Gun, as a sign for us
to stay till it came up to us: whence we understood it to be one of Ruy
Freira's Fleet; for by custom the Ships of war in India do thus, and other
Merchant-Ships are obliged to stay and obey; if not, the War-ship may sink
them. Accordingly we stayed, and by the help of Oars it presently made toward
us. Wherein I observed the little Military Discipline, and good order practiced
by the Portugals in India; for there was all the reason in the world, that, if
we stayed the coming up of this Ship, according to the custom, yet we should
not have trusted it till we knew what it was; for it might have been an Enemy
or a Rover, as there are many in these Seas, who being Portugals by Nation, and
banished for some misdemeanors, betake themselves to carry Pepper, Arms, and
other prohibited things to the Territories of the Moors. Wherefore to secure
our selves from all deceit and damage, which such a Ship feigning to be of Ruy
Freira's Armada might have done us, we should have stayed indeed, but it ought
to have been with our Arms in our Hands, Falcons, Corchabuses, and Muskets
laden; and, in short, in a posture of defense and fighting, as occasion
required. On the contrary, this good Discipline was observed neither on our
part, nor by the Vessel which came to see who we were; which imprudent
confidence, though it succeeded well in this case, yet was undeniably a great
and perilous error; and had the event been ill, it could not have been excused
otherwise then by saying, Non putaram, a word) (according to Cicero, very
little besitting Prudent Men. This Vessel of the Armada demanded of us water
and Mariners. Now amongst the Portugals, it is a custom for these War-ships to
take from Merchants which they meet what they please, either by fair means or
by foul; although it is but a disorderly thing, and many inconveniences happen
by it. Of water we gave them two barrels, but no Mariners, because we had few
enough for our selves, and they took them not by force, (as they would perhaps
have done from others) out of respect to Sig: Coutigno, who was in the Ship
with us; and the rather because we told them, we were going to carry Provisions
to Ruy Freira, who, they informed us, was retreated into the Island of Larek,
and that the Armada of Goa was not yet arrived, and also that themselves were
going to Mascat for Provisions. In the Evening, we met a Terrada, or Bark of
Ruy Freira's Fleet, going likewise to Mascat, by which we understood the same
News.

February the first, The wind turning contrary, we cast anchor at distance from
land for more security, the shore being all the way on our left hand.

February the second, Though the wind became somewhat favorable, Augustine
Friar at Sohar, of which place he was Curate; and neither we nor the Pilot
knowing whether we had passed Sohar, or not; nor yet what Land it was where we
were, therefore we sent our Boat ashore to inquire; it brought word that Sohar
lay a little more forward, and thereupon it was remitted to carry the said
Friar on shore, that so he might ride thither on a Camel by Land. This business
took up all the day. At night we set sail, but with no favorable wind, so that
we were constrained to anchor again a little further; till about midnight, the
wind ^^sing a little in our favor we set forwards. The land in this place is a
low Plain, as the word Sohar signifies; yet we saw abundance of hills at a
great distance from the shore. Sohar is four and twenty leagues from Mascat.

February the sixth, Having by the help of Oars with much difficulty come to
Chursakan, which is twelve leagues beyond Sohar, in the morning we sailed under
Doba which lies three leagues further. The Portugals had not so much confidence
in the people as to think fit to enter into the Port, but resolved to go three
leagues onwards to a secure place of friendly Arabians called Lima. The coast
of Doba is mountainous, and the Town stands behind a Promontory which runs far
into the Sea. Here we first discerned the opposite coast of the Persian Gulf,
from whence rather rowing then sailing, by Sunset we came to an anchor under
Lima. Many of our Ships went ashore, some to fetch provisions, of which they
found but little store, and others to refresh themselves.

I was not in a condition to do the like, being in bed under deck by reason of
an Ague; as also was Mariam Tinatim; so that neither of us could so much as
look up to behold the Land.

February the seventh, We passed by the Cape of Mosendom, at the point of which
stand two or three Rocks one further then another into the Sea. That nearest
the Cape is greatest, and the remotest is the least, which they call Baba
Selam; the Moorish Seamen when they pass by it, salute it with many shouts of
joy.

Ormuz) leaving Ormuz and Bender di Kombra on the right hand, (because we
presumed the Dutch and English Ships to be there) we directed our course
toward Larek, hoping to find Ruy Freira there, as we had understood by the
way; but a little after, we descried two Ships of Ruy Freira's Armada (as we
supposed) in two several places toward the Land; each of which gave us a Gun;
whereby we apprehended that they intended either to receive or give us some
necessary Advertisement. Wherefore quitting our course to Larek, we turned the
Stern to the coast of Arabia, toward which one of the said Ships about Sunset
seem to be retired. We approach't near the Land about Evening, and passing
amidst certain Rocks, went to cast anchor within a little bay which was there;
but in the narrow straight between a Rock and the Continent, a most impetuous
current of the Sea hurried us away so furiously, that without giving us time to
let down the sail, it had almost dash't us against the foot of certain high
Rocks, where, if we had touched, without doubt our Ship had been split in a
thousand pieces, nor had any one of us escaped with life unless by miracle:
nevertheless by plying our Oars stoutly, and at length letting down the sail,
by God's mercy we were delivered from this imminent and manifest danger. Yet
not so fully, but that we had like to have been cast upon another Rock, not so
much through the violence of the Current, as the negligence of the Seamen who
did not govern the Sails and Helm well. But at length, being by the Divine
Assistance freed from both dangers, we got to the place we designed, and there
found one of Ruy Freira's Ships which had given us a Warning-piece in the
preceding day; and also an armed Bark of that sort which they call Terrankim,
and are almost such as our Caichi or Shallops; which Bark Ruy Freira sent to
the Rock Baba Selam there to wait for the Armada of Goa, and advertise him when
it arrived. In the Ship was Sig. Sancho di Toar, who the last year had been
sent from Goa General of certain Ships to assist Ruy Freira, and being weary of
the war, now with his license (obtained, as may be thought, by importunity) was
returning to Mascat, and so to Goa, with seventy or eighty soldiers that
accompanied him. After we had cast anchor, although it was very dark, yet some
of the said soldiers, and the Captain of the Terranquim came to our Ship to
speak with Don Francesco Cavacio; so also did the Captain of the Ship, the
abovesaid di Toar, next morning. Don Francesco dissuaded the soldiers from
deserting the war in a time of so great need, and of so fair an occasion as
would be at the coming of the Armada of Goa, which was approaching hourly;
telling them that at Goa it would be held an action little honorable, and that
the Viceroy would severely punish whoever returned thither abandoning Ruy
Freira: In short, he said so much to them, that being assured of the coming of
the Fleet of Goa, which before they disbeliev'd and accounted only a report to
keep the soldiers in suspense) almost all of them changed their purpose, and
resolved to continue at the war, after they had been at Mascat only to provide
themselves some necessaries. Of such moment to the public good is the
authority and prudent discourse of a worthy person amongst people. We had news
from them, that Ruy Freira had quitted Larek, because the English at the
instance of the Persians had gone thither with their Ships to drive him thence;
whereupon having first destroyed certain Shops of Provision, which he had made
there for convenience of the soldiers, and a weak Trench, he removed with his
Armada of Oars to a desert station of Arabia a little beyond the place where we
were, and there we should find him; that if we had gone to Larek, we should
have incurred the danger of falling into the enemies hands; and therefore, as
soon as they saw us, they shot off a Warning-piece to recall us from that bad
way. They told us moreover, that before the Portugals were driven from Larek,
Ruy Freira going one day with the greatest part of his Ships to make an
appearance about Ormuz, a great Tempest arose, by which four Ships which he
left at Larek, were driven upon the Rocks of the Island, and lost, with the
death of many people; and that it was a great mercy of God that Ruy Freira was
not there with his other Ships, because they would have been all lost, although
they wanted not a share of trouble too by the tempest in the place where they
were. Hence I concluded that misfortunes every day increased upon'the Portugals
in India, so that I know not what good judgment can be made of their affairs
for the future.

February the eighth, in the morning, We departed from the place where we were,
and coasting along in less then an hour, we arrived at a little Island which
they call delle Capre or delle Gazelle, near the Continent of Arabia, almost
within a Bay which affords an ample and secure Port for small Vessels. This
place lies almost directly over against Ormuz, so that Ormuz will come to be
sixty leagues distant from Mascat, and consequently eighteen from Lima. Here we
found Ruy Freira with part of his Ships, of which some were mending; I say,
Part, because he had sent some to the Cape of Giask to wait for the Armada of
Goa, some to Mascat for Provision (of which he had but small store) and some to
the Port of Guadel to scout, and some about other services. As Soon as we had
cast anchor, Ruy Freira came in person to our Ship acompani'd by some of his
Captains, and stayed there between two and three hours receiving and
distributing amongst them certain small provisions of Victual and Arms which
were brought him; reading the Viceroy's Letters and many other which came to
him from Goa, and discoursing with Don Francesco Contigno Cavacio, and others,
giving them account of all his successes, and inquiring concerning the Armada
and other things which we knew. And because we assured him, the Armada could
not be long before it arrived, since we came all together from Ciaul at the
same time; he sent forth another Ship to meet it, with order to inform them
where he was, and presently to return and advertise him of his arrival, that he
might go out and join with it. I could not be present at all the Conversation,
because I had my Ague and was in bed. Yet upon his coming, I arose and dressed
my self to wait upon him, as I did so long as I was able; but at length I was
forced to retire, and only returned to take leave of him when he departed. He
made many complements to me, telling me that he had long since had knowledge of
my person by fame, and should always be ready to serve me upon any occasion;
with other like Civilities. I offered him to show him the Pass I had from the
Viceroy, because I had heard him say in discourse how strictly the Viceroy had
charged him not to let any one pass into the Territories of the Turks without
his license; but he would not look upon it, and told me it needed not for me,
re-iterating that he was ready to serve me; to which civil language I answered
in the best terms I could, signifying to him how great a while I had been
desirous to see his person, and to serve him; The fame of his actions testified
to me by the mouths of his very enemies, and how he was spoken of at Goa both
by the Viceroy and all others; all which he received as kindly as I did his
obliging expressions. At length he returned to his own Ship, taking with him
Don Francesco Contigno Cavaccio, the F. Provincial of Maniglia, and diverse
others, to be entertained there with him all the day; but I remained in bed
with my Ague.

February the ninth, Having taken a Persian Pilot which Ruy gave us, (because
the Portugal Pilots are not very skilful in the Persian Gulf, by reason of the
multitude of shelves, and the inconstancy of the winds, which make it needful
to have a Pilot of the Country) at night we put off from the abovesaid Island
steering our course outward. Almost at the same time Ruy Freira went with some
of his Ships, leaving order for the rest to follow him as soon as they should
be repaired; and by the inner way, to wit, by the channel between the Island
and the Continent, went I know not where to take in water, intending afterward
to see how matters were at Ormuz, where there rode ten Ships of War, Dutch and
English, partly under the Castle, and partly in Bender di Kombru, having
already put what relief they pleased into the place.

February the tenth at evening, We arrived at a Bay which they call de 'i
Limoni, from the multitude of Lemons growing in a Village hard by. And on the
fifteenth of the same Month, having passed the Island called Tombo, another
called by the Portugals Piloro, that is, the Ball; and lastly that which they
call Cais, once famous for its competition with Ormuz, both in War, and the
Traffic of India, but now altogether desolated by war, we wereby a contrary
wind forced to return somewhat backwards, and cast anchor under the said Island
Cais, which is forty Leagues from Ormuz. Some of our people went ashore to
refresh themselves, but found nothing except a few Herbs, and a fruit like
Goos-berries; which yet to us that were ill furnished with Provision were not
unwelcome. I must not omit here, that when we passed by the Bay of Lemons, we
left the Coast of Arabia, and crossed over to sail along the opposite Coast of
Persia, which is the better way from from thence forward.

February the sixteenth, We departed from Cais, and at night certain Armenians
who were in our Ship, were set a shore on the Persian side, in order to go to
Nachilu, which was not far from thence, to meet certain companions of theirs
who had gone before Mascat in another Ship with much common Merchandise.

February the seventeenth, A contrary wind repelled our course backwards, so
that we anchored under an uninhabited Island called Andreve, where we stayed
till the twentieth of the same Month, when the abovesaid Armenians, not
finding their companions at Nachilu, returned to the Ship, and brought two
Letters from the Governor of that place; one to the Captain and all the rest
in general, offering the Ship a free Port, and desiring us to sell our
Merchandise there, because they had suffered much by war; that they would show
all good usage to the Portugals as Merchants; and in case we trusted him not so
much as to go a shore, we might ride at Anchor in the open Sea, and they would
send people and money to buy many things. The other Letter was directed to the
Religious that were in the Ship, some of whom he had understood were minded to
go to Sphahan; and therefore he promised them good and secure passage with all
courtesy. But neither did the Ship stay to sell any thing, nor the Religious
think good to land in that place, for all those promises.

February the two and twentieth, Being at Anchor in a certain place, at night
we descried some Vessels afar off, which we knew not what they were; and
therefore weighing Anchor, and putting our selves in a posture for fight, we
rowed up to them. When we came near, we found them to be of those Persian
Vessels, which they call Terrats, (a kind of great bark, frequent in these
Seas) laden with Dates and Victuals. Yet because they neither stayed for us nor
obeyed, we discharged some Falcons and many Muskets at them, without doing any
hurt, because of those that shot none knew how to do it as they ought, but all
was done with great confusion and disorder, as is usual amongst the Portugals,
especially in our Ship, which was a Merchant and not a Man of War. So that the
Persian Terrats went away untouched, and we not only took them not, as we
might easily have done, had our Ships been well armed and well-governed; but it
seemed also, that, had those Vessels had armed people, and a mind to assault
us, they might easily have taken us, considerng the little order and
preparation for fight that I saw in our Sihip.

February the seven and twentieth, The wind not being good, Indians, but of the
Mohammedan Religion, tied a bundle of clothes, which they said was the Old Man
(but I know not what Old Man they meant) to one of the Ropes of the sails, and
there fell to beat it vehemently, crying out to it, to give them a good wind;
in the mean time, other Mariners desired him that beat it, to desist, saying
that it would give them a good wind. This superstitious Ceremony, not unlike
that abovementioned of the Portugals binding S. Anthony of Padua, I was
willing to insert for its strangeness; although through the ignorance of the
Mariners themselves, who could give no other reason for it but that the custom
was so; or because they would not tell us; I could not understand what Old Man
it was that they beatt, under the figure of a bundle of Clothes, or from whom
they demanded a good wind.

February the eight and twentieth, We were minded to take in water in the
Country of Verdistan (a part of Persia), of which we had great need; but the
people of the place prohibited us, repelling the boat from the shore with many
Musket-shots. And being we had not Soldiers to land and take water by force,
it behooved us to have patience and depart without.

March the first, We put out to Sea, to avoid certain shelves that were near
the Persian shore, which here we found low and flat, whereas hitherto it had
been all mountainous; at night, we came under Riscel, a Port of Persia in the
state of Siraz, but no good one.

March the second, A little before night we came to an Anchor under the Island
of Charg, which lies distant from Cais 24 Giam. (A Giam is a measure used by
the Arabian and Persian Pilots in the Persian Gulf, containing three leagues;
so that from Cais to Charg we had sailed 70 Leagues.) From Charg to Bassora,
they told us, there remained eight Giam, and as many from Charg to Bahhaerein:
The part of the Continent nearest Charg, is Bender Rich, belonging, as I
conceive, to the Country of Loristan, from which this Island is distant two
Giam. We cast Anchor between Charg and another little Island which lies to the
North-west, and is called Chargia. Charg is a little Island having a Town of
forty or fifty Houses, wherein there is a Meschita with the Sepulcher
(venerated by the Moors) of one Muhhammed Anefia, who, the people of the Island
say, was one of the Descendents of Muhhammed. Because the Sea was very rough we
did not go a shore; but a Portugal Ship belonging to the Captain of Ciaul and
bound for Bassora, put in at the same Island.

March the fourth, We went on the other side of the Island to get water, of
which we stood in great need; and my Ague having left me, I landed with the
rest upon the Island, where I saw little besides the abovesaid Sepulcher, and
others less venerable, which they said were of some of the familiars of him
that was buried in the greater; there was also a Grotta cut out by hand in
stone, which by some carved work of the Frontis-piece, and the form within,
seems to have been made for a Temple or place of burial, but now it is used
only as a stall for Cattle. The Island it self is low and plain; the Peasants
sow it with Corn, Onyons, and a few other such things; but it is poor enough,
the wealth of the Inhabitants consisting for the most part in the fish which
they take. They speak the Persian Language, and indeed are Vassals of Persia,
though by reason of their poverty they pay no Tribute to the Persians. They
told me, that they are governed by a Chief, called, according the custom of the
Arabians, Sceich, which dignity descends from Father to Son; that in the war
between the Persians and the Portugals, the former had intended to have built a
Fort here, whereby to hinder the Portugal Ships from watering here as they
passed by; but the Inhabitants excused themselves from it by their poverty; and
by treating all parties alike friendly, they have escaped unmolested by any,
and enjoy their sweet Liberty upon no other account but their poverty. They
told me also, that free Trade was granted to all the Inhabitants of this
Persian Coast between Charg and Bassora, both by the Portugals and the people
of Bassora, so that they were not molested by any party; the ground of which I
take to be, because Bassora has not sufficient Victuals, the greatest part
being brought thither from these Lands of Persia; and on the other side, the
Portugals need Provision for their Fleet which they keep at Bassora, to assist
the place against the Persians. At night we returned aboard, having exchanged
the Persian Pilot, which Ruy Freira gave us for one of Charg, it being the
custom so to do. It rained in the night, and the Sea grew high; wherefore for
more security, we put off from the land further to Sea.

March the sixth, Very early in the Morning we departed from Charg, together
with the other Ship of Ciaul, yet each taking its own way; and we proceeded
coasting along Persia, which lay on the right hand: The next day the wind
failing we cast Anchor, so far from the Persian shore that it was out of sight;
yet we found no more water than about ten fathom; and indeed, we were fain to
sail when the wind arose, with plummet constantly in hand, by reason of the
shallow which are hereabouts.

March the eighth, We sailed still out of sight of land, yet had but four
fathom of water; and because the shallow is equal in this place for a great way
together, the Persian Pilots call it Meidan, that is, the Plain. The next day
we sailed a little, but most of the day lay at Anchor, because the Pilots could
not find the mouth of the River of Bassora, although it seemed to us to be very
near; and indeed, it is no easy matter to find it, the shore being so low that
it is not discerned, unless very near hand; and to approach so near the shore
as to discern the River, is not safe by reason of the shallows.

March the eleventh, In seeking the mouth of the River, opinions were so
various, and consequently the Ship governed with such confusion, that the
rudder struck on ground, not without some danger; but at length with much
diligence we freed the Ship, and got into more water (the Ship of Ciaul, which,
as lighter, drew less water, going before us as guide, and entering into the
River's mouth before we knew it.) The River of Bassora (which is Euphrates and
Tygris joined together) is called by the Arabians Sciat d' Arab, that is, the
Arabian River, and falls into the Sea with two great Mouths about twelve
Leagues distant one from the other. The most Easterly, which is the biggest and
securest, lies on the side of Ormuz and Persia, whose name it borrows: The more
Westerly, and less frequented by great Ships, lies on the side of Buhhreim, or
Cutifu of Arabia, from whence it assumes a name. And because the division of
the River into two Branches happens within the land a little below Bassora, I
know not how many leagues from the Sea; hence it forms a no small Trianguler
Island, called at this day Cheder; which I hold to be the gift of the River
(like the Delta of Egypt) and that it will increase every day by the sand
brought down by the River, considering the many flats and shallows, which as I
said above are found in these places. Now we being entered by the Eastern mouth,
and having sailed a good way against the stream, at length came to the place of
the division; and leaving the more Westerly branch on the left hand, continued
our course amongst the verdures of Date-trees and cultivated Fields, which on
both sides the River down to the Sea are very fertile. At length we came to the
place from whence up to the City of Bassora, (which lies on the west bank a
good way from the River) is drawn an artificial Dike capable even of Portugal
Galliots, which pass up to the Dogana or Custom-house, where a bridge of planks
laid upon boats, and fortified with Iron chains crosses the Dike; on the
South-part of which bridge stands a Castle, and strong Bulwark for guard of the
City and passage. The water of this trench ebbs and flows with the Sea, and at
high Tide runs up I known not how far beyond the bridge; yet Ships go no further
then the bridge, where they ride as in a secure Haven. From this trench are
derived some other little channels on either side to several places of the
City; and in some of them they make use of small Boats, which they call Done^,
with great convenience to the houses; besides that they want not little bridges
upon the said channels to walk over on foot.

Bassora is large and populous, but ill built, and till of late without walls;
for by reason of these wars with the Persians they have almost enclosed it with
an earthen Rampart; within which is the Bazar of Goldsmiths, and for linen
Cloth, and all the best things that are sold. Before the Castle is an
indifferent large Piazza, where there are some great Pieces of Ordnance,
amongst which we saw certain Portugal Pieces which had been taken many years
ago by the Turks of Bassora from Mascat when they infested the seas with their
Galleys, which afterward were destroyed by the Portugals. Another Piazza there
is before the Basha's House, which is always full of heaps of Corn, Rice, and
other Fruits, which are to be sold here; being kept night and day without other
shops or enclosure then ordinary mats, without fear of stealing in regard of
the strict justice exercised by the Turks in matter of Theft. The people are
Arabians with some Turks intermixed, so that the Arabian Language is most
spoken, although the Turkish and Persian are not unfrequent. As for Religion,
the Moors are partly Sonai's, and partly Scinai's, with Liberty of Conscience
to both; yet in the Meschita's the Service is after the manner of the Sonai's,
and also all public Ceremonies are performed after the Rite of the Sonai's,
which is that which the Great Turk, who is King of this Country, observes at
Constantinople. There are also some Houses of Chaldean Christians, called
Christians of S. John, or Sabeans; though I believe they have little more
besides the name of Christians; for they have no Church except the House of one
single Priest, who was there in my time, and he a very Idiot; nor could I learn
that they ever assembled there to be present at any Divine Service. They have
no Fast or abstinence from Flesh, but eat every day alike. Nor have they any
Sacraments, except some shadow of them; and it is a question whether their
Baptism be such as it ought to be, and not rather the Baptism of S. John then
of Christ. And because in this, and many other things, they observe S. John
Baptist more then any other, and have him in greatest Veneration, therefore
they are called Christians of S. John, with no small suspicion of being the
remainder of those Jews whom S. John baptized with the Baptism of Repentance,
and who, without caring for any thing else, have continued in that Rite ever
since. The Gospels, and other sacred Books, it is not known (at least) in
Bassora, that they have or use; but they have a Book which they call Sidra,
according whereunto they govern themselves in matters of Religion; but who is
the Author of it, I know not. They speak a harsh Chaldee, besides Arabic which
is generally in use; which Language of theirs they call Mendai, as also for the
most part amongst themselves they are styled Mendai, besides the two other
names of Christians of S. John and Sabeans, by the first of which they are
known to us Europaeans, and by the latter to the Moors. What Mendai signifies,
and whence it is derived, I could not learn. They have also particular
Characters different from the ordinary Chaldaick and Syrian, both ancient and
modern, wherewith they transcribe their sacred Books, but commonly none can
either read or write this character besides the Priest, who by an Arabic word
is usually styled Sceich, that is, Old Man. I could not learn any thing more
concerning them, because they are few and very Idiots; only I think they may be
those Sabean Heretic mentioned in Histories, and particularly in the Elenchus
Alphabeticus Haereticorum of Gabriel Prateolus, who relates their Original and
Rites. Besides these of Bassora, there are other at Hhaveiza, which is near
Bassora, at Durec, Sciuscter, and many other places of Persia; amounting, as
they say, to many thousand Families: yet in Hhaveiza there are more then in any
place else, where they have a place inhabited only by themselves, called
Kiumalava, or, as themselves pronounce it, Chiumalava, reading the Letter K
with the sound of Chapter Here live certain of their chief Priests, Monks, and
Bishops, whom they all Chanzaba, and by whom they are governed in Religion. I
believe they have there some kind of Church, Sacrifice, and all other things
better then at Bassora; yet because I cannot speak either upon my own knowledge,
or any sufficient and credible information, I shall not relate any thing more
of them; although I had once a servant of the same Nation, born in Kiumalava
near Hhaveiza, who amongst them was called Roheh, but being afterward
re-baptiz'd by our Religious, was named Giovanni Robeh. I shall only add
concerning Bassora, that of late days the City has been more frequented with
the trade of the Portugals of India, (to wit, since the loss of Ormuz) five of
whose Ships at my being there continually rode in the River to defend the place
from the attempts of the common enemy the Persian. Upon the conflux of many
Europaean Christians hither, the barefooted Carmelite-Fathers of Persia first,
and afterward the Portugal Augustines of Goa have built two Churches, either
Order one, wherein the Catholic and Roman Rite is publicly observed. That of
the Carmelites, the Seat whereof was partly given them by the Basha, and partly
bought by themselves, I found already finished with a small Cloister, and some
Cells for the Fathers that live there: of its Dedication which happened in my
time, I shall speak below. The Church of the Augustines had not its foundation
yet fully laid, and they were in suspense whether to go on with the building or
no, for fear lest the Persians should one day take Bassora in these wars which
were on foot. So that in my time the said Fathers lived in an hired house,
which the Basha paid for; yet they had a Church, or rather an Oratory there,
wherein Mass, and all Divine Offices were publicly celebrated. Of Augustines,
there were two at Bassora; one with the Title of Prior, was also Vicar to the
Archbishop of Goa; likewise an Augustine Friar, who, for the sake of the
Portugals that resort to the City of Arabia, pretends to a Jurisdiction, which
he usurps not without some intrusion upon the Barefooted Carmelites,
notwithstanding the Briefs of most ample Authority which they have obtained of
the Pope for that purpose; insomuch that in my time the said Augustine-Vicar
published an Excommunication against all such as should not confess at Easter
in their Church, although they did it in that of the Carmelites; and published
his Church to be the Parish Church, and not the other, besides other like
contentions between them; not without some prejudice to the Affairs of
Religion. The Basha, who for the assistance which he had of the Portugals in
the war, used not only them, but all Europaeans that came thither, very well;
gave a Pension or Alms to either Church every Month sufficient for Provision;
and he also well paid the five Portugal Ships which lay at Bassora for his
service in the War.

Having entered the abovementioned Dike, and cast anchor for fear of being
carried back again by the violence of the ebbing water; we met with two of the
said Portugal Ships at anchor, in one of which was the General himself: the
other three were abroad in the great River near the place where the Basha had
pitched his camp to make head against the Persian Army, which was upon the
Confines, and was rumor'd to intend an attempt against Bassora.

Marcch the twelfth, Early in the morning, before we stirred, I was visited in
the Ship by F. Basilio a Barefooted Carmelite, and by F. Fra. Paolo di Giesu
an Italian Franciscan whom I had known at Goa, and who was now in his passage
to Italy, lodged at Bassora by the Carmelites. At night, upon the coming in of
the Tide, we towed the Ship up to the City. On either side of the Dike, were
abundance of Houses and Gardens, which render the passage very delightful.
Having cast anchor within the City, near the Southern bank, which is most
inhabited, I went ashore after dinner to seek a House; but not finding one to
my mind returned back to rest all night in the Ship.

March the thirteenth, Not finding a House to my content, upon further search,
I got one to speak to Chogia Negem, the chiefest Christian of S. John then
amongst them, being also Scibender of the Dogana; who, as a Christian and a
Person of much humanity, contracting an intimate friendship with me, did me a
thousand courtesies whilst I staid at Bassora. In the morning his Wife in
person went about seeking a House for us; and at night I accompanied her to see
one adjoining to her own, which for that reason, and because it was somewhat
better then the rest, although far from good, I made choice of, and she
promised to get it prepared for me against the next day; whereupon I returned
aboard this night also. This day Proclamation was made in Bassora for every
house to send out a man with Arms to the camp to aid the Basha in the War
against the Persians, who were said to approach.

March the fourteenth, I took possession of the House prepared for me, and
afterward visited Sig. Consalvo Martino da Castelbranco, chief of the
Portugals in Bassora, to deliver him a Letter which I had brought from the
Viceroy of Goa, the effect whereof was only an earnest recommendation of me;
upon which and other letters of friends which informed him of me, he very
courteously offered me all his service. He told me good news (being one that
might well know the same) of the affairs of Bassora, Persia, and Hhaveiza;
namely, that Mansur, Brother to the deceased Mubarek, being some years ago sent
by Sciah-Abbas to Hhaveiza as Prince thereof, after he was well possessed of
the State, became not well affected to the King of Persia, though his
Benefactor, (and indeed the Arabians cannot endure to be subject, but desire
liberty above all things.) Now in order to recovering his Liberty, he held much
correspondence with the neighboring Basha of Bassora, the Turk's Vassal, and of
a contrary faction to the Persian, who was then Efrasiab Basha, who from Aga of
Segmeni, as he was at first in the same City his native place, had made himself
Basha by force, and endeavored to establish the dominion of that State in his
own House, being tolerated, and indeed favored by the Turk, although half a
Rebel; both because he carried himself well in the Government, and because he
might not proceed to deny him that little obedience which he gave him in words:
Nor was it easy to chastise him in these Confines of the Enemies at such a
distance from Constantinople, or to make any other change in the City of
Bassora, where he was so powerful. The Persian, understanding the friendship
which Mansur held with him, contrary to the custom of the other Princes of
Haveiza, who used to make war against Bassora, and that (in short) Mansur was
not obsequious and devoted to him as he desired; when he went upon the
Expedition of Baghdad, he sent for him to come with his people to the Persian
Camp to that war, and appointed Imamculi Chan Sciraz to march to Baghdad by
Hhaveiza, and by all means to bring Mansur with him. The Chan performed the
command of the Sciah, and coming near Hhaveiza, stayed many days for Mansur,
importuning him frequently to come forth and go along with him. Mansur put him
off so long with words and promises, that at length the Chan thought good to go
away without him; yet arrived at Baghdad so late, that the Sciah had taken the
City before; but, in conclusion, Mansur stirred not. Thereupon the Sciah, after
his return from the enterprise of Baghdad to Sphahan, sent several Messengers
to Mansur to come to his Court; to all which Mansur answered that he would go
speedily, but never went: Wherefore the Sciah being incensed against him, sent
him word to come speedily by all means, otherwise he would send to take off his
Head. To which Mansur answered, that if the Sciah were minded to cut off his
Head, he might come in person to do it; That he knew very well how to defend it
with his sword; That he was resolved not to go into Persia; and, That if the
Sciah was King in Persia, himself was King in Hhaveiza; and that he did not
value him. Hereupon the Sciah commanded the said Imamculi Chan to march into
Hhaveiza with a great power, taking with him Mubhammed the Son of Mubarek, who
had been educated in the Persian Court, and establishing him Prince there,
either to bring away Mansur Prisoner, or else to kill him: Accordingly, a
little before our arrival at Bassora, the Chan entered Hhaveiza with an Army,
and the said Muhhammed. Mansur apprehending that most of the Grandees and the
People would obey the Sciah, and accept of Muhhamed for their Prince, to avoid
being taken or slain, fled with about 500 that were faithful to him to Bassora,
where Ali Basha the Son of Efrasiab, (who had succeeded his dead Father, or
rather intruded into the Government by force before his Father expired)
received him courteously, and gave him a piece of Territory belonging to the
jurisdiction of Bassora, in the Confines of Hhaveiza, where he might live with
his followers. The people of Hhaveiza in the mean time agreed with the Chan,
and received Muhhamed for their Prince, being ready to obey the Chan in this,
and whatever else he should command; yet upon condition that no Qizilbasci
should enter into Hhaveiza, whereunto the Chan assented. Concerning Occurrences
since our arrival at Bassora, News came that the Chan, after he had established
Muhhamed in Hhaveiza, was advanced forwards with his Army toward Bassora, and
was already entered into the State by a place which they call Qarna; intending,
perhaps, to take certain Garrisons in those borders, and also to make further
progress: Whereupon the Basha went out against him with all his Forces, and
three of the five Portugal Ships, which, as I said, he kept in Pay; the City of
Bassora in the mean while being in great fear of the Persian Army.

As for other things more particularly pertaining to the State of this City, he
told me, that after the taking of Ormuz, the Sciah sent an Embassage to the
then Basha of Bassora Efrasiab, to tell him, that he required no more from
Bassora but only to have his Coin stamped there, his Name used in the
Acclamations of the People, and in the Prayers of the Meschita's, as King of
the Country, instead of that of the Great Turk; and that the People of Bassora
should wear their Turbants after the Persian manner; that as for the rest he
should leave Efrasiab to rule in that State as absolute Lord, have the same
confirmed to his Issue, and be protected against the Turk or any other, without
paying any Tribute, but remaining in perfect Liberty. Efrasiab, who was a
prudent man, well knowing the ways of the King of Persia, made no account of
these offers, and thought not fit to adventure the safety of the State which he
possessed, upon uncertain hopes; but trusting in the aid of the Portugals,
whose Ships might be of great use to him in that place, which the Persians in
order to offend Bassora must pass by force, namely, either the Sea, or at least
the great River, (the Persians having no Vessels fit to contest with such
Ships) he rejected the Proposition of the Sciah, and presently re-manded the
Ambassador with a strict Order immediately to depart both the City and the
State, lest he should secretly corrupt some of the Grandees, who might
afterward pervert the people, who are half Sciani's, of the sect of the Sciah;
telling him in brief, that he was the Great Turk's Vassal and so would die, and
that he was prepared for War, is the Sciah pretended any thing from him. The
Sciah finding he could do nothing upon Bassora by fair means, commanded the
Chan of Sciraz, as his nearest Minister to that Country, and the most potent,
to march thither with an Army, and attempt to take the same by force.
Accordingly the Chan's Army came, (in which I know not whether himself was in
person, or some other General) and by the way of Sciuscter, and other places
belonging to the Sciah near Hhaveiza, entered into the State of Bassora; which
entrance was the year before my arrival there, to wit, 1624. Yet he did not
besiege the City, (as it was reported at Goa) nor yet come near it, but only
besieged a Garrison in the Frontiers called Qaban, which was in danger of being
lost, to the great hazard of all the rest of the Country, and the fear of
Bassora it self; for the Persians fought valorously, and slew many of the
Defendants; but at length, by the help of the Portugals, who from the adjoining
River did great mischief with the Artillery of their Ships to the Persian Camp,
the Qizilbasci were repulsed with loss, or rather, of themselves, (being
wearied with the length of the attempt, or else re-call'd into Persia for other
services) they drew off and departed. Nor did they return again till the
following year, as I have said, about the time of my arrival at Bassora, upon
the occasion of displacing Mansur, and establishing Muhhamed the Son of
Mubarek, Prince of Hhaveiza; when I found the new Ali Basha abroad with his
Army, and three Portugal Ships to with-stand them, and the City of Bassora not
without fear, because the Persian Army much exceeded theirs, both in number and
quality of Soldiers.

March the sixteenth, News came to Bassora that the Armies Consalvo de
Silveira, Chief Commander of the Portugal Squadron of Ships at Bassora, told
me, that having heard that the Persians intended to bring seven pieces of
Artillery by Sea to Durec, (a neighboring Port of theirs to Bassora) to be
employed in the War, he had sent forth two of his Ships, and one of those
lighter Frigots which they call Sanguisei, to meet and intercept those Gunns,
which would be a notable piece of service.

March the seventeenth, Chogia Negem, (who might well know things, as he that
was employed in much business by the Basha) informed me that the Persian Army
consisted of 30000 men, and that there were seven Chans in it; which to me
seemed not probable, because if the Chan of Sciraz with his people was not
sufficient, 'twas possible his Brother Dand Chan, whose Government is near him,
and the Chan of Locistan, might be come; but that others more distant should be
there for the sole war of Bassora, there was no necessity, and consequently, no
ground ^o believe. He told me further, that now the waters were high there was
no danger, nor could the Persians make much progress, by reason of the great
River which they were to pass, and many over-flow'd Lands and Trenches full of
water, wherewith Bassora was now fortified: But when the waters came to be low,
as they would be within three months, then Bassora would be in danger: that as
for defense by the Portugal Ships, the Persians might pass over the great River
by a Bridge much higher and further from Bassora, either at Hhella, which is in
their Hands, or at Baghdad it self, or some where else, without the Portugals
being able to hinder them; that if they came but with Provision for a few
days, the Country on the West side of the River on which Bassora stands, was
not so desert but they might have forage enough for a great Army: If this be
true, as it may be, then considering the power of the Persians, their manner of
warring, the situation, strength, and forces of the City of Bassora, I am
confident, that at the long run it will not escape the Persians Hands, so long
as he holds Baghdad, although in case of need the Grand Emir of the Desert (who
is now Mudleg, surnamed as all his Predecessors were, Aburisc, that is, he of
the Plume or Feather) should come to assist the Basha; who can now hope for no
aid from the Turk, since the taking of Baghdad. He also related to me
concerning Baghdad, that the place was betrayed to the Sciah by Bekir Subasci,
called otherwise Dervise Mahhammed, whose Father (who pretended to render
himself Tyrant thereof) the Sciah caused publicly to be slain upon his
entrance into it, but kept the Traitor with him, and used him well: That
besides Baghdad, he took Kierkuc and Mousul by his Captains, and marched beyond
Hhella into the Country of Emir Aburisc, even to Anna and Taiba, within a
little way of Aleppo, which was thereupon in great fear; and that he left a
Garrison at Anna. But after the Sciah, and the main of his Army was retired
into Persia, Emir Aburisc, who was always confederate with the Turk, making an
excursion with his People about the Desert, recovered Taiba and Anna, killing
seventy Qizilbasci whom he found there in Garrison; after which he turned his
arms against Emir Nasir ben Mahanna, Lord of Mesched Hussein, (but not so great
a Prince as himself) and made great destruction of his People and Country.
Finally, He added, that a potent Army of Turks had since fallen upon Persia and
Baghdad, and had already recovered Mousul and Kierkuc; which last News I rather
suspect to be dispersed to animate the People of Bassora, then hold for true;
because, on the other side, it was reported for certain, that the Sciah was
reposing his Forces at Ferhabad, which could not consist with the so near
approach of the Turks against him.

March the nineteenth, An eminent man of Bassora, named Scaich Abdassalam,
mustered a great company of his kindred, friends, and followers, with whom he
intended to go to the assistance of the Basha. Amongst them were mustered about
200 Christians of S. John, armed with Arquebuzes, and other weapons like the
rest; but all, in my judgment, as much Moors as Christians, little Soldiers,
and of no esteem in comparison of the Qizilbasci.

March the two and twentieth, In the Piazza before the Basha's House, I saw a
wild Ass, or little Onager, which was kept there for pleasure. It was of the
shape of other Asses, but of a brighter color, and had a ridge of white hair
from the head to the tail, like the mane of a Horse; in running and leaping, it
seemed much nimbler then the ordinary sort of Asses.

March the three and twentieth, A Portugal came from the Basha's Camp to
Bassora, bringing News that the Qizilbasci were returned home to their own
Countries, and that in such haste that they had left much Cattle, Goods, and
Meat ready dressed in the Camp where they had quartered: Which so unexpected
departure of the Persian Army, could not happen through any disturbance given
them by that of the Basha; but, perhaps, they were re-call'd for some other
war, or service of greater necessity, as that of Ormuz, or against the Turks,
or against the Moghol at Candahar, which the Sciah had lately taken.

March the four and twentieth, I took the height of the Sun in Bassora at noon,
and found him decline 28 degrees 48 minutes from the Zenith. He was this day,
according to the Ephemerides of David Origanus, in 4 degrees, 4 minutes, 57
seconds of Aries, and according to the Meridian of the said Ephemerides,
declined from the Aequinoctial North-wards -- degrees; but according to our
Meridian of Bassora, calculating by proportional parts, 1 degree, 38 minutes,
and 32 seconds, which, added to the 28 degrees 48 minutes of the Sun's
Declination from the Zenith, amount to 30 degrees, 26 minutes, 32 seconds. So
that the Zenith of Bassora is distant from the Aequinoctial 30 degrees, 26
minutes, 32 seconds, to which the Elevation of the North Pole at the same is
equal.

March the one and thirtieth, Returned the two Portugal Ships abovementioned
to have been sent abroad by the General to intercept the Persian Artillery; of
which design they failed, because the Persians having notice thereof, stirred
them not of the Port. Yet they took three Persian Barques called Terrats, with
much wealth in them; and a rich Moor, who offered a thousand Patacches for his
Ransom, but they would not accept it. All the other Moors in the Vessels they
killed, with two young children, lest, as they said, if they should have
carried them into a Country of Moors, the Basha would have released them:
However, in seemed to me a great Cruelty, although it be no new thing among the
Portugals, who upon all occasions commit the like and greater in India.

April the seventh, The Basha returned with all his Army to Bassora, the fear
and danger of the war being now over by the departure of the Persians. He
entered into the City betimes in the Morning with great pomp, and the
salutations of the Artillery.

April the thirteenth, F. Basilio di San Franceso, a Barefooted Carmelite,
having finished the building of the little Church and Covent of his Order which
he had founded at Bassora, made a solemn Feast, adorning both the Church, and
the whole Oratory of the Covent very sumptuously: and with a great concourse of
Christians both Europeans and Orientals of several Nations, he celebrated the
dedication of the said Church, intitling it Nostra Signora de 'i remedii: The
evening before, he had caused many Bone-fires to be made, all the Portugal
Soldiers contributing to the joy with many volleys of Arquebusses. Moreover, to
honor the said Father, the Basha sent about five hundred Moorish Soldiers to
the Covent to do the like, and caused many great Pieces to be shot off at the
Castle; so that the Feast was celebrated generally by the whole City, both
Christians and Moors, with great concourse and applause. The next night, the
Basha himself with all his Court went to see the Church and the Covent, where
also at his departure he left an Alms; the Father received him with all due
honor, and gave him a sumptuous Banquet; with which, both as to the manner and
ceremonies according to the fashion of the Country, both the Basha and all the
rest were much satisfied. The General of the Portugals, with all the Captains
of Ships, and most principal Persons of the Fleet, and (in short) all the
Europaeans then in Bassora, were present at this entertainment: only I, by
reason of an indisposition, had the displeasure to be absent. Mass was sung by
the F. Prior of the Augustines, who assisted all the day to honor the feast;
and the F. Provincial of Maniglia, who was a Passenger with us, preached. The
same day there came to Bassora, to the Basha a Capigi from the Serdar or Vezir
of Constantinople newly created (whose Predecessor was said to have been put to
death by the Great Turk for having used little diligence in the affairs of
Baghdad.) The said Capigi brought the Basha a Robe or Vestment (as their custom
is) as a Present from the Vezir, and news that the Turkish Army was already
moving toward Baghdad, and was very near it, having re-taken Mousul and
Kierkuc, which are open places, and exposed to the force of any Attempter. But
that this should happen so soon, to me seemed very strange; especially, if the
new Serdar was sent from Constantinople the same year, as he could not be
before May or April at the soonest; and being of necessity to pass by Aleppo,
and get together not only much provision, but also Soldiers from very remote
Countries, and wait for them (besides, providing grass and hay for the horses,
as every year they are wont to do in May) it was not possible that he should be
so foward by this time. Considering too, that in all the Expeditions of late
years, it has been seen that the Turkish Army never arrives at the Confines of
Persia the same year that it is dispatched from Constantinople, but must always
winter the first year either at Aleppo, or in Mesopotamia, or, at most, when it
is nearest in Erzirna; the second year it arrives at the confines of Persia to
make War; yea it oftentimes arrives there so late in the year, and so near
Winter, that it scarce does any thing. Now that this new Serdar was dispatched
from Constantinople the same year, and not the preceding, seemed credible,
because I never heard of his wintring at Aleppo, or any where else; 'twas
likely that the new Serdar lately created at Constantinople (as he uses to be
in March, and sometimes sooner) understanding the danger of Bassora, presently
dispatched the said Capigi to confirm the mind and courage of the Basha; which
Capigi traveling by the shortest ways, and with great speed, as the business
required, might well arrive at Bassora from Constantinople by the time
abovementioned. In brief, I suspected the credit of so near approach of the
Turkish Army, waiting till effects should manifest the truth of the matter.

April the twenty third, News came to Bassora, that the King of Persia had
straightly charged the Chan, who governs Bagdad for him, and also his friend in
the Desert Emir Nasir, by all means to intercept the Cafila which was preparing
at Bassora to go to Aleppo, or at least to hinder its going. This intelligence
so terrified the Merchants who were upon the point to depart, that they
deferred their journey, and in their own name dispatched a Messenger to Emir
Nasir, to know whether it was true, and whether he would permit them secure
passage or no. That it was true, on one hand I conceived not unlikely; for it
being of great importance to the Sciah to have the trade of India by Sea
brought into his own Country, (which, since the taking of Ormuz, he has lost)
and the said trade being diverted to Bassora, where (for want of Ships to
contest with the Portugals) he cannot hinder it (which is the reason why he was
so desirous to take Bassora, namely, that so the Portugals might be deprived of
all ports and passes, and be necessitated to come with the traffic of India to
some place of his Territories, without his rendering Ormuz to them) I say, it
seemed likely that he should endeavor to hinder the traffic of Bassora to
Aleppo by land, which would amount to the same thing: for the Merchandises of
India cannot be all absum'd at Bassora, but remaining there little or nothing
must be from thence dispersed to Aleppo and elsewhere: Upon this account the
Sciah raised a great War both against the Portugals and the people of Bassora,
whose chiefest subsistence is from this trade. On the other side I conceived it
might not be true, because Emir Nasir draws great profit from the Cafila's
which pass from Bassora to Aleppo; and though at the taking of Bagdad he sided
with the Sciah for some end of his own, yet I believe, that as an Arabian and a
free Prince he is not so devoted to the Sciah as to serve him with the
prejudice of his proper interests; and the rather because at the same time he
keeps some Agents and Ministers at Bassora to receive the said Imposts, and
without the Emir's assistance the Sciah can do nothing in those Deserts.
Moreover, this Emir Nasir has lately been much mortified by the losses he
received from Emir Aburisc, and it is likely would rather endeavor to
re-ingratiate with Aburisc and the Turk (from whom he may suffer much) for
avoiding a total ruin, than expose himself to new dangers for the Sciah, from
whom he can hope little good or hurt so long as he is not Master of all as far
as Aleppo; which is not a thing to be brought to pass suddenly or easily. But
of this also time will show the truth.

May the ninth, Another Capigi arrived at Bassora from the Serdar, Serdar at
Mardin, which lies within a few days journey of Baghdad, confirming the
recovery of Mousul and Kierkuc; (whereof, supposing the Serdar at Mardin, I
made no scruple) and adding that the Serdar was then upon removing from Mardin,
and by this time had marched much forwards. This is what was given out; for
more intrinsic and secret news I could not know, having no acquaintance with
any considerable Turk from whom to learn the same: nor was any more then this
signified to the chief Commander of the Portugal Ships. Only I judged that the
Turks well considering the danger wherein Bassora was of being lost, might
possibly by these successive Messengers, and good tidings endeavor to confirm
the minds of the Basha, and the people, as much as they could.

May the eleventh, The Cafila designed for Aleppo, which had many days waited
some leagues, without the City, at length set forth and departed; either
because they had received a good answer from Emir Nasir, or rather, (as I
believe) because they relied upon other fresh tidings, how that Emir Nasir was
reconciled to Emir Aburisc, and returned into the favor and devotion of the
Great Turk, so that the Desert was all in peace; and perhaps also they trusted
to the common report of the nearness of the Turkish Army. I purposed to depart
from Bassora the same way and upon the same day (though alone, and not with the
Cafila) having hired Camels and certain Beduni Arabians to conduct me. But Ali
Aga, the chief Captain of the Militia, gave notice to my Camelier that I must
not depart within three days. Whereupon being desirous to go with all speed by
reason that the hot weather came on, I got Sig. Consalvo Martins, a Portugal
Father, to speak to the said Aga to know wherefore he detained us, and if there
were no cause, to dispatch us and let us go. The Aga answered that I must by
all means have patience for this week, that so the Cafila might have time to
get a little more onwards; and that he did this because he mistrusted my
Camelier as a Beduin Arabian (although he had a House and Wife at Bassora) lest
for some interest of his own, departing at the same time with the Cafila, he
should outgo it, and by other ways of the Desert (wherein he was well skilled)
give notice thereof to Emir Nasir, or else to some other Beduin Arabians who
might rob it, or perhaps also to the Qizilbasci themselves. Wherefore since my
going so soon might prove to my own damage, he desired for my security, and the
public good of the Cafila, that I would stay those few days; to the end that
the Cafila advancing before out of all suspected places, my Camelier might not
have time to do any villainy either to it or to me. The truth is, I did not
conceive my Camelier likely to do any such thing, having had good information
and assurance of him from Chogia Negem, to whom he was well known, and who
recommended him to me: Nevertheless, since he that governed would have it so, I
had patience to wait as long as he desired. Yet from hence I gathered that the
abovementioned news, now that the Persians and Emir Nasir conspired against
the Cafila, was not altogether vain; being Ali Aga, a man of so great place in
Bassora, had such apprehensions about it. And it might consist well enough with
the Cafila's departing; for perhaps it went out upon a venture, the Merchants
being unwilling to suffer longer delay, (for it was above eight months since
this Cafila began to unite) I say, at a venture; because the Desert is like the
Sea, where' it is a chance to meet or not meet enemies; and as men forbear not to
sail upon the Sea through fear of Pirates or Enemies, so neither do they cease
to pass through the Desert. The F. Provincial of Maniglia with his Companion,
(a Castilian too but not a Friar of his Order) Marc' Antonio Lanza a Venetian
(who came with me from Goa to Bassora) and I know not how many other
Europaeans, went along with the Cafila: I alone would not, but staid with my
Servants to go by my self, and to travel more hazardously indeed, but yet with
more speed, and undoubtedly with more convenience then they.

May the thirteenth, Another Capigi sent from the Serdar to the Basha arrived
at Bassora, bringing a Robe and a Scimiter as Presents, and the confirmation of
the Government of Bassora in his person, which hitherto he had not had. As for
news, 'twas dispersed amongst the people that the Turkish Army was very near,
and almost upon Baghdad; yet Letters from our Aleppo Merchants to the
Carmelites brought by a Moor of the company of the said Capigi, informed us for
certain that according to my abovementioned Prophecy the Serdar was not yet
come to Aleppo. It Is true, they writ that perhaps to make his voyage more
compendious he would not come to Aleppo, but march directly to Mesopotamia and
Baghdad by another way; which yet was uncertain when the said Letters were
written: whence it is clear that one way or other he could not be further then
Aleppo, and perhaps, according to my opinion, was scarce departed from
Constantinople. So that it was not possible for Baghdad and Persia to have wars
this current year 1625; since it would have been no small Summer's work to have
marched to the Frontiers: yet that war will follow the next year, unless some
other chance intervene, I no-wise doubt. The said Letters further told us news
from Turkey, mamely that the Emir of Saida, anew rebelling against the Turk,
had taken and sacked Tripoli, driving away the Basha that was there: but
afterward the Basha of Aleppo marching out with his people, had recovered
Tripoli, and restored the said expelled Basha to the government. From
Christendom, That Italy was all in wars about the Valtoline, which the French
had surpised out of the hands of the Pope's Officers, wherewith his Holiness
was much offended. That the Prince of England was to marry a Sister of the King
of France: That the Dutch had taken an important City from the Portugals in
Brasile: That Marquess Spinola had laid siege to another considerable one of
the Dutch in Flanders; that the Emperor's affairs in Germany proceeded very
prosperously; and other particulars of less moment, which for brevity I omit.

May the twentieth, Upon the return of Emir Zambar, owner of the House where I
lived, I resigned the possession to him, and withdrew to the Covent of the
Carmelites, till my departure, in which the Capigi intends to accompany me, we
having provided us arms and resolutions not to fear meeting Arabian Thieves. I
declined the Cafila, not only that I might go as I pleased, but also to avoid
prolonging the voyage by the slowness of the Carriages in the Desert, which
affords nothing but bare earth, void of water and grass. If it please God, I
will write to you again at Aleppo, from whence you shall receive the next.

LETTER XI.
From Aleppo, August 5. 1625.
HAving obtained license of the Aga to depart, on the one and twentieth of May,
in the Evening I caused my goods to be Mascraqa, where the Camels were to take
their burdens; and having ordered a little Tent to be pitched there, I repaired
thither with Marian Tinatim, and all my servants.

May the twenty second, Having in the day dispatched some small business which
remained for me to do in order to my departure, and paid a Custom, usually
demanded of such as go out of Bassora; about midnight I departed the City, and
traveled all night (having presently entered into the Desert, which is
altogether level) first in clayie and something dirty ways, and afterward in
dry with very little grass for Camels.

May the twenty third, After we had traveled about six leagues, we arrived at
a Town of the Arabians called Cuvebeda, where an Arabian Sceich resides, who
receives a Gabel of the Caravans and Burdens that pass that way; at my time he
was called Sceich Abdullah. Here we pitched a tent in a field without the Town
in expectation of our chief Camelier, who was to follow us with one of those
Capigi's that had been sent from the Serdar to the Basha of Bassora. But on May
the twenty fifth, because he came not, and it was tedious to me to abide longer
in that place where the wind and the dust much molested us; in the Evening I
dispatched my servant Michel to Bassora, with Letters to F. Fra: Basilio, Sig:
Consalvo Martins de Castelbranco, Factor of the Portugals, and Chogia Negem,
earnestly entreating them to procure that the chief Camelier might come away
forthwith; or, in case he must stay yet longer for the Capigi, that he would
give order to his under-Cameliers to conduct us forwards, and I would go
without him; if not, I would return to Bassora. Two days after, my Servant
returned from Bassora with this account, That the Capigi would come away the
next day without fail; and that F. Fra: Gregorio Orsino, a Dominican, formerly
known to me, and Vicar General at Constantinople ten years before, was arrived
at Bassora from Armenia, (where he had been Apostolical Visitor) in order to go
speedily into Italy; and hearing of my being upon the way to Aleppo, intended
to come along with the chief Camelier: Which last News was so welcome to me,
that I accounted all the time of my passed, and yet future, waiting at Cuvebeda
well spent; for I imagined the Capigi would not come so soon as they said,
because the Moors never speak truth.

May the thirtieth, At dark night the abovesaid F. Fra: Gregorio Orsino
arrived with the chief Camelier Hhaggi Ahhamed. I received him with such
contentment as you may imagine; and, though he civilly declined it, caused him
to lodge with me in my Tent. The Capigi came not; and though they said, he would
come presently after, yet I conceived we were to wait for him yet a good while,
and, perhaps, till the New Moon; it being the custom of the Moors almost ever
to begin their journeys at the New Moon.

June the third, Early in the Morning the Capigi arrived at the place where we
waited for him; whereupon, in order to our further progress, we discharged such
duties of Gabels or Customs as were to be paid at this Town.

Sceich Abdullah, Lord of Cuvebeda, for every Camel's load of fine Merchandise,
valued at the rate of Indian Cloth, five Piastres; for every like load of any
other Goods whatsoever, valued at the rate of Tobacco, a much lesser sum, but
I know not how much. Another Gabel was to be paid to a Chieftain of the
Arabians of the Desert, whom they call Ben Chaled; he takes for every load, be
it what it will, five Lari, which amount to one Piastre and a Sciahi besides,
of which eight and a third part go for a Piastre at Bassora, but at Aleppo
only eight. The third Gabel was to be paid to another Head of the Arabians,
surnamed il Cieco, who takes for every load what soever, six Sciahi; and
lastly, six other Sciahi, were in like manner to be paid for every load to
another Captain of Arabians, Cousin to the foresaid Cieco. Scich Abdullah,
Lord of Cuvebeda, said, he would take nothing of me, in regard of two Letters
which I brought him; one from the Basha of Bassora, and the other from the
Factor of the Portugals his Friend; both of them having much recommended me to
him. The other three were not themselves at Cuvebeda, but had their Agents or
Officers there, to whom we paid what they said was due; and they gave us an
Acquittance for it, that it might not be demanded of us again by any other of
their Officers in the Desert.

June the fourth, Sceich Abdullah, it seems altered his mind concerning the
Gabel which he had remitted, and required the same of me, taking for my two
Trunks ten Piastres; which was a most rigorous rate. I mention this to give
notice of the manner of proceeding, and little punctualness observed by these
Barbarians.

June the fifth, We departed very early from Cuvebeda, and before noon arrived
at certain Wells or Pits, which they call Ganemiat, (importing their use for
Cattle) where we found many Arabians lodged. At a distant view of them, we
betook our selves to our Arms, against whatever should happen; but upon nearer
approach, we perceived them to be poor peaceable people; whereupon we lodged
all together in that place. Yet here we had News that a band of Arabian Thieves
had way-lay'd us at another Pass a little further off, with intent to assault
us. For discovering the truth whereof, our chief Camelier went to Cuvebeda,
where the Spies of these Thieves use to reside; and at night he brought us word
that it was true, and that therefore it behooved us to go back again. Whether it
was true, or only an Invention of his for some end of his own, I cannot
affirm; but the next day early we returned to Cuvebeda, and lodged without the
Town at some distance from the place where we had been before. Two days after,
we were persuaded to lodge within the Town, for more security from the Thieves,
and to deceive their Spies, by making show as if we resolved not to go further,
which might divert them from their design. The same did the two Capigi that
were with us; for, besides the former, whose Name was Scervanli Ibrahim Aga,
there came another with him called Mahhmad Aga, who had been sent by the
preceding Serdar to Bassora, Lahhsa, and diverse other adjacent places, and had
not dispatched his business in order to his return before now.

June the thirteenth, After a long contest with our chief Camelier, about
hiring certain Arabian Guides, which he pretended necessary, (to get money of
us) and I refused as superfluous; since we knew the way without them, and they
could do us no good against the Thieves: At length, the business resting half
undecided, being, I said, if he would not go without those Guides, I would
return back to Bassora, (which he was loath to hear of, because of restoring my
money) without speaking a word more about it, he determined to proceed from
Cavebeda; and traveling all night we passed by the Pits of Ganeniat.

June the fourteenth, Three hours before noon, (having traveled till then) we
rested a while near certain Pits; and setting forwards again in the Evening,
traveled till midnight, and then we rested. The next day rising early, we
traveled till about noon; till coming to a little bitter water, we stayed
there to repose. Here the great wind, which blows continually in the Desert,
allaying the great heat of the Season, having before much shattered our little
Pavilions, now broke them all in pieces, so that we could no more make use of
them: Which indeed, was a great inconvenience; but for the future, we had no
other remedy but when we rested, to ward off the Sunbeams with little sheds
made of our Cloths, fastened upon three Chairs wherein the Women and I were
carried, though they scarce sufficed to cover three or four persons: Yet in the
night, when there was no need of shadow, we slept more pleasantly and coolely
under the fair Canopy of the Starry Heaven. After noon, we proceeded further
till an hour before night, and then took up our lodging near another water.

June the sixteenth, Having traveled from break of day till noon, and then
rested two hours, we proceeded again till night, lodging in a place where the
multitude of Gnats suffered us to sleep but little. The next Morning early, we
passed by a great dry Lake, (which yet seemed to have water in it at some time
of the year) and an hour before noon rested in a place full of Hornets, very
troublesome both to Men and beasts. At the usual hour we set forwards again,
and journey'd till night.

June the eighteenth, Rising before daybreak, we passed by, at Arabians, which
they call Argia, governed by one Hhasan Aga Curdo, a Fugitive from his own
Country, and, by Alliance with the Arabians, become great amongst them. The
Capigi Ibrahim Aga, had a Robe to present to him from the Serdar; but being we
could not go to Argia, by reason all the Passages were then overflown with
water, and the Cameliers had no mind to it in regard of a Gabel which would be
required there of us, we reposed our selves about noon in the place where we
were. Having passed Argia a good way, the Capigi got one to swim over the
waters, and to advertise Hhasan Aga of the Serdar's Present which he had for
him, and would have delivered himself, had the way been passable; he also
desired some Arquebusiers to accompany us over the Desert. In expectation of an
Answer, we stayed in this place all day, where I saw upon the ground abundance
of Sea-shels, shining within, like Mother-of-Pearl, some whole, and some
broken; I wondered how they came there so far from Sea. I saw also many pieces
of Bitumen scattered up and down, which is produced in that brackish soil by
the overflowing of the water at some time of the year: I have a piece of it by
me to show.

Being suspicious of some Arabian Maedi's, that is, Vagrants or from the
Bedavi; or Beduvi, that is, Deserticolae, who are the noblest amongst them,
never residing in walled places, but wandering about the Fields with black
Tents; as also from the Hhadesi who live in Cities and Stable-houses, and are
therefore accounted by them the ignoblest and meanest, but indeed are of a
middle condition between both the other sorts) for more security we removed a
mile further, and took up our station under a little Hill near some ruins of
building, which we discovered afar off, and I walked on foot to behold near
hand. In the revolutions of Baghdad, the abovesaid Hhasan Aga Lord of Argia,
was visited by the Persians, the Sciah sending a Tag to him, as he uses to do
to great Persons whom he intends to invite to be, or declare themselves of his
Party: and he carried himself in such sort that his fidelity became something
suspected to the Turks; insomuch that a Basha had an intention to kill him, but
did not do it, perhaps because he knew not how to effect his purpose: wherefore
to keep him still faithful, as I believe, since it was not possible to punish
him, the Serdar sent him by this Capigi the abovementioned Present.

June the nineteenth, Our removal hence being still deferred in expectation of
the answer of Hhasan Aga, I went in the forenoon to take a more diligent view
of the ruins of the abovesaid ancient building. What it had been I could not
understand; but I found it to have been built with very good Bricks, most of
which were stamped in the midst with certain unknown letters which appeared very
ancient. I observed that they had been cemented together in the Fabric, not
with lime, but with bitumen or pitch, which, as I said* is generated in these
Deserts: whence the Hill, upon which these ruins are, is called by the
Arabians, Muqeijer, that is, Pitchy. In the evening two men came from Hhasan
Aga, to the Capigi with Letters and an Answer that he would send him some
provisions; but they departed discontented because the Capigi gave them nothing.

June the twentieth, Surveying the abovesaid ruins again, I found on the
ground some pieces of black Marble, hard and fine, engraven with the same
Letters as the Bricks; which seemed to me to be a kind of Seal like what the
Orientals use at this day: for their Seals are only letters or written words
containing the name of him whose Seal it is, together with some Epithet of
humility and devotion, Titles of Honor, or other words according as every one
pleases; not being perpetual to the Family, as ours are. Amongst other letters
which I discovered in that short time, two I found in many places, one of which
was like a jacent Pyramid thus,, and the other resembled a Star of eight points
in this form. Of the Provisions promised to the Capigi by Hhasan Aga, some few
came this day; but he sent no more; and they said, he was angry that the Capigi
had not sent him the Serdar's Present; which he forbore to do, because he knew
he had absolutely declared himself of the Persian Party. Wherefore doubting
lest he might send to do us some displeasure, although it was night, we removed
our Quarters, and traveled in haste till midnight.

June the twenty first, We set forth by daylight, and journied till Noon, and
after two hours rest, continued our way till night over Lands sometimes moorish
with abundance of little canes, sometimes whitish with salt, and sometimes
covered with thickets of Shrubs.

June the twenty second, We traveled again till Noon; and as we were reposing
in these Plains which were all covered with small dry grass, a little sparkle
falling from some of the Cameliers, who, according to their custom, stood
sucking the smoke of Tobacco, set this grass on fire, and the flame increased
so suddenly that we had much ado to save our Goods from burning; but at length
we extinguish't it by casting cloths and thick coverings upon it; for water the
place afforded none, and we had only enough for drink. Departing thence two or
three hours before night, we quartered in another place called Ehathuer, where
two or three men whom we met with their laden Camels, informed us that the
great Cafila, which went so many days before us from Bassora, had incounter'd
many difficulties, and was stopped by Emir Nasir, who, besides taking a great sum
of money from them, also constrained many of the people to go to Mesched
Hhussein to fight with the Qizilbasci, with whom he was now at enmity; in which
conflict, which proved little successful to the Arabians, the chief Leader of
the Cafila was slain, his Son succeeding him in his Charge; with other like
news, which made me doubt of the good estate of our Francks who went along with
that Cafila.

June the twenty third* the twenty fourth, and the twenty fifth, Geuazir of the
Chaldean Lake on our right hand; and on the last of them, we reposed at a place
wherein grew certain low and thin plants, which to me seemed to be Juniper.

June the twenty sixth, We traveled from daybreak till two hours before Noon,
and then rested near certain Pits, where we had on the right hand afar off
Mesched-Ali, the place where anciently stood the City of Kufa, and where Ali
the Son-in-law of Mahhammed was slain; the name Mesched-Ali signifying the
place of the Martyrdom of Ali, whom they hold a Martyr. And though the City of
Kufa is no longer in being, yet, upon account of the said Sepulcher, venerated
by Mahometans, and adorned with a noble Fabric, the place is frequented and
inhabited: when we passed by, it was in the power of the Qizilbasci, whereas it
used to be in that of the Turks whilst they were Masters of Baghdad. From hence
we continued our Journey till two hours within night.

June the twenty seventh, We set forth by daylight, and at Noon rested near a
water, which rising out of the ground, runs under a thicket of Canes, where we
stayed all day. The next day setting forth, and resting at our accustomed
hours, we passed over many dry Lakes, which seemed to have had water in them at
some time of the year.

June the nine and twentieth, Two or three hours before Noon, we rested by a
water near the ruins of an ancient great Fabric, perfectly square with
thirteen Pillasters, or round Columns on each side without, and other
compartiments of Arches; within which were many Chambers, with a Court of no
great bigness, and uncovered. The Arabians call this Fabric Casr Chaider. I
could not conjecture whether it had been a Palace, or Temple, or Castle; but I
incline to believe it a Palace rather then any thing else. In this place we had
within half a days journey on the Right Hand Mesched-Hhussein, which signifies
the place of the Martyrdom of Hhussein, and where Hhussan the Son of Ali and
Fatima, Muhhammed's Daughter, was slain, and buried by his Emulators; which
place, in the Country called Kierbela, being inhabited and adorned with the
said Sepulcher, which the Moors visit as Holy, (a very sumptuous Fabric after
their mode) was now in the Hands of the Qizilbasci, into which it fell with the
other Territories of Baghdad, which is but a little distant from thence. Here
we stayed to pay a Gabel to Emir Nasirben-Mahhanna, Lord of these Deserts, or
rather, to Sceich Abitaleb his Son; for Sceich Nasir being now old, and devoted
to a Spiritual Life, (as he that had been in pilgrimage at Meka) had resigned
the Government to his Son; and both of them were now remaining in Tents about a
League from the place, where we rested toward the North-East.

June the thirtieth, In the Morning the two Capigi's that were Serdar to the
Sceich; namely, Ibrahim Aga to the present, and Mahhmud Aga to the preceding
Serdar; who, as they said, was poisoned either by others, or by himself for
fear of worse, because he had not been diligent enough in the war of Baghdad;
yet this his Capigi, having been sent to several other places, could not come
hither sooner to the Sceich. After dinner, in the absence of the Capigi, the
Sceich's Men came to demand a Gabel; and after I had paid them as much as they
required, to wit, twelve Piastres, for only two Chests, and two or three more
Piastres of free-gift; nevertheless they opened all my Trunks, breaking some
for haste, turning all things topsie-turvy, and taking away for the Sceich and
themselves some things of value which they liked, a rich Persian Turbant of
Silk and Gold, a piece of fine checkered Silk to make Cassocks withal, after
the Persian Mode; many dishes of rare Porcellane, beautified with Gold and
colors; an Harquebuse belonging to my Servant; much curious Paper of Japan and
India; besides, many other toys which I remember not, telling me that they
would buy them; notwithstanding that I told them that they were not things to
be sold, but only such as I carried for my own use and service. Moreover, they
made me by force (that is, refusing to hear any of my Reasons to the contrary,
but saying, that the Sceich commanded so, though, in truth, I ought not) pay
twenty Piastres to my chief Camelier their Friend, alleging that the same were
for the Guide which he would have hired at Cuvebeda; which Guide, I neither
hired nor made use of; and if I had, I ought to have paid only half at most,
the said Camelier having other Carriages besides mine, and all of Merchandise.
But they were resolved to do a kindness to the Camelier, who was an Arabian,
and a Thief like themselves, and gave not this money to any Guide, but kept it
for his own use. Hereby the Readers may observe, how we Christians are used by
these Barbarians in their own jurisdictions. At length, they would have taken
for the Sceich a Sword, and Changiar or Arabian Poniard, the hilts and
garniture whereof were Silver-gilt, and which belonged sometimes to Sitti Maani
my Wife: Whereupon being no longer able to suffer so many insolences, I
resolved to go to the Sceich my self, and present him a Letter from the Basha
of Bassora, which he had writ to him in commendation of me. Accordingly leaping
upon a Mule of Ibrahim Aga's, who was already returned, and highly angry with
the proceeding of the Arabians, both toward me, the rest, and himself; I rid
in haste with the Notary of the Sceich, and our cheating Camelier, (who was
partly the cause of this bad usage, although I dissembled my resentment thereof
to him.) By the way I found many black Tents of his Arabians dispersed in
several places, and an hour within night I came to the Tent of Sceich Abitaleb,
a little distant from that of his Father Sceich Nasir; which Tents differed
from the rest, neither in color nor stuff, (being all of coarse black
Goats-hair) but only in bigness, which showed them to be the principal. We
entered not into the Tent, because we saw many of his chief Arabians sitting in
a round on one side thereof, upon certain colored and coarse woollen clothes
spread on the ground; and the Sceich was not there. Yet he came presently
after, and we all rising up at his coming, he went and sat down in the midst of
the circle, and so also did we in our places round about him. Then a
Candle-stick with a light being placed before him, he performed his Orisons
according to their manner; after which, sitting down again, he began to read
and subscribe certain Letters, giving dispatch to several businesses; and,
amongst others, to the Capigi Mahhmud Aga, who was there, and waited for
License to return. These things being over, I arose and presented him the
Basha's Letter. He asked, whether I was the Frank, (or Christian) of the
Cafila? Whereupon the Camelier answered that I was, and declared to him the
cause of my coming; whereunto I added in Arabic what I thought fit. He desired
to see my Hat nearer Hand, and caused it to be brought before him; and being
informed that I understood the Be^^in-Language, he told me, that I must excuse
what his Officers had done, for he had great need of Arquebuzes for war; that
the Turbant and piece of Silk much pleased him, but he would pay for them;
whereto I answered, that I did not value his payment, but would give him both
the one and the other. Then he called for the Turbant, and having viewed and
highly commended it, though I told him it had been used, (as indeed I had worn
it several times in Persia) he entered into the Tent with it where his Women
were, and from whence was heard a great noise of Hand-mils, wherewith to make
Meal for Bread; it being the custom amongst the Arabians, for even the noblest
Women to do such services: By and by he came out again with the Turbant upon
his Head, whereupon his people congratulated him for his new bravery, saying to
him, Mubarek, that is, Blessed, to the same purpose with our Ad multos Annos.
Then they set before him a brass dish full of Grapes, and we being all called
about him, he began to eat and give us some of the said Grapes, which were very
sweet and good, and the first that I had eaten this year. This ended, we
retired to our places, and after a short stay, I took leave and departed with
Mahhm^d Aga to the Cafila; one of his servants and the Camelier remaining
behind by the Sceich's Order, who said he would send a dispatch for his own and
my business the next day by them.

July the first, The Camelier returned with an Answer, that the Sceich would
not take the Sword, and the Changier or Poniard from me; and for the Turbant
and piece of Silk, he sent me 29 Piastres, whereof the Camelier said he had
expended five; to wit, two to the Officer that paid him, and three to I know
not who else, so that he brought me but 24; which were not a third part of what
the things were worth. However I took them, because the barbarous dealing of
the Sceich deserved not that I should correspond with him with better
courtesy. I have related this Adventure, that thereby the dealings of these
uncivil Barbarians may be known.

July the second, We departed from this Station early in the Sceich Nasir, who
also would needs extort some payment upon each Camel. We arrived late to bait
near a water, where we found many Arabian Tents, from which, and a neighboring
Village, we had plenty both of sweet and sower Milk, and also of Grapes. Here
we stayed all day, and upon a hasty quarrel between Batoni Mariam, and Eugenia
my Indian Maid, at night the said Maid ran away from us in these deserts, yet
was so honest as to leave even all her own things and ornaments behind; so that
it was rather despair than infidelity that occasioned her flight. I had much
ado to recover her again, and was in great danger of losing her, in case she
had fallen into the hands of any Arabian, who, undoubtedly, would have hid her;
and, perhaps, carried her afar off, and made her a slave for ever. I mention
this, to the end Masters may learn not to drive their Servants into despair by
too much rigor, which may redound to the prejudice of themselves, as well as of
them.

July the third, Setting sorth early, we baited before noon Assuetae ripis
Volucres, some of which we took and eat. F. Gregorio Orsino, who was with me,
bathing himself here, (as he was wont often to do for the heat) and being
unskilful of swimming, was in great danger of being drowned; happening unawares
to go into a much deeper place of the Lake then he imagined. We traveled no
further this day, but only at night went to join with the Capigi's, who had
pitched a Tent a little further from the Water, to avoid the Gnats there, which
were very troublesome both to Men and Beasts. The two next days we traveled
but little, because of some difference between the Arabians and the chief
Camelier, who went back to the Sceich about it.

July the sixth, We traveled this day over Lands full of a white and shining
Mineral, which was either Talk, or Saltpeter, or some such thing. I brought a
good quantity of it away with me.

July the seventh, We traveled from daybreak till noon, passing over a clayie
and slippery ground, where the Camels went with much difficulty. We rested at a
place full of prickly shrubs, the leaves whereof are less then a Man's nail,
and of the shape of a heart; the fruit was round and red, like small
coral-beads, of taste sweet, mixed with a little sharpness, having little stones
in them; it was very pleasant to the taste, and afforded no small refreshment
to us in these Deserts. The Mahometans celebrated their Bairam, the Fast of
Ramadhan being now ended.

July the eighth, We came to several places of stagnant waters, and baited at
one, two or three hours before noon; but the water was sulphurous and
ill-tasted, as most of the rest were also, in regard of the many Minerals
wherewith the Earth of the Desert abounds. We departed not from this place at
night, because we were to pay a Gabel to Emir Mudleg Aburisc, whose Territory
here-abouts begins. Emir Aburisc is the greatest Prince of the Arabians in
Arabia Deserta; and this Prince, (whose proper name is Mudleg) succeeded his
deceased Uncle Feiad, who was living and reigned when I went from Aleppo to
Baghdad nine years before, having usurped the Government from Mudleg, who was
very young at the time of his Father's decease. At night we were visited by
some pilfring Arabians, who finding us prepared with our Arms, betook
themselves to their heels, and escaped unhurt from us, though we pursued them a
while.

July the ninth, The Morning was spent in paying Gabels: I paid for my part
for a load and half of portage, as they reckoned it, fifteen Piastres, and two
more toward the abovementioned Gabel of the Camels to Emir Nasir's Brother,
besides other fees. They opened my Trunks, and took away two Velvet Caps, much
good Paper, and several other things; and had it not been more for the Capigi
Ibrahim entreaties than authority, they would also have broken open the Chest,
wherein I carried the Body of Sitti Maani my Wife. Three hours before night, we
put our selves upon the way, and traveled till about an hour before night,
when we came to a place of water.

July the tenth, We traveled till Noon, and rested in a great Plain surrounded
with certain Hills, in the midst whereof stands erected a Stone, fashioned at
the Top like the bowl of a Fountain. After which, we proceeded till an hour
after Sunset, and came to a place where we found good water between two little
Hills. Here we staid to refresh our selves and our Camels till three hours
before night; the Capigi's, who were to go by the way of Anna to find the
Serdar at Mardin, or elsewhere, departing before us: but we, who intended to go
to Aleppo without touching at Anna, for compendiousness of the way, and for
avoiding payment of some kind of Gabel there, left the way to Anna on the right
hand, and took that within the Desert more Southward. We traveled all the
remainder of this day, and all the night, with part also of the next day,
without staying; to the end we might the sooner arrive at water, of which we
had no less desire then need.

July the twelfth, About three hours after Sunrise we baited, being weary, at
the foot of certain little Hills, without finding water; so that we were fain
to drink that little which remained in the Goat-skin borachoes which we carried
with us. About three hours before Sunset, we proceeded again till almost Noon
the next day, when we arrived at water, to wit, the famous River Euphrates,
lighting upon a place of the ordinary way to Aleppo, where I had formerly
passed when I went from thence to Baghdad, and where the road between the River
and certain little Hills full of that Talk or shining Mineral is very narrow.
Our further stirring at night was prevented by the supervening of some
Soldiers, sent by the Officers of Anna, (whom the Capigi's had informed of our
passage) to demand those Tolls or Gabels which we had sought to avoid, although
we passed not through that City.

July the fourteenth, Most part of this day was spent in paying the said Gabel.
I paid for my part six Piasters, and gave two more as a gratuity to the
Soldiers; besides which, I was obliged to pay twenty to the chief Camelier,
whose money was all gone; and in this manner I was constrained both to profit
and pleasure him who never did me other than disprofit and displeasure. But for
all this, they afterward opened the two greatest Trunks I had, and tumbled all
my Goods about, treating me with all rigor and discourtesie. Only I took it
well (and upon that account willingly pardoned them all the rest) that seeing
the Chest wherein the body of Sitti Maani was, and understanding what it was
(for I was glad to tell them, lest they should have broken it open) they not
only gave me no trouble about it, as I thought they would, (being a thing
contrary to custom and their Laws) but rather accounted it a picce of piety
that I carried her with me to bury her in my own Country, both pitying and
commending me for it: which happening beyond all expectation I attributed to
God's particular favor, and to her own effectual prayers, which undoubtedly
helped me therein.

Anna, but others, who were carrying I know not what moneys to their Emir
Mudleg, accompanied with us. In the Evening the Leader or Chieftain of these
Soldiers made me open my Trunks once again, (namely the two little ones which
they had omitted in the day) and putting all my Goods in disorder, took away
many things, as a Mantle of Sitti Maani of deep azure silk, according to the
mode of Assyria, a Ball of Amber, an Alabaster Vessel curiously wrought, and
consigned to me in India by Sig. Antonio Baracho, to present in his name to
Sig. Francesco del Drago at Rome; many exquisite Porcellane Dishes miniated
with Gold; an Arabic Book, though of little importance; a great watchet Cloak
or Mantle to keep off rain after the Persian mode; much paper besides other
such things. At night we staid to rest, but the Soldiers went onwards; before
their going, I redeemed from them the Mantle of Sitti Maani, and Sig. Francesco
del Drago's Alabaster Vessel, giving them in exchange two Abe's, or Arabian
Surcoats which I bought of one of our company for seven Piastres; the Amber and
other things I could not recover, but they carried them away; for they would
neither restore them freely, nor take money for them, and our Cafila was so
small that I could find nothing to give them instead thereof which pleased
them. It was no small good luck that I saved the Sword and Poniard of Sitti
Maani, with many of her jewels, bracelets, and other ornaments of Gold from
their rapacious hands; hiding them under a trunk: for, if they had seen them,
it is ten to one but they would have taken them from me. I relate these things
that it may be known what Tyranny these Barbarians exercise in their own
Countries toward us, who in ours very often, with ill-employ'd courtesy, are
wont to be undeservedly caressed and honored when they come thither.

July the fifteenth, We traveled from Daybreak till Noon, and three hours
after till night, when we took up our Station not far from the River, amongst
many shrubs which to me seemed to be Juniper, or else that plant which in
Persia they call Ghiez. The next two days we traveled and rested at our usual
hours, and on the latter, we rested near a Pit or Well of bitter and stinking
water in a mineral Soil, all full of Talk, of which I brought away a parcel
with me. In like manner we proceeded the two next days; and on the twenty
first, we passed by a ruinous Castle called Hheir, which I had formerly seen
only by night when I went from Aleppo to Baghdad. I took a better view of it
now, and found it to be a great Building, all of good and large white Marble
Stones; the form of it is a long Square, with walls round about, here and there
distinguished with small round Turrets; within are many contrivances of Rooms,
all likewise of white stone, but so ruinous that it cannot be known what they
were. From hence we traveled about three hours further, and at night arrived
at Taiba, a Town which I had formerly seen, and lodged in a by-place amongst
the walls of the Houses near the Gate.

July the twenty second, This day was spent in paying the usual Gabels, which
every day are enhaunc'd in these Countries, and are now become insupportable.
Though I had nothing of Merchandise, but only goods for my own use; yet I could
not come off under twenty Piastres between Gabels and Donatives to the
Officers, which they demanded as equally due. Here I found an Arabian named
Berekiet, who spoke a little Italian, and passed for Factor or Procurator of
the Franks, saying, he had authority so to be from the Consuls of Aleppo. He
presently offered himself to speak to the Officers in our behalf, gave us an
Entertainment, and invited us to lodge in his House, and, if we had been so
minded, would have conducted us thither; but his services tended only to get
some money of us, and by his speaking with the Officers to make us pay more
then perhaps we should otherwise have done.

July the twenty third, Two hours after Sunrise, we departed from Taiba,
whence the said Officer sent an Arabian with us, to conduct us first to Emir
Mudleg (who they said was at Hhamah, between Aleppo and Damascus) and
afterward to Aleppo; they having done the same to the great Cafila of Bassora
which had passed by Taiba a little before us. This going to the Emir, was a
troublesome thing, both in regard of the great diversion out of the way, and the
inconveniences we imagined the Emir himself would put us to, after all the
Tyrannies we had hitherto met with in the Desert. We traveled till past Noon,
and after a short rest till Sunset, having a continued ridg of little Hills
always on the left hand.

July the twenty fourth, We traveled again from daylight till past Noon, and
two hours more in the Evening, taking up our Quarters an hour before Sunset.

July twenty fifth, We set forth an hour before Sunrise, traveling till Noon,
when the Arabian, assigned to us by the Officers of Taiba to conduct us to the
Emir, being so persuaded, as I believe, by the Cameliers, who alleged that the
Camels were very weary (as indeed they were, and ovet-laden, in regard that
many of them died by the way, so that they could travel but gently) resolved to
go alone before us by a nearer way over the mountains, and leave us to follow
him leisurely, as the Cameliers said they would. I was glad of his going, and
intended to take a different course from what the Cameliers imagined; but
because it was not yet seasonable, I held my peace. After two hours rest, we
traveled till an hour before night, when we took up our Station near certain
Pits, a little distant from the relics of certain ancient Fabrics called
Siria by me formerly seen and described in my journey to Baghdad.

July the twenty sixth, Setting forth by daylight, we came to rest after Noon
near a water which springs up in a place full of small Canes, whence we removed
not this night, partly, that ourt ir'd and over-laden Camels might recover
themselves a little, and partly, because the Cameliers were minded to eat a
Camel there conveniently, which falling lame of one leg they knocked on the head
in the morning; and indeed they had eaten all the others which failed by the
way, either through Disease or otherwise. Of this, which was not infirm, I was
willing to take a trial, and liked the roasted flesh well enough, only it was
something hard.

July the twenty seventh, Setting forth early, we waved the directest way to
Aleppo, (which was by the Town of Achila) and took another more Southwards, and
to the left hand, which led to the place where the Emir resided; intending to
leave the Camelier at a certain Town upon the way, from whence he was to go
alone to the Emir, to carry him a Present, and excuse our going to him by
alleging the death and weariness of our Camels. Hereby we endeavored to avoid
(if possible) the troubles and disgusts which we were likely to meet with from
the Emir and his Arabians, in case we should have gone to him our selves. At
Noon, we came to the defign'd Village, called Haila; they account it a Mezar,
that is, a place to be visited, and of devotion, in regard of some persons
buried there whom the Mahometans hold for Saints: yet it consisted only of four
poor Cottages, and those un-inhabited and abandoned, as is credible, by reason
of the Tyrannies which the Arabians of the Desert, especially the Soldiers,
exercised in these troublesome times upon the poor Peasants. The Camelier,
because he could not leave us here, by reason the Village was without people,
purposed to carry us to the Emir; doubting, lest if he did otherwise, it might
turn to his prejudice. Whereupon, considering what disgusts and perhaps dangers
too I might meet with there, both by reason of the women whom I carried with
me, and of whom the Mahometans use to be very greedy; and also by reason of the
body of Sitti Maani, and upon other accounts; I set my foot against the wall,
and resolutely told the Camelier, that I would by no means go to Emir Mudleg,
with whom I had nothing to do, now I had paid all his Gabels; I would go
directly to Aleppo; whither if he would not carry me with his Camels, I would
go on foot with my people, leaving all my Goods there on the ground to his
care; of which, if any were lost, he should be responsible to me for the same
at Aleppo: And, indeed, had the Camelier been obstinate, I was resolved to do
as I said, having little heart to trust to the mischievousness of the Emir,
(which was very infamous); or to expose to so great danger, not only the few
goods I had, but also the body of Sitti Maani, our lives, and the Women's both
Liberty and Souls (which was a great consideration); and little caring to
present to the Emir the Letter which I had for him from the Basha of Bassora in
my recommendation, because I had found by experience what little good the two
former did me, which I had presented to Sceich Abdullah at Cuvebeda, and to
Sceich Abitaleb the Son of Nasir in the Desert. The chief Camelier tried a good
while to prevail with me to go with him to the Emir; but at length seeing me
obstinate, and some other Cameliers of his companions of the same mind, he
resolved at last to leave the Camels with me to carry my Goods directly to
Aleppo, together with some few other companions of the journey, and to go
himself alone with all his loads to the Emir, purposing also to tell him, that
we by force, and against his will, had freed our selves from going to him; with
which I was very well contented.

After he was gone his own way, we took ours directly to Aleppo, and after two
hours travel, took up our station in a bare champian place, where night had
over-taken us.

July the eight and twentieth, From Sunrise we traveled almost till noon, but
the Camels being few, weary, and over-laden, made no great progress. After
three hours baiting, we journey'd again till almost night, and lodged by a
water near the Tents of some Arabian Beguin shepherds who were there.

July the nine and twentieth, Setting forth early, we saw some number of Horse
cross the way before us at a good distance, and finding the place a Plain
enclosed with Hills, and consequently, fit for Ambuscades and Treacheries, we
suspected that they were Thieves, and that they went to wait at some Pass to
assault us. Wherefore we put our selves in order, and marched a good while on
foot with our Arms ready to defend our selves by fight: But at length these
suspicions vanished, and we met no body; and, peradventure, they were people
that were afraid of us, and fled. Such encounters we frequently had in the
Desert, and many times betook our selves to our Arms; some times too in the
night we were visited by Pilferers, who attempted to steal something
clandestinely; but, God be thanked, no mischief ever befell us, and the Thieves
finding us upon our guard, went away always frustrated; and sometimes too,
either hurt or terrified by our Arms. On this occasion I will not omit, (now we
are near the end of this journey), that the Desert between Bassora and Aleppo,
is a great Plain with very few inequalities; and some of the soil is dry, some
saltish and full of other Minerals, little stony, and less moorish with Reeds;
but the greatest part was green with grass at the time of my passing through
it, yet with grass most commonly thorney, and good only for Camels to eat. The
heat, even in these Summer-months, was always supportable, and, provided a Man
were sheltered from the Sun, the wind was continually so great and constant
that it caused coolness, though sometimes it molested us with the dust. The
nights were always sufficiently cool, and, to avoid catching cold, it was
requisite to be very well covered. But to return to my purpose, on the day
abovesaid, a good while before noon we stayed to rest in a little Village of
Arabians, (not subject to the Emir, but Vassals of Aleppo) called Ludehi, lying
in a fertile Valley irrigated with a running water. From hence I dispatched my
Servant Giovanni Rubehh with a Camelier to Aleppo, which was about a League
off; and I writ Letters by him to the most Illustrious Sig: Aluyse da Ca, the
Venetian Consul in that City; and also to Doctor Luigi Ramiro his Physician, a
Roman both by Birth and Education, (upon which account I hoped, that though I
was unknown by sight, he would nevertheless be favorable to me) giving them
account of my coming, and desiring the Doctor to provide me a convenient
residence for my self and the Women with me. The Consul sent some of his
servants to introduce us into the City, without disturbance from the Turks or
Custom-Officers; which to me, in regard of the Coffin wherein I carried the
Body of Sitti Maani, was a great happiness; for if it had been seen, I might
have found much trouble from the Turks; as also by reason of the Books which I
had in their Language, some about matters of Religion, which, (as it had happened
to some others at Aleppo) it is likely would have been taken from me. After my
Servant was gone, we followed him till within a mile of Aleppo, where we stayed
his return in a Meschita or Sepulcher, upon the way, of one Sceich Saadi,
venerated for a Saint; and because either the Consul's Servants missed of me
and took another way, or else my Servant arrived there late; therefore hearing
of no Answer, we remained in this place all night.

July the thirtieth, In the Morning I writ again to the Consul, Giovan Maria de
Bona, his chief Interpreter, and my ancient Friend, to whom I had not written
the day before, because I beliv'd him dead, as was falsely reported at Bassora;
but understanding in the said Meschita by certain Women that he was alive and
well, I would not omit to write to him also. I gave account both to the Consul
and to him where I was, and desired of both the same favors of being met and
provided of a habitation, as I had done the day before. As soon as my Letters
arrived at Aleppo, the Consul sent several persons to fetch me, who the Evening
before had sought me a good while, but in vain, and went to look for me at the
Town of Ludehi, whence I sent the first advice. There came from the Consul's
House Sig: Andrea Buonanimi his Factor, some Janissaries, and other servants;
with whom came also some Officers of the Doganier, or Chief-Customer Abedik, an
Armenian Christian; the Consul intending by their means to render my entrance
more facile, and less suspected. All of them conducted us to the Consul's
House, where by all means he would have me lodge, having invited me so to do by
a most courteous Letter, which he had written the day before, and his Factor
presented to me before my entrance, with many good Reasons now urging the same;
whereunto I knew not in civility how to gainsay. The Customers came to search
my Goods, and to see whether we had any jewels concealed; which they did
civilly enough: As for the Chest wherein the Body of Sitti Maani was, and the
Books; partly, by the authority of the Consul, and the good management of my
Friend Sig: Giovan Maria de Bona his Interpreter; and, partly, by a Present to
the Doganier Abedick of fifty Piasters, and a vestment of Damask, worth thirty
Piasters more to the Searcher, (who only opened the outward Chest, wherein the
Coffin lay under many Indian medicinal Herbs, and saw nothing else but them)
and above thirty Piasters to several other Officers, it was brought about that
the Turks knew not what it was, and nothing was spoken of it. The Consul at
first intended to receive my Women into his House; but afterward being told
that it was not convenient by reason of the churlishness of the Turks, who were
now become more exorbitant than ever, he thought to lodge them in another decent
place; but Sig: Giovan Maria de Bona, was pleased to take them to his House,
wherewith I was very well contented, because they could not go to a better
place whilst separated from me: They were received there, and treated by the
Women of Sig: Giovan Maria, with very great kindness. F. Orsino and I remained
in the Consul's House, being entertained with the greatest Love and Courtesy
imaginable: And indeed he has been extremely obliging to me, not only in this
particular, but in all other matters occurring about my departure from Aleppo;
which we have determined to be, shortly, in some of the Dutch or French Ships,
which are now in the Port of Alexandretta, ready to set sail upon the next fair
wind; and, perhaps, together in consort: which, in regard of the many Pirates
now infesting the Medeterranean, would be the securest way.

LETTER XII.
From a Shipboard in the Port of Della Saline of Cyprus, Sept. 6. 1625.
DUring my stay at Aleppo, from whence I writ my last to August I took the
Altitude of the Sun with an Astrolabe, and found him decline Southwards from
the Zenith, 19 degrees, 20 minutes. He was that day, according to the
Ephemerides of David Origano, which I much esteem but have now with me in the
-- degrees. --

August the twelfth, The great Caravan of Bassora arrived at Aleppo; it set
forth a considerable time before us, but had encountered so many difficulties
in the Desert, that our sufferings were pleasures in respect of theirs.

August the sixteenth, I was informed by Sig. Gio. Maria de Bona, of many
passages of the Turkish affairs, which as appertaining to things before, or
hereafter to be mentioned in these Letters, and to the full knowledge of the
history of things in my time, I will not omit to relate in this place. He gave
me certain intelligence how Sultan Mustafa, Brother of the deceased Sultan
Ahmed, who reigned in Constantinople at my being there, reigned, and was
deposed for an Idiot (as really he is) twice; namely once before, and once
after Sultan Othman. How Othman, who was a Prince sufficiently odd humor'd,
being ill-bent against the Christians, and very desirous to make an Expedition
against Rome after the bad success befallen him in Poland, was slain by his own
Grandees, who would not suffer his government, which was somewhat rigorous and
violent: and that, as a sign of his being slain, he that slew him, carried one
of his ears to Mustafa's Mother, who was yet living, and was likely to be
well-pleased therewith. That it was not true that the said Othman in the
beginning of his Reign had put to death Qizlagarasi of so great authority in
the time of Sultan Ahmed his Father, because he had too much power, having been
the man that deposed Mustafa, and placed Othman himself in the Throne; but
indeed he banished him from Constantinople, sending him into a kind of exile to
live privately in Egypt; from whence he was afterward recalled by the present
Emperor, and restored to his ancient favor, and at length died of a disease at
Constantinople. How the present Emperor was Sultan Murad, Son of Sultan Amed,
and Sultana Chiose, of whom in the time of Amed I have elsewhere in these made
long mention; And that Murad was not the eldest Son of Chiose, who was seen at
Constantinople in my time, and was of the same age with Othman; but was a Son
much younger, that elder having been put to death by Othman, when he designed
to go into Poland. How the said Sultana Chiose was still living, and of more
authority then ever, her Son Murad now reigning since the death of Othman,
(wherein perhaps she had a hand, because he was not her Son but the Son of
another Woman) after the second deposition of Mustafa; and indeed I foresaw
many years ago, that the said Chiose, having one day removed all other
pretenders would at length by her wisdom and the power she had in Court bring
the Scepter into the hand of one of her sons, as accordingly she has done. How
the Government of the Turks was very ill-manag'd in this nonage of the Emperor
and all their affairs grew worse and worse; because there being no head, there
was likewise no obedience; all the Ministers did what they pleased, every one
more or less according as he had more or less power, without any regard of the
Prince, whom as a child they not only esteemed kept remote from the Government,
but endeavored to keep always so by educating him only to delights and
pleasures. Lastly, how the Serdar or Grand Vizier lately sent to the War of
Persia, was Hhapidh. Mahhammed Basha; that he was not sent from Constantinople,
but created Serdar or Grand Vzier whilst he was at Amid or Diarbekir, as Basha
or Governor; from whence, without being seen to pass by Aleppo, or spending
much time by the way, he happened to be the same year in Mesopotamia; which, I
said above, that I much wondered at, and could not believe, in case he had come
from Constantinople, as ordinarily it uses to be. He told me, that indeed he
was still at Amid, and had not passed further, because he continually waited
for the coming up of the Army, which was not yet gathered together. Whereby it
appears to be true what I had always affirmed at Bassora; namely, that nothing
would be done this year in the War of Baghdad, because it would scarce suffice
for the uniting of an Army, the expedition being begun, and the same year, and
the Serdar who was to be General being newly created. Sig. Giovan Maria added
to these relations concerning the Turks some news about the affairs of the
European Tartars, pertaining also to the former; namely, that the Tartarian
Princes of Cafa were three Brothers; Chan, who first reigned, a man of spirit
and valor; Chan who was a hostage at Constantinople; and a third Chan, an
enemy to the two others but a Vagabond from his own Country, and a fugitive at
the Court of the Persian, on whom he depends, and where he was seen by me in
the year 1618. when we marched against the Turkish Army. Now of late years I
know not upon what occasion the first Chan being sent for to Constantinople,
was there detained Prisoner, and his Brother Chan their Hostage, a person of
little valor and age established in his stead; under whom the affairs of his
State proceeded very ill, and the forces were very feeble; by which occasion
the Chan that was in Persia being invited, by the help of the Persian, and many
Tartars of the same Stare devoted to him, he entered with an Army into his
paternal Territories, and driving his Brother from the Throne, made himself
Lord thereof by force; continuing also to possess himself of all that Country
by the help of the Cossacks of Poland with whom he confederated in despite of
the Turks; a thing indeed of very prejudicial consequence to them.

August the second, I saw at Aleppo a Mohammedan of the Country, but only the
Woman or Child related what he or she saw and heard. He also caused two persons
to sit upon the ground one opposite to the other, and giving them four Arrows
into their hands, which both of them held with the points downward, and, as it
were, in two right lines united one to the other. Then a question being put to
him about any business, he fell to murmur his enchantments, and thereby caused
the said four Arrows of their own accord to unite their points together in the
midst (though he that held them stir^ed not his hand) and according to the
future event of the matter, those of the right side were placed over those of
the left, or on the contrary. I know well that such things are not difficult to
be done by the art of the Devil, nor yet to gain belief, the Devil being
naturally a Liar; but because the severity in our Countries makes such pranks
very rare, I therefore mention these here.

August the ninteeenth, Being ready to depart from Aleppo to Alexandretta,
there to go aboard a small French Ship which was ready to set sail (the great
Dutch Ships being already gone before I could be ready), though I hoped to find
them in Cyprus, and perhaps to imbarque in a Flemmish Ship called the Neptune
for more security with a Caravan of the same French. When I sent my Goods
aboard, I hid the Coffin of Sitti Maani in a great Ball of Cotton Yarn; and as
such it passed at the Custom-house, being sealed wit this mark P V, N 6. the
Letter denoting my Name, and the figure signifying the number of trunks and
bundles that I carried with me, being set upon every one of them, after the
Mercantile fashion. By this means the said Coffin was happily conveyed both in
and out, without being understood what it was either by the Turks, or Mariners
of the Ship, who otherwise would undoubtedly through their vain Auguries have
scrupled to carry it.

August the twenty second, I was visited in the Consul's House by Metran
Iscivaiab or Isciva-jahab, Archbishop of Mufarquin, a Syrian Nestorian, who had
been sometimes a great intimate to F. Fra. Tomaso de Novara, and joined with
him in the reduction of that Nation to the obedience of the Catholic Church.
He told me, he was very desirous to go to Rome, and in a manner offered himself
to accompany me, though I was to depart the next day: but because he said, he
had not his Patriarch's Letters for that purpose, but expected them shortly,
therefore (according to the prudent judgment of other persons who had informed
me of his affairs, namely, that there was little likelihood of his having
Letters of much importance from the Patriarch, and that his desire of going to
Rome was chiefly upon hope to get something there) I counseled him by no means
to get to Rome, without his Patriarch's Letters, inasmuch as the same would
render his reception undoubtedly more favorable. He came to be of my opinion,
and said he would follow me as soon as his Letters arrived; but in the mean
time he desired me, that I would carry with me two men of his Nation, who were
honest persons, and would serve me in the voyage. Whereunto I readily
consented, both to do him a kindness, and because I wanted Servants, having but
two; and not knowing where to get others that were trusty and fit for my
purpose. I offered him also my House at Rome, and my Person likewise in
whatever it might be useful to his service; remembering the Obligation I had to
his whole Nation for the sake of Sitti Maani Giocrida, my dear and esteemed
Wife, who was of it. With these and other the like Complements to him and the
Priest Rezqallah who brought him, and who was Son of the Priest Joseph Elbani,
a Maronite, (who read Arabic to me when I was before at Aleppo) he departed,
giving me many benedictions after their manner, and leaving a great Frienship
established with me.

August the third, In the Morning I went to see the Synagogue Aleppo, famed for
fairness and antiquity. Their Street is entered into by a narrow Gate, and lies
so much lower then the rest, that it is descended to by a considerable number
of steps. After I had gone through many of their narrow Lanes, which they
contrive so, purposely to hide the goodness of the Building from the Turks, I
came at length to the Synagogue; which is a good large square uncovered Court,
with covered Walks or Cloisters round about, upheld by double Pillars disposed
according to good Architecture. On the right hand of the entrance, is a kind of
great Hall, which they make use of for their Service in the Winter, when it is
cold or rains; as they do of the Court in Summer and fair weather. In the
middle of the Court four Pillasters support a Cupoletta, under which in a high
and decent place, like our Altar, lies the volume of the Law, and there also
their Doctor and principal Rabbi stands reading in a kind of musical tone, to
whom all the people alternatively answer. They stand in very great number
dispersed in the Court, Cloisters, and Hall, with their bonnets on their Heads,
and promiscuously like us in our Churches, Men and Women together (though I
have sometimes seen it otherwise in Italy); yet they are mixed in such order
that those of one family Men and Women stand all together; and, I believe too,
they have their peculiar places and benches to sit upon. Moreover, the right
side of the Synagogue was filled with Jews origiginaries of the Country from
ancient time; but the left with Europaean Jews, who although inhabitants, and
married at Aleppo, yet are originally adventitious; and these are all
Spaniards, and speak Spanish for their natural Language; yea, many of them were
born and bred up if not Spain or Portugal, at least in Italy, Germany, or other
Countries of Christendom. I was carried to see this Synagogue by a Jew named
Baruch, or in our Language Blessed, whom I had known at my last being at
Aleppo; He was born and bred in Mantua, a man well qualified, danced, played,
and sung competently well; and upon these accounts came to my familiarity. We
sat together a good while in the Synagogue amongst his fellow-Jews, beholding
their Ceremonies; and, after I had seen enough, I went away and left Baruch at
his devotions. As I went home I passed by the Carvanserai, (or Market) of Silk,
as they call it, because in times past, Silk and other Persian Commodities were
brought thither more then to other places, but now it is little frequented.
Here buying some few things of certain Vzbeghi Tartars, newly come to Aleppo
with a Caravan; I inquired concerning their Countries, and they told me, that
no Tartars are called Vzbeghi, but those of the Countries of Balch, Buchara,
and Sarmacand, who, at this day, are divided under two Princes, Brethren; one
whereof has his Seat at Balch, and is called Nedhir Muhhammed Chan, on whom
depends an inferior Prince, named Bahadar, (which signifies Gallant or Stout)
and sirnam'd, Jelan Tusc, from his spoiling and killing his Enemies in war; for
in their Language Jelan signifies to Spoil, and Tusc to Kill. The other Brother
named Imanculi Chan, has under him Buchera, Sarmacand, Tosc-Kiend, Endigian or
Endigan, with other Territories, and both of them border upon those of the
Persian Empire, and reign in the Countries, anciently called Sogdiana,
Bactriana, and perhaps also Hircania; but by the Moderns, Giagata, Maurenucher,
and Turkistan. The same day after dinner I took leave of the Consul, with all
my other Friends, and was by his Servants, and many others of the Italian
Nation, accompanied out of the City.

Aleppo, the Churches of the Oriental Christians, which stand in a Street
called Giudeida, not from the Jews, as some who skill not of Languages
erroneously imagine, but from the Arabic word Gedida, which signifies New;
perhaps, because this place of the Suburbs was built more lately then others.
Here, a little out of the Street on the right hand, I found four Churches all
together, led unto by one Gate only from the Street, but (the place being
spacious enough within) conveniently divided and separated about the Court or
Yard: Two of them belonged to the Armenians, the greater (a fair one indeed)
called Santi Quaranta, or the forty Saints; and the less, Della Madonna, or our
Lady. One of the other two called San Nicolo, belonged to the Greeks; and the
other, which is the least of all, to the Maronite Catholics, called Sant'
Elia. In another place a good distant from this, I saw alone by it self another
Church, hansome and large for the Country, built after our manner, with three
Naves or Isles upon Pillars; it belonged to the Syrian Jacobites, and was
called Sitaa Assedi, or Santa Maria. This Church has adjoining to it a good
House, with a little Garden and other conveniences according to the use of the
Country, wherein lives the Patriarch of the Jacobits, called Heda, for whom I
had brought from Bassora a Letter of F. Basilio di San Francesco, a
discalciated Carmelite, wherein he invited him to a mutual friendship and
correspondence, from which he might draw some benefit to the service of God, by
reason of his skill in the Arabic, and his residence here in behalf of the
Christians of the Country. This Letter I had gotten presented to the Patriarch,
and transmitted his answer to F. Basilio, but had never visited him as the
Father desired me in order to second his Letter, and settle a friendship
between them; because he lived far from the Venetian Consul's House where I
resided; and all the while I remained in Aleppo, I was lame of one foot by a
hurt caused by walking in ill shoos that day when we were in danger of being
assaulted by thievs; so that I could not walk, and was not wholly cured when I
departed. Nevertheless happening to be so near his Church now, I would not omit
to visit him. I found him a very complete, civil, and courtly man according to
the mode of the Country: he had not the fame of being learned, but yet was
accounted wise and generous. He told me, he was glad of F. Basilio's Letter,
and residing at Bassora, and building a Church there so peaceably, and with so
much favor of the Turks, as he advertised him; and that he would continue
correspondence with him. He also showed me two fair Books of the Gospels
written in large Parchment-sheets, with excellent Syrian Characters, one of
them, (as I remember) written four hundred years ago; the Letters whereof were
all either of Gold or Silver* and this Book, they say, was found by the Turks
in Cyprus when they took the Island, and carried to Constantinople, from whence
it was afterward redeemed with money, and brought hither. Indeed no Manuscript
could be more goodly or rich with gold and miniature; it had also a velvet
Cover adorned with Silver gilt, but made by themselves; the ancient Cover,
which they said was set with jewels of great value, being taken away by the
Turks. It Is the custom of the Orientals to make great account of Books so
fairly written and richly adorned, as likewise S. Jerome reports they used to do
in his time; though himself, being a Scholar, was better contented, as he
says, with his schedules of a less fair Character, but correct. The other
Gospel which the Patriarch showed me, was more ancient, namely, four hundred
and fifty years old, but written with ordinary ink and few miniated Figures;
this, he told me, they bought lately at Cyprus for two hundred Piastres. He
added, that the Church of Aleppo was not his Patriarchal See, although under
his jurisdiction; but it was near the City of Mousul, which is in the place of
the ancient Niniveh. After much more discourse, he caused very good Sherbets of
Sugar with snow, to be given us to drink as the custom is; and offered us a
Collation of fruits, which we received not because it was already late and time
to be gone. At last, at my taking leave, he prayed me to do reverence to his
Holiness in his name; and so when he had given me many benedictions, as their
manner is, I left him and departed.

Being come to the place where the Camels with the Women me thither, and chose
not the direct way to Alexandretta, which the Caravans commonly use, but one
somewhat longer hard by Antioch, out of a desire to see the remains of that
ancient City, which I had not yet seen. After a short travel, we rested till
the Moon arose, and then proceeded all the remainder of the night in bad and
uneven ways.

August the twenty fourth, We passed by some Villages and places cultivated
with Olive Trees, which I was joyful to see, not having beheld any for many
years. About Noon, we rested amongst certain ruins of Stone-buildings which had
once been very magnificent, and seemed to be the remains of some noble City in
ancient times. Here the Archbishop Isciva-jahab's men, the one named Abdisciva,
and the other Hendi, overtook me with his Letter: I received them, and carried
them with me as I had promised. The said place is called Hhalqa, which
signifies a Circle, because it is a great Plain almost surrounded with Hills.
Three hours after Noon we set forth again; we passed by another Village
belonging to the Territory of Hhalqa, and at night took up our Quarters near a
running Water under another Village called Harta. At midnight the Moon rising,
we set forth again, and traveled all the remainder of the night.

August the twenty fifth, Continuing our journey we came into a great Plain,
and traveling along the River Orontes according to the stream, (which we had
found at daybreak) we crossed over the same upon a good Stone Bridge. Here the
Plain is contracted, being straightened on the right hand with high, and on the
left with lower mountains; traveling in which Valley about Noon, we arrived at
Antioch, which is fronted with high mountains almost on the North beyond the
River Orontes, and backed with lower toward the South, the walls of the City
being extended over the same. We entered at the Eastgate, and took up our
Quarters near a great Cistern which is on the left hand of the Gate, divided
only by a wall from the Street, and paved round with white Marble: it is filled
by a running-water, and stands in a shady retired place, very delightful and
convenient for travelers to rest in. On the right side of the said Gate, in
one of the Towers of the wall, was a large and fair room, as high as the wall,
with few windows besides low and half-fill'd loop-holes for defense; so that it
was very cool, and would not be inconvenient in hot hours, were it in good
repair; but it is now all ruinous without a pavement, being made only a Stall
for Cattle. The walls of the City were still standing, all of Stone,
magnificent, and built with Turrets after the ancient mode. At the Gate where
we entered, began a Street not very broad but of great length, extended within
the City, and paved all with white Marble. Antioch is now inhabited by few
people, who live in little cottages patcht out of the ruins amongst Gardens, of
which the City is all full; for of the ancient houses and structures, saving
the walls of the City, there is none standing. Near the place where we lodged,
The Turks showed us I know not what, which they called Paulos de' Christiani,
which perhaps had been some Church of Saint Paul; but every thing was so
destroyed, that I neither saw nor understood it well. There being nothing else
remarkable to be seen, we went away three hours before night, by the same Gate
we had entered at (perhaps because the way was better without then within)
going about the City on the outside toward the plain on the North. But
re-entring afterward at a breach of the Wall, we walked a good way within the
City, which I found full of Gardens and Orchards, with few dwellings, saving at
the end. At length we went out at a Gate which stands in the more Western part
of the City, though not full West, where we passed over a fair Stone-bridg
which lies upon the River Orontes, taking our way to Alexandretta on the
Northern banck; for, they that go directly thither from Aleppo, never see this
River, but leave it much South. We traveled along its banks till night,
contrary to its stream, and took up our lodging by the Riverside, almost
directly against the Eastern Gate, at which we entered, and which we beheld
afar off on the other bank: Antioch is almost square, about a mile long, and
has many Gates; on the South, it is terminated with Mountains, which, they
said, were seven, like the seven Hills of Rome, but I could distinguish no more
then five, that is, not five Mountains, (for the Mountain appears but one
continued ridg) but five tops of it. These Mountains are very steep, and
therefore I think could not be built upon; but only, that part of them was
included within the wall for strength, and that the same might not be
prejudicial to the City by being left without, in case of War. That which
remains of the City at the foot of the said Mountains, is of small
circumference; so that the City appeared to me much less then I imagined it.
Within, as I said, there is not any Fabric standing, but infinite ruins, and
the earth is everywhere strow'd with great and goodly stones. Only the Walls
are almost all sound and entire, with little decay. After midnight the Moon
arising, we also got up; and leaving this Station, proceeded on our way.

A Platform of ANTIOCH.


1. The Eastern Gate, at which we entered. 2. The Cistern. 3. The Street paved
with Stone and extending within the City. 4. A few Habitations in the end of
the City. 5. A Bridge over Orontes without the City, and contiguous to the Gate.
6. The River Orontes. 7. A Turret with a room within it.
August the twenty sixth, Continuing our Journey, at daybreak Amano, which,
because at a distance it appears black, is called by the Turks Cara Aman, that
is, Black Aman; whence also they now corruptly call the Province which is
comprehended in the said Mountain, (and was, according to some, the ancient
Cilicia) Caramania. We refresht our weary Camels with two hours rest in a place
amongst the Mountains, where, though there were no Houses, yet we wanted not
Water and wild Figs. After which being arrived to the highest part of the
Mountain, and re-enter'd the common road from Aleppo, we discovered the
Mediterranean Sea afar off, which to me was a welcome sight, in regard I had
not seen it since my departure from Gaza in the year 1616. We descended down by
a way where the Precipices are secured with good breast-works of earth
sometimes for a Mile together; and at length came to the Town of Beilan, from
whence the mountains are here denominated Montagne di Beilan. A little beyond
this Town, we reposed in a by-place near a running-water, and under the shadow
of abundance of Nut-trees; for the Town it self and places adjacent were all
taken up by a great Caravan which came from Aleppo to Constantinople by land.

August the twenty seventh, An hour before day we began to descend amongst the
streights of these Mountains, where we met a great Caravan of Merchandise which
had lately come in two Venetian Ships, and was going to Aleppo: After two or
three hours travel we came to Alexandretta, called by us Europaeans Scanderoon,
but more correctly in Turkish Eskander, that is, Alexandro Graeco, because they
will have it denominated from Alexander the Great. It was sometimes a noble
City, but by reason of the bad air (for it is situated upon the Sea in a
Moorish Plain, and enclosed with Hills which keep off the wind) it was never
much inhabited; and the year before my being there, it was al-wholly destroyed
by the Pirates of Barbary, who spare none either of a different or of their own
Religion, nor yet bear any respect to the States of the Great Turk himself,
though their Lord; so that I found only four small Houses, scarce re-edifi'd
this year, wherein the Lieutenant of the place (for the right Governor remains
at Aleppo) the Vice-Consuls of such Europaean-Nations as trade into Soria, and
a very few other people resided. Sig: Antonio Grandi, the Venetian Vice-Consul,
having notice of my coming by a Messenger whom I sent to him from Beilan,
received and lodged us in his own House with much Courtesy, upon the
recommendation of his Consul, from whom I presented him a Letter. And when I
had acquainted him with my desire to depart as soon as possible, and shown him
the Governor's Pass for my self, goods, and people, which I brought with me
from Aleppo, together with other commendatory Letters to his Lieutenant and
other Ministers; the said Sig: Antonio went presently to present the same, and,
by the authority he had here obtained, much more easily then I expected, that I
might imbarque when I pleased; yet upon promise, according to the custom of
Turkey, of a small Present to the Governor, and also to a Jew his Minister;
which was afterward given to them both. After dinner Captain Fort, Commander
of the French Ship S. Anne, wherein I was to imbarque, came a shore, and I
agreed with him to go aboard that night, though he puposed to stay two or three
days longer, in expectation of more lading before he set sail. Accordingly
after I had written to Aleppo, and supped in the House of Sig: Antonio Grandi,
I was carried aboard by the said Captain with all my people, and only those
few goods which I had brought with me from Aleppo; leaving all the rest to be
first received by the said Sig: Antonio, and then conveyed to me by Sea more at
leisure. Thus after many years I quitted the Continent of Asia, with a certain
Resolution never to set foot upon it again unless armed, and began my Voyage
toward my desired Italy; there being with me of Women, Batoni Mariam Tinatin,
a Giorgian Virgin, and faithful Companion of most of my Peregrinations; Eugenia
an Indian Maid of Scilan; and of Men, F. Fra: Gregorio Orsino, Vicar General of
Armenia; and my Servants, Michel di Bengala, commended to me at Goa by Sig:
Antonio Barraccio, Giovan Robehh, a Chaldean of Kiumalava, and the two Syrians
recommended to me by that Archbishop, namely, Abdisciva, and Hendi, Nestorians.

August the nine and twentieth, All my other goods, together with the Coffin of
Sitti Maani, (concealed in a ball of Cotton yarn) were imbarqu'd, (thanks be to
God) without any disturbance. The next day I took the height of the Sun in the
Port of Alexandretta, and found him decline at noon from the Zenith 28 degrees.
He was that day in the -- degree of Virgo. The same day, by the advice of Sig:
Antonio Grandi, to prevent all further troubles which might arise from new
searching of my goods, and payment of half Gabels, in case I should exchange
the Ship wherein I was, for a Flemish Vessel called the Neptune, as I had
formerly intended to do at Cyprus; I determined to continue in the same Ship
till I came either to Malta or Sicily, and the rather because the Captain was a
Person to my liking, and all his people honest Catholics, with whom I promised
my self most satisfaction. Besides, though the Flemish Ship was greater, better
armed, and accompanied with two others, and consequently, as to danger of
Pirates, more safe; yet 'twas known too that the Flemmings were at Truce with
the Pirates, and sometimes will not fight with them, but being secure not to
lose any thing of their own, use to submit to them, and let them take all the
goods of other people that they have in their Ships without the least contest:
So that I had some reason not to trust my self with them, (although much
persuaded thereunto by the Master of the Ship) because, perhaps, in such case
they would not have much cared for securing me, whom they hated upon the
account of Religion. On the other side, though the French Ship wherein I
imbarqu'd was small and unprovided of Artillery, yet it was an excellent
Sailer, and safe enough from being overtaken by any Pirate, provided it
descried him first at a little distance, and had but the least advantage: For
which purpose a Man was constantly placed upon the main-sail to make
discoveries; and as for being surpised by the Pirates without foreseeing them,
as 'twas possible we might be in a Morning at daybreak, falling among them
unawares; so, we hoped, God would preserve us from such misfortune. Of this
change of my Resolution, I gave account in my Letters to Aleppo; and I mention
it here, to the end, that it may appear that my passing into Italy in so small
and disarmed a Ship, was not folly or rashness, (as, perhaps, it may otherwise
seem) but a considerate determination prudently made upon weighty and important
Reasons. Accordingly, after Sig: Antonio Grandi had presented us many
refreshments for the Voyage, the same Evening a little before night we set sail.

September the first, In the Evening we passed by Capo Chanzir, Capo Porco,
lying thirty miles from Alexandretta, and the next Evening we discovered the
Island of Cyprus, where we were to touch and stay some days.

September the third, In the Morning we doubled the Cape of S. Andrea, on the
South of the said Island, being to put in at Porto della Saline, or the Port of
the Salt Pits, which is now the principal and most frequented landing-place of
Cyprus.

September the fourth, We entered the said Port, which lies on the South part
of Cyprus in a large Bay, surrounded with Land, spacious and secure enough for
all sort of Ships. It lies two hundred miles from Alexandretta, and is the Port
where the Turkish Army landed when they took the Island. As soon as we had
entered, we were visited in the Ship by Sig: Dimitrio Todorini, a prime Greek
Merchant, but not a Cypriot, who offered me his House; and Sig: Giovan
Francesco Parente, a Venetian, my ancient Friend and correspondent in Aleppo,
(from whence, upon certain discontents befallen him there, he had betaken
himself hither) who visited me not only upon his own account, but also in the
Name of Sig: Alessandro Goneme, the Venetian Consul in that Island, who excused
his not coming in Person, for that he was just then called away by the Cadhi,
upon a certain business.

September the fifth, The said Venetian Consul with Sig: Parente, and some
others of his House visited me in the Ship: And though I intended not to go
ashore notwithstanding all his entreaties and invitations, yet he resolutely
refused to depart till I went with him. Wherefore I obeyed him, and went only
with one servant, leaving F. Orsino, and the Women in the Ship. On the seaside
I found some few dwellings, and magazines or storehouses, which are those that
they properly call delle Saline, from the Salt Pits hard by; where the Turks
have a small square Castle, with a Platform, and Artillery to guard the Sea,
but of little importance. Here taking Horse, we rode a little mile within Land,
to another Village called Larnaca, where the Franks live for the most part, and
there we alighted at the Consul's House. And because it was yet early, after a
little repose, we went to the Franciscan's Church, called Santa Maria; and
there heard Mass, which was sung with the Office pro mortuis, for the Soul of
Sig: Giovan Maria Parente, Brother to Sig: Francesco, who the day before passed
to a better Life. In the Evening, I visited Sig: Dimitrio Todorini in his own
House, and lodged in that of the Consul. I will not omit that the Venetians
have always a Consul at Cyprus, who is not of the Nobility, but of the Order
of Eminent Citizens, whereof many Secretaries of the Republic use to be; so
that though the Consul of Cyprus be not dependent upon him of Aleppo, as
Vice-Consuls are; yet he of Aleppo, as noble, and a more principal Minister in
these parts, has something of superiority over this of Cyprus.

September the sixth, This Morning I am returned a Shipboard, where I conclude
this Letter, and commit it to F. Fra: Giovanni di Segovia, a Spanish reformed
Franciscan, who came hither in the same Ship with us from Alexandretta, and is
the same Person who, disguised in a secular and Souldier-like garb, for fear of
being hindered in his passage by the Portugal Ministers, came (in company of F.
Fra: Roderigo di San Michele, a Discalceated Augustine, and Provincial of
Manila) in the same Ship with us from Mascat to Bassora, passing under the name
of l' Alfiere, or Ensign, till he arrived safe at Aleppo, where laying off his
disguise, he resumed his proper name and Fryer's habit; and because the
Provincial of Manila, with whom he came into India, could not dispatch his
affairs but stayed behind at Aleppo; therefore he being desirous to arrive
speedily at Rome and Spain, in order to the affairs of his Religion, is just
now departing, and has promised me to deliver this to you, and to salute you
in my name, as I do most heartily.

LETTER. XIII.
From Malta, November 4. 1625.
WHen I was thinking of finishing the small remainder of Malta by a little kind
of misadventure, sufficient to temper the course of so many good Fortunes. In
regard of the formidable Pestilence still continuing in Constantinople, and
other places of Turkey, we have not been able to get admittance to anchor, and
land in this Island without undergoing a Quarantine. Wherefore finding my self
at leisure enough here in a House assigned me, as a favor, by the Lords of the
Council, and separated from the little Island whither all the rest are sent, I
have thought fit to pass my time in writing to you what Adventures have
befallen me since my last, which was dated from a Shipboard at Cyprus,
September the sixth. Be pleased therefore to know, that on September the
seventh, I went ashore again to hear Mass; after which, I returned a visit to
Sig: Rocco Andreani, a Venetian Merchant, in whose House I saw a live Camelion,
which a Boy of the family, kept very tame, tied with a little string for his
Recreation. They are frequent in India, and are seen leaping amongst the Trees;
but I never saw any but at distance, and so did not well observe them. Here
therefore holding it in my hand, (for it is a gentle and pleasing Animal) I
observed it to be as big as a Lizard, and almost of the same shape, but more
unhandsom to behold, having an ill shapen head, divided feet, and two paws, in
the middle whereof the leg arises; each of which paws, is divided into two
toes or nails, yet so as the fissu^^ is very small. Its color was gray, but
with some variety, like a dapple. They told me, that it sometimes changed
color, (not, as is vulgarly reported, according to that which is laid before
it, but) according as it has more heat or cold, takes pains or reposes, with
other like Accidents: Which event I saw not, though I tried several ways to
procure it.

September the eighth, The Consul carried me to another Village about two
leagues, or six miles distant from Larnaca, and called to this day, Kiti and
Citium, anciently a City and Bishopric, but is now all destroyed saving a few
Cottages. We went, particularly, to visit a Greek Doctor, named Sig: Aluise
Cucci, who lived there, and had the same of much knowledge, and spoke Italian
well; as also to see his Garden, which, though half ruined, (as all things are
in the Island, since it fell into the Turk's hands) is yet one of the goodliest
places in those parts. Here died Cimon the most valorous and virtuous Athenian
Captain, Son of the no less famous Captain Miltiades. You may see Aemilius
Probus in the Life of the said Cimon, where he says, In Oppido Citio est
mortuus, after he had conquered most part of the Island Cyprus. Two or three
hours before noon, we passed by the place where the Salt-work is, which, though
through the negligence of the Turks, who do not cleanse and empty it well, it
decays and fills up every day; yet in my time it yielded yearly about 10000
Piasters, and almost all Ships make ballast of Salt; particularly, those of
Venice are all obliged to take as much as will serve for that purpose; and many
times they take more, which at Venice is a good commodity, and a Trade reserved
to the Prince. Then we passed through a Village called Bromolaxaia, and at
length arriving at Kiti, which lies a little distant from the Sea, (the Coast
of the Island running Westward from the Saline) we visited Sig: Aluise Cucci,
whom (indeed like a Philosopher, as he professes to be) we found living in a
House, which had sometimes been great and fair, but was now half ruin^d; the
Garden had a small Brook, with structures of Fountains and such like things,
but all out of order, and reserving no other beauty besides a great number of
Orange Trees, planted regularly, and of equal height, and making a goodly and
delicious Grove. I discoursed with the said Sig: Aluise, and he seemed an
intelligent Person; but because he was sick, or at least recovering, and so
weak that he could scarce speak, I could not benefit by him as I desired. I
asked him concerning Cadmia and its species, and other Minerals, which you writ
me word that you desired from Cyprus, and I accordingly sent to Nicosia, (the
chief City of the Island, and the place of the Basha's residence); as also
concerning the Book of Galen. He told me, there was some at this day, but 'twas
hard to meet with any that knew it, or could tell where to find it, the people
being very Idiots, and the Mines intermitted heretofore by the Christians, for
fear of alluring the Turks thereby to invade the Island, as also since by the
Turks through ignorance. After this and such other Discourse, we returned to
Larnaca by a different road, about the midst whereof we found another Village,
called Menego; but all these Villages in former times well peopled, are now
almost wholly destroyed and uninhabited.

September the ninth, Being returned to the Ship, the next day della Saline of
Cyprus, and found him decline Southward from the Zenith 29 degrees, 29 minutes,
50 seconds. On which day he was in -- degrees of --.

September the thirteenth, I went ashore in the Morning to Larnaca again, from
whence, upon the Consuls instance, I was accompanied by Sig: Gio Francesco
Parente, two other Venetians, a Greek named Meser Manoli, my servant Michel,
and a Janizary for our guard, to a delicious place of Devotion, called by the
Greeks, Agia Nappa, that is, Holy, about eight leagues from Larnaca, upon the
Eastern Seacoast near Capo della Greca, where there is a Church built in a
Grotto, wherein a miraculous Image of our Lady was found. Having rid all day
almost continually by the Seaside, we lodged at the Village Ormidia, and the
next day early, passing through the Village Xylofago, and the Cape di San
Georgio, where many Ships, especially Pirates, use to put in for water at a
River which falls into the Sea on the East of the said Cape, we arrived at the
Village Agia Nappa. We found it like all the rest that I saw in Cyprus, almost
wholly destroyed; partly, by the ordinary tyrannies of the Turks, partly, by
the Pestilence which a few years before had swept away most of the people. The
Church being built almost like a little square Castle, (perhaps for fear of the
Pirates) is still standing; and being under ground, is descended into by many
stairs. A Papas, or Greek Priest, who officiates there, has charge of it,
together with certain Calogrie, or Nunns, who having renounced the world, have
addicted themselves to God's Service, and are modestly clothed in black, though
they be not Recluses. In the middle of a great Court or Yard, stands a marble
Fountain not ill built, over which they have lately built a great Cupola, upon
four Pilasters with seats round about, where we not only entertained our
selves all day, but slept at night; the murmur of the water rendering the place
sufficiently pleasant. The next Morning, Mass was sung in the Church after the
Greek Rite, and I was present at it till the end of the Gospel. On one side of
the Church in a place apart, is an Altar, where our Latin Priests say Mass
when any comes thither. In sum, the Church is an indifferent large Grotto, the
Image ancient, and the Altar adorned after the Greek manner, without any thing
else remarkable. Here we eat a great quantity of Becca-fichi, or Fig-snappers,
(a sort of Birds called by the Greeks Sicalidia) which are so plentiful in
Cyprus, that abundance of them are sent sows'd in Vinegar to Venice and
elsewhere; but those at Agia Nappa sometimes are not good, by reason of their
having eaten Scammony, which is not known to be found there-abouts, but
probably, they feed upon it in some other place.

September the sixteenth, We departed from Agia Nappa to return to Larnaca, and
passing through the Village Xylofago, we alighted there to see the Church of
San Giorgio, wherein amongst other Saints, I saw one painted whom they call
Agios Mapeas, that is, San Mama, much venerated by the Greeks; who say, He was
a Martyr, and buried in Cyprus; but I know not according to what History, they
paint him between a Horse and a Lion.

September 17th Returning a Shipboard, by the way I visited a Church of the
Greeks, (but heretofore of the Armenians) called, S. Lazaro, some of the stones
whereof I observed engraven with Armenian Letters: It Is a very ancient
stone-structure of an extravagant form, though used by the Greeks in sundry
places, namely, consisting of 3 Nave's or Isles, supported only by 4
Pilasters, with three Cupola's on a row in the middle Nave; the place within
amongst the Pillasters serving for men, and that round about for women by
themselves. Behind the Altar they show a Subterranean Sepulcher, like a little
Grotto, and entered into by a square hole like that of a Tomb; they say it was
the Sepulcher of Lazarus raised by Christ, and that he built the Church whilst
he was Bishop here, and at last died here; from whence his Body was afterward
transported first to Constantinople, and then to Marseilles: The truth whereof,
they affirm, is proved by the Miracles done every day in the said Sepulcher, as
healing the sick, and the like; but this is repugnant to the History we have in
the Breviary, Martyrologie, etc.

September the twentieth, The Consul gave me a piece of Ladano-Vergine, that
is, pure, without any other mixture, as it comes naturally; whereof there is
plenty in Cyprus: and some intelligent persons of the Country whom I consulted
purposely, told me, it is generated of the Dew which falls from Heaven, just as
Manna is, and that it is gathered off the leaves of a plant no higher then a span
and half, or two spans; which matter they boil, and being viscid like wax,
form into rolls like little Candles, which they wrap afterward round together.
The said Ladanum is black, has a good quick Aromatical Smell; and, in our
Countries, mixed with other things, makes a good Perfume; and, perhaps, serves
for Medicinal Uses, as you know very well.

September the one and twentieth, Sig: Cicach gave me some of the stone
Amiantus, a sort of stone that may be spun, of which the Ancients made the
Cloth which, they say, was incombustible, and the fire only cleans'd it, as
water does other Linen; in which Cloth they burnt dead bodies, and so
preserved the ashes thereof from being mingled with those of the wood. At this
day none knows how to make the Cloth, or to spin the matter; although a whitish
matter like Cotton is clearly seen to issue out of the stone, not incapable of
being spun. The color of the Stone, when entire, is greenish, inclining to
black, but shining enough, almost like Talk; yet when it is broken or spun, the
matter that issues out of it is white. I remember I once saw some of this
Stone, and the Cloth woven thereof, in the Study of Ferrante Imperato at
Naples, amongst other Curiosities.

September the twenty fourth, The Consul invited us to dinner in the Venetian
Ship Cacciadiavoli, where we stayed not only to dine, but also to sleep
all-night, being entertained with Music, and the good conversation of Sig:
Parente, Flatro, and Rocco Andreani, who were there. The next day, we returned
to our own Ship, and the Evening following I went ashore again. A new man was
expected to come to govern the Island, the old being already departed upon the
arrival of an Officer of the new, who, as their custom is, was come with the
Title of Musselem, to prepare the place for his Master: But before this New
Elect arrived at his Residence in Nicosia, News came that by a fresh command of
the Grand Signior at Constantinople, the new Basha was recalled, and deprived
of his Office before he possessed it, unto which the old was restored; besides
the changing of the Defecodar, and other Officers. These sudden and unexpected
changes of Ministers, have many years ago begun to be practiced in the Court of
Constantinople, occasioned chiefly by the ill Government, and the selling of
those Offices, without any limitation of time, to who-ever gives most; which
disorders are more prevalent now then ever: Which I mention, that it may be
known in what an ill State the Commonwealth of the Turks is at this day, which
indeed seems to be tending of its accord to manifest ruin.

September the eight and twentieth, After another treatment given us by the
Consul in the Ship of Viaro, he accompanied us in the Evening to our Caravel,
which was to set sail forthwith, and there, with many Complements and
expressions of Courtesy, we took leave one of another; the Consul returning
ashore, and we remaining in the Ship.

About three hours after Sunset, we hois'd sails toward Limiso, another Port
of the Southern Coast of Cyprus, but more Limiso, where we anchored at a good
distance from Land, because for so short a time as our Ship was to stay there,
it would not be subject to pay Anchorage.

September the thirtieth, Sig: Gio: Francesco Parente, who arrived at Limiso
the night before by Land, came in the Morning to invite me ashore in the Name
of Sig: Pietro Savioni a Venetian, who has a House at Limiso, and is
Vice-Consul in Cyprus for the Dutch; he received me with very much Courtesy.
And being it was yet early, I walked about the Town, which is of indifferent
bigness, where I saw a great Meschita of the Turks standing in a goodly street
near the shore, where I saw great plenty of Carrubes, or Capers, wherewith
whole Ships are laden from hence for Venice and other parts. More within the
Town, I saw the Castle which is small, of a round form, representing rather a
low thick Tower or Turret then a Fortress; yet it has some small pieces of
Artillery, and is built of stone. Then I came to the Church of the Bishopric;
for Limiso has a Greek Bishop, who commands four Eparchats, (as they speak) to
wit, this of Limiso, that of della Saline, and two others; the whole Island
being divided only into four Bishoprics, each of which has several Eparchats
under them. This Cathedral Church is small, and dedicated to our Lady S. Mary;
of Building, like the rest of the Country; and because it is the Cathedral, they
call it, according to custom, La Catholica, i. e. Universal. Here I found one
Didascalo Matteo a Greek Monk, who spoke Italian well, as he that had lived
many years at Venice, and professed skill in Minerals, Chemical matters, and
the like. To him, whilst he was at Nicosia, I had gotten a friend to write from
Larnaca, to desire him to procure me the Cadmia and other Minerals which you
desired. But the Letter found him not in Nicosia, for he was departed from
thence to go to Mount- Sinay. Finding him here, and asking him about the
business, he told me, There was to his knowledge abundance of those Minerals,
particularly* Sori, Mysi, Melanteria, and Cadmia, to be had in some places of
Cyprus, and that he would have procured me some, had he known my desire in
time; but now he could not by reason of his present departure, and the place
where to have them was very remote. He gave me certain little pieces of Silver
and Gold found in Cyprus, and promised me to use exquisite diligence for the
rest at his return from Monte Sinay, which would be within three Months;
whereupon, I writ to the Consul of Larnaca, that at his going to Nicosia, where
he was shortly to salute the new Basha (for by virtue of a third command from
Constantinople, the new Basha was once again confirmed, and the old again
deprived, with more strange inconstancy of government then ever) he would
consult by the way with a renegado German, who practiced Physic there, and, as
Didascalo Matteo told me, knew where to find the said Minerals for me. Whilst
I was discoursing thus in the Churchyard with Didascalo, the Bishop an ancient
man with a white beard passed by, together with another Monk, who was going to
Church to rehearse his hours. I, understanding who he was, saluted him, and
passed many complements with him in the Greek Tongue; for he understood not
Italian.

October the first, The Hollanders invited me a Shipboard to see their Ships
which were in the Port: whereupon, after dinner, I went accompanied with Sig.
Parente aboard of two, the Neptune, and the S. Peter, in both which we were
obliged to drink several healths, particularly, that of their Prince
Henry-Frederick of Nassau; every Cup we drank being solemnized with a Great
Gun, and also at our departing from the Ships, they discharged three Pieces,
which were answered by those of all the rest.

October the second, By Letters from Constantinople to certain Greek Monks, the
news I had heard at Aleppo, concerning the progress of the Tartar of Cafa,
united with the Cossacks of Poland against the Turks, was confirmed, and that
about seven hundred of their Ships sailing to the Confines of Constantinople,
had done inestimable damage, and put the City it self in fear. They said also
that a violent Pestilence raged at Constantinople, and that the Grand Signor
had been grievously sick, having had in his own person seventy Plague-sores, of
all which notwithstanding he was cured: which indeed is a strange thing, and
happens but rarely.

October the third, The Dutch entertained us at a dinner in their greatest Ship
which was bound for Venice, and called Il-Naranciero, or the Orange, where many
healths were drunk to the Doge of Venice, and the Prince of Nassan; each Cup,
as also our departure out of the Ship, being honored with many Guns. Which
ended, I would not go ashore any more, being our Ship was to depart the night
following, but repaired to it; the Dutch continuing their drinking and shooting
all night in augury of a happy voyage.

An hour after midnight we all set sail, five Ships together, Dutch, the
Orange, S. Peter, the Neptune, and the Unicorn; and our French Caraval, S. Ann,
wherein I was imbarq'd. I will not omit, that being our French Ship did not pay
anchorage at Limiso, though person alone were suffered to go ashore, yet they
were not permitted to buy any thing there to carry aboard; for had it been
known that we had shipped the least thing, even but a little Water, or a single
Lemon, they would have demanded the whole Anchorage-money; wherefore I was fain
to get a few fruits and refreshments conveyed into the Dutch Ships, without
being known that they were for us.

October the fourth, We continued sailing Westwards along the South coast of
Cyprus, our Caraval which was swifter than the rest, having but half the sails
displayed, whilst they spread all.

October the ninth, Having hitherto hovered about the shores of Cyprus, and
advanced little, a more favorable wind now carried us out of sight of the
Island, and we sailed directly on our voyage with various winds till the
thirteenth day, when we discovered the gulf of Settaglia. The next night, some
rain laid the contrary wind and rough Sea; but we remained almost in a calm,
with great trouble of the Ship, which by the weight of the sails was made to
rock to and fro continually like a cradle. On the fifteenth day at night, we
were surrounded with thick clouds, and amongst them with many spouts of water,
called in Latin (if I mistake not) Typhones Vortices, but we passed through
them without any hurt or damage.

October the twenty first, After many days of contrary wind Settaglia, at
length it becoming favorable, the Pilot, and other Mariners said they descried
land afar off, which some took to be Candia, others Rhodes; but, whatever it
was, we soon lost sight of it again, and the same night the wind growing
strong, we were separated from the other Ships which were in our company.
Nevertheless we continued our Voyage alone, and at evening descried land on the
North-west, which the Mariners said was the Island Scarpanti subject to the
Venetians, and that, the good wind continuing, we should soon discover Candia:
but about midnight the wind fell, and we remained becalmed.

October the twenry third, The Wind turning favorable, we discovered land,
which they said was Candia, at the prow of the Ship: but at night, lest the
increasing South Wind should drive us too much to Land, we put forth to Sea
Southwards, and left Candia on the right hand Northwards, so far that we could
not see it. The next day, the Sky being very cloudy, we discovered Malta whilst
we were at dinner, very near-hand, (the thick Air having intercepted it before)
and, a good while before night, we cast anchor just without the Port of the
said Island, soon after which a Guard-boat came to see who we were, and whence
we came (in order to inform the Grand Master thereof:) the Officer demanded our
Bill of Health, which we had from Cyprus, but would not touch it till it had
been first dipped in Vinegar, in regard of the great suspicions there were here
of the Plague, which raged much at Constantinople, and other parts of Turkey.
But he not returning that night to us again with an answer, we remained all
aboard, being suffered only to send for water without the City.

October the twenty ninth, Early in the Morning, the same Officer, named Sig.
Desiderio Montemagni, returned and told us, that the Knights made a little
difficulty concerning my Bill of Health made at Cyprus by the Venetian Consul,
which was not so plain as that of the Ship which was made at Cyprus also the
same day by the French Consul; wherefore he made an excuse to me in their name
for the delay of expediting me so suddenly. I took all well, commended the
diligence of the Knight, thankt them for their courtesy, and professed my self
obedient to their commands. After which, I delivered the Messenger a Letter for
Monsig. Visconti, Inquisitor Apostolical there; wherein I gave him account of
my rrrival, and desired him to favor me in order to a speedy exepetion. F.
Orsino writ another to him, both which bathed likewise in Vinegar Sig.
Desiderio promised to present with his own hand. The same day after dinner, the
Sig. Commendator Fra. Marcantorio Erancaccio, a prime Neapolitan Cavalier, my
ancient friend at Naples, and Sig: Fra: Mandosio Mandosii, a Roman Cavalier,
both of the Religion of Malta, came to visit me in a Boat, which yet stayed a
little distance from our Ship (as the Guard-boat also did) and they offered me
their persons to serve me with much courtesy. I received much news of them
concerning some of my friends at Naples and elsewhere; after which they
departed, giving me hope, that in a Council to be held that day about other
weighty affairs of the Religion, my Expedition should be taken into
consideration.

In the Evening, Monsig: Visconti sent me a Present of some refreshments, and
signified to me that he had earnestly moved the Grand Master concerning the
business of my expedition; and when the Council broke up, I should hear the
result thereof by his Secretary. A while after, the Secretary brought me word
that the Council held very long, having determined a difference between two
Spanish Knights, who pretended to the Priorate of Navarre, by giving it to one
of them; and also created a new General of the Galleys, which charge was also
pretended to by diverse, but fell to the Prior della Roccella, Son of the Prince
della Roccella, who had a new instituted that Priorate in his Father's
dominion; insomuch that by reason of so many and long businesses, ehiter the
Grand Master had forgot or forborne to propose any thing else, to wit, our
Expedition: but that he having spoken to him as he came out of the Council, the
Grand Master told him that within two days another Council should be held
purposely for our business, because it could not be done without a Council; and
that in the mean time he gave order that our Ship should not depart from the
Port, to the end I might have the convenience of waiting the resolution
concerning Landing, without being carried away to my inconvenience to
Marseilles, whither those of our Ship intended directly to go; and therefore we
must have a little patience in the interim. I returned my thanks to Mons.
Visconti, and sent him word, that I should have patience, being secure of
receiving all favor from his great courtesy. Soon after which Sig: Desiderio
came to signify the order to our Ship that it should not depart out of the
Port.

October the thirty first, Besides a Present of refreshments sent me this day
from the Sig. Commendator Brancaccio, and frequent visits of Sig: ^esiderio,
ane also of diverse others, partly known, and partly unknown to me; a little
before night, the Commissarii della Sanita (Commissioners of Health) came to
see me, and to enquire what goods I carried with me; they told me, the next day
a Council would be held for dispatch of my business; but hearing of the goods I
brought, particularly of the Ball of Cotten-yarn (though they were not told
what was within it; for then without doubt the difficulty would have been
greater) they told me that by reason of the said goods I must have a little
more patience; for they should give me the Quarantine a little longer then if
we had had nothing besides our persons.

November the first, After dinner, the Captain of the Port brought us license
to go ashore, to wit, for me and my company, the Knights of the Council
vouchsafing me this favor; yet upon condition that I should pass my Quarantine
not in the Isoletto, whither all others are sent, but at the Port where we were
in the house of Sig: Don Francesco Ciantar near his Church of S. Savior; which
house the Inquisitor procured for me, and the Council as a particular favor
granted me for my better convenience. They prefixed no time of the Quarantine,
but reserved it at their own arbitrament; however I resolved it should not be
very long. The Caravel S. Ann, which brought me, desired to undergo the
Quarantine also, that they might afterward have Prattick, and sell their
commodities perhaps more advantagiously at Malta; but it would not be granted,
but the next day the Vessel was dismissed away for France. The reason whereof I
suppose was, either because the Isoletto where Ships pass the Quarantine was
already full of other people, or because the Island was scarce of provision,
and therefore they would not admit other new Passengers to consume it. However
we, according to our license, landed all our goods at the abovesaid place; and
we were no sooner got ashore, but My Lord, the Inquisitor came in a Boat to
visit me at the Seaside. We discoursed together above half an hour; he in his
Boat, and I upon the bank. He inquired of me several things concerning the
affairs of the East, and informed me of many of Europe; and at last offering me
his favor in all things, particularly, in getting the Quarantine shortened,
which he intimated would last forty days or more, (including those which had
passed by the way from Cyprus hither) departed, and I repaired to the house,
which the owner of it, and the Captain of the Port, Desiderio, came to assign
to me; where all our Goods were spread abroad to be air'd in a large open room
belonging to the said house; which indeed I found very handsome, and well
provided with convenience of water, and other things, having a delicate
prospect upon the Port, the Sea, the Country, the Town, the new City; and, in
short, being the best, most convenient and delightful that we could have had
for that purpose. By the Council's order a man was assigned to guard the House,
and a Boat both to guard us, and to supply us with provisions; both at our
charge, as the custom is. Nor does the Captain of the Port omit to visit us
frequently, and to discourse with us at a distance. God be thanked, we are all
well, and free from all contagious suspicion; so that I hope to surmount this
difficulty happily, which I acknowledge to proceed from the Divine Providence,
to which I heartily commend you.

LETTER. XIV.
From Syracuse, December. 4. 1625.
AFter two and twenty days confinement upon suspicion, behold Mario, now at
liberty and in health, ready to come to kiss your hands, having no other
impediment to detain me. What things I have noted in the mean time, and what
befell me at Malta, and how I am safely arrived at Syracuse, I shall now give
you an account, in continuation of the Narrative of my Travels.

November the seventh, Early in the Morning four Galleys belonging to the
Religion of Malta, arrived in the Port from Sicily; the new ones, which they
were providing instead of two lost a few Months before, not being yet finished.
They were colored all black in token of sadness for the death of their
General, who died of a Disease a few days before at Naples.

November the eleventh, The Commissioners of Health came to visit us, and
entered into the House to see our Goods, whether we had used such diligence as
was requisite in opening them to the Sun and Wind, that they might give account
thereof to the Council.

November the thirteenth, My Lord the Inquisitor came to visit me, and
discoursed with me about an hour without the Gate; for seeing we had no License
of Prattick, it was not lawful for me to give him so much as a Chair out of my
House. He promised me to speak to the Grand Master the same day, and to procure
our expedition.

November the sixteenth, In the Morning before day, three of the said Galleys
set sail from Malta toward Licata, or Alicata in Sicily, to fetch Corn,
whereof there was great penury. The fourth Galley was so old that it could go
no more to Sea, and the new which were preparing at Malta, Palermo, and Naples,
instead of those that had been lost, were not yet finished. After dinner, the
Commissioners of Health returned again to see my Goods, bringing with them a
Physician to view and make relation of the Coffin wherein they understood I
carried the Body of Sitti Maani; but because the ball of Cotton yarn wherein it
was wrapped, was not quite loosned for fear of spoiling, though I had opened and
air'd it, they not only refused to give me Prattick, but would not suffer the
Physician to touch or view the said Coffin, and told me, I must first loosen
and air the Cotton yarn well, and then they would return to us another day to
resolve about Prattick. After which they made many excuses to me for this
strange treatment, alleging that the subsistence of Malta depending upon other
parts abroad, they were forced to use the most rigorous courses in case of
suspicion of Infection; to the end Sicily and the other Countries, on which
their subsistence depended, might not deprive them of Prattick, as they would
easily do, were it known that they proceeded otherwise, and were too easy in
admitting suspected things which came from the Levant. Whereupon I knowing that
they had reason for what they said, caused the Cotton Ball to be wholly
unwound, as they desired, though I did not so at first, to avoid spoiling it,
and the hazard of not making it up again so well as before.

November the twentieth, The Grand Spedaliere, (or Master Malta's being the
Bulwark of the Territories of the Catholic King and of all Christendom, he
fell to blame me, (though civilly) in the Name of the Grand Master, that I had
not at first declared my having my Wife's Body with me, (a very jealous thing,
as they said, in times of suspicion) and asked me the reason of it. I answered,
that whilst I was yet a Shipboard, I was asked only in general, What Goods I
had? And I truly answered, that I had one Ball, five Trunks, and some other
bundles of goods for my use; and being not more particularly questioned, I did
not specify what was within the Trunks and the Ball, conceiving it not
necessary; and the rather, because I being yet uncertain, whether I should stay
at Malta, or depart in the same Ship, I did not think fit to speak of the said
Body in the presence of the Mariners, lest I should be troubled with the vain
Auguries they are wont to conceive about carrying such things, in case I had
been to go with them: That after I was landed, upon the first more precise
demand concerning my goods, I forthwith declared it plainly, and afterward
used all diligence in opening the Cotton to the Wind and Sun, as those that had
frequently visited me could testify. The Knights remained satisfied with my
Answer, and also with my proceeding, which was not so bad as at first they
apprehended. Then they viewed the Coffin, and caused the Physician to consider
it, asking me Questions concerning all the particulars relating to it; which
done, they consulted apart amongst themselves what to do, and the result was:
That if I meant to have a clear and full Bill of Health, I must be contented to
let the Coffin be opened and air'd, not only outwardly, (as had been already
done) but also what was within it; otherwise, they would let the Coffin alone
as it was, but could not give me a full Bill of Health; whence, perhaps, I
might meet with more trouble in other places. Wherefore they desired me to
consider of the business, for they left me to my choice: I remained in some
suspense, and took time to think of it, as they courteously offered me; and so
they departed without giving me Prattick, or resolving upon any thing. On one
side I was unwilling to open the Coffin, because it was secure and could not be
opened without spoiling both it, and, perhaps, what was within it; and having
brought it so far with me with so much diligence, only to keep it entire and
sound, I was very loath to lose my passed pains. On the other side, to go from
Malta without a good Bill of Health, and so incur a greater trouble elsewhere,
was no safe course: Wherefore I recurr'd to the wonted favor of my Lord the
Inquisitor, giving him account in a Letter how the case stood, and earnestly
entreating him to find some little shift how the Knights might be contented,
without opening or spoiling the Coffin, to make me a good Bill which might
serve me elsewhere; for which purpose I urged him with many good Reasons. The
Inquisitor, according to his accustomed courtesy, undertook the business, and
I remained in the same House without Prattick expecting the issue.

November the two and twentieth, Early in the Morning we saw the Galleys of
Malta already in the Port, being returned the Night preceding with some
provision of Corn, but not much. The Council required of me a punctual Relation
of the time, place, and manner of my Wife's Death; which I accordingly sent
them in writing, attested by the Journal of my Travels, my Book of Expenses,
and a Latin Treatise of the Countries subject to the modern Empire of Persia;
from which Books, wherein mention is made thereof, I extracted the said
Relation. It was read in the Council, and they being satisfied with it, at
length sent in the evening to give me Prattick; causing us first to swear that
we knew not of any dead of the Pestilence in any place where we had been, nor
yet in our Ship. Which truth we swore to; whereupon they granted us Prattick,
and promised us a good Bill of Health at our departure.

November the three and twentieth, In the Morning my Lord the Inquisitor sent
to congratulate with me for my Prattick, and La Valletta, and there in the
Palace I did Reverence to the most Serene Grand Master, called, Frat' Antonio
de Paula, a Frenchman, who received me with much courtesy, and offered me his
utmost favor, both in order to my departure, or any other occasion. After
which I accompanied his Highness to Vespers in the Church of S. John, together
with all the other Knights, and back again to the Palace; and after much
conversation with the Commendator Brancaccio, at night I returned to my own
House, waving the favor of my Lord the Inquisitor who invited me to lodge in
his; because I would not leave my own people alone.

November the four and twentieth, I dined with my Lord the Inquisitor according
to his invitation, and in the Evening accompanied the Grand Master to the
Church of S. Catherine, where because the said Saint is their Patroness, and
her Church is used for the Italian Tongue, the Knights of Italy solemnized a
Festival.

November the five and twentieth, I went to hear Mass in the new City at the
said Church, where I saw the Relic of the said Saint's Ring, wherewith she
was married by our Savior; it is a Gold Ring, of very plain, antique, and
coarse work, having a green stone, which, probably, is an Emerald, (a stone in
those times much in request) but, whether it be ill pollish'd, or be decayed by
time, it is a great Table for a Ring, but appears no very fair Jewel of it self.

December the second, Two Galleys of Malta, being ready to depart from Messina,
I would not lose so good an opportunity of passing the channel securely; but
having gotten my Bill of Health ready, (wherein though they mentioned my wife's
Body which I carried, yet they made it to my satisfaction, and full enough to
prevent trouble elsewhere) and dispatched all things that needed; in the
Evening I put all my goods aboard the Galley Santa Maria, whereof Sig: Gio.
Francesco Geronimo Salvago, a Genouese was Captain. But because it departed not
this night, I repaired to lodge at the House of my Lord the Inquisitor, and left
the Women in that of Sig: Don Francesco Ciantar, our Friend and Patron of the
Benefice and House del Salvadore.

December the third, In the Evening we all went aboard the abovesaid Galley,
after we had taken leave of the Inquisitor and all other Friends, with many
Complements and demonstrations of true kindness; a little before midnight we
set sail, being accommodated with the other Galley, called, S. John, and four
Ships of the Order laden with Flax; all which went under the mand of our
Captain.

December the fourth, This Morning we found that we had Capo Passaro, which is
the ancient Promontory Pachinum. Before dinner, we entered the Port of
Syracuse, where Sig: Fra: Marcantonio Pericontato, Receiver of the Order of
Malta, came presently to our Galley to visit the Captain, and take his Letters
and Orders of business. By this Knight, without making my self known to him, I
understood that my great Friend, Monsignor Paolo Faraone, Bishop of Syracuse,
being lately returned from a visitation was now in the City; of which I was
very joyful, through the great desire I had to see him. Wherefore after dinner
I went ashore as all others did, and with Sig: Frate Antonietto Costa a Roman,
presently repaired to his Palace to visit him: But understanding he was saying
the Office, and would not be disturbed, I stayed in the Antichamber till he
had done, being entertained in the mean time by Sig: Paolo Faraone his Nephew,
whom I had seen at Messina, in the year 1611, then a very Youth, but now grown
a complete young man; yet I did not discover my self to him. When the Bishop
had ended the Office, we entered to kiss his hands; At first view, he said, he
thought he knew me, but remembered not who I was; and, indeed, he knew me not
by my voice after I had spoken to him; although I knew both his voice and
person, he seeming to me little or nothing changed from what I left him at Rome
about twelve years ago when he was an Abbot. But when I discovered my self to
him, he seemed amazed, and with much joy, for seeing me here at a time when he
thought I was far enough off; and, perhaps, (as he said) not in this world,
(for 'twas four years since he had heard any News of me) he received me with
extreme kindness and gladness. After we had given one another account of many
things, and I had been complemented by Sig: Paolo his Nephew, and others that
were with him, I told him that I had in the Galley Batoni Mariam Tinatin, my
spiritual Daughter, and should be glad that before we departed, (as I thought
to do with the same Galleys for Messina) that she saw the Church and something
of Syracuse. The Bishop presently sent Signora Maria (his Brother's Wife, and
Mother of Sig: Paolo) with two of her Daughters to fetch my Women from the
Galley in a Coach; and Sig: Paolo, the Receiver of Malta and my self, went in
another Coach to fetch them on Land. After these Gentlewomen had received them
with many Complements, we all went together to the Nunns Church of S. Lucie,
where we stayed till evening; the Nunns being much delighted to behold the
strange habits of my Women, and to discourse with them by Interpreters. In the
mean time many people flocked into the Church to see them, and several
Cavaliers came to complement me, and make themselves known to me. It being
late, we were accompanied by many Gentry and people to the Palace, where my
Women were received by the Bishop with much Courtesy. And being the Galleys
were to depart for Messina this very night, I desired leave of the Bishop to
return aboard again, but he would by no means grant it; saying that since I was
come to see him, it was not fit that I should embitter his joy with so sudden a
departure, much less when S. Lucy's day was so near at hand, for which those
that are remote use to go to Syracuse; and that I was the more obliged to stay,
because I had once promised him by a Letter, (as indeed I had) to come to
Syracuse, and spend a S. Lucy's day with him; so that since chance had brought
it thus to pass, I must needs make my word good. I answered many things, and
did all I could to get away, but to no purpose; for the Bishop sen the Receiver
to get all my goods out of the Galley, for which end was necessary for the gate
of the City to be kept open a good part of the night contrary to custom: and
besides, having caused a very noble Apartment to be got ready for me in the new
building of his Palace, he would by all means have us all lodge there.
Wherefore, seeing his pleasure was such, I thought fit to obey him, and accept
the favor. The Gentlemen and Gentlewomen after some discourse departed, and we
were conducted to our apartment, where, because the Bishop eats not at night,
he left us to sup and rest. The two Galleys which brought us, depart this night
for Messina, and with them F. Orisno my late Fellow-traveller, who will deliver
you this Letter which I conclude this Evening, not omitting to acquaint you
with my tarrying here for some days, to the end you may understand my
deliverance, and the good issue of my health; and so praying God for the like
to you, I very heartily kiss your hands.

LETTER XV.
From Messina, January 24. 1626.
IN continuation of my last to you concerning the favors I received Syracuse,
I must tell you in the first place, that on the fifth of December we were
conducted by a great company of Gentry of both Sexes out of the City to several
relics of ancient Syracuse. We saw the Artificial Echo reported to have been
made by Dionysius in a Prison where he kept many slaves, to hear what they
talked within; and, if I mistake not, Archimedes seems to have been the
contriver of the Fabric. It Is indeed one of the goodliest pieces of Art that I
ever saw in the world, and perhaps was ever invented, imitating nature so
exactly that the Echo returns words, sentences, sounds, and songs most entire
and perfect; as was proved in our presence with sundry Instruments. If a man
strike a thick extended cloth with a wand, it renders a sound like the shot of
Artillery: which to be done so well in a Grotto formed not by Nature, but by
Art, is indeed a strange thing, and shows a prodigious wit in the Contriver. I
must not omit, that the roof of this grotto is hollowed in the form of a man's
ear, from which probably the Artificer borrowed the Invention; since just as
the voice striking the ears which are so shaped renders the sound audible; so
it is seen by experience, that this great artificial Ear cut by hand in hard
stone, being struck in like manner produces the same effect of augmenting a
sound; although we know not but other Natural Echoes in Caves are framed after
the same manner. Near the place of the Echo, we saw the subterranean Cavities
wherein the slaves were imprisoned, and over them the place of Dionysius's
Palace, in a very goodly situation, with a Prospect extending far both on Land
and Sea. And near the Palace we beheld many remainders of his great Theater,
which was not built up like other Structures, but cut and hollowed out of the
hard stone, all of a piece, very large and of excellent Architecture. As we
returned home, we saw contiguous to the City on one side the Port which they
called Marmoreo, or the Marble Port, from its being built all of Stone, and
differing from the other great one which lies under the City on the other side;
for at this day the City stands wholly in the Peninsula Ortygia, which is
almost surrounded by the Sea, saving where it joins to the Land by a narrow
Euripus.

December 8th, I accompanied the Bp to the Church of S. Francis, whither
because it was the Feast of the Conception he went to hear Mass, being attended
by the Senate, and all the Nobility of the City. After which, I went with
diverse Gentlemen my Friends to see the Church of S. Lucy without the City in
the place where she was martyred; which Church, though sometimes it belonged to
Priests, yet is now possessed by reformed Franciscan Friars. Under the Church
we saw certain grottoes extending to a great distance every way under ground
and made I know not whether for Sepulchers of the Ancients, or for places of
Refuge in times of danger.

December 9th, Two Galleys of Malta, which came from Messina with Provisions
for the Island, entered the Port, in one of which was their present General Sig:
Don Francesco Caraffa Prior della Roccella, and Son of the Prince della
Roccella, who had lately founded this Priorate della Roccella at his own
charge, always to remain in his own Family; though after his death, if I am
rightly informed, it shall be no longer a Priorate or Grand Cross, but only a
Commendum.

December the tenth, Accompanied by Sig. Paolo Faraone, I visited the said
Prior della Roccella in his own Galley; having seen him several times, and
contracted Friendship with him whilst I was at Malta, in which time he was
created General of the Galleys upon the vacancy of the charge by the death of
the former General.

December the twelfth, Being S. Lucie's Eve, Solemn Vespers were sung in her
Church, whither the Bishop with the Senate and all the Nobility repaired. At
night bone-fires were made, and a Cavalcade of many Cavaliers rode about with
Torches, but clothed in their ordinary habits; after whom followed the Senate
likewise on Horseback.

December the thirteenth, Being the day of S. Lucie the Patroness of Syracuse,
a solemn Procession was made, wherein the Images of the Saint in Silver, as big
or bigger then the life, were carried through the chief streets upon a goodly
Pedestal of silver, all the Clergy and Nobility accompanying the same. The
Procession set forth from the Cathedral, and as the H. Image came out of the
Church-Gate, a certain man placed purposely on the top of the Steeple, came
flying down (as they speak) upon a rope and fell in the midst of the Piazza,
which was thronged with people assembled to see the Show. The Procession ended
at the Church of S. Lucie without the City, where a solemn Mass was sung; after
which in a little Chapel hard by, called Sant' Agata, I saw under ground the
Sepulcher of S. Lucie, where She was buried first; for now her Body is not
here, but was translated to some other place long ago.

December the fourteenth, Many Races were run both by Footmen, Mules, ordinary
Horses, and Barb or Ginets as they call them in Syracuse, with the usual
circumstances of throngs of people, Ladies at the windows, Gentlemen on
Horseback, and in Coaches about the streets.

December the fifteenth, A Mascherade of twelve Cavaliers on Horseback,
clothed by couples after several fashions, went about the City. In the Piazza
before the Bishops Palace they ran al Saraceno, (i. e. at a wooden stock made
like a Man; we call it a Turk) and at the Ring, making many Caracols (or quick
Turns) at the end. Which divertisement continued till night; when the Maskers
were entertained with a sumptuous Supper by the Bishop, together with the
Senate and other Cavaliers.

December the sixteenth, In the Morning I went to view the Fountain Arethusa,
which I had seen imperfectly many years Sicily. It Is in a Grove within the
walls of the City, where issuing out of a cavern of a Hill, it descends to the
Seaside, forming an indifferent Pool before its going out of the walls, where
the Syracusian Women use to go to wash their Clothes. In the afternoon going
out of the City, to see many courses at the Ring in the field of S. Lucie, we
went to hear an excellent natural Echo between the Sea and the Walls, which
returned the sound of a Trumpet once or twice very pleasantly.

December the eighteenth, The General of the Maltese-Gallies set sail for
Malta, and the next Morning two other Galleys of Malta arrived from Messina in
the Port of Syracuse. This day we went to see the Capuchins Covent without the
City, in whose Gardens are seen extreme deep cavities and precipices; for the
Soil being all stony, was in ancient times dig'd in that manner for stones; and
one may see where goodly Pillars have been cut out all of a piece, as others
might still be: nevertheless in those dark valleys and cavities there are
Gardens and Trees planted, which bring forth goodly fruit; at which I wondered
the more, because some of them are never seen by the Sun, the Soil is so low
and closely surrounded with high Rocks. These are Lapidicinae, or
Stone-Quarries, where the Athenian Prisoners were put, who after the loss of
many battles both by Land and Sea, at last yielded at Syracuse, as Thucydides
relates.

December the twentieth, The Bishop made an Ordination according the custom of
Four times of the year, and this Morning ordained above two hundred persons of
several Orders; for this Diocese is sufficiently populous; and many, to avoid
the numerous grievances imposed upon the King's people, willingly put
themselves into the Church.

December the one twentieth, Another Procession like the former was made in the
Evening, wherein the sacred Image of S. Lucie was carried from her own Church,
where it had been till now, to the Cathedral, in which it is usually kept in a
little Chapel well guarded, and locked with many keys. When the Image was
come thither, and the Bishop standing at the Altar, first showed the
Magistrate, and then the People the Relics of the Saint, (to wit, a dark blew
Mantle, and a Slipper like that of the Pope) holding the same to them to kiss,
and distributing Cotton to them which the said Relics had touched. After
which the Bishop entertained the Senate with a Supper.

December the two and twentieth, The two Maltese-Gallies departed for Malta,
and the next Evening the General of Malta returned to Syracuse for more
provision; the Island of Malta being in great want thereof.

December the four and twentieth, The said General shipped all the Corn he could
possibly, as well by stealth as openly, (because he had not License for so
much) and in the Evening set sail for Malta. He informed us that the Prior of
the Church was coming Ambassador extraordinary to the Pope, in order to pacify
his Holiness who was much offended at certain things which they had lately done
ill at Malta: Whereof I shall give you this brief account.

A while since two or three Commendams of Malta becoming the Pope joined them
into a new Priorate, and gave the same to Sig* Don Antonio Barberino his
Nephew. Hereupon the Order took distaste that the Pope should give these
Commendams to his Nephew, in prejudice of the Ancients who pretended to them,
and making a great stir (as if the Pope were not Patron of their goods, as well
as those of all other Orders) they tumultuously resolved to send Ambassadors to
the Emperor, and to the Kings of France and Spain to complain thereof, and to
entreat the said Princes to undertake their Protection that the Pope might not
do them such Prejudices. This coming to the Pope's Ears, he commanded Monsig:
Visconti his Inquisitor at Malta, to endeavor the hindering of those Embassies;
and, in case of obstinacy, to prohibit them by a Public Act in the Name of his
Holiness, admonishing the Order that they had no other Superior besides the
Pope, and ought not to recurr to any about their affairs but to him. The
Inquisitor used his utmost diligence, but seeing it prevailed not, he caused
the Pope's Prohibition to be signified to the Ambassador's Elect, by a fit
Minister. One or two of them made no stir, but another fell into such a rage
that he drew a Poniard to assault the Inquisitor's Officer that gave him the
Intimation: After which all the Knights banded together, and went tumultuously
to the Grand Master, who was then in the Church at Vespers, and by furious
menaces of a notable sedition, caused him to send some Grand Crosses to desire
the Inquisitor to revoke the said Prohibition, otherwise a very great tumult
and the ruin of the Order would ensue. The Inquisitor, moved with this and
other effectual Instances which they made to him not without tumult, said; He
had no Authority re-call a Prohibition made by the Pope; but, to prevent
further mischiefs, he condescended to revoke the said Order, so far as his own
Authority (which he judged none at all in this matter) could extend: Whereupon
the Ambassadors presently departed. The Pope understanding this sequel, gave
the Maltese-Ambassador residing at Rome a great check, and testified so great
displeasure with the Order, that the Ambassador himself, who, perhaps, had been
the first cause of these Tumults at Malta, by writing to the Knights there to
defend their causes resolutely; that he now writ after a different manner, and
so represented both to the Grand Master and the Order, the Pope's displeasure,
and what mischief he might do them; That being terrified therewith they sent
Posts after their Ambassadors to return, without negotiating at all with the
said Princes. Some of them, who were not yet arrived at the places whither they
were sent, upon this Order returned back without doing any thing; others, who
were arrived at the Courts of the designed Princes, obtained their Letters of
recommendation to the Pope, which were of little moment; but ever since this
business, the Pope has had but little good will toward the Order, and has
frequently declared a purpose to reform it in sundry things: As, that no Women
should live in the new City, called il Convento, their Simoniacal Elections of
Grand Masters, and other things, of which the Knights were much afraid. To
these old disgusts, another has lately been added: Upon the loss of their
Galleys taken by the Turks a while ago, with the slaughter of many Knights,
the Order, for repairing the same, thought, (and, I believe, had already
resolved) to lay a Gabel, (whether perpetual or temporal, I know not) upon the
Commendams and Possessions of the Order; which, without the Pope's leave, could
not be done. The Pope extremely disliked this course, conceiving no necessity
of attempting it for that loss; since they had lost nothing but two pieces of
wood; and as for the Knights, they might be recruited by the income of moneys
which are paid upon the admittance of others to take the Cross; besides that as
to interest, they had rather gained then lost, having by the death of so many
Knights, gotten spoils enough to pay the charge pretended, without burdening
the possessions of the Order with any imposition. All which Reasons considered,
the Pope hearing that they were resolved to impose the said Gabel without
addressing to him, became extremely displeased with the Knights, threatening
them with Excomunications and other punishments: Whereupon the Order dispatched
this Prior of the Church, (who is also a Grand Cross and a Priest) Ambassador
extraordinary to his Holiness, to pacify him.

December the twenty sixth, We had news at Syracuse, that an English Fleet had
landed some Forces at Cadiz upon the Coast of Spain, which were valorously
repulsed by the Spaniards. They are great amplifiers of their own Exploits, and
writ word that the said Fleet consisted of eighty Ships, and landed twelve
thousand men.

December the twenty ninth, Being desirous to visit some Cavaliers la Valle in
the City of Catania, where there lives many, by all circumstances, derived from
the same Root with us of Rome; I set forth thither this Morning in the Bishop's
Coach, accompanied by Sig: Paolo Satalia a Syracusian. We traveled not far
from the Seaside, leaving on the right hand a little fruitful Island, near the
Continent of Sicily, now called Manghesi, but by Virgil with good reason
Tapsumque jacentem; for it is all plain and very low. A little further we left
on the right hand also toward the Sea, the City Augusta, sometimes called
Megara; whence Virgil, making mention of it, says Megarosque Sinus. In the
Evening, we passed through Carlo Lentini, built upon high clifts, and so called
as if it were Lentini di Carlo, because Charles the Fifth, Emperor, built it,
with intent perhaps to transfer the City of Lentini (which lies hard by)
thither for better air. At length having traveled twenty four miles from
Syracuse, we took up our Lodging in Lentini at the house of Sig: Flaminio
Mollica Baron of Bagnara, who a few days before had sent to visit me in
Syracuse, and received me here with extraordinary civility.

December the thirtieth, Having heard Mass in Santa Maria di Giesu a little
without the City, we went to the Church of the Saints Alfio, Philadelfo, and
Cirino, three French Brethren, Martyrs and Protectors of Lentini; which City is
styled Faecundissima Lentinorum Vrbs, and gives for its Arms a Lion Rampant,
the ancient badg of the Leontines, as appears by their ancient Medals, and I
observed by the Bill of Health which they gave us; for by reason of the
Contagion at Palermo, without taking a Bill of Health at every place, etc.
After dinner we departed, and not far from Lentini, passed over a little River
which they call il fiume di Lentini, and probably is the Pantagia of Virgil.
Before night, we arrived at Catania, which lies but eighteen miles from
Lentini, and lodged in the house of Sig: Don Angelo Campochiano di
Calatagironi, who was then Vicar General to the Bishop of Catania, and upon the
recommendation of the Bishop of Syracuse, received and treated us here with
much respect, being also something allied to the Sig: della Valle of Catania.

December the thirty first, I was visited by all the Sig: della and many other
Eminent Gentlemen of several Families, their Alliances. They were so many that
I shall not particularly name them; only I shall intimate that at this day
there are in Catania five Chiefs of the Family of la Valle, all derived from
the same stock; namely, first Sig: Don Franc. della Valle Baron of Miraglia,
who being newly come from abroad, was put upon his Quarantine in a Church
without the City; secondly, Sig: Don Gutteres della Valle, Brother of the
abovesaid Baron, who was absent at Palermo; thirdly, Sig: Don Diego della
Valle, whom I knew many years ago at Messina; fourthly, Sig: Don Vincenzo della
Valle, Baron of Schisi, which they hold to be the ancient Naxus; and fifthly,
Don Franc. della Valle who was in an Ecclesiastical Habit: with many of these
Gentlemen, who did me the honor to accompany me, I went this morning to see
the Mother Church, where in a close Chapel the body of S. Agatha is kept.
After which I was conducted to see the Benedictine's Monastery of S. Nicolas,
(which is a handsome building,) and the Relics kept there in the Sacristie;
amongst which was shown me a Nail of our Savior's Cross, an Arrow of S.
Sebastian's, a piece of S. George's Coat of Mail, some of S. Peter the
Apostle's beard, and some of the beard of S. Zaccharias Father of S. John
Baptist. I saw also the ruins of the Amphitheater and the Cirque, the Fountains
without the Walls of the City by the Seaside, which being so many Spouts on a
row, make a pretty sight, near the place where S. Agatha was put into the fire.

January the first, 1626. Accompanied by the same Gentlemen, who did me that
honor at all hours, I went to see the prison of S. Agatha under ground, and
her Sepulcher, where there is also another Church, and in that the place where
S. Lucy appeared to her; and a little further a little Chapel apart where her
breasts were cut off. After which, I spent the day in visiting such Gentlemen
as had visited me, as also such Gentlewomen of the Family of la Valle as had
sent to visit me. The next day I went to S. Francis's Church to see the Chapel
and Tombs of the Family of la Valle, in whose arms I found some difference from
my own as to the colors, (which was only the Error of the Painter) they giving
the Lions and Stars, Or, in a field gules; but we at Rome, the Lions azure, and
Stars, gules in a field Or. And being Arms are commonly taken from old
Stone-monuments which have no colors, 'twas no hard matter for some Modern
Painter to mistake, and put one for another. In the Evening, I was visited by
the Magistrates of Catania, whom they call Guirati (Jurats); and news came that
a Proclamation was published at Palermo, whereby as many as were obliged either
by Tenure, or otherwise to military service in Sicily in in times of need, were
commanded to appear forthwith in the field, in order to a General Muster, and
then be distributed into several places, for fear of an invasion by the English
Fleet, which they said was entered into the Mediterranean upon designs of
mischief.

January the third, I returned the Visit to the Magistrates in the City-Palace,
being received by them with much honor, and at my departure accompanied almost
to the Gate. After dinner, having visited Sig: Don Francesco della Valle, Baron
of Miraglia, who was upon his Quarantine in the Church of the Infirm without
the City, I took leave of all my honorable Friends, and departed from Catania
toward Syracuse, arriving at Lentini two hours after Sunset, where I lodged
in the House of the Baron of Bagnara.

January the fourth, Having heard Mass in the Church of the Saints Alfio and
his Brethren, and dined early, we departed from Lentini, and at night arrived
at S. Cosmano, a place twelve miles from Syracuse, famous for making Sugar. It
being late, we took up our Quarters in a House, where we saw the Machins,
Furnaces, and other contrivances for that Work.

January the fifth, About Noon, we arrived at Syracuse, being met without the
Gate in a Coach by Sig: Paolo Faraone, Sig: Don Diego Landolnia his Cousen,
Sig: Don Gasparo Diamante, and others of the Bishop's House.

January 10th, We went abroad a shooting in a boat upon the famous River Alfeo,
which falls into the Port of Syracuse, just opposite to the walls of the City,
passing first under a bridge of one arch, exactly according to the printed
figure of the Pastoral of Cavalier Guarini called il Pastor fido, wherein the
River Alfeo speaks the Prologue.

January the eleventh, I saw the subterraneous Grottoes of S. John's Church
without the City; they are many, great, and handsome, contrived almost like a
Labyrinth, and appear to have been intended for Sepulchers; in some places the
light is admitted a little by Cupola's, which probably served for the people to
assemble in, either to the Obsequies or Funeral-suppers. Yet certain Figures of
ancient Saints, and other Tokens argue them to have been used by Christians;
it is a goodly Fabric for a work underground, being all cut out of the natural
stone by hand.

January the thirteenth, Four Maltese-Galleys arrived at Syracuse; and because
they intended for Messina, and one of them for Naples, and perhaps further, to
carry the Prior of the Church, who, as I said, was going extraordinary
Ambassador to Rome, and was here imbarqu'd; I desired to take the opportunity
of these Galleys to Messina: and accordingly went to speak with the General,
who was gone a hunting with the Prior of the Church near the River Alfeo. The
General courteously granted me passage in his own Ship to Messina: but as for
going to Naples in the Galley with the said Prior, I could not obtain this
favor from him: and though his excuse was, that but one Galley went thither,
and that with many Passengers, and my people and goods were not few; yet I
perceived that the Prior, on whom the courtesy depended (although he had been
my Friend at Malta, and showed himself such here also) was unwilling to grant
me the same, because I lodged in the house of the Bishop, with whom the Prior
was displeased, because the Bishop had neither visited him, nor yet the General
of the Galleys, as they pretended he ought to have done: but the Bishop
pretended the contrary, namely, that they ought to have visited him first; so
that between the punctilio's of both sides, I was fain to suffer an
inconvenience, as it commonly happens in such cases. However I resolved not to
decline the General's offer of passing to Messina in these Galleys, and
accordingly taking leave of the Bishop, and all other Friends after supper, I
went aboard of the General's Galley with my people, and at the second watch we
set sail. The winds being contrary we could not pass further then Augusta,
where we anchored a little without the Port; but because we did not salute the
City, (in regard we stood off from it, and were upon departing) a great Gun was
discharged from thence against us with a bullet. Which though the General was
offended at, yet because there was nothing else to be done, he sent a Spanish
Gentleman of his Order to make excuse to the Governor for not having saluted
him, (as not being the custom in such occasions) and to complain of his
shooting with a bullet in that manner. The Governor answered courteously, yet
(like a Spaniard) held his point, and advised the Galleys to have patience;
thereby implying, that if they would ride in that Port, they must salute the
Royal Standards, otherwise they should be sunk.

January the fourteenth, The weather proving foul, our Galleys made into the
Port of Augusta, where we saluted the Block-houses, and received the like
salutations from them again. There are three Block-houses or Forts at Augusta,
one within the City upon a high situation, another upon the mouth of the Port
which is very large within, and another also within the Port divided into two,
and standing upon two little rocks. Diverse of our people went ashore the same
day, but I did not, till the next: when after I had heard Mass said by the F.
Provincial of the Jesuits in Sicily, in a Church called Our Lady delle Gratie,
I went to see the Capuchins Church, the Streets of the City, the Castle, and
whatever was remarkable, which was very little.

January the sixteenth, The weather continuing foul with snow, the Captains
upon consultation resolved to return back to Syracuse, because the Galleys had
not provision enough for a longer stay. Wherefore after dinner, we set sail
back again, and arrived before night at Syracuse; whereof the Bishop being
advertised, sent Sig: Paolo Faraone to fetch me, and Sig: Maria to conduct my
women to his House.

January the nineteenth, The weather becoming good, the General sent us sudden
notice that he would depart immediately, as accordingly we did, and at night
entered the Port of Augusta, because it was again become somewhat tempestuous.
The next Evening we departed from Augusta, and sailed all night with a bad
wind, which forced us to make use of our Oars.

January the twenty first, At daybreak we came before Capo grosso, about
twenty miles from Messina, and continuing our course, arrived at Messina before
Noon. At the mouth of the Port we were questioned by the Commissioners of
Health, who were very rigorous here, and indeed were to be commended for it;
since, had it not been for the exact diligence of Messina in this matter, the
present Pestilence of Sicily might easily have infected all Italy: for Card.
Dona and others that governed at Palermo, to avoid damnifying that City by loss
of Trade, have hazarded the safery not only of the whole Kingdom (as is
manifestly seen) but also of all Italy by concealing the Plague of Palermo as
much as they could, instead of remedying the Infection by such severe and
rigorous courses as was fit, namely, by burning infected Goods and the like;
yea, they rather maintained that the Plague was not there when it was there,
and required prattick to be given them everywhere, procuring Orders from Spain
for that purpose: by which means many other places of Sicily, are become
infected, and the Plague, which, had fit means been used, perhaps would soon
have been extinguished, has continued above two years, and continues still; the
Orders of the Viceroy and the Court of Spain, promoting the spreading thereof
in despite of all. Only the City of Messina has the glory of withstanding so
great mischief for the public safety. Whilst we were under examination,
expecting Bills for Prattick against night, I advertised Sig: Francesco
Faraone, and Sig: Don Palmieri di Giovanni, my ancient Friends, of my coming,
who, in the Evening when Prattick was granted us, came with other Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen in Coaches to the shore-side to receive me, and Sig: Maria. After I
had taken leave of the General, and all the Knights of the Galleys, I went
ashore and was accompanied by the said Gentlemen to the House of Sig: Francesco
Faraone, where taking up my Residence, I have been visited by most Persons of
quality in the City, as also Sig: Maria has been by many Ladies; we also
returning visits to all to whom we owed them.

January the five and twentieth, Sig: Don Giov. Bisogni, a Cavalier of Messina,
Cousin to the Bishop of Syracuse, and Husband of Donna Margarita Faraone, (whom
I left at Catania with three of her Sons) dying at Messina, his Son Don
Francesco, (who alone was here at his Father's death) according to the custom
of this City, as soon as his Father expired, went out of the House, leaving it
and the Body yet unburi'd, to the care of other kindred, and retired to the
House of Sig: Franc. Faraone (wherein I lodge) as his nearest Kinsman; and here
he receives condoling visits, and remains till his Father's Body be buried,
and the House purified and fitted with mourning; which I mention as a custom
not practiced by us at Rome. We have been to see the Bodies of San Placido, and
other Saints, with all the other Relics of Messina, which were shown us near
the High Altar, where they are kept very conveniently. I have also heard one of
the Moral Lectures of Sig: Antonio Mazzapinta, a Famous Philosopher, and
Public Reader in Messina: Which Lecture, as also many others, he read in his
Extraordinary House for his own pleasure, and that of the Curious. Here I
arrest my Pen, this Letter being the last of my Oriental Voyages. If it please
God, I shall shortly entertain you viva voce; in the mean time I commit you to
his Providence, and kiss your Hands.

An account of my Arrival and Residence at Naples, in the House of Sig: Maria
Schipano.
JAnuary the thirtieth, Having hired two Felluca's for Naples, Sitti Maani's
Body which I carried with me, were more then necessary, and my Friends at
Messina had procured to my satisfaction) in the Morning we set sail from
Messina with a good wind, being accompanied to the boat by many Persons of
quality of both Sexes, from whom we separated with much tenderness. We passed
the Pharo between Caribdis and Scilla, the Sea being sufficiently rough, though
the wind favorable. On the left hand, at a good distance we left the Island of
Strongile, Vulcano, and other places; at night arriving at Trupia, where,
because they refused to give us Prattick, alleging that this was no
Landing-place in these infectious times, and that certain Landing-places were
appointed for Passage-Vessels upon the Coast of Calabria, where alone Prattick
was to be had; we kept out at Sea all night, and passed il Pizzo.

January the one and thirtieth, We passed by Mantea and other places, at noon
arriving at Paola where I went ashore. A little without the City, amongst the
little Hills we saw the Church of S. Francis of Paola, which is delicately
seated amongst goodly Trees and Brooks which run between the Hills. We saw the
Relics, the Chapel of the Marquis, Lord of the place, and his Sepulchers;
the Lime-kiln where S. Francis did a miracle; the Fountain and the Grotto
wherein he lived, with all other things remarkable; after which we lodged in an
Hostery or Inn upon the shore.

February the first, Having heard Mass in a little Church there, we left Paola,
and passing by Scoglio del Marchese and other Islands; in the Evening we supped
at Sea under Belvedere, and sailing all night, the next day we dined on Land at
Camerota; from whence we sailed and came to an Anchor in the Port of Palinuro;
which place I beheld with pleasure, through the delightful remembrance of
Virgil's Verses, which relate the misfortune of the Pilot Palniurus, and
with-all, give immortal fame to the place.

February the fourth, We departed from Palinuro, and lodged on shore at
Acciaruolo, where Passengers are notoriously abused, by being constrained to
lodge in a lewd Inn there, and pay the Host what he pleases to demand, who is
also to pay the Lord of the place what Rent he desires. The next day we passed
the Gulf of Salerno, and bocche di Capri, arriving late in the Port of
Napples, under the Dogana of Corn; but because it was so late that we could not
get Prattick, we slept all night in the Felluca's.

February the sixth, Sig: Andrea Pulice my Comrade, being by me advertised of
my coming, brought Sig: Mario Schipano, and many other Friends to visit me in
my Felluca; which interview, after so many years, was as pleasant as can be
imagined. As soon as the Officers negotiated for Prattick they obtained it;
but, for less trouble, and because I intended to stay little at Naples, I
dispatched one of my Felluca's wherein was the Body of Sitti Maani, and other
goods, immediately to Rome. Upon Sig: Schipano's invitation, I lodged in his
House, together with all my people. At Naples I received the first Letters from
Rome after above four years, wherein I had not received any, nor heard any
certain tidings of my Relations. These advertised me of the death of Sig:
Vallerio della Valle, which happened four years before, and also of that of Sig:
Tomasso della Valle, my Uncle, which fell out about a year before my arrival.
At whose deaths I also being no longer accounted living, certain Pious Places
seized upon part of my goods and revenues, and would have gotten all the rest
with the writings, (as they attempted to do) had not my kindred, and,
particularly, Sigra Laura Gaetana stoutly with-stood them, making it apparent
that I was alive, by showing some of my Letters which she had lately received;
whereto nevertheless they would by no means give credit. I found entertainment
for many days in reading abundance of Letters from Rome, which almost all my
kindred and friends writ to me, and in answering the same; as also in receiving
and returning the visits of many Neapolitan Cavaliers and Titolado's; and,
indeed, I am much obliged to all the Nobility of that City for the Civilities
they showed me in this my Return.

February the tenth, I sent to Rome authentical Certificates of Naples, who
acknowledged me for what I was twelve years before when I departed thence; as
also Letters of Attorney and other writings, to the end my Relations might make
use thereof to my benefit against who-ever at Rome attempted to molest my
Estate.

February the three and twentieth, A brave Tournement was publicly made at
Naples with great splendour in the Piazza of the Palace, for the Birth of the
Princess of Spain, the King's firstborn Daughter; to behold which, there
intervened with the Duke of Alva, the Viceroy, the Duke of Alcala, newly
arrived from Rome, where he had been extraordinary Ambassador about the
troubles of Italy. The Tourneyment was gallant, consisting of abundance of
Squadrons and Cavaliers, but without any Inventions, and nothing near so brave
as that which I saw here in the year 1612. upon the Marriage of France and
Spain.

February the four and twentieth, Which was the day of Carnival, a Mascherade
was made in Naples, and Balls in the Palace for an entertainment to the Duke of
Alcala; as also the next day, (although it was Lent) another Mascherade was
made on Horseback with a Tilting, and at night Balls in the Palace.

March the ninth, About seven a clock at night, a very great Earthquake happened
in Naples, which shook the strongest walls as if they had been but of paper;
but it lasted little, and was very short, so that (God be praised) it did no
considerable hurt, although for the small time it continued, it was
sufficiently dreadful.

March the tenth, The Abbess and other Nunns of San Marcellino, and,
particularly, Donna Feliciana, and Donna Beatrice d' Avalos, (to whom I have
always had great respect) did me the favor to cause a Mass to be sung in their
Church, whilst I was present, in thanks to God for my safe return into Italy;
where twelve years before I had begun and took the Ensigns of my Peregrination.

March the thirteenth, The fit time for my departure by Sea to Rome, being
come, I took leave of Sig: Mario Schipano, who had entertained us nobly all the
time of my stay at Naples, (during which, we frequently reviewed our Letters
and Travels with much Curiosity and Pleasure) and also of all other Friends,
and after due thanks to Sig: Angelo Crescentio, and Sig: Andrea Pulice who
accompanied us to the Scoglio di Euplea, vulgarly called Gaiola, I went aboard
and departed.

LETTER XVI.
From Rome, April 4. 1626.
Rome, the place of my Nativity; but though I walk upon the banks of Tyber and
the seven Hills, yet my mind runs wandering through Turkey and Persia, hoises
sail again to the wind, and roams as far as the Indian shores, reviewing
Ikkeri, Manel, and Calecut. Whence embarquing again in the great Dolphin, it
reconducts me over Seas and Lands, to my recent and late Peregrinations, and
even to the Rock of Euplea, whither now I return both with my Thought and Pen.
Being divided there, from Sig: Angelo, Sig: Andrea, and the rest with
expressions of much affection, whilst they in another boat returned toward
Naples, I with my Felluca's set sail, and, Post varios casus, post tot
discrimina rerum
Tendimus in Latium.
In a few hours I came to Procida, where I was entertained by Sig: Antonio d'
Antonii in his Garden; and not only dined there, but in expectation of a fit
hour to depart, (because I would not touch at Gaeta, but intended to go
directly to Terracina) I also lodged there all night. The Judge of Procida
being informed, whether by the Mariners or others I know not, of the Coffin of
Sitti Maani which I had, according to the cheating tricks used in the Kingdom
of Naples, thought to get something from me upon this occasion; and to make the
case more heinous, he waited till midnight when we were all asleep,
(notwithstanding he might have done it in the daytime when I walked up and down
the whole Island with the Women) and at that unseasonable time came with many
armed people to disquiet us in the House where I was, saying, that he would see
my goods, and stop the Coffin; with other such Language. I, who was prepared for
such encounters, showed him the good Bills which I had brought from Naples,
and, in short, made him take as a favor a small pittance, which I gave him out
of respect to the Master of the House where I lodged.

March the fourteenth, I left Procida before day, and putting to Sea arrived
with a pretty rough Sea at Terracina, where Horatio Pagni, Steward of my House,
to whom I had written from Naples to wait for me here, had been some days
expecting me, with another manservant to Sigra Faustina Alberina my Aunt. As
soon as he saw our Felluca's afar off, and conjectured who we were, because the
Tide was so boisterous that we could not easily get to shore, he caused certain
men to wade into the Sea naked, who with ropes presently drew both the Boats to
Land in safety, where Horatio and his Companion received us with much gladness
and many tears, and conducted us to a Lodging already provided for us in one of
the Inns upon the Seaside. Sig: Paolo Heltori, Governor of Terracina, sent to
invite me to his House, and to excuse himself for not coming in Person to fetch
me, for that he was taken up with the Prince of Venosa Ludovisio, who lodged
with him in his passage to Naples, whether almost all the Roman Barons, Vassals
of Spain, were summoned by the Viceroy, (as 'twas believed) about some
disgusts which he had with them about matters of Titles, and the like
Complements; and the Prince of Venosa was now at Terracina upon the Way. I
thanked the Governor, but declined the favor; partly, to avoid giving him more
trouble at such a busy time; and, partly, because I intended to depart
forthwith.

March the fifteenth, A Captain came from Sezze, to invite me Francesco della
Valle Governor there, (whom I knew already by fame of his Books of Poetry, and
desired much to know personally) that I would lodge with him in my passage to
Rome, adding, that he would wait for me at Case Nuove, an Inn upon the way,
subject to his jurisdiction. Whereupon, after I had heard Mass in a Church near
the shore, I imbarqu'd with all my people and Goods, and, at night, arrived at
Case Nuove, where I found the said Sig: Francesco della Valle, who entertained
us nobly, and, upon the like desire which he had of knowing me, we established
a great and perpetual friendship.

March the sixteenth, I dispatched Horatio with part of my servants and carriage
to Rome, particularly, with the Coffin of Sitti Maani, ordering him to get it
into Rome secretly before the day of my arrival, for preventing all
difficulties that might arise either from the guards of the Gate, or the
Toll-house, or otherwise: to which purpose I also writ Letters to Sigra Laura,
with orders what was to be done. I, with the Women, and only two Servants,
leaving the rest of my Goods in charge with the Host, because there wanted
Mules to carry them, went with Sig: Francesco to Sezza, there to wait for a
Coach, which I had writ for to Rome. In the Evening, the Prince of Rassano
Aldobrandino passed by Case Nuove toward Naples, whither he was summoned with
the rest.

March the twenty second, The Prince of Salmona Borghese, who was going
likewise to Naples, entered Sezza with a solemn Cavalcade, being met at the
foot of the Hills by the Governor, all the Militia of horse and foot, the
Bishop, and a company of all the Gentlemen of the Town. Which honor I believe
was done him by the procurement of Sig: Girolamo Muti, a Servant to the Card.
Borghese, who was allied by marriage to many in Sezze, and accompanied him
hither. I visited the said Prince as soon as he was alighted, and he expressed
much civility to me, and satisfaction with my Visit.

March the twenty third, In the Morning before I was up, the Prince of Sulmona
sent Sig: Baldassar Pignatello, Gentleman of his Chamber, to visit me, and to
bid me Adieu, being he was just ready to depart. I dressed my self in haste,
and went to wait upon him before he took horse, as he did presently after. In
the Evening, Horatio returned to Sezze, but without a Coach, for at Sermoneta,
the people being advertised of the Coffin which he carried with him, refused to
let it pass without particular license, but (which was worse) would have it
carried about the Town. Horatio would not put it into the hands of the Priests,
as they importuned him, but left it in a handsome chamber in the Inn, under the
care of one of my servants, and went directly to Rome, where he stayed till he
had got Licenses both from Sermoneta, Velletri, and Rome, for the free carrying
of it. And because he knew I wished this business done before I entered into
Rome my self, he brought no Coach, as he might have done, but came with these
dispatches to see what I intended to do. When I saw the Bills were good, and
proof against all difficulty, I dispatched a footman purposely to Rome for a
Coach to carry me thither.

March the twenty fifth, A Messenger whom I sent to carry the Coffin from
Sermoneta to Rome, arrived there, and without being seen or stayed by any
person, consigned the same to Sig: Laura, who placed it in my chamber, as I had
appointed.

March the twenty sixth, In the Evening the Coach which was to carry me to
Rome, arrived at Sezze, from whence, bidding adieu to Sig: Francesco della
Valle, I departed the next day, and by night got to Velletri.

March the twenty eighth, Departing from Velletri, in the Morning we passed by
Genzano in sight of its Lake, which was sometimes the famous Lacus Triviae;
afterward by Riccia, where the Sig: Savelli have a goodly Palace. We stayed to
dine at Albano, beholding Castle Candolfo afar off, and the place where Alba
longa sometimes stood. In the Evening we arrived at Rome as privately as could
be, because being a Widower, I was unwilling to admit of the congratulatory
meeting which diverse intended to me; and going to the Holy Stairs, I there,
according to my appointment, entered into another Coach, which carried us
leisurely through the longest Street of Santa Maria Maggiore, and about other
Streets also, till it was more late and dark. At length we entered my House by
the back-gate, and I presently caused all the doors to be locked, to the end
the news of my arrival might not bring any to disturb me before I had spoken a
little with Sig: Laura, as I desired. I was no sooner entered, but I found Sig:
Francesco Maria della Riccia, who waited for me, and with Sig: Laura his
Mother, did me the favor to dwell in the house, as also Sig: Gaspara Salviano
my Friend. Sig: Laura, scarce recovered of a great sickness, which had
endangered her life whilst I was at Naples, yet walked down into the Court as
well as she could with a staff to receive me there; and accordingly I was
received with a joy suitable to the great desire they had of us, and to the long
absence of so many years. We ascended all together, and after some conversation
amongst us, and a long discourse between me and Sig: Laura, who informed me of
sundry things, it being about three hours within night, I sent to to advertise
Sig: Faustina Alberina my Aunt, and also the Sig: Crescentii, of my arrival;
excusing my self that I went not in person to see them, because it was too
late. Sig: Faustina came immediately to me, and with her my Daughter Silvia, who
was so grown that I did not know her; as also Sig: Antonia Ruggieri, Mother of
Sig: Tiberio Alberii, whom likewise I did not know at first. We supt all
together very joyfully, and after a long conversation, Sig: Faustina with her
company retired home. Sig: Gaspare remained with me that night; and, before I
went to bed, I caused the Coffin of my Sitti Maani to be delivered to me.
Hitherto I have been continually visited by almost all the Nobility of Rome,
and also by many Ladies, Kindred, and Friends, who after so many years absence
see me again, and receive me a stranger and pilgrim in my own Country with
exceeding pleasure. This is an account of what has occurred within the few
days since my departure from Naples, and arrival at Rome. At present, I am
preparing to repay Visits, and to kiss the feet of our Lord Pope Urban VIII,
whereof, and all other occurrences, I shall advertise you. I kiss your hands,
and humbly salute all my Friends.

From Rome, April 4. 1626.
LETTER XVII.
From Rome, July 11. 1626.
HAving begun to go abroad, and to perform the respects I April, I first kissed
the feet of our Lord Pope Urban VIII, who received and honored me with
extraordinary courtesy, holding me in discourse with himself almost an hour
about several things. I was introduced by the Privy Stairs by Card. Magalotti,
who menages almost all the affairs of his Holiness, and discoursed with me a
long time exceeding courteously.

April the eleventh being my Birthday, I dated therewith the Dedicatory
Epistle of my Treatise, De Regionibus subjectis recentiori Persarum imperio,
which I intended to publish; and on the nineteenth of the same Month I
presented to the Pope, The Information of Georgia written in our own language,
to the end to persuade him to send a Mission of Priests thither in order to
reduce those people to the union of the Roman Church. The Pope was mightily
well pleased with it, and upon this occasion I spoke to him, and informed him
of many other businesses.

April the twentieth, Card. di sant' Onofrio, the Pope's Brother, sent for me
to the Palace, and there told me that his Holiness had made me his Chamberlain
of honor; which was a thing I never sought, nor thought of. I thanked him, and
professed my self ready to serve his Holiness in this and every thing else he
should command me.

May the fourth, The Pope having upon my informations spoken of the business of
the Georgians in the Congregation de propaganda Fide, a Decree was made in the
said Congregation for sending thither a Mission of Theatine Fathers under the
care of F. Don Pietro Avitabile of Messina, who had offered himself for that
purpose, and was proposed by me, which Fathers were enjoined to receive
instruction from me concerning what was fit to be done; in regard his Holiness
had made a great encomium of me in the Congregation, and ordained that nothing
should be done, either as to this Mission of the Georgians, or any affairs of
the East, without consulting of me first. Of this Decree, a Copy was sent me
subscribed by Sig: Francesco Ingoli, Secretary of the Congregation, which I
keep by me: and accordingly I have prepared Instructions for the said Fathers.

June the fifth, The Ensign-bearer Caterina d' Arcuso, a Biscainer, being
arrived at Rome the day before from Spain, came to my house. She was a Lass
between thirty five and forty years old, and had in her Childhood been bred up
in a Monastery of Biscay her own Country, and, I believe, wore a Nuns Habit
when she was grown up. But repenting of this life before she made profession,
she went away; and fancying to live like a Man, fled disguised from her
Father's House, and went to the Court of Spain, where for some time she served
in the Habit of a Page. Afterward she was minded to go to Sevil, and from
thence to the West- Indies, where at first she served as a manservant to
certain Merchants; but within a little time upon occasion of a quarrel which
befell her, she was fain to fly, and betook her self to the life of a Soldier,
being naturally much inclined to arms and martial affairs. This course she
followed a great while in those parts, being engaged in several Actions,
wherein she always gave good account of her self as a soldier; as also in
sundry civil quarrels; so that she got the repute of a gallant man; but because
she wanted a beard, they believed and called her Eunuch. Among other battles,
she was in a dangerous one, wherein her Company being routed, and the Ensign
left to the enemies, she effected by her valor, that she stayed her companions
flight, re-encourag'd them against the enemies, and leading them on valorously,
recovered the lost Ensign with her own hand, killing him that had taken it; for
which service she remained Ensign-bearer of that Company. At length, suspicions
arising that she was a woman, the matter came to be discovered in a great
quarrel which she had, wherein after many proofs of her courage, she was
mortally wounded, and to save her self from the Court of justice which
persecuted her, she was constrained to put her self into the Bishop's hands, to
whom she confessed the former passages of her life, saying that she was a
Woman, and what she had done was not out of any evil end, but only through an
inclination which she had to a military life: and for proof hereof she desired
the Bishop, he would cause her to be searched. Which was accordingly done, and
the Matrons and Midwives found her a Woman. The Bishop put her into a
Monastery; and because 'twas known that she had been a Nun* but doubtful
whether she was professed or not, he kept her there till certainty came from
her own Country that she was not: Wherefore being set at liberty, and unwilling
to become a Nun, but rather inclined to a military life, she returned into
Spain, where petitioning the King for a reward of her military service, (her
case being examined, as the custom is, in the Council, and by the way of
justice) she obtai'd of the King eight hundred Crowns of yearly Revenue, there
in the Indies, being styled in the Patents L^ Alfiere, or Ensign-bearer, and
having liberty given her to live as a man, and to serve in the Wars in any of
the King's Dominions without molestation. Hereupon she came into Italp, running
several adventures by the way, to beseech the Pope for some favors in
reference to her course of life, which by the mediation of many principal
Persons she has obtained. I had heard of her in the East- Indies, whither her
fame was arrived, and many times desired further information concerning her.
Wherefore my friend F. Roderiga di San Michele, a Discalceated Carmelite, being
now arrived at Rome by the way of Venice, many days before me, and acquainted
with my desire, brought her to my house; where she has related to me many
strange accidents befallen her in the course of her life, of which I here
mention only the most important and certain, as of an extraordinary person in
our times. I have since brought her into the company of several Ladies and
Cavaliers, whose conversation she loves much more then that of women. Sig:
Francesco Crescentio, who is well skilled in painting, has drawn her picture
with his own hand. She is of a large and portly stature for a Woman, and cannot
thereby be known for other then a man. Her breast is but like a young Girl's,
and she told me she had used I know not what kind of Remedy to dry it, and make
it almost plain, which Remedy was a Plaster given her by an Italian, which at
first put her to much pain, but afterward without doing her other hurt, or
corroding the flesh, produced the effect sufficiently well. Her Visage is not
deformed though not fair, but somewhat worn with age; and her black short
hair, cut after the fashion of Men with a little lock, as the mode also is at
this day, represents rather an Eunuch then a Woman. She wears Clothes, and a
Sword after the Spanish manner; and is well trussed at the waste, only she
carries her Head somewhat low, and is a little thick shouldered: In brief, she
rather resembles a weather-beaten Soldier than a fine Amorous Courtier.
Nothing but her Hand discovers her a Woman; for it is somewhat plump and
fleshie, although strong and robust, and she moves it after a womanish manner.

June the eleventh, After dinner F. Don Pietro Avitabile came

June the fourteenth, I visited the said Father in the Church of S. Silvester
at Montecavallo, and gave him the said Instruction in writing, of which I also
delivered another Copy to the Congregation De Propaganda Fide, to the end they
might supply the Father with many things which I judged necessary,
particularly, with Briefs from the Pope to those Princes, and with Letters of
Recommendation to such Ambassadors of Catholic Princes as were at
Constantinople, through which he was to pass, and to others who might help him
upon the way.

June the five and twentieth, F. Avitabile began his Voyage for Georgia,
together with one of his Companions, named F. Don Francesco Aprile, intending
to take F. Don Giacomo di Stefano, and others, at Messina; five or six Fathers
being designed for this Mission: but, by my advice, they divided into two
Companies, because I thought it best for the others, either to follow these
first, after they should be advertised by them from Constantinople of the
easiness of the passage, or else take another way. Those that went first
carried his Holiness's Briefs to the four present Georgian Princes, namely, of
Imeriti or Basciaive, of Dadian or Odisci, which is Mengrelia, of Guriel, and
of Kacheti. They also carried Letters from the Congregation to two
Metroplitans, to whom because it was not evident that they were Catholics, but
rather suspected Schismatics, it was not convenient for the Pope to write.
Sundry fine things they carried likewise to present to the Princes and
Metropolitans, and to who-ever else it should be needful. Their allowance from
the Congregation was five hundred Crowns, as much more being reserved for the
other company of Fathers who were to follow; besides that, they were to collect
many Alms for this purpose, both of money and things, to present at Rome,
Naples, Messina, and all the way they passed. I took leave of them in the
Evening at their own Church, with many embraces, and an appointment that they
would continually communicate all Occurrences to me by Letters.

June the eight and twentieth, The Pontifical Vespers being ended at S.
Peter's, the Pope in his Cope and Mitre was carried from the Church in his
Chair to the Palace; but before he came out of the Church-Gate, the Spanish
Ambassador, Count d' Ognate, (who was arrived a few days before, in place of
the Duke of Pastrana) presented himself according to the custom (for of late
years this Ceremony has been performed on S. Peter's Eve, and not on the Feast
day it self, as formerly) to give his Holiness a Gennet for the accustomed
Tribute of the Kingdom of Naples. But before the Ambassador came to the Pope,
(near whose Chair I stood, and saw all very well) the Treasurer of the Chamber
came running to his Holiness, and told him, that the Ambassador brought not a
Bill of so many thousand Crowns as use yearly to be presented, together with
the Gennet. I know not whether they said, it could not be made timely enough,
but should be done afterward; or whether it was made but not subscribed, with
those Cautions that were requisite; but, in sum, the money was not ready. And
although they alleged that this happened through negligence, by reason of the
new arrival of the Ambassador, who was not well informed, yet 'twas believed,
that they designed only to try whether the Pope would let the business pass
thus, that so by degrees they might introduce a custom of paying no more money
hereafter. The Pope, as I conceive, apprehending their drift, presently
answered, that without a good Bill he would not accept of the Gennet, nor do
that prejudice to the Apostolical Chamber; wherefore if the Bill were not in
order, they should return back with the Gennet, and bring both together the
next Morning. The Ambassador made suit to have the Gennet received presently,
promising that the Bill should be ready speedily. The Pope replied, that if
Sig: Marcello Sacchetti, Brother of Card: Sachetti, who kept the public
accounts of the Exchequer, and was then near the Pope, would take security from
the Ambassador, he would be contented; but he neither commanded the said Sig:
Marcello to take it, nor would have him take it for his sake; but he might do
it, if he pleased at the Ambassadors request. The Spaniards, perceiving there
was no other way, presently desired Sig: Marcello to make the security, which
he very readily and courteously condescended to; and thereupon, by the Pope's
Order, made a public writing in good form, and his Holiness was contented to
receive the Gennet, which the Ambassador presented to him with the usual
Ceremonies. I was willing to relate this passage as a thing extraordinary,
which happened in my time and presence. So I humbly kiss your Hands.

From Rome, July 11. 1626.
LETTER XVIII.
From Rome, August 1. 1626.
James's day, the twenty fifth of July last past, Intending to bury the Body of
Sitti Maani Gioerida my Wife (which I had brought with me so many Voyages) in
our Chapel of S. Paul, belonging to the Church of Ara Coeli in the Capitol; (a
place, which besides being the ancient Sepulcher of my Ancestors, is,
undoubtedly, the Noblest, and one of the Holiest in the world) before I
enclosed it in a Coffin of Lead which I had prepared, I resolved to open the
innermost wooden Coffin, that I might see how it was after so many years.
Accordingly I opened the same in the presence of Sigra Laura Gaetana my Cousin,
Silvia my Daughter, Sigra Maria, and all the women of the House. I found that
the flesh of the Head, which I could perceive at a rent of the Linen which
covered it, was wholly consumed, nothing remaining but the bone; at which I
wondered not, because the brain not being taken out of the skull at first,
thence proceeded the cause of this consumption. The rest of the Body seemed
better preserved; but because the Face was no longer to be seen, I would not
unfold the Linen to see further. That dry Herb wherewith I had first filled
the vacuities of the Coffin was still entire; and so also was the Amba, or
Manga-wood of the Coffin, and the pieces of Linen Cloth glu'd upon the
Commissures thereof. Having nailed up this innermost Coffin of Amba as it was
at first, instead of putting the same into the other outward wooden Coffin in
which it came from Malta to Rome, I enclosed it in a leaden one which I caused
to be well soder'd, and upon a large Plate fastened near the feet, I caused this
Epitaph to be engraven at the foot of a great erected Cross, MAANI GIOERIDAE
HEROINAE
PRAESTANTISSIMAE
PETRI DE VALLE PERINI VXORIS
MORTALES EXVVIAE.


Having thus prepared all things, late in the Evening, I caused it to be
carried secretly to Ara Coeli, having first obtained leave of Card. Melino, the
Pope's Vicar for that purpose; and it was accompanied thither by Sig: Gasparo
Albertino my Friend, Horatio the Steward of my House, and others of my familiar
acquaintance; whilst I, with Sigra Maria, and my Daughter Silvia, waited in the
Church. When it was come, I laid it in the Vault on the left hand of the Altar
as you enter into the Chapel, where lie also my Father, my Mother, my Uncles,
and almost all my Relations. I descended my self into the Tomb, together with
Sigra Maria who was willing likewise to pay this last Office, and with help of
the Friars and Sextons placed it there with my own hands. After which, causing
the Vault to be closed up, I took leave of the Friars, giving them some Alms of
Money and Torches. Besides the persons abovementioned, there were present at
this action, Madonna Guilia Vogli a Bolonnese, servant to Sig: Laura, Eugenia
the Indian Maid, Michel an Indian man, Ibrahim Abdisciva a Syrian, Gio: Robeh a
Chaldean, with others of my servants and familiars; besides the F. Guardian.
This last Office of Piety which remained, I have paid to the mortal relics
of my dear Consort Sitti Maani; yet it is not the last that I perform to her
better and immortal part, which I accompany with suffrages; neither have I
abandoned those in the Tomb, but deposited them, intending (when it shall
please God) to leave my own ashes laid in the same place, and to rise again
with her.

Now from this meditation of death, let us pass (Sig: Mario) to a Remarkable,
which occurrs to me of a very long life.

July the seven and twentieth, Being the Feast of S. Pantaleo, in the Church of
the Fathers Della Scuole Pie, I went to see F. Gaspare Dragonetti, who has
lived in the said Schools ever since the year 1600, and although now a hundred
and fifteen years old and more, (as appears by the Dimissory, Letters at his
Ordination, and the writings of a Canonship which he has had ever since the
same was conferred upon him, which was in the year 1530 or 1531, and were seen
when he entered into the pious Schools) nevertheless is sound and lusty, and not
only sees without Spectacles, and has his Teeth good, but labors daily in
teaching Children the Grammar in those Schools; which profession he told he, he
has exercised publicly above sixty years, and before the Jesuits began the
same in Rome; who, he says, when they came first to Rome, he remembers lived
in a very mean and small House, and sent their novices to learn Grammar in his
School. Before he read Grammar at Rome, he had read it many years in Sicily in
the City of Lenoni, where he was born; his Father being of Calabria, and having
retired thither I know not upon what occasion. In Sicily, he told me, he
remembered Giovanni de Vega, who was the first Viceroy under Charles V; and he
very well remembered the first time that the Turks upon the solicitation of
Francis the French King came to infest those Coasts: Moreover, he remembered
when Tripoli was lost, long before the loss of Goletta and Tunis; with several
other things sufficiently ancient for the age of one man. The Grammar which he
had always read, and still reads to his Scholars, is that of Nebrissensis,
which he approves for the best of all; and by his Discourse with me about
Grammatical Points, he seems to me exactly skilled therein. He told me, he had
many Writings and Grammatical Lectures of his own, curious, and, I believe,
very profitable, as proceeding from a Person so much experienced; but hitherto
he has not printed any thing. Emanuel Alvarez, and many other Modern
Grammarians acknowledge themselves his Scholars: He is a Man of a good and
reverend Aspect, cheerful, and of a good Complexion; his Beard is white and
large, and his Stature is of the middle sort. It being a rare thing in our
days to see a Man of so long and healthy an Age, I thought it not amiss to
give you this Relation. And so wishing you the years of this new Sicilian
Nestor, I heartily kiss your Hands.

From Rome, August the first, 1626.
FINIS.
A VOYAGE TO East India. WITH A Description of the large Territories under the
subjection of the Great MOGOL.
APologies do more question than strengthen Truth, which Truth has such power
in prevailing, that she does not know, and much less needs, the use of Preface
or words of Persuasion to get her credit; for though she appear simple and
naked unto open view, yet dares she encunnter with armed falsehood, and is sure
at last to overcome; which Truth being the best ornament of this ensuing
Discourse, looks to be credited, in what is here faithfully related.

So to make a re-entry upon a long-since finished Voyage; The third of February
1615. our Fleet consisting of six good Ships, three great, viz. the Charles,
Admiral of that Company, then a New-built goodly Ship of a Thousand Tuns, (in
which I sailed;) the Unicorn a new Ship likewise, and almost of as great a
burden; the James, a great Ship too; Three lesser, viz. the Globe, the Swan,
the Rose, (all under the Command of Captain Benjamin Joseph) fell down from
Graves-end into Tilbury-Hope, where we continued till the eighth day following,
when we weighed Anchor, and by a Slow, that we might have the safer passage,
the twelfth came into the Downs, where an adverse wind forced our abode till
the ninth of March, on which day it pleased God to send us, what we had much
desired, a North-East wind, which made us leave that weary Road, and set sail
for East India; and the eleventh about night, we were in the height of the
Lizard in Cornwall, and, that day, for that time, took our last sight of our
Country.

This wind was favorable to us till the sixteenth day at night, at which time
a most fearful storm met us, we being then in the Bay of Portugal, whose
violence continued five whole days and nights; and that Tempest was the most
lively and real Comment, that ever I observed, on that place recorded in Psalm
107.23.

The twenty eighth day, We had sight of the Grand Canaries, and of that
Mountain in the Island of Teneriffa, commonly called the Peak.

This overgrown rise of Earth, is in shape like to a Pyramid or Sugar Loaf,
circled, and wrapped about with many wreaths of clouds, which encompass it by
several distances; as first earth, then clouds, above which the earth appears
again, then clouds again, then earth; the top of it being of such an immense
height, that it may be as truly said of this, as Virgil. Eclog. 5. writes of
Olympus.

Candidus insuetum miratur limen Olympi,
Sub pedibusque videt nubes, and sidera --
So beautiful, it Heavens unwonted spires,
And Clouds, and Stars under its feet admires.
This Peak of Teneriffa, in a clear day, may be seen (if the Mariners report
truth) more than forty leagues at Sea. These Islands lie twenty eight Degrees
of North-Latitude.

The one and thirtieth, being Easter Day, We passed under the Tropic of
Cancer. And the seventh of April, the Sun was in its Zenith or Vertical, at
Noonday directly over our heads, which we found by this infallible
Demonstration made by a slender knife, or long Needle, set upright, which did
cast no shadow. The Sun in this course like the Equinoctial, divides the Globe
of the Heavens in two equal parts; and in this Motion arises so directly or
upright, that there is but a very little time 'twixt the darkness and the
appearance of the body of the Sun in the morning; for it is dark immediately
before the Sun then appears; and so it is in the Evening presently after the Sun
has left the Hemisphere. Here we were becalmed fourteen days, enduring extreme
heat.

April the sixteenth we met with winds, (we being then against, and not far
from the Coasts of Africa) which the Mariners call the Turnadoes; very strange
Gusts indeed, like those in Aeschylus, on the shore Aesc. (...): (ad finem.)

Those self-opposing blasts we there had, were so variable and uncertain, that
sometimes within the space of one hour, all the thirty two several winds,
(which are observed in so many points of the Compass) will blow, so that if
there be many Ships in company, you may observe them all to sail so many
several ways, and every one of them seem to go directly before the wind. Now
that it should be so here, and not known so to be in any part of the world
beside I ever heard of (if not in those winds, which they say are sometimes
sold by the Lapland-Witches) I can give no reason for it, unless Satan (who is
most Tyrannical where he is most obeyed) that Prince of the Air seems to rule
more here, than he does in other parts. And most certain it is that he rules
very much in the Inhabitants on that Main, the poor, ignorant, and most
miserable Negroes, born for sale, slavery, and slaughter. These strange Gusts
were accompanied with much Thunder and Lightning, and with extreme rain, so
noisome, that it made their clothes who stirred much in it, presently to stink
upon their backs; the water likewise of those slimy, unwholsom, hot, and
unsavory showrs, wheresoever it stood, would presently bring forth many little
offensive Creatures. These Turnadoes met with us, when we were about twelve
Degrees of North-Latitude, and kept us company ere they quitted us two Degrees
Southward of the Equinoctial, under which we passed the twenty eighth of April.

The nineteenth of May being Whitsunday, We passed the Tropic of Capricorn, so
that we were seven weeks complete under the Torrid Zone.

Between the Tropicks we saw (almost every day) different kinds of fishes, in
greater abundance than elsewhere, as the great Leviathan, whom God has made
to take his pastime in the Sea; Granpisces, or lesser Whales; Sharks, Turtles
or Tortoises, Dolphins, Bonitoes, Albicores, Porpisces, Flying fishes, with
many others. Some Whales we saw of an exceeding greatness, who in calm weather
often arise and show themselves on the top of the water, where they appear like
unto great Rocks, in their rise spouting up into the Air with noise, a great
quantity of water, which falls down again about them like a shower. The Whale
may well challenge the Principality of the Sea, yet I suppose that he has many
enemies in this his large Dominion; for instance, a little long Fish called a
Thresher, often encounters with him; who by his agility vexes him as much in
the Sea, as a little Be in Summer, does a great Beast on the shore.

The Shark has not this name for nothing; for he will make a morsel of any
thing he can catch, master, and devour. These Sharks are most ravenous fishes;
for I have many times observed, that when they have been swimming about our
Ships (as oftentimes they do) and we have cast overboard an iron hook made
strong for this purpose, fastened to a rope strong like it, baited with a piece
of beef of five pounds weight, this bait has been presently taken by one of
them; and if by chance the weight of the fish, thus taken, in haling him up,
has broken out the hook's hold, not well fastened (as sometimes it did) so that
he fell again into the Sea, he would presently bite at another Bait, and so
bite till he was taken. This Sea-shark is a Fish as bad in eating, as he is in
quality, a very moist watery fish, yet eaten at Sea (because any fresh thing
will there down) but no good food. This Fish turns himself on his back to take
his prey; by which he gives warning to many other little fishes, who ever swim
about him, to avoid his swollow. Those Fishes that thus keep him company, are
called by the Mariners, Pilot-fishes, who always shape their course the same
way the Shark takes, and by consequence (nature having made them so wary) he
becomes their guard, not his food. And there are other fishes too they call
Sucking-fish, that stick as close to the body of the Shark, as a Tike on the
shore does to the body of a Beast, and so receive their nourishment from him:
and he must be contented; for, while he is swimming up and down, he cannot
possibly free himself of them. Many of these Sharks grow to a very large
greatness; they have a broad round head, in which are three rows of teeth very
strong and sharp, by which they are able to take off the leg of a man at one
bite, as some have found by woeful experience, while they have been carelessly
swimming in these hot Seas, where these Sharks most use; and certainly, were
they as nimble as they are mischievous, would do very much hurt.

The Turtle or Tortoise, is one of those creatures we call Amphibia, that lives
sometimes in the Sea, and sometimes on the Shore; he is marvellously fortified
by Nature, dwelling (as it were) continually under a strong roof, which moves
with him, and covers (when he will) his whole body; therefore Testudo, which
signifies a Tortoise, signifies also the roof or vault of an house, which
covers all within it. Those concave backs (like bucklers, but of an Oval shape)
that cover these creatures, are many of them so exceeding strong, that they
will bear off the weight of a Cart-wheel. These Tortoises increase by eggs (as
I have been often told) are very good to eat, the substance within them
(whether you will call it flesh or fish) first boiled, and after minced with
butter, tastes like buttered Veal. Their shell makes (as is very commonly
known) excellent good Combs, Cups, or Boxes, and further it is used by them in
East India, to make or adorn little or great Cabinets.

The Dolphin is a fish called, for his swiftness, The Arrow of the Sea,
differing in this one particular, from all other fishes I ever observed, in
that he has many little teeth upon the top of his tongue; He is very pleasing
to the eye, smell, and taste; of a changeable color, finn'd like a Roach,
covered with many small scales, having a fresh delightsom scent above other
fishes, and in taste as good as any; these Dolphins are wont often to follow
our ships, not so much I think for the love they bear unto man, (as some
write,) as to feed themselves with what they find cast overboard: whence it
comes to pass, that many times they feed us; for when they swim close to our
ships, we often strike them with a broad instrument, full of barbs, called an
Harping-iron, fastened to a rope, by which we hale them in; This Dolphin may be
a fit Emblem of an ill race of people, who under sweet countenances, carry
sharp tongues.

Bonitoes and Albicores, are in color, shape, and taste, much like unto
Mackrels, and as good fish as they, but they grow to be very exceeding large.

The Porpisces or Hogfish, are like the former, very large and great, but
better to look upon than to taste; they usually appear at Sea in very great
sholes or companies, and are (as if they came of the race of the Gadaren Swine,
that ran violently into the Sea) very swift in their motion, and like a company
marching in rank and file; They leap or mount very nimbly over the waves, and
so down and up again, making a melancholy noise, when they are above the water.
These are usually, when they thus appear, certain presagers of very foul
weather.

The Flying fishes have skinny wings like unto Bats, but larger; they are
stiffned and strengthened with many little bones, such as are in the back-fins
of Pearches, by which they fly but a little way at a time; they have small
bodies like unto Pilchers, and appear when they fly, in mavelous great
companies, and some of them often fly into our ships, by which we have tasted
that they are excellent good fish. Of all other, these flying Fishes live the
most miserable lives: for being in the water, the Dolphins, Bonitoes,
Albicores, and Porpisces, chase, persecute, and take them, and when they would
escape by their flight, are oftentimes caught by ravenous Fowls, somewhat like
our Kites, which hover over the water. These flying Fishes are like men
professing two Trades, and thrive at neither.

The twelfth of June early in the morning, We espied our long wished for
Harbor the Bay of Souldania, about twelve leagues short of the Cape of good
Hope, where we came happily to an Anchor that fore-noon. In which Bay we found
a Dutch-ship bound for Bantam, which had taken in her course, and brought
thither, a small Portugal bound to Angola, a Colony belonging to the Portugals,
lying in the skirts of Africa, about ten degrees South of the Line; in which
small Ship amongst many rich Commodities (as we heard) to the value of five or
six thousand pounds sterling, there were ten Portugal Virgins (as they called
themselves) sent to that Colony, I suppose for Husbands. The young women were
well-favoured, and well clad in silks; but such were the courtesies of these
Dutch men toward them, as that they took not only away all the goods,
Artillery, and good provisions of their Ship, but they robbed these poor captive
Maidens of all their apparel, (which they most sadly complained of) to one poor
suit (and I suppose of their honor too, if they brought it with them) then
giving them water for their wine, and a very scant proportion of all other
provisions, turned them with their unarmed, leakie, and ill-man'd ship, to the
mercy of the Seas, the twentieth day following.

This Bay of Souldania lies in 34 degrees and half of South Latitude in a
sweet Climate, full of fragrant Herbs (which the soil produces of its self)
pleasing to the sense, where our ships companies, when they have oftentimes
there arrived with very weak and feeble bodies, usually by that Sea-disease the
Scurvy; in which disease (I shall observe by the way) if any that have it be
not too much over-gone with it, as soon as he comes to enjoy the fresh air on
any shore, with fresh water, and fresh food, he will presently recover; but if
this disease have overmuch prevailed on him, immediately after he sets his
foot on shore he usually dies. I say our people when they have come hither with
very crazie bodies, have often found here much good refreshing; for besides a
most delectable brook of pure good water, arising hard by out of a mighty Hill,
(called, for its form, The Table, close by which there is another Hill, which
arises exceeding high like a Pyramid, and called by Passengers the Sugar Loaf)
there are good store of Cattle, as little Beeves, called by the barbarous
Inhabitants, Boos; and Sheep which they call Baas, who bear a short coarse
hairy wool, and, I conceive, are never shorn. These Boos and Baas, (as they
call them) were formerly bought in great plenty, for small quantities of
Kettle-brass, and Iron-Hoops, taken off our Empty Casks; (which are all for
this long Voyage hoop'd with Iron.) These Salvages had their Cattle which we
bought of them, at a very great Command: for with a call they would presently
run to them, and when they had sold any one of their Bullocks to us, for a
little inconsiderate piece of brass, if we did not presently knock him down,
they would by the same call, make the poor creature break from us, and run unto
them again; and then there was no getting them out of their hands but by giving
them more brass: and by this trick, now and then, they sold the same beast unto
us, two or three times; and if they had thus sold him more often, he had been a
good pennyworth; how ever in this we might observe, the covetousness and
deceit of this brutish people. Here ye must know, that this people of all
metals seem to love Brass, I think (as you may ghess afterward) for the
rankness of its smell; with which they make great Rings to wear about their
Wrists; yea, so taken are they with this base metal, that if a man lay down
before them a piece of Gold worth two pounds sterling* and a piece of brass
worth two pence, they will leave the Gold and take the brass. On this shore
there likewise are found excellent good, though small Roots for Salads, which
the soil brings forth without husbanding. And in the head of the Bay, may be
taken with nets great store of fair fat Mullets, of which we took abundance.

This remotest part of Africa is very mountainous, overrun with wild beasts,
as Lions, Tigers, Wolves, and many other beasts of prey, which in the silent
night discover themselves by their noise and roaring. To the Teeth and Jaws of
which cruel Beasts, the Natives here expose their old people; if death prevent
it not, when once they grow very old and troublesome, laying them forth in some
open place in the dark night, When the wild beasts (as David observes, Psalm.
104.20, 21.) do creep forth, and the young lions roar after their prey. One
miserable poor old wretch was thus exposed when we there, who by his pitiful
cries, was discovered by our Court of Guard, there on shore, and not far off
from him and by them relieved and delivered for that present time, out of the
jaws of Death; And we asking Cooree one of the Natives (whose Story you shall
have by and by) why they did so, he told us, It was their custom, when their
people had lived so long, that they knew not what to do with them, thus to be
rid of them.

We saw in this Bay of Souldania many Whales, and about the shore diverse
party-colored Fowls; And here are Ostriches to be seen. For the soil about the
Bay; it seems to be very good, but the Sun shines not upon a people in the
whole world, more barbarous than those which possess it; Beasts in the skins of
men, rather than men in the skins of beasts, as may appear by their ignorance,
habit, language, diet, with othet things, which make them most brutish.

First for God, the great God of Heaven and Earth, whom generally all the
people in the World, Heathen as well as Christians do confess, they (as this
Cooree told us) acknowledge none. For their speech, it seemed to us an
inarticulate noise rather than Language, like the clucking of Hens, or gabling
of Turkies; and thus making a very strange confused noise, when they walk here
or there: if there be two, or three, or five, or ten, or twenty, or very many
more in company, it is their manner to walk in rank one after the other, in
small paths they have made by their thus walking; as Kine in Summer many times
do, when they come home to the Pail; or as Wild-geese who fly in ranks, and as
they fly make a noise; so these walking together thus gabble from the first to
the last in company, as if all spoke, but none answered. Their Habits are their
sheeps-skins undrest, thonged together, which cover their bodies to the middle,
with a little flap of the same skin tied before them, being naked downward; and
when it is cold, keep the woolly, when hotter weather, the fleshy side of those
skins next to their bodies. Their Ornaments and Jewels, Bullocks, or
Sheeps-guts full of excrement, about their necks; and therefore when we bought
their Cattle, they would take (and we were content they should) their skins,
guts, and garbage, which plentifully furnished them with that rich attire, and
gay ornaments; and when they were hungry, they would sit down upon some
hillock, first shaking out some of that filthy pudding out of the guts they
wore about their necks, then bowing and bringing their mouths to their hands,
almost as low as their knees* like hungry dogs would gnaw, and eat the raw
guts, when you may conceive their mouths full of sweet green sauce. The women
as the men are thus adorned, thus habited, and thus dieted, only they wear more
about their lower parts than the men. And (by the way) these carry their
sucking Infants under their skins upon their backs, and their breasts hanging
down like Bag-pipes, they put up with their hands to their children, that they
may suck them over their shoulders. Both Sexes make coverings for their heads
like to skull-caps, with Cow Dung, and suchlike filth, mingled with a little
stinking grease, with which they likewise besmear their faces, which makes
their company unsufferable, if they get the wind of you. I observed, that some
of the rest of their diet was agreeable to the former; for they would eat any
reffuse thing, as rotten and moldy Biskets, which we have given them, fit
indeed for nothing but to be cast away; yea, they will eat that which a
ravenous Dog in England will refuse. I once took notice of a Couple of them,
who had found on the neighboring shore a large piece of a dead fish the Sea
had cast up, which did most sufficiently stink; they presently made a little
fire with dry Cowdung, and with this they warmed it, and then they eat it, with
as much seeming appetite, as an hungry man with us would feed upon a very
choice and savoury dish, which makes me almost to believe, that those wretched
creatures have but three senses, wanting the benefit both of Smelling and
Tasting. They lodge upon the earth in Hovels, so ill-covered that they keep not
out the weather, made like to those we call Summer-houses, with boughs and
sticks.

These Brutes devote themselves to idleness; for they neither dig nor spin. For
their stature and making, they are very straight, and well limbed, though not
very tall, but in their faces very ill-favored, for the noses of most of them
are flat. They have little or no beard; the hair on their heads short, black,
and curled; their skins very tawny; swift they are of foot, and will throw
Darts, and shoot Arrows, which are their weapons, very dangerously.

But I shall here insert a short Story: About three years before I went to
India, it happened, that one of the Company-ships returning thence, and
arriving at this Harbor, after a little stay, when she was ready to set sail
for England, and having then two of these Salvages aboard, her Commander
resolved to bring them both home with him, thinking that when they had got some
English here, they might discover something of their Country which we could not
know before. These poor wretches being thus brought away, very much against
both their minds, one of them (merely out of extreme sullenness, though he was
very well used) died shortly after they put to Sea, the other, who called
himself Cooree (whom I mentioned before) lived, and was brought to London, and
there kept, for the space of six months, in Sir Thomas Smith's house (then
Governor of the East India Company) where he had good diet, good clothes, good
lodging, with all other fitting accommodations; now one would think that this
wretch might have conceived his present, compared with his former condition, an
Heaven upon earth; but he did not so, though he had to his good entertainment
made for him a Chain of bright Brass, an Armor, Breast, Back, and Headpiece,
with a Buckler all of Brass, his beloved Metal; yet all this contented him not;
for never any seemed to be more weary of ill usage, than he was of Courtesies;
none ever more desirous to return home to his Country than he: For when he had
learned a little of our Language, he would daily lie upon the ground, and cry
very often thus in broken English, Cooree home go, Souldania go, home go; And
not long after, when he had his desire, and was returned home, he had no sooner
set footing on his own shore, but presently he threw away his Clothes, his
Linen, with all other Covering, and got his sheeps skins upon his back, guts
about his neck, and such a perfumed Cap (as before we named) upon his head; by
whom that Proverb mentioned, 2 Pet 2.22. was literally fulfilled, Canis ad
vomitum; The dog is returned to his vomit, and the swine to his wallowing in
the mire.

After this fellow was returned, it made the Natives most shie of us when we
arrived there; for though they would come about us in great Companies when we
were new come thither, yet three or four days before they conceived we would
depart thence, there was not one of them to be seen, fearing belike we would
have dealt with some more of them, as formerly we had done with Cooree. But it
had been well if he had not seen England; for as he discovered nothing to us,
so certainly when he came home, he told his Countrymen (having doubtless
observed so much here) that Brass was but a base and cheap commodity in
England, and happily we had so well stored them with that metal before, that
we had never after such a free Exchange of our Brass and Iron for their Cattle.
It was here that I asked Cooree who was their God? he lifting up his hands
answered thus, in his bad English, England God, great God; Souldania no God.

In the year 1614. Ten English men having received the sentence of death for
their several crimes at the Sessions house in the Old Bailey at London, had
their Execution respited by the entreaty of the East India Merchants, upon
condition that they should be all banished to this place, to the end (if they
could find any peaceable abode there) they might discover something
advantageous to their Trade; And this was accordingly done. But two of them
when they came thither were taken thence, and carried on the Voyage. One whose
surname was Duffield, by Sir Thomas Row, that year sent Ambassador to the
Great Mogol; that fellow thus redeemed from a most sad Banishment, was
afterward brought back again into England by that noble Gentleman, and here
being entrusted by him, stole some of his Plate, and ran away: Another was
carried on the Voyage likewise, but what became of him afterward, I know not.
So that there remained eight which were there left with some Ammunition, and
Victual, with a small Boat to carry them to and from a very little uninhabited
Island lying in the very mouth of that Bay, a place for their retreat and
safety from the Natives on the Main. The Island called Pen-guin Island,
probably so named at first by some Welsh-man, in whose Language Pen-guin
signifies a white head; and there are many great lazy fowls upon, and about,
this Island, with great cole-black bodies, and very white heads, called
Penguins. The chief man of the eight there left, was surnamed Cross, who took
the Name upon him of Captain Cross; He was formerly Yeoman of the Guard unto
King James; but having had his Hand in Blood twice or thrice, by men slain by
him in several Duels, and now being condemned to die with the rest, upon very
great suit made for him, he was hither banished with them: whither the Justice
of Almighty God was dispatched after him, as it were in a Whirlwind, and
followed him close at the very heels, and overtook him, and left him not till
he had paid dear for that blood he had formerly spilt. This Cross was a very
stout, and a very resolute man, who quarrelling with, and abusing the Natives,
and engaging himself far amongst them, immediately after himself with the rest
were left in that place, many of these Salvages being got together, fell upon
him, and with their darts thrown, and arrows shot at him, stuck his body so
full of them, as if he had been larded with darts and arrows, making him look
like the figure of the man in the Almanac, that seems to be wounded in every
part; or like that man described by Lucan, Totum pro vulnere corpus, who was
All-wound, where blood touched blood. The retaliations of the Lord are sure and
just; He that is Mercy it self, abhorrs Cruelty above all other sins; He cannot
endure that one man should devour another, as the Beasts of the Field, Birds of
the Air, Fishes of the Sea do; and therefore usually shows, exemplary, signal
revenges for that sin of Blood, selling it at a dear rate unto them that shead
it. Every sin has a tongue, but that of Blood, outcries and drowns the rest;
Blood being a clamorous and a restless suter, whose mouth will not be stopped
till it receive an Answer, as it did here. The other seven, the rest of these
miserable Banditi, who were there with Cross, recovered their Boat, and got off
the shore, without any great hurt; and so rowing to their Island, the waves
running high, they split their boat at their landing, which engaged them to
keep in that place, they having now no possible means left to stir thence. And,
which made their condition while they were in it most extremely miserable, it
is a place wherein grows never a Tree,, neither for sustenance or shelter, or
shade, nor any thing beside (I ever heard of) to help sustein Nature; a place
that has never a drop of fresh water in it, but what the showrs leave in the
holes of the rocks. And besides all this, there are very great number of Snakes
in that Island (as I have been told by many that have been upon it) so many of
those venomous worms, that a man cannot tread safely in the long grass which
grows in it, for fear of them; And all these put together must needs make that
place beyond measure uncomfortable to these most wretched men. To this may be
added their want of provision, having nothing but dry Biscuit, and no great
quantity of that; so that they lived with hungry bellies, without any place fit
for repose, without any quiet rest, for they could not choose but sleep in fear
continually; And what outward condition could make men more miserable than
this? Yet notwithstanding all they suffered, these seven vile wretches all
lived to be made examples afterward of Divine Justice. For after they had
continued in, and endured this sad place, for the space of five or six months,
and they were grown all even almost mad, by reason of their several pressing
wants and extremities; it pleased God by providence, to bring an English Ship
into that road, returning for England; four of these seven men being impatient
of any more hours stay there, immediately after that Ship was come in, made a
Float with the ruins of their split boat, which they had saved together, and
with other wood which they had gotten thither, and with ravel'd and untwisted
boat-ropes, fastened as well as they could all together (for there are no such
sudden Teachers and Instructers as Extremities are.) These four got upon the
Float, which they had thus prepared, and poizing it as well they could by their
several weight, hoped by the benefit of their Oars, and strength of the Tide
(that then ran quick toward the Ship newly arrived) they might recover it; but
this their expectation failed them: for it being late in the day when they made
this attempt, and they not discovered by the Ship, which then road a good way
up in the Bay, before they could come up near unto her, the Tide returned, and
so carried them back into the main Sea, where they all perished miserably. The
day following, the Ship sent a boat to the Island, which took those three yet
surviving into her, as the other four might have been, if they could but have
exercised their patience for one night longer. These survivers came aboard the
Ship, related all that had befallen to their fellows; but these three,
notwithstanding all their former miseries, when they were taken into the Ship,
behaved themselves so lewdly as they returned homewards, that they were very
often put into the Bilbowes, or Ship-stocks, in the way returning; and
otherwise many times punished for their great and several misdemeanors: At last
the Ship being safely returned into the Downs, she had not been there at an
Anchor above 3. hours, but these three Villains got on shore, and they had not
been ashore above three hours, but they took a Purse, and a very few hours
after were apprehended and all taken for that Fact, and suddenly after that,
their very foul story being related to the Lord Chief Justice, and they looked
upon as men altogether incorrigible, and incapable of amendment by lesser
corrections, by his special Warrant were executed upon their former
Condemnation (for which they were banished not to return hither again, but
never pardoned) near Sandwich in Kent, where they committed the Robbery. From
whose example we may learn, that it is not in the power of any affliction, how
heavy soever it light, and how long soever it lie, if it be not sanctified, to
do any man good. That when the rod is upon a man, if he be not taught as well
as chastned, all the stripes bestowed on him are cast away. A man might have
hoped that these wretched fellows had been long enough in the fire to have
purged away their dross. But afflictions, like fire, harden as well as soften;
and Experience teaches us, that the winds and waves though they beat with their
greatest violence upon the Rocks, yet leave them as they found them unmovable;
It being a most tried Truth recorded by Solomon, Prove. 27.22. that, Bray or
beat a fool in a mortar, he will not leave his foolishness; But as he was put
in, so will he come out a fool.

The year following we carried three more condemned persons to be left in this
place, but they hearing of the ill success of their Predecessors, and that it
was very unlikely for them to find any safe footing here, when we were ready to
depart thence, and to leave them on the shore, they all came and presented
themselves on their knees, with many tears in their Eyes unto our chief
Commander Captain Joseph, most humbly beseeching him, that he would give Order
that they might be hanged before he departed, in that place, which they much
rather chose, than to be there left; we thought it was a very sad sight to
behold three men in such a condition, that made them esteem hanging to be
mercy. Our Commander told them, that he had no Commission to execute them, but
to leave them there, and so he must do. And so he believed he had done; but our
fifth Ship the Swan staying in this place after us a day or two, took these
poor men into her, and then took her course for Bantam whither she was bound.
And the Rose our last Ship, whose sight and company we lost in that most
violent storm (before mentioned) at the beginning of our Voyage, was safely
preserved, and happily afterward found her way to Bantam likewise.

We made our abode in this Harbor till the twenty eighth following, on which
day we being well watered and refreshed, departed. And the twenty ninth we
doubled the Cape of good Hope, whose Latitude is thirty five degrees South. Off
this Cape there sets continually a most violent Current Westward, whence it
comes to pass, that when a strong contrary wind meets it (as oftentimes it
does) their impetuous opposition makes the Sea so to rage, as that some Ships
have been swallowed, but many more very much endangered amongst those huge
Mountains of water, and very few Ships pass that way without a storm. We kept
on in a circular course, to gain a South-west wind; for ye must know, that the
wind in those parts, and so in East India, blows (and but with a very little
variation) half the year South-west, and the other half North-east; we sailed
here Southerly, till we had raised the South-Pole almost forty degrees above
the Horizon. This Pole is a Constellation of four stars, the Mariners call the
Crosiers; these stars appear near one another like a Cross, and almost
equidistant. And while we had the view of this Pole, the Sun (as it must needs
be) was North at Noon unto us.

The two and twentieth of July we discovered the great Island Madagascar,
commonly called Saint Lawrence, we being then betwixt it and the African shore,
which Island lies almost every part of it under, or within the Southern
Tropic: We touched not at it, but this I dare say from the Credit of others
who have been upon it, that as it is an exceeding great Island (if not the
greatest in the known world) so it is stored with abundance of very excellent
good Provisions, though inhabited by a barbarous and heathenish people, but
stout and warlike, and very numerous.

Over against this Island, on the main Continent of Africa, are Zefala and
Mozambique, whereon the Portugals have got some footing; the places (as may be
strongly supposed) whither Solomon sent his Navy of Ships, built at Eziongebar,
which stood on the banks of the Red Sea in Arabia the Happy; the Country of
that famous Queen of the South, who hearing of his wisdom and renown, took her
journey thence to visit the Court of King Solomon, who had understanding like a
flood. From that place forenamed, Solomon sent his Ships for Gold and Silver
and Ivory, etc. 1 Kings 10.22. they coasting all along the shore of Africa; for
in the days of Solomon the Art of Navigation was not known, and Seamen then
steering without Cart or Compass were necessitated to keep the neighboring
Land always in their sights, as without question those Ships did, and to those
forementioned places, stored (as is related) above other parts of Africa, with
those richest Commodities.

I might have taken notice before (but yet it will not be unseasonable) of many
sudden, strong, and violent Gusts of wind, frequently to be observed in those
South-west Seas, which surprise a Ship so suddenly, that if she have many sails
abroad, and the Mariners be not very watchful and nimble to strike them, their
strength is such that they will endanger her overturning. And to these there
are many strange watery Clouds they call Spouts, which appear like a Funnel or
water-tankard, very large and big at the one end, but small on the other which
hangs lowest and of a very great length; They contain a great Quantity of
water, wrapped together by a whirlwind, that falls within a very narrow Compass,
the abundance whereof by its great weight, if it fall directly (as sometimes it
does) upon the body of a small Ship, it will much endanger it; and would do
much more harm, but that these Spouts when they are seen may be easily avoided.

From the Island of Madagascar we proceeded on in our Course; and the fifth of
August following, approached near the little Islands of Mohilia, Gazadia, St.
John de Castro, with some others, whose Name I know not, called in general the
Islands of Comora, lying about twelve Degrees South of the Equator.

The day following being the sixth of August, Early in the Morning our Men
looking out for Land espied a Sail which stood directly in our Course but far
before us; at first sight she appeared as if there had been some great Hill
interposed betwixt us: For first, we had sight only of her Colors in her high
Maintop; after this, of her Masts and Sails, and then of her Hull; after which
manner, Ships at Sea do every where appear at great distance one to another,
which proves that that mighty Collection of waters called Seas, have a Unequal,
or Globous and round body, placed by Almighty God, as it were in Hills, or
Heaps; and being being above the earth, and higher than it, they have set
Limits, and commanded they are to their Bounds, contrary to their Nature, which
they may not pass, for so says the Psalmist, Psalm 104.9. Thou have set a
bound which they may not pass over, that they return not again to cover the
earth. But this is known to all that have been at Sea, therefore we proceed.
Upon the first sight of that Ship, we were all glad of the object, improving
all endeavors we could to overtake her, with-all preparing our great Ordnance,
that if she were a Friend we might salute her, if an Enemy be in readiness for
her. So eagerly pursuing this unlooked for Ship with the wings of the wind,
after that we had given her Chase about five hours, her Colors and bulk
discovered her to be a very great Portugal Caraque bound for Goa, lying in the
skirts of East India, and principally inhabited by Portugals, the City of
Residence for the Viceroy to the King of Spain, her Commander called Don
Emanuel de Meneces, a brave Resolute Man, as the sequent will demonstrate.
About noon, the Globe our least Ship (by reason of her nimbleness sailing
better then her fellows) came up with her on her broad side to wind-ward, and
according to the Custom of the Sea, hayl'd her, asking whence she was; she
answered indirectly, Of the Sea, calling our Men Rogues, Thieves, Heretics,
Devils; and the Conclusion of her rude Complement was, in loud Cannon Language,
discharging seven great Pieces of Artillery at our Globe, (though she had very
little reason so to do, we having four Ships in Company, and she alone) whereof
six pierced her through the Hull, maiming some of her Men, but killing none;
our Globe replied in the same voice, and after that fell off.

About three of the Clock in the Afternoon, the Charles our Admiral came up
with her so near, that we were within pistol shot: our Commander Captain Joseph
proceeded religiously, in offering them a Treaty, before he proceeded to
Revenge; so we saluted her with our Trumpets, she us with her wind-
Instruments; then we showed our Men on both sides aloft; this done, our
Commander called to them requiring Theirs to come aboard, to give an account
for the injury they had lately before offered us; they answered, They had never
a Boat; our Commander replied, that he would send them one, and immediately
caused his Barge to be manned, and sent off to them, which brought back one of
their Officers, and two others of inferior rank, with this message from their
Captain, how that he had promised the King of Spain his Master not to leave his
Ship, and therefore forced he might be, but never would be Commanded out of
her. Captain Joseph received the Message, and used those that brought it
Civilly, and then ordered, that they should be showed (in a broad side of great
Guns, that lay all ready prim'd to be fired against them) how we were prepared
to vindicate our selves, which put the poor Portugals into a fit of trembling,
and upon it desired our Commander to write a few words to theirs, that happily
with their persuasion might make him come. Captain Joseph, willing to preserve
his Honor, and to prevent blood, consented, and forthwith caused a few lines
in Spanish to this effect to be wrote unto him. That

Whereas he the Commander of the Carraque had offered violence to our Ship that
sailed peaceably by him, he willed him to come presently and give a reason for
that wrong, or else at his peril.

So he discharged those Portugals, sending one of our Masters Mates back with
them with those few words, and this further message, that if he refused to
come, he would sink by his side, but that he would force him before he left
him; Morientium verba sunt prophetica, his words came to pass; for he himself
suddenly after fell by a great Shot that came from the Caraques side. The
Commander of the Caraque, notwithstanding the Message and Menace sent to him,
was still peremptory in his first answer. So our Men returning, Captain Joseph
himself, made the three first Shot at them, all which, the mark being so fair
and near, hit them; this done, the Bullets began to fly on both sides, our
Captain cheering his Company, immediately ascended the half- Deck, the place
where Commanders use to keep in those Encounters, to show their own Gallantry,
and to encourage the Company under their Command, where he had not been the
Eighth part of an hour ere a great Shot from the Caraques quarter, deprived him
of Life in the twinkling of an Eye. For this Captain Joseph; he was certainly
one who had very much of a Man in him, for years ancient, who had commanded
before in Sea Fights, which he met withal within the Streights in the Midland
Sea; and near death many times in them, which took others round about him,
while himself went off untouched.

After Captain Joseph was slain, the Master of our Ship continued the fight
about half an hour, then (knowing there was another to be admitted into that
prime place of Command) the night approaching, for that time gave over; putting
out a flag of Counsel to call the Captain of the Vice Admiral ( Captain Henry
Pepwell) who was to succeed, and the other Commanders aboard to consult about
the prosecution of this encounter. The night being come, we now proceeded no
further. The Caraque stood still on her Course, putting forth a light at her
Poop for us to follow her, and about midnight came to an Anchor under the
Island of Mohilia; which when we perceived, we let fall our Anchors too.

The Morning comn, we found the Caraque so close to the Shore, and the nearest
of our Ships at least a League off, that we held our Hands for that day,
expecting when she would weigh her Anchors, and stand off to Sea, a fitter
place to deal with her. And that afternoon, we chested our late slain
Commander, putting some great shot with him into it that he might presently
sink, and without any Ceremony of Guns, etc. usual upon such occasions, because
our Enemy should take no notice, put him overboard against the Island of
Mohilia, where he made his own Grave, as all dead Bodies do, buried not in dust
but water, which shall one day as well as the earth give up its dead, Rev.
20.13. when all the Bodies of Men since the world began, that have tasted Death
in their several Generations, however after Death they have been bestowed,
wheresoever laid up, shall be raised again. And though all would not, yet all
must.

A little before night that present day, the Caraque departed again to Sea; we
all loosed our Anchors, opened our Sails, and followed. The day now left us,
and our proud Adversary unwilling as it should seem to escape, put forth a
light (as before) for us to follow him, (as afterward we did to purpose). The
night well-nigh spent, we commended again our selves and cause to God, when I
observed more seeming devotion in our Seamen that Morning, than at any time
before, or after while I kept them company; who, for the generality are such a
kind of People that nothing will bow them or bring them on their knees, but
extreme Hazards. When this exercise was ended, the day began to appear in a red
mantle, which proved bloody unto many that beheld it. And now we entered upon a
second encounter, our four Ships resolving to take their turns one after the
other, that we might compel this proud Portugal either to bend or break.

And now Reader thou may suppose us speaking again to our Adversary, and he
to us, in the harshest and lowdest of all Dialects; no Arguments being so
strong as those that proceed from the mouths of Guns, and points of Swords. Our
Charles the Admiral played her part first, and ere she had been at defiance
with her Enemy half an hour, there came another great shot from him, which
hitting against one of our Iron Pieces, mounted on our half Deck, brake into
many little parts, which most dangerously wounded our New Commander, and the
Master of our Ship, with three others beside, who received several hurts by it.
Captain Pepwells left Eye, by a glance of a Piece of that broken Bullet, was so
Torn that it lay like Rags upon his Cheek; another hurt by a piece of the same
Bullet he received on his Jaw Bone; and by another, on his Head; and a fourth
hurt, he received in his Leg, a ragged piece of that broken shot sticking fast
betwixt the two bones thereof, grating there upon an Artery, which seemed by
his complaining to afflict him so much, that it made him take very little
notice of all the rest of his Hurts, it being most true of bodily pains, that
the extremity of a greater pain will not suffer a Man much to feel and complain
of that which is less; as that tormenting pain of the Toothache, makes a man
insensible of the aching of his Head; and when the Gout and Stone surprise the
Body at once together, the torture by the Gout is as it were lost in the
extremity of the Stone.

And thus was our New Commander welcomed to his Authority; we all thought that
his wounds would very suddenly have made an end of him, but he lived till about
fourteen months after, and then dyed as he was returning for England. I told
you before, that this man suffered not alone by the scattered pieces of that
broken shot; for the Master of the Ship had a great piece of the Brawn of his
Arm struck off by it, which made him likewise unserviceable for a time, and
three other of the common sailers received several and dangerous hurts by it
likewise.

The Captain and Master both thus disabled, deputed their Authority to the
chief Master's mate, who behaved himself resolutely and wisely; so we continued
Alternis vicibus one after the other, shooting at our Adversary as at a But,
and by three of the Clock in the Afternoon had shot down her Mainmast by the
board, her Mizen-Mast, her Fore-top-Mast: And moreover, had made such breaches
in her thick sides, that her case seemed so desperate that she must either
yield or perish. Her Captain thus distressed stood in for the shore, being not
far from the Island of Gaziaia; we pursued as far as we durst without hazard of
Shipwreck, then we sent off a Boat with a flag of Truce to speak with him. He
waved us with another, upon which Mr Connick our chief Merchant employed in
that service came up to them, and being invited, entered their Ship, where he
was civilly used; and there he delivered this Message to the chief Commander,
and his Company, that he had brought them Life and Peace, if they would accept
it; withal telling them, that they had deserved so well by their undaunted
valor, that they would put themselves into our hands, they should be
entertained with all Honor and Respect. How the ordinary sort in the Caraque
were taken with this proffer, I know not; yet all this would not work upon that
high-resolv'd Commander, who like Fabricius in Tully could not be turned, in
the least measure, from his former and first Resolution.

So he contemning the Misery he could not prevent; or like a pruned hedge which
grows stronger by cutting; answered our Messenger thus; That no infelicity
should make alter his first Resolution, and therefore must not be talked out of
the Ship; That he would stand off to Sea, if possibly he could, and fight us
again; and then if fire or sword forced him, he might unhappily be taken, but
he would never yield; and if we took him alive, he hoped to find the respect of
a Gentleman, and till then we had our answer. So our Messenger was discharged;
and shortly after, this distressed Ship wanting her wings was forced by the
wind and waves upon the adjacent Island of Gazidia, where she stuck fast between
two Rocks; those that were alive in her, by their boats got upon the shore,
which when they had all recovered, willing (as it should seem) to destroy what
they could not keep, they set her on fire to make her a Coal, rather than we
should make her a Prize. She was a Ship of an Exceeding great value in Coin and
Bullion, besides many other rich commodities, (if report afterward abused us
not) but we got nothing from her but blows, for which she was repayed by us
with Ruin. The poor distressed Portugals after they had left their Ship, were
most inhumanly used by the barbarous Islanders, who spoiled them of all they
brought on shore for their succor, some of them finding Death in the place
they chose to escape it; and doubtless they had made havoc of them all, had
they not presently been relieved by two Arabian Junks (for so their small
ill-built Ships are called) there in Trade; which, in hope I suppose of some
great reward, took them in, and conveyed them safely to their own City Goa.

In this Sea Fight we lost, out of our four Ships, but five men; three out of
our Admiral, and two out of the James, besides we had about twenty in our whole
Fleet hurt. But of seven hundred which sailed in the Carraque, (for she was a
Ship of an exceeding great bulk and burden; our Charles, though a Ship of a
thousand Tuns, looking but like a Pinace when she was beside her) there came
not near half her Company to Goa, as afterward we were informed.

Our Charles in this opposition made at her adversary, for her part, three
hundred seventy and five great Shot (as our Gunners reported) to these we had
one Hundred Musketeers that plied them with small shot all that while; neither
was our Enemy Idle, for our Ship received from him at least one hundred great
shot, and many of them dangerous ones through the Hull. Our foremast was
pierced through the middle, our Mainmast hurt, our Main stay almost spoiled,
and many of our Main-shrouds cut asunder.

And now, Reader, if thou shall be pleased to accompany me further, I shall
carry thee from this sad discourse, where we may be both refreshed upon a near,
rich, and pleasant Island; And to make way for our entertainment there, take
further notice, that after we saw the Carraque in a flame (which was about
midnight) we stood off and on till morning, to see if any thing might be found
in her Ashes; of which when we despaired, we sought about to succor and
comfort our wounded and sick men on the shore. The Land there was very high,
against which the Sea is always deep; so that it was the tenth day of that
month, ere we could be possessed of a good Harbor; which enjoyed, we found the
Island called Mohilia, very pleasant, full of Trees, and exceeding fruitful,
abounding in Beeves, Kids, Poultrey of diverse kinds, Rice, Sugarcanes,
Plantens (of which Fruit more shall be spoken hereafter) Oranges, Coquer-nuts,
as with many other wholesome things; of all which we had sufficient to relieve
our whole Company, for little quantities of White Paper, Glass-beads,
low-prized Looking-Glasses, and cheap Knives. For instance, we bought as many
good Oranges as would fill an Hat for one quarter of a sheet of white Writing-
Paper, and so in proportion all other Provisions.

Here we had the best Oranges that ever I tasted, which were little round ones,
exceeding sweet and juicy, having but a little spongie skin within them, and
the rind on them almost as thin as the paring of an Apple: We eat all together,
Rind and Juice, and found them a Fruit that was extraordinary well-pleasing to
the Taste.

Much of their Fruits the Ilanders brought unto us in their little Canoos
(which are long narrow boats, but like troughs out of firm trees) but their
Cattle we bought on the shore; Where I observed the people to be straight, well
limbed, stout, able men, their color very tawny; most of the men, but all the
women I saw uncloathed, having nothing about them but a Covering for their
shame. Such as were clothed had long Garments like unto the Arabians, whose
Language they speak, and of whose Religion they are, Mahumetans, very strict
(as it should seem) for they would not endure us to come near their Churches.
They have good convenient Houses for their Living, and fair Sepulchers for
their Dead.

They seemed to live strictly under the Obedience of a King, whose place of
residence was some miles up in the Country; His leave by Messengers they first
craved, before they would sell unto us any of their better Provisions. Their
King hearing of our arrival, bad us welcome by a Present of Beeves, and Goats,
and Poultrey, and the chief and choice Fruits of his Country, and was highly
recompensed as he thought again, by a Quire or two of white Paper, a pair of
low-prized Looking-Glasses, some strings of Glass- Beads, some cheap Knives,
and with some other English toys.

We saw some Spanish Money amongst them, of which they seemed to make so little
reckoning, that some of our men had from them many Royals of Eight, in exchange
for a little of those very low and very cheap Commodities which before I named.

The Coquer-nut-tree (of which this Island has abundance) of all other Trees
may challenge the pre-eminence: for, merely with these Trees, without the least
help of any other Timber, or any other thing (unless a little Iron-work) a man
may build, and furnish, and fit, and victual a small Ship to Sea. For the Heart
of this Tree (being very tough, firm and fast wood) growing up straight and
high, will make Timber, and Planks, and Pins, and Masts, and Yards; a strong
Gum that issues out of it, with the Rind that grows about it, will serve to
calk the Ship; and that spongy Rind (that looks like our Hemp when it is a
little bruised) will make Cordage and Sails, and the very large Nuts that grow
upon it (of which are made many excellent drinking Cups) when it is newly
gathered, has a milky, white substance that is tender (tasting like an Almond)
round about of a good substance within it; and within that a very pleasant
Liquor, that is wholesome, as well as savoury, which may for a need serve those
which sail in this Ship for meat and drink.

Now well stored with these Nuts and other good Provisions, after six days
abode there, the breaches our Ship had lately received in fight being repaired,
and our men well-refreshed, we put again to Sea the sixteenth day, and a
prosperous gale following us, were carried happily a second time under the
Aequinoctial, without the least heat to offend us, the twenty day fourth of the
same Month. Our Course was for the Island of Zocotora near the mouth of the Red
Sea, from whence comes our Aloes Zocotrina; but an adverse gale from the
Arabian shore kept us so off that we could by no means recover it. We passed by
it the first of September.

Missing that Fort, we proceeded on our Voyage, and the fourth of September
made a solemn Funeral in memory of our late slain Commander, when after Sermon
the small Shot and great Ordnance made a large Peal to his Remembrance.

On the sixth of September at night, to our admiration and fear the Water of
the Sea seemed to us as white as milk, which did not appear only so in the body
of the Sea, but it looked so likewise in Buckets of water which we did then
draw out of the Sea. Others of our Nation passing on that Course have observed
the like: but I am yet to learn what should be the true reason thereof, it
being there very far from any shore, and the Sea so deep as that we could fetch
no ground.

The twenty first, We discovered the main Continent of Asia the Great, in which
East India takes up a large part. The twenty second, we had sight of Deu and
Damon, places that lie in the skirts of India, principally inhabited and
well-fortified by Portugals; and the twenty fifth of September we came happily
to an Anchor in Swally-Road within the Bay of Cambaia, the Harbor for our
Fleet while they make their stay in these remote Parts.

Then after a long, and troublesome, and dangerous passage, we came at last to
our desired Port. And immediately after my arrival there, I was sent for by Sir
Thomas Row, Lord Ambassador, then residing at the Mogol's Court (which was
very many miles up in the Country) to supply the room of Mr John Hall his
Chaplain (Fellow of Corpus Christi College in Oxford) whom he had not long
before buried. And I lived with that most Noble Gentleman at that Court more
than two years, after which I returned home to England with him. During which
space of my abode there, I had very good advantage to take notice of very many
places, and persons, and things, traveling with the Ambassador much in
Progress with that King up and down his very large Territories.

And now, Reader, I would have thee to suppose me setting my foot upon the
East-Indian shore, at Swally before-named. On the banks whereof amongst many
more English that lie there interred, is laid up the body of Mr Thomas Coryat,
a man in his time Notus nimis omnibus, very sufficiently known. He lived there,
and there died, while I was in those parts; and was for some Months then with
my Lord Ambassador, during which time, he was either my Chamber-fellow or
Tent-mate, which gave me a full acquaintance of him. That
Greek-travelling-Thomas (they which know his story know why I call him so)
formerly wrote a Book entitled Coryats Crudities, Printed in the beginning of
the year 1611. and then ushered into the World by very many Copies of excellent
Verses made by the Wits of those Times, which did very much advantage and
improve, if not enforce the sale thereof (doing themselves much more honor
than him whom they undertook to commend in their several Encomiasticks.) And if
he had lived, he would have written his last Travels to, and in, and out of,
East India; for he resolved (if God had spared him life) to have rambled up and
down the world world (as sometimes Ulysses did) and though not so long as he,
yet ten full years at least before his return home, in which time he purposed
to see Tartaria in the vast parts thereof, with as much as he could of China,
and those other large Places and Provinces interposed betwixt East India and
China, whose true Names we might have had from him, but yet have not. He had a
purpose after this to have visited the Court of Prester John in Aethiopia, who
is there called by his own people, Ho Biot, The King; and after this, it was in
his thoughts to have cast his eyes upon many other places; which if he had
done, and lived to write those Relations, seeing, as he did, or should, such
variety of Countries, Cities, Nations, Things, and been as particular in them
as he was in his Venetial Journal, they must needs have swollen into so many huge
Volums, as would have prevented the perishing of Paper. But undoubtedly, if he
had been continued in life to have written them, there might have been made
very good Use of his Observations; for, as he was a very Particular, so was he
without question a very Faithful Relator of things he saw; he ever disclaiming
that bold liberty which diverse Travelers have, and do take, by speaking and
writing any thing they please of remote parts, when they cannot easily be
contradicted, taking a Pride in their feigned Relations, to over-speak things;
being resolved in this case Not only things to do, but or'-do;
Speaking, writing all, and more too.
I, therefore for my part, believing this Relator to be none of those, have
taken some things from his trust and credit in this my following Discourse; And
because he could not live to give an account unto the world of his own Travels,
I shall here by the way make some little discovery of his footsteps and
flittings up and down, to and fro, with something besides of him, in his long
peregrinations, to satisfy very many yet living, who, if they shall please to
read this Discourse, may recall that man once more into their remembrance, who
while he lived was like a perpetual motion, and therefore now dead should not
be quite forgotten.

In the year 1612. he shipped himself from London for Constantinople, now called
by the Turks Stombole, where he took special notice of all things there most
observable. In which place he found very great respect and encouragement from
Sir Paul Pinder* then and there Ambassador, to whose House he had free and
welcome access whenever he pleased. Being there for some time, he took his
opportunities to view diverse parts in Grecia; and in the Hellespont, took
special notice of those two Castles directly opposed to each other, called
Sestos and Abydos, which stand on the several banks that bound that very narrow
Sea; which Places Musaeus makes famous in his very ancient Poem of Hero and
Leander.

He desired much to see where those seven Churches sometimes famous in Asia the
Less stood; but since their sin so darkened their light, and God removed their
Candlesticks from them (as before he threatened) those Places lie so in the
dark, that it cannot be well discovered where they once were: Only Smyrna is
famous at this present day for Trade, but not Religion; and Ephesus and some
others of them keep their names still, though they left and lost their Faith
and profession of Truth with the rest.

He saw what yet remains of the Ruins of sometimes great Troy, but Jam Seges
est ubi Troja fuit -- That place which was once so populous as if it had been
sow'n with People, -- And seeded thus, had after born
Millions of men, now is sow'n with Corn.
And -- O jam periere Ruinae, the very Ruins of that place are almost all gone
to Ruin: The most observable thing there yet remaining, is part of an
exceeding great House, which is continued by Tradition to have been sometimes a
part of the famous Palace of great King Priamus.

From Smyrna he found a Passage to Alexandria in Egypt; Egypt, that is called
by some, in regard of the Plenty it produces, the Granary or Storehouse of
the World. And in Egypt near Gran-Cairo (anciently called Memphis) he observed
what remains of the once famed Pyramids. Returning thence back to Alexandria
with one Englishman more, they found a pass by Sea to Jatta, anciently called
Joppa, and there they met some others going to Jerusalem, which is about twenty
English miles distant from Joppa, whence they departed together toward
Jerusalem, and found it a very solitary, rocky, uncomfortable way, full of
danger, by reason of the wild Arabes, who keep about those Passages to make
poor Travelers their prey and spoil. But they came safe to Jerusalem, now
inhabited by Turks, and that place called by them Cutts; where he told me, that
himself and his Companion were courteously received by the Father Guardian of
the Convent of Franciscan Friars that keep their residence in Jerusalem, and by
some of them were met at the Gate of the City, where they were compelled by the
Turkish Soldiers who keep those Gates (as all others that bear the name of
Christians are) at their first coming thither to redeem their heads by paying
each of them the value of five shillings, before they could have admittance
into that place; which they had no sooner entered, but they were presently
carried by those Franciscans which met them to their Convent; and then the
first thing they did to or for them, they washed their feet, then set some
comfortable refection before them, and after went in Procession about a little
Cloister they had, praising God that he had brought in safety those two
Votaries (as they called them) to visit that Holy Place. A day or two after
they accompanied them to Bethlehem, the place of our Blessed Savior's Birth,
about five English miles distant from Jerusalem; and in the way betwixt those
two places showed them a Rock, on which (as they said) the Blessed Virgin sat
down, as she went on a time betwixt Jerusalem and Bethlehem, to give her Babe
suck; and that the Rock might not feel hard under her, it yielded (as they told
them) to her body like a Cushion, and that impression made by her so sitting
remains unto this day, and is most devoutly kissed by Votaries as they pass
up and down. After this they returning back, showed them all that was to be
seen in and about Jerusalem. Many particulars they told them (stories which are
there kept by Tradition) concerning our Blessed Savior and his Mother: Then
they had a sight of as much of Mount Calvary (where our Blessed Savior
suffered) as could be showed them, that Hill being now enclosed within the
walls of Jerusalem. They undertook to show them afterward the place wherein
our blessed Savior was buried; and after that upon Mount Olivet, the very
place whence he after Ascended, where, upon a Rock there was an impression of
the former part of two feet, such as is seen in soft earth, when a man lifts up
his body to leap thence; and these Franciscans confidently affirmed, and seemed
undoubtedly to believe, that it was so as they showed and told them. Many other
things they affirmed, which being but Circumstantials, (though appertaining to
the best of all Stories) were enough for these Pilgrims to believe, and enough
to make doubt of.

At Jerusalem, this our Traveller had made upon the Wrists of his left Arm the
Arms of Jerusalem, a Cross Crossed, or Crosslets; and on the Wrist of his
right, a single Cross made like that of our Blessed Savior suffered on; and on
the sides the Stem or Tree of that Cross these words written, Via, Veritas,
Vita, some of the Letters being put on the one side of that Stem or Tree, and
some of them on the other; and at the foot of that Cross three Nails, to
signify those which fasted our Savior unto it: All these impressions were
made by sharp Needles bound together that pierced only the skin, and then a
black Powder put into the Places so pierced, which became presently indelible
Characters, to continue with him so long as his flesh should be covered with
skin: And they were done upon his Arms so artificially, as if they had been
drawn by some accurate Pencil upon Parchment. This poor man would pride himself
very much in the beholding of those Characters; and seeing them, would often
speak those words of Saint Paul written to the Galatians, Gal. 6.17. (though
far besides the Apostles meaning) I bear in my Body the marks of the Lord Jesus.

Now after that himself and Camrade had seen what they desired in and about
Jerusalem, they took their leave of those Franciscans, leaving with them money
to recompense the courtesy they had received from them; the Friars being very
poor, and consequently, unable to entertain them freely without requitals.

From hence they took their way to take a view of the Dead Sea, (so called,
either because the water therein is still, and moves not; or because no living
Creature is in it, and nothing thrives on the banks thereof) the place where
Sodom and Gomorrah, and Admah and Zeboim once stood, those Cities which
Almighty God overthrew in anger, and repented not, Jer. 20.16. Hence they went
to have a sight of the River Jordan, which discharges it self into that most
uncomfortable lake; and from hence they journeyed North-East through those ten
tribes, (which for the sin of Solomon were rent from his Son Rehoboam) till
they came to Mount Libanus. Thence back to Sidon, which retains that Name
still. And here he told me, as his last observation made in that Land of
Canaan, sometimes ( like the Garden of the Lord) flowing with milk and honey,
being then enriched with a very great variety, and abundance of Gods good
Creatures; and in the days of David so populous, that there were numbered in it
at one time thirteen hundred thousand fighting men, 2 Samuel 24.9. besides Women
and Children, and others unfit to draw swords; which was a most wonderful thing
to consider that such a spot of ground in comparison, not above one hundred and
sixty miles in length, from Dan to Bersheba, and not above sixty miles in
breadth, from Joppa to Jordan, should be able to bear and feed such a numerous
people; and now the very self same tract of earth, either for want of manuring,
or (which is rather to be conceived) for the want of the blessing of Almighty
God which once shined upon it, but is now long since withdrawn from it, ( For
a fruitful Land the Lord makes barren for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein, Psalm. 107.34.) is now become unable to sustain one in an hundred of
such a number.

From Sidon they got a passage by Sea unto Alexandretta, now called Scanderoon
(in the extremest bottom of the Mediterranean Sea) which is one of the
unwholsomest places in the world; where I have often heard that no stranger
(that was born far from it) comes to continue there for the space of one
month, but is sure to meet with a sickness, which very often proves mortal. At
this place his English Companion left him, and turned his face toward England,
and he presently took his way toward Aleppo in Syria, about seventy miles or
more distant from Scanderoon, which is as much renowned for wholsomness, as the
place before-named for being unwholesome; and therefore it is called,
sweet-air'd Aleppo. Here he being kindly received by the English Consul, stayed
a time to gain the company of a Caravan, which consists of a great mixed
multitude of people from diverse parts, which get and keep together traveling
those parts, for fear of the incursions and violences by Thieves and
Murderers, which they would undoubtedly meet withal* if they traveled single,
or but few together. With these he after set forwards toward, and to that City
anciently called Niniveh in Assyria, which we find in the Prophecy of Jonah
was sometimes a great and excellent City of three days journey, Jonah 3.3. but
now so exceedingly lessened and lodged in obscurity, that passengers cannot say
of it, This was Niniveh; which now has its old name changed, and is called
Mozel. From hence they journied to Babylon in Chaldea, situated upon the River
Euphrates, once likewise so great that Aristotle called it a Country, not a
City, but now it is very much contracted, and it is called Bagdat. From this
place they proceeded through both the Armeniaes, and either did, or else our
Traveller was made to believe, that he saw the very Mountain Ararat, whereon
the Ark of Noah rested after the Flood, Genesis 8. And from hence they went
forward toward the Kingdom of Persia, and there to Vzspahan, the usual place
of Residence for that great King, then called Sha Abbas, or King Abbas. And
after they went to Seras, anciently called Shushan, where the great King
Ahasuerus kept his Royal and most Magnificent Court, Esth. 1. From hence they
journied afterward to Candahor, the first Province North East under the
subjection of the Great Moghol, and so to Lahore, the chiefest City but one
belonging to that great Empire; a place, as I have been often told by Tom:
Coryat and others, of very great trade, wealth, and delight, lying more
temperately out of the Parching Sun than any other of his great Cities do: And
to this City he wanted not Company; nor afterward to Agra, the Moghol's
Metropolis or chief City.

And here it is very observable that from Lahore to Agra it is four hundred
English miles, and that the Country betwixt both these great Cities is rich,
even pleasant and flat, a Campania; and the rode-way on both sides all this
long distance planted with great Trees which are all the year clothed with
leaves, exceeding beneficial unto Travelers for the shade they afford them in
those hot Climes. This very much extended length of way 'twixt these two
places, is called by Travelers the Long Walk, very full of Villages and Towns
for Passengers every where to find Provision.

At Agra our Traveller made an halt, being there lovingly received in the
English Factory, where he stayed till he had gotten, to his Turkish and Morisco
or Arabian Languages, some good knowledge in the Persian and Indostan Tongues,
in which study he was always very apt, and in little time showed much
proficiency. The first of those two, the Persian, is the more quaint; the
other, the Indian, the vulgar Language spoken in East India: In both these he
suddenly got such a knowledge and mastery, that it did exceedingly afterward
advantage him in his Travels up and down the Mogol's Territory; he wearing
always the Habit of that Nation, and speaking their Language.

In the first of these, the Persian Tongue, he made afterward an Oration to
the Great Mogol, bringing in that Story of the Queen of Sheba, 1 Kings 10. (in
which parts of that Sacred History the Mahumetans have some knowledge) and he
told him, that as the Queen of Sheba having heard of the Fame of King Solomon,
came from far to visit him, which when she had done; she confessed that though
she had heard very much of him, and many things beyond her belief, yet now
seeing what she did, acknowledged that she had not heard half of that which she
now saw concerning the Wisdom, and Greatness, and Retinue, and Riches of
Solomon: So our Orator told the Mogol, that he had heard very much of him
before he had the Honor to see him (when he was very far off in his own
Country) but now what he beheld did exceedingly surmount all those former
Reports of him which came to his Ears at such a distance from him: Then larding
his short speech with some other pieces of Flattery, which the Mogol liked
well, concluded: And when he had done, the Mogol gave him one hundred Roopus,
which amounts to the value of twelve pounds and ten shillings of our English
Money; looking upon him as a Derveese, Votary or Pilgrim, (for so he called
him) and such as bear that name in that Country seem not much to care for
money; and that was the reason (I conceive) that he gave him not a more
plentiful Reward.

After this he having got a great mastery likewise in the Indostan, or more
vulgar Language, there was a Woman, a Landress, belonging to my Lord
Ambassadors House, who had such a freedom and liberty of Speech, that she would
sometimes scould, brawl, and rail from the Sunrising to Sunset. One day he
undertook her in her own Language, and by eight of the Clock in the Morning so
silenced her, that she had not one word more to speak.

I shall have occasion to say more of this man in some passages of this
following Discourse, and therefore I shall not wrap all I have to speak of him
in this, although it be a very long digression: Yet because I must now shortly
bring you to his journies end, I shall take the freedom to enlarge my self a
little further concerning him here in this place, before I leave him for the
present; and to give thee, Reader, a piece of his Character, it speaks thus:

That he was a man of a very coveting Eye, that could never be satisfied with
seeing, as Solomon speaks, Eccles. 1.8. though he had seen very much; and I am
persuaded that he took as much content in seeing, as many others in the
enjoying of Great and Rare things. He was a man that had got the mastery of
many hard Languages, (as before I observed) to the Latin and Greek he brought
forth of England with him: in which, if he had obtained wisdom to husband and
manage them, as he had skill to speak them, he had deserved more Fame in his
Generation. But his knowledge and high seize in several Languages made
him not a little ignorant of himself; he being so covetous, so ambitious of
praise, that he would hear and endure more of it than he could in any measure
deserve; being like a Ship that has too much Sail, and too little Ballast: Yet
if he had not fallen into the smart hands of the Wits of those Times, he might
have passed better. That itch of Fame which engaged this man to the
undertakings of those very hard and long, and dangerous Travels, has put
thousands more (and therefore he was not alone in this) into strange attempts
only to be talked of.

Upon a time one Mr Richard Steel a Merchant, and servant to the East India
Company, came unto us from Surat to Mandoa, the place then of the Mogol's
Residence (of which place somewhat more hereafter) at which time Mr Coryat was
there with us: This Merchant had not long before traveled over-land from
East India through Persia, and so to Constantinople, and so for England; who in
his Travel home-ward had met with Tom: Coryat, as he was journeying toward
East India. Mr Steel then told him, that when he was in England, King James
(then living) enquired after him, and when he had certified the King of his
meeting him on the way, the King replied, Is that Fool yet living? which when
our Pilgrim heard, it seemed to trouble him very much, because the King spoke
no more nor no better of him, saying, that Kings would speak of poor men what
they pleased.

At another time when he was ready to depart from us, my Lord Ambassador gave
him a Letter, and in that a Bill to receive ten pounds at Aleppo when he should
return thither: The Letter was directed unto Mr Libbaeus Chapman, there Consul
at that time, in which that which concerned our Traveller was thus: Mr Chapman,
when you shall hand these Letters, I desire you to receive the Bearer of them,
Master Thomas Coryat with Courtesy, for you shall find him a very honest poor
Wretch; and further, I must entreat you to furnish him with ten pounds, which
shall be repayed, etc. Our Pilgrim liked the gift well, but the Language by
which he should have received it, did not at all content him, telling me, That
my Lord had even spoiled his Courtesy in the carriage thereof; so that if he
had been a very Fool indeed, he could have said very little less of him than he
did, Honest poor Wretch! And to say no more of him, was to say as much as
nothing. And furthermore he then told me, that when he was formerly undertaking
his journey to Venice, a Person of Honor wrote thus in his behalf unto Sir
Henry Wotton, then and there Ambassador: My Lord, Good Wine needs no Bush,
neither a worthy man Letters Commendatory, because whithersoever he comes he is
his own Epistle, etc. There (said he) was some Language on my behalf; but now
for my Lord to write nothing of me by way of Commendation, but Honest poor
Wretch, is rather to trouble me than to please me with his favor. And
therefore afterward his Letter was phras'd up to his mind, but he never lived
to receive the money. By which his old acquaintance may see how tender this
poor man was to be touched in any thing that might in the least measure
disparage him. O what pains this poor man took to make himself a Subject for
pre^^nt and after Discourse! being troubled at nothing for the present, unless
with the fear of not living to reap that fruit he was so ambitious of in all
his undertakings. And certainly he was surprised with some such thoughts and
fears (for so he told us afterward) when upon a time he being at Mandoa with
us, and there standing in a room against a stone Pillar, where the Ambassador
was, and my self present with them, upon a sudden he fell into such a swoon,
that we had very much ado to recover him out of it; but at last, comn to
himself, he told us that some sad thoughts had immediately before presented
themselves to his Fancy, which as he conceived put him into that distemper;
like Fannius in Martial -- Ne moriare mori, to prevent death by dying: For he
told us that there was great Expectations in England of the large Accounts he
should give of his Travels after his return home; and that he was now shortly
to leave us; and he being at present not very well, if he should die in the way
toward Surat, whither he was now intended to go, (which place he had not yet
seen) he might be buried in Obscurity, and none of his Friends ever know what
became of him; he traveling now, as he usually did, alone. Upon which my Lord
willed him to stay longer with us, but he thankfully refused that offer, and
turned his face presently after toward Surat, which was then about three
hundred miles distant from us, and he lived to come safely thither: but there,
being over-kindly used by some of the English who gave him Sack, which they had
brought from England, he calling for it as soon as he first heard of it, and
crying, Sack, Sack! Is there such a thing as Sack? I pray you give me some
Sack. And drinking of it, though I conceive, moderately, (for he was a very
temperate man) it increased his Flux which he had then upon him; and this
caused him within a few days after his very tedious and troublesome Travels
(for he went most on foot) at this place to come to his journeies end; for here
he overtook Death December. 1617. and was buried (as aforesaid) under a little
Monument, like one of those usually made in our Churchyards. I now proceed to
our former Discourse of the Description of the Great Mogol's Territories: Which
I shall digest into several Sections.

SECTION I. Of the several Provinces, the chief Cities, the Principal Rivers,
the extent of this vast Empire.
THe most spacious Monarchy under the subjection of the Great Mogol, divides it
self into thirty and seven several and large Provinces, which anciently were
particular Kingdoms, whose true Names (which we there had out of the Mogol's
own Records) with their Principal Cities and Rivers, their Situation and
Borders, their Extent in length and breath. I shall first set down very
briefly, beginning at the North-West. Yet as I name these several Provinces, I
shall by the way take notice of some particulars in them which are most
Remarkable.

1. Candahore, the chief City so called; it lies from the heart of the Mogol's
Territories North-West; it confines with the King of Persia, and was anciently
a Province belonging to him.

2. Cabut, the chief City so called, the extremest part North of this
Emperors Dominions; it confineth with Tartaria; the River Nilob has its
beginning in it, whose Current is Southerly till it discharges it self into
Indus.

3. Multan, the chief City so called; it lies South from Cabut and Candahore,
and to the West joins with Persia. This Province is famed for many excellent
Bows and Arrows made in it: The Bows made of Horn, excellently glued and put
together; the Arrows of small Canes or Reeds, both of them curiously set off by
rich Paint and Varnish: They which are made here are neat and good than in any
part of East India besides.

4. Haiacan, the Province of the Baloches, who are a very stout and warlike
people that dare fight. I insert this, because there are infinite multitudes of
people in the Mogol's Territories who appear as likely as these, but so
low-spirited (as I shall after observe) that they dare not fight. This Province
has no renowned City. The famous River Indus (called by the Inhabitants Skind)
borders it on the East; and Lar, a Province belonging to the King of Persia,
meets it on the West.

5. Buckor, the chief City called Buckor-Succor; that famous River Indus makes
its way through it, and gently enricheth it.

6. Tatta, the chief City so called; the River Indus makes many Islands in it
exceeding fruitful and pleasant, the Main Current whereof meets with the Sea at
Sindee, a place very famous for many curious Handicrafts.

7. Soret, the chief City is called Janagar; it is but a little Province yet
very rich; it lies upon Guzarat; it has the Ocean to the South.

8. Jesselmure, the chief City so called; it joyneth with Soret; but Buckor and
Tatta lie to the West thereof.

9. Attack, the chief City so called; it lies on the East side of Indus, which
parts it from Haiacan.

10. Peniab, which signifies five Waters, for that it is seated amongst five
Rivers, all Tributaries to Indus; which, somewhat South of Labor, make but one
Current: It is a large Province, and most fruitful. Lahore is the chief City
thereof, built very large, and abounds both in people and riches one of the
most principal Cities for Trade in all India.

11. Chishmeere, the chief City called Siranakar; the River Bhat finds a way
through it, though it be very mountainous, and so creeps to the Sea.

12. Banchish, the chief City is called Bishur; it lies East, somewhat
Southerly from Chishmeere, from which it is divided by the River Indus.

13. Jangapore, the chief City so called; it lies upon the River Kaul, one of
those five Rivers which water Peniab.

14. Jenba, the chief City so called; it lies East of Peniab.

15. Dellee (which signifies an Heart, and is seated in the heart of the
Mogol's Territories) the chief City so called; it lies between Jenba and Agra,
the River Jemni (which runs through Agra, and after falls into Ganges)
begins in it. This Dellee is both an ancient and a great City, the Seat of the
Mogol's Ancestors, where most of them lie interred. It was once the City and
Seat of King Porus, who was conquered about this place by Alexander the Great;
and here he encountering with huge Elephants as well as with a mighty Host of
Men, said, as Curtius reports, Tandem par animo meo inveni periculum, That he
had met with dangers to equal his great mind. I was told by Tom: Coryat (who
took special notice of this place) that he being in the City of Delle, observed
a very great Pillar of Marble, with a Greek inscription upon it, which time
has almost quite worn out, erected (as he supposed) there, and then, by Great
Alexander, to preserve the memory of that famous Victory.

16. Bando, the chief City so called; it confineth Agra to the West.

17. Malway, a very fruitful Province; Rantipore is its chief City.

18. Chitor, an ancient great Kingdom, the chief City so called, which stands
upon a mighty high Hill flat on the top, walled about at the least ten English
miles. There appear to this day above an hundred ruined Churches, and diverse
fair Palaces, which are lodged in like manner among their Ruins, besides many
exquisite Pillars of Carved Stone; and the Ruins likewise at the least of an
hundred thousand Stone-Houses, as many English by their observation have
ghessed. There is but one ascent unto it, cut out of a firm Rock, to which a
man must pass through four (sometimes very magnificent) Gates. Its chief
inhabitants at this day are Ziim and Ohim, Birds and Wild Beasts; but the
stately Ruins thereof give a shadow of its Beauty while it flourished in its
Pride. It was won from Ranas, an ancient Indian Prince, who was forced to live
himself ever after in high mountainous places adjoining to that Province, and
his Posterity to live there ever since. Taken from him it was by Achabar Padsha
(the Father of that King who lived and reigned when I was in those parts) after
a very long siege, which famished the besieged, without which it could never
have been gotten.

19. Guzarat, a very goodly, and large, and an exceeding rich Province; it
encloseth the Bay of Cambaya; its chief City is Amadavaz; besides, it has in
it Cambaya, Brodera, Baroch, and Surat, fair Cities; but the first of those I
named, more spacious, and populous, and rich, then any of the other. It is
watered with many goodly Rivers, as that of Cambaya, (falsely supposed to be
Indus) with the River Narbodah, (passing by Baroch, and so to the Sea) with the
River Taplee, which waters Surat. The Merchants which are the Natives of this
Province trade to the Red Sea, to Achin, and to diverse other places.

20. Chandis, the chief City called Brampore, which is very great, and rich,
and full of people. Adjoining to this Province lived a petty Prince, called
Partapsha, tributary to the Mogol; and this is the most Southernmost part of
all his Territories.

21. Berar, the chief City is called Shapore, the Southernmost part whereof
does likewise bound this Empire.

22. Narvar, the chief City is called Gehud; it is watered by a fair River that
much enricheth it, and discharges it self into Ganges.

23. Gwalier, the chief City so called, where the Mogol has a very rich
Treasury of Gold and Silver kept in this City, within an exceeding strong
Castle, wherein the Kings Prisoners are likewise kept. The Castle is
continually guarded by a very strong Company of Armed Soldiers.

24. Agra, a principal and very rich Province, the chief City so called, this
great Emperors Metropolis; in North Latitude about twenty eight degrees and a
half. It is very well watered by the River Jemni. This and Lahore are the two
principal and chosce Cities of this Empire, betwixt whom is that Long Walk (I
made mention of before) of four hundred miles in length, shaded by great Trees
on both sides: This is looked upon by Travelers, who have found the comfort of
that cool shade, as one of the rarest and most beneficial Works in the whole
World.

25. Sanbat, the chief City so called; the River Jemni parts it from Narvar,
and after at the City Hellabass falls into that most famous River Ganges, which
is called by the Inhabitants of East India, Ganga.

26. Bakar, the chief City called Bikaneer; it lies on the West side of the
River Ganges.

27. Nagracot, the chief City so called, in which there is a Chapel most
richly set forth, being seeled and paved with Plate of pure Silver, most
curiously imbossed over head in sevetal figures, which they keep exceeding
bright by often rubbing and burnishing it; and all this Cost those poor seduced
Indians are at, to do honor to an Idol they keep in that Chapel. What charge
can Heathenish Idolaters be content to bear for their gross Idolatry! Nothing
is too rich, too precious, or too dear for it. This Idol thus kept in that so
richly adorned Chapel, they call Matta, and it is continually visited by those
poor blinded Infidels, who, out of the officiousness of their Devotion, cut off
some part of their Tongues to offer unto it as a Sacrifice; which (they say)
grow out again as before: But in this I shall leave my Reader to a belief as
much suspensive as is my own in this particular. In this Province likewise,
there is another famous Pilgrimage to a place called Jallamakee; where out of
cold Springs that issue out from amongst hard Rocks, are daily to be seen
continued Eruptions of Fire, before which the Idolatrous People fall down and
worship. Both these places were seen, and strictly observed by Master Coryat.

28. Siba, the chief City is called Hardware, where the famous River Ganges
passing through or amongst large Rocks, makes presently after a pretty full
Current: but both this and that other great River Indus have their Rise and
Original out of the Mountain Caucasus, from whence they both first issue. That
principal Rock, through which this River Ganges there makes a Current, is
indeed, or (if not) according to the fancy of the Superstitious Indians, like a
Cow's Head, which of all sensible Creatures they love best (of which more
hereafter) thither they assemble themselves daily in Troops to wash their
bodies, ascribing a certain Divinity to Waters, but more especially to the
Water in the River Ganges. And thither our famous Coryat went likewise to view
this place.

29. Kakares, the principal Cities are called Dekalee and Purhola; it is a
large Province, but exceeding mountainous; divided it is from Tartaria by the
Mountain Caucasus; it is the extremest part North under the Mogol's subjection.

30. Gor, the chief City so called; it is full of Mountains; the River Sersily,
a tributary unto Ganges, has its beginning in it.

31. Pitan, the chief City so called; the River Canda waters it, and falls into
Ganges in the Confines thereof.

32. Kanduana, the chief City is called Karhakatenka; the River Sersily parts
it from Pitan: This and Gor are the North-east-bounds of this Monarchy.

33. Patna, the chief City so called; the River Ganges bounds it on the West,
Sersily on the East; it is a very fertile Province.

34. Jesuat, the chief City is called Raiapore; it lies East of Patna.

35. Mevat, the chief City is called Narnol; it is very mountainous.

36. Vdessa, the chief City called Jekanat; it is the most remote part East of
this Empire.

37. Bengala, a most spacious and fruitful Province, but more properly to be
called a Kingdom, which has two very large Provinces within it, Purb and
Patan; the one lying on the East, the other on the West Side of the River
Ganges: It is limited by the Golph of the same name, whereinto the River Ganges
(which at last comes to be divided into four great Currents) discharges it
self, after it has found a way through the Mogol's Territories more than
fifteen hundred miles in length. The chief Cities in it are Ragamahat and
Dekaka. It has many Havens and Ports belonging unto it, which are places of
very great trade.

Now these are the several Provinces belonging to the Great Mogol, and all of
them under his subjection, which may be beheld all together at one view in this
most exact affixed Map, first made by the especial observation and direction of
that most able and honorable Gentleman, Sir Thomas Row, here contracted into a
less compass; yet large enough to demonstrate, that this great Empire is
bounded on the East, with the Kingdom of Maug; West, with Persia; and with the
Main Ocean, Southerly; North, with the Mountain Caucasus and Tartaria; South,
with Decan and the Gulf of Bengala. Decan, lying in the skirts of Asia, is
divided betwixt three Mahumetan Princes, and some other Indian Rhaiaes, which
are Princes likewise.

The length of these Provinces is Northwest to South-west more than two
thousand English miles; North and South the extent thereof is about fourteen
hundred miles; the Southermost part lying in twenty, and the Northermost in
forty and three degrees of North-Latitude.

The breadth of this much enlarged and far extended Empire is North-east to
South-west about fifteen hundred of the same miles.

And here a great error in Geographers must not escape my notice, who in their
Globes and Maps make East India and China near Neighbors, when as many large
Countries are interposed betwixt them; which great distance may appear by the
long travel of the Indian-Merchants, who are usually (they going and returning
all the way by Land) in their journey, and return, and some stay there, two
full years from Agra to China.

Now, to give an exact account of all those forenamed Provinces, were more
than I am able to undertake; yet out of that which I have observed in some of
them (by traveling many miles up into that Country, and then up and down with
my Lord-Embassador unto many places there in progress with that King) I shall
adventure to ghess at all, and I think for my particular, that the Great Mogol,
considering his most large Territories, his full and great Treasures, with the
many rich Commodities his Provinces afford, is the greatest and richest known
King of the East, if not of the whole World. I shall now therefore fall upon
particulars to make that my observation good: Where

SECTION II. Of the Soil there, what it is, and what it produces, etc.
THis most spacious and fertile Monarchy (called by the Inhabitants Indostan)
so much abounds in all necessaries for the use and service of man, to feed, and
cloth, and enrich him, as that it is able to subsist and flourish of it self,
without the least help from any Neighbour-Prince or Nation.

Here I shall speak first of that which Nature requires most, Food, which this
Empire brings forth in abundance; as, singular good Wheat, Rice, Barley, with
diverse more kinds of good Grain to make Bread (the staff of life) and all these
sorts of Corn in their kinds, very good and exceeding cheap. For their Wheat,
it is more full and more white than ours, of which the Inhabitants make such
pure, well-relished Bread, that I may say of it, as one sometimes spoke of the
Bread made in the Bishopric of Liege, it is Panis Pane melior, Bread better
than Bread.

The ordinary sort of people eat Bread made of a coarser Grain, but both
toothsom, and wholesome, and hearty; they make it up in broad Cakes, thick like
our Oaten-cakes; and then bake it upon small round iron hearths, which they
carry with them when they journey from place to place, making use of them in
their Tents. It should seem to be an ancient Custom in the East, as may appear
by that Precedent of Sarah when she entertained the Angels, who found her in
her Tent, She took fine meal, and did knead it, and made Cakes thereof upon the
hearth, Genesis 18.6.

To their Bread they have great abundance of all other good Provision, as of
Butter (beating their Cream into a substance like unto a thick Oil, for in that
hot Climate they can never make it hard) which though soft, yet it is very
sweet and good. They have Cheese likewise in plenty, by reason of their great
number of Kine, and Sheep, and Goats. Besides, they have a Beast very large,
having a smooth thick skin without hair, called a Buffelo, which gives good
milk; the flesh of them is like Beef, but neither so toothsom nor wholesome.
These Buffeloes are much employed in carrying large skins of water (for they
are very strong Beasts) which hang on both sides of them, unto Families that
want it: their Hides make the most firm and excellent Buff.

They have no want of Venison of diverse kinds, as Red-Deer, Fallow-Deer, Elks
(which are very large, and strong, and fierce Creatures) Antilops, Kids, etc.
but their Deer are no where imparked, the whole Empire being (as it were) a
Forest for them; for a man can travel no way but he shall here and there see
of them. But because they are every man's Game that will make them so, they do
not multiply to do them much hurt, either in their Corn, or other places.

To these they have great store of Hares, and they have plenty of Fowls wild
and tame, as abundance of Hens, Geese, Ducks, Pigeons, Turtle-Doves*
Partridges, Peacocks, Quails, and many other singular good Fowl. They have
variety of Fish; all which, by reason of their Plenty, and because many of the
Natives eat no kind of Flesh at all, nor of any thing that has or may have
life; and those that feed on such things, eat not freely of any of those living
Creatures, they are all bought there at such easy rates, as if they were not
worth the valuing. They do not cut their Chickens when they be little to make
Capons, and therefore they have no Creatures of that name, but men, their
Eunuchs, called there Cogees or Capons in their Language: so made, when they be
very young, and then deprived of all that might after provoke jealousy; and
therefore they are put to be attendants on their women, the great men of that
Nation keeping many of them, a soft, tender people, tener Spado, as Juvenal
calls one of them, that never come to have any Hair on their Faces.

But to return again to their Provisions, the Beeves of that Country differ
from ours, in that they are none of them very large; and those they have, have
each of them a great bu^^^ of grisly flesh which grows upon the meeting of
their shoulders. The flesh of their Beeves is much whiter than the flesh of
ours, and very sweet, tender and good. Their Sheep differ from ours by their
great fleshy Bob-tails, which, severed from their bodies, are very ponderous.
Their Wool is generally coarse, but their flesh is not so.

Now to season all their good Provisions, there is great store of Salt; and to
sweeten all, abundance of Sugar growing in that Country; which after it is
well refined, may be there had at a very low rate; out of which they make very
pure white Sugar Candy, which may be had there at a small easy Price likewise.

Their Fruits are every way answerable to the rest, the Country abounding in
Musk-Melons (very much better, because they are better digested there by the
heat of the Sun, than these with us.) They have many Water-Melons, a very
choice good Fruit, and some of them as big as our ordinary Pompions, and in
shape like them; the substance within this Fruit is spongy, but exceeding
tender and well-tasted, of a color within equally mixed with red and white,
and within that an excellent cooling and pleasing liquor. Here are likewise
store of Pome-granats, Pome-citrons; here are Limons and Oranges, but I never
found any there so good as I have seen elsewhere. Here are Dates, Figs, Grapes,
Prunelloes, Almonds, Coquernuts (of which I observed something before) and here
they have those most excellent Plums called Mirabolans, the stone of which
Fruit differs very much from others in its shape, whereon Nature has curiously
quartered several strakes equally divided, very pretty to behold; many of which
choice Plums (they write) are very cordial; and therefore worth the prizing,
are there well-preserved, and sent for England.

They have to these another Fruit we English there call a Planten, of which
many of them grow in Clusters together; long they are in shape, made like unto
slender Cucumbers, and very yellow when they are Ripe, and then taste like unto
a Norwich Pear, but much better. Another most excellent Fruit they have, called
a Manggo, growing upon Trees as big as our Walnut-trees; and as these here, so
those Trees there, will be very full of that most excellent Fruit, in shape and
color like unto our Apricocks, but much bigger; which taken and rolled in a
man's hands when they are through ripe, the substance within them becomes like
the pap of a roasted Apple, which then sucked out from about a large stone they
have within them, is delicately pleasing unto every Palate that tastes it. And to
conclude with the best of all other their choice Fruits, the Amana's, like unto
our Pine-Apples, which seems to the Taster to be a most pleasing Compound made
of Straw-berries, Claret Wine, Rose Water and Sugar, well tempered together. In
the Northermost p^^ts of this Empire they have variety of Pears and Apples,
every where good Roots, as Carrets, Potatoes, and others like them. They have
Onions and Garlic, and some Herbs and small Roots for Salads; and in the
Southernmost parts, Ginger growing almost in every place: the large races
whereof, are there very excellently well preserved, as we may know by our
tasting them in England. And all these things I have last named may be there
likewise bought at very low rates. And lastly, some one kind or other of their
very good and choice Fruits may be there had at every time or season of the
Year.

And here I cannot choose but take notice of a very pleasant and clear liquor,
called Toddie, issuing from a Spongie Tree, that grows strait and tall without
Boughs to the Top, and there spreads out in tender branches, very like unto
those that grow from the Roots of our rank and rich Artichokes, but much bigger
and longer. This Toddie-tree is not so big, but that it may be very easily
embraced, and the nimble people of that Country will climb up as fast to the
top thereof (the stem of the Tree being rough and crusty) as if they had the
advantage of Ladders to help them up. In the top-tender branches of those Trees
they make incisions, which they open and stop again as they please, under which
they hang Pots made of large and light Gourds, to preserve the influence which
issues out of them in a large quantity in the night-season, they stopping up
those vents in the heat of the day. That which thus distills forth in the night,
if it be taken very early in the morning, is as pleasing to the taste as any
new White Wind, and much clearer than it. It is a very piercing, and
medicinable, and inoffensive Drink, if taken betimes in the day, only it is a
little windy: but if it be kept till the heat of the day, the Sun alters it so,
as if it made it another kind of liquor, for it becomes then very heady, not so
well relished, and unwholsom; and when it is so, not a few of our drunken
Seamen choose to drink it; and I think they so do, because it will then
presently turn their brains; for there are too too many of the common sort of
those men who use the Sea, who love those brutish distempers too much, which
turn a man out of himself, and leave a Beast in the skin of a man. But for that
drink, if it be taken in its best, and most proper season, I conceive it to be
of it self very wholesome, because it provokes urine exceedingly; the further
benefit whereof some there have found by happy experience, thereby eased from
their torture inflicted by that shame of Physicians, and Tyrant of all
Maladies, the Stone. And so cheap too is this most pleasing Wine, that a man
may there have more than enough for a very little money.

At Surat, and so to Agra, and beyond, it seldom or never rains, but one season
of the year; but yet there is a refreshing Dew during all that times the
Heavens there are thus shut up, which every night falls, and cools, and
comforts, and refreshes the face of the earth. Those general rains begin near
the time that the Sun comes to the Northern Tropic, and so continue till his
return back to the Line. These showers, at their beginning most extremely
violent, are ushered in, and usually take their leave, with most fearful
Tempests of Thunder and Lightning, more terrible than I can express, yet seldom
do harm; the reason in Nature may be the subtilty of the Air in those parts
wherein there are fewer Thunder-stones made, than in such Climates where the
Air is thick, gross, and cloudy. During those three months it rains usually
every day more or less, sometimes one whole quarter of the Moon together,
scarce without any intermission; which abundance of moisture, with the heat of
the Sun, does so enrich their Land, which they never force (if I observed
right) by Soyling of it, as that, like Egypt, by the inundation of Nilus, it
makes it fruitful all the year after. When the time of this Rain is passed
over, the face of the Sky there is presently so serene and clear, as that
scarcely one Cloud appears in their Hemisphere the nine months after.

And here a strong Argument that may further, and most infallibly show the
goodness of their Soil, shall not escape my Pen, most apparent in this, That
when the Ground there has been destitute of Rain nine months together, and
looks all of it like the barren Sands in the Deserts of Arabia, where there is
not one spire of green Grass to be found; within a few days after those fat
enriching showers begin to fall, the face of the Earth there (as it were by a
new Resurrection) is so revived, and throughout so renewed, as that it is
presently covered all over with a pure green Mantle. And moreover, to confirm
that which before I observed concerning the goodness of that Soil, amongst many
hundred Acres of Corn of diverse kinds I have there beheld, I never saw any but
what was very rich and good, standing as thick on the Ground as the Land could
well bear it.

They till their Ground with Oxen and Foot-Ploughs, their Seed-time is May, and
the beginning of June, they taking their time to dispatch all that work before
that long Rainy season comes; and though the Ground then has been all the time
we named before without any sufficient moisture by showers, or otherwise, to
supple and make it more fit for Tillage, yet the Soil there is such a brittle
fat mould (which they sow year after year) as that they can very easily till
it. Their Harvest is in November and December, the most temperate months of all
that year.

Their Ground is not enclosed, unless some small quantity near Towns and
Villages, which stand scattered up and down this vast Empire very thick,
though, for want of the true names, not inserted in the Map.

They mow not their Grass (as we) to make Hay, but cut it off the ground,
either green, or withered, as they have occasion to use it.

They sow Tobacco in abundance, and they take it too, very much; but after a
strange way much different from us: for first, they have little Earthen Pots,
shaped like our small Flowerpots, having a narrow neck, and an open round top,
out of the belly of which comes a small spout, to the lower part of which spout
they fill the Pot with water; then putting their Tobacco loose in the top, and
a burning coal upon it, they, having first fastened a very small strait hollow
Cane or Reed (not bigger than a small Arrow) within that spout, a yard or ell
long, the Pot standing on the ground, draw that smoke into their mouths which
first falls upon the Superficies of the water, and much discolours it. And this
way of taking their Tobacco, they believe, makes it much more cool and wholesome.
The Tobacco, which grows there, is doubtless in the Plant as good as in any
other place of the world, but they know not how to cure and order it, like
those in the West Indies, to make it so rich and strong.

The Country is beautified with many Woods and Groves of Trees, in which those
winged Choristers make sweet Music. In those Woods some excellent Hawks make
their nests; and there are very often to be seen great flocks of Parakeetoes,
or little Parrats, who have their breeding and lodging amongst those Melancholy
Shades. And (in the number of many other Creatures covered with Feathers) there
are some very little Birds less than our Wrens, who are exceeding pretty, for
their neat shape, and their covering, with most curious parti-colour'd
Feathers, full of variety of little spots. I have seen there many of those rare
Creatures kept together in large Cages, who please the Eye with their curious
Colors, and the Ear with their variety of pleasant Notes. The Woods and Groves
in the Southermost parts of Indostan, have great store of wild Apes, and
Monkeys, and Baboons in them; some of which I have seen as high as our tallest
Greyhounds, which live among the Trees, and climb them at pleasure. Those Apes,
etc. are very terrible to those little Birds, which make their Nests in those
Woods; and therefore Nature has taught them this subtilty (to preserve their
young ones from those Creatures which would otherwise destroy them) to build
their Nests in the twigs, and the utmost boughs of those Trees, where some of
them hang like little Purse-nets, to which those Apes and Monkeys, be they
never so little and light, cannot come to hurt them.

Besides their Woods, they have great variety of fair goodly Trees that stand
here and there single, but I never saw any there of those kinds of Trees which
England affords. They have very many firm and strong Timber Trees for building
and other uses; but much of their brush, or small wood, I observed to be very
sappy; so that when we brake a twig of it, there would come a substance out of
some of it, like unto Milk, and the sappiness of that underwood may (as I
apprehend it) be ascribed in part to the fatness of that Soil. Some of their
Trees have leaves upon them as broad as Bucklers, others are parted small like
our Fern or Brakes, as the Tamerine Tree, which bears Cods somewhat like our
Beans, in which when the Fruit is ripe, there is a very well tasted pulp,
though it be sour, most wholesome to open the body, and to cool and cleanse the
blood.

There is one very great and fair Tree growing in that Soil, of special
observation, out of whose Branches or great Arms grow little Sprigs downward
till they take Root (as they will certainly do if they be let alone) and taking
Root, at length prove strong supporters unto those large Branches that yield
them. Whence it comes to pass, that those Trees in time (their strong and
far-extended Arms being in many places thus supported) grow to a very great
height, and extend themselves to such an incredible breadth, they growing round
every way, as that hundreds of men may shade themselves under one of them at
any time; the rather, because these, as all other Trees in those Southern parts
of East India (as particularly I observed before) still keep on their green
Coats.

For their Flowers, they are for the generality like unto painted Weeds, which,
though their color be excellent, they rather delight the eye than affect the
smell; for not many of them, except Roses, and some few kinds more, are any
whit fragrant: Amongst them that are, there is one white Flower, like to
Spanish Jessamin (if it be not the same) which is exceedingly well sented, of
which they make a most excellent pure sweet Oil, with which they anoint their
heads, and other parts of their bodies; which makes the company of those that
do so very savoury and sweet.

This Empire is watered with many goodly Rivers (as they are expressed in the
Map) the two principal are Indus and Ganges; where this thing is very
observable (for they say there, that it is very true) that one pint of the
water of Ganges weighs less by one ounce than any other water in that whole
great Monarchy. And therefore (they say) that the Mogol, wheresoever he is,
has water brought him from that River, that he may drink thereof, by some
appointed for that service, who are continually either going to it, or coming
from it: The water is brought unto the King in fine Copper Jars, excellently
well tin'd on the inside, and sealed up when they are delivered to the
Water-bearers for the King's use; two of which Jars every one carries, hanging
upon Slings fitted for the Porter's shoulders.

Besides their Rivers, they have store of Wells fed with Springs; and to these,
they have many Ponds, which they call Tanques, some of them exceeding large,
filled with water when that abundance of Rain falls (of which more hereafter.)

That most ancient and innocent Drink of the World, Water, is the common drink
of East India; it is far more pleasant and sweet than our water; and must needs
be so, because in all hot Countries it is more rarefied, better digested, and
freed from its rawness by the heat of the Sun, and therefore in those parts it
is more desired of all that come thither, though they never made it their drink
before, than any other liquor, and agrees better with men's bodies. Sometimes
they boil the water there with some wholesome Seeds, and after drink it cold, and
then it is, by much, more cold after an heat. (Like unto some men, who have
showed formerly much zeal and heat for good, and afterward become more chil and
cold than ever they were before.) Sometimes we mingle our water there with the
juice of Limons and Sugar, which makes an exceeding pleasant drink, which we
call there Sherbet.

Some small quantity of Wine, but not common, is made amongst them; they call
it Raak, distilled from Sugar, and a spicy rind of a Tree called Jagra; it is
very wholesome, if taken very moderately.

Many of the people there, who are strict in their Religion, drink no Wine at
all; but they use a Liquor more wholesome than pleasant, they call Coffee; made
by a black Seed boyld in water, which turns it almost into the same color,
but does very little alter the taste of the water; notwithstanding it is very
good to help Digestion, to quicken the Spirits, and to cleanse the Blood.

There is yet another help for those that forbear Wine, by an Herb they have,
called Beetle, or Paune, in shape somewhat like an Ivy-leaf, but more tender;
they chew it with an hard Nut, somewhat like a Nutmeg, (but not in taste like
that) and a very little pure white lime amongst the leaves, and when they have
sucked down the juice, put forth the rest. It has (as they say, and I believe
very much of it) many rare qualities; for it preserves the Teeth, strengthens
the Stomach, comforts the Brain, and it cures or prevents a tainted Breath.
This I am sure of, that such is the pleasing smell of this Beetle, being
chewing in a close room, that the breath of him so chewing it fills it with a
very pleasing savor.

This Empire further affords very excellent good Horse, curiously made, high
metl'd, and well managed by the Natives. Besides their own, they have many of
the Persian, Tartarian, and Arabian breed, which have the name to be the choice
ones of the World. But of these more when I come to speak of the Inhabitants.

Here are a great number of Camels, Dromedaries, Mules and Asses, employed for
the carriage of burdens, or the carrying of the people, to which use also they
employ many of their Oxen, and their Buffeloes likewise, (which before I spoke
of.) The Camels, as I often observed there, have one strange quality, who cry and
make a very piteous noise at night, when they take off their burdens; but in
the morning when they are laid on, the poor Creatures are very still and quiet,
making no noise at all.

The Dromedary is called by the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 2.23. the swift Dromedary;
the reason may be, because these, like the Camels, have very long legs; and
consequently make long steps, and so traveling rid ground apace; or because at
a pinch, or time of need, they will carry a man exceeding far without rest, and
but with a very little food.

They have some Rhinocerots, but they are not common, which are very large
square Beasts, bigger than the largest Oxen England affords; their skins
without hair, lie in great wrinkles upon their necks, breasts and backs, which
does not make them seem lovely unto the beholders. They have very strong, but
short Horns, growing upon very firm bones, that lie over their Nostrils; they
grow upwards, toward the top of their head, every one of these Creatures being
fortified with one of them; and that enough to make them so terrible, that they
are shunned by other, though very large Creatures. With these Horns (from which
those Creatures have their Names) are made very excellent Cups, which (as is
conceived) give some virtue unto the liquor put into them, if it stand any whit
long in those Cups.

And now to conclude with the largest and the most intelligent (as we shall
hereafter show) of all the sensible Creatures the Earth produces, the
Elephant, of which this vast Monarchy has abundance; and of them, the Mogol is
Master of many thousands; and his Nobles, and all men of quality besides, in
those large Territories, have more or less of them. But of these much shall be
spoken in my sixth Section.

I observed before, that the Inhabitants of this Empire did carry most of their
burdens upon the backs of their Beasts; and in a special manner this people
employ their Camels and Dromedaries for this use, to carry their Merchandises
from place to place: and therefore I shall let my Reader see

SECTION III. What the chief Merchandises, and most Staple, and other
Commodities are, which are brought into this Empire.
THe most Staple Commodities of this Empire are Indico and Cotton Wool; of that
Wool they make diverse sorts of Callico, which had that name (as I suppose) from
Callicut, not far from Goa, where that kind of Cloth was first bought by the
Portugals.

For the Spices brought hither by the East India Fleet, they are had more
Southerly, from the Islands of Sumatra, from Java major and minor, from the
Moluccoes, and from other places thereabouts: In which, as in the Molucco
Islands, and those other parts too from whence the richest Spices come, the
Low Country Merchants have got such footing, and such a particular interest,
that our English Factors there (for the present) buy those Commodities; as we
sometimes do buy Provisions and Commodities here at home, out of the engrossing
Hucksters hands: So that our English in those parts have a free Trade for no
kind of Spice, but for that, which is one of the lowest prized, namely, Pepper,
which they fetch from Bantam. Which more general Trade of the Dutch, they have
formerly gained at a very vast expense, by fortifying themselves there, in the
places wherever they settle; and then standing, upon their Guard, put a kind
of force upon the Natives to sell them their Commodities.

What the carriage of that people has formerly been in those parts toward our
English, ( where their Swords has been longest) is sufficiently made known by
other Pens: This I may conclude from their example (and I would they were
singular and alone in it) that when a people will not be ordered by that Royal
Law, which commands us, Matthew. 7.12. To do nothing, but what we would be
content to suffer; as to do nothing unto others, but what we would be well
content to suffer from others: But on the contrary, when they measure things,
not by the strait and even Rule of Equity, but by the crooked and oblique Line
of Power, arming their Injustice to do what they please, because they can do
what they will: This causes many to make very bold with God in cases that seem
to give advantage unto their high thoughts and Commodities: For what evil
cannot Ambition and Covetousness do, when they are backed with an Arbitrary and
unlimitted Power here below, if they be not checked by a stronger Arm from
above? Whence we see it often come to pass, that when the Laws of Nature and
Nations, yea of God himself, lie in the way of their profit, or earthly
advantages (whatever their sufferings or loss be afterward) they either spurn
them thence, or else tread and trample upon them at pleasure, to compass their
ends for the present. This I can say of the Dutch (something from my own
knowledge, but more from the report of others) that when I lived in those
parts, and we English there were more for number than they, and consequently
could receive no hurt from them, we there used them as Neighbors and Brethren;
but in other places, where they had the like advantage of us, they dealt with
us neither like Christians nor Men. But I will not here any longer digress, but
return to speak further of the Commodities to be had in East India.

The Indico we bring thence, is a good, and a rich Commodity. It is there made
of little leaves, not bigger than those on our Goos-berry bushes, and the
shrubs that bear those leaves are about their bigness. These leaves they slip
off from the small branches of those bushes, which grow with round and full
heads without pricks. The leaves thus stripped off, are laid in great heaps
together certain days, till they have been in a hot sweat; then are they
removed, and put into very great and deep Vessels filled with a sufficient
quantity of water to steep them in, where they leave their blew tincture with
their substance; this done, the water is drained out into other exceeding
broad, but very shallow Vessels, or Vats, made of Plaster (like to that we
call Plaster of Paris) which will keep in all the Liquor till the hot Sun in
short time extracts the moisture from it; and then what mains in the bottom,
is a Cream about one quarter of an inch thick, which suddenly becomes hard and
dry, and that is our Indico, the best sort whereof comes from Biana, near unto
Agra, and a coarser sort is made at Cirkeese, not far from Amadamaz; about
which two places, are a very great number of those shrubs planted, which bear
those leaves.

For their Cotton-wooll, they sow seed, and very large quantities of Ground in
East India are thus seeded. It grows up like small Rose-bushes, and then puts
forth many yellow blossoms; those afterward falling off, there remain little
Cods, about the bigness of a Man's Thumb, in which the substance at first is
moist and yellow; but as they ripen, they swell bigger, till they break their
Covering, and after, in short time, that within them becomes Wool, as white as
Snow, and then they gather it. Amongst that Wool they find seeds to sow again
as they have occasion; but those shrubs bear that Wool three or four years e're
they supplant them. Of this Cotton-wool they make diverse sorts of white Cloth
(as before I observed) some broad, some narrow, some coarse, some fine, and
very fine indeed; for some that I have seen there I believe was as fine as our
purest Lawn. Much of the coarser sort of that Cloth they dye into Colors, or
else stain in it variety of well-shaped and well-colored Flowers or Figures,
which are so fixed in the Cloth, that no water can wash them out. That pretty
Art of staining, or printing fixing those variety of Colors in that white
Cloth, the People of Asia have engrossed to themselves, where the most curious
Pintadaes are made; whither neighboring, as well as more remote Nations, bring
their Moneys to fetch them thence.

In Decan, which bounds upon the Mogol's Territories South, (the Princes
whereof are Tributaries unto him) there are many Diamond-Rocks, in which are
found those most precious of all other Stones; and they are to be sold in this
Empire, and consequently to be had by those who have skill to buy them, and
Money to pay for them. But as all the Stones in East India are not precious, so
those that are, the Natives know very well how to value.

But further, for the Merchandising Commodities the Mogol's Provinces afford,
there is Musk (by reason of their abundance of Musk-Cats) to be had in good
quantity; and there are Bezar stones: which are not so called from any Beast of
that name, but they grow in the maws of Goats, which when they observe to grow
exceeding lean, they kill them, and find those stones in them; and if they did
not so, that stone in them would make an end of them. By which we may observe,
how that precious Bezar stone, that proves many times such a Cordial, and
Preservative to the Life of Man, is destructive and mortal unto the poor
Creature from whence it is taken: Like that precious Word of God, that may
proceed from the Lips of him that has a lean Soul, and may do others good, but
himself nothing but mischief. The greatest number of those Goats, from whence
those Bezars are taken, feed on the Mountains of Lar in the Persians
Territories, the Western-Bound (as before) of the Mogol's great Empire.

They have some store of Silk here; but the greatest quantity of that rich
Commodity, that any place in the whole World affords, comes out of Georgia, a
Province belonging unto the King of Persia. Those Georgians and Armenians,
(both under the Command of the Persian King) are by profession Christians, like
those of the Greek Church. And the Abissins, under the Command of Prester John,
are in profession Christians likewise, but these Abissins circumcise their
Males before they baptize them. Alas poor People! who for want of better
instruction cannot know what they should, and therefore know not what they do.
All those Armenians, Georgians, and Abissins, (as I have it from others, but
can relate something of it out of my own knowledge) even all of them see Christ
but in the dark, and by reason of the general ignorance that is in them, cannot
know God as they ought in Jesus Christ. These are the different cases of many
which profess Christ in the World; some cannot know him, some care not to know
him, and some will not know him; Amongst the first of these, they all may be
ranked whom I but now named, as many others of the Greek, and those that
profess Christianity in Russian Churches, with many-many others of the Romish,
who have the Truths of God sealed up in an unknown Tongue, to keep, and to
continue them in ignorance; who instead of the two Breasts of the Church, the
Law and the Gospel, are fed with moldy and finnowed Traditions; and their case
being so, our Charity toward them may lead us thus far, to believe that they
would do better, if they knew better; and this may speak much in their excuse.
But what Plea can be made for us of this Nation, that Do not what we Know; or
if we be ignorant, it is because we will be so; not because we cannot know, but
because we care not for knowledge, and will not know?

But to return to the place where I began my last digression; I told you that
the People here have some store of Silk, of which they make Velvets, Sattins,
Taffataes, either plain, or mingled, or stripped in party-colours; but the best
of them for richness and goodness come not near those which are made in the
parts of Italy.

Many curious Boxes, Trunks, Standishes, Carpets, with other excellent
Manufactures, may be there had. They have medicinal Drugs, and amongst them
very much Cassia growing there in Canes. They have Gums well sented, and much
Lignum Aloes, which burnt, yields a perfume better than any one thing in the
world that I ever smelled. They have great store of Gum-lac, of which they make
their hard Wax; and that Gum likewise they there employ for many other neat
uses. The Earth there yields good Minerals of Lead, Iron, Copper, Brass, and
(they say) they have Silver-Mines too; which (if true) they need not open,
being so enriched from other Nations of Europe, and other parts, who yearly
bring thither great quantities of Silver to purchase their Commodities. Which I
collect from our English Trade there; for, though we vent some quantity of our
Woollen Cloth, with some other things we carry thither, yet the greatest part by
far of Commodities brought thence, are caught by the Silver hook. And this is
the way to make any Nation of the world rich, to bring, and leave Silver in it,
and to take away Commodities. And, as all Rivers run into the Sea, so many
Silver Streams run into this Monarchy, and there stay; the People of any Nation
being there very welcome that bring in their Bullion, and carry away the others
Merchandises; but it is looked on as a Crime that is not easily answered, to
transport any quantity of Silver thence.

The Coin, or Bullion, brought thither from any place, is presently melted and
refined, and the Mogol's Stamp (which is his Name, and Titles, in Persian
Characters) put upon it. The Coin there is more pure than in any other part of
the world, being (as they report) made of pure Silver, without any Allay; so
that in the Spanish Money, the purest of all Europe, there is some dross.

They call their pieces of Money, Roopees; of which there are some of diverse
values, the meanest worth two shillings and three pence, and the best two
shillings and nine pence sterling. By these they count their Estates and
Payments. They have another Coin of inferior value in Guzarat, called
Mamoodies, about twelve pence sterling; both the former, and these, are made in
halfs, and some few in quarters; so that three pence is the least piece of
silver current in those Countries, and very few of them to be seen. That which
passes up and down for exchange under this rate, is Brass or Copper Money,
which they call Pices, whereof three, or thereabouts, countervail a Penny,
Those Pices are made so massy and thick, as that the baser metal of which they
are made, put to other uses, is well-nigh worth the Silver they are rated at.
Their Silver Coin is made either round or square, but so thick, as that it
never breaks nor wears out. They have pure Gold-Coyn likewise, some pieces of
great value; but these are not very ordinarily seen amongst them.

I have now done with this Section, wherein I have related much of the
Commodities, and Riches, as before of the Provisions and Pleasures which are to
be found in that vast Monarchy, and, I conceive, nothing but what Truth will
justify. And now, lest that place I have described, should seem to be an
earthly Paradise, I must acquaint my Reader, that the Contents there found by
such as have lived in those parts, are sour'd and sauc'd with many unpleasing
things; which he must needs know, when he takes notice.

SECTION IV. Of the Discommodities, Inconveniences, and Annoyances, that are to
be found or met withal in this Empire.
AS the Poets feigned that the Garden 'of the Hesperides (wherein were Trees
that bare Golden Apples) was guarded by a Serpent: So there are stings here, as
well as fruits; all considered together may not unfitly be resembled by those
Locusts mentioned, Rev. 9.7, 8, 10. verses, Who had the Faces of Men, and the
Hair of Women, and Crowns as of Gold on their Heads; but they had too, the
Teeth of Lions, and the tayls of Scorpions, and there were stings in those
tayls. Here are many things to content and please the enjoyers of them, to make
their life more comfortable; but withal here are Teeth to tear, and stings to
kill: All put together, are nothing but a mixture made up (as indeed all
earthly things are) of good and bad; of bitter and sweet; of what contents, and
of what contents not.

The Annoyances of these Countries are, first many harmfull beasts of prey, as
Lions, Tigers, Wolves, Jackalls, with others; those Jackalls seem to be wild
Dogs, who in great companies run up and down in the silent night, much
disquieting the peace thereof, by their most hideous noise. Those most ravenous
Creatures will not suffer a Man to rest quietly in his Grave, for if his Body
be not buried very deep, they will dig him thence, and bury as much of him
again as they can consume in their hungry bellies. In their Rivers are many
Crocodiles, and -- Latet anguis in herba, on the Land, not a few overgrown
Snakes, with other venomous and pernicious Creatures. In our Houses there we
often see Lizards, shaped like unto Crocodiles, of a sad green color, and but
little Creatures, the fear of whom presents its self most to the Eye, for I do
not know that they are hurtful. There are many Scorpions to be seen, which are
oftentimes felt, which creep into their houses especially in that time of the
Rains, whose stinging is most sensible, and deadly, if the Patient have not
presently some oil that is made of Scorpions, to anoint the part affected,
which is a sudden and a certain cure. But if the man can get the Scorpion that
stung him, (as sometimes they do) the oily substance it affords, being beaten
in pieces, suddenly applied, is a present help. The sting of the Scorpion may
be a very fit resemblance of the sting of Death, the bitterness and anguish
whereof nothing can assuage and cure so well, as a serious consideration, and a
continual application of the thoughts of dying. Facile contemnit omnia, qui
cogitat se semper moriturum, that man may trample upon every thing, whose
meditations are taken up with the thoughts of his Change. He cannot dye but
well, who dies daily; daily in his preparations for death, though he dye not
presently.

The Scorpions are in shape like unto our Cra-fishes, and not bigger, and look
black like them, before they are boiled. They have a little round tail which
turns up, and lies usually upon their backs, at the end whereof is their sting,
which they do not put in, and let out of their bodies, as other venomous
creatures do, but it always appears in their tayls ready to strike; it is very
sharp and hard, and not long, but crooked like the talon of an Hawk.

The abundance of Flies ( like those swarms in Egypt, Exodus 8.21.) in those
parts did likewise very much annoy us: for in the heat of the day their
numberless number was such, as that we could not be quiet in any place for
them, they being ready to fly into our Cupps, and to cover our Meat as soon as
it was placed on the Table; and therefore we had always some of the Natives we
kept there, who were our Servants, to stand round about us on purpose while we
were eating, with Napkins to fright them away. And as in the day one kind of
ordinary Flies troubled us; so in the night we were likewise very much
disquieted with another sort called Musqueetoes, like our Gnats, but somewhat
less, and in that season we were very much troubled with Chinches, another sort
of little troublesome and offensive creatures, like little Tikes: and these
annoyed us two ways; as first by their biting and stinging, and then by their
stink. From all which we were by far more free when we lodged in Tents (as
there we did much) than when we abode in Houses; where in great Cities and
Towns, (to add unto the disquiets I before named) there were such an abundance
of large hungry Ratts, that some of us were bitten in the night as we lay in
our beds, either on our Toes or Fingers, or on the tips of our Ears, or on the
tops of our Noses, or in any part of our Bodies besides which they could get
into their Mouths.

The winds in those parts (as I observed before) which they call the Mont
soon, blow constantly one way, altering but few points, six months Southerly,
and six months Northerly. The months of April, May, and the beginning of June,
till the Rain falls, are so extremly hot, as that the wind when it blows but
gently, receives such heat from the parched ground, that the reflection thereof
is ready to blister a Man's Face that receives the breath of it. And if God did
not provide for those parts, by sending a breeze, or breath, or small gale of
wind daily, which somewhat tempers that hot sulphurous Air, there were no
living in that Torrid Zone for us English, who have been used to breathe in a
temperate Climate; and, notwithstanding that benefit, the Air in that place is
so hot to us English, that we should be every day stewed in our own moisture,
but that we stir very little in the heat of the day, and have clothing about
us as thin as we can make it. And no marvel, for the coldest day in the whole
year at noon (unless it be in the time when those Rains fall) is hotter there
then the hottest day in England.

Yet I have there observed most strange and sudden changes of heat and cold
within few hours, as in November and December the most temperate months of
their year (as before) and then at midnight the Air was so exceeding fresh and
cold, that it would produce a thin Ice on the water, and then as we lay in our
Tents, we would have been very glad of the warmth of a Rugg upon us, and the
noon of that following day would be so extreme hot, as that it was troublesome
then to keep on the thinnest clothing.

Sometimes there, the wind blows very high in those hot and dry seasons, not
long before the Rain begins to fall, raising up into the Air a very great
height, thick Clouds of Dust and Sand, which appear like dark Clouds full of
moisture, but they deceive like the brook in Job, Job 6.15. that has no water
in it. These dry showers (which Almighty God threatens to send among a people
as an heavy judgment, Deuteronomy. 28.24. When he will make the Rain of a Land powder
and dust) most grievously annoy all those amongst whom they fall, enough to
smite them all with a present blindness; filling their Eyes, Ears, Nostrils,
and their Mouths are not free if they be not also well guarded; searching every
place as well within as without our Tents or Houses, so that there is not a
little keyhole, of any Trunk or Cabinet, if it be not covered, but receives
some of that dust into it, the dust forced to find a lodging any where, every
where, being so driven and forced, as it is, by the extreme violence of the
wind.

But there is no place nor Country under Heaven, nor yet ever has been,
without some discommodities. The Garden of Eden had a Serpent in it, Genesis 3. He
that made all things by his Absolute Command, has so mixed and tempered, and
ordered all things here below by his infinite Wisdom, that either too much
Heat, or too much Cold; either the barrenness of the Soil, or the unwholsomness
of the Air, or some thing else, ministers matter of exception more or less
against every place, that the Sons of Men might hence learn, that there is no
true and perfect content to be found in any Kingdom, but in that of Heaven: For
while we are here, trouble and peace, mourning and joy, comfort and discontent,
come all of them by courses and succescessions; so that there is no weeding up
of those Tares, no removing of those Annoyances from the Life of Man.

And so having observed what is Truth, and what is enough to be said of the
Inconveniences and Annoyances, as well as of the Commodities and Contentments
which are to be found in those parts, I come now to speak of the People that
inhabit there. And because many particulars will necessarily fall within the
compass of this part of my Observations, which would more weary my Reader if
they should be presented unto him in one continued Discourse, I shall therefore
(as I have begun) break this into Sections, and proceed to speak

SECTION V. Of the Inhabitants of East India, who they are; Of their most
excellent Ingenuity expressed by their curious Manufactures, their Markets at
Home to buy and sell in, and their Trade abroad
THe Inhabitants in general of Indostan were all anciently Gentiles, called in
general Hindoes, belonging to that very great number of those which are called
Heathens, which take up almost two thirds of the number of the People who
inhabit the face of the whole Earth. But of this more hereafter. There are some
Jews (but they are not many) here and there scattered and lost as it were, in
those other great numbers of People; the greatest company of Jews now to be
found together in any one place of the world (as I have been made to believe
from the observation of others) are to be seen at Grand Cairo in Egypt, whither
they are returned, and where settled, to take their fill of their Forefathers
Fleshpots. For the Inhabitants of East India ever since they were subdued by
Tamberlain, they have been mixed with Mahumetans, which though they be by far
in respect of their number less than those Pagans, yet they bear all the sway,
and command all in those Countries.

There are besides these, (now become as it were Natives there) a great number
of Persians and Tartars (who are Mahumetans by Religion) that there inhabit,
very many of which the Mogol keeps for Soldiers to serve on Horseback, called
there Haddees: There are of both these many daring, stout, hardy and valiant
Men. For the Persians, there are many of them comely Persons, not so swart as
those of East India. But for the Tartars I have there seen, (and I have seen
many of them) they are more to be commended for their Valor than Beauty; a
square, stout, strong People, having platter Faces, and flat Noses. There are
many Armenians, and some Abissins amongst them, who wear the Livery of Christ,
in being called Christians, the greatest part of whose Christianity lies in
their Name. Those Armenians there make some wine to sell, of Raisons, Sugar,
and other ingredients, that is strong and heady, and luscious, tasted too much
by many Christians that come thither, as by those too that make it. Of the
green Grapes there, though they have abundance and they great, and sweet, and
good, yet they make no Wine at all: The Mahumetans (in obedience to a Precept
of Mahumets which forbids Wine) neither make, nor drink it; and others are not
suffered there to make it of those green Grapes, for fear (as I suppose) they
should make, and drink too much of it.

To those I have named of other Nations, (that are to be seen in East India)
there are besides some few almost of every people in Asia, and many Europeans
of diverse parts (that use to stir from their own fires) to be found amongst
them; and among that great variety of People and Nations there to be observed,
I have taken special notice of diverse Chinesaas, and Japanesaas there, and
those I have seen of them, for the generality, are a people of no large
stature, with little eyes, and noses something flatted; de tribus Capillis, with
a few black hairs that stand scattered on their upper lips which make them as
handsome beards as are to be seen on our Hares, or Cats.

There are some Jews here (as before I observed) whose stubbornness and
Rebellion, long ago, caused Almighty God to threaten them, that they should be
after sifted, and scattered among all the Nations of the World.

Those ancient Satyrists, Persius, and Juvenal, after that most horrid act
committed by them in Crucifying our Blessed Savior (though not in respect unto
that most cruel action, for they were Heathens) yet they call them Verpos, that
is, circumcised, Worms, vermin. Tacitus after gives them a most unsavory
Epithete, calling them foetentes Judaeos, stinking Jews. Marcus the Emperor
observing them well, concluded that they were a generation of men worse than
savages or Canibals, to be even the worst of men, as if they were the very
reffuse and dregs of mankind.

How usual is that Proverb, that when men are suspected to do otherwise than
they should, to answer, what, am I Jew, that I should do so, and so? I have
observed something to this purpose, from the people of East India, who are very
valiant at tongue-fights, though not so with their weapons (as you will hear
afterward); that people, I say, who have a very nimble but a base quality in
railing at, and miscalling one another; and their language is so full, and
significant, that they can call a man in it, two or three base things in one
word; but when they come to call him, whom they miscall, Judeo Jew, they
believe (as I have been often told) that they can go no higher; esteeming that,
above all other terms, the highest name of obloquy.

Yet we do believe, (because the Lord has promised it) that he will find a
time to call home this people again to himself, when they shall receive honor
above all the contempt they have been long under; after they shall see with
sorrow, and with the eye of faith, Him, whom their Forefathers, out of
ignorance, and despite, and unbelief pierced.

For the Stature of the Natives of East India, they are like us, but generally
very straight; for I never observed nor heard of any crooked person amongst
them: And one reason may be, because they never lace nor girt in their Bodies;
and when they sleep, they accustom themselves to stretch out their Bodies at
their full length, without any thing to raise up their heads. And further,
among many other things I took special notice of there, I never observed any
deformed Person, nor Idiot or natural Fool, in those Parts.

Now for the Complexion of this People, they are all of them of a sad tawney or
Olive-colour; their hair black as a Raven, very harsh, but not curled. They
like not a man or woman that is very white or fair, because that (as they say)
is the color of Lepers, common amongst them. Most of the Mahumetans, except
the Moolaes (which are their Priests) or those which are very old and retired,
and have (as it were) given the World quite over, keep their chins continually
bare, but suffer the hair on their upper lips to grow very long; and they keep
it in its natural color, by combing it continually with black-lead Combs, till
they be of good years; but afterward, when Time has so snowed upon them, that
they can no longer keep in nor conceal their gray hairs, they use the Rasor (as
they did) no more, but let the hair of their chins grow long and large, which
makes many gray-beards amongst them, and I conceive that there are of those
many Old men.

And further, it is the manner of the Mahumetans to shave all the hair from off
their Heads, reserving only one lock on the Crown of them, for Mahomet to pull
them up to Heaven with (as they fondly conceit). The Hindoes shave their Heads
likewise, but cut all off; and both of them shave thus, and that very often;
but however their baldness appears not at all, because their Heads are
continually covered with a Shash, or a wreath of narrow Callico-Cloth, many
times wrapped about them, (usually for their color white or red) which they
never pull off, as we do our Hats in Complements. Their much and often shaving
makes many excellent Barbers amongst them, who besides their Scis^ers and
Rasors, use a little Instrument about the length of a short Bodkin, very sharp,
made like a Chizel, but not broader at the cutting end than the shank of a
six-penny nail, with which they pare and cleanse the nails on their fingers and
toes. Every Barber carries always about him a round Looking-glass made of
steel, about the compass of a large trencher-plate, made somewhat hollow, and
kept by them exceeding clean and sleek, so that it will represent the Face of
him that beholds it on the unequal side very well. These Barbers, as they walk
up and down, often present these Glasses unto men whom they find sitting still,
which is a tender of their Service if they shall please to make use of them.

The people there often wash their Bodies, and keep their Feet as clean and as
sweet as their Hands. The better sort anoint themselves very much with sweet
oils, which makes their company (as before I observed) very savory.

The Natives there (of which there is something before in my third Section) show
very much ingenuity in their curious Manufactures; as in their Silk-stuffs
which they most artificially weave, some of them very neatly mingled either
with Silver or Gold, or both. As also in making excellent Quilts of their
stained cloth, or of fresh colored Taffata lined with their Pintadoet, or of
their Satin lined with Taffata, betwixt which they put Cotten-wooll, and work
them together with Silk. Those Taffata or Sattin-quilts, are excellently
stitched by them, being done as evenly, and in as good order, as if they had
been drawn out to them, for their direction, the better to work them. They make
likewise excellent Carpetts of their Cotton-wooll, in fine mingled colors,
some of them more than three yards broad, and of a great length. Some other
richer Carpets they make all of Silk, so artificially mixed, as that they
livelily represent those flowers, and figures made in them. The ground of some
other of their rich Carpets is Silver or Gold, about which are such silken
flowers, and figures (as before I named) most excellently and orderly disposed
throughout the whole work.

Their skill is likewise exquisite in making of Cabinets, or Boxes, or Trunks,
or Standishes, curiously wrought, within, and without; inlaid with Elephants
tooth, or Mother of Pearl, or Ebony, or Tortoyse-shell, or Wyre; they make
excellent Cups, and other things of Agate, and Cornelian; and curious they are
in cutting all manner of stones, Diamonds as well as others.

They paint Staves, or Bed-steads, or Chests of Boxes, or Fruit-dishes, or
large Chargers, extreme neatly; which, when they be not inlaid (as before) they
cover the wood (first being handsomely turned) with a thick Gum, then put their
Paint on, most artificially made of liquid silver, or gold, or other lively
colors, which they use; and after make it much more beautiful with a very
clear varnish put upon it.

They are excellent at Limning, and will copy out any Picture they see to the
life: for confirmation of which take this instance; It happened that my Lord
Ambassador visiting the Mogol on a time, as he did often, presented him with a
curious neat small oval Picture done to the life in England. The Mogol was much
pleased with it, but told the Ambassador withal, that happily he supposed that
there was never a one in his Country that could do so well in that curious Art;
and then offered to wager with him a Leck of Roopees (a sum which amounted to
no less then 10000 l. sterling.) that in a few days he would have two Copies made
by that presented to him, so like, that the Ambassador should not know his
own. He refused the great wager, but told the King he would adventure his
judgment on it: Two Copies taken from that Original were within few days after
made, and brought and laid before the Ambassador, in the presence of the King;
the Ambassador viewing them long, either out of Courtship to please the King,
or else unable to make a difference 'twixt the Pictures being all exquisitly
done, took one of them which was new made, for that which he had formerly
presented, and did after profess that he did not flatter, but mistake in that
choice. The truth is, that the Natives of that Monarchy are the best Apes for
imitation in the world, so full of ingenuity that they will make any new thing
by pattern, how hard soever it seem to be done; and therefore it is no marvel,
if the Natives there make Shoes, and Boots, and Clothes, and Linen, and Bands
and Cuffs of our English Fashion, which are all of them very much different
from their Fashions and Habits, and yet make them all exceeding neatly.

They have Markets, which they call Bazars, to sell and buy their Commodities
in all their great Towns twice every day, a little before, and an hour after
Sunrising in the morning, and so a little before and a little after Sunset at
night. The other parts of the day being too hot for those great confluences of
people to meet together; and those are the seasons we Englishmen there make
use of, to ride abroad and take the air, the rest of the day we usually spend
in our houses. The people there sell almost all their Provisions, as very many
other things, by weight.

For the foreign Trade of this people, it is usually once a year into the Red
Sea to a City called Moha in Arabia the happy, about thirty leagues from the
mouth of it; It is a principal Mart for all Indian Commodities, but the Staple
and most principal there vented is their Cotten-cloth, either white, or
stained, and their Cotten-wooll. Hither they come from Grand Cairo in Egypt, as
from many other parts of the Turks Dominions, to trafique; hither they come
from Prester John's Country which lies on the other side of the Arabian Gulf
(for so the Red Sea is there called) and not above fourteen leagues over at the
City Moha.

The Ship or Junk (for so it is called) that usually goes from Surat to Moha is
of an exceeding great burden, some of them I believe fourteen or fifteen
hundred Tuns, or more, but those huge Vessels are very ill built, like an
overgrown Liter, broad and short, but made exceeding big, on purpose to waff
Passengers forward and backward: which are Mahometans, who go on purpose to
visit Mahomets Sepulcher, at Medina near Mecha, but many miles beyond Moha. The
Passengers, and others in that most capacious Vessel that went and returned
that year I left India, (as we were credibly told) amounted to the number of
seventeen hundred. Those Mahumetans that have visited Mahomets Sepulcher, are
ever after called Hoggees, or holy men.

This Junk bound from Surat to the Red Sea, as she has many people in her, so
has she good Ordnance, but those Navigators know not well how to use them for
their defense. She begins her Voyage about the twentieth of March, and
finisheth it, about the end of September following. The Voyage is but short and
might easily be made in less than three months, but the Ship is very slow, and
ill-built to abide foul weather; and in the long season of the rain, and a
little before and after it, the winds upon those Coasts are commonly so
violent, that there is no coming but with much hazard into the Indian Sea. This
Ship returning is usually worth (as I have heard it faithfully reported, and if
my credit given to that report make me not to abuse my Readers) two hundred
thousand pounds Sterling, and most of it brought back in good Gold and Silver;
some fine Chamlets they bring with them home likewise. But that huge mass of
wealth thus brought home into India, is another especial thing, and might have
been added to that I spoke of before toward the continual enriching of this
great Monarchy: where, in the next place I shall speak

SECTION VI. Of the care and skill of this people in keeping and managing their
excellent good Horses; Of their Elephants and their ordering and managing them;
And how the people ride and are carried up and down from place to place.
THe Soldiery here, and so many of the Gentry, and better sort of the people,
who live at Court, show excellent good skill in riding and managing of their
well turned, high metal'd, choice Horses; which are excellent good at mounting
up, bounding and curvetting, and when they run them at their full swiftest
speed will stop them at a foots breadth; for the scantling of those creatures,
they are in proportion like ours, but excellently well eyed, headed, limn'd;
for their colors, there are some of them Raven-black, but many more of them
white, curiously Dapled; and a very great number Pied and spotted all over, and
there are some of other bright colors. But it is a usual custom there amongst
Gallants who ride upon the bright-coloured horses, to have their legs and lower
parts of their bellies and breasts died into a Saffron color (of which they
have much there) which makes them look as if they had stood in some Dyars Vatt,
just to such an height of their bodies.

The hair upon their Horses (whom they keep plump and fat) is very short, soft,
and lies sleek upon them: and I wonder not at it, they are kept so daintily;
every Horse being allowed a man to dress and feed him, and to run by him when
he is rode forth, and this is all his work.

They tie not down their horse-heads when they stand still (as we do) with
halters, but secure each horse by two ropes, fastened to their hind-feet, which
ropes are somewhat long, to be staked down behind them in Tents, or other places
wherein they are kept.

They cut grass for them green or withered on the earth as they have occasion
to use it, never mowing their ground and making Hay as we do. But that which
keeps their horses in heart, and in flesh, is the Provender they eat, which is
a kind of round grain they call Donna, somewhat bigger than our Tares; which
they give not unto them dry, but boiled, and mingled with some coarse Sugar
amongst it; and when it is cold give it them, made up in round balls, which
they put into their mouths, as if they cramb'd them; and sometimes they put a
little Butter into these balls to scour their bodies.

Their choice good horses are valued there at as dear if not an higher rate,
than those we esteem most of in England are prized with us. They make excellent
Saddles, and some of them of great value, adorned with handsome and rich
trapings, all of them very easy both for the horse, and his rider. They manage
their horses with strong snaffles, whose reins and head-stalls are made
suitable to their Saddles and Trappings,

The Elephants in this vast Monarchy are very numerous, and though they be the
largest, and that by far, of all the Creatures the earth brings forth; yet are
they so tractable, unless at some times when the Males are mad (of which more
afterward) as that a boy of twelve years old is able to rule the biggest of
them, in which we may in a special manner read a Comment on that truth which
tells us how that the Lord has put the fear of man upon all the creatures here
below.

But for the Elephants (I have begun to speak of) they are very huge vast
overgrown Creatures, some of whom, which I have seen, I conceive at the least
twelve foot high; but there are amongst them (as they say) fourteen or fifteen
foot in height. The color of them all is black; their skins thick, and smooth
without hair; they have full eyes, but not proportionable to their great
bodies; they have ears like our Oxen, but not exceeding large, and those ears
edged (as it were) about with a short hair-fringe; and at the end of their
tails (which are slender and not very long) there grows some hair likewise and
a little on their eyelids; but no where else about their bodies.

The feet of the Elephants look like the trunks of small trees cut square off
from their roots; round about which there are thick, and short, and broad claws
growing.

Some that write of them have abused the world with this tradition that they
have no joints in their legs, and therefore stand when they sleep against trees
to hold them up: which is all very false, for they lie down and arise again at
their pleasure, as other beasts do.

Their motion is not swift, a walking rather than a pace, about three miles at
the most an hour; but of all beasts that carry burdens they are most sure of
foot, for they never fall, nor yet stumble to endanger their Rider.

They are most docile creatures, and of all those we account merely sensible
come nearest unto reason.

Lipsius in his Epistles Cent. 1. Epist. 50. out of his observation from
others, writes more of them than I can confirm, or any, I persuade my self,
believe; yet many things most remarkable, which seem indeed to be acts of
reason rather than sense, I have observed in them: for instance, an Elephant
will do any thing his Keeper commands him, as if he bid him to affright a man,
he will make toward him as if he meant to tread him into pieces, but when he
is come at him do him no hurt at all; so if he would have him, to abuse or to
disgrace a man, he will take dirt, or dust, or kennel-water into his Trunk, and
dash it on his face.

Their Trunks are grisly Snouts of a great length, hanging down betwixt their
long teeth, which teeth nature has given them for their defense, otherwise
they are of little use to them. In their Trunks they have such mavelous
strength, that by them they can do very much mischief: for if they strike an
Horse, or Camel, or any other the like beast with them (as sometimes they do
when as they are mad) they will so break their bones, as that they will spoil,
nay kill them at one blow; and much more a man, if he chance to come in their
way.

Those Trunks of the Elephants are to them as an hand by which they feed
themselves, and make great use of them otherwise upon all occasions: for with
those Trunks they tear off boughs from trees, by winding them about them; and
after, with them, put boughs into their mouths, and eat the tenderest parts of
them. With these they pull up green corn (if they be suffered) and grass by the
roots, and then against their legs beat off the earth and dust that hangs about
them, before they eat thereof. Thus they deal with sedgs, or weeds, which they
find in the water, first washing off the dirt which hangs on the roots thereof,
and then down they go into their vast bellies.

The Elephants delight much to bathe themselves in water; in which, when they
find depth enough, they swim as well as any other Creatures.

I observed before, that the male Elephants when they grow lusty are sometimes
mad for their females, but in few days come again in temper; before which time
they are so mischievous, that they will strike any thing, but their Keepers,
that comes in their way; and their strength is such (as before I observed) that
there is no blow they give which lights either upon men or beast, but carries
death with it. At those times to prevent mischief they are kept apart from
company, fettered with strong chains unto Trees; but if by chance in their
frenzy they get loose (as sometimes they do) they will make after every thing
they see stir, in which case they have no means to stop them in their violent
course, but by firing of Crackers made of Gunpowder, whose sparkling, and
noise makes them to stand still and tremble. When those creatures are in that
mad distemper, they sweat much, which makes their savor exceeding rank and
filthy like that ill smell of a Boar when he is fatting in his Stye, but, by
much, more strong and more offensive than that.

An English Merchant there, of good credit upon his own knowledge, reported this
thing which follows, and is very observable, of an Elephant in Adsmer (the
place then of the Mogols residence); who being brought often through the Bazar
or Market place, a woman who usually sat there to sell herbs, was wont to give
this great Elephant an handful, as he many times passed by; this Elephant
after, being mad, brake his fetters, and took his way through that Bazar; the
people being all of them much affrighted, made haste to secure themselves by
getting out of his way, amongst whom was this Herb-woman, who, for fear and
haste, forgot her little Child which she had brought thither; the Elephant came
to the place where this woman usually sat, stopped, and seeing a little Child
lying there about her herbs, took it up gently with his Trunk, not doing it the
least harm, and presently after laid it down upon the stall of an house that
was hard by; and then proceeded on in his furious course. Acosta, a Jesuit,
relates the like of an Elephant in Goa from his own experience.

The Elephant, though he be vast, and terrible, yea and cruel too, when he is
set to do mischief, or when he is mad; yet otherwise is a tame gentle Creature,
so that the dread of this huge beast, most appears to the eyes. But
notwithstanding his terribleness, I once there saw a Creature compared with an
Elephant, not much bigger than a small Fish compared with a Whale, boldly to
encounter one of them. The occasion by which this so came to pass offers it
self thus: that year I went for East India, the Merchants here (as from the
King of England, in whose name they sent all their Presents) amongst many other
things, then sent the Mogol some great English Mastives, and some large Irish
Greyhounds, in all to the number of eight, dispersed in our several Ships; one
of those high spirited Mastives in our Voyage thither, upon a day seeing a
great Shoal or company of Porpisces (before described) mounting up above the
waves, and coming toward that Ship wherein he was, suddenly lept overboard to
encounter with them, before any did take notice of that fierce creature: to
prevent that engagement, wherein he was irrecoverably lost, the Ship then
having such a fresh gale of wind, that she could not suddenly slack her course,
whereby that poor creature might have been preserved. Another, one of the Irish
Greyhounds had his head shot off in our fight. The Mange was the destruction of
four more of them; only two of the Mastives came alive to East India, and they
were carried up, each of them drawn in a little Coach, when I went up to the
Ambassador, that he might present them to the Mogol. The fiercest of these two,
in our way thither, upon a time breaking loose, fell upon a very large Elephant
that was hard by us, fastening his teeth in the Elephants Trunk, and kept his
hold there a good while, which made that huge beast extremely to roar; and
though the Elephant did swing the Mastive up and down above ground many times
(as not feeling his weight) that he might throw him off; yet he could not
suddenly do it, but at last freeing himself from the dog by throwing him a good
space from him, there came a Mungril Curr of that Country toward our Mastive,
who then lost this his most unequal match, fell upon that dog and killed him,
by which means we recovered our Mastive again into our custody, he having not
received any apparent hurts; by which we may see how much Courage and Mettle
there is in those right fierce Mastives.

This story pleased the Mogol very much when the dogs were presented to him,
and he allowed each of them four attendants of those Natives to wait upon them,
who by turns two and two together carried them up and down with him in
Palankees, (after described) to which they were tied, and the other two went by
them, fanning the Flies from off them; and the King caused a pair of silver
tongs to be made on purpose, that with them when he pleased, he might feed
those dogs with his own hand. But this story by the way.

The Mogol has many of his great Elephants trained up for the war, who carry
each of them one iron Gun, about five foot long, lying upon a strong frame of
wood, made square that is fitted to a thick broad Panel fastened about him,
with very strong and broad Girses or Girts. The Gun like an Harquebuss has a
piece of iron like a Musket-rest fastened on the sides thereof, made loose to
play up and down. The bottom of that Iron Rest so fixed, is long, to be let
through that frame of wood on the foreside, and so to be keyed in at the
bottom. At the four corners of this frame are small flags of silk, with sundry
devices painted on them, put upon little neat colored staves; upon the neck of
the Elephant sits a man to guide him, and within the frame a Gunner, to make
his shot as he finds occasion. The Piece thus mounted, carries a bullet about
the bigness of a Tennis Ball.

Some Elephants the King keeps for the execution of Malefactors; the manner
how, follows in Sestion 23. And some he keeps to carry himself and women; and
some Elephants are kept for State (of which more when I shall come to speak
more particularly of the great Mogol.) Other Elephants are there employed for
the carrying of burdens, their strength being so great as that they will bear a
mavelous weight.

The Elephants are all governed with a small rod of steel about half a yard
long, made sharp on the lower end, and toward that end there is an hook
returned, like a Fish-hook, that is very sharp likewise; by which their Riders
sitting on their necks, pull them back, or prick them forward at their pleasure.

These vast Creatures, though the Country be exceeding fruitful, and all
provisions in it cheap, yet by reason of their huge bulk, if they well be kept
and fed, are very chargeable in keeping; they are kept usually under the shade
of great Trees, where by a strong chain of iron upon one of their hind-legs
they fasten them. And as they stand, the abundance of Flies vex them, and
therefore with their fore-feet they make dust, (the ground usually being very
dry) and with their Trunk cast the dust about their bodies to drive away those
Flies from them.

The King allows every one of those great male-Elephants four femals, which in
their language they call their wives. These brutes (as they say) will not
endure any to behold them when they are coupling together; which may condemn
many who call themselves men and women, but have so lost all modesty, that they
are not ashamed when they commit any act of filthiness, no they are not
ashamed, neither can they blush. The Female Elephants (as they further say)
carry their young, one whole year ere they bring them forth; Thirty years
expire ere they come to their full growth; and they fulfill the accustomed age
of men ere they die. And lastly, notwithstanding the great Number there of
those vast Creatures, and the excessive charge in keeping them well, they value
them at exceeding high rates.

For this people, when as they journey from place to place, the men of the
inferior sort go all on foot, their women that cannot so travel, ride on
little Oxen, inured to carry burdens, or on Asses, which carry their little
children with them; the women like the men astride. Others that are of better
quality ride on Horses, Mules, Camels, Dromedaries, or else in slight Coaches
with two wheels covered on the top and back-end, but the forepart and sides
open, unless they carry women. Those Coaches will carry four persons beside the
driver, but two may lie at ease, and at length in them upon quilts, that lie in
the body of them, upheld by girt-web, with which they are bottomed, which makes
them by far more easy. These Coaches are covered for men of quality with some
thing that is costly; much of our English broad cloth that is died red, is
there bought from us and employed for that use. At the back-end of this Coach
they have a long round bolster, that reaches both sides, stuffed with
Cotten-wool, and covered with Velvet or Satin, or with some other thing that
is rich. These Coaches are drawn by Oxen, one yoke to a Coach; some of which
Oxen have their short horns neatly tipped with silver plate, and some others
with brass; and they have each of them a fine Collar of large round bells, some
of them made of Silver. They are pared and suited as our Coach-horses for
stature and color; most of them thus employed are white, and some pide, or
spotted all over with several colors. They are guided with small cords which
go through the parting of their Nostrils, and so twixt their horns into the
Coach-mans hand, who by these restrains them when, and guides them how he
pleases; and when he would have them go on, pricks them forward with a small
and short staff he keeps in his hand pointed like a goad. These Oxen there, are
very neatly made, slender, strait-limb'd and not very large, but naturally very
nimble, and by daily use made so fit to perform that labor, (being kept well
shod) as that they go twenty miles a day and more, with good speed. They keep
those Oxen for this service, as their horses, well-dressed, and so well fed,
that they be plump and fa^, and consequently very handsome to behold.

The men there of the greatest rank and quality, ride sometimes in those
Coaches, and sometimes on their curious Horses, and sometimes on their brave
Elephants, but however they are carried, they have their horses, which wait
upon them when they go abroad, that they may bestride them when they please.
And at other times they ride on men's shoulders, in a slight thing they call a
Palankee, made somewhat like a Couch or standing Pallat, covered with a Canopy,
wherein a man may lie at his full length, as many of those Grandees do, when
they are removed from place to place, giving themselves up to ease, and over
unto those sins which follow it; and while they are thus carried, they make the
shoulders and joints of those that feel their heavy weight, to bow and buckle
under their burdens. This as it should seem was an ancient, but a base
effeminacy sometimes used in Rome. Juvenal in his first Satyr, describing a
fat Lawyer thus carried. Causidici nova cum veniat Lectica Mathonis,
Plena ipso --
Matho the pleader comes in his new Chair,
Filled with himself; when that he takes the air.
It had been well, if such carriages as these had been never heard of, but in
then-heathen Rome, or amongst poor blinded Indians. But, Vae nobis miseris ad
quos Paganorum vitia transierunt. Woe to us wretched people of this Nation, unto
whom the vices of Pagans are derived. It was a curse that the old Cretans were
wont to wish might fall upon their greatest enemies, that they might fall in
love with evil customs. This doubtless is one, amongst many more, fallen upon
us of this Nation, when some, not out of necessity, but choice, make other men
their Pack-horses to ride upon them, a thing (as I conceive of it) most
unworthy of a man, as he is a man, so to do.

But I shall here digress no further; but return again to that people (I mean
those of quality amongst them) who out of Pride, or Idleness, or both, are thus
carried up and down, or by some other means I named before, though they remove
never so little way from one place to another, accounting it very dishonorable
for them to go on foot. And so much of this. I shall now proceed, (having made
mention of their huge multitudes of Horses, and Elephants) etc. to take notice

SECTION VII. Of their numerous Armies; Their Ammunition for war; How they lade
themselves with weapons; How terribly they appear; yet how pusillanimous, and
low-spirited they are.
WHere first, for their numerous Armies, it will appear to be no strange thing,
if we consider the Great Mogol to be what he is, an overgrown Prince, (as
before described) in the vast extent of his large Territories, being like a
huge Pike in a great Pond, that preys upon all his neighbors, who therefore
purchase, and keep his favor by very great Presents given him by way of
homage, and a submiss acknowledgment of his mighty Power. And besides, the
Mogol is a Master of unknown treasure, having Silver, as it is written of
Solomon, 1 Kings 10.27. like stones in the streets. And certainly in far
greater abundance than ever Solomon had. Though I must tell my Reader, that all
metals there, are not silver and gold, nor all stones precious. Now he that can
command what treasure he will, may likewise command what men he please, as the
Mogol does besides his own people. Many Persians and Tartars (before spoken of)
very valiant men, who serve him as Soldiers on horseback, and so the major
part by far, whether Natives, or strangers, are mounted for his service in his
wars.

Hence it is that the Armies there consist of incredible multitudes; they talk
of some which have exceeded that mighty Host which Zerah King of Aethiopia
brought against King Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.9. but they having not well learned that
horrid bloody art of war, as the Europeans have, and wanting Commanders, and
other Officers to manage their great Companies, are not so skilful to destroy,
as otherwise they might be: it is a phrase most properly and fitly applied unto
savage, and absurd, and brutish, and unreasonable men, to the Enemies of God,
and of his Church by the Prophet Ezekiel. 21.31. Where Almighty God threatens that
he will deiver them into the hands of brutish men, and skilful to destroy.

The Weapons they use in their Wars are, Bows and Arrows, Swords and Bucklers,
short Lances having excellent good steel-heads, and short pieces like unto
Carbines, besides those carried upon Elephants (before described) some Footmen
in their Wars carry those lesser Guns, with Bows and Arrows, Swords and
Bucklers, and they are excellent Marks-men. They make good Gunpowder for their
own use, and fire their Guns with Match, or Touch-wood. Their Swords are made
crooked like Falchons, and are very sharp; but for want of skill in those that
temper them, will easily break, but not bend. And therefore we sell at good
rates our English Sword-blads that will bow, and become strait again. They have
(and they say that for many generations past have had) great Ordnance, though
they seldom make use of them in their Wars.

Their warlike Music are some Kettle-drums carried on horseback, with long
wind Instruments, which make not Music, but noise, so harsh and unpleasing,
that it is enough to fright away their enemies.

They say, that in their Military engagements, they make at the first very
furious onsets, which are too violent long to continue, for the Scale quickly
decides the controversy, when that side which happens first to be worsted, and
to be put into disorder, knows better to Run than to Rally again.

There are some of the Mogols own Subjects which are men of courage; those of
note among the Mahometans are called Baloches, inhabiting Haiacan, adjoining
unto the Kingdom of Persia, (spoken of before) and there are others called
Patans, taking their denomination from a Province of that name in the Kingdom
of Bengala. These will look an enemy boldly in the face, and maintain with
their lives, their reputation and valor. Amongst the many Sects of Hindoos or
Gentiles (after spoken of) which are subject to this King, there is but one
race of fighters called Rashboots, a number of which live by spoil, who in
Troops surprise poor Passengers, for the most part murdering those whom they
get under their power. These excepted, the rest of the Mogols Natives, for the
generality of them, had rather eat than quarrel, and rather quarrel than fight.
I say quarrel, for I have several times observed there, that when two of them,
have been both well armed, and have most shamefully abused one another, in
baser language than I can express, yet durst not draw their weapons; in
conclusion, when one of them has caught the other by the throat, and forced
him up against some wall, the sufferer would cry out pitiously, and the
standers by would admire the other for his valor, saying, Sha-Abas; a
proverbial speech amongst them relating to the late King of Persia, called
Sha-Abas, a Prince much renowned for valor; and when any man did a thing they
thought gallantly, they cried Sha-Abas, as much as to say, it was done as well
as the Persian King could have done it.

Yet, however the people here in general are cowardly, they appear men of very
terrible aspects, having great long Mustacho's upon their upper Lips, their
Chins continually kept bare by the Rasor, which makes them all to look like the
Pictures of our old Britains; or like those our rude Painters daub upon
clothes, and call them the Nine-worthies. And further, to make them the more
formidable, they will appear on horseback as if they were surrounded with an
Armory, or carrying an whole Armory about them, thus appointed; At their left
sides swords hanging on belts, under them sheaves of many arrows; on their left
shoulders broad Bucklers fastened, and upon their backs small Guns like to
Carbins fixed likewise; at their right sides Bows hanging in cases, and Lances
(about two yards and an half long) hanging in loops near their stirrups (when
they carry them not in their hands); yet for all this Harness the most of them
are like those Ephramites, Psalm. 78.9. Who being armed, and carrying bows,
turned their heads in the day of battle. For they dare not look a man of
courage in the face, though they be thus fortified, with such variety of
weapons for their defense. Nay, a man of resolution will beat one of these out
of all his weapons, with a small Stick or Cane. So that I shall do the Natives
of that Country no wrong, if I say of them, that they are sola Libidine fortes,
most strong and valiant in their base lusts, and not otherwise.

The base Cowardice of which people, has made the great Mogol sometimes to use
this Proverb, that one Portugal would beat three of his people; and (because
the English there have many times prevailed much at Sea against those
Portugals) he would further add, that on Englishman would beat three Portugals.

The truth is, that the Portugals, especially those which are born in those
Indian Colonies, most of them a mixed seed begotten upon those Natives, are a
very low, poor-spirited people, called therefore Gallina's dealt Mar, The Hens
of the Sea.

One notable instance to prove this: it happened that the East India Company
had a very little Pinnace, they called the Coaster, which they kept in those
parts for discoveries; manned she was but with ten men, and had only one small
Murdering-piece within her. She upon a time met with a Portugal Ship, going
then toward Ormos, which had one hundred and thirty men aboard her* and Guns
answerable to her Burden, and Company; Our petty Pinnace came up with her,
discharged her murdering-piece, which slew one of her chief Officers; upon
which, without any further resistance, she presently struck her Sails and
yielded. Our English presently commanded her Gunners, and some other of her
Chief Officers, to come aboard them, which immediately they did, and there kept
them bound, till they had taken what they pleased out of their Ship, and then
let them go, being most deservedly used in that their suffering, they being
thirteen to one; and yet such beasts they were, as they durst not make any
resistance.

But take some stories of valiant Portugals before I leave them, and these you
shall have from some of that Nation themselves, whom we not seldom met in
India, and would there beg relief of us; but I never knew any come to us upon
those terms, but his pride would excuse his poverty thus, that he was
challenged into the field, and there in single combat had fairly slain a man;
how that he durst not return again any more into the Portugal Colonies, for
fear of the Law, and it was that which put him at present into that sad exigent
to ask relief, and this was their usual plea there; when in truth and in deed,
we did believe them to be such pitiful wretches, or men of such a strange
resolution, as that, (as it was written of one called Pisander) they would be
made to fear their own shadows.

However, upon this account there came upon a time at my first coming into
India, unto the Factory at Surat, where I then was, a most valiant Portugal (if
you will give him leave to tell his own story, and believe it when he has
done) who first for his person was a Quantus tantus, tantillus, a very poor,
little dwar-fish man, whose person promised as little valor as any that I ever
saw, though I know that high courage is not tied to an huge bulk, for (if
stories abuse us not) Alexander the Great was but a little man; but what ever
Alexander was, I am sure, that this was a poor little thing; but however he
told us, that he was by birth an Hidalgo, which signifies in Spanish the Son of
some body, or no ordinary man, but a Gentleman of Spain, and that he came from
thence as a Companion to the King of Spains Viceroy, sent to Goa, and himself
was called the Knight with the Golden Rapier, and that suddenly after his
coming to Goa, he was honorably invited into the field, there to fight a
single Combat with a very gallant man of that place, but he soon left him there
dead; and having done so, the Viceroy prevented him with a pardon for that
fact, before he asked it, but willing him withal, now he had been sufficiently
tried, to confine his Rapier to its scabbard. But he told us further, that he
could not long after live quietly there, but was provoked again by a man of
high resolution, unto a second encounter, when he had the like success as
before, in killing his Adversary. The Viceroy now was very angry with him, but
upon much entreaty, as he said, pardoned him a second time; upon the receipt of
which favor he told us that he was then resolved to throw away his Rapier, to
get into a Religious House, and there to remain the residue of his days, a
Convertado or Penitent. But the Viceroy could not be long without his Company;
and therefore to gain it, restored him again into his former favor: But for
himself he was still so unhappy (the fame of his great valor being spread
abroad) as that he could not long enjoy that peace, and quiet, which he now so
much desired, but received a third Challenge from a very gallant, and very
valiant man, as he described him, a man big enough to beat a Goliath; and then
he further told us, that his honor was ever more dear unto him than his life;
and therefore notwithstanding the loss of the Viceroys favor, and what else
might happen, he entered the Lists with him; and though he found him the
stoutest adversary that ever he opposed, yet after a long conflict this little
Knight killed that great Giant, and left him there dead likewise: which done,
He (not daring to return any more unto Goa) told us, that he came naked out of
the field as we then saw him with no ornaments (I assure you) about him, fit to
make him a Viceroys companion, nor any weapon fit to Dub him Knight of the
Golden Rapier. He further added, that he was now resolved not to live any
longer amongst the Christians, but that he desired to live amongst the English;
but when we replied that we were Christians, he cried Jesu Maria! as wondering
at it, and further told us, that he never heard so before.

When this Rhadomantadist had ended his perilous story, it was dinner time,
and the Merchants bid him to sit down with us and eat, and so he did, where
certainly he laid about him more valiantly than ever he had done before in the
field, giving our meat many a cut, and eating, as if he had been more than half
starved. He continued with us there for some few days, and after, when his
hunger was well satisfied, and his spirits well refreshed, he began to take
some exception against his place at the Table, because he eat at the lower end
thereof, saying, that the company there were but Factors, Servants, but he was
a Gentleman, and therefore his due place was higher at the board, but then
corrected himself, saying, that it was not to be much considered where he sat,
for his place made the upper end of the Table where ever he was placed: and
suddenly after, this Don Quixot being weary of his stay with us (though he was
but too well used) and having a great mind to ramble further, told our Company,
that he being an Hidalgo, it was very dishonorable for him to take
entertainment upon the terms he had it; and therefore desired us to make a
little Purse for him, on which he would live as long as he could, and then
creep into some Desert place, and there repent and dye. And now our great
Ghest, having spent all his humor, and told us all his Dream, had his desire
granted in some money that was given to him; and so we parted with our Knight
Errant, who lived longer than he told us he would live. For half a year after I
took notice of him at the Mogols Court, and there I leave him.

I will now shortly relate a story of another of his Nation (and I do believe,
as good a Gentleman as himself) who called himself Antonio de la Valla. It
happened, that a little before our coming thence, my Lord Ambassador going
from his own house to dine at the English Factory in Surat, and I waiting on
him, there appeared then to us a walking Skeleton, most miserably clothed, the
poorest, and leanest Creature that ever mine Eyes beheld, who faintly begged of
him some relief, telling (what was true) that he was almost quite starved; the
Ambassador pitied and relieved him, and, as we returned back, found this poor
Creature eating with so much greediness, as if he could not have been
satisfied. He was then willed to come to our House, and he did so, and there
was fed, and heartned up again, and then, when he was come to himself, told us,
that he had endured there abundance of misery, which, as he acknowledged, did
most justly befall him, because he had there renounced his Religion, and become
a Mohammedan, which, when he had done, no care was taken of him there, (for they
regard not a Man that will not be constant in his Religion, believing, that if
that Bond cannot tie him, nothing will.) He told us further, that he was very
sorry that he had so done, and desired a passage for England, which was granted
him; and he was put unto me as my Servant, and therefore I fitted him with
Clothes, etc. fit for his turn, but afterward (we being at Sea) he would often
curse and ban, and cry out, O Mal ventura! O his hard hap! and that of all the
miseries which he had endured, this was the greatest; that he, an Hidalgo, a
Gentleman of Spain, should live to become a Servant, and which was worse, to
serve an Heretic. I would, when I heard this of him (for he spoke not so to
me) tell him of it, and further mind him of that most sad condition in which we
found him, how that he had starved to death, if our pity in the relief he
found from us, had not even then prevented it. He would reply, that he knew not
what he said; telling me, that his many miseries had turned his Brains: (Not to
bestow any more Ink and Paper on him) we brought him afterward to Plimmouth,
and immediately after our arrive there, he desired his Liberty, which was
easily granted him, and from thence (having some Money given him, more than he
deserved) took his course; whither, I cannot tell, neither need my Reader
desire to know. And therefore I will return again, as swift as meditation or
thought can carry me, unto East India, where I shall in the next place speak

SECTION VIII. Of our safe and secure living amongst the Natives there, if we
do not provoke them. Of their faithfulness unto those that entertain them as
Servants: For how little they serve, and yet how diligent they are, etc.
WHere first for our Living in East India, it is with as much freedom and
safety in our Journies and Tents, when we travel; in our Houses when we are
most fixed, as if we were in an Army of Banners appointed for our Guard; or as
if the Vines and Fig Trees under which we there sit were our own.

But there are Spoilers sometimes met with-all in those Provinces, that live by
their Swords and Bows, having nothing for their subsistence (because they will
take no other course) but what they get by rapine and spoil; of whom somewhat
more afterward.

And now by the way for those Villains who thus live, (wherever they be) and
those sturdy Rogues who are next to them in guilt, by eating up the Bread of
the Poor, having able limbs to carry them that they may beg from House to
House, and Hands to receive Alms but none to labor; both these being the very
vermin of those Commonwealths, wherein they are suffered to breathe, it were
very well if such of these as have not deserved to be cut off by the Hand of
Justice, were all served as Philip King of Macedon dealt with two Rogues,
alterum e Macedonia fugere, alterum persequi jussit. He made one of them to
whip the other out of his Country, and so he was rid of both of them.

But to return to the place from whence I am now digressed. I traveled from
Surat with four Englishmen more, and about twenty of the Natives in our
Company, we beginning our journey the first of Jan. toward Sir Thomas Row, at
the Mogol's Court, then above four hundred miles distant from Surat. We had six
Wagons drawn with Oxen in our Company, laden with rich English Goods (the
principal part whereof was English broad Cloth) assigned to an English Merchant
at the Court, and some other Carriages we had, of all which we made a ring
every night near some large Town or Village, where we resolved to stay, and
pitched our Huts within that Circle, some of us watching, and the Natives with
us, every night; we went on that long journey very safely, only in some places
where there was any suspicion of danger, we had a Guard of Horse appointed to
go with us for our defense, by the Command of Sultan Caroon then Prince, and
now King, (who had his Revenew out of those parts we then traveled thorough)
who sent a Footman, that continually kept us company, with his Letters to
command a Company of Soldiers that were Horsemen, to guard us where he
thought good; who as they did not expect, so they would take no recompense for
their pains, though we freely offered it them. But the Providence of God did so
order it, that though we had their Company in several places, we never had need
of their help for our d^fence. The truth is, that the People there in general
are very civil, and we never had any affronts or ill usage from them, if we did
not first provoke them.

But if we did, they would not well bear it, for twice in one Week, at my first
coming to Surat, the whole Town in general were in an uproar, and surrounded
our House there, both times some of our English provoked those Natives to stir
against us, but by our speedy Addresses unto the Governor of that place, we
excusing the fault of those that ministered the occasion of their discontent,
they being newly come thither, and altogether unacquainted with their customs,
he presently commanded that wild Assembly to depart from our House; and so
immediately they did, we receiving no hurt at all from any of them.

When my Lord Ambassador at first arrived at Surat, so it was, that an English
Cook he carried with him, the very first day of his coming thither, found a way
to an Armenian Christians House, who sold Wine, which in that place, they call
Armenian Wine. But (by the way) I do believe that there was scarce another in
that populous City of that Trade: the greater shame for those whosoever they be
that suffer so many unnecessary Tippling Houses (in the places where they have
power to restrain them) which are the Devils nursery, the very Tents wherein
Satan dwells, where Almighty God receives abundance of dishonor, Drunkenness
being a sin which has Hands and Fingers to draw all other sins unto it; For a
Drunkard can do any thing, or be any thing but good. That Armenian Wine I speak
of is made of Raisons of the Sun and Sugar, with some other things put and
boiled in water: which Wine, when it is ripe and clear, is in Color like to
our Muscadels, pleasant enough to the taste, but heavy and heady. The Cook had
his Head quickly over-fraighted with it, and then staggering home-ward, in his
way met the Governors Brother of Surat, as he was riding to his House: the
Cook made a stand, staying himself up upon his Sword and Scabbard, and cried
out to the Governors Brother, Now thou Heathen Dog! He not understanding his
soul Language, replied civilly in his own, Ca-ca-ta; which signifies, What
say thou? the Cook answered him with his Sword and Scabbard, with which he
struck at him, but was immediately seized on by his followers, and by them
disarmed and carried to Prison; the Ambassador had present intelligence of the
misbehaviour of his drunken servant, and immediately sent word unto the
Governor's Brother, that he was not come thither to patronize any disorderly
person, and therefore desired him to do with him what he pleased, upon which he
presently sent him home, not doing him the least hurt. But before I leave this
Story, it will not be amiss to enquire who was the Heathen Dog at this time,
whether the debaucht drunken Cook who called himself a Christian, or that sober
and temperate Mohammedan who was thus affronted.

In our journey toward the Court (after we had been in our way about seven
days from Surat) we rested at a place called Ditat, where many of the
Inhabitants offered to guard us and our goods, though we (observing there no
danger) desired it not; but they would do it, and in the Morning expected and
asked something of us, by way of recompense. One of our Company (who had been
in East India a year or two before) told them, that what they had done they did
without our desire, and therefore they should have nothing from us, but some
ill Language which he then gave them. We set forward in the Morning according
to our wonted custom, they followed after us, to the number at the least of
three hundred Men, (for the place was great and populous) and when we were gone
about a mile from that Town, stopped our carriages; he of our Company who told
them they should have no recompense, was presently ready to shoot at them with
his Musket, which made them all to bend their Bows at us: but I happily and
suddenly stepping in, prevented his firing at them, and their shooting at us;
which if I had not by Gods good Providence done, but we had madly engaged a
great multitude, there could not have been less expected in the sad issue
thereof, than the loss of all our lives and goods. But having a little Parlee
with them, for the value of three shillings of English money given amongst
them, they were all quieted and contented, and immediately left us, wishing us
a good journey.

After this, when we had gone forward about twenty days journey, (which daily
Remoovs were but short, by reason of our heavy carriages, and the heat of the
weather) it happened, that another of our Company, a young Gentleman about twenty
years old, the Brother of a Baron of England, behaved himself so ill, as that
we feared it would have brought very much mischief on us.

This young man being very unruly at home, and so many others that have been
well born, when their friends knew not what to do with them, have been sent to
East India, that so they might make their own Graves in the Sea, in their
passage thither; or else have Graves made for them on the Indian shore, when
they come there. A very cleanly conveyance (but how just and honest, I leave to
others) for Parents to be rid of their unruly Children; but I never knew any
who were thus supposed to be sent thither, but they outlived that Voyage.

For the young Gentleman I spoke of, his employment was to wait upon our Chief
Commander in his Cabin, who very courteously, when he came to Sea, turned him
before the mast amongst the common Saylors [a great preferment for a Man of his
Birth] but for all this he outlived that harsh usage, and came safely to
East India, and my Lord Ambassador hearing of him, and being well acquainted
with his great kindred, sent for him up to Court, and there entertained him as
a Companion for a year; then giving him all fit accommodations, sent him home
again as a passenger for England, where after he safely arrived.

But in our way toward that Court, it thus happened, that this hot-brains
being a little behind us, commanded him [then near him] who was the Princes
servant [before spoken of] to hold his horse; the man replied, that he was none
of his servant and would not do it. Upon which this most intemperate mad youth,
who was like Philocles, that angry Poet; and therefore called, Bilis, and
Salsigo, Choler and Brine, [for he was the most hasty and choleric young man
that ever I knew] as will appear by his present carriage, which was thus; first
he beat that stranger, for refusing to hold his horse, with his horse-whip,
which, I must tell you, that people cannot endure, as if those whips stung
worse than Scorpions. For of any punishments that carry most disgrace in them,
as that people think, one is to be beaten with that whip, wherewithal they
strike their beasts; the other to be beaten [and this they esteem the more
disgraceful punishment of the two] about the head with shoes. But this
stranger (being whipped as before) came up and complained to me; but to make him
amends, that frantic young man (mad with rage, and he knew not wherefore)
presently followed him, and being come up close to him, discharged his Pistol
laden with a brace of bullets directly at his body, which bullets, by the
special guidance of the hand of God, so flew, that they did the poor man no
great hurt; only one of them first tearing his coat, bruised all the knuckles
of his left hand, and the other brake his bow which he carried in the same
hand. We presently disarmed our young Bedlam, till he might return again to his
wits. But our greatest business, was how to pacify the other man, whom he had
thus injured: I presently gave him a Roopee, in our money two shillings and
nine pence; he thanked me for it, and would have taken it with his right, but I
desired him to take it with his maimed hand, and so he did, and could clinch it
very well, which I was glad of. Then we did show (as we had cause) all the
dislike we could against that desperate act of him, from whom he received his
hurt, telling him, that we were all strangers, and for our parts had done him
no wrong at all; and therefore hoped that we should not be made any way to
suffer for the faults of another: and we further told him, that if he would be
quiet till we came up to the Court, he should have all the satisfaction he
could desire. He told us, that we were good men, and had done him no wrong, and
that he would till then rest contented; but he did not so, for about two hours
after we met with a great man of that Country, having a mighty train with him,
(as all the Grandees there have when they travel, of whom more after-ward): He
presently went toward him, that to him he might make his complaint; and so
did, telling him, that he was the Prince's servant, why he came to us, and how
he had been used by us, showing him his hand and his other breaches. The great
man replied, that it was not well done of us, but he had nothing to do with it;
and so departed on his way. That night after, we came to a strong large Town,
and placing our selves on the side of it, he did what he could (as we imagined)
to raise up that People against us, some of them coming about us to view us, as
we conceived, but putting on the best confidence we could, and standing then
upon our guard, and all of us watching that night, but (in a special manner) by
the good providence of God, who kept us in all our journey, we here felt none
of that mischief we feared; but early in the morning quietly departed without
the least molestation. After which, with a little money, and a great many good
words, we so quieted this man, that we never after heard any more complaining
from him. So that (as before I observed) we were not at any time in any dangers
of suffering by that people, but some of our own Nation were the procuring
causes of it.

Before I observed, that for the generality of this people they have very low
and timorous spirits, but there are some I named in my last Section, who are
stout daring men, as the Baloches, Patans, and Rashboots, who, as they have the
honor above all the rest of the people in those large Provinces to be
accounted valiant; so, as occasion is offered, they will show themselves so to
be: and therefore they are much hired as Convoys to secure Men's Persons and
Goods, from place to place.

For those Provinces, they are not without Mountains of prey, and Tabernacles
of Robbers, as David and Job speak: where desperate men keep in some Woods and
Deserts, which are not far from great road-ways, most frequented and used; and
there, like the wild Arabes, in Companies, meet and spoil, and destroy poor
Passengers, when they expect them not; it being the cursed manner of those
Spoilers, if they prevail against them whom they surprise, to kill them before
they rifle them; and therefore the first thing heard from them is, Mor, mor,
mor, that is, Kill, kill, kill, which they all speak out as loud as they can.
We were often told of them as we traveled sometimes in the night, by reason of
the extreme heat of the day (after we had taken leave of the King, and so were
journeying toward Surat) that we should meet with those cruel villains; but,
through Gods mercy, we were never in danger of them but once; and that was
about midnight, near a large City called Brodera; but we being a competent
number of Englishmen together, about twenty, and all of us resolved to sell
our lives at as dear a rate as we could, and having twice so many Indian
servants with us, which are very nimble with their Bows and Arrows, we with our
Pistols and Carbins, which we presently discharged amongst them, and our
Indians plying them with their Arrows, made them suddenly to retreat, we
receiving little hurt from them; but after this, we made no more night-marches.

Those Indians I named before, are so faithful to their trusts unto whomsoever
they engage, to the English as well as to any other, that if they be at any
time assaulted, they will rather dye in their defense, than forsake them at
their need. So that I am very confident, if an English Merchant should travel
alone with a very great treasure in Gold, and Jewels (both, or either) from
Surat, to Lahor, which is more than one thousand English miles, and take those
Indian servants only for his company, and guard, and all they knew what he
carried with him, He paying them their Wages, they would be so far from
injuring him of the least penny of his wealth, that whosoever besides should
attempt his spoiling, must make a way through their blood, before they should
be able to do it.

Here is a great and good example of faithfulness, and it is very true. But I
much doubt, that if a great Indian Merchant, I mean a Native of that Country,
should come for England with like treasure, with a desire to pass through this
whole Nation, and should for his more safe passage take a guard of Swordmen
here, and pay them well for their service, they might lie under such a strong
tentation, as might make them to spoil the Egyptian, by shortning his journey,
dividing his substance, and by disposing so of his person, that it should never
tell tales.

But for that people, as their faithfulness is very remarkable, so is their
diligence very exemplary likewise; for they keep continually within the call of
their Masters, and will not at any time depart thence without special leave.
And the plenty of all Provisions being very great throughout the whole
Monarchy, they serve at very low rates, which I never knew them to raise, not
requiring more than five shillings Sterling every new Moon, paid the next day
after its Change, which is all the recompense they do desire, or expect from
their Masters, to provide themselves with all necessaries -- quibus hinc Toga,
Calceus hinc est,
Et Panis fumusque Domi. --
Juven. Sat. 1. Their coat, their shoes, their bread, their fire,
And all besides, bought with this hire.
and for this do as good service, as if they had ten times as much wages.

They stand to be hired in the Bazar or Marketplace, an ancient custom, as may
appear, Mat. 20.3. where some of them may be at all times had.

But it is their manner, when they are hired to receive advance-money, that is,
one months pay before hand, and to have their pay thus in hand every month so
long as they serve; and so honest they are, that if they be bidden to provide
themselves of other Masters, they will serve out the time for which they have
received pay, to an hour before, they depart.

Now these who are so exact in performing their duty by their faithfulness and
diligence, must be exactly paid their Salary at the time they expect it,
otherwise they will be ready to quit their service, as one of them whom we thus
hired, left us as we were traveling up to the Court; the reason, because our
money was almost quite gone (though we were supplied again a day or two after)
and we could not punctually pay him at his day, as we had formerly done. This
fellow led one of our Camels, and had been with us two months before; but upon
this little failing him, would needs leave us: but before he departed he made a
speech to his Camel, telling him, that he had led him thus long, and had during
that time lived by him; but now our money (as he supposed) quite failing, he
told him that he must be gone, desiring God to bless him; and that he might
have some other to lead him that might not be less careful of him than he had
been. So he took leave of his Camel, though not of us, and departed. All the
rest of his company were persuaded to continue with us, and had their pay a day
or two after; and so we proceeded on our journey, and so shall I further in
this Discourse. And now I have spoken something of the people, I shall speak

SECTION IX. Of their buildings in Villages, Towns, and Cities; How their
Houses are furnished; Of their Sarra's or Houses for the entertainment of
Passengers; Of their Tents, Wells, and of their places of pleasure, etc.
I Observed before the richness of their Soil, and how those Provinces are
watered by many goodly Rivers, fed with abundance of Springs; and how their
Fields are clothed with very much plenty of Corn of diverse kind, sold there at
such low rates that every one may there eat bread without scarceness.

Now I come to take notice of their Buildings; and here I must tell my Reader,
that this People are not much taken or infected with that plague of Building
(as the Italians call it) wishing the love of it as a Curse to possess the
thoughts of them they most hate; and therefore, as the stones in India are not
all precious, so the Houses there are not at all Palaces; the poor there cannot
erect for their dwellings fair Piles, and the Grandees do not cover their heads
under such curious Roofs, as many of the Europeans do; The reason, first,
because all the great men there live a great part of the year, (in which their
Months are more temperate, as from the middle of September, to the midst of
April) in Tents, Pavilions, or moveable habitations, which, according to their
fancies, changing they remove from place to place, changing their air as often
as they please. And secondly, because all the great men there have their
Pensions and whole subsistence from the King, which they hold upon very sickle
and uncertain terms; for as they are settled upon, and continued unto them by
the King's favor, so are they forfeited and lost by his frown. Of which more
afterward.

Yet though they make not much use of them, they have in plenty excellent good
materials for building, as Timber, Bricks, stone and marble of diverse kinds and
colors, of which I have seen some very good Vaults and Arches well wrought, as
in their Mosquits or Churches, so in some of their high-erected Tombs, (of
which more afterward) and so in some other places likewise.

For their buildings in Cities and Towns, there are some of them handsome,
others fair, such as are inhabited by Merchants, and none of them very
despicable.

They build their houses low, not above two stories, and many of their tops
flat and thick, which keep off the violence of the heat; and those flat tops,
supported with strong Timber, and coated over with a plaster (like that we call
plaster of Paris) keep them dry in the time of the Rains.

Those broad Tarrases, or flat Roofs, some of them lofty, are places where many
people may stand (and so they often do) early in the morning, and in the
evening late, like Camelions, to draw, and drink in fresh air; and they are
made after this fashion, for prospect, as well as pleasure.

Those houses of two stories, have many of them very large upper rooms, which
have many double doors in the sides of them, like those in our Balconies, to
open and let in fresh air, which is likewise conveyed in unto them, by many
lesser lights made in the walls of those rooms, which are always free and open;
The use of glass windows, or any other shuttings, being not known there, nor in
any other very hot Countries.

Neither have they any Chimneys in their buildings, because they never make any
use of fire but to dress their food, which fire they make against firm wall, or
without their Tents against some bank of Earth, as remote as may be from the
places where they use to keep, that they may receive no annoyance from the heat
thereof.

It is their manner in many places, to plant about, and amongst their
buildings, trees which grow high and broad, the shadow whereof keeps their
houses by far more cool; this I observed in a special manner when we were ready
to enter Amadavar; for it appeared to us, as if we had been entering a Wood,
rather than a City. That Amadavar is very large and populous City, entered by
many fair Gates girt about with an high and thick Wall of Brick, which mounts
above the tops of their houses, without which wall there are no suburbs. Most
of the houses within the City are of Brick, and very many of them ridged and
covered with Tiles.

But for their houses in their Aldeas or Villages, which stand very thick in
that Country, they are generally very poor and base. All those
Countrey-dwellings are set up close together; for I never observed any house
there to stand single, and alone. Some of their houses in those villages are
made with earthenwalls, mingled with straw, set up immediately after their
Rains, and having a long season after to dry them thoroughly, stand firm, and so
continue; they are built low, and many of them flat: but for the generality of
those Country-Villages, the Cottages in them are miserably poor, little, and
base; so that as they are built with a very little charge, set up with sticks
rather than Timber, if they chance to fire (as many times they do) for a very
little they may be re-edified.

Those who inhabit the Countrey-Villages, are called Coolees. These till the
ground, and breed up Cattle, and other things for provision, as Hens, etc.
^hese, they who plant the Sugar, the Cotten-wool, and Indi^o, etc. -- for their
Trades and Manufactures they are kept in Cities and Towns, about which are
their choicest fruits planted. In their Cities and Towns, without their
dwellings, but fixed to them, are pend-houses where they show and sell their
provisions, as bread, and flower-cakes made up with Sugar, and fruits, and
other things; and there they show their manufactures, and other Commodities,
some of which they carry twice every day to sell in the Bazar or Market.

I saw two houses of the Mogol's, one at Mandoa, the other at Amadaver, which
appeared large and stately, built of excellent stone well squared and put
together, each of them taking up a large compass of ground; but we could never
see how they were contrived within, because there are none admitted, strangers
or others, to have a sight of those houses, while the King's wives and women
are there, which must not be seen by any but by himself, and his servants the
Eunuchs.

The Mogol's Palace Royal is at Agra his Metropolis (of which more afterward)
but for the present I shall take a little notice of a very curious Grot I saw
belonging to his house at Mandoa, which stood a small distance from it, for the
building of which there was a way made into a firm Rock, which showed it self
on the side of an Hill, Canopied over with part of that Rock. It was a place
that had much beauty in it by reason of the curious workmanship bestowed on it;
and much pleasure by reason of its coolness.

That City Mandoa I speak of, is situated upon a very high mountain, the top
whereof is flat, and plain, and spacious. From all parts that lie about it but
one; the ascent is very high, and steep; and the way to us seemed exceeding
long, for we were two whole days climbing up the Hill, with our Cariages, which
we got up with very much difficulty; not far from the bottom of which Hill, we
lodged at a great town called Achabar-pore, where we ferried over a broad River
(as we did in other places) for I observed no bridges made there over any of
their Rivers where their highways lie. That Hill on which Mandoa stands, is
stuck round (as it were) with fair trees, that keep their distance so one from
and below the other* that there is much delight in beholding them either from
the bottom or top of that Hill.

In those vast and far extended Woods, there are Lions, Tygres, and other
beasts of Prey, and many wild Elephants. We lay one night in that wood with our
Carriages, and those Lions came about us discovering themselves by their
Roaring; but we keeping a very good fire all night, they came not near enough
to hurt either our selves, or cattle. Those cruel Beasts are night-walkers for
in the day they appear not.

After when (through Gods most gracious assistance) we had overcome those
difficulties and dangers, we came into a plain and even Country; in which
traveling a few days more, we first met with my Lord Ambassador marching
toward Mandoa with that great King, with whom I then settled, and continued
with him, till he was returned home.

We were in our journey to the Court from the beginning of January, till the
end of March, we resting a while at Brampore, which is a very spacious and
populous City, where we had a Factory. And after that, we were violently
detained in our journey by Sultan Caroon the Prince, whom we met in his march
toward Brampore, and a very marvelous great retinue with him. The reason why
he interrupted us in our course was, that he might see the Presents we had for
his Father the King; but we having command from the Ambassador to tell him,
that we durst not open them, till we came to the King, we most humbly craved
his pardon to spare us in that; so presenting him with a pair of Rich Gloves
(though they be things they wear not in those hot Countries) and a rich
embroidered bag for perfume (which amongst many other things of the like kind
were brought from England to be given away for Presents) after that he had
carried us back three days journey, he let us go, taking further order for our
safe convoy.

And now Reader, thou may suppose us almost settled in Mandoa, the place then
of the Mogol's residence, not much inhabited before we came thither, having
more ruins by far about it, than standing houses. But amongst the Piles of
building that had held up their heads above Ruin, there were not a few
unfrequented Mosquits, or Mohammedan Churches; yet I observed, that though the
people who attended the King there, were marvellously straightened for room,
wherein they might dispose of very great numbers of most excellent horses,
which were now at that place, they would not make stables of any of those
Churches, though before that time, they had been forsaken, and out of use.

One of those deserted Mosquits, with some large Tomb near it, both vaulted
over head (which shall be after described) were the best places there to be
gotten for my Lord Ambassador and his Company to lodge and be in, we carrying
our bedding, and all things appertaining thereto, all necessaries belonging to
our Kitchen, and every thing beside for bodily use, from place to place, as we
occasionally removed. Here we stayed with the Mogol from the middle of April,
till the twentieth of September following, and then began our progress with
him, toward the City Amadavar.

Our abiding place at Mandoa, was very near one of the sides of that vast
Wilderness, out of which, some of those wild beasts oft-times in the night came
about our habitation, and seldom teturned back without a Sheep, or a Goat, or a
Kid, some of which we always kept about us for our provision. And it was a
wonderful great mercy, those furious, and ravening, and hunger-bit Creatures,
did not make their prey sometimes in the dark and silent nights, while we were
sleeping, on some of our bodies, the forepart of our dwelling standing upon
pillars; and there was nothing in those open distances, that had any strength
in it to keep them from us.

One night, early in the Evening, there was a great Lion which we saw, came
into our Yard, (though our Yard was compassed about with a stone-wall, that was
not low.) And my Lord Ambassador having a little white neat Shock, that ran
out barking at him, the Lion presently snapt him up, leapt again over the wall,
and away he went.

But for a ravening and roaring Lion, as I believe that he cannot be made tame
when he is old; yet certainly he may be bred tame, being kept full, and high
fed. For the Mogol, at my being there, had a very great Lion (I often saw)
which went up and down, amongst the people that frequented his Court, gently as
a dog, and never did hurt; only he had some Keepers which did continually wait
upon him.

For those wild and cruel Beasts, one of our Englishmen watching in a tree by
night, (that stood not far from our dwelling) with a fire-lock charged with
some small bullets, shot a Tigre, and killed him stone-dead, as he was coming
toward us. It was a large beast, higher than an Irish-Greyhound, with grizled
hair, a long head, and sharp and short picked ears, having a mouth filled with
cruel teeth; after which (we usually keeping a little fire without our house
every night) were not so much troubled with those night-walkers.

Now to return to that from which I am occasionally digressed, I told you
before what their buildings are. And now for the furniture that the greatest
men have in them, it is Curta supellex, very little; they being not beautified
with hangings, nor with any thing besides to line their walls; but where they
are best adorned, they are kept very white, and set off with a little neat
painting and nothing else; for they have no Chairs, no stools, nor Couches, nor
Tables, nor Beds, enclosed with Canopies, or Curtains, in any of their Rooms.
And the truth is, that if they had them, the extreme heat there would forbid
the use of many of them; all their bravery is upon their Floors, all which are
made eeven with fine Earth or Plaster, on which they spread their most
excellent Carpets in their Tents, as well as in their dwelling houses, laying
some coarse thing under to preserve them; on which they sit (as Tailors on
their shop-boards) when they meet together, putting off their shoes (which
they usually wear as slippers and their feet bare in them) when they come to
tread upon those soft Pavements, and keeping them off till they remove thence,
this helps to keep cool their feet, and is very pleasant in those hot
Countries. On those Carpets they sleep in the night time, or else upon an hard
Quilt, or lying upon a flight and low Bed-stead they call a Cot, bottomed with
broad Girt-web made of Cotten-wool. But wherever they lie, they stretch
themselves out at their full length when they go to sleep, usually upon their
backs, without any Pillow, or Bolster, to raise up their heads. Very many of
the meaner sort of people (as I have often observed) lie thus stretched out to
take their rest upon the ground, in the dry season of the year, with a white
Callico-cloth spread all over them, which makes them to appear like so many
dead corpses laid forth for burial. This lying so eeven, and at length with
their bodies thus extended, may be one reason why the people there are all so
straight limn'd, having none crooked amongst them; and another, because they
never girt, nor lace in their bodies (as before was observed). Some of those
slight Bed-steads, they call Cots, in their standing houses hang by ropes, a
little above ground, which are fastened to the four corners thereof; moved
gently up and down, by their servants, to lull them asleep.

They have no Inns in those parts for the entertainment of strangers; but in
some great Towns large Houses they call Sarraas very substantially built, with
brick, or stone, where any Passengers may find house-room and use it without
any recompense; but there is nothing to be had beside room, all other things
they must provide and bring with them, as when they lodge in Tents.

Amongst their Buildings I must take special notice of their Wells and Tankes,
upon both which in very many places they bestow exceeding much cost in
stone-work; for their Wells which are fed with Springs, they make them round,
but very wide and large. They are wrought up with firm stones laid in fine
Plaster; they usually cover those Wells with a building over-head, and with
Oxen draw water out of them, which rises up in many small Buckets, whereof
some are always going down, others continually coming up, and emptying
themselves, ^n troughs, or little rills, made to receive, and convey the wa^^r
whither they please.

Their Tanks are made in low places, and many of them very deep and large (one
mile, and some of them much more in compass) made round or apiece, or in
more squares, about which there is a low stone-wall, that has many doors in
it, and within that wall steps, made one below the other round about it, that
go down to the bottom thereof, (which is paved likewise): those steps are made
of well squared lasting stone, laid firm, and eeven in very good order, for
people that have not plenty of water otherwise, to go down and take it. These
great receptacles of water, are made near places that are very populous; filled
when that long season of rain (before spoken of) comes, immediately before
which time, they cleanse them, that the water may be more clear, and wholesome.
They hold water all the dry season of the year.

For their places of pleasure, they are in their Groves, where their curious
Fruit Trees (before described) grow; but especially in their Gardens, wherein
they plant little Vineyards that afford mavelous fair and sweet Grapes, which
they cut green, for their eating, or make Raisons of them. But for Wine, they
make none, because their Mahomet forbids the drinking thereof. In those Gardens
likewise, they have many Pome-granat-trees, with all other of the choicest
fruits and flowers their Country affords; to which Nature daily yields such a
supply, as that there is beauty to be seen in those Trees, and Plants, and that
continually. In the middle of those Gardens, they have such Wells (as before
are described) the tops whereof stand a good deal higher than the planted
ground, which lies eeven, and flat below them, from whence water is conveyed in
narrow open passages, (they knowing not the use of Leaden-Pipes) to all the
parts of them in the dry season of the year. In those Gardens likewise they
have little round Tanks to bathe in; whose sides and bottoms are made firm and
smooth with that plaster before named; they are filled by aquae-ducts from
those Wells, and they can empty them when they please, as well as fill them.
The water that is conveyed into those small Tanks, usually runs down broad
stone Tables, that have many hollows made in them, like to scollop-shells,
which water in its passage makes such a pretty murmr, as helps to tie their
senses with the bonds of sleep, in the hot seasons of the day when they
constantly keep their houses, and then they lie down near them on their
Carpets, to be lulled asleep. Those bathing places are within, or very near
their Garden-houses, which usually are by far more neat, than any other of
their dwelling.

In such a Garden-house, with all those accommodations about it, my Lord
Ambassador lay with his company at Surat, the last three months before he
left East India.

And further, in those hot seasons of the day; the people of better quality
lying or sitting on their Carpets, or Pallats, have servants standing about
them, who continually beat the air upon them with Flabella's, or Fans, of
stiffned leather, which keeps off the flies from annoying them, and cool them
as they lie. Thus taking their ease, they call for Barbers, who very gently
gripe their arms, and shoulders, and other parts, they can in any measure
grasp, and they strike likewise very softly those parts with the sides of their
hands; it is very pleasing as they do it, and causes their blood to stir in
their veins; it is therefore very much used in those parts, to such as do not
heat their blood by bodily motion.

For their pastimes within doors, they have Cards, but much different from ours
in the figures made in them, and in their greater number of suits. Those Cards
I have often seen; and have been more often told, that they have very good
skill in that most innocent and ingenious game we call Chesse.

They delight themselves sometimes with the Company of Mountebanks, and
Juglers. For their Mountebanks; they keep venomous Snakes in baskets, and will
suffer themselves to be bitten or stung by them; which part thus bitten, or
stung, presently swells, and immediately after that, they cure themselves again
by Oils and Powders, which they apply unto the place, and then offer to sell
them unto the people standing by.

Their Juglers are the cunningst that ever I saw, to do strange things by sleight of hand, as in this trick I shall here name: where I have observed them
to lay down scuttles or broad open Wicker-baskets upon the ground, three or
four one upon another, all which appeared empty, as they laid them down; but
taking them up again one after the other, in the bottom of them there would
appear, three or four living Turtle-doves: which they would cover again with
the same Scuttles, and tossing and turning them as they took them off, and up
the second time, none of those pretty creatures were to be seen any more. But
how they first conveyed them thither, and how after thence, we could not
possibly discover.

For their Pastimes abroad they have Hawks of diverse kinds, greater and less,
and Partridges, and other choice Fowl great store to fly at. They have Hares,
and Antilops, with other wild Beasts to hunt, and these not a few. Their dogs
for chase are made somewhat like our Greyhounds, but much less, who never open
in the pursuit of their game. They hunt likewise with Leopards trained up and
made fit for their sport, who by leaping seize on that they pursue: but by
reason of the heat of the Country, those sports are not there much used. The
Mogol when he hunts, carries Hawks and Dogs, and all things beside with him, to
make him pastime; that if one sport fail, he may be pleased with another.

They say, that they have a curious Device to take wild fowls that use the
water; into which a fellow goes, with a fowl of that kind he desires to catch,
whose skin is stuffed so artificially, as that with a noise he counterfeits
that fowl, it appears to be alive, the man keeps all his body but head under
water, on which he fastens that counterfeit fowl to stand fore-right on the top
thereof, and thus coming amongst them, he plucks them (as they say) by their
legs under water at his pleasure. But this I have only by tradition.

For other pastimes abroad, this I am sure of, that when the weather is more
temperate, they shoot much in their Bows, and are very excellent Marks-men,
somewhat like those left handed men spoken of Judge. 20.16. And with their Guns
in which they shoot single bullets (for they have not the use of small-shot)
they are somewhat long in taking their aim, but they will come very near the
mark.

Other delight themselves very much in managing their excellent Horses; But so
shall not I delight my Reader, if I dwell too long in particulars. And
therefore having spoken of their Buildings, I shall now invite him, though not
to eat, or taste, yet to take notice

SECTION X. Of their Diet, their Cookery in dressing it, etc.
ANd though this Country affords very much variety of excellent good
Provisions, yet the Mahometans feed not freely on any flesh, but on that which
is strange, and forbidden (of the Hindoos Diet I shall speak afterward): but
for the Mahometans they are a people, as I conceive, not much given to their
Palate; but are very careful of, and temperate in their Diet, as having learned
by experience, that full bellies do more oppress, than strengthen the body,
that too much of the Creature does not comfort but destroy Nature; It being a
tried truth, that Gluttony reaches, and kills those whom swords cannot touch.
All Diseases of the body for the most part being contracted to it by Surfeits,
in on kind or other; and therefore they keep themselves to a thin Diet, and
eat not to pamper and please their Appetite, but to satisfy and support
nature, which is contented with a little every where, but with less in hot
Countries, where men's digestion of food is not so quick and good; this being
further a tried truth, that those bodies are most strong, active, and healthy,
which are most temperate.

Therefore though they have abundance of flesh and fowl, and have fish too, yet
are they temperate in all of them. For Swines flesh, it is an abomination unto
the Mahometans; and therefore they touch it not. And for other kind of flesh,
they eat very little of them alone, to make their full meals of them, for they
dress no kind of flesh in great pieces, or whole joints, nor scarce any of
their fowls whole.

For boiling of flesh in water, or baking or roasting any flesh, are pieces of
Cookery (if I observed well) they know not; but they stew all their flesh as
their Kid and other Venison, etc. out into sippets, or slices, or little parts,
to which they put Onions, and Herbs, and Roots, and Ginger, (which they take
there green out of the earth) and other Spices, with some butter, which
ingredients when as they are well proportioned, make a Food that is exceedingly
pleasing to all Palats, at their first tasting thereof most savoury Meat, happily
that very dish which Jacob made for his Father Isaac, when he got the blessing,
Genesis 27.

With their flesh and herbs, etc. they sometimes stew Hens and other Foul cut
in pieces, which is like that the Spaniards call an Oleo, but more toothsome.

But their great common standing dish there is Rice, which they boil with more
Art than we: for they boil the grain so as that it is full, and plump, and
tender, but not broken in boiling; they put to it a little green Ginger, and
Pepper, and Butter, and this is the ordinary way of their dressing it, and so
it is very good.

Sometimes they boil pieces of flesh, or Hens, and other Fowl cut in pieces in
their Rice, which dish they call Pillaw; as they order it, they make it a very
excellent, and a very well-tasted Food.

Once my Lord Ambassador had an Entertainment there by Asaph Chan, who invited
him to dinner (and this was the only respect in that kind he ever had, while he
was in East India) That Asaph Chan was a Man made by his great Alliances, the
greatest Subject and Favorite in all that Empire; for his Sister was the
Mogol's most beloved Wife, and his Daughter was married unto Sultan Caroon the
Prince, and very much beloved by him, but of all these, more afterward.

This Asaph Chan entertained my Lord Ambassador in a very spacious and a very
beautiful Tent, where none of his followers besides my self, saw, or tasted of
that Entertainment.

That Tent was kept full of a very pleasant Perfume; in which sents the King
and Grandees there take very much delight. The floor of the Tent was first
covered all over with very rich and large Carpets, which were covered again in
the places where our dinner stood, with other good Carpets, made of stitched
Leather, to preserve them which were richer; and these were covered again with
pure white and fine Callico Clothes, and all these covered with very many
dishes of Silver, but for the greater part of those Silver dishes they were not
larger than our largest trencher-plates, the brims of all of them gilt.

We sat in that large Room as it were in a Triangle; The Ambassador on Asaph
Chan's right hand a good distance from him, and my self below; all of us on the
ground, as they there all do when as they eat, with our Faces looking each to
the other, and every one of us had his several mess. The Ambassador had more
dishes by ten, and I less by ten, than our entertainer had, yet for my part I
had fifty dishes. They were all set before us at once, and little paths left
betwixt them, that our entertainers servants (for only they waited) might come
and reach them to us one after another, and so they did. So that I tasted of
all set before me, and of most did but taste, though all of them tasted very
well.

Now of the provision it self, for our larger dishes, they were filled with
Rice, dressed (as before described.) And this Rice was presented to us, some of
it white, in its own proper color, some of it made yellow with Saffron, and
some of it was made green, and some of it put into a purple color, but by what
Ingredient I know not, but this I am sure, that it all tasted very well; And
with Rice thus ordered, several of our dishes were furnished, and very many
more of them with flesh of several kinds, and with Hens, and with other sort of
Fowl cut in pieces, as before I observed in their Indian Cookery.

To these we had many Jellies, and Culices; Rice ground to flower, and then
boiled, and after sweetened with Sugar Candy and Rose Water to be eaten cold.
The flower of Rice mingled with sweet Almonds, made as small as they could, and
with some of the most fleshy parts of Hens stewed with it, and after the flesh
so beaten into pieces, that it could not be discerned, all made sweet with
Rose Water and Sugar Candy, and sented with Ambergris; this was another of
our dishes, and a most luscious one, which the Portugals call Mangee Real, Food
for a King. Many other dishes we had, made up in Cakes of several forms, of the
finest of the wheat flour, mingled with Almonds and Sugar Candy, whereof some
were sented, and some not. To these Potatoes excellently well dressed, and to
them diverse Sallads, and the curious fruits of that Country, some preserved in
Sugar, and others raw, and to these many Roots candied, Almonds blanched,
Raisons of the Sun, Prunellas, and I know not what, of all enough to make up
that number of dishes before named; and with these quelque chose, was that
entertainment made up.

And it was better a great deal, than if it had consisted of full and heaped up
dishes, such as are sometimes amongst us provided, for great and profuse
entertainments. Our Bread was of very good and excellent Wheat, made up very
white and light, in round Cakes; and for our Drink, some of it was brewed for
ought I know, ever since Noah his Flood, that good innocent water, being all
the Drink there commonly used (as before) and in those hot Climates (it being
better digested there than in any other parts) it is very sweet, and allayes
thirst better than any other Liquor can, and therefore better pleases, and
agrees better with every Man that comes and lives there, than any other Drink.

At this entertainment we sat long, and much longer than we could with ease
cross-leg'd, but all considered, our Feast in that place was better than
Apicius, that famous Epicure of Rome, with all his witty Gluttony (for so
Paterculus calls it, ingeniosa Gula,) could have made with all provisions had
from the Earth, and Air, and Sea.

My Lord Ambassador observed not that uneasy way of sitting at his meat, but
as in his own House had Tables and Chairs, etc. Served he was altogether in
Plate, and had an English, and Indian Cook to dress his diet, which was very
plentiful, and cheap likewise; so that by reason of the great variety of
provisions there, his weekly account for his Housekeeping came but to little.

The meaner sort of people there eat Rice boiled with their green-Ginger and a
little Pepper, after which they put Butter into it, which is their principal
dish, and but seldom eaten by them: But their ordinary Food is made (not of the
flowr of Wheat) but of a coarse well tasted Grain, made up in round broad and
thick Cakes, which they bake upon their thin iron plates (before spoken of)
which they carry with them, when as they travel from place to place; when they
have baked those Cakes, they put a little Butter on them: And doubtless the
poor people find this a very hearty Food, for they who live most upon it, are
as strong as they could be, if they had their diet out of the King's Kitchen. I
shall here say no more of this, but proceed to speak.

SECTION XI. Of the Civilities of this People; Of their Complements, and of
their Habits.
ANd here the People in general (as before was observed) are as civil to
Strangers as to their own Countrymen; for they use when they meet one another,
or when they meet strangers, to bow their Heads, or to lay their right Hands on
their Breasts, and to bow their Bodies as they pass, saluting them further with
many well-wishes.

They use not to uncover their Heads at all, as we do in our Salutes, (from
which custom of ours, the Turks borrow this imprecation for their Enemies,
wishing their Souls no more rest after death than a Christians hat has, which
is always stirred) but the meaner sort, instead of uncovering their Heads to
their Superiors, use these abject Ceremonies, by putting their right Hand to
the Earth, and then laying it on their Heads; or by falling down on their
Knees, and then bowing their Heads to the Earth; both signifying, that those
unto whom they show these reverences, and respects, may tread or trample on
them, if they pleased.

When we visit the people there of better quality, they entertain us with much
humanity; first rising up to us, they bow their Bodies, and then entreat us to
sit with them on their Carpets, where they are free in their discourse, which
we usually exchange with them by an Interpreter. If we have any business with
them, they return very civil and fair Answers, and for our further
entertainment give us Beetle or Paune to chew, (before spoken of.)

In their near, and more close and hearty Salutes, they do not join Hands as
we, but do that which is hateful to the Spaniard, and not at all in use with
us; for they take one another by the Chin, or Beard, and cry Bobba, which is,
Father; or Bij, which is, Brother: And this appears to be a very ancient
Complement, for thus Joab long ago saluted Amasa, 2 Samuel 20.9. But this they do
in love, not as Joab did there, in Treachery.

In their Complements they express many good wishes to one another, as Salam
Allacum, God give you health; the reply, Allacum Salam, The same health God
give you. And Greb-a Nemoas, I wish you the prayers of the poor. And Tere gree
gree kee Bulla door, which made-English speaks thus, I wish one good to come
unto you after another, every Gra, (which is a space of time a little more than
a quarter of an hour); and they have many more Complements like these,
handsome, and significant. As inferior people (who have their dependence on
others) use to say unto them, I eat your Bread and Salt, (as much to say) I am
your Servant, I live by you, and you may do with me, or to me, what you please.

Now as this People of East India are civil in their speeches, so are they
civilly clad; for there are none who wear their own skin alone for their
covering, as very many in the western India do.

For the Habits of this People, from the highest to the lowest, they are all
made of the same fashion, which they never alter nor change; their Coats
sitting close to their Bodies unto their Wastes, then hanging down loose a
little below their Knees, the lower part of them sitting somewhat full; those
close Coats are fastened unto both their Shoulders, with slips made of the same
Cloth, which, for the generality, are all made of coarser, or finer white
Callico; and in like manner are they fastened to their Waste, on both sides
thereof, which Coats coming double over their Breasts, are fastened by like
slips of Cloth, that are put thick from their left Arm-holes to their middle;
The sleeves of those Coats are made long, and somewhat close to their Arms,
that they may ruffle, especially from their Elbows to their Wrists. Under this
Coat they usually wear another slight one, made of the same Cloth, but shorter
than the other, and this is all they commonly wear upon the upper part of their
bodies. But some of the greater sort in the cooler seasons of the day there,
will slip on loose Coats over the other, made either of quilted Silk, or
Callico, or of our English Scarlet-broad-cloth (for that is the color they
most love.) Under their Coats they have long Breeches like unto Irish-trouses,
made usually of the same cloth, which come to their Anckles, and ruffle on the
small of their legs. For their feet, they keep them (as was before observed)
always bare in their shoes.

Some of their Grandees makes their Coats and Breeches of striped Taffata of
several colors, or of some other silk stuff all of the same color, or of
slight cloth of Silver or Gold, all made in that Country. But pure white and
fine Callico-laune, (which they there make likewise) is for the most part the
height of all their bravery; the collars, and some other parts of their upper
coats, being set off with some neat stitching.

Upon their heads they wear a long wreath of cloth, about half a yard broad,
usually white, but sometimes of other colors. Which cloth worn for their
head-covering, is sometimes inter-woven in spaces with threads of colored silk,
or silver, or gold; and when not so, one end of that wreath of cloth worn by
Gallants is usually thus inter-woven; and so put upon their heads, that its
gayness may appear. This head-covering of theirs, they call a Shash, which
incircles their heads many times, and does mervellously defend them from the
violence of the Sun. And because this covering must needs keep their heads hot,
they provide for this, as well as they can, by shaving the hair continually
from off them. And they have girdles made of the same wreaths of cloth for the
better sort, thus inter-woven, which come twice at least about them, made very
trim with that kind of weaving, especially on both ends, which hang down
directly before them.

And thus have I presented a Mohammedan there in his proper dress whose habit
will more visibly appear together in the Mogols Picture, portrayed and after
put into this discourse.

Now for the Mohammedan women, (because I had never sight of those of the
greatest quality) I cannot give such an account of them in respect of the
Habits. For these, unless they be dishonest, or poor, come not abroad; but for
the fashion of their Garments, they do not differ much from those the men wear,
for they wear Coats, and Breeches one very like the other, only women bind
their long hair with Phillets, which hang down behind them. They wear likewise
upon their heads Mantles or Vails (usually made of white Callico, or of their
Pintado's) which hang down over their other Garments. Further, the women have
their Ears boared, not only in their flaps, but round about them, wherein they
wear very little Pendants; those of the richer sort are made of flat, narrow
and thin pieces of Gold or Silver; those worn by the poorer sort made of Brass,
or Iron kept bright, so that all are in the same fashion; they bestow some work
upon the edges and ends of those Pendants. And those women have the lower part
of their left Nostrils pierced, wherein they wear a Ring (when they please) of
Gold, or Silver, or of some other baser Metals. Those Rings of Gold have little
Pearls fastened to one end of them, and that Pearl is dril'd through, that both
ends of the ring may meet in it. And doubtless, the women of the greatest
quality (though I saw it not) are bedecked with many rich Jewels. This I have
observed in some of those of the better sort I there saw, that they did wear
great broad hollow Rings of Gold enameled; and some made of Silver, or Brass,
upon their wrists, and upon the small of their legs, to take off and on; two or
three of them upon each Arm, and Leg, which make a tinkling noise, very
probably such Ornaments as the Jewish women were threatened for, Isaiah 3. where
Almighty God tells them, that he would take away their tinkling Ornaments about
their feet, the Bracelets, and the Ornaments of their legs, their Rings, and
Nose-jewels.

For my Lord Ambassador, and his Company, we all kept to our English Habits,
made as light and cool as possibly we could have them. His waiters in red
Taffata Cloaks guarded with green Taffata, which they always wore when they
went abroad with him, my self in a long black Cassock; and the colors and
fashion of our garments were so different from theirs, that we needed not,
wheresoever we were, to invite spectators to take notice of us.

And now, the Constancy there observed by the Natives of both sexes, in keeping
to their old fashions in their Habits, exampled to them by their Predecessors
in many foregoing Generations, and by them still continued, is the great praise
of this people, as the commendation of every Nation in the World almost,
besides ours, still constant to their ancient fashions in their Apparel.

SECTION XII. Of their Language, their Books, their Learning, etc.
THE Language of this Empire, I mean the Vulgar, bears the name of it, and is
called Indostan; it has much affinity with the Persian, and Arabian Tongues:
but the Indostan is a smoother Language, and more easy to be pronounced than
the other, a Language which is very significant, and speaks much few words;
They write it (as we) to the right hand. It is expressed by letters, which are
very much different from those Alphabets, by which the Persian and Arabian
Tongues are formed. The Persian there is spoken as their more quaint and
Court-tongue. The Arabian is their learned Language, both written backward to
the left hand like the Hebrew, from whence they borrrow many words, which come
so near it, as that he who is a good Critic in the Hebrew may very well guess
at the meaning of much in both those Languages. The Persian is a Language, as
if it consisted all of Guttural letters (as some in the Hebrew Alphabet are
called) filling the mouth in the pronunciation of them; for as the words in
that Language are full of sense, so in their speaking they are full of sound.

For the Latin and Greek, by which there has been so much knowledge conveyed
into the World, they are as ignorant of them both, as if they had never been;
and this may be one great reason why there is so little learning amongst them.
But for the people themselves, they are men of very strong reason, and will
speak ex re nata, upon any offered occasion, very exceeding well; and doubtless
they are a people of such strong Capacities, that, were there literature
amongst them, they might be the Authors of many excellent works; but as the
case stands with them, all that is there attainable toward Learning, is but to
read and write.

And here by the way let me insert this, that I never saw any Idiot or natural
Fool, nor any deformed person amongst them, in any of those parts.

For Logic and Rhetoric which are so instrumental, the first to enlarge, and
the second to polish discourses, they have none but what is Natural. They say,
that they write some witty Poems, and compose many handsome Annals and Stories
of their own, and other adjacent Countries.

They delight much in Music, and have some stringed, but many more
Wind-instruments; They have the use of Timbrels likewise; but for want of
pleasing Airs, their Music in my ears never seemed to be any thing but discord.

Their Books are not many, and those are Manuscripts. That rare and happy
invention of Printing, which has been the advancement of so much learning
within Christendom, is not known without it.

They have heard of Aristotle, whom they call Aplis, and have some of his Books
(as they say) in the Arabian Tongue, in which Language (they further say) they
have many Books written by Avicenna, that ancient Physician, who was born in
Samarchandia, one of the most famed places within the Tartarian Empire, the
Country (as they believe) where Tamberlain, the Mogols great Ancestor, drew his
first breath.

Some parts or fragments they have of the old Testament; of which more, when I
shall come to speak of their Religion.

Many amongst them profess themselves to have great skill in judicial Astrology,
that great Cheat, which has been very anciently, and often put upon (as the
Sacred Story witnesses) the people inhabiting the East, and South parts of the
World. I call it a Cheat, because there is, and must needs be, so much
uncertainty in it; all things here below being ordered, and overruled, by the
secret, and unerring providence of Almighty God, which frustrateth the tokens
of the Liars, and makes Diviners mad; that turns wise men backward, and
makes their knowledge foolish, Esaias 44.25. First, these Diviners are mad when
things fall not out according to their bold predictions; And secondly, they
have been, and not without cause, esteemed as madmen, in foretelling things
which they could not know, and much less bring to pass.

And therefore I have heard a great Master in, and a public Professor of,
Astronomy, who could see as far into Constellations, and observe as much from
them as any other, often say, that he would go by the very self same rules that
others did, to predict things to come; and would write that which was quite
contrary to what they observed, yet what he wrote should as often fall to be as
true as what they foretold.

Yet notwithstanding the truth of these premises, the great Mogol puts so much
confidence in his Astrologers, that he will not undertake a journey, nor yet
resolve to do any thing besides of the least consequence, unless his Wizards
tell him, it is a good and a prosperous hour, to begin, and set upon such an
undertaking, and at the very instant he has his directions from them, he sets
upon the thing he undertakes, and not before.

SECTION XIII. Of their Physicians, Diseases, Cures; When they begin their
year; How they measure their time, etc.
HEre are those which pretend unto much skill in Physic, though (for ought I
could ever there observe) the people make but little use of them, they fearing
more Medicum quam Morbum; and therefore do believe the Physician to be the more
dangerous disease.

The common Diseases of that Country are Bloody-Fluxes, with others that come
not to blood, Hot-Fevers, Calentures, which seize on and fire the head and
brain, more than other parts. These, many times put our men at Sea into very
high distempers, especially while they are under the Torrid Zone, which makes
the poor creatures visited with them, sometimes to conceit the spacious Sea and
Waves therein to be great Fields full of Haycocks; and if they were not
sometimes happily prevented, would leap overboard to tumble in them.

For ordinary Agues, such as are so common among us, and for those two torments
rather than diseases (when they are felt in extremity) the Gout and the Stone,
they have the happiness to be ignorant of them.

But sometimes they are visited with an inflammation, or an extreme Burning,
such as is spoken of, Deuteronomy. 28.22. or rather with a most grievous Pestilence,
which on a sudden sweeps away many thousands when it comes into great populous
Cities. This Pestilence makes the bodies of Men there which are visited with
it, like an House, which on a sudden is covered all over with fire at once. The
City Amadavar (at our being there with the King) was visited with this
Pestilence in the month of May, and our Family was not exempted from that most
uncomfortable visitation; for within the space of nine days, seven persons
that were English of our Family were taken away by it, and none of those which
dyed lay sick above twenty hours, and the major part well and sick, and dead in
twelve hours. As our Surgeon (who was there all the Physician we had, and he
led the way) falling sick at midday, and the following midnight dead. And
there were three more that followed him, one immediately after the other, who
made as much haste to the Grave as he had done, and the rest went after them,
within that space of time (I named before.) And (as before I observed) all
those that dyed in our Family of this Pestilence, had their Bodies set all on
fire by it, so soon as they were first visited; and when they were dying, and
dead, broad spots of a black and blew color appeared on their Breasts; and
their flesh was made so extreme hot by their most high distemper, that we who
survived, could scarce endure to keep our hands upon it.

It was a most sad time, a fiery Trial indeed. But such is the goodness of
Almighty God, that he makes the miseries of Men here, Aut tolerabiles, aut
breves, either sufferable, or short; so that if the thing imposed be extreme
heavy to be born, it continues not long, as this most grievous visitation, most
violent for the time, like a mighty storm, and then blown away. For here the
mercy of God suddenly stepped in, betwixt the living and the dead; so that not
only in our Family, but also in that great City, the Plague was stayed.

All our Family [my Lord Ambassador only excepted] were visited with this
sickness; and we all, who through Gods help and goodness outlived it, had many
great blisters, filled with a thick yellow watery substance, that arose upon
many parts of our bodies, which when they brake, did even burn and corrode our
skins, as it ran down upon them.

For my part I had a Calenture before at Mandoa, which brought me even into the
very Jaws of Death, from whence it pleased God then to rescue and deliver me,
which amongst thousands and millions of mercies more received from him, has,
and shall for ever give me cause to speak good of his Name.

There are very few English which come thither, but have some violent sickness,
which if they escape, and live temperately, they usually enjoy very much health
afterward. But Death made many breaches unto my Lord Ambassador's Family, for
of four and twenty Waiters, besides his Secretary and my self, there was not
above the fourth Man returned home. And he himself by violent Fluxes, was twice
brought even to the very brink of the Grave.

The Natives of East India in all their violent hot diseases, make very little
use of Physicians, unless it be to breathe a Vein sometimes, after which they
use much fasting as their most hopeful remedy.

The foul Disease is too common in those hot Climates, where the people that
have it are much more affected with the trouble it brings, than with the sin or
shame thereof.

The people in East India live up to our greatest Ages; but without all
question they have more old people than we; a thing not to be wondered at, if
we consider the great Temperance of that people in general in their eating and
drinking.

But to proceed. The Hindooes or Heathens there begin their year the first day
of March. The Mahometans begin theirs, the tenth, at the very instant as the
Astrologers there ghess that the Sun enters into Aries, their year as ours is
divided into twelve Months, or rather into thirteen Moons, for according to
them they make many payments. They distinguish their time in a much different
manner from us, dividing the day into four, and the night into as many parts,
which they call Pores; which again they subdivide each of them into eight
parts, which they call Grees; measured according to the ancient custom, by
water dropping out of one vessel into another, by which there always stands a
Man appointed for that service, to turn that vessel up again when it is all
dropped out, and then to strike with an hammer (upon the brim of a concave
piece of Metal, like the inner part of a large Platter, hanging by the brim on
a wire) the number of those Pores, and Grees as they pass. It has a deep
sound, and may be heard very far; but these are not common amongst them.
Neither have they any Clocks, or Sun-Dials, to show them further how their time
passes.

We lived there some part of our time a little within, or under the Tropic of
Cancer, and then the Sun was our Zenith, or Verticle at noonday directly over
our heads, at his return to his Northern bounds (of which I have spoken
something before.) The Sunrising there, was about six hours in the Morning
before its appearing here, so that it is twelve of the Clock with them, when it
is but six with us. We had the Sun there above the Horizon in December, when
the days are shortest near eleven hours; and in June when they are at their
fullest length, somewhat more than thirteen hours; which long absence of the
Sun there from the face of the Earth, was very advantageous to cool both the
Earth and Air. I proceed to speak

SECTION XIV. Of the most excellent Moralities which are to be observed amongst
the People of those Nations.
NExt to those things which are Spiritually good, there is nothing which may
more challenge a due and deserved commendation, than those things which are
Morally and Materially so; and many of these may be drawn out to life, from the
examples of great numbers amongst that people.

For the Temperance of very many, by far the greatest part of the Mahometans
and Gentiles, it is such, as that they will rather choose to dye, like the
Mother and her seven Sons mentioned in the second of Macchabees and seventh
Chapter, then eat or drink any thing their Law forbids them. Or like those
Rechabites, mentioned, Jer. 35. Where Jonadab their Father commanded them to
drink no Wine, and they did forbear it for the Commandment sake. Such meat and
drink as their Law allows them, they take, only to satisfy Nature, (as
before) not Appetite; strictly observing Solomon's Rule, Prove. 23.2. in keeping
a knife to their throats, that they may not transgress in taking too much of
the Creature; hating Gluttony, and esteeming Drunkenness, as indeed it is,
another Madness; and therefore have but one word in their Language, (though it
be very copious) and that word is Mest, for a drunkard, and a madman. Which
shows their hatred of drunken distempers; for none of the people there, are at
any time seen drunk, (though they might find liquor enough to do it) but the
very offal and dreggs of that people, and these rarely, or very seldom.

And here I shall insert another most needful particular to my present purpose,
which deserves a most high commendation to be given unto that people in
general, how poor and mean soever they be; and that is, the great exemplary
care they manifest in their piety to their Parents, that, notwithstanding they
serve for very little (as I observed before) but five shillings a Moon for
their whole livelihood and subsistence; yet, if their Parents be in want, they
will impart at the least half of that little toward their necessaries,
choosing rather to want themselves, then that their Parents should suffer need.

For the Mahometans [who live much upon the labors of the Hindooes, keeping
them under, because they formerly conquered them] there are many of them idle,
and know better to eat than work, and these are all for to morrow, a word very
common in their mouths; and the word is Sub-ba, which signifies to morrow, and
when that day comes to morrow, and so still to morrow, they will set down upon
their businesses to morrow, will do any thing you would have them to do to
morrow, they will bestow any thing upon you Sub-ba, to morrow. Pollicitis
divites, most rich in promises, in performances not so. That being true of many
of those Mahometans, which Livie sometimes spoke of Hannibal, that he stood
most to his Promise, when it was most for his Profit, [though, to do the
Mahometans in general right, such as are Merchants and Traders, are exact in
their dealings] or, as Plutarch writes of Antigonus the King, who was called
(...), as being ever about to give, but seldom giving.

But for the Hindooes, or Heathens, the ancient inhabitants of East India, they
are a very industrious people, very diligent in all the works of their
particular Callings, believing that Bread sweetest, and most savory, which is
gained by sweat. These are for the generality the people that plant and till
the ground: These they which make those curious Manufactures that Empire
affords; working, as we say, with tooth and nail; employing their ears and
toes, as well as their fingers, to assist them [by holding threads of silk] in
the making of some things they work. These are a people who are not afraid of a
Lion in the way, of a Lion in the streets, as the slothful man is, Prove. 26.13.
but they lay hold on the present time, the opportunity, to set upon their
businesses which they are to do to day, they being very laborious in their
several employments, and very square and exact to make good all their
engagements.

Which appears much in their justness manifested unto those that trade with
them; for if a Man will put it unto their Consciences to sell the Commodity he
desires to buy at as low a rate as he can afford it, they will deal squarely,
and honestly with him; but if in those bargainings a man offer them much less
than their set price, they will be apt to say, What, do thou think me a
Christian, that I would go about to deceive thee?

It is a most sad and horrible thing to consider, what scandal there is brought
upon the Christian Religion, by the looseness, and remisness, by the
exorbitances of many which come amongst them, who profess themselves
Christians; of whom I have often heard the Natives [who live near the Port
where our Ships arrive] say thus, in broken English, which they have gotten,
Christian Religion, Devil Religion; Christian much drunk, Christian much do
wrong, much beat, much abuse others.

But to return again unto the people of East India: Though the Christians which
come amongst them do not such horrible things, yet they do enough to make
Christianity it self evil spoken of; as a Religion that deserves more to be
abhorred, than embraced. For truly it is a sad sight there to behold a dunken
Christian, and a sober Indian; a temperate Indian, and a Christian given up to
his Appetite. An Indian that is just and square in his dealing, a Christian not
so; a laborious Indian, and an idle Christian; as if he were born only to fold
his Arms, or fruges tantum consumere natus: to devour Corn, and wear out Wool.
O what a sad thing is it for Christians to come short of Indians, even in
Moralities, come short of those, who themselves believe, to come short of
Heaven.

SECTION XV. Of their Religion, their Priests, their Devotion, their Churches,
etc.
ANd now I come to speak of their Religion, I shall first take notice of the
Mohammedan Religion there professed. That of the Hindoos or Heathens shall find
a place wherein I may speak of it afterward.

But first of the Mohammedan Religion, because the Great Mogol with his
Grandees, and all other of quality about him are Mahometans; which Religion (if
it deserve that name) took its first Rise, and began to be professed in the
world about the year of Christ 620, as has been observed by many Writers.

The Ringleader to it, and chief Founder of it was Mahomet, an Arabian by
Birth, born (as is said) in a very obscure place, and of very mean and low
Parentage, but a Man filled with all Subtilty and Craft; who, (as they write)
after that he had much enriched himself by Wives, came to be the Commander of a
Company of Arabian Volunteers that followed Heraclius the Emperor in his
Persian Wars; but not long after, himself and Soldiers, falling first into
Mutiny, and after that to Rebellion, which was an excellent preparative to put
an innovation or change on Religion, and his Soldiers standing close unto him,
he himself, with the help of Sergius, a Christian by profession, but an
Heretical Nestorian Monk, and of Abdala a Jew, composed a Religion that has
nothing in it, or that savours of nothing so much, as of rude Ignorance, and
most palpable Imposture; it being a Monster of many Heads; a most damnable
mixture of horrid impieties, if it be considered altogether.

Yet because it contains much in it very pleasing to flesh and blood, and
sooths up, and complies exceedingly with corrupt Nature, it wanted no followers
presently to embrace, and assert it; so that in a little time, like a Gangrene,
it spread it self into many parts of Asia, and since that has enlarged it self
like Hell; so that, at this present day, it has more that profess it in the
world, than those which profess Christianity, if we take in all collectively
that do but bear the Names of Christians, the world over.

The poor people, that are so much abused by the strong delusions of that great
Impostor, say for themselves thus, that God has sent three great Prophets into
the world, first Moses, and after him Christ, and then Mahomet; and further
add, that when Christ left the world he promised to send a Comforter into it,
and that Comforter was Mahomet, and therefore they close with him.

I shall not need amongst men professing Christianity to write any thing in
answer to those their frantic assertions, neither will I make it my business
to enlarge my self in the discovery of the Mohammedan Religion, because that
has been done by so many hands already; only this I will say of it, and not
much more, that it has Will Worship for its Foundation; Fables and Lies for
its support; and a groundless presumption for its superstructure.

For its Foundation; first, abundance of Will Worship, manifested in many
outwatd performances, which are not hard to be performed, because the depraved
will of man, is ready pressed and bent to perform things of that kind with
readiness, cheerfulness, and delight. The works of your Father the Devil you
will do, says our Savior, of the obstinate Jews; do them, be they never so
hard, with content and willingness.

Secondly, the Mohammedan Religion has abundance of strange Monstroos Fables
and Lies for its support, their Alcoran (for the substance of it) being a
fardle of foolish impossibilities, fit to be received by none but fools and
madmen; for they can gain no more credit with those that are judicious, then
what is related in the ryming story of that ancient Knight Errant, Bevis of
Southampton, or in the Poems of Orlando, the furious, where may be found some
such like parallel fictions, as of Astalpho who mounted a Griffin, which
carried him up immediately into the Moon, where (they say) Mahomet sometime
was; the reason I conceive which made himself, and his followers, ever since so
full of Lunacy or madness.

Thirdly, it has a groundless presumption for its superstructure, which
presumption draws that misled people into a careless security, they esteeming
themselves the only true believers of the world, and none true believers but
themselves.

Yet it cannot be denied, but that there are some things in the precepts which
Mahomet has prescribed to be received and observed by his followers, that are
good; laid down in eight commandments which are these.

First, That God is a great God, and the only God, and Mahomet is the Prophet
of God.

Second, That Children must obey their Parents, and do nothing to displease
them either in word or deed.

Third, That every one must do to another that, and only that, which he would
have another do to him.

Fourth, That every man five times every day must repair to the Mosquit or
Church, to pray there; or, wheresoever he is, he must pray every day so often,
if not in the Church, then elsewhere.

Fifth, That one whole Moon in every year, every man, come to years of
discretion, must spend the whole day, 'twixt the rising, and setting of the
Sun, in fasting.

Sixth, That every one out of his store, must give unto the poor liberally,
freely, and voluntarily.

Seventh, That every one (except those Votaries which renounce marriage) must
marry, to increase and multiply the Sect and Religion of Mahomet.

Eighth, That no man must kill, or shed blood.

Now much in these Commandments agrees with the word of Truth; and we need not
wonder at it, when we consider, that even the Devil himself (as we may observe
in the Gospel) has sometimes had a Scripture in his mouth. So have Heretics,
and so did Mahomet and his Assistants mix some Scripture in their Alcoran, to
put a fairer gloss upon their irreligion. But what Scriptures they all urge,
are for the most part, if not ever, wrested, by their maiming, or perverting,
or mis-applying of them. Thus the Devil quotes a Scripture, Mat. 4.6. but one
part is left out, and the rest mis-applied. Those therefore who wrest or mangle
Scripture to serve their own turn, we may see from whose School they have it.
Thus Mahomet cites Scripture to do more mischief by it; let no man content
himself, and think all is well, because he can sometimes speak good words, have
a Scripture in his mouth; when he considers that Heretics, Hypocrites do so,
that Mahomet, nay Satan himself has done as much.

But to proceed; the Mahometan-Priests are called Moolaas, who read some
parcels out of their Alcoran, upon Fridays (which are their Sabbaths or days of
rest) unto the people assembled in their Mosquits or Churches, and then further
deliver some precepts, which they gather out of it, unto their miserably
deluded hearers.

These Moolaas are they which join those of that Religion in marriage; and
these employ much of their time as Scriveners to do businesses for others; or
to teach their young Children to write and read their language in written hand,
for (as before) they have no Printing. Those Moolaas are more distinguished
from the rest of the Mahometans by their Beards (which they wear long) then by
any other of their habits. Their Calling gains, and gives them very much
reverence and esteem amongst the People; as another sort of Priests there have,
of an high order or rank, which live much retired; but when they appear openly
are most highly reverenced; they are called Scayds who derive themselves from
Mahomet.

The Mahometans have fair Churches which (as before) are called Mosquits; their
Churches are built of Marble or coarser stone, the broadside toward the West
is made up close like a firm wall, and so are both ends, in which there are no
lights; the other broad side toward the East is erected upon Pillars (where a
man may take notice of the excellent workmanship both in Vaults, and Arches)
the spaces betwixt them Pillars stand open. Their Churches are built long and
narrow, standing North and South which way they lay up the bodies of their
dead, but none of them within their Churches.

At the four corners of their Mosquits which stand in great Cities or in other
places much peopled, there are high and round, but small Turrets; which are
made open with lights every way, wherein a man may be easily seen, and heard;
their devout Moolaas five times every day ascend unto the tops of those high
Turrets, whence they proclaim, as loudly as they can possibly speak, their
Prophet Mahomet, thus in Arabian, La alla illa alla, Mahomet Resul-alla, that
is, There is no God but one God, and Mahomet the Messenger from God, That voice
instead of Bells (which they use not in their Churches) puts the most devout in
mind of the hours of their devotion, those Priests being exceedingly zealous to
promote the cause, and to keep up the honor of their Mahomet, as the men of
Ephesus sometime were: when they feared that the credit of their Baggage Diana
was like to be called into question, they took up a Cry which continued for the
space of two hours, Crying out with one voice, Great is Diana of the Ephesians,
Acts 19.24.

But to return again to those Mohammedan Priests, who out of zeal do so often
proclaim their Mahomet. Tom Coryat upon a time having heard their Moolaas often
(as before) so to cry, got him upon an high place directly opposite to one of
those Priests, and contradicted him thus: La alla illa alla, Hasaret Eesa
Benalla, that is, No God, but one God, and the Lord Christ the Son of God, and
further added that Mahomet was an Impostor: and all this he spoke in their own
language as loud as possibly he could, in the ears of many Mahometans that
heard it. But whether (circumstances considered) the zeal, or discretion of our
Pilgrim were more here to be commended, I leave to the judgment of my Reader.
That he did so, I am sure, and I further believe how that bold attempt of his,
if it had been acted in many other places of Asia, would have cost him his life
with as much torture as cruelty could been invented. But he was here taken for
a madman, and so let alone.

Happily the rather, because every one there has liberty to profess his own
Religion freely, and, if he please, may argue against theirs, without fear of
an inquisition, as Tom Coryat did at another time with a Moolaa, and the
Question was, Which of these two was the Mussleman or true Believer: after much
heat on both sides, Tom Coryat thus distinguished, that himself was the
Orthodox Musslemam or true true-believer, the Moolaa the pseudo Mussleman or
false true believer; which distinction, if I had not thought it would have made
my Reader smile had been here omitted.

The Mahometans have a set form of prayer in the Arabian Tongue, not understood
by many of the common people, yet repeated by them as well as by the Moolaas:
they likewise rehearse the Names of God and of their Mahomet certain times
every day upon Beads, like the miss-led Papists, who seem to regard more the
Number, then the weight of prayers.

But for the carriage of that people in their devotions, before they go into
their Churches they wash their feet, and entering into them put off their
shoes. As they begin their devotions they stop their ears, and fix their eyes,
that nothing may divert their thoughts; then in a soft and still voice they
utter their prayers, wherein are many words most significantly expressing the
Omnipotency, and Greatness, and Eternity, and other Attributes of God. Many
words likewise that seem to express much humiliation, they confessing in diverse
submissive gestures, their own unworthiness, when they pray casting themselves
low upon their Face sundry times, and then acknowledge that they are burdens to
the Earth, and poison to the Air, and the like, being so confounded and ashamed
as that they seem not to dare so much as to lift up their eyes toward Heaven;
but after all this, comfort themselves in the mercies of God, through the
mediation of Mahomet.

If this people could as well conclude, as they can begin and continue their
prayers, in respect of their expressions, and carriages in them, they might
find comfort; but the conclusion of their devotions marrs all.

Yet this, for their commendation (who doubtless, if they knew better would
pray better) that what diversions, and impediments soever they have arising
either from pleasure or profit, the Mahometans pray five times a day. The Mogol
does so, who sits on the Throne; the Shepherd does so that waits on his flock
in the field (where, by the way, they do not follow their flocks; but their
flocks, them) all sorts of Mahometans do thus whether fixed in a place or
moving in a journey, when their times, or hours of prayer come, which in the
morning are at Six, Nine, and Twelve of the clock; and at three and six in the
afternoon.

When they pray, it is their manner to set their Faces that they may look
toward Medina near Mecha in Arabia where their great Seducer Mahomet was
buried, who promised them after one thousand years, to fetch them all to
Heaven; which term, when it was out, and the promise not fulfilled, the
Mahometans concluded that their Forefathers mis-took the time of the promise
of his coming; and therefore resolve to wait for the accomplishment of it one
thousand years more. In the mean time they do so reverence that place where the
body of Mahomet was laid up, that whosoever has been there (as there are
diverse which flock yearly thither in Pilgrimage) are for ever after called, and
esteemed Hoggees, which signifies Holy men.

And here the thing being rightly and seriously considered; it is a very great
shame that a Mohammedan should pray five times every day, that Pagans and
Heathens should be very frequent in their devotions, and Christians (who only
can hope for good answers in prayer) so negligent in that great prevailing
duty. For a Mohammedan to pray five times every day, what diversions soever he
has to hinder him, and for a Christian to let any thing interrupt his
devotion; for a Mohammedan to pray five times a day, and for one that is called
a Christian not to pray (some believing themselves above this and other
Ordinances) five times in a week, a month, a year!

But this will admit less cause of wonder if we consider how that many bearing
the Names of Christians cannot pray at all, those I mean which are profane and
filthy, and who live as if there were no God to hear, or to judge, and no Hell
to punish. Such as these can but babble, they cannot pray, for they blaspheme
the Name of God, while they may think they adore it.

I shall add here a short story; It happened that I once having some discourse
with a Mohammedan of good quality, and speaking with him about his frequent
praying, I told him that if himself, and others of his profession who did
believe it as a duty to pray so often, could conclude their Petitions in the
Name of Jesus Christ, they might find much comfort in those their frequent
performances, in that great duty: He answered, that I needed not to trouble my
self with that, for they found as great comfort as they could desire in what
they did. And presently he would needs infer this Relation.

There was (said he) a most devout Mussleman who had his habitation in a great
City where Mahomet was zealously professed, that man for many years together
spent his whole day in the Mosquit, or Church; in the mean time, he minding not
the world at all, became so poor that he had nothing left to buy bread for his
family; yet, notwithstanding his poor condition, he was resolved still to ply
his devotions: and in a morning (when he perceived that there was nothing at
all left for the further subsistence of himself and household) took a solemn
leave of his wife and children, resolving for his part to go and pray and dye
in the Mosquit, leaving his family (if no relief came) to famish at home. But
that very day he put on this resolution, there came to his house in his absence
a very beautiful young man (as he appeared to be) who brought and gave unto his
wife a very good quantity of Gold bound up in a white Napkin, telling her, that
God had now remembered her husband, and sent him his pay for his constant pains
taken in his devotion; withal charging her not to send for her husband, for
though he had taken such a solemn leave of her that morning, yet he would come
home to her again that night; and so he departed from her. The woman presently
bought in some necessaries for her house (for they had eaten up all before),
and further made some good provision for her husband against his coming home in
the evening (for so he did); and finding all his family very cheerful and
merry, his wife presently told him, that there had been such a one there (as
before described) and left so much gold behind him, with that forementioned
message delivered with it. Her husband presently replied that it was the Angel
Gabriel sent from God (for the Mahometans speak much of that Angel) and he
further added, that himself had nothing to bring home unto her but a little
grett, or sand, which he took up in his way homeward, and bound it in his
girdle, which he presently opening to show her, it was all turned into precious
stones, which amounted unto a very great value in money. The seventh part of
which, as of his gold likewise, he presently gave to the poor, (for, said he, a
Mussleman is very charitable) and then inferred, that if we do not neglect God,
God will not forget us; but when we stand most in need of help will supply us.
Unto which conclusion we may all subscribe, leaving the premises which are laid
down in that story, unto those that dare believe them.

The Mahometans say, that they have the Books of Moses, but they have very much
corrupted that story, in ascribing that to Ishmael which is said of Isaac, Genesis
22. as if Ishmael should have been sacrificed, not Isaac, (of which more
afterward). They say, that they have the Book of David's Psalms; and some
Writings of Solomon, with other parcels of the Old Testament; which, if so, I
believe are made much to vary from their Original.

They speak very much in the honor of Moses whom they call Moosa Calim-Alla;
Moses, the publisher of the mind of God. So of Abraham whom they call Ibrahim
Carim-Alla, Abraham the honored or friend of God.

So of Ishmael whom they call Ismal, The Sacrifice of God. So of Jacob, whom
they call Acob, The blessing of God. So of Joseph, whom they call Eesoff, The
betrayed for God. So of David, whom they call Dahood, The lover, and praiser of
God. So of Solomon, whom they call Selymon, The wisdom of God; all expressed,
as the former, in short Arabian words, which they sing in Ditties unto their
particular remembrances.

And, by the way, many of the Mahometans there are called by the names of
Moosa, or Ibrahim, or Ismal, or Acob, or Eesoff, or Dahood, or Selymon: so
others are called Mahmud, or Chaan, which signifies the Moon; or Frista, which
signifies a Star, etc. And they call their women by the names of Flowers or
Fruits of their Country, or by the names of Spices or Odours, or of Pearls, or
precious Stones, or else by other names of pretty or pleasing signification. As
Job named one of his daughters Jemimah, which signifies, Clear as the day; the
second Keziah, which signifies pleasant, as Cassia or sweet Spice. And the name
of the third Keren-happuch, signifying, The Horn or strength of beauty, Job
42.14.

But I Will return again to that people, that I may acquaint my Reader with one
thing of special observation, and it is this: That there is not one among the
Mahometans (of any understanding) which at any time mentions the name of our
blessed Savior called there Hazaret Eesa, the Lord Christ, but he makes
mention of it with high reverence and respect. For they say of Christ that he
was a good man, and a just, that he lived without sin, that he did greater
miracles then ever any before or since him; nay further they call him
Rha-how-Alla, the breath of God, but how he should be the Son of God, they
cannot conceive, and therefore cannot believe.

Perhaps the Socinians first took that their opinion from these, which bids
them to have every thing they receive as truth, to be cleared up unto them by
the strength of Reason, as if there were no need of the exercise of Faith.

And truly (I must needs confess) that to believe the Incarnation of the Son of
God, is one of the hardest and greatest tasks for Faith to encounter withal,
that God should be made a Man, that this Man Christ should be born of a Virgin,
that Life should spring from Death; and that from Contempt and Scorn, Triumph,
and Victory should come, etc. But Christians must bind up all their thoughts,
as to these, in that excellent meditation of Picus Mirandula, saying, Mirandam
Dei Incarnatinem, etc. concerning that admirable, and wonderful Incarnation of
Christ the Son of God, I shall not say much; it being sufficient for me, as for
all others that look for benefit by Christ, to believe, that he was begotten,
and that he was born. These are Articles of our Faith; and we are not
Christians, if we believe them not.

I may seem very strange therefore, that the Mahometans (who understand
themselves better) should have such a very high esteem of our Blessed Savior
Christ, and yet think us who profess our selves Christians to be so unworthy,
or so unclean, as that they will not eat with us, any thing that is of our
dressing, nor yet of any thing that is dressed in our vessels.

There are more particulars which challenge a room in this Section as their
proper place: but because I would not have it swell too big, I shall here part
it, and speak further

SECTION XVI. Of their Votaries; where, of the voluntary and sharp Penances,
that people undergo. Of their Lent; and of their Fasts, and Feasts, etc.
AMong the Mahometans there are many Votaries they call Derveeses who
relinquish the world, and spend all their days following in solitude and
retiredness, expecting a recompense (as they say, and are very well content to
suffer and wait for it) in that better life. Those very sharp and very strict
Penances which many of this people for the present voluntarily undergo, far
exceed all those the Romanists boast of; for instance, there are some who live
alone upon the tops of Hills (which are clothed or covered with trees, and
stand remote from any Company) and there spend the whole time of their
following lives in Contemplation, stirring not at all from the places they
first fix on, but ad requisita naturae, crying out continually in these or the
like expressions, Alla Achabar, etc. that is, God Almighty look upon me, I love
thee, I love not the world; but I love thee, and I do all this for thy sake;
look upon me, God Almighty.

These, after they thus retire, never suffer the Razer or Scissers to come
again upon their heads, and they let their Nails grow like unto Birds Claws, As
it was written of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. when he was driven out from the
society of men.

This people after their retirement, will choose rather to famish then to stir
from their Cells: and therefore they are relieved by the Charity of others, who
take care to send them some very mean covering for their bodies (for it must be
such, otherwise they will not accept of it) when they stand in need thereof,
and something for their bodily sustenance, which must be of their coarser food,
otherwise they will not take it, and no more of that at one time then what is
sufficient for the present support of nature.

Some again impose long times of Fasting upon themselves, and will take no food
at all, till the strength of Nature in them be almost quite spent.

And others there are amongst them they call Religious men, who wear nothing
about them but to hide their shame; and these (like the mendicant Friars) beg
for all they eat. They usually live in the skirts or outsides of great Cities,
or Towns, and are like the man our blessed Savior mentions, Luke 8.27. about
the City of the Gadarens, which had Devils, and wore no clothes, neither abode
in any house but in the Tombs. And so do these, making little fires in the day,
sleeping at nights in the warm ashes thereof, with which they besmear and
discolor their bodies. These Ash-men will sometimes take intoxicating things
which make them to talk wildly, and strangely (as some of our Quakers do in
their strange distempers) and then the foolish common people will flock about
them, and (believing they then Prophecy) hearken unto them with all attention.

A very great difference 'twixt that people and ours; for there they call
madmen Prophets, and amongst us there are many Prophets which are accounted
but madmen.

There are another sort among them called Mendee, carried on likewise merely by
miss-takes and mis-conceivings in Religion; who like the Priests of Baal,
mentioned 1 King. 18. often cut their flesh with knives and launcers.

Others again I have there seen, who merely out of Devotion put such massy
Fetters of Iron upon their legs as that they can scarce stir with them, and
then covered with blew mantles (the color of mourners in those parts) as fast
as they are able, go many miles in Pilgrimage barefoot upon the hot parching
ground, to visit the sepulchers of their deluding Saints; thus, putting
themselves upon very great Hardships, and submitting unto extreme sharp
penances, and all to no purpose.

But to return again to those Indian Votaries who undergo such hard things and
out of this mistake that they do God good service in the things they do.
Concerning which actings, Lucretius (though accounted an Epicurean and an
Atheist) in his first book, speaks to purpose about the Error of Religion.

-- Saepius olim
Religio peperit scelerosa atque impia facta.
often of old,
Religion bred acts impiously bold.
The Mahometans keep a solemn Lent, they call the Ramjan or Ramdam, which
begins the first New Mood, which happens in September, and so continues during
that whole Moon. And all that time, those that are strict in their Religion,
forbear their Women, and will not take either Meat or Drink any day during that
time, so long as the Sun is above their Horizon, but after the Sun is set they
eat at pleasure. The last day of their Ramjan, they consecrate as a day of
mourning to the memory of their deceased friends, when I have observed many of
the meanner sort, seem to make most bitter lamentation. But when that day of
their general mourning is ended, and begins to die into night, they fire an
innumerable company of lamps and other lights; which they hang or fix very
thick, and set upon the tops of their houses, and all other most conspicuous
places near their great Tanks, that are surrounded with buildings, where those
lights are doubled by their Reflection upon the water, and when they are all
burnt out; the ceremony is done, and the people take food.

The day after this Ram-jan is fully ended, the most devout Mahometans in a
solemn manner assemble to their Mosquits, where by their Moolaas some selected
parts of the Alcoran, are publicly read unto them, which book the Moolaas
never touch without an expression of much outward reverence.

For their works of charity, there are some rich men that build Sarraes in
great Cities and Towns (spoken of before) where passengers may find house-room
and that freely, without a return of any recompense, wherein themselves and
goods may be in safety.

Others make Wells and Tanks for the public benefit; Or maintain servants,
which continually attend upon road-ways that are much traveled, and there
offer unto Passengers water for themselves and beasts, which water they bring
thither in great skins hanging upon the back of their Buttelos; which as it is
freely given, so it must be freely taken by all those, who desire to refresh
themselves by it.

There are some which build rich Monuments to preserve the memories of those
whom they have esteemed eminent for their austerity and holiness: these they
call Paeres or Saints, amongst whom some of those (beforementioned) help to
fill their Number, who sequester themselves from the world (as they think) and
spend their life alone upon the tops of Hills, or in other obscure corners.

SECTION XVII. Of the Marriages of the Mahometans, and of their Polygamy, etc.
AMongst many other things that confirm the Mahometans in their irreligion,
this certainly is not the least, the indulgence which Mahomet gives them to
take more wives than one (for they make take four if they please) and that
further promise which that monstrous Seducer has made unto his followers of a
fleshly Paradise hereafter, wherein he will provide for them all wives which
shall have large rolling eyes, which they look upon in that sex as a great
beauty. And it is a very suitable comfort for such as walk so much after the
flesh.

For Polygamy, or the having of more wives than one, Lamech a great Grandchild
of Cain, was the first that brought it into the World, Gen 4.19. And it was
first brought into the Church by Abraham: which act of his, as of others after
him (good men in their generation) though it found permission, never had
approbation from Almighty God. And further, though under the times of the Law;
it found some connivence, yet since the Gospel there has been no such custom
in any of the Churches of Christ.

I remember that my Lord Ambassador had a Servant of that Nation, who desired
leave to be absent one day, and being asked why, he told us, that he was then
to marry a Wife, though he had three living then, a Man would think enough for
his means but five shillings a Moon, the usual pay of Servants there (as before
I observed) to maintain himself, and all the rest of his family.

Often have I heard this Question put, How these Mahometans can do with so many
Wives; some of which they keep pent up in little Cottages, or Tents? And in
other places and parts of the World, where men's dwellings are very large and
spacious, there is scarce room enough to be found for one Wife in a great House.

The Mahometans, who have most Wives, and Women, are most jealous; and their
jealousy such, as that they will not suffer the Brothers, or Fathers of their
Wives, to come to them, or to have any speech with them, except it be in their
presence. And a continued custom by this restraint has made it odious for such
Women, as have the reputation of honesty, to be seen at any time by any Man,
besides their own Husbands, or by those before named, and by them but very
seldom. But if they dishonor their Husbands beds, or being unmarryed are found
incontinent and filthy, professing Chastity; rather than they shall want the
severest punishment, their own Brothers hands will be first against them to
take away their lives, and for so doing, shall be commended, but not questioned.

The Women there of the greater quality, have Eunuchs instead of men to wait
upon them, who in their minority are deprived of all that might provoke
jealousy.

Here is a free toleration for Harlots, who are listed and enrolled (as they
say) before they can have liberty to keep such an open house. Which Creatures
in general there, and so all the World over whosoever they be, embrace those
they pretend to love, as Monkies and Apes do their little ones; for they kill
them with kindness. Those base Prostitutes are as little ashamed to entertain,
as others are openly to frequent their houses.

Other Creatures (as they say) are there kept for base, and abominable ends;
many of those Nations being deeply engaged in those sins of the Gentiles, Romans
1. in doing things which should not be named, and make no scruple at all for
their so doing, ut honest peccare videantur, (as Lactantius speaks) as if they
might sin honestly.

Some of the finer sort of those base Strumpets before named, at certain Times
appear in the presence of the Mogol, before whom they sing their wanton Songs,
playing on their Timbrels.

The Marriages of all the Mahometans are solemnized with some Pomp; for after
the Moolaa has joined their Hands, and performed other Ceremonies, and
bestowed on the parties some words of Benediction, (which is done in the
Evening); immediately after the night coming on, they begin their jollity. The
man on horseback, be he poor or rich, with his kindred and friends about him,
many Lights before him, with Drums and Wind-instruments, and some mixed pastimes
to increase the merriments. The Bride she follows with her Women-friends in
Coaches covered, and after they have thus passed the most eminent places of the
City, or Town they live in, return to the place of the married couples abode,
where (they say) if the parties be able, they make some slight entertainment
for them, immediately after which, they all disperse, and the show is over.

Women there, have a very great happiness, above all I have heard of, in their
easy bringing forth of Children into the world; for there it is a thing very
common, for Women great with Child, one day to ride, carrying their Infants in
their Bodies, and the next day to ride again, carrying them in their Arms.

How those of the greater quality, order their little Children when they are
very young, I could not observe, but those of the meaner sort keep them naked
for some years after they are born, covering them only, and that but
sometimes, with slight Callico-Mantles.

The Mohometans (as I have before observed) who please so to do, may take to
themselves each four Wives; and that filthy liberty given unto them by their
fleshly Mahomet, allows them in it. I have heard of some in this Nation of late
times, who have been married here to more than so many at once, but that
wickedness here is not (as amongst them) committed by a Law, but by Law made
Capital, and so punished.

The eldest Son they have by any of their married Wives, has a prerogative
above all the rest, whom their other Children call Budda, by their great
Brother. And so much of their Marriages, of their Children, and of their
Births. In the next place, I shall speak

SECTION XVIII. Of their Burials, of their mourning for their Dead, and of
their stately Sepulchers and Monuments.
FOr the Mahometans, it is their manner to wash the Bodies of their Dead before
they interr them. An ancient custom as it should seem among the Jews; for it is
said of Dorcas, that after she was dead, they washed her Body, as a preparative
to her Burial.

They lay up none of the Bodies of their Dead in their Misquits, or Churches,
(as before) but in some open place in a Grave, which they dig very deep and
wide, a Jewish custom, likewise to carry the Bodies of their Dead to bury them
out of their Cities and Towns.

Their mourning over their Dead is most immoderate: for, bebesides that day of
general lamentation at the end of their Ramjan, or Lent, (beforementioned)
they houl and cry many whole days for their friends departed, immediately after
they have left the world; and after that time is passed over many foolish
women, so long as they survive, very often in the year, observe set days to
renew their mourning for their deceased friends; and as a people without hope,
bedew the graves of their husbands, as of other their near relations, with
abundance of (seemingly) affectionate tears; as if they were like those
mourning women mentioned Jer. 9.17. who seemed to have tears at command; and
therefore were hired to mourn and weep in their solemn lamentations.

And when they thus lament over their dead, they will often put this question
to their deaf and dead Carcasses, Why they would die? they having such loving
wives, such loving friends, and many other comforts: as if it had been in their
power to have rescued themselves from that most impartial wounding hand of
death.

Which carriage of theirs deserves nothing but censure and pity; though, if it
be not Theatrical, we may much wonder at it, and say of it, as it was said of
the mourning in the floor of Atad, Genesis 50.11. That it is a grievous mourning;
or, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon, Zech. 12.11. if
we take those lamentations only in a literal sense.

But now further concerning their places of Burial, many Mahometans of the
greatest quality in their lifetime provide fair Sepulchers for themselves and
nearests friends, compassing with a firm wall a good circuit of ground near
some Tank, (before spoken of) about which they delight to bury their dead; or
else they close in, a place for this use, near springs of water, that may make
pleasant fountains, near which they erect little Mosquits, or Churches, and
near them Tombs built round, or apiece, or in six, or eight squares, with
round Vaults, or Canopies of stone over-head, all which are excellently well
wrought, and erected upon Pillars, or else made close to be entered by doors
every way, under which the bodies of their dead lie interred. The rest of that
ground thus circled in, they plant with Fruit Trees; and further set therein
all their choicest flowers, as if they would make Elysian fields (such as the
Poets dreamed of) wherein their souls might take repose.

There are many goodly Monuments which are richly adorned, built (as before was
observed) to the memory of such as they have esteemed Paeres, or Saints (of
whom they have a large Calendar) in which are Lamps continually burning;
attended by votaries, unto whom they allow Pensions for the maintaining of
those lights, and many (transported there with wild devotion) daily resort to
those Monuments, there to contemplate the happiness those Paeres (as they
imagine) now enjoy.

And certainly of all the places that Empire affords, there are none that
minister more delight, than some of their Burying places do; neither do they
bestow so much cost, nor show so much skill in Architecture in any other
Structures as in these.

Now amongst many very fair Piles there dedicated to the remembrance of their
dead, the most famous one is at Secandra, a Village three miles from Agra; it
was begun by Achabar-sha the late Mogols Father, who there lies buried; and
finished by his Son, who since was laid up beside him. The materials of that
most stately Sepulcher are Marble of diverse colors, the stones so closely
cemented together, that it appears to be but one continued stone, built high
like a Pyramid with many curiosities about it, and a fair Mosquit by it; the
Garden wherein it stands very large planted (as before) and compassed about
with a wall of Marble: this most sumptuous Pile of all the Structures that vast
Monarchy affords, is most admired by strangers. Tom Coryat had a most exact
view thereof, and so have many other Englishmen had, all which have spoken
very great things of it.

And now Reader I have done with this, and shall proceed to speak more
particularly,

SECTION XIX. Of the Hindoo's, or Heathens, which inhabit that Empire, etc.
AND for these, the first thing I shall take notice of, is, that they agree
with others in the world, about the first Roots of Mankind Adam and Eve: and
the first of them they call Babba Adam, or Adamah, Father Adam; and the second
Mamma Havah, Mother Eve. And from Adam they call a man, Adami.

For Adam they further say, that when his wife was tempted to eat the forbidden
fruit, she took it and chaw'd it, and then swallowed it down; but, when her
husband was swallowing it, the hand of God stopped it in his Throat, and from
hence (they say) that every man has there an hollow bunch which women have not.

The names they give to distinguish one man from another are many, and amongst
them these following are very common. As Juddo, or Midas, or Cooregee, or
Hergee, and the like. Casturia and Prescotta, are Women's names amongst them;
but whether these, as those names they call their men or women by, are names of
signification, or only of sound, I know not.

Those Hindoo's are a very laborious, and an industrious people: these are they
which Till and Plant the Ground, and breed the Cattle; these are they which
make and sell those curious Manufactures, or the Cloth and Stuff which this
Empire affords.

This people marry into, and consequently still keep in their own Tribes,
Sects, Occupations, and Professions. For instance, all Bramins (which are their
Priests, the Sons of all which are Priests, likewise) are married to Bramins
daughters; so a Merchants son marries a Merchants daughter; and so men of
several Trades marry to the same Trade. Thus a Coolee (who is a Tiller of the
Ground) marries his son to a Coolees daughter; and so in all other professions
they keep themselves to their own Tribes and Trades, not mixing with any other;
by which means they never advance themselves higher than they were at first.

They take but one wife, and of her they are not so fearful and jealous as the
Mahometans are of their several wives and women, for they suffer their wives to
go abroad whither they please. They are married very young, about six, or seven
years old, their Parents making Matches for them, who lay hold of every
opportunity to bestow their Children. Because confined to their own Tribes,
they have not such variety of choice as otherwise they might have; and when
they attain to the age of thirteen, or fourteen, or fifteen years at the most,
they bed together.

Their Marriages are solemnized (as those of the Mahometans) with much company,
and noise; but with this difference, that both the young couple ride openly on
horseback, and for the most part, they are so little, that some go on their
horse sides to hold them up from falling. They are bedecked, or strewed all
over their clothing, with the choice flowers of that Country, fastened in order
all about their Garments.

For their Habits they differ very little from the Mahometans, but are very
like them civilly clad, but many of their women were Rings on their Toes; and
therefore go bare foot. They wear likewise broad Rings of Brass, or better
metal, upon their Wrists, and small of their Legs, to take off and on.

They have generally (I mean the Women) the flaps, or tips of their ears,
boared when they are young; which holes daily extended and made wider, by
things put and kept in them for that purpose, at last become so large, as that
they will hold Rings (hollowed on the outside like Pullies) for their flesh to
rest in that are as broad in their circumference, some of them (I dare say) as
little Sawcers. But though those fashions of theirs seem very strange at first
sight, yet they keep so constantly to them, as to all their other habits,
without any alteration, that their general and continual wearing of them makes
them to seem less strange unto others which behold them.

And for their Diet very many of them (as the Banians in general (which are a
very strict Sect) will eat of nothing that has had, or may have life. And
these live upon Herbs, and Roots, and Bread, and Milk, and Butter, and Cheese,
and Sweetmeats, of which they have many made very good by reason of their
great abundance of Sugar. Others amongst them will eat Fish, but of no living
thing else. The Rashboots will eat Swines-flesh, which is most hateful to the
Mahometans, some will eat of one kind of flesh, some of another (of all very
sparing); but all the Hindoo's in general abstain from Beef, out of an high and
over-excellent esteem they have of Kine; and therefore give the Mogol yearly,
besides his other exactions, great sums of money as a ransom for those
Creatures; whence it comes to pass, that amongst other good provisions, we meet
there but with little Beef.

As the Mahometans bury: so the Hindoos in general (not believing the
Resurrection of the Flesh) burn the bodies of their dead near some Rivers (if
they may with convenience) wherein they sow their ashes.

And there are another Sect, or sort of Heathens, living amongst them, called
Persees, which do neither of these; of whom, and how they bestow the bodies of
their dead, you shall hear afterward.

The Widows of these Hindoos (first mentioned) such as have lived to keep
company with their Husbands, for (as before) there is usually a good space of
time 'twixt their wedding and bedding. The Widows (I say) who have their
Husbands separated from them by death, when they are very young, marry not
again; but whether, or no, this be generally observed by them all, I know not;
but this I am sure of, that immediately after their Husbands are dead, they cut
their hair, and spend all their life following as creatures neglected both by
themselves, and others; whence to be free from shame, some of them are
ambitious to dye with honor (as they esteem it) when their fiery love carries
them to the flames (as they think) of Martyrdom, most willingly following the
dead bodies of their Husbands unto the fire, and there embracing them, are
burnt with them.

A better agreement in death than that of Eteocles and Polynices, the two
Theban brothers, of whom it is said, that they were such deadly enemies while
they were alive, that after, when both their bodies were burnt together in the
same fiery Pile, the flame parted and would not mix in one, of which Statius
thus: Nec furiis post fata modus; flammaeque rebels
Seditione Rogi. --
But those, which before I named, agree so well in life, that they will not be
divided by death, where their flames unite together. And although the woman,
who thus burns with her Husband, does this voluntarily, not by any compulsion
(for the love of every Widow there is not thus fired) and though the poor
creature, who thus dies may return and live if she please, even then when she
comes to the Pile, which immediately after turns her into ashes: yet she who is
once thus resolved, never starts back from her first firm and settled
resolution, but goes on singing to her death, having taken some intoxicating
thing to turn or disturb her brains; and then, come to the place where she will
needs dye, she settles her self presently in the midst of that combustible
substance provided to dispatch her, which fuel is placed in a round shallow
trench, about two foot deep, made for that purpose near some River, or other
water (as before), and though she have no bonds but her own strong affections
to tie her unto those flames, yet she never offers to stir out of them. And
thus, she being joyfully accompanied unto the place of her dying by her Parents
and other friends; and when all is fitted for this hellish sacrifice, and the
fire begins to burn, all which are there present shout, and make a continued
noise so long as they observe her to stir, that the screeches of that poor
tortured creature may not be heard. Not much unlike the custom of the
Ammonites, who, when they made their children pass through the fire to Molech,
caused certain Tabrets, or Drums to sound, that their cries might not be heard,
whence the place was called Tophet.

Now after their bodies are quite consumed, and lie mixed together in ashes,
and those ashes begin to grow cold, some of them are gathered up by their
nearest friends, and kept by them as choice Relics; the rest are immediately
sown by the standers by, upon the adjacent River, or water.

But for those poor silly souls, who sing themselves into the extremity of
misery, and thus madly go out of the world, through one fire into another,
through flames that will not last long into everlasting burnings, and do it not
out of necessity, but choice, led hereunto by their tempter and murderer, and
consequently become so injurious and merciless to themselves; certainly they
deserve much pity from others, who know not how to pity themselves. For nemo
miserior misero non miserante seipsum. There are none so cruel as those, which
are cruel, and pitiless to themselves. But though (I say) there are some which
thus throw away their own lives; yet if we consider those Hindoos in general we
may further take notice

SECTION XX. Of the tenderness of that people in preserving the lives of all
other inferior Creatures, etc.
FOr they will not (if they can help it by any means) take, but, on the
contrary, do what they can to preserve the lives of all inferior Creatures,
whence (as before I told you) they give large money to preserve the lives of
their Kine, (a reason for this you shall have afterward) and I have often
observed, that when our English boys there have out of wantonness been killing
of Flies (there swarming in abundance) they would be very much troubled at it;
and, if they could not persuade them to suffer those poor Creatures to live,
they would give them money, or something else, to forbear that (as they
conceived) Cruelty.

As for themselves (I mean a great number of them) they will not deprive the
most useless, and most offensive Creatures of Life; not Snakes, and other
venomous things that may kill them, saying, that it is their nature to do hurt,
and they cannot help it: but as for themselves they further say, that God has
given them Reason to shun those Creatures, but not liberty to destroy them.

And in order to this their conceit, the Banians (who are the most
tenderhearted in this case of all that people) have Spittles (as they say) on
purpose to recover lame Birds and Beasts.

Some ground for this their tenderness happily proceeds from this consideration;
that they cannot give Life to the meanest of the sensible Creatures, and
therefore think that they may not take the Lives of any of them: for the
poorest worm which crawleth upon the face of the Earth, tam Vita vivit, quam
Angelus, (as one of the Ancients speaks) live for the present as much as the
Angels, and cannot be willing to part with that Life, and therefore they
imagine that it is most injurious by violence to take it.

But (as I conceive) the most principal cause why they thus forbear to take the
lives of inferior Creatures, proceeds from their obedience unto a precept
given them by one of their principal, and most highly esteemed Prophets and
Lawgivers they call Bremaw; others they have in very high esteem, and the name
of one of them is Ram, of another Permissar. I am ignorant of the names of
others, and I conceive that my Reader will not much care to know them. But for
him they call Bremaw, they have received (as they say) many precepts, which
they are careful to observe, and the first of them, This

Thou shall not kill any living Creature whatsoever it be, having Life in the
same; for thou art a Creature, and so is it; thou art endued with Life, and so
is it; thou shall not therefore spill the Life of any of thy Fellow Creatures
that live.

Other Precepts (they say) were delivered unto them by their Lawgiver about
their devotions, in their washings and worshippings where they are commanded,

To observe times for fasting, and hours for watching, that they may be the
better fitted for them.

-- Other directions they have about their Festivals wherein they are required,
To take their Food moderately, in not pampering their Bodies.

-- Concerning Charity, they are further commanded, To help the poor as far as
they are possibly able.

-- Other Precepts (they say) were given them likewise in charge; as Not to
tell false Tales, nor to utter any thing that is untrue.
Not to steal any thing from others, be it never so little.
Not to defraud any by their cunning in bargains, or contracts.
Not to oppress any, when they have power to do it.


Now all those particulars are observed by them with much strictness; and some
of them are very good, having the impresssion of God upon them, but that
scruple they make in forbearing the lives of the Creatures made for men's use,
shows how that they have their dwellings in the dark, which makes them by
reason of their blindness, to deny unto themselves that liberty, and
Sovereignty which Almighty God has given unto Man over the Beasts of the
Field, the Fowls of the Air, and the Fishes of the Sea, appointed for his Food,
given unto him for his service and sustenance, to serve him, and to feed him,
but not to make havoc and spoil of them.

However, the tenderness of that people over inferior Creatures, shall one day
rise up in judgment against all those who make no scruple at all in taking the
Lives, not of sensible Creatures, but Men, not legally to satisfy good and
known Laws, but violently to please their cruel and barbarous Lusts.

SECTION XXI. Of other strange and groundless, and very gross Opinions,
proceeding from the blackness and darkness of Ignorance in that people.
ALl Error in the World proceeds either from Ignorance (commonly joined with
Pride) or else from Wilfulness. This is most true as in natural, and moral, so
in spiritual things: For as Knowledge softens and sweetens Men's manners, so it
enricheth their Minds; which Knowledge is certainly a most divine, a very
excellent thing, otherwise our first Parents would never have been so ambitious
of it. This makes a Man here to live twice, or to enjoy here a double Life in
respect of him that wants it. But for this Knowledge, it certainly must be
esteemed better, or worse, by how much the object of this Knowledge is worse,
or better. Now the best object of this Knowledge is a right Understanding, and
Knowledge of the true God, which that people wants.

Now touching this people, they are altogether ignorant of God, as they ought
to know him; and they have no learning amongst them, but as much as enables
them to write and to read what they have written; and they having no insight
into the reasons and causes of things (I mean the ruder sort, both of the
Mahometans and Gentiles) when they observe things which are not very ordinary,
as when they see any Eclipses, but especially of the Moon (happily some of them
sacrificing to her, and calling her the Queen of Heaven, as those Idolaters
did, Jer. 44.18.) they make a very great stir and noise, bemoaning her much,
which helps (as they conceive) to free, and bring her out of it. Juvenal
observing that custom (which appears to be very ancient among the Heathens)
reproves a very brawling clamorous Woman in his sixth Satyr thus, Vna,
laboranti poterit succurrere Lunae, that she made noise enough to deliver the
Moon out of an Eclipse.

Their ignorance in this, as in many-many other things, is much to be pitied:
as the knowledge and learning of many others, which (by their not improving of
it) is to them as the Letters which Vriah sometimes carried against himself; it
condemns the bearer.

But though the Hindoos, or Heathens there, have no learning; yet they want not
opinions: for their divided hearts are there distracted into four-score and
four several Sects, each differing from others, very much in opinion about
their irreligion; which might fill a man, even full of wonder, that does not
consider, how that Satan, who is the author division, is the seducer of them
all.

Those many Sects (as I conceive among them) consist of people there of several
Trades, Occupations, and Conditions of Life; which several sorts of people (as
before I observed) marry into their own Tribes; and so unite and keep together
amongst themselves, that they have not much correspondency with any other
people. These without doubt have several ways of worship within themselves,
which makes them so separate from others, as that they will not eat with any,
but those of their own Tribes.

The illiterate Priests of all that people for the generality of them are
called Bramins, who derive themselves from Bramon, whom (they say) was one of
the first men that inhabited the World; and, after the sin of that first World
brought the Flood, the race of that Bramon (whose very name they highly
reverence) was continued in Bremaw, who (as they say) outlived that deluge,
and is honored by them likewise as one of their great Prophets and Lawgivers.

Those Bramins (as I conceive) are they, which the ancient stories call
Brachmans, but with this difference, that those Brachmanes were accounted
learned men, for the learning of those times wherein they lived: But these
Bramins are a very silly, sottish, and an ignorant sort of people; who are so
inconstant in their Principles, as that they scarce know what the particulars
are which they hold and maintain as truths.

As anciently amongst the Jews, their Priesthood is hereditary; for all those
Bramins Sons are Priests, and they all take the Daughters of Bramins to be
their Wives. (Of which something before.)

They have little Churches they call Pagods, standing near, or under their
green Trees, built round; but as their ancient Brachmans were said not to
endure, these, on the contrary, have Images in their Pagods made in monstrous
shapes, but for what end they have them, I know not.

Now, from the manner of those Heathens, which I believe has been for
many-many years retained in their Idolatrous worships; I conceive that the Jews
long ago borrowed that unwarrantable custom of worshipping God in Groves, or
under green Trees.

Both men and women before they go to their devotions (which are very
frequently performed) wash their bodies, and keep off all their clothes, but
the covering of modesty, till they have done; led hereunto by a Precept (as
they say) commanded them to be performed by their Lawgiver Bremaw, which
requires them daily to observe their times of devotion expressed by their
washings, and worshippings, and prayer to God; which must be all done with
purity of hearts.

And it is the manner of this people before they take their food to wash their
bodies; then (which I much observed while we lived in Tents) they make a little
Circle upon the ground, which they seem to consecrate; after which they sit
down within that compass, and eat what they have provided; and if any come
within that Circle before they have ended their meal, they presently quit the
place, and leave their food behind them.

That outward washing (as this people think) avails very much to their
cleansing from sin, not unlike the Pharisees, who were all for the outside of
Religion, and would not eat with unwashen hands, Mark. 7.2. unless they washed
themselves up to the Elbows (as Theophylact observes); hence those Hindoos
ascribe a certain divinity unto Rivers, but above all to that famous River
Ganges, whither they flock daily in troops, that there they may wash
themselves; and the nearer they can come to the head of that River, the more
virtue they believe is in the water. After they have thus washed, they throw
pieces of Gold, or Silver (according to their devotion and ability) into that
River, and so depart from it.

Thus Reader thou have somewhat of the carriages of this people in life. Now
after death some of them talk of Elyzian fields (such as the Poets dreamed of)
to which their souls must pass over at Styx, or Acheron, and there take new
bodies. Others of them think that ere long the World will have an end, after
which they shall live here again on a new earth. Some other wild conceivings of
this people follow afterward.

Some Bramins have told me that they acknowledge one God, whom they describe
with a thousand eyes, with a thousand hands, and as many feet, that thereby
they may express his power, as being all eye to see, and all foot to follow,
and all hand to smite offenders. The consideration whereof makes that people
very exact in the performances of all moral duties, following close to the
light of Nature in their dealings with men, most carefully observing that Royal
Law, in doing nothing to others, but what they would be well contented to
suffer from others.

Those Bramins talk of two books, which not long after the Creation, when the
World began to be peopled (they say) were delivered by Almighty God to Bramon
(before spoken of): one of which Books (they say) containing very high, and
secret, and mysterious things was sealed up, and might not be opened; the other
to be read, but only by the Bramins, or Priests. And this Book, thus to be read
came, after (as they further say) into the hands of Bremaw (of whom likewise
something before) and by him it was communicated unto Ram, and Permissar, two
other famed Prophets amongst them, which those Heathens do likewise exceedingly
magnify; as they do some others, whose names I have not. Now that Book which
they call the Shester, or the Book of their written word, has been transcribed
in all ages ever since by the Bramins, out of which they deliver Precepts unto
the people.

They say that there are seven Orbs, above which is the seat of God; and that
God knows not small and petty things, or if he do, regards them not.

They further believe that there are Devils, but so fettered and bound in
chains, as that they cannot hurt them.

I observed before the tenderness and scruple, which is in very many of that
people in taking the lives of any inferior, and merely sensible, yea and of
hurtful creatures too. And those which are most tenderhearted in this case are
called Banians, who are by far more numerous than any other of those Indian
Sects; and these hold Pythagoras his Metempsychosis, as a prime Article of
their Faith. Which that untaught people come up very near unto, thinking that
all the souls, both of men and women after they leave their bodies make their
repose in other Creatures, and those Souls (as they imagine) are best lodged
that go into Kine, which (in their opinion) are the best of all sensible
creatures; and therefore (as before) they give yearly (...) sums of money unto
the Mogol to redeem them from ^^^^ghter. And this people further conceit, that
the Souls of (...) wicked go into vile Creatures, as the Souls of Gluttons and
Drunkards into Swine. So the Souls of the Voluptuous and incontinent into
Monkies and Apes. Thus the Souls of the Furious, Revengeful, Cruel People, into
Lions, Wolves, Tygres, other beasts of prey. So the Souls of the Envious into
Serpents, and so into other Creatures according to peoples qualities and
dispositions, while they lived successively from one to another of the same
kind, ad infinitum for ever and ever, by consequence they believing the
immortality of the World. And upon that same mad and groundless fancy,
probably they further believe, that the Souls of Froward, Peevish, and Teachy
Women go into Wasps; and that there is never a silly Fly, but (if they may be
credited) carries about it some Souls (happily they think of light Women) and
will not be persuaded out of their wild conceivings, so incorrigible are their
sottish errors.

The day of rest which those Hindoos observe as a Sabbath is Thursday, as the
Mahometans Friday. Many Festivals they have which they keep solemnly, and
Pilgrimages, the most famous briefly spoken of before in those short
descriptions of Nagraiot, and Syba, observed in my first Section.

Now there are a race of other Heathens (I named before) living amongst those
Hindoos, which in many things differ very much from them: they are called
Persees, who (as they say) originally came out of Persia, about that time
Mahomet and his followers gave Laws to the Persians, and imposed a new Religion
on them; which these Persees not enduring left their Country, and came and
settled themselves in East India, in the Province of Guzarat, where the most
part of them still continue (though there are some of them likewise in other
parts of India) but wherever they live they confine themselves strictly to
their own Tribe, or Sect.

For their Habits, they are clad like the other people of that Empire; but they
shave not their hair close as the other do, but suffer their beards to grow
long.

Their profession is for the generality all kinds of Husbandry, employing
themselves very much in Sowing and Setting of Herbs; in Planting and Dressing
of Vines, and Palmeeto, or Toddy-Trees, as in Planting and Husbanding all other
Trees bearing fruit; and indeed they are a very industrious people, and so are
very many of the Hindoos (as before I observed) and they do all very well in
doing so, and in this a due, and deserved commendation belongs unto them. For,

There is no condition whatsoever can privilege a folded arm. Our first
Parents before their fall were put into the Garden of Eden to dress it.
Certainly, if idleness had been better than labor, they had never been
commanded to do work, but they must labor in their estate of innocence,
because they were happy, and much more we in our sinful lost estate that we may
be so. It was a law given before the Law, that man should eat bread by the
sweat of his brows, and it is a Gospel-precept too that he, who will not work,
should note. The sluggard desires and has nothing (says Solomon) because he
does nothing but desire; and therefore his desires do him no good, because his
hands refuse to labor. That body therefore well deserves to pine and starve
without pity, when two able Hands cannot feed one Mouth.

But further, for those Persees; they use their liberty in meats and drinks, to
take of them what they please; but because they would not give offense, either
to the Mahometans, or Banians, or other Hindoos amongst whom they live, they
abstain from eating Beef, or Swines flesh.

It is their usual manner to eat alone, as for every one of them to drink in
his own Cup; and this is a means (as they think) to keep themselves more pure,
for if they should eat with others, they are afraid that they might participate
of some uncleanness by them.

Alas poor Creatures, that do not at all understand themselves, and their most
miserable condition: for to them that are defiled, and unbelieving is nothing
pure.

Yet I observed before, the Mahometans and Gentiles there are very strict in
this particular; so that they will not eat with any mixed company, and many of
the Gentiles not eat with one another. And this has been an ancient custom
among Heathens. It is said, Genesis 43.32. that the Egyptians might not eat bread
with the Hebrews, for that was an abomination to the Egyptians.

For those Persees; further they believe that there is but one God, who made
all things, and has a Sovereign power over all. They talk much of Lucifer, and
of other evil spirits, but they say, that those and all Devils besides are kept
so under, and in aw by two good Angels, that have power over them, as that they
cannot hurt or do the least mischief, without their leave, and license.

As, many of the Hindoos ascribe to much unto water (as before) so these to
fire: and the reason of it, is this, because they have had this tradition from
many ages and generations past, that their great Lawgiver, whom they call
Zertoost was rapt up into Heaven, and there had fire delivered unto him, which
he brought downthence; and he ever after commanded his followers to worship it
and so they do; and further, they love any thing that resembles fire, as the
Sun and Moon; and therefore, when they pray in the day time they look toward
the Sun, and so toward the Moon in their night-devotions, and from that so
over-high esteem they have of fire, they keep fires continually burning in
their Eggarees, or Temples in Lamps fed with Oil, which are always attended by
their Priests; and they talk of many of these which have burned without
extingiushment from many foregoing generations.

And, by the way, that wild and mad fancy of theirs, that their Zertoost did
fetch fire from Heaven is as certainly true, as that ancient Fiction and Fable
of Prometheus, that he did steal fire thence.

But to proceed: their Priests they call Daroos, or Harboods, above both which,
they have a Chief, or High Priest, they call the Destoor, who not often appears
openly, but, when he does, he meets with much Reverence and Respect given unto
him by the common people, and so do those other Churchmen which are his
inferiors: unto all which they allow free maintenance for their more
comfortable subsistence.

Those Churchmen by their Law are commanded to dwell near, and to abide much
in their Eggarees, or Temples, to give advice, or direction to any that shall
repair unto them for it. They observe diverse Feasts, and immediately after each
of them a Fast follows.

That living sensible Creature, which they first behold every Morning (that is
good and serviceable) is to them (as they say) a Remembrancer all the day
after, to draw up their thoughts in Thanksgiving unto Almighty God, who has
made such good Creatures for man's use and service.

There are good things (as I have been informed) in that Book of their Religion
delivered them in precepts, which their Lawgiver has left unto them for the
direction of their Lives.

As first, To have shame and fear ever present with them, which will restrain,
and keep them from the committing of many evils.

Secondly, When they undertake any thing, seriously to consider whether it be
good or bad, commanded or forbidden them.

Thirdly, To keep their Hearts and Eyes from coveting any thing that is
another, and their Hands from hurting any.

Fourthly, To have a care always to speak the Truth.

Fifthly, To be known only in their own businesses, and not to enquire into,
and to busy themselves in other men's matters.

All which are good moral precepts: but they have another which marrs and
spoils all the rest, and that is, upon the greatest penalties they can be
threatened withal,

Sixthly, Not to entertain, or believe any other Law besides that which was
delivered unto them by their Lawgiver.

This people take but one Wife; which has liberty, as the Wives of the
Hindoos, to go abroad. They never resolve to take Wives, or Husbands without
the advice of their Churchmen: and when they come to be married, they stand
some distance one from the other, there being two Churchmen present, one in
the behalf of the Man, and in behalf of the Woman the other. The first of these
asks the Woman, whether or no she will have that Man to be her Husband; and the
other asks the Man, whether or no he will have that Woman to be his Wife: and
they both consenting, the Priests bring them together and join their Hands,
praying that they may live in Unity and Love together; and then both those
Churchmen scatter Rice upon the Married Couple, entreating God to make them
fruitful in sending them many Sons and Daughters, that they may multiply as
much as that seed does in the ears that bear it. And so, the Ceremony being
thus performed, which is about the time of midnight, the whole Company depart,
leaving the Married Couple together.

At the Birth of every Child, they immediately send for the Daroo, or
Churchman, who comes to the parties House, and there being certainly enform'd
of the exact time of the Child's birth, first, undertakes to calculate its
Nativity, and to speak something of it by way of prediction; after which he
conferrs with the Parents about a Name whereby it shall be called; which when
they have agreed upon, the Mother, in the presence of the Company there
assembled, gives it that Name.

And now lastly, touching the Burials of that People, they incircle pieces of
ground with a round Wall, that is of a good height, set a part for that
purpose. These burying places stand remote from Houses and Road-wayes, the
ground within them is made smooth, or else paved on the bottom, in the midst
whereof they have a round pit, made deep like a draw-Well. The Bodies of their
Dead, both Men, Women, and Children, are carried to those places, upon a Beer
made of slight round Iron Bars, (for they will not have dead bodies touch any
wood, lest they should defile it, because that is fuel for their adored Fire)
and thus brought thither, are laid round about near the inside of that Wall
upon the ground, or pavements, covered with a thin white Cloth; the Daroo, or
Harboode, accompanies the dead body near unto the door which enters that place
(always kept fast shut, but when it is opened upon this occasion to let in
their dead); and, comn thither, speaks these words in the audience of all those
which are thither assembled, That whereas the party deceased consisted of all
the Four Elements, he desires that every one of them may now take his part. And
this is the form they use, when they there thus dispose of the bodies of their
dead. Which being there so left in that open place, are presently laid bare by
the Fowls of the Air, who in short time after pick all their flesh clear from
their bones, by consequence their fleshly part having no other Sepulchers,
Graves, or Tombs, but the Craws and Gorges of those ravenous Fowls. And when
upon this occasion they enter that round stage of Mortality, the bare Skeletons
they there find, which have parted with all their flesh, are by those bearers
of the dead cast into that deep round pit, where they mix promiscuouslly
together, and so make room for other dead bodies.

But now that my Reader may not conceive that I have endeavored in some of
these strange Relations to write a new Romance, I would have him to think, that
for my part I do believe that there is very much of truth in the particulars I
have inserted, if there be any credit to be given to some men of much integrity
that lived amongst them, who made it a great part of their business to be
satisfied in many of the particulars here spoken of, or if I might trust mine
own Eyes and Ears that saw and heard much of it, which could have enabled me to
have written a great deal more concerning the Rites, Ceremonies, Customs, wild
conceivings, and mad Idolatries of this people, as of the Hindoos spoken of
before, if I durst have thrown away more time upon them; all which would have
made my Judicious Reader thus to have concluded with me, that those Mahometans
and Heathens ground very many of their Opinions upon Custom, Tradition, and
Phantsie, not Reason, much less upon safe Rules that might lead them into, and
after keep them in, the way of Truth. They esteeming it a very great boldness,
a very high Presumption, to be wiser in their Religion then their Forefathers
were (as many of the more ignorant sort of Papists will often say, though it be
directly against themselves) and therefore are desirous to do, and to believe
as their Ancestors have before them; to fare as they have fared, and as they
have sped to speed; though they perish everlastingly with them, never
considering of, or ruminating on those things which they hold and maintain for
truths; being like unto unclean Beasts, which chew not the Cudd.

So much of that people in general: I come now more particularly to speak

SECTION XXII. Of their King the great Mogol, his descent, etc.
NOw those Mahometans and Gentiles I have named, live under the subjection of
the Great Mogol, which Name, or rather Title, (if my Information abuse me not)
signifies Circumcised, as himself, and the Mahometans are; and therefore for
his most general Title he is called the Great Mogol, as the chief of the
circumcised, or chief of the circumcision.

He is lineally descended from that most famous Conqueror, called in our
Stories Tamberlain, concerning whose Birth and original Histories much differ,
and therefore I cannot determine it; but, in this, all that write of him agree,
that he having got together very many huge multitudes of Men, made very great
Conquests in the South-East parts of the World, not only on Bajazet the
Emperor of the Turks, but also in East India* and elsewhere; for, What cannot
force by multitudes do? This Tamberlain in their Stories is called Amir Timur,
or the great Prince and Emperor. Timur, who (as they say) toward his end,
either by an hurt received in his Thigh, or else by an unhappy fall from his
Horse, which made him halt to his Grave, was ever after that called Timur lang,
or Timur the lame, from whence he is corruptly in our Stories named Tamberlane.
The late Mogol, at whose Court we lived, was the ninth in a direct line, from
that his great Ancestor.

And now that my Reader may see the Great Mogol in a Portraiture (which was
taken from a Picture of his drawn to the life) I have caused that to be here
inserted, which presents him in his daily unvaried Habit, as he is bedeckt, and
adorned with Jewels, he continually wears; for the fashion of the Habit, in
which he is here presented, it is, for the fashion, the Habit of that whole
vast Empire; so that he who strictly views this, may see the dress of the Men
throughout that whole great Monarchy.

After this I have set up the Royal Standard of the Great Mogol, which is a
couchant Lion shadowing part of the Body of the Sun.

And after that, I have caused his Imperial Signet, or Great Seal to be laid
down before my Reader's Eyes; where in nine rounds, or Circles, are the Names
and Titles of Tamberlane, and his lineal successors in Persian words: which I
shall make presently to speak English, and (as I conceive) no more in English,
than what is fully expressed in those original words.

This Seal (as it is here made in Persian words) the Great Mogol, either in a
large, or lesser figure causes to be put unto all Firmaunes, or Letters
Patents; the present Kings Title put in the middle, and larger Circle that is
surrounded with the rest, the impression whereof is not made in any kind of
Wax, but Ink, the Seal put in the middle of the Paper, and the writing about
it, which Paper there is made very large, and smooth, and good, and in diverse
colors, besides white, and all to write on. And the words on the Mogol's Seal
being imboss'd, are put upon both sides of his Silver and Gold Coin, (for there
is no Image upon any of it.) And the like little Signets, or Seals are used by
the great Men of that Country, and so by others of inferior rank, having their
Names at length engraven on them, with which they make impressions, or
subscriptions by by Ink put on them, to all their acts and deeds; which round
Circle is their Hand and Seal too.

For Timur lang, or Tamberlane; he was famous about the year of Christ 1398. in
the last year of the Reign of Richard the Second, King of England. And he the
first of the Race of those great Monarchs, has a Title, which speaks thus:

1. Amir, Timur, Saheb Cera^, that is, the great Conqueror, or Emperor; Timur,
or Tamberlain, Lord possessor of the Corners, or of the four Corners of the
World.

2. The second his Son was called Mirath-Sha, the King and Inheritor of
Conquests, or the Inheritor of his Fathers Conquests.

3. The third, his Son, was called Mirza, Sultan, Mahomeds; The Prince and
Commander for Mahomet; or, The Defender of the Mohammedan Religion. For this
King (as it should seem) was the first Indostan Emperor that professed
Mahometism, which Tamberlane his Grandfather was a great Enemy to, and
therefore ever strongly opposed it. But this third Monarch of that Line, and
all his Successors since, have been Mahometans.

4. The fourth, his Son, was called Sultan Abusaid, The Prince and Father, or
Fountain of Beneficence.

5. The fifth, his Son, was called Mirzee Amir Scheick, The Imperial Princely
Lord.

6. The sixth, his Son, was called Baba Padsha, The King the Father, or, The
King, the Father of his Country.

7. The seventh, his Son, was called Hamasaon Padsha, The King Invincible.

8. The eighth, his Son, was called Achabar Padsha, The great King, or,
Emperor that is most mighty, or, The King most mighty.

9. The ninth, his Son, was called Almozaphar, Noor, Dein, Gehangeir, Padsha,
Gaze; The most warlike and most victorious King, the Light of Religion, and the
Conqueror of the World.

Here are very high Titles taken by Tamberlane and his Successors, and the
lower we go, the greater still they are; but the last of them swells biggest of
all, calling himself amongst other Phantsies, The Conqueror of the World, and
so he conceits himself to be; As they write of Thrasyllus the Athenian, who
believed that all the Ships on the Sea were his own, and therefore he would
call them, My Ships, when ever he saw them floating on the waters; and thus the
great Mogol imagines all the Kings, Nations, and People of the World, to be his
Slaves and Vassals.

And therefore when the Grand Signiour, or Great Turk, sent an Ambassador to
the Great Mogol, who came unto him attended with a great train and retinue, and
after, when he was ready to take his leave, desired of the Mogol to know what
he should say to his Master when he was returned; Tell thy Master, said the
Mogol, that he is my Slave, for my Ancestor conquered him.

The Mogol feeds and feasts himself with this conceit, that he is Conqueror of
the World, and therefore (I conceive) that he was troubled upon a time, when my
Lord Ambassador, having business with him (and upon those terms, there is no
coming unto that King empty-handed without some Present, or other; of which
more afterward), and having at that time nothing left, which he thought fit to
give him, presented him with Mercators great Book of Cosmography, (which the
Ambassador had brought thither for his own use) telling the Mogol, that that
Book described the four parts of the World, and all several Countries in them
contained. The Mogol at the first seemed to be much taken with it, desiring
presently to see his own Territories, which were immediately shown unto him;
he asked which were those Countries about them, he was told Tartaria and
Persia, as the names of the rest which confine with him; and then causing the
Book to be turned all over, and finding no more to fall to his share, but what
at first he saw, and he calling himself the Conqueror of the World, and having
no greater share in it, seemed to be a little troubled; yet civilly told the
Ambassador, that neither himself, nor any of his People did understand the
Language in which that Book was written; and because so, he further told him,
that he would not rob him of such a Jewel, and therefore returned it unto him
again.

And the Truth is, that the Great Mogol might very well bring his Action
against Mercator and others who describe the World, but streighten him very
much in their Maps; not allowing him to be Lord and Commander of those
Provinces, which properly belong unto him.

But it is true likewise that he, who has the greatest share on the face of
the Earth, if it be compared with the whole World, appears not great. As it was
said of the Lands of Alcibiades, that, compared with the Globe of the whole
Earth, they did not appear bigger then a small tittle. The Mogol's Territories
are more apparent, large, and visible, as one may take notice, who strictly
views this affixed Map, which is a true representation of that great Empire in
its large dimensions. So that although the Mogol be not Master of the whole
World, yet has he a great share in it, if we consider his very large
Territories, and his abundant riches, as will after more appear, whose wealth
and strength makes him so potent, as that he is able, whenever he pleases to
make inroades upon, and to do much mischief unto any of his Neighbors; but I
leave that, and come now to speak

SECTION XXIII. Of the Mogol's Policy in his Government, exercised by himself
and Substitutes.
ANd it is that indeed, which is the worst of all Governments, called by
Aristotle (...), Arbitrary, Illimited, Tyrannical, such as a most severe Master
uses to Servants, not that which a good King administreth to Subjects.

Which makes it very uncomfortable for those that live as Subjects there, under
the command of others, taller then themselves by their swords length, or so to
be fixed in any part of the World.

-- Where no Law resists
The sword, but that it acts what it lists.
As in that Empire; where the King measures his power by his Sword or Lance,
in making his will, his guide, and therefore any thing lawful that likes him;
which carriage of his might very well become that Emblem of illimited power,
which is, a Sword waved by a strong arm and hand, and the Word sic volo, sic
jubeo, or thus will I have it; and if any there be so far discontented as to
make any the least question at what he does, he has a far stronger argument
still in readiness, than all the force of Logic can make, and that is very
many thousands of men, that are stout and able Soldiers, whom he keeps
continually in arms, and pay, that can make any thing good, which he shall
please to command.

There are no Laws for Government kept in that Empire upon record (for ought I
could ever learn) to regulate Governors there in the administration of
Justice, but what are written in the breast of that King and his Substitutes;
and therefore they often take liberty to proceed how they please, in punishing
the Offender rather than the offense; men's persons more than their Crimes;
aegrotum potius quam morbum.

Yet ever they pretend to proceed in their ways of judicature (which is the
right progress in judgment) secundum allegata and probata, by proofs and not
by presumptions.

The great Mogol will sit himself as Judge, in any matters of consequence that
happen near unto him. And there are no Malefactors that lie more than one night
in prison; and many times not at all, for if the party offending be apprehended
early in the day, he is immediately brought before him that must be his Judge,
by whom he is presently either acquitted or condemned; if he be sentenced to be
whipped, he has his payment, and that (usually with much severity) in the place
(often,) where he received that sentence. If condemned to die, he is presently
(which as I apprehend it is a very hard course, though used anciently among the
Jews) carried from his sentence to his execution, which is done usually in the
Bazar, or Marketplace. And this round and quick Justice keeps the people there
in such order and aw, as that there are not many executions.

Murder and Theft they punish with death, and with what kind of death the Judge
pleases to impose: for, some Malefactors are hanged, some beheaded, some
impaled, or put upon sharp stakes (a death which has much cruelty and extreme
torture and torment in it,) some are torn in pieces by wild Beasts, some killed
by Elephants; and others stung to death by Snakes.

Those which are brought to suffer death by Elephants (some of which vast
Creatures, are trained up to do execution on Malefactors) are thus dealt
withal. First, if that overgrown Beast be commanded by his Rider to dispatch
that poor, trembling Offender presently, who lies prostrate before him, he will
with his broad round foot immmediately press him to death; but that wretched
Creature be condemned ita mori, ut se mori sentiat; so to die, as that he may
feel tortures and torments in dying (which are as so many several deaths.) The
Elephant will break his bones by degrees (as men are broken upon the wheel) as
first his Legs, then his Thighs, after that the bones in both his Arms; this
done, his wretched Spirit is left to breathe its last out of the midst of those
broken bones.

But it is a very sad thing, and very much unbeseeming a man, as he is a man,
to seem to take pleasure in executing of punishment, as those appear to do, who
make it their business to study, and invent tortures to inflict on others.

I have been told by some, who were eyewitnesses (whom I dare credit, and
therefore I dare relate it) of strange kinds of death executed by the command
of the King of Japan upon his subjects: where some are crucified or nailed to a
Cross: others rather roasted, than burnt to death; Thus, there is a stake set
up, and a Circle of fire at a pretty distance, made round about it; the
condemned person being naked, is so fastened to that stake, as that he may move
round about it, and so does as long as he is able to stir, till his flesh
begins to blister; then he falls down, and there lies roaring till the fire,
made about him, puts him to silence by taking away both his voice and life.

Now they say that one great reason, why they put men there unto such exquisite
torments, is, because they hold it a thing of the greatest dishonor there for
any man to die by the hand of an Executioner: therefore they are usually
commanded, when they are sentenced to die, to rip up, or cut open their own
bellies, and those who will not so do are tormented in dying. Hence most of
that people, when as they have received that hard command to prevent death, by
dying; call for their friends about them, eat, and seem to be merry with them,
and then in the close of the meal, and in their presence, commit this sad
slaughter upon themselves, as first those poor wretches make themselves naked
to the middle, he, or they who are to die; then the most wretched
self-murderer, who is to act that bloody part, strikes a sharp Knife into the
bottom of his belly, then rips himself up, and after gives himself one other
cut cross his belly, and when he has done both these, if after he can but wipe
his bloody knife upon a white paper, or napkin that is laid by him, he is
believed to part with his life with a very great deal of honor, and immediately
(as he is made to believe) goes to Fakaman, whom they say is the God of war. So
much power the Devil has in those dark places of the world, to make the people
there do what he please. Oh it is a misery of all miseries here to be a drudge,
a bondman, a slave to the Devil! as those, and so infinite multitudes more
professing Christ, are, by obeying Satan in his most unreasonable commands, and
yet will not be made sensible of that, their basest bondage.

But to return again to the place from whence I have made some excursion. When
I was in India, there was one sentenced by the Mogol himself, for killing his
own father, to dye thus; first he commanded that this Parricide should be bound
alive by his heels fastened to a small iron chain, which was tied to the
hind-leg of a great Elephant; and then that this Elephant should drag him after
him one whole remove of that King, from one place to another, which was about
ten miles distant, that so all his flesh might be worn off his bones, and so it
was, when we saw him in the way following that King in his Progress; for he
appeared then to us a Skeleton, rather than a body.

There was another condemned to dye by the Mogol himself (while we were at
Amadavar) for killing his own Mother; and at this the King was much troubled to
think of a death, suitable for so horrid a crime; but, upon a little pause, he
adjudged him to be stung to death by Snakes, which was accordingly done. I told
you before that there are some Mountebanks there, which keep great Snakes to
show tricks with them; one of those fellows was presently called for to bring
his Snakes to do that execution, who came to the place where that wretched
Creature was appointed to dye, and found him there all naked (except a little
covering before) and trembling. Then suddenly the Mountebank (having first
angered and provoked the venomous creatures) put one of them to his Thigh, which
presently twined it self about that part, till it came near his Groin, and
there bit him till blood followed, the other was fastened to the outside of his
other Thigh, twining about it (for those Snakes thus kept, are long and
slender) and there bit him likewise; notwithstanding, the wretch kept upon his
feet near a quarter of an hour, before which time the Snakes were taken from
him; But he complained exceedingly of a fire that with much torment had
possessed all his Limbs, and his whole body began to swell exceedingly, like
Nasidius, bit by a Lybian Serpent, called a Prester: Now much after this manner
did the stinging of those Snakes work upon that wretch; and about half an hour
after they were taken from him, the soul of that unnatural monster left his
groaning Carcass, and so went to its place. And certainly both those I last
named so sentenced, and so executed, most justly deserved to be handled with
all severity, for taking away the lives of those from whom they had received
their own. Some of our family did behold the execution done upon the later, who
related all the passages of it; and for my part I might have seen it too, but
that I had rather go a great way not to see, then one step to behold such a
sight.

After the example of that King, his Governors, deputed and set over Provinces
and Cities, proceed in the course of Justice, to impose what punishment and
death they please upon all offenders, and malefactors.

That King never suffers any of his Vicegerents to tarry long in one place of
Government, but removes them usually (after they have exercised that Power,
which was given unto them in place, for one year) unto some other place of
Government, remote from the former, wherein they exercise their power: and this
that King does, that those, which be his Substitutes, may not in any place grow
popular.

I told you before that this people are very neat, shaving themselves so often,
as that they feel the Rasor almost every day; but when that King sends any of
them unto any place of Government, or upon any other employment, they cut not
their hair at all, till they return again into his presence; as if they desired
not to appear beautiful, or to give themselves any content in this while they
live out of the Kings sight; and therefore the King, as soon as he sees them,
bids them cut their hair.

When the Mogol by Letters sends his Commands to any of his Governors, those
Papers are entertained with as much respect as if himself were present; for the
Governor having intelligence that such Letters are come near him, himself with
other inferior Officers ride forth to meet the Patamar, or Messenger that
brings them; and as soon as he sees those Letters he alights from his horse,
falls down on the earth, and then takes them from the Messenger and lays them
on his head, whereon he binds them fast, and then returning to his place of
public meeting, for dispatch of businesses, he reads them, and answers their
contents with all care and diligence.

The King often times in his own person, and so his Substitutes appointed
Governors for Provinces and Cities, Judge in all matters Criminal that concern
Life and Death. There are other Officers to assist them, which are called
Cut-walls (whose Office is like that of our Sheriffs in England) and these have
many substitutes under them, whose business it is to apprehend, and to bring
before these Judges such as are to be tried for things Criminal, or Capital,
where the offender (as before) knows presently what will become of him. And
those Officers wait likewise on other Judges there, which are called Cadees,
who only meddle with Contracts and Debts and other businesses of this nature
'twixt man and man. Now these Officers arrest Debtors, and bring them before
those Judges, and their Sureties too, bound as with us in Contracts, confirmed
(as before) under their hands and seals; and if they give not content unto
those which complain of them, they will imprison their persons, where they
shall find and feel the weight of fetters; nay, many times they will sell their
Persons, their Wives and Children into bondage, when they cannot satisfy their
debts; And the custom of that Country bears with such hard and pitiless
courses, such as was complained of by the poor Widow unto the Prophet Elisha;
who when her husband was dead, and she not able to pay, the Creditor came and
took her two sons to be bondmen, 2 Kings 4.1.

The Mogol looked to be presented with some thing, or other, when my Lord
Ambassador came to him, and if he saw him often empty handed, he was not
welcome; and therefore the East India Company were wont every year to send many
particular things unto him, in the name of the King of England, that were given
him at several times, especially then when the Ambassador had any request unto
him, which made a very fair way unto it.

Amongst many other things, when my Lord Ambassador first went thither, the
Company sent the Mogol an English Coach, and Harness for four Horses, and an
able Coachman, to suit and manage some of his excellent Horses, that they
might be made fit for that service. The Coach they sent was lined within with
Crimson China Velvet, which when the Mogol took notice of, he told the
Ambassador that he wondered the King of England would trouble himself so much,
as to send unto China for Velvet to line a Coach for him, in regard that he had
been informed, that the English King had much better Velvet nearer home, for
such, or any other uses.

And immediately after, the Mogol caused that Coach to be taken all to pieces,
and to have another made by it, for (as before) they are a people that will
make any new thing by a pattern; and when his new Coach was made according to
the pattern, his workmen first putting the English Coach together, did so with
that they had new made; then pulling out all the China Velvet which was in the
English Coach, there was in the room thereof put a very rich Stuff, the ground
Silver, wrought all over in spaces with variety of flowers of silk, excellently
well suited for their colors, and cut short like a Plush, and in stead of the
brass-nails that were first in it, there were nails of silver put in their
places. And the Coach, which his own Workmen made was lined and seated
likewise with a richer stuff than the former, the ground of it gold, mingled
like the other with silk flowers, and the nails silver and double gilt; and
after having Horses and Harness fitted for both his Coaches, He rode sometimes
in them, and contracted with the English-coach-man to serve him, whom he made
very fine, by rich vests he gave him, allowing him a very great Pension;
besides, he never carried him in any of those Coaches, but he gave him the
reward of ten pounds at the least, which had raised the Coachman unto a very
great Estate, had not death prevented it, and that immediately after he was
settled in that great service.

The East India Company sent other Presents for that King, as excellent
Pictures which pleased the Mogol very much, especially if there were fair and
beautiful Women portrayed in them. They sent likewise Swords, Rapiers,
excellently well hatched, and pieces of rich Imbroidery to make sweet bags, and
rich Gloves, and handsome Looking-glasses, and other things to give away, that
they might have always some things in readiness to present both to the King,
and also to his Governors, where our Factories were settled: for all these were
like those Rulers of Israel mentioned, Hosea 4.18. who would love to say with
shame, give ye. They looked to be presented with something, when our Factors
had any especial occasion to repair unto them, and if the particular thing they
then presented did not like them well, they would desire to have it exchanged
for something else, happily they having never heard of our good and modest
proverb, That a man must not look into the mouth of a given Horse. And it is a
very poor thing indeed which is freely given, and is not worth the taking.

The Mogol sometimes by his Firmauns, or Letters Patents, will grant some
particular things unto single, or diverse persons, and presently after will
contradict those Grants by other Letters, excusing himself thus, That he is a
great, and an absolute King; and therefore must not be tied unto any thing,
which if he were, he said that he was a slave, and not a freeman: Yet what he
promised was usually enjoyed, although he would not be tied to a certain
performance of his promise. Therefore there can be no dealing with this King
upon very sure terms, who will say and unsay, promise and deny. Yet we
Englishmen did not at all suffer by that inconstancy of his, but there found a
free Trade, a peaceable residence, and a very good esteem with that King and
People; and much the better (as I conceive) by reason of the prudence of my
Lord Ambassador, who was there (in some sense) like Joseph in the Court of
Pharaoh; for whose sake all his Nation there, seemed to fare the better. And we
had a very easy way upon any grievance to repair to that King as will appear
now in my next Section, which speaks,

SECTION XXIV. Of the Mogol, showing himself three times publicly unto his
people every day, and in what state and glory he does oftentimes appear.
FIrst, early in the morning, at that very time the Sun begins to appear above
the Horizon, He appears unto his people in a place very like unto one of our
Balconies, made in his Houses, or Pavilions for his morning appearance,
directly opposite to the East, about seven, or eight foot high from the ground,
against which time a very great number of his people, especially of the greater
sort, who desire as often as they can to appear in his eye, assemble there
together to give him the Salam, or good morning, crying all out as soon as they
see their King with a loud voice, Padsha Salamet, which signifies, Live O great
King, or, O great King, Health and life. At Noon he shows himself in another
place like the former, on the South Side; and a little before Sunset, in a
like place, on the West Side of his House, or Tent: but as soon as the Sun
forsakes the Hemisphear, he leaves his people ushered in and out with Drums and
Wind-instruments, and the peoples acclamations.

At both which times likewise very great numbers of his people assemble
together to present themselves before him: And at any of these three times, he
that has a suit to the King, or desires Justice at his hands, be he Poor, or
Rich, if he hold up a Petition to be seen, shall be heard and answered.

And between seven and nine of the Clock at night, he sits within House, or
Tent, more privately in a spacious place, called his Goozalcan, or
bathing-house made bright, like day by abundance of lights, and here the King
sits mounted upon a stately Throne, where his Nobles and such as are favored
by him stand about him: others find admittance to, but by special leave from
his Guard, who cause every one that enters that place to breathe upon them; and
if they imagine that any have drunk wine, they keep him out.

At this time my Lord Ambassador made his usual addresses to him, and I often
waited on him thither; and it was a good time to do business with that King,
who then was for the most part very pleasant, and full of talk unto those which
were round about him, and so continued till he fell a sleep (often times by
drinking) and then all assembled, immediately quitted the place, except those
which were his trusted servants, who by turns watched his person.

The Mogol has a most stately, rich, and spacious house at Agra, his
Metropolis, or chief City, which is called his Palace Royal, wherein there are
two Towers, or Turrets about ten foot square covered with massy Gold (as ours
are usually with Lead) this I had from Tom Coryat, as from other English
Merchants, who keep in a Factory at that place. And further they told me, that
he has a most glorious Throne within that his Palace, ascended by diverse
steps, which are covered with plate of silver, upon the top of which ascent
stand four Lions upon pedestals (of curiously colored Marble) which Lions are
all made of Massy silver, some part of them gilded with gold, and beset with
precious stones. Those Lions support a Canopy of pure gold, under which the
Mogol sits, when as he appears in his greatest state and glory.

For the beauty of that Court; it consists not in gay and gorgious apparel, for
the Country is so hot, that they cannot endure any thing that is very warm, or
massy; or rich about them. The Mogol himself for the most part is covered with
a garment (as before described) made of pure, white, and fine Callicolaune, and
so are his Nobles; which garments are washed after one days wearing. But for
the Mogol, though his clothing be not rich and costly, yet I believe that
there is never a Monarch in the whole world that is daily adorned with so many
Jewels as himself is. Now, they are Jewels which make men's covering most rich;
such as people in other parts sometimes wear about them, that are otherwise
most meanly habited. To which purpose I was long since told by a Gentleman of
honor, sent as a Companion to the old Earl of Nottingham, when he was employed
as an extraordinary Ambassador by King James, to confirm the peace made 'twixt
himself and the King of Spain, which Ambassador had a very great many
Gentlemen in his train, in as rich clothing as Velvets and Silks could make;
but then there did appear many a great Don, or Grandee in the Spanish Court, in
a long black bays Cloak and Cassack, which had one Hatband of Diamonds, which
was of more worth by far, than all the bravery of the Ambassadors many
Followers.

But for the Mogol, I wonder not at his many Jewels, he being (as I conceive)
the greatest, and richest Master of precious stones that inhabits the whole
earth. For Diamonds (which of all other are accounted most precious stones)
they are found in Decan (where the Rocks are, out of which they are dug) the
Princes whereof are the next Neighbors and Tributaries to the great Mogol, and
they pay him as Tribute many Diamonds yearly; and further, he has the refusal
of all those rich stones they sell, he having Gold and Silver in the greatest
abundance, (and that will purchase any thing but heaven) and he will part with
any money for any Gems beside, that are precious and great, whether Rubies, or
any other stones of value, as also for rich Pearls.

And his Grandees follow him in that fancy: for one of his great Lords gave our
Merchants there, twelve hundred pounds sterling for one Pearl which was brought
out of England. The Pearl was shaped like a Pear, very large, beautiful, and
orient, and so its price deserved it should be.

Now the Mogol having such an abundance of Jewels, wears many of them daily;
enough to exceed those women, which Rome was wont to show in their Star-like
dresses, who in the height and prosperity of that Empire -- were said to wear
The spoils of Nations in one ear.
Or, Lollia Paulina, who was hid with Jewels. For the great Mogol, the
Diamonds, and Rubies, and Pearls, which are very many, and daily worn by him,
are all of an extraordinary greatness, and consequently of an exceeding great
value. And besides those he wears about his Shash, or head covering, he has a
long Chain of Jewels hanging about his Neck (as long as an ordinary
Gold-Chain); others about his wrists, and the Hilts of his Sword and Dagger,
are most curiously enriched with those precious Stones; beside others of very
great value, which he wears in Rings on his fingers.

The first of March, the Mogol begins a royal Feast, like that which Ahasuerus
made in the third year of his Reign, Esth. 1. wherein he showed the riches of
his glorious Kingdom. This feast the Mogol makes, is called the Nooroos, that
signifies Nine-days: which time it continues, to usher in the new year, which
begins with the Mahometans there, the tenth day of March.

Against which Feast, the Nobles assemble themselves together at that Court in
their greatest Pomp, presenting their King with great gifts, and he requiting
them again with Princely rewards: at which time I being in his presence, beheld
most immense and incredible riches, to my amazement, in Gold, Pearls, Precious
stones, Jewels, and many other glittering vanities. This Feast is usually kept
by the Mogol while he is in his Progress, and lodges in Tents.

Whether his Diet at this time be greater than ordinary I know not; for he
always eats in private amongst his Women, where none but his own Family see him
while he is eating; which Family of his consists of his Wives, and Children,
and Women, and Eunuchs, and his Boys; and none but these abide and lodge in the
Kings Houses, or Tents, and therefore how his Table is spread, I could never
know; but doubtless he has of all those varieties that Empire affords, if he
so please. His food (they say) is served in unto him in Vessels of Gold, which
covered and brought unto him by his Eunuchs, after it is proved by his Tasters,
he eats, not at any set times of the day, but he has provision ready at all
times, and calls for it when he is hungry, and never but then.

The first of September (which was the late Mogol's birthday) he retaining an
ancient yearly Custom, was, in the presence of his chief Grandees, weighed in a
Balance; the Ceremony was performed within his House, or Tent, in a fair
spacious Room, whereinto none were admitted but by special leave. The Scales in
which he was thus weighed were plated with Gold, and so the beam on which they
hung, by great Chains made likewise of that most precious Metal, the King
sitting in one of them was weighed first against silver Coin, which immediately
after was distributed among the poor; then was he weighed against Gold; after
that against Jewels (as they say) but I observed (being present there with my
Lord Ambassador) that he was weighed against three several things, laid in
silken Bags on the contrary Scale. When I saw him in the Balance, I thought on
Belshazzar, who was found too light, Dan. 5.27. By his weight (of which his
Physicians yearly keep an exact account) they presume to guess of the present
estate of his body, of which they speak flatteringly, however they think it to
be.

When the Mogol is thus weighed, he casts about among the standers by thin
pieces of silver, and some of Gold, made like flowers of that Country, and
some of them are made like Cloves, and some like Nutmegs, but very thin and
hollow. Then he drinks to his Nobles in his Royal wine (as that of Ahasuerus is
called, Esth. 1.7.) who pledge his health: at which solemnity he drank to my
Lord Ambassador, in a Cup of Gold most curiously enameled, and set all over
the outside with stones (which were small Rubies, Turkesses, and Emeralds) with
a Cover, or Plate, to set in it in, both of pure Gold, the brims of which
plate, and the cover were enameled, and set with stones as the other, and all
these together weighed twenty and four ounces of our English weights, which he
then gave unto my Lord Ambassador, whom he ever used with very much respect,
and would moreover often ask him, why he did not desire some good, and great
gifts at his hands, be being a great King, and able to give it; the Ambassador
would reply, That he came not thither to beg any thing of him; all that he
desired, was that his Contrymen the English might have a free, safe, and
peaceable trade in his Dominions: The Mogol would answer that he was bound in
honor to afford them that, we coming from the furthermost parts of the world
to trade there; and would often bid the Ambassador to ask something for
himself, who to this would answer, that if that King knew not better to give,
then he knew to ask, he must have nothing from him. Upon these terms they
continually both stood, so that in conclusiun the Ambassador had no gift from
him, but that beforementioned, besides an horse or two, and sometimes a Vest,
or upper Garment, made of slight Cloth of Gold, which the Mogol would first put
upon his own back, and then give it to the Ambassador. But the Mogol (if he
had so pleased) might have bestowed on him some great Princely gift, and found
no greater miss of it, than there would be of a Glass of water taken out of a
great Fountain. Now although the Mogol had such infinite Treasure, yet he could
find room to store up more still: the desires of a covetous heart being so
unsatiable, as that it never knows when it has enough: being like a bottomless
purse that can never be filled; for the more it has, the more still it covets.

See an image hereof in Alcmaeon, who being willed by Craesus to go into his
Treasure-house, and there take as much Gold as himself could carry away;
provided for that purpose a long Garment that was double down to his ankles,
and great boots, and filled them both; nay, he stuffed his mouth, and tied
wedges of Gold to the locks of his head, and doubtless, but for killing
himself, he would have filled his skull and bowels therewith. Here was an heart
set upon Gold, and Gold overlading an heart: for the man stowing so much about
him, as that he could not stir with it, forfeited what he might have had, and
was turned out of the Treasury, as poor and empty as he came into it. He is a
rich man whatever he has (be it more, or less) that is contented. He is a poor
man, who still wants more, in becoming poor by plenty, wanting what he has as
well and as much as what he has not; and so do very many, who are the greatest
engrossers of the worlds wealth.

SECTION XXV. Of his Pastimes at home and abroad, etc. where, something of his
Quality, and Disposition.
NOw what he does, and how he behaves himself amongst his house-full of Wives
and Women cannot be known, and therefore not related; but when he shows himself
(as before) thrice openly to his people, every day, he had always something or
other presented before him to make him sport, and to give him present content.

As sometimes he delighted himself in seeing Horses ridden, the Natives there
(as before) being very excellent in their well-managing of them. Sometimes he
saw his great Elephants fight. And at other times he pleased himself in seeing
wrestling, or dancing, or juggling, and what else he liked.

And it happened that (but a few years before our abode there) a Juggler of
Bengala (a Kingdom famous for Witches, and men of that profession) brought an
Ape before the King (who was ever greedy to please himself with Novelties)
professing that he would do many strange feats: The Mogol was ready presently
to make a trial of this, and forthwith called some boys about him (which he was
conceived to keep for such use as I dare not name,) and plucking a Ring from
his finger gave it one of them to hide, that he might make a trial, whether or
no the Ape could find it out; who presently went to the boy that had it. The
Mogol made some further trials like this, where the Ape did his part as before.
And before the Ape was taken out of his presence, this strange, and unexpected
thing following came into the King's thought. There are (said he) many disputes
in the World about that true Prophet which should come into the World. We, said
the Mogol, are for Mahomet. The Persians magnify Mortis Hale (but they are
Mahometans for Religion likewise.) The Hindoos, or Heathens there, have many
whom they highly extol and magnify; as Bremaw, and Bramon, and Ram, and
Permissar; the Parsees are for Zertoost, the Jews for Moses, the Christians for
Christ; and he added three more whose names I have not, who make up the number
of twelve, who have all their several followers in that part of the World; and
then he caused those twelve Names to be written in twelve several Scrolls, and
put together, to see if the Ape could draw out the Name of the true Prophet,
this done, the Ape put his paw amongst them, and pulled forth the Name of
Christ. The Mogol a second time, caused those twelve Names to be written again
in twelve other Scrolls and Characters, and put together; when the Ape as
before pulled forth the Name of Christ.

Then Mahobet-Chan, a great Nobleman of that Court, and in high favor with the
King, said, that it was some imposture of the Christians (though there were
none that did bear that Name there present) and desired that he might make a
third trial; which granted, he put but eleven of those names together,
reserving the name of Christ in his hand; the Ape searching as before, pulled
forth his paw empty, and so twice, or thrice together, the King demanding a
reason for this, was answered, that happily the thing he looked for was not
there: he was bid to search for it, and then putting out those eleven names one
after the other, in a seeming indignation rent them; then running to
Mahobet-Chan caught him by the hand where the Name of Christ was concealed,
which delivered, he opened the Scroll, and so held it up to the King, but did
not tear it as the former; upon which the Mogol took the Ape, and gave his
Keeper a good Pension for to keep him near about him, calling him the Divining
Ape, and this was all that followed upon this admirable thing, except the great
wonder and amazement of that people.

There was one some years since wrote this story (but somewhat varied from that
I have here related) in a little printed Pamphlet, and told his Reader that I
had often seen that Ape while I lived in those parts, which particular he
should have left out; but for the Relation it self, I believe it was so,
because it has been often confirmed there in its report unto me by diverse
persons, who knew not one another, and were differing in Relion, yet all agreed
in the story, and in all the circumstances thereof.

Now for the disposition of that King, it ever seemed unto me to be composed of
extremes; for sometimes he was barbarously cruel, and at other times he would
seem to be exceeding fair and gentle.

For his cruelties; he put one of his women to a miserable death, one of his
women he had formerly touched and kept Company withal, but now she was
superannuated; for neither himself, nor Nobles (as they say) come near their
wives, or women, after they exceed the age of thirty years, though they keep
them, and allow them some maintenance. The fault of that woman, this: the Mogol
upon a time found her, and one of his Eunuchs kissing one another; and for this
very thing, the King presently gave command that a round hole should be made in
the earth, and that her body should be put into that hole, where she should
stand with her head only above ground, and the earth to be put in again unto
her close, round about her, that so she might stand in the parching Sun, till
the extreme hot beams thereof did kill her, in which torment she lived one
whole day, and the night following, and almost till the next noon, crying out
most lamentably while she was able to speak in her language, as the Shunamits
Child did in his, 2 King. 4. Ah my head, my head! Which horrid execution, or
rather murder was acted near our house: where the Eunuch by the command of the
said King was brought very near the place where this poor Creature was thus
buried alive, and there in her sight cut all into pieces.

That great King would be often overcome by Wine, yet (as if he meant to
appropriate that sin to himself) would punish others with very much severity,
who were thus distempered.

Sometimes for little, or no faults, the Mogol would cause men to be most
severely whipped, till they were almost ready to die under the rod; which after
they must kiss in thankfulness.

He caused one of his servants of the higher rank to be very much whipped for
breaking a China-Cup, he was commanded to keep safe, and then sent him into
China, (which is a mavelous distance from thence) to buy another.

Sometimes in other of his mad distempers he would condemn men to servitude, or
dismember, or else put them to death, as sacrifices to his will and passion,
not Justice. So that it might be said of him, quando male nemo pejus, that when
he did wickedly none could do worse, as if it had been true of him which was
spoken of that monster Nero observed before, who was called Lutum sanguine
maceratum, Dirt soaked in blood.

For his good actions, he did relieve continually many poor people; and not
seldom would show many expressions of duty and strong affection to his Mother
then living, so that he who esteemed the whole world as his Vassals would help
to carry her in a Palankee upon his shoulders.

The Mogol would often visit the Cells of those he esteemed religious men,
whose Persons he esteemed sacred, as if they had been Demigods.

And he would speak most respectively of our blessed Savior Christ; but his
Parentage, his poverty, and his cross did so confound his thoughts, that he
knew not what to think of them.

Lastly, the Mogol is very free and noble unto all those which fall into, and
abide in his affection, which brings me now to speak

SECTION XXVI. Of the exceeding great Pensions the Mogol gives unto his
Subjects, how they are raised, and how long they are continued, etc.
WHich great revenues that many of them do enjoy, makes them to live like great
Princes rather than other men. Now for those Pensions, which are so exceeding
great, the Mogol in his far extended Monarchy allows yearly pay for one Million
of Horse; and for every Horse and Man about eighteen pounds sterling per annum,
which is exactly paid every year, raised from Land, and other Commodities which
that Empire affords and appointed for that purpose. Now some of the Mogol's
most beloved Nobles have the pay of six thousand horse; and there are others
(at the least twenty in his Empire) which have the pay of 5000 horse, exceeding
large Pensions above the revenue of any other Subjects in the whole World, they
amounting unto more than one hundred thousand pounds yearly unto a particular
man. Now others have the pay of four thousand horse; others of three, or two,
or one thousand horse, and so downward; and these by their proportions, are
appointed to have horses always in readiness well manned, and otherwise
appointed for the Kings service, so that he who has the pay of five, or six
thousand, must always have one thousand in readiness, or more, according to the
Kings need of them, and so in proportion all the rest which enables them on a
sudden to make up the number, at the least of two hundred thousand horse; of
which number, they have always at hand one hundred thousand to wait upon the
King wheresoever he is.

There are very many private men in Cities and Towns, who are Merchants, or
Tradesmen that are very rich: but it is not safe for them that are so, so to
appear, lest that they should be used as filled Sponges.

But there is never a Subject in that Empire, who has Land of inheritance,
which he may call his own; but they are all Tenants at the will of their King,
having no other title to that they enjoy besides the Kings favor, which is by
far more easily lost than gotten; It is true, that the King advances many
there, unto many great honors, and allows them (as before) mavelous great
revenues; but no Son there enjoys either the Titles, or Means of his Father
that has had Pensions from that King, for the King takes possession of all
when they are dead, appointing their Children some competent means for their
subsistence, which they shall not exceed, if they fall not into the Kings
affection as their Fathers did; wherefore many great men in this Empire live up
to the height of their means; and therefore have a very numerous train, a very
great retinue to attend upon them, which makes them to appear like Princes,
rather than Subjects.

Yet this their necessary dependence on their King binds them unto such base
subjection, as that they will yield with readiness unto any of his unreasonable
and willful commands. As Plutarch writes of the Soldiers of Scipio, Nullus est
horum, qui non conscensa turri semet in mare praecipaturus sit, si jussero,
There was never a one in his Army, by his own report, that would not for a word
of his mouth, have gone up into a Tower, and cast himself thence headlong into
the Sea: and thus the people here will do any thing the King commands them to
do; so that if he bid the Father to lay hands of violence upon his Son, or the
Son upon his Father, they will do it, rather than the will of the King should
be disobeyed. Thus forgetting Nature, rather than Subjection.

And this tie of theirs (I say) upon the Kings favor makes all his Subjects
most servile flatterers, for they will commend any of his actions, though they
be nothing but cruelty; so any of his speeches, though nothing but folly. And
when the King sits and speaks to any of his people publicly, there is not a
word falls from him that is not written by some Scriveners, or Scribes, that
stand round about him.

In the year 1618. when we lived at that Court, there appeared at once in the
month of November in their Hemisphear two great Blazing-stars, the one of them
North, the other South, which unusual sight appeared there for the space of one
month. One of those strange Comets in the North, appeared like a long
blazing-torch, or Lance fired at the upper end; the other in the South, was
round like a pot boiling out fire. The Mogol consulted with his flattering
Astrologers, who spoke of these Comets unto the King, as Daniel sometimes did
of Nebuchadnezzars dream, Dan. 4.19. My Lord, the dream is to them that hate
thee, and the interpretation thereof unto thine enemies. For his Astrologers
told him that he needed not trouble himself with the thought thereof, for it
concerned other places and people, not him nor his. But not long after this,
their season of Rain, (before spoken of) which was never known to fail till
then, failed them; and this caused such a famine and mortality in the South
parts of his Empire, that it did very much unpeople it: and in the Northern
part thereof (whither the Mogol then repaired) his third Son Sultan Caroom
raised, and kept together very great forces, and stood upon his guard, and
would not disband, till his Father had delivered his eldest Son Sultan
Coobseroo into his hands. And how, when he had him in his power he used him,
you shall after hear.

In the mean time, take one admirable example of a very gross flatterer, but a
great Favorite of that King, who was noted above others of that Nation to be a
great neglecter of God, believing it Religion enough to please the Mogol his
Master. This man was a Soldier of an approved valor: But upon a time he
sitting in dalliance with one of his women, she plucked an hair from his breast
(which grew about his Nipple) in wantonness, without the least thought of doing
him hurt. But the little wound, that small and unparalle'd instrument of death
made, presently began to fester, and in short time after became a Canker
incurable; in fine, when he saw that he must needs dye, he uttered these words,
which are worth the remembering of all that shall ever hear them, saying:

Who would not have thought but that I, who have been so long bred a Soldier,
should have dyed in the face of mine Enemy, either by a Sword, or a Lance, or
an Arrow, or a Bullet, or by some such instrument of death: But now (though too
late) I am forced to confess that there is a great God above, whose Majesty I
have ever despised, that needs no bigger Lance than an hair to kill an
Atheist, or a despiser of his Majesty. And so, desiring that those his last
words might be told unto the King his Master, he died.

The Mogol never advances any, but he gives him a new name, and this of some
pretty signification; as Pharaoh did unto Joseph, when he made him great in his
Court, Genesis 41.45. The new names (I say) that the Mogol gives unto those he
advances and favors, are significant. As Asaph Chan, The gathering, or rich
Lord; whose Sister the Mogol married, and she was his most beloved Wife: and
her Brothers mavelous great riches, answered his name; for he died worth many
Millions (as I have been credibly informed) the greatest Subject (I believe)
for wealth that ever the World had. So another of the Mogols Grandees was
called Mahobet-Chan, The beloved Lord. Another Chan-Iahan, The Lord of my
heart. Another Chan-Allaam, The Lord of the World. Another Chan-Channa, The
Lord of Lords. He called his chief Physician Mocrob-Chan, The Lord of my
health; and many other names, like these, his Grandees had, which at my being
there belonged to his most numerous Court.

And further for their Titles of honor there, all the Kings Children are
called Sultans, or Princes; his Daughters Sultana's, or Princesses; the next
title is Nabob, equivalent to a Duke; the next Channa, a double Lord, or Earl;
the next Chan, a Lord. So Meirsa signifies a Knight, that has been a General,
or Commander in the Wars; Vmbra, a Captain; Had, a Cavalier, or Soldier on
horseback: who have all allowed them means by the King (as before)
proportionable for the supports of their Honors, and Titles, and Names.

His Officers of State are his Treasurers, which receive his revenues in his
several Provinces, and take care for the payment of his great Pensions, which,
when they are due, are paid without any delay: There his chief Eunuchs (which
command the rest of them) take care for the ordering of his House, and are
Stewards and Controulers of it; his Secretaries, the Masters of his Elephants;
and the Masters of his Tents are other of his great Officers; and so are the
keepers of his Wardrobe, who are entrusted with his Plate and Jewels. To (...)
I may add those which take care of his Customs for Goods brought into his
Empire, as for commodities carried thence. But these are not many, because his
Seaports are but few. The Customs paid in his Ports are not high, that
strangers of all Nations may have the greater encouragement to Trade there with
him. But as he expects money from all strangers that Trade there: So it is a
fault he will not pardon (as before) for any to carry any quantity of silver
thence. He has other Officers that spread over his Empire, to exact moneys out
of all the labors of that people, who make the curious manufactures. So that
like a great Tree he receives nourishment from every, even the least Roots that
grow under his shadow; and therefore though his Pensions are exceeding great
(as before); they are nothing comparable to his much greater revenues.

By reason of that Countries immoderate heat, our English-cloath is not fit to
make Habits for that people: that of it which is sold there, is most of it for
color Red; and this they employ for the most part to make coverings for their
Elephants and Horses, and to cover their Coaches, the King himself taking a
very great part thereof; whose payments are very good, only the Merchant must
get the hands of some of his chief Officers to his Bill, appointed for such
dispatches, which are obtained as soon as desired. And this the King does to
prevent the abuses of particular, and single persons.

And now that I may present my Reader with the further glory of this great
King, I shall lead him where he may take a view,

SECTION XXVII. Of the Mogols Leskar, or Camp Royal, etc.
WHich indeed is very glorious, as all must confess, who have seen the infinite
number of Tents, or Pavilions there pitched together; which in a Plain make a
show equal to a most spacious and glorious City. These Tents, I say, when they
are altogether, cover such a great quantity of ground, that I believe it is
five English-miles at the least, from one side of them to the other, very
beautiful to behold from some Hill, where they may be all seen at once.

They write of Xerxes, that when from such a place he took a view of his very
numerous Army, consisting at the least of three hundred thousand men, he wept,
saying, that in less than the compass of one hundred years, not one of that
great mighty Host would be alive. And to see such a company then together of
all sorts of people (and I shall give a good reason presently why I believe
that mixed company of men, women, and children may make up such an huge number,
as before I named, if not exceed it) and to consider that death will seize upon
them all, within such a space of time, and that the second death has such a
power over them, is a thing of more sad consideration.

Now to make it appear that the number of people of all sorts is so exceeding
great, which here get and keep together in the Mogols Leskar, or Camp Royal;
first there are one hundred thousand Soldiers, which always wait about that
King (as before observed) and all his Grandees have a very great train of
followers and servants to attend them there, and so have all other men
according to their several qualities; and all these carry their Wives and
Childern, and whole family with them, which must needs amount to a very
exceeding great number. And further to demonstrate this; when that King removes
from one place to another, for the space of twelve hours, a broad passage is
continually filled with Passengers, and Elephants, and Horses, and Dromedaries,
and Camels, and Coaches, and Asses, and Oxen, (on which the meaner sort of men
and women with little children, ride) so full as they may well pass one by the
other. Now in such a broad passage, and in such a long time, a very great
number of people, the company continually moving on forward, may pass.

Thus this people moving on from place to place, it may be said of them, what
Salvian speaks of Israel, while they were in their journey to the land of
promise, that it was Ambulans Respublica, a walking Commonwealth. And therefore
that ancient people of God were called Hebrews, which signified Passengers:
their dwelling so in Tents, signified thus much to all the people of God in all
succeeding ages, that here they dwell in moveable habitations, having no
continuing City here, but they must look for one, and that is above.

The Tents pitched in that Leskar, or Camp Royal, are for the most part white,
like the clothing of those which own them. But the Mogols Tents are red,
reared up upon poles, higher by much than the other. They are placed in the
midst of the Camp, where they take up a very large compass of ground, and may
be seen every way, and they must needs be very great to afford room in them,
for himself, his Wives, Children, Women, Eunuchs, etc.

In the forefront, or outward part, or Court within his Tent, there is a very
large room for access to him, 'twixt seven and nine of the clock at night,
which (as before) is called his Goozulcad.

His Tents are encompassed round with Canats, which are like our Screens to
fold up together; those Canats are about ten foot high, made of narrow strong
Callico, and lined with the same, stiffened at every breadth with a Cane; but
they are strongest lined on their outside by a very great company of armed
Soldiers, that keep close about them night and day. The Tents of his great Men
are likewise large, placed round about his. All of them throughout the whole
Leskar reared up in such a due and constant order, that when we remove from
place to place, we can go as directly to those moveable dwellings, as if we
continued still in fixed and standing habitations, taking our direction from
several streets and Bazars, or Market places, every one pitched upon every
remove alike, upon such, or such a side of the Kings Tents, as if they had not
been at all removed.

The Mogol (which I should have observed before) has so much wealth, and
consequently so much power, by reason of his mavelous great multitudes of
fighting men, which he always keeps in Arms, commanding at all times as many of
them as he pleases; that as the Moabites truly said of Israel, (while they had
Almighty God fighting with them, and for them) so it may be said of him (if God
restrain him not) That his huge Companies are able to lick up all that are
round about him, as the Ox licketh up the grass of the field, Numb. 22.4.

When that mighty King removes from one place to another, he causes Drums to
be beat about midnight, which is a signal token of his removing. He removes not
far at one time; sometimes ten miles, but usually a less distance, according to
the best convenience he may have for water; there being such an infinite
company of Men, and other Creatures, whose drink is water, that in a little
time it may be as truly said of them, as it was of that mighty Host of
Sennacherib that Assyrian Monarch, Esaias 37.25. That they are able to drink up
Rivers.

But when the place he removed to afforded plenty of good water, he would
usually stay there three or four days, or more; and when he thus rested in his
Progress, would go abroad to find out pastimes; to which end he always carried
with him diverse kinds of Hawks, and Dogs, and Leopards, which (as before) they
train up to hunt withal; and being thus provided for variety of sports, would
fly at any thing in the Air, or seize on any Creature he desired to take on the
Earth.

The Mogol, when he was at Mandoa (which was environed with great Woods as
before was observed) sometimes with some of his Grandees, and a very great
company beside of Persian and Tartarian horsemen, his Soldiers (which are
stout daring men) would attempt to take some young wild Elephants found in
these Woods, which he took in strong toyls made for that purpose, which taken,
were manned, and made fit for his service. In which hunting they likewise
pursued on horseback Lions, and other wild beasts, and killed some of them
with their Bows, and Carbines, and Lances.

I waiting upon my Lord Ambassador two years, and part of a third, and
traveling with him in Progress with that King, in the most temperate months
there, 'twixt September and April, were in one of our Progresses 'twixt Mandoa
and Amadavar nineteen days, making but short journeys in a Wilderness, where
(by a very great company sent before us, to make those passages and places fit
to receive us) a way was cut out and made even, broad enough for our convenient
passage, and in the places where we pitched our Tents, a great compass of
ground rid, and made plain for them, by grubbing a number of Trees and Bushes;
yet there we went as readily to our Tents (the same order being still observed
in the pitching of them) as we did, when they were set up in the Plains. But
that which here seemed unto me to be most strange, was, that notwithstanding
our mavelous great company of men, women, and children there together, that
must all be fed, and the very great number of other creatures which did eat
Corn, as we never there wanted water, so we had so many Victuallers with us,
and so much Provision continually brought in unto us, that we never felt there
the want of any thing beside, but had it at as low rates as in other places.

The Mogols Wives and Women, when as they are removed from place to place, are
carried in Coaches (such as were before described) made up close, or in
Palankees on men's shoulders, or else on Elephants in pretty Receptacles,
surrounded with curtains, which stand up like low and little Turrets on their
backs; and some of the meaner sort ride in Cradles, hanging on the sides of
Dromedaries, all covered close, and attended by Eunuchs, who have many
Soldiers, which go before them to clear the way as they pass, they taking it
very ill if any (though they cannot see them) presume so much as to look
toward them; and therefore, though I could never see any of them, I shall here
take the liberty to speak somewhat I have heard and do believe

SECTION XXVIII. Of the Mogols Wives and Women; [where something of his
Children, etc.]
WHom I conceive to be Women of good feature, though for their color very
swart, which that people may call Beauty, it being the complexion of them all,
as the Crow thinks his bird fairest; but (as before) I never observed any
crooked or deformed person of either sex amongst them: For the honesty of those
great Men's Wives and Women, there is such a quick eye of jealousy continually
over them, that they are made so by force, though (as they say) they are never
much regarded by those great ones after the very first, and prime of their
youth is past.

For that great Monarch the Mogol, in the choice of his Wives and Women, he was
guided more by his eye and fancy, than by any respect had to his Honor; for
he took not the Daughters of neighboring Princes, but of his own Subjects, and
there preferred that, which he looked upon as beauty, before any thing else.

He was married to four Wives, and had Concubines, and Women beside (all which
were at his command) enough to make up their number a full thousand (as they
there confidently affirmed.) And that he might raise up, his beastly and
unnatural lusts, even to the very height, he kept boys as before, etc.

His most beloved Wife (when I lived at his Court) he called Noor-Mahal, which
signified, The Light of the Court; and to the other of his Wives and Women,
which he most loved, he gave new Names unto them, and such Names as he most
fancied.

For his Wife I first named, he took her out of the dust, from a very mean
Family; but however, she made such a through Conquest on his Affections, that
she engrossed almost all his Love, did what she pleased in the Government of
that Empire, where she advanced her Brother Asaph-Chan, and other her nearest
Relations, to the greatest places of Command and Honor, and Profit in that
vast Monarchy.

Her Brother Asaph-Chan was presently made one of the Stars of the first
Magnitude that shined in that Indian Court; and, when he had once gotten, so
kept the Mogol's Favor by the assistance of his Sister Noor-Mahal, that by the
Pensions given, and many Offices bestowed on him, he heaped up a mass of
Treasure above all belief (as before), and married his Daughter unto Sultan
Caroom, who is now King.

The Mogol of all his so many Wives and Concubines had but six Children, five
Sons and one Daughter. The Names he gave his Children, and others, were Names
that proceeded from Counsel (as he imagined) rather than Chance. His eldest Son
was called Sultan Coobsurroo, which signified the Prince with the good Face,
his Person and Beauty answered his Name; for he was a Prince of a very lovely
presence. His second Son he called Sultan Perum, Prince of the Pleiades, or of
the sweet influences of the Pleiades. His third Son (now King) though that
great dignity was never intended to him by his Father, was called Sultan
Caroom, or, The Prince of Bounty. His fourth, Sultan Shahar, or, The Prince of
Fame. His fifth, and last Son was called by him Sultan Tanct, Tanct in the
Persian Tongue, signifies a Throne; and he was named so by the King his Father,
because the first hour he sat peaceably on his Throne, there was News brought
him of that Sons Birth.

Yet the first Son of that King, which he has by any of his married Wives, by
Prerogative of Birth, inherits that Empire, the eldest Son of every Man (as
before) is called there (the great Brother.) And he that inherits that
Monarchy, does not openly slaughter his younger Brothers, as the Turks do; yet
it is observed, that few younger Brothers of those Indostan Kings have long
survived their Fathers.

Yet notwithstanding that long continued custom there for the eldest Son to
succeed the Father in that great Empire; Achabar Sha, Father of that late King,
upon high and just displeasure taken against his Son, for climbing up unto the
bed of Anarkelee, his Fathers most beloved Wife (whose name signified the
Kernel of a Pomegranate) and for other base actions of his, which stirred up
his Fathers high displeasure against him, resolved to break that ancient
custom; and therefore often in his life time protested, that not he, but his
Grandchild Sultan Coobsurroo, whom he always kept in his Court, should
succeed him in that Empire.

And now, by the way, the manner of that Achabar Sha his death (as they report
it in India) is worthy observation. That wicked King was wont often to give
unto some of his Nobles (whom upon secret displeasure he meant to destroy)
Pills prepared with Poison, that should presently put them into incurable
diseases. But the last time he went about to practice that bloody Treachery, he
dyed himself by his own instrument of death: for then having two Pills in his
Hand, the one very like the other, the one Cordial for himself, the other
Corrosive, for one of his Grandees he meant to purge, and flattering him with
many proffers of Courtesy before he gave him the Pill, that he might swallow
it down the better; at last having held them both in the palm of his Hand long,
by a mistake took the poisoned Pill himself, and gave him the other, which Pill
put the King immediately into a mortal flux of blood, which in few days put an
end to his life in his City Lahore.

-- Neque enim lex justior ulla est,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
Achabar Sha thus dead, Sultan Coobsurroo his Grandchild, then aged about
twenty years, took his opportunity at the first bound, and ascended the Regal
Throne at Lahore, where by a general Acclamation of that very great and
populous City he was pronounced, and acknowledged King. His Father (the late
Mogol) was thus acknowledged at Agra. Two great Armies were presently levied,
and met together to decide the Controversy: and the generality of the people
within that Empire, thinking it meet that the Father should be King before the
Son, clave by far more to him then to his Son, by which means Sultan Coobsurroo
was defeated and taken Prisoner, and a very great many of young Gallants with
him, whereof his Father immediately after caused to be impaled, or put upon
Stakes (that most cruel and tormenting death) eight hundred in two several
ranks in one day, without the City Lahore, and then carried his Son most
disgracefully through them, bidding him to behold the men in whom he trusted.
His Son told him, that he should have served him so, and spared the other, who
did nothing in that action but upon his Command; his Father replied, that he
could serve him so presently (if he so pleased); his Son willed and desired him
so to do, telling his Father that he had no joy at all to live, after the
beholding of so many gallant men dead. Notwithstanding, the King spared his
Life, casting him into Prison, where his Eyes were sealed up, (by something put
before them which might not be taken of) for the space of three years; after
which time, that seal was taken away, that he might with freedom enjoy the
Light, though not his Liberty. And after his Father had taken him out of
Prison, he kept him always near about him, but with a very strong Guard upon
him; so that he following the King his Father in his Progresses, we sometimes
saw him. And once he called my Lord Ambassador to him as we passed by him,
asking him many Questions, as how far distant our Country was from them, and
what we brought thither, and what we carried thence, and how the King his
Father had used him since his arrive there, whether or no he had not bestowed
upon him some great gifts. The Ambassador told him, that his business there
was to obtain a free Trade for his Nation the English; and that being granted
him, he had reward enough. The Prince replied, that this could not be denied
us, we coming so far to trade there with him; and the Prince further asked him,
How long he had been there, the Ambassador told him, About two years; the
Prince replied again, that it was a very great shame for the Successor of
Tamberlane, who had such infinite Riches, to suffer a Man of his quality to
come so far unto him, and to live so long about him, and not to give him some
Royal Gift; and he further added, that for himself he was a Prisoner, and
therefore could do him no good, but would pray for him, and so he departed.

For that Prince, he was a Gentleman of a very lovely presence and fine
carriage, so exceedingly beloved of the common people, that, as Suetonius
writes of Titus, he was Amor and Deliciae, etc. the very love and delight of
them. Aged then about thirty and five years. He was a Man who contented himself
with one Wife, which with all love and care accompanied him in all his
streights, and therefore he would never take any Wife but her self, though the
Liberty of his Religion did admit of Plurality.

It was generally believed to be the intent of his Father (for he would often
presage so) to make this Prince his firstborn his Successor, though for the
present out of some jealousy (he being so much beloved of the people) he
denied him his Liberty.

His Father's Love, brings upon him the extreme hatred of his Brother Caroom,
the Mogol's third Son, who then lived in very great Pomp and Splendour at that
Court, aiming at that Empire: to which end he put many jealousies into his
Father's Head (now grown in years) concerning his Brother Coobsurroo, and that
his Father might live more secure, and out of all present fear of him, if he so
pleased; upon which insinuations, partly, by force, (as I observed before) and,
partly, by entreaty of Friends about the King, he was by the King put into the
Cruel Hand of his Brother Caroom; who told his Father that he would have both
his Eyes upon him, and further so provide, that he should never have cause to
fear him any more; and he was as good as his word: for, presently after he had
gotten possession of him (though his Father had given him as great a charge as
possibly he could to use him well, and to keep him honorably, and by no means
to hurt him, which was all promised by Caroom to be faithfully observed) he
caused his Second Brother, Sultan Parveen, to be poisoned; and, not long after
that, strangled that most gallant Prince his eldest Brother: which did so
trouble his Father, that the grief thereof (as it was strongly believed)
shortened his days; who not long after this (much against his mind) made room
for that Murderer to succeed him in that Empire, who laid the foundation of
his high Advancement, in the Blood of his Brothers; and rather then he would
have missed it, would certainly have made a way through the Blood of his Father
likewise: All Laws of honesty, and of Nature were by him thrown down, trampled
under foot, forgotten and made void, to compass and gain his most unjust ends;
as if he resolved to practice that Language which Polynices out of the height
of Ambition spoke in the Tragedy, -- Pro Regno velim
Patriam, Penates, Conjugem flammis dare;
Imperia Precio quolibet constant been
Sen. Trag. Fire on my Gods, Wife, Country for a Crown,
An Empire can the dearest price weigh down.


I shall add but a few things more to this Relation before I conclude it. And
one shall be to give my Reader a taste, but very briefly,

SECTION XXIX. Of the manner of the style or writing of that Court.
WHich I shall here insert, and in some measure show, by the Copy of a Letter
written by the Great Mogol unto King James, in the Persian Tongue, here
faithfully translated, which was as follows:

UNto a King rightly descended from his Ancestors, bred in Military Affairs,
clothed with Honor and Justice, a Commander worthy of all Command, strong and
constant in the Religion, which the great Prophet Christ did teach King James;
whose Love has bred such an impression in my thoughts, as shall never be
forgotten, but as the smell of Amber, or as a Garden of fragrant flowers, whose
Beauty and Odor is still increasing: so be assured, my Love shall still grow
and increase with yours.

The Letters which you sent me in the behalf of your Merchants I have received,
whereby I rest satisfied of your tender Love toward me, desiring you not to
take it ill, that I have not wrote to you heretofore: This present Letter I
send to you to renew our Loves, and herewith do certify you, that I have sent
forth my Firmaunes throughout all my Countries to this effect, That if any
English Ships or Merchants shall arrive in any of my Ports, my People shall
permit and suffer them to do what they please, freely in their
Merchandizing-Causes, aiding and assisting them in all occasion of injuries
that shall be offered them, that the least cause of discourtesie be not done
unto them; that they may be as free, or freer then my own People.

And as now, and formerly, I have received from you diverse Tokens of your Love;
so I shall still desire your mindfulness of me by some Novelties from your
Countries, as an argument of friendship betwixt us, for such is the custom of
Princes here.

And for your Merchants, I have given express Order through all my Dominions,
to suffer them to buy, sell, transport, and carry away at their pleasure,
without the let or hinderance of any person whatsoever, all such Goods and
Merchandises as they shall desire to buy; and let this my Letter as fully
satisfy you in desired Peace and Love, as if my own Son had been Messenger to
ratify the same.

And if any in my Countries, not fearing God, nor obeying their King, or any
other void of Religion, should endeavor to be an Instrument to break this
League of Friendship, I would send my Son Sultan Caroom, a Soldier approved in
the Wars, to cut him off, that no obstacle may hinder the continuance, and
increase of our Affections.

Here are likewise the Complements of two other Letters of later date, sent
home by Sir Thomas Row, whereof the first does thus begin: WHen your Majesty
shall open this Letter, let your Royal Heart be as fresh as a small Garden, let
all People make Reverence at your Gate. Let your Throne be advanced higher.
Amongst the greatness of the Kings of the Prophet Jesus, let your Majesty be
the greatest; and all Monarchs derive their Wisdom, and Counsel from your
Breast, as from a Fountain, that the Law of the Majesty of Jesus may receive,
and flourish under your protection.

The Letters of Love and Friendship which you sent me, the present Tokens of
your good Affection toward me, I have received by the Hands of your
Ambassador, Sir Thomas Row, who well deserves to be your trusty Servant,
delivered to me in an acceptable and happy hour; upon which mine Eyes were so
fixed, that I could not easily remove them unto any other Objects, and have
accepted them with great joy and delight, etc.




The last Letter had this beginning: HOw gracious is your Majesty, whose
greatness God preserve. As upon a Rose in a Garden, so are mine Eyes fixed upon
you. God maintain your Estate, that your Monarchy may prosper and be augmented,
and that you may obtain all your desires worthy the greatness of your Renown;
and as the Heart is noble and upright: so let God give you a glorious reign,
because you strongly defend the Law of the Majesty of Jesus, which God made yet
more flourishing, for that it was confirmed by Miracles, etc.




What followed in both those Letters, was to testify his Care and Love toward
the English. Now all these Letters were written in the Persian Tongue, the
Court-Language there, and their Copies were sent to the Ambassador, that he
might get them translated. The Originals rolled up somewhat long, were covered
with Cloth of Gold, sealed up on both ends, the fashion in that Court and
Country to make up Letters, though they be not all clothed there in such a
glorious dress.

In which Letters, notice may be taken (what was observed before) how
respectively that King speaks of our Blessed Savior Christ. And here it will
not be impertinent to speak something of those who pretend to enlarge the Name
of Jesus Christ in those parts, I mean,

SECTION XXX. Of the Jesuits, sent thither by their Superiors to convert
People unto Christianity, etc.
IN that Empire all Religions are tolerated, which makes the Tyrannical
Government there more easy to be endured. The Mogol would speak well of all of
them, saying, that a Man might be happy and safe in the profession of any
Religion; and therefore would say, That the Mohammedan Religion was good, so the
Christian Religion good, and the rest good; and therefore, by the way,

The Priests or Ministers of any Religion find regard and esteem amongst the
people. I shall speak something to this from my own particular usage there,
then very young, while I lived in those parts; yet when I was first there
brought into the presence of the Mogol, immediately after my arrive at his
Court, I standing near the Ambassador (for no man there of the greatest
quality whatsoever, is at any time suffered to sit in his presence) and but a
little distance from that King in his Gozulcan, he sent one of his Grandees to
me, to let me know, that the King bad me welcome thither, that I should have a
free access to him when ever I pleased; and if I would ask him any thing, he
would give it me (though I never did ask, nor he give) and very many times
afterward when, (waiting upon my Lord Ambassador) I appeared before him, He
would still show tokens of Civility and Respect unto me; and I never went
abroad amongst that people, but those that met me, upon this consideration,
that I was a Padre (for so they called me) a Father or Minister, they would
manifest in their Behavior toward me, much esteem unto me. But for the
Jesuits there;

There was one of that Order, in Goa (a City of the Portugals lying in the
skirts of India) of very much Fame and Renown called Jeronymo Xaviere, sent for
by Achabar-Sha, the late Kings Father, in the year 1596. to argue before him
the Doctrine of Christianity: there being always present a Moolaa, or
Mohammedan Priest; and a Third Person, who followed no precise Rule, but what
the Light of Nature merely led him to; and these two were to obtain what they
could against his Reasoning.

The Jesuit in the Mogol's own Language (which was a great advantage to him)
began to speak first of the Creation, and then of the Fall of Man: in which the
Mahometans agree with us.

Then he laid down diverse grounds to bottom his reasonings on,

That Man by Creation was made a most Excellent Creature, endued with the Light
of Reason, which no other sublunary Creature besides himself had; then,

That Man thus endued, must have some Rule or Law to walk by, which he could
not prescribe unto himself, and therefore it must be given him from above.

That this Law was first given unto Man from God, and afterward confirmed by
Prophets sent into the World, in diverse Ages, from God.

That this Law thus delivered must needs be one Law, in all things agreeing in
it self. And so did not the Law of Mahomet.

That this Law thus delivered was most conformable to right son; And so was not
the Law of Mahomet.

That Man fallen from God by sin, was not able to recover himself from that
Fall; and therefore it was necessary that there should be one, more than a Man,
to do it for him, and that that One could not be Mahomet.

That this One was Christ, God as well as Man; God to satisfy (the Mahometans
themselves confessing that Christ was the breath of God), and Man to suffer
death as he did.

That Christ the Son of God coming into the World, about that great Work of
satisfying Gods anger against Man for sin; it was necessary that he should live
a poor and laborious life here on Earth (at which the Mahometans much stumble)
and not a life that was full of pomp, and pleasure, and delicacy.

That the Gospel of Christ, and other holy books of Scripture, which the
Christians retain and walk by, contain nothing in them that is corrupt and
depraved; But there is very much to be found in their Alcaron which is so.

That the great worth and worthiness shining in the Person of Christ, was by
far more excellent than any thing observable in Mahomet (for they themselves
confess that Christ lived without sin; when Mahomet himself acknowledges, that
he had been a filthy person.)

That the feigned, foolish, and ridiculous miracles, which they say were done
by Mahomet, were nothing comparable to the Miracles done by Christ, who (as the
Mahometans confess) did greater Miracles than ever were done before or since
him.

That there was a great deal of difference in the manner of promulgating the
Gospel of Christ, into the world; and the introducing of the Laws of Mahomet.

That Christ has purchased Heaven for all that believe in him, and that Hell
is prepared for all others that do not rely on him, and on him alone, for
Salvation.

There were many more particulars besides these, which that Jeronymo Xaveere
laid down before the Mogol, to ground his arguments on: which that King heard
patiently, at several times during the space of one year and a half; but at
last he sent him away back again to Goa honorably, with some good gifts
bestowed on him, telling him, as Felix did, after he had reasoned before him,
that he would call for him again when he had a convenient time, Acts 24.25.
Which time or season, neither of them both ever found afterward.

These Particulars, which I have here inserted (with many more; I might have
added to them; upon all which, that Jeronymo Xaveere enlarged himself before
the Mogol in his arguings before him) were given unto me in Latin by Francisco
Corsi, another Jesuit resident at that Court, while I was there, and long
before that time. And further I have been there told by other people professing
Christianity in that Empire, that there was such a Dispute there held; and for
my part I do believe it.

For that Francisco Corsi; he was a Florentine by birth, aged about fifty
years, who (if he were indeed what he seemed to be) was a man of a severe life,
yet of a fair and an affable disposition: He lived at that Court, as an Agent
for the Portugals; and had not only free access unto that King, but also
encouragement and help by hifts, which he sometimes bestowed on him.

When this Jesuit came first to be acquainted with my Lord Ambassador, he told
him that they were both by profession Christians, though there was a vast
difference betwixt them in their professing of it. And as he should not go
about to reconcile the Ambassador to them: So he told him that it would be
labor in vain if he should attempt to reconcile him to us. Only he desired,
that there might be a fair correspondency betwixt them, but no disputes. And
further, his desire was that those wide differences 'twixt the Church of Rome
and us, might not be made there to appear; that Christ might not seem by those
differences to be divided amongst men professing Christianity, which might have
been a very main Obstacle, and hinderance unto his great Design and endeavor,
for which he was sent thither, to convert people unto Christianity there.
Telling my Lord Ambassador further, that he should be ready to do for him all
good offices of love and service there, and so he was.

After his first acquaintance, he visited us often, usually once a week. And as
those of that society, in other parts of the world are very great
intelligencers: so was he there, knowing all news which was stirring and might
be had, which he communicated unto us.

And he would tell us many stories besides; one of which, if true, is very
remarkable. And it was thus; There are a race of people in East- India, the men
of which race have (if he told us true) their right legs extraordinary great
and misshapen, their left legs are like other men's. Now he told us, that they
were the posterity of those who stamped St Thomas the Apostle to death, come
thither to preach the Gospel; and that ever since the men of that race have,
and only they of that Nation, that great deformity upon them. Some few people I
have there seen of whom this story is told, but whether that deformity be like
Geheza's leprosy, hereditary; and if so, whether it fell upon that people upon
the occasion before-named, I am yet to learn.

The Jesuits in East- India (for he was not alone there) have liberty to
convert any they can work upon, unto Christianity, etc. The Mogol has thus far
declared, that it shall be lawful for any one, persuaded so in conscience, to
become a Christian, and that he should not by so doing lose his favor.

Upon which, I have one thing, here to insert, which I had there by report (yet
I was bid to believe it and report it for a truth) concerning a Gentleman of
quality, and a servant of the great Mogol, who upon some conviction wrought
upon him (as they say) would needs be Baptized and become a Christian. The King
hearing of this Convert sent for him, and at first with many cruel threats
commanded him to renounce that his new profession: the man replied, that he was
most willing to suffer any thing in that cause, which the King could inflict.

The Mogol then began to deal with him another way, askking why he thought
himself wiser then his Forefathers, who lived and died Mahometans; and further
added many promises of riches and honor, if he would return to his Mahometism,
he replied again, as they say (for I have all this by Tradition) that he would
not accept of any thing in the world, so to do: The Mogol wondering at his
constancy told him, that if he could have frighted, or bought him, out of his
new profession, he would have made him an example for all waverers; but now he
perceived that his resolution indeed was to be a Christian, and he bid him so
continue, and with a reward discharged him.

The late Mogol about the beginning of his reign, caused a Temple to be built
in Agra, his chief City, for the Jesuits, wherein two of his younger Brothers
Sons were solemnly Baptized, and delivered into their hands to be trained up in
Christianity. The young Gentlemen, growing to some stature (after they had had
their tuition for some years) desired them to provide them Wives out of
Christendom fitting their Birth; in which having not sudden content, they gave
up their Crucifixes again into the Jesuits hands, and so left them. Who had
these conjectures upon this their revolt, that either the King their Uncle
caused them to be Baptized, to make them more odious to the Mahometans, being
so near of his blood; or else, it was his plot to get them beautiful Wives out
of Europe, which himself meant to take if he had liked them.

The Jesuit I last named, Francisco Corsi, upon a time (at our being there)
having his house, amongst very many more consumed by a sudden fire, it so was
that his wooden Cross, set on a Pole near the side of his house, was not (as he
said) consumed. Upon which he presently repaired to that Court, carried that
Cross with him, and told the King thereof. The Prince Sultan Caroom (who was no
favourer of the Christians) being then present, and hearing him talk how his
Cross was preserved, derided him, saying, that it was one of his fabulous
miracles; and further added, that he would have a fire presently made before
the King, whereinto he would have that Cross cast; and if it consumed not, his
Father, himself, and all the people there would presently become Christians;
but if it did, himself should be burnt with it. The Jesuit not willing to put
himself upon so sudden and so hot a trial, answered that he durst not tempt
God, who was not tied to times; and it might be that Almighty God, would never
show that people that infinite favor to make them Christians, or if he had
such a great mercy for them in store, it might be that the time of manifesting
it, was not yet come; and therefore if he should now submit to that trial, and
Almighty God not please to show a further and a present miracle, his Religion
would suffer prejudice there for ever after; and therefore he refused.

It should seem that the Jesuits there do exceedingly extol the Virgin Mary,
which I have gathered from poor people there, Natives of that Country, who have
often asked Alms of me, when I stirred abroad amongst them; and whereas one
has desired me to give him some relief for Christ's sake, there are many who
have begged it for the Virgin Mary's sake.

Well known it is, that the Jesuits there, who like the Pharisees, Mat. 23.25.
That would compass Sea and Land to make one Proselyte, have sent into
Christendom many large reports of their great Conversions of Infidels in
East India. But all these boastings are but reports; the truth is, that they
have there spilt the precious water of Baptism upon some few Faces, working
upon the necessity of some poor men, who for want of means, which they give
them, are contented to wear Crucifixes; but for want of knowledge in the
Doctrine of Christianity are only in Name Christians. So that the Jesuits
Congregations there are very thin, consisting of some Italians, which the Mogol
entertains (by great pay given them) to cut his Diamonds, and other rich
Stones; And of other European strangers which come thither; and some few others
of the Natives, before mentioned. So that in one word I shall speak this more
of the Jesuits in East India, that they have there Templum, but not Ecclesiam.

When I lived in those parts it was my earnest desire and daily prayer, to have
put my weak hands unto that most acceptable, but hard labor of washing Moors,
that the Name of Jesus Christ might have been there enlarged (if God had
pleased to honor me so far) by my endeavors. But there are three main and
apparent obstacles (besides those which do not appear) that hinder the
settlement and growth of Christianity in those parts. First, The liberty of the
Mohammedan Religion given the people there in case of Marriage. Secondly, The
most debauched lives of many coming thither, or living amongst them who profess
themselves Christians, per quorum latera patitur Evangelium, by whom the Gospel
of Jesus Christ is scandalized, and exceedingly suffers. And lastly, The hearts
of that people are so confirmed and hardened in their own evil old ways, their
ears so sealed up, their eyes so blinded with unbelief and darkness, that only
he, who has the Key of David that shuts when no man can open, and opens when
no man can shut, can open to them the door of life.

FINIS.

