I Have been, according to my Opportunities, not a negligent Observer of the
Genius and Humor of the several Sects and Professions in Religion; and upon
the whole matter, I do in my Conscience believe the Church of England, to be
the best constituted Church this day in the Christian World; and that as to the
main, the Doctrine, and Government, and Worship of it, are excellently framed
to make men soberly Religious, securing men on the one hand from the wild
Freaks of Enthusiasm, and on the other hand from the gross Follies of
Superstition.

Dr. Tillotson in a Sermon before King CHARLES the Second. A VINDICATION OF
THEIR MAJESTY'S Wisdom, In the late NOMINATION of some Reverend Persons To the
Vacant Arch-Bishopricks AND BISHOPRICS: Occasioned by the Scandalous
Reflections OF UNREASONABLE MEN.

By a Minister of London.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall,
1691.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
READER,
THere are three sorts of Persons whose Spirits I know so well, that I am very
well satisfied beforehand, I shall not want their unseemly as well as unkind
Reflections, for several things said in these few sheets.

The first is the man so resolute for the late King James, that he cares not if
the whole Kingdom, was nothing but a Common Slaughterhouse, and the
Inhabitants thereof, were involved in an utter ruin, together with our
Religion, and Liberties, provided King James was at the Helm again.

The other is the very High flown Churchman, who rather than part with
something, that is but like the pairings of his Nails, will venture the whole
Constitution of the Church.

The last is the loose Whigg, who notwithstanding all his former Professions of
satisfaction if he might enjoy the Liberty of his Conscience without
molestation, yet still is very uneasy, as if nothing would content him but the
Power of a Committee-man or Sequestrator, and is daily extolling the Justice of
the late Civil War, and where he dares, justifying the Murder of that
Incomparable Prince, King CHARLES the First.

Now Reader, to be plain with thee, as I expect bad words from these persons,
so I will promise thee to be Easy under them; because I think it much more for
a man's Credit, to be spoke Ill, than Well of, by men of such Kidneys; for such
spirited men have been the Bane of all sorts of Society, Religious, as well, as
Civil, in most Ages of the World.

And therefore if thou find any thing that cuts with too keen an Edge, and
looks too sharp, in the following Treatise, I must beg thee, to believe it is
intended only against such Bigots as these, and not against any good man
whatever. For I am not afraid to tell the World, that wherever I meet with a
good and modest man, let him be of any Opinion, or Persuasion, never so
different from my own, yet I love him as a Friend, and according to my power
will treat him as a Brother. Farewell.

A VINDICATION OF THEIR Majesty's Wisdom In the NOMINATION of some BISHOPS TO
THE Vacant Sees.
THere is nothing in all the Ages of Christianity, has done more Mischief to
the Church of God than violent Prejudices and Passionate Resolutions to adhere
to those Prejudices, though never so hastily and groundlessly taken up either
against Things or Persons; for through the influence of these, Men have been
deaf to all Argument and Reason, to all wise and cool Thoughts and Discourses,
and you can as well almost remove a Mountain, as stir these Men from their
fixed and determined Opinions and Persuasions so hastily taken up.

It is no doubt, but this is the main Reason, of so many Men's (otherwise Men of
Consideration in the World, both for Learning and other Qualities) standing out
and declaring against the late Revolution, and whispering, nay, the more is the
pity, publicly abusing the Government, as it is in the Hands of their present
Majesty's, (whom God grant long to live, and to succeed in all their Just and
Pious Undertakings,) and impeaching all those Conscientious Persons, that
having taken the easy Oaths imposed by Authority upon them, as Men that have
forsaken the Principles of the Church of England, and turned their backs upon
their former Obligations to the late King James: and withal, in gratification
of these Principles of Prejudice, are now full of nothing but Rage and Fury,
which they vent by all manner of unseemly Words and Speeches upon their
Majesty's late Nomination of those worthy Men to fill up the Sees of the
Bishoprics, vacant by their Predecessors denying to take the Oaths enjoined
them by the Supreme Power of the Kingdom. Alas! you cannot come into the
Company of some sort of Men, but your Ears are filled and dinned with nothing
but the Church! the Church! Oh the Church is utterly destroyed, put into the
hands of false Loons, who will betray her Rites, break down her Fences, set up
Presbytery, or else countenance Anarchy and Confusion, and give up the Order of
Bishops, together with the grave and solemn, and therefore necessary way of
public Worshipping of God by a stated Liturgy: and that is not all, but they
must be cried down too, as Men of no Honor nor Conscience, in taking the
Places of Men so good and deserving. And what particular brands of Infamy and
Reproach are fixed upon the Reverend, Learned and Pious Dean of St. Paul's, whom
their Majesty's have Nominated to the Sea of Canterbury; things, which as he is
altogether unworthy of, so thanks be to God, he is a Man of that Christian
Courage, and of that great Prudence, that he knows how to do his Duty to God,
and to their Majesty's Persons and Government, without being ruffled or
discomposed by such unmannerly and base Reflections, which have no Original,
but from the corrupt and disingenuous, malicious and revengeful minds of those
who have been all along Enemies to him, because he has been a steady Friend to
Truth and Christian Moderation, and has lived bewailing, but no ways
countenancing or encouraging those Passions of all Sides and Parties, which
have been the Bane of Religion it self, as well as of the Safety and Honor of
the Church of England.

And therefore because the Clamor is so great, and runs so high, and the
effects of it may be of so very destructive Consequence to their Majesty's
Government, both in Church and State, I will endeavor to do Right to those
Reverend Persons, who have so greatly Merited by their learned Pens and Pious
Lives, as well as to their Majesty's Wisdom at this time, in pitching upon Men
to succeed those who have voluntarily quitted their Stations in the Church, and
I do not doubt but to make it plain, that the Church of England is so far from
being in danger of ruin by these worthy Men, that she will gather strength
more and more, and look with a more acceptable Countenance amongst the general
part of the Nation; yea, even Dissenters themselves, who are but tolerably wise
and thoughtfull.

It is very well known to those, who have been impartial Readers of the History
of the Church, since the Reformation, by what means she has lost ground, and
upon what score the Non-conformists grew up in Interest against her. To pass by
the Reign of King Edward the sixth, because it was a Reign of great Factions
amongst Men of different Interests, and who too many of them rather sought to
serve themselves of the Reformation, than to serve the Reformation it self, we
will begin with Queen Elizabeth's coming to the Crown, who though she was
certainly always a Protestant, after she came to some Years of discerning in
her Inclination, yet was forced to comply when Popery was upermost, so as to
keep her self out of danger: For without doubt, had she professed her self an
open Enemy to Popery, and used any other Public Devotions than what were then
in fashion, and established by Law, she had fallen a Sacrifice to the Biggottry
of her Sister, and to Gardiner's Rage and Revenge; but however when she came to
the Crown her self, she presently after a very little Temporizing, which we
ought to believe Necessity of State was the only Reason of, she fell to
reforming the Church, and it may be advanced a Number of as good Men to the
Vacant Bishoprics, both for Learning and Piety, as any of her four Successors
have done since. And here was the first false step by which the Church has
rather lost than got ground ever since; for though she preferred Men of so
great Worth, Men of such signal Holiness, and who upon the account of either
their Banishment or other Sufferings in Queen Mary's days were very acceptabe
to all the Men of the Kingdom, who were then Protestants, and who by virtue of
their exemplary Conversations, were very well fitted to stop the Mouths of gain
sayers, and by degrees to win over the Papists, especially those who were only
so by the strength of their Education; yet at the same time she would not
suffer these Men, though of her own raising, to influence her into any little
Alterations or Changes, which might at that time have settled the Church upon a
larger bottom, and prevented that after Schism which was made by some Men, who
by their Travels in Germany and another place had sucked in some very narrow
stingy Principles, which by a little Condescension they certainly had been
shamed out of, or else put out of Capacity of deluding the common People, as
they afterward did, to the great detriment of the Church. She had been brought
up in the pompous, gaudy way of Popish Worship, and therefore notwithstanding
all the modest Applications of her Pious Bishops, who valued substantial
Religion above all other things, she continued her Zeal for Ceremonies, and
supported and maintained them all her Reign; which tho she might lawfully do,
and there was no moral Evil in them, as has been sufficiently made out by many
learned Pens ever since; yet some wise Men think, that an Abatement of one or
two Ceremonies, and changeing four or five Phrases in the Common Prayer Book,
would have enlarged the Churches Pale, and prevented all the Puritans designs
against her; for to give those early Malcontents their just due, and I am not
afraid to speak it, they never got into the good Opinion and Affection of the
People by any strength of Argument, by any real and solid Proofs of Scripture,
but by popular Harangues, and odious Names fixed upon the Ceremonies and the
Common Prayer Book, and they wrought more upon the unthinking and yet
zealously-inclin'd Vulgar, by calling a thing a Rag of Rome, a Mark of the
Beast, and an Antichristian Usage, than ever they did by rational and
well-weighed Exceptions to any thing enjoined by the Laws of the Land; all
which Occasions of Mischief had been prevented, as very wise Men think, if the
Bishops at that time could have had their Will of the Queen, and got her to
Condescend to those Abatements in which they thought the Church so little
concerned as to her Being or Well-being, that they did believe they could
thereby stifle the Faction, and have left them to be the Heads of an
inconsiderable Party, which would quickly have dwindled into nothing. But
however, Queen Elizabeth kept to her Point resolvedly, and by her prudent and
unwavering Government kept the Party down for forty four Years together; upon
whose Death, and King James the first's just Accession to the Crown, the Party
hoping some advantage from his Education under Buchanan, a Friend of theirs,
Petitioned for Relief, and he to settle the Minds of his Subjects commands a
Conference at Hampton Court, where certainly had there not been too stiff an
adherence to some few things, which might without danger have been altered, had
not the Bishops then, (though very good Men, yet not able to foresee the
effects of these Men's Pretenses, upon the Common People in future times, and
trusting to the Zeal of the then King to stand by and assist them,) I say, had
not the Bishops then had such an Ascendant throughout the whole Conference over
the King, which he was well pleased withal, having by the contrary Party in
Scotland been so roughly handled all his time; I say, certainly that Conference
had terminated in a great advantage to the Church of England; for the Puritan
Party was not so numerous, nor consequently strong, as afterward; nor yet
their Dissatisfactions so great as they have been since, a very little and
easy Condescension had spoiled the Market of the Designing men, both Gentry
and Ministers too, and we had not heard of, nor felt those Miseries in the
Nation, that God knows both our Ancestors and we have done ever since: And so
this Opportunity was lost, and the Party grew stronger and stronger all King
James his time, and talked as loud as they durst against Will Worship and
beggarly Elements, as they were pleased to call our Prayers and Ceremonies, by
which they continued to captivate abundance of easy People, and to insinuate a
Belief into them that they only Worshipped God and Administered Ordinances
according to the Pattern in the Mount, as they Phrased it; and that which gave
them a great advantage over and above their Pretenses to a more Pure way of
Worship, was the Spanish Match, and upon the Failure of that the French
Marriage: for then they easily made the credulous World believe that nothing
but Popery was at the door, and that it was impossible, when a Papist lay in a
King's Bosom, but that he must be influenced by her Charms to Favor her
Religion as well as to Love her Person: and the truth of it is, this was too
great an advantage to be put into a restless and designing Party's Hand, and
they made use of it accordingly; for by this means they got a great Power in
most of the Counties and Corporations of England, whereby were returned a major
part of Men affected to them to the House of Commons, and what the Effects of
their Counsels were, and what Spirits they showed, I had rather any one should
tell than my self; for though I do believe many of them meant very well, yet by
the sequel we find others made a noise in the House, and found fault, on
purpose to be bought off by the Court, and put into Posts of Honor and Profit
together, and then we find how quickly their Opinion of State Affairs altered;
for that which was before the greatest Grievance, was now necessary for the
Preservation of the Government. Now at the same time, while the Puritans thus
enlarged their Interest throughout the Kingdom, the Bishops on the other side
carried things with a very high Hand, having the Countenance of King and Laws,
and used some Men very roughly, yea and those many of them too who were the
Peoples Darlings, and made the greater Darlings too by reason of their harsh
usage of them; so that there was nothing in the Nation but endeavors by Fines
and Punishments, Corporal as well as Pecuniary, to suppress the Party on the
one side, and Cabals and Clubs of many of the Nobility, Gentry, and
discontented Clergy, to pluck the Plumes of the Hierarchy, and to weaken the
Bishops Power, together with the Exorbitancies, as they thought them, of their
Ecclesiastical Courts on the other side: And the truth of it is, the Book of
Sports, together with some other, I fancy (though I am tender of judging)
unnecessary Innovations, which Bishop Laud (tho otherwise a very good Man)
countenanced, and the Zeal for which he rewarded with the best Preferments of
the Nation, these gave a very great Advantage to the Puritan-Party to get into
the Hearts and Affections of many well and religiously inclined People
throughout the Nation; and to give them their due, they were not wanting to
make use of it accordingly; and therefore when King Charles the first, through
his pressing Necessities called a Parliament, the People being alarmed at the
new Supra-conformity, all those things brought into the Church, which they were
made to believe were introductions to Popery, nay, Popery it self, they
generally pitched upon such Men to represent them as would look into these
things, and provide such remedies for them as were thought at that time
necessary; which Parliament at its first sitting down, certainly had abundance
of great Patriots of their Country, passionate Lovers of their King, and true
Admirers of the Church in its essential Constitution, such as my Lord Falkland,
etc. and designed none of those things which afterward through the craft and
subtilty of too many of their Fellow Members were brought to pass.

And here now another Opportunity was put into the Church-mens hands to save
the Church, and to have prevented that Bloody War, the miserable Effects of
which we feel to this very day; and certainly had there been any good Temper,
and harkening to the Commands of a true Christian Spirit, at this time our
breaches had been healed, and our Church had been like a compacted City, at
Unity with it self, and all those Notorious Schisms and Divisions, together
with all those filthy Opinions and Doctrines of Devils, which like a violent
Innundation broke in upon the Church, had certainly been prevented: But alas,
we then did not, or would not know the things that belonged to our Peace. And
here I must change the Tables, and charge another sort of Men with one of the
greatest Mistakes, if not one of the greatest Crimes imaginable, and plainly
show that when Men, though pretending the greatest Conscience, fancy themselves
furnished with power to back them, even they are as ready to sacrifice the
public good and Peace of Church and State to their own private Passions, to
their own Lust and Revenge, as those they formerly complained of as their
greatest Oppressors.

For we find that when Archbishop Williams, Bishop Morton of Durham, and other
very learned, pious and moderate Divines, were appointed to meet at
Jerusalem-Chamber in the Deans House at Westminster, with Mr. Calamy, Dr.
Seaman, and others who pretended dissatisfaction at some parts of the Churches
Constitution, those Bishops and learned Men, made such Offers, drew up such
Terms of Accommodation, and made such Condescentions, that all wise Men
expected nothing but an happy Union. There was nothing that I can meet withal,
that the other Party objected against, and made matter of scruple or uneasiness
to the Party called Puritans, but they were ready to part withal, though they
had before defended them so well; Bishop Morton particularly, as any one knows
that has read his defense of the three innocent Ceremonies; for by the by, you
must know, that Party was not run so far as now, as to write Books against
Diocesan Episcopacy and stated Liturgies. Now if any Man ask me where things
stuck at this seeming happy juncture, and what hindered such a blessed Accord,
as without all doubt would have made the Kingdom instead of a Field of Blood, a
Garden of Eden, a Paradise of God? Why truly I must deal plainly, for I put out
these Papers with a resolution to spare nor flatter any Party of Men, the Fault
now lay at the Puritans door, and they who had Complained of Severity and
Persecution, and called the Bishops, both in their Pulpits and private
Conversation, by worse Names, all things truly considered, than they did
deserve, only for exacting Conformity to the Laws of the Church, and which they
had subscribed with their own Hands to observe; why now when they saw their
Party uppermost, and too great a Number, God knows, of the House of Commons to
side with them, they left these great and good Men in the lurch, turned their
backs upon their Persons as well as upon all those moderate and healing
Proposals they had made; and when Sir Arthur Hazzlerigg had the Confidence as
well as the dishonesty to bring in a Bill for taking away Deans and Chapters
Lands, that is, in plain English, robbing them of what they had as good a riht
to legally, as he had to his Estate; they, I mean Mr. Calamy and the rest,
thought themselves so secure of the Power of the Nation, that nothing would
serve their turn but Root and Branch, (a spirit too much amongst their
Successors in Principles at this very day) and both Episcopacy and Liturgy, all
must be sacrificed and given up to the Designs and Pretenses of a prevailing
Party, who, God knows, thereby involved three Kingdoms in Blood and Ruin, and
have thereby entailed a spirit of Antipathy amongst Neighboring Families in
all parts of the Nation ever since: for had this hopeful Meeting at
Jerusalem-Chamber obtained its desired effect, which I am sure, if I know any
thing in History, the Conformable Clergy were very forward to promote, the War,
the dismal War had been prevented, and all the woeful Effects of it too: For
the designing Lords and Gentlemen, who had a mind to engross the Power and
Riches of the Nation into their Hands, to rule both King and People, could
never have raised Men to have fought their Battles, if they had not wheedled
and seduced the more easy, Gentlemen and the Common People, by Pretenses that
the Cause of God and Jesus Christ lay at stake, and that if they did not come
in to help the Lord against the Mighty, Popish Tyranny would overrun them in a
Moment, and the pure Ordinances of Christ would be mixed and blended with humane
Inventions and superstitious Observations.

And thus we lost, through the Pride and Folly of some Men, (I scarce ever
think of it without horror and trouble of mind) one of the best Opportunities
that was ever put into Men's hands, to have set things right in the Church, and
to have united almost all the Kingdom in one way of Worship, which would have
been such a Blessing, as is beyond my poor Rhetoric to express.

And what followed after, let those who have a mind to be informed, read the
History of the Civil Wars, for I take no pleasure to write it; only thus much I
will say, that it ended in the Murder of one of the best Princes that ever sat
upon a Throne: A Prince whom nothing but black Malice and devilish Revenge dare
venture to blot and defame, and whose bright and excellent Virtues do so
upbraid his Murderers, and those who are so ready to abet them, that by Lies
and Forgeries they are always endeavoring to lessen, or else flatly to deny
them: A Prince, whose Name and Memory ought to be, as no doubt it will,
precious to all impartial and unprejudiced Men who have any sense of Truth,
Honor or Religion.

And this I speak, the rather because I find abundance of New Royalists, who
would make the World believe they are the only Friends to King William and
Queen Mary, (or as they Phrase it, to the present Government) and yet at the
same time heap all the Calumnies and Reproaches upon their glorious Grandfather
they can, and applaud and vindicate that villainous High Court of Justice which
brought him to such an untimely end; and at this time some of them have
reprinted, to give an undoubted Testimony to his Royal Grand children of their
Dutifulness and Loyalty, that false and scandalous Answer of Milton to his
Unparalled Book, with a vile insinuation as if it was not his own: But these
Men, notwithstanding all their Pretenses of Loyalty, must give me leave to tell
them, there is a Snake in the Grass, and that we know them better than to
believe they purpose any Duty to their present Majesty's, than as it serves
their turns, and helps forward those Designs which a Man of half an Eye may see
into, especially if he has but read over the History of the late War.

Well, things being at this pass in the Nation, for want of an early
accommodation, when the Parliament sat down in Forty, all things running into
nothing but disorder and confusion, all sorts of Parties striving to get
uppermost; the Nation wearied with their various Changes, and hankering after
their old Constitution of Church and State, by the help of a great General,
invited their Natural Prince, after twelve Years Banishment, home again; and
having been tossed and tumbled up and down by cross Winds, longed for a Calm,
which they found could not be obtained, but by a return to their Duties to
their lawful Sovereign, and building upon their old Foundations. And now every
Man's Heart was easy, unless it were some particular deep-dyed Criminals, whom
the Justice of the Nation, for its own Honor sake must needs overtake; I say,
every Man's Heart almost was easy, and the two great differing Parties of the
Kingdom seem to be inclinable to a Conjunction of Interest, and nothing was
talked of but a Comprehension, founded in such Abatements as would bring in all
the wise and sober Men of the Kingdom into one way of Worship and Communion;
and in pursuance of this a Commission was issued out, and some of both Parties
met, and many Debates they had, but alas, after all, the old spirit, which has
defeated the best and most profitable Designs in the World, I mean the spirit
of Revenge and Retaliation, sprung up with all fierceness and cruelty, and the
Sufferers were not mortified enough to forgive thole who had been the occasion
of their Miseries, and therefore instead of bringing them into the same Body
with themselves, and thereby strengthening the Interest of the Church, they made
harder Terms of Communion than there were before the War, and imposed a New
Declaration to be subscribed and read afterward in public Churches, which
neither the Pride of some nor the Tenderness of others would or could submit to.

And here again we lost as fair an Oppertunity of Union as could be desired,
and what have been the effects of it, there is no Man that converses with Books
or himself, must or can be ignorant of; there were some hundreds of Men that
afterward became the Heads of discontented Parties, and those considerable for
Wealth and Numbers, who would certainly have staid in the Church upon some very
few Abatements, and have served God and the Necessities of the Souls of the
People very faithfully, but are now so imbittered, that it is not an easy
thing to bring them back, and to reconcile them to any Terms of Union
whatsoever. Good God! that a Nation should be so blinded, as thus at all times
to consult their own Passions against the common good of Christianity, as well
as the Safety and Honor of the best Constituted Church in the World. What hand
the Papists had in keeping up these Divisions, and what advantage they have
made of them ever since, is apparent to any Man of but very mean Observation of
things. We were by this means within a very little of utter ruin, both of our
Church and State, and the late King James to carry on his Designs against the
Protestant Religion, sweetened these sort of Men, took them into his Bosom, and
gave them such verbal Assurances of a Magna Charta for Liberty of Conscience,
that (however they talk against him now) they then slavishly lay at his Feet
with fulsome Addresses of Thanks, and with Promises of Life's and Fortunes to
stand by him, by whose help and assistance, had not our present Gracious and
Noble King stepped in to our rescue, the Church of England had certainly been
born down by those two Parties of Papists and Dissenters, and sacrificed to the
rage and cruel resentments of them both; though by the way, I am sure it is no
part of the goodness, or that singular Piety (they pretend to) of too many of
our Dissenters, (for all were not guilty) to run so violently, and against all
reason and common experience, into such an Interest as was never true to any
Promises or Oaths that crossed and thwarted their own Ambition and secular
Designs.

Well, the then Prince of Orange coming over as a Sovereign Prince, to
vindicate the Hereditary Rights of his Noble Lady, as well as his own, and
succeeding; and the States of the Realm Recognizing and Declaring him and his
Princess King and Queen of England, which by the way I verily believe, was the
only way, (things being in such a Posture as they were) to settle the Nation,
notwithstanding all the talk of a Regency, or any other Expedient. Pray now
upon this great Change of Affairs, was there no steps made by both Parties to
an Accommodation? surely now, if ever Men's Eyes might be opened, in order to
see the Cause of their former Miseries, and to provide Remedies against them
for the future; yea, to give a great many good Men their due, and in particular
our excellent King and Queen, they with abundance of other Men showed their
Inclination to bring the Nation to a due Temper; a thing we all know our
Reverend Bishops in the day of their Afflictions and Fears promised; and in
order to this, a Commission was issued out by the King, in which were named a
great many extraordinary Persons both for Religion and Learning, and who (for
the greatest part of them, as I am well assured) had with great Harmony and
Agreement prepared things for the Convocation, which the wise and well disposed
part of the Nation did not doubt would have had a very good effect, to bring in
many of the Clergy; and I am very well satisfied great Numbers of the Laity too
into our Communion, and by that means would have weakened the hands of
Division, and much laid that scurvy Spirit which has been so mischievous to so
many of the Churches of Christ ever since the Apostles days.

What was done upon this, I will rather with grief of mind pass over in
silence, than bring fresh upon the Stage, because it will tend to nothing but
exasperation.

And therefore seeing all these Opportunities have been so lost, which I have
named, truly I know no way to keep the Church in a state of Life, to preserve
her from the rough and barbarous hands of her resolved and stubborn Enemies,
than to put such Men into Places of Trust and Command, of Authority and Power,
whose Religion as well as Learning, whose Christian Spirits as well as great
Understandings may endear the Church to the People, and make them see that a
Man may be a true and zealous Member of the Church of England, and yet be a
Pious and a good Man; a thing which the Dissenters, too many of them, God
knows, (the more is their ignorance or their impudence) have endeavored to
persuade the People against, as if no Man could be a Child of God, and in a
State of Regeneration, that thinks honorably of a Bishop, or serves God (as he
ought to do, if he would serve him wisely) by well digested Forms of Prayer.
And were such Pious and Holy Men in most of the Places of the Church, of low as
well as high degree, I am very certain that Separation would lose ground every
day, and our Posterity would not be leavened with such sour and narrow
Principles, as we have cause to fear they will be, if Fanaticism does not lose
its reputation more than it has done a few Years last past. And to this end I
dare say it is, that our excellent King and Queen have Chosen and Nominated
such Persons to the several Vacant Sees. I am no Flatterer, but speak what I
know from Personal Acquaintance, that they are Men of Prudence and Learning, of
Integrity and Honor, who highly value, and also live up to that which we call
deservedly, Substantial Religion, and yet at the same time know how to defend,
and encourage the honest Observation of the legal and established Rites of the
Church, and who by Virtue of these good Qualities will, and cannot but promote
the true Interest of the Church, both by being Examples of, and also by zealous
recommending Holy Living to all under their Charge and Care.

And notwithstanding all the Clamours against the present Archbishop of
Canterbury; notwithstanding all those false as well as vile Reproaches they
have attempted to fasten upon him, which can proceed from no other than a
Diabolical Spirit, I do not doubt but he will prove one of the greatest
Blessings to the Church this Age has produced; for it is such a Temper as he
has always manifested throughout his whole Life and Conversation that must
heal our Breaches, and restore us Paths to dwell quietly and safely in; and
they who accuse him for not being a true Churchman, I must tell them, have
framed false Notions and Idea's of the Church, and have made it a little Fold,
fit to hold none but a Company of hotheaded and violent spirited Men: A
Notion, which at this time of the day ought to be laid aside, and without doing
of which the Church England will be but a small Party of Men, and lose every
day her Strength and her Reputation, and at last will be devoured by those
greedy Cormorants that long for her Lands and Possessions again; and those Men
that have the Confidence as well as Sillyness, to call no Men true Church men
but such as are stretched out to just such a length, must excuse me if I tell
them, that under pretense of Friendship and Love to her, they smite her through
the fifth Rib, and throw out of her Communion the best and most pious Members
she can and ought to glory in.

I know I shall anger abundance of Men, by these just, though too short
Characters I have given of these Worthy and Reverend Persons; and some may
think that it looks like a design, to lessen the deserved value of those, who
have forsaken their Bishoprics, because they could not take the Oaths; but I
must beg their Pardon, I am, I thank God for it, a Person of more Manners and
Justice, as well as of more Candor and Temper, than rudely to fly in the Face
of, or by any voluntary Act to disparage those, whom all observing Men must
needs acknowledge to have merited highly at the Nations hands. I thank God I
never think of some of these great Men's stout Defense of the Nations Religion
and Laws, by Petitioning King James against reading the Declaration, by an
undaunted Appearance at the Council Table, and going in that unconcerned manner
to the Tower, with the Spirits of Noble and Brave Patriots and Heroes, by
standing a Trial at Westminster Hall: Further, I never reflect upon that Noble,
and almost unparalled Act of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr.
Sandcroft, with others of his Brethren, Addressing to King James, and telling
him to his Face, though with all modesty and becomingness, yet with more than a
Roman Courage, all those Faults of his, whereby he had violated the Laws, and
incensed his Subjects against him, with an humble desire to rectify those
Errors of his Government for the time to come: I say, I never think of these
things without thoughts of great honor and admiration; and I heartily wish for
the Churches sake and their own, they could have complied with what was
required at theirs and all other Men's hands who were in public Places; but
since they cannot, God forbid but they should have a share in our Charity as
well as others, and that they should be no more severely reflected upon than
others, whose Consciences and Principles are so widely different from the
established Church. And those Men (we know what stamp they are of, and what
they design) who tho they lay at King James's Feet with Lives and Fortunes,
even at that very time when these great Men suffered for their Religion and
Laws, and ventured their all; I say those Men (God knows there are too many of
them) who now when they hear these Men's Names, cry, Hang, Damn, Sink them,
(Saint like terms indeed) and Drink Healths of Confusion to them, I must beg
their Pardon if I tell them, they are so far from understanding the Commands of
Christianity, that they are strangers to the Laws of Nature, such as the very
Heathens think themselves obliged by, and reproach themselves, if they do not
in some sort live up to.

One thing more, and I have done, if any Man shall think and suggest to others
the Commendation I have given these Learned Men, reflects upon those Eminent
Persons who were in Episcopal Chairs before, I must crave leave to tell them, I
scorn the thoughts of it, for there were some of those as great and good Men as
we can desire to fill a See for the Churches Honor, and the Comfort and
Satisfaction of those, both Clergy and Laity, who are Members of her Communion;
amongst whom, I must tell the World, I mean our own Honorable and Right
Reverend Diocesan, whose Name and Virtues will find a room in future Annals and
Records, when the Memory of his implacable Enemies on both sides will perish.

And now therefore for a Conclusion, let us Bless God for such a King and
Queen, who make it their Business to Consult and Study the Nations good, by
promoting worthy Men themselves, and countenancing all those Worthy Persons,
whom they found fixed in the upper Preferments of the Church, before they came
to the Throne. May they Prosper in all their just and righteous Undertakings:
May they live long to Reign over, and to preserve us against all the Designs of
Priests and Jesuits, and all other wicked Men, who either Envy, or are ready
to Plot the ruin of the Nations Happiness and present Settlement; and may God
cover our great Kings Head in the Day of Battle, give him Victory over all his
Enemies, and bring him home again with Triumph to an Obedient and Rejoicing
People; to which I do not doubt but all good Men, who love their Religion and
their Laws, will say Amen.

FINIS.

