A VINDICATION OF Addresses in general, And of the Middle Temple Address and
Proceedings in particular. In Answer to the Impartial Account of Addresses,
wherein the Popular pretenses of some men are exposed. By a Barrester of the
Middle Temple.
WHen Faction and Ambition has seized the Ignorant man, how troublesome he
grows? his Magisterial Nonsense roars in every corner, fills every Press; and
however nauseous and intolerable it proves to the Discerning, yet the Vulgar
too often admire the man, because they understand him not, and are ready with
him to cry out against the Government, for that He and such Great men are not
advanced thereto: Till at last the braying Animal brings both himself and his
miserable deluded crowd, to the hazard of both their Temporal and Spiritual
Interest. On such men there was never greater cause of complaint, than now; and
I wish to God the people would open their eyes, to see what these Incendiaries
aim at. Has any man been Executed by public Authority illegally? Does not
every man peaceably enjoy the Fruits of his own Vine? Are Liberties abridg'd in
any one particular? or are any of these things like to be? Has not His Majesty
given fresh promises for the continuity of all and every these particulars, in
his late most gracious Declaration? that is true, but that stabs them to the
heart. It Is not the preservation of the Lives, Liberties and Properties of the
people, that these men seek; but they themselves would be disposers thereof.
Wherefore their Choler boils mightily, that His Majesty should condescend to
undeceive his people, but much more that a great part of the people should be
undeceived, and give His Majesty thanks for that gracious condescension. This
reduces them to their former sneaking Aspects, makes them stand as uneasy,
change feet as often as an Elephant learning to dance upon hot Stones. At last
(these disappointments are plaguey things) out creeps a Treasonable Answer to
the Kings Declaration, which has been by some Loyal Pen most ingeniously
reflected on; After that, An Impartial Account (as it is titled) of the Nature
and Tendency of the late Addresses; and this of my word is performed after no
ordinary rate, not by one, I dare say, that pretends to those little helps and
tricks of Unriversity and Humane Learning: No, no, by one of the Saints of our
times, who is above the vain thing called Learning, or the dull thing called
Practical Divinity. Gratitude! What paid to the King too! This is in its nature
the most devilish thing that ever was found out. But suppose the Commons do
give His Majesty thanks for his gracious Speeches made to them in Parliament;
this is one argument that they don't think Addressing or giving His Majesty
thanks, a thing evil in its own nature: If not, the next Parliament no doubt
will be for maintaining the Liberties of the Subject, and proceed against those
as betrayers of our Liberties, who have declared Addresses to be evil in their
nature. This we may well supp se from that late instance of preserving the
Right of Petitioning; and Addressing being altogether as great a Right, it will
no doubt receive as great favor and protection from the Parliament. Well,
perhaps the nature of Gratitude is not truly so black as it does appear to our
Authors Conscience; what then? It Is however a vain insignificant thing, and a
thing of as damnable tendency as any thing about the Town: For confirmation of
this, there is a huge bundle of Reasons, which had never never seen day had it
not been for pure love and compassion (p. 4.. 1.) to the King, whom he fears is
not only industriously deluded, but woefully betrayed, by the Judgment which
some about him pretend to make of the sense and inclination of the people from
these Addresses. Ah love and compassion! how I reverence love and compassion!
what condition were we tumbling into, till you Ah love and compassion raised
this Moses to stand in the gap! till you made him in all humility let the
Privy-Councel know they were Fools and Knaves, and in all humility let His
Majesty know what an object of pity He was become, by his unreasonable
credulity.

And now woe to the poor Addressers, for out comes our Authors Reasons: the
first is to be found in p. 4. No applications of this nature to the Regnant
person, are to be esteemed of any great weight and significancy, if you do but
consider the result of the many Addresses 23 years ago to Richard Cromwell, and
how they only served to render him secure, till he was undermined and
supplanted; for of all that vowed to live and dye by him, not so much as one
man drew a Sword in his favor, when he came to be laid aside. That is as much
as to say, May it please your Majesty, I as in tender love and compassion
bound, do in all humility let your Majesty know, that your Majesty is a poor
deluded wretch, and cannot see so far into a Millstone as another, else you
would never esteem those ill-look'd things called Addresses. Alas! every
Regnant person is to believe all his Subjects deceitful and lying Rogues, he is
to give credit to nothing they vow and protest; because the Whigs proved Liars
to Richard Cromwell, and notwithstanding their Addresses, when they saw the
rightful person would prevail, they left poor Dick in the lurch. In short, the
Argument is this; If the Whigs are Liars and not to be trusted, all the men in
the World are Liars and not to be trusted: But the Whigs are Liars and not to
be trusted, etc. The Assumption is proved, and it is no great matter for proving
the Major; besides he is just now when he should go about it, p. 5. frighted
into the most astonishing, surprising, amazing fit, that ever poor creature
was. Strange! what will this Age come to, when well-meaning men are thus scared
out of their senses? The reason of this wondering fit is to be seen at large in
p. 5. viz. That His Majesty should more discountenance one who comes to
reprehend and instruct him in his managements in State Affairs, than one who is
well pleased with His Majesty's managements, and for that reason comes to make
his humble and grateful acknowledgments. If this is not cause of wonder, what
is? especially when we consider too, as it is in the said. p. That Petitioners
know what they want, but Addressers do not know what is promised to them, or
what they have received. Moreover and above, Addresses will not, p. 8. in the
event prove so useful either to a Popish or Arbitrary design, as some do
apprehend: No, I think verily that is very needlessly apprehended; Not that any
think the King knows of such a design promoted by them, but there are those who
may have ends in this, which His Majesty is not aware of. What a happy Nation
should we be, had His Majesty but this man's Headpiece! then there would be
some hopes that he would love and embrace those mightily that always showed an
uneasiness under his Government, and as much discountenance those who came to
give him thanks for, and were well pleased with what He did. I, then the King
would see, that for his Subjects to be well pleased with his actions, was
always a Popish and Arbitrary design; but 'twas They were his Friends, who were
always rendering both his person and actions contemptible and ridiculous. He
would then see,. 4. that Addresses tend only to divide the Nation into Faction
and Parties: but that Petitions had no such tendency. It Is true, the
Petitioners began before the Addressers, and had given the stamp of Papist, and
Popishly affected, upon all Non Petitioners: What they call that, I cannot tell,
but 'twas not dividing, for that was for Petitions; and would any man think
that Petitioning would divide the Nation, therefore 'twas not dividing, but for
Addressing, any man may see that divides the Nation, therefore that is
dividing. To proceed, His Majesty would then see that,. 7. the number of
Addressers are very few, all of them put together makes not so great number as
we have seen not long since to one Petition. Well said Whig, this is a Swinger!
let the Reader take notice, this is a second proof that Whigs will lie: If this
be true, where was the need of our Author's tender care and compassion toward
His Majesty, in rectifying the apprehension of Him and his Privy-Councel
concerning the sense of the Nation, etc. for they have the numbers before them
both of Addressers and Petitioners, and they could not therefore be deceived
which was greatest. Our Author seems to mistrust this will not be swallowed,
therefore adds, p. 10. If it be allowed, as in justice as well as modesty it
ought, that whoever have either avoided or refused subscribing; are as truly to
be judged against them, as they who have positively withstood, or directly
opposed them, then the tale of the Addressers will make but a very small show
and appearance in the Muster-Roll of the Nation. Smartly said, I protest! Must
it not as well follow that they who avoided or refused subscribing Petitions,
are as truly to be judged against them, as they who have positively withstood,
or directly opposed them? And then what a show they will make in the
Muster-Roll of the Nation. And now the Gentleman is fallen into a fit of
railing for two or three pages together; That the Addressers are the scum of
the people; Those which are Popishly inclined, etc. All which I deny, so there
wants only proof on his part: And thus he concludes his natural thoughts, as to
the general; and I begin mine as follows: That to give His Majesty Thanks for
His late most Gracious Declaration, is very avowable; for my first reason, I
shall lay down these two Propositions, That grateful acknowledgments for
favors received, are a Christians Duty; That for every man to be judge when he
has received a favor, is an English man's Liberty. One would think neither of
these two Propositions need any manner of proof; But because those who would be
thought the Preservers of our Liberties are for betraying them; in this, or any
other particular, where they run counter to their Damnable Designs, (of which,
no doubt, the next Parliament will take notice) I shall prove the second
Proposition from their own practices, I mean Petitioning; for if I have not a
liberty of judging what is a Favor when received, a fortiori, I have no
liberty of judging what will be a Favor when it shall be received, being then
at a greater distance; therefore less capable of judging; So that by
consequence if they do except to what I have laid down a fortiori, they must
exclude themselves the Right of Petitioning: Wherefore I may conclude, if I do
not dislike the Kings Declaration, because it is the Kings, or because 'twas
given with an intent to satisfy the Minds of His Subjects, but really do
esteem it as a Gracious Favor, (notwithstanding these and such like weighty
reasons) I may, nay I am bound, as appears by my first Proposition to render
His Majesty all Humble Thanks. Wherefore in so doing, I am so far from
breaking, that I keep the Law.

But I need not take this advantage, that because I think the King's
Declaration exacts Thanks, therefore I may justify paying them; For I may well
stand the Trial, whether right reason does not call upon us to perform that
respect as a duty; and in order thereto, I shall reduce the King's Declaration
to these three Heads. 1st. His Reasons for His dissolving two Parliaments,
2dly. His promises to govern according to Law. 3dly. His promises to call
frequent Parliaments. First, His Reasons for dissolving two Parliaments! The
very naming of this Head is sufficient to baffle that blundring mistake of
those that affirm, that when we give His Majesty Thanks in general for His
Declaration, we give him Thanks for dissolving two Parliaments; As if there was
no difference between dissolving, and giving reasons for dissolving: Those
Dissolutions were unquestionably justifiable by Law: Afterward, the King
condescends to give us reasons; For what? for doing a thing which by Law he
might do. This was certainly more than His Greatness need to have condescended
to, and therefore commands our grateful returns: especially if we consider the
end for what 'twas done, which does fully appear to be only for the quiet and
satisfaction of his Subjects minds, at such a time, when Malcontents were
endeavoring to possess the people with a needless Fear and Jealousy, that
these Dissolutions were in order to their utter Ruin and Destruction. 2dly. Our
Thanks are due, for His Majesty's gracious promise, That he will govern
according to Law. This grave Mr. Thompson (glad, no doubt, of the opportunity)
explodes, in a formal Speech before the Bench of the Middle Temple, upon the
account of the Address carrying on in that Society; says that Gentleman, (a
weighty reason truly) The King is bound by his Coronation Oath to govern
according to the Laws of the Land, therefore in so doing he does but his duty,
and it is absurd to thank any man for barely doing his duty. I cannot say these
are the words, but I am misinformed if this be not the substance of Mr.
Thompson's Argument; which in form is thus: Whenever a man does but his bare
duty, it is absurd to pay him Thanks for so doing: But the King has done but his
duty, etc. He had done well, had he proved the major Proposition. It Is but the
bare duty of every rich man, to relieve one whom he knows to be necessitous;
It Is but the bare duty of every Christian, when he sees another almost
suffocated in a Pit, to ^end the utmost assistance to his relief; It Is but the
bare duty of a Father, (which is just the case) to provide for, and comfort his
Children; But none can be so hardy to deny Thanks to be due in all these cases;
wherefore that Argument is grossly Illogical. And further, let me ask, why the
City, and some Countries, gave Thanks to their Members that served in
Parliament, for preserving their right of Petitioning, etc? Did these Members
more than barely execute their Trust, or more than what was barely their Duty?
When men catch hold of straws, it is sign they are sinking. Our Author ( 12.)
insists upon the same reason, but goes somewhat further; For, (says he) It does
unbecome English Subjects to thank their Prince for promising to govern
according to Law, seeing, as he never did, so cannot do otherwise. Let it be
admitted; But then, why all this roaring against his Royal Highness? By what
means can He take our Lives, Liberties, and Properties? By what means can He
introduce Arbitrary Power, if a King cannot do otherwise than govern according
to Law? This is downright confessing they scare the people, when there is no
need for it 3dly. Beyond all contradiction, His Majesty may justly expect our
Thanks, for his promise of frequent Parliaments; why else was there such a stir
made in petitioning for them? It may well be presumed, those men were not in
earnest, when they seemed hotly and zealously to desire, and now they have a
gracious promise, that their desires shall be fulfilled, think that promise not
worth their acknowledgements. From what has been said, it is manifest, 1st.
That, admit His Majesty's Declaration does not reasonably exact Thanks, yet, if
any man thinks it does, he (being thereof proper Judge) is obliged to pay them.
2dly. That there is not one particular in that Declaration, but what, according
to right reason, exacts our most grateful returns. As for the particular forms
of Addresses, which our Author quotes, I am not obliged to justify, not only
because I have them not by me, and therefore cannot know whether He
prevaricates, but also because several passages in these forms are incerted
upon reasons most obvious to the Inhabitants of that place from whence they
came: For in one place the Republican-spirits take one way in another, another
way according as they and the Jesuits together think most conducing to their
ends; Wherefore each company of Loyal Addressers assure His Majesty to stand by
him, in opposition to those undutiful Managements, etc. which they more
particularly see carried on. I shall therefore say nothing to any particular
form, except that of the Middle Temple, to which I was a Subscriber. And before
I speak to the exception against the Address it self, because there has been a
great noise made, as if our Proceedings in the carrying it on were abominably
irregular, I shall acquaint the world with the truth of the fact, as follows:
At the first proposing of an Address, 'twas thought fit to appoint a meeting at
a Tavern, that they might consider whether their Party were the Majority,
before they would publicly propose it in the Hall: Upon this score they met
two or three times, which begot a Jealousy in the Adverse party (who also met,
and I suppose too, 'twas to try their own strength,) that we would huddle up an
Address, and privately get Hands, without proposing the matter fairly and
publicly in the Hall. To this effect I have heard our Party upbraided, who
still replied they designed no such thing, nor indeed did they: But a day was
appointed, and the fullest Hall that has been seen appeared. We made a noise
for one Speaker, they for another; we with all the earnestness imaginable pressed
a Poll; twice or oftener we drew out from them in order thereto, yet could not
obtain it. When they would by no means come to a Poll, we took it for granted
they yielded us the Majority (and indeed we were so) we set our Speaker in the
Chair, who put the Question, and all that Voted him Speaker, Voted for the
Address. After this was all over, and a great many of us gone, some of the
other party very Gravely demanded a Poll. No sooner were we all gone, then they
chose themselves a Speaker, Voted our Proceeding Irregular etc. For that we had
no power to call a Parliament in Term time, the Benchers having then the sole
Government of the House: They clamoured likewise that we had appointed three of
the Clock, but met at two, so that their party was surpised, etc. Thus truly
stands the Fact; I defy any of them to prove me mistaken in any one
particular. And now I shall beg leave to make some brief Observations thereon.

First, That they were surpised by our appointing Three of the Clock, and our
meeting at Two, is totally false; for they knew the time of meeting as well as
we our selves, and they had public notice thereof by the Blowing of the Horn:
There was diverse of their party present (I knew none Absent) at the very time
of our Meeting, which had not been in Commons within twelve Months at least;
abundance that had not been in Commons that Term, and how was it possible for
those to be there, had they not had fair notice? Nor was this Sham ever
mentioned, till they found themselves the fewer number. 2dly. It Is very
observable that they should upbraid us for not meeting publicly in the Hall,
(which I will Depose I heard,) and then because we did meet publicly in the
Hall, that they should Vote our Proceedings Irregular. Which way shall one take
to please such men? There was no noise of Irregular proceedings in the Inner
House when 'twas, carried (though in Term time) against the Address: Nay, to my
own knowledge, not long since: These very men who now Vote our Proceedings
Irregular, because the Bench are the governing part in Term; these very men, I
mean all the Leading men were the most busy Actors in our Parliaments convened
in Term-time, even in opposition to the Bench: In answer to these instances
they tell us; those Parliaments began in Vacation, and therefore they might
continue them in Term: What a miserable shift those Gentlemen are put to, to
vent such Nonsense for their excuses? As if our calling a Parliament in
Vacation, took away the Benchers power in Term. Had they not much better deal
plainly and say, that Parliaments which meet in Term in opposition to the Bench
are well enough, because they favor something like Rebellion: But Parliaments
that meet to carry on Addresses, those, fie upon'm irregular things! They are
never to be justified, for they look something like Loyalty: To come yet harder
upon these Gentlemen; If because the Government is in the Bench, we have no
power to act Parliamentary: First, why did they Nominate and Vote for a
Speaker, if 'twas an Irregular meeting, why did they not oppose all Speakers?
No, if their party had been strong enough to have carried it, all had been
extremely Regular. But 2dly. By what Authority did they themselves act
Parliamentary when we were gone out of the Hall? By what Authority I say, did
they choose a Speaker, Vote our Proceedings Irregular, etc. This was one of
Neatest composed Blunders that I ever met with: I have heard of one that would
Swear bloodily all Swearers were damned; I have heard of a Jesuit in a
Conventicle bitterly railing against the Whore of Babylon: But now these
instances cease to be Comical, they are far outdone: It Is a sign the
Well-meaning Party had all the understanding men (as they boasted) of their
side, for none but profound Considering men could be hotly condemning, what at
the same time they were hotly practicing: Upon the whole, I think it may be
concluded that our proceedings are fully justified by even the Practices of our
Opposers. There remains nothing therefore now, but to remove the Objection
against the Address it self, which lies p. 33. against these words, That we
will Serve His Majesty, etc. against those who under specious pretenses, and by
possessing the people with groundless Fears and Jealousies, would bring us back
into Anarchy and Confusion. Surely, says my Author, had these persons who
presume to suggest this unto His Majesty, known any Republicans or Phanaticks
who did do this, they ought by their Allegiance to have deposed against them,
and given in their Names that they might be Prosecuted. Deposed against a
Phanatick! any thing good Sir, any thing but that, there is a Notion indeed at
this time a day; when there must be more Witnesses to satisfy even a
Grand Jury when the Bill is against one of them, then is required at Rome to
Convict a Cardinal: Now, it is but Herding with the Godly Conscientious party,
and you may commence Rogue with safety; for you must know they are our
Jurymen, and it is beneath those Saints to be guided by the old Fusty Rules of
doing as you would be done unto; of doing Justice equally, without Favor or
Affection. Alas! there are Crutches fit only for weak Brethren to bear on, fit
for those only who have not arrived to their pitch of Godliness. There Is
nothing guides them but their Consciences, and their Consciences can,
(notwithstanding their Oaths to the contrary,) find one Guilty without
Evidence, another Innocent, though there be many Credible Witnesses to the
contrary. Verily, verily, these men were in the right on it when they only asked
Liberty of Conscience; had they but Liberty of Conscience, the Devil were an
Ass if he put them upon asking more: Did we therefore know how 'twould be in
vain to Depose against the Sanctified Crew: But it does not follow (by the
Gentleman's leave) that I cannot have a Moral certainty that Discord and
Rebellion are the ends of these men's Actions, and yet not be able to bring them
under a lash by Deposing. For first, this may be done by Mediums, which come
under no Law, yet as they are circumstantiated, do manifestly tend to, or at
least are aimed at no other ends: 2dly. If their Medium do come under a Law, as
by Treasonable Pamphlets, etc. they are pleased to let us have them without
Names, so that it would be very difficult, without the help of one of our late
Grand Jury men's Consciences to Depose positively against any particular person:
I say this may be done first by Mediums which come under no Law, yet as they
are circumstantiated, do manifestly tend to, or at least are arrived at no
other end. And these are principally three. 1st. Petitioning for Parliaments.
2dly. Their desires of a Bill of Exclusion. 3dly. Their Fears of the
Popish-plot: They themselves don't think that any one of these three things
come under any Law; therefore whether they do or not, I need not inquire, but
demonstrate, that every one of these particulars as managed by them, I say, as
managed by them, are designed means to raise groundless Fears and Jealousies
among the people; and then as I before observed, what signifies Deposing in
such Cases: To begin with the first Petitioning for Parliaments, His Majesty
was made sensible what they would Petition for, and showed His dislike thereto
by public Proclamation, yet still did they obtrude Petitions for the same
things: And what could be the meaning of such Rudeness and ill Manners? No
hopes of Success, those were all Anticipated by the Proclamation: But this
vehement repeated Petitioning would serve to breed groundless Fears, that Ruin
hung over the peoples Heads, and His Majesty would not see it, that He was
wholly regardless of His Peoples Welfare and Safety; whereas the people cannot
be either Injured or Ruined, but the King must be so too. If this undoubted
Truth were well considered, 'twould be enough to dissipate all Jealousies of
His Majesty's Managements. But to return, why all this Fondness for
Parliaments? What evil have they done that these men Satyr them with their good
words? Does none Reverence Parliaments but Phanaticks? If Reverence be best
seen by Obedience to Acts of Parliament, I am certain there are those that pay
greater respects then Dissenters, though with less noise. Could an Act of
Parliament keep them from Conventicles? Could an Act bring them to Church?
Could an Act keep them any distance from Corporations? Could an Act hinder them
from Scribbling Treason and Rebellious Principles? No, all Acts are but Cobwebs
when they in the least competize with the Interests or Inclinations of their
party: And therefore, which brings me to the second plausible pretense, a Bill
of Exclusion according to their own Tenants cannot be an Expedient for the
Kingdoms Safety; for how can they, who barely for the sake of unreasonable
Whimseys trample upon Acts of Parliament, believe the Duke would be concluded
by an Act in so great and weighty a matter, They will not object surely; That
his Royal Highness is a better Subject than themselves; one more conformable to
Laws; No, they proclaim him a rigid Papist, and that no Laws can bind a Papist,
when they come in Competition with the good of the Church. Upon this very
reason they seem to press a Bill of Exclusion. No Laws, say they, can bind a
Popish Successor, That (says the Character of a Popish Successor) is hedging in
the Cuckoo. Well then, a Bill of Exclusion would come in Competition with the
good of his Church, or not; If not, then his Royal Highness being upon the
Throne would be no advantage to his Church; then where is the fear of Popery? If
it would, according to themselves, his Royal Highness would not deem such a Law
obligatory; and then they cannot believe the Peace and Quiet of the Nation
would be the consequence of such a Bill, but rather War and Confusion; And it is
that they would have; they care not which way they obtain it, whether by
passing that Law, or whether by sowing Sedition, rendering the King His Subjects
dreadful Enemy, for not passing such a Law. One second hit for the Bishops fair
Possessions would mightily revive the hungry Saints.

The 3d. plausible pretense is, fears of a Popish-Plot; which was a Plot
against His Majesty's Sacred Person, the present Government, and the Protestant
Religion: We shall properly therefore inquire into these three things: First,
Whether Phanaticks desire His Majesty's Life more heartily than all the rest of
His more Loyal Subjects; or indeed, more than His Majesty Himself? 2dly.
Whether they are the chief persons aimed at by the Romanists, when their Plots
are laid against the Protestant Religion? 3dly. Whether They are the only
persons who would protect and preserve the present Government? First, That
Phanaticks desire His Majesty's life, more than He does Himself, is wonderfully
credible; or that they value it more than the Loyal Party, is almost as
credible; for the Question is no more than this: Whether those who have
Martyred the late King, and used their utmost endeavor to Martyr This, be more
zealous for the Preservation of His Majesty's Life, than those who to their
utmost have assisted His late Majesty and this present King, in all times of
dreadful Trials and Adversities? The decision of this Question I leave to any
just man; and if it does appear that it is in reason to be supposed that the
King is as willing to preserve His own Life, as the Phanaticks are to Preserve
it; If it is in reason to be supposed that those who have ventured upon all
occasions their own Lives and Fortunes for the preservation of the King, covet
preservation of His Majesty's Life, as much as those who have hazarded their
Lives and Fortunes to Deprive HIs Majesty of His Life and Government; then it
as reasonably follows, that their over Fear and Care of His Majesty's Life,
which exceeds greatly in appearance, both the King and his Loyal Subjects are
but Pretense and Sham. 2dly. Whether Phanaticks are the chief persons aimed at
by the Romanists, when their Plots are laid against the Protestant Religion?
One would believe by these men's over-bustling and noise, that they were the
only Defenders of the Protestant Faith; That 'twas only the Ruin of Them the
Papists levelled at, as a certain means to eradicate the Protestant Religion;
Whereas Rome well knows, these men are a Goad in our Churches side, and
therefore its Emissaries were careful to make and increase them: That the
Papists made them out of mere envy to our incomparable Church, is evident from
the Examinations of some Popish-Priests in Queen Elizabeth's time; The first
was one Faithful Commin a Friar of the order of St Dominick: he made the first
breach in our Churches walls, by railing against Forms of Prayer, calling the
English-Prayers English-Mass, persuading people to pray Spiritually and
Extempore; to whom the Pope gave a reward for his considerable Service. Two
years after, one Thomas Heath a Jesuit was taken acting the same part; which
stories see at large in Foxes and Firebrands, Printed 1680. and in the Reverend
Dr. Stillingfleet's Preface to the Unreasonableness of Separation. But the
Papists were not only careful to make, but ever since constantly to increase
Votaries to the Phanatick Party; to this end the Jesuits have constantly
preach among the Conventiclers, to the Truth of this many can witness. And Dr.
Oats has deposed, nay when we press Phanaticks with their actions of 41. they
tell us for Excuse, they were deluded by the Papists: from which it fully
appears, that it is against the Church of England all their Plots and
Conspiracies are planted; So far from being aimed primarily at Dissenters, that
the Papists do with all their Art endeavor to preserve them as Instruments and
Tools to afflict and overthrow us. From these Premises I shall draw not
unnaturally two Conclusions. First, That those declamatory Revilings the
Phanaticks throw upon the Members of our Church, as being Popishly affected,
are but barefaced Lies and Calumnies; for it is incredible the Papists would
vent all their malice agaisnt their Friends, and do what in them lies to
cherish and increase their only Enemies, as the Nonconformists would have the
World believe they are. Is it not the Protestant Religion Papists would
extirpate? And can that be supposed a way which increases the preservers
thereof. Whatever these Dissenters pretend, they cannot but know that this is
too too absurd; They cannot but know the Papists believe them the scandal and
affliction to the true Professors of the Protestant Religion, that they deserve
not the name of Protestant, for by Protestant is meant one who protests against
the Errors only, not the Truths too of the Church of Rome, if other wise, a
Turk may be called a Protestant: Is it not them the Papists upbraid us with in
all our Disputations? Is it not amongst them they shroud in all their Hellish
practices; nor had the Papists had any thing to say or do against the
Protestant Religion, had it not been for the unhappy assistance given them by
these foolish and wicked Dissenters. A second Conclusion is, That whatsoever
reasonable fear there is of execution of a Popish plot, it ought to be lodged
in the breasts of the Members of the Church of England, they being only the
marks and Butts of all the malicious stratagems of the Papists. Wherefore when
we see those who have least to lose, Those whom the Plot is least aimed at, the
only men who seem to be scared and frighted out of their Senses, the only men
who roar out Murder, as if the knife were already at their throats, and that
tho the Plot be defeated, it nothing at all abates their unreasonable noise;
what can a man conclude, but that this excessive Feat and Zeal they pretend, is
only to heighten Jealousies among his Majesty's Subjects beyond all Prudence
and Reason. It Non-conformists were in earnest, why do they not run into the
Arms of our Church which has been always open and ready to embrace them? for
that is the only means to make Protestant Strength more Formidable. By this
means we should be able to oppose the Pope, and the Gates of Hell too: If they
did this, there might be some credit given to their zeal: But can a considering
man believe that they can possibly fancy Popery such a dreadful thing and so
unavoidably almost tumbling upon us; That they have so great a fondness for the
Protestant Interest, and that now they deem it in extremity of Danger, and yet
will not make this one easy and certain step to dissipate that Threatening
Cloud, and to increase the Strength, Interest and Reputation of the Protestant
Cause: Surely these prodigious Fears they express, are feigned, or they had
rather Popery shound come in than they themselves should conform to our present
Churches; which ever of these it be the Government had need look warily to
them. Our third Inquity is, Whether Phanaticks are the only Persons that are
truly zealous for protection of the present Government. The Romish Priests did
not make, nor does increase them for that purpose. And we have found them
continually owning and practisiing Principles destructive to our envied
Government. So then in King Jame his time writing to the Lord Hamilton to
invite him to be their General; they told him the People were animated by the
Word and Motion of God's Spirit to go to Arms: See them in Charles the first's
time, making the whole Kingdom a Bloody Theater, and to groan under all the
heaviest calamitous pressures that the most miserable distressed Nation could
possibly be subject to: All backwardness in Murders, Rebellion and Robberies
was then branded with Lukewarmness in the Cause of God: And Curse ye Meroz etc.
Was thundered out against lots for God. Then the blessed Covenant was entered
into: That we shall endeavor the extirpation of Prelates, etc. and shall not
suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever Combination, Persuasion
or Terror to be divided and withdrawn from the blessed Union and Conjunction,
whether to make defection on the contrary part, or to give our selves to a
detestable Indifferency or Neutrality in the Cause, and.c. But shall all the
days of our Lives zealously and constantly continue therein against all
opposition, and promote the same according to our Power against all Lets and
Impediments whatsoever. And what Signs? what Indication have they given of
Repentance for the Commission of these hellish Tragedies? or that they do not
believe this Covenant, this blessed Union as they term it, Obligatory. No other
than that they have drawn the Sword in Scotland, than that they have brought
us, even us, who have so lately, so severely smarted into a Relapse of Faction,
Parties and Confusion, than that they live in perpetual contempt and
nonconformity to what they have Covenanted against. Certainly therefore their
hot pretended care for the present Government is but to terrify the People
with a greater danger than really there is. Thus I have demonstrated that
Phanaticks are in earnest for nothing but Rebellion even by their most specious
and popular pretenses, I need not therefore trouble my self to show their more
open impudence tends thereto; Such as Treasonable Pamphlets against the King,
Such as Libelling of the Government, Such as vilifying of the Clergy which was
the second way I observed they daily take to alienate the Affections of His
Majesty's People and stir them up to Rebellion, and yet in such Cases it is
difficult to depose against particular Persons. I shall present you with one
smart Example only and conclude; Who the Author of the Character of the Popish
Successor is I know not, therefore cannot depose against him; But this I know,
He deserves severe punishment for the great pains he has taken to propagate
Rebellious Principles. This man is the Darling of the Phanaticks, and he speaks
downright in terms for Rebellion, for which Reason I quote him rather than
another, though at the very naming of him I begin to be in a sweat; for you must
know Reader, it is a Plaguey thing this hot Weather to be tumbling over a huge
Company of great rumbling words without one dram of Sense for ones refreshment.
Therefore take it kindly that I show you this thundering Fellow; And stand clear
here how be comes. p. 8. The Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and all the
Judicious Officers are of the Kings Creation: But if the Public Ministers of
Justice betray the Liberties of the Subject, the Subject may petition for a
Parliament to Punish them for it. But what if he will neither hear one, nor call
the other? Who shall compel him? Good God! Here Is a Rogue thinks I to my self;
He has taught the King to make us all Slaves whether we will or no; S'bud we
must all doff our Dublets, and away to making of Bricks without allowance of
Straw: But Mr. Charactarizer, since you are so good at invention, can you find
out no trick to prevent this Devilish thing? No; there is no way but a
Parliament? and what if he will not call one, who shall compel him? That Is true,
no body can compel him as I know on: but hanged I shall fair as well as the
rest: Getting a little life at this thought (tho it did stick confoundedly in
my Maw that the Fool did not keep private to himself this easy way of making
Kings of England Arbitrary) on I went with my reading, but found a tormenting
deal of Rubbish in my way, sometimes as I was telling you over head and ears
pop't I amongst a great heap of empty words, sometimes fast stuck between
contradictions; at last puffing and blowing I came to p. 20. where I met with
this crum of Comfort: There Is scarce a Precedent in the oldest Historical part
of the Bible, that shall not by an extorted application be appropriated even to
the duty and necessity of all ages, places and constitutions of the World, for
example they will tell you the Prophet Samuel makes the answer to the Jews that
desired a King, that he would make their Sons, etc. and you shall cry out in
that day, because of your King that ye have chosen; which was as much as if the
Prophet had said; If a King shall (as he may do this) you have no redress but
to your Prayers for his conversion. He does not tell them they might Revolt or
Rebel to Redress themselves: No, Heaven forbid he should; for their King was
absolute, etc. Here indeed a passive Obedience is due; But what is this to a
King of England? Say you so quot hI? then given me my Whinyard, I Am resolved to
have a brush for 't before I come to the making Bricks; for it seems if we
think a King of England intrenches upon our Liberties and Properties, we may
Revolt and Rebel, to Redress our selves: All places in Scripture which teach
obedience to Princes in such cases are appropriated to us by extorted
applications. Now, Reader, if you should object, as 't is very likely you may.
First, How it comes to pass that no body could Rebel? In p. 8. But that every
Body may Rebel in p. 20. That there was no Redress in p. 8. but Prayers for a
Parliament: and if the King would not call one, no body could compel him: But
that in p. 20. Prayers for Redress are proper only for Subjects of absolute
Princes, But all that is nothing, to a King of England; we need not pray for the
turning of his heart, but turn all the Kings of England as Charles the first
was turned. My solution to this objection is in p. 8. The Peoples conditions
were to be made inevitably miserable, they must not be allowed the least hopes
of Redress, that the Remedy of Rebellion, when it was offered, might be the
sweeter and more greedily received. Secondly, If you should object how this
doctrine of taking up Arms is reconcilable to the Statute of the 14. of this
King, Chap. 3. which says, For as much as within all his Majesty's Realms and
Dominions the sole and Supreme Power, Government, Command and Disposition of
the Militia, and of all Forces by Sea and Land, and of all Forts and Places of
Strength is, and by the Laws of England, ever was the undoubted Right of His
Majesty etc. and that both or either of the Houses of Parliament cannot, nor
ought to pretend to the same nor can, nor lawfully may raise, or levy any War,
Offensive or Defenssive against His Majesty His Heirs, etc. I have no other
solution than as Ben Johnson told us there were three sort of Lights; So I tell
you there are three sorts of Wars, 1st. War Offensive. 2. War Defensive. 3. No
War at all. Now though the two first Wars are mentioned in the Act, you know the
Last is not, Ergo: So far I have managed well enough, but the next page does
wonderfully gravel me. And if now at last Popery must and shall come in (as by
Law it cannot) it must be restored by Arbitrary Power: if a new Monarchy, then
a new Conquest. and if a Conquest, Heaven forbid we should be subdued like less
than English- men, or be debarred the common Right of all Nations, which is to
Resist or Repel an Invader, if we can, This justifies all the Plots,
Conspiracies and Rebellions of the Papists, for if Protestanism could not be
brought-in by Law (as it could not, for the same reason Popery cannot)
consequently by Arbitrary Power: If a new Monarchy, then a new Conquest; and if
a Conquest, Heaven forbid they should be subdued like less then English men; or
be debarred the Common Right of all Nations, which is to Resist or Repel an
Invader if they can: To be serious can there be greater impudence for a Fellow
whoseignorance fits him for a Schoolmasters Lash, with the help only of a hard
Forehead and a few words borrowed out of some bombast Heroic Poem to dare to
lay down Principles that justify all Popish Plots and Conspiracies; Principles
of Rebellion which run exactly Counter to an Act of Parliament: And yet all
this is humbly offered to the Parliaments consideration! Als! These men cannot
write against an Act of Parliament, They don't design Rebellion; for shame for
shame let us see our Temporal as well Spiritual Interest loudly, and hastily
call us to be quiet and united, to be good Christians and Loyal Subjects.

LONDON, Printed by N. Thompson. 1681.


