A NEEDFUL CORRECTIVE OR BALANCE IN Popular Government, Expressed in a Letter
to JAMES HARRINGTON, Esquire, Upon occasion of a late Treatise of his; And
published as seasonable in the present Juncture of Affairs.
SIR,
THE high esteem and reverence you bear (and that deservedly) unto humane
Prudence, (which the more ancient the date is that you set to it, is doubtless
the better, as most partaking of its primitive purity) does nevertheless, I
fear, outweigh with you, beyond what it ought, to the derogation and prejudice
of that pattern for Magistracy it self, which was shown unto Moses in the
Mount, during the forty days in which the body of that godly Man was
nourished, without the help of secondary means, and yet lived not upon the
air, but upon every word that proceeded out of the mouth of God: In the wisdom
of which Word he was then taught to see the most excellent platform of Civil
Government; as having its root and inward principles, as well as its outward
administration flowing from Divine Institution and revelation: of which we may
well suppose, that the abilities in Jethro a Heathen (that appeared in the
advice he gave touching the outward order to be observed for the administration
of Justice in the Commonwealth of Israel) did fall very short, although there
be nothing contained in the one, which may not have witness and justification
given unto it by the other, as was the case between Jethro and Moses; yet Moses
was he, that by conversing face to face with God, and receiving the lively
Oracles, was much better qualified to lay down the rules of a perfect
Commonwealth Government then Jethro was, that by the help only of tradition,
acquired gifts and experience, might arive to that skill in the rules of
ancient Prudence, as to make him a very knowing and able Politician, and yet
not to stand in competition with Moses.

And since you have thought fit, in your Treatise showing the Prerogative of
popular Government, and very worthily asserting that cause, with great
advantage on your part, against all adversaries that are entered into the list
with you, to annex to it certain Queries with this inscription, To the godly
man: Be pleased to take in good part this general return that is made
thereunto, not with any intent to oppose, but rather conntenance the essentials
of that Government you plead for, and perfect the principles of true freedom,
which are taught by ancient Prudence, to the rendering us a holy as well as a
free people: In which Spirit of holiness you may become invinsible against the
very Clergy themselves, that have begun to undertake you; as you also, in
requital, have not a little unmasked them in their pretended ordination, which
they, as the Presbytery, would fain ingross and usurp to themselves, without
the free consent of the Congregation.

Nor will it be much material in this, to know from whom this comes to you,
under any other notion, then the Advocate for the godly Man, to whom your
Queries are directed; it being indeed from one that cannot be wrought off from
a sincere and hearty friendship and value of true godliness; how shameful
soever the miscarriage has been in these our days, of those that having had
only the form of it, have served themselves thereof to advance their worldly
interests, to the making that very name to stink amongst the Heathens and great
Leviathans of the world; and therefore is desirous to receive a clear
information and resolution from your self, unto some Queries that you will find
in the close of this paper, directed to you, on the behalf of the godly Man;
after some little discanting upon the nature of Government, in the general, and
joining in witness with you unto those principles of common right and freedom,
that must be provided for, in whatsoever frame of Government it be, which does
pretend to a perfection in its kind.

By Government or Rule in general is to be understood that power which, de
facto, comes to be set up as supreme, and is exercised over Nations or People
by way of oversight and command for the good of the whole Body, in either of
the three conditions of men you mention, whether of Servants, Subjects, or
Citizens.

The rise and being which is given to ruling Power amongst Nations and
Kingdoms, is not by chance, nor merely through the will of Man, but has its
place found in Gods Ordinance and Institution; for there is no Power but is of
God, and the Powers that are sprung either from his Authority and Commission,
or from his Tolleration and Permission. So as upon one account or the other, we
may truly say, they are so limited and ordered by him, whether it respect the
form of their constitution, the force of their operation, or the time of their
continuance, as well as the use and end which they serve unto, that when all is
done, Power only belongs to God, who kills and makes alive, and pulls down one
and sets up another, that it may be kuown, that the pillars of the Earth are
his, and he has set the World upon them, upholding all things by the Word of
his Power; so as neither promotion nor abasement does come from the East or
from the West, but from him alone, in order to bring to pass the work which he
has to do in the World, for the good of his Church and People.

However Government, considered as well in reference to the right as to the
actual exercise of it, is seated also in the will of man, where it has, next
under God, its rise and being. And the access unto it is usually had upon
pretense of one of these three rights.

First the right of consent and free gift by the common vote of the whole Body,
which is the right door to enter into the exercise of supreme Power, and is
genuine, natural, righteous, consonant to those pure Principles of man's nature,
wherein he was at first created, and does declare the governed to be in the
state of free Citizens, who as Brethren partaking of the Spirit of right
reason, common to them as men made in the Image of God, are equally entitled
to their own oversight and Government, and do therefore see cause voluntarily
to associate themselves together, and on the grounds of common right and
freedom, to agree to be subject and yield obedience to the Laws, that are from
time to time made amongst them by their own free and common consent. So as this
sort of Empire or Government is that of Laws, and not of Men, and is of a
nature better agreeing with the many then the few, and least of all with the
single person.

The second is the right of conquest, which is also through the will of man
usurping and imposing upon his Brethren, by force of arms, that which could
not be obtained (as it ought) by free consent, and is therefore held upon the
same terms of force and violence, to the proclaiming the governed to be fallen
into a state of servants, if not of slaves, who hold all they have at the will
of the Lord, and are in a condition most agreeing with the principles of
absolute Monarchy, as in practice began with Nimrod, and is yet to be seen in
the Government of Turkey, and other Nations of the World.

Thirdly, There is a mixed right that is made up of both the former, to the
rendering that tolerable, and, in some sort, satisfying, in process of time,
which was at first most wickedly and unduly acquired: And is their case, who
not being able to be free men, are resolved to do their utmost not to be
slaves; and so are brought to consent to walk in the middle way, between both;
agreeing to be subjects, or yield subjection to their Ruler, upon condition of
enjoying certain known rights and privileges belonging to them as men, and
which may distinguish them from mere slaves, and be laid as fundamental Laws of
that constitution of Government. This way of obtaining the exercise of supreme
Power, carrying in it the temper and mixture of the other two, is neither very
good, nor stark naught; but is the worse for this, that such as are under it do
seldom care to be better, they are so afraid, that by attempting to mend
themselves, they shall make themselves irrecoverably worse. This kind of
Government agrees not with the principles of absolute Monarchy, nor perfect
popular freedom, but sorts with Aristocracy, that is, the mixture of them
both, and with regulated Monarchy, as that of Kings, Lords and Commons.

The difficulty at first view appears not to be great in introducing and
settling a Government, where the people are conquered by force of arms, no
more then (under the fright and apprehension of the fate of those that come to
be reduced by the sword) to compound up the business in the middle way before
mentioned, as this Nation has often and dearly experienced in the changes of
Governors, if not Governments, which they have been subject unto; So as the
great clamor and objection lies only against the first; that is, as to the
practicableness of introducing and settling the exercise of the supreme Power,
by the free and common consent of the Citizens, whose equality in power is apt
to make their tempers luxuriant and immoderate, and keeps them from coming
rightly to agree in a matter of such consequence.

Wherein first consideration is to be had by them, whether this high trust of
the chief Magistracy shall be placed in one single person, or in a collective
Body of Elders, or a Senate, consisting of more or fewer persons? And then,

Secondly, Whether this Power shall be transferred absolutely to the person or
persons so chosen, or with limitation and condition?

To transfer it absolutely yields up with it the Legislative Power, and sixes
it as well as the executive, in one and the same hand) admit it be to a single
Person, or a Senate) and leaves nothing afterward unto the People but slavery
and bondage, by putting forth all the Acts of Rule and Power without their
consent.

But to confer this Power rationally, and agreeably to the principles of
ancient Prudence, is to reserve, by way of limitation, that which may so
qualify and regulate the supreme executive Power, in and by whatsoever hand it
be exercised, as is able to preserve it within its due bounds as it is
executive, and keeps the result of that wherein it is Legislative within the
power and consent of the People.

This is easily done, by the help of a second order of men, ordained and
constituted by the Peoples suffrage; who, in the capacity of their Deputies and
Representative Body, are from time to time to make up one general Assembly with
the Senate, by yertue of their Summons and call, and there to give the consent
of the People to all Acts and Decrees that are Legislative and binding to the
Commonwealth.

The third thing to be done, in order to the right introducing and settling of
Magistracy in a free State of Citizens, is to dispose themselves, or suffer
themselves to be disposed into that order, which is requisite, and may best
conduce to the choice of meet and fit persons into either of the two
Assemblies, whether that of the Senate, or of the Peoples Representative.

But the great difficulty remains yet to receive its solution, which is to show
how the depraved, corrupted, and self-interested will of man, in the great
Body, which we call the People, being once left to its own free motion, shall
be prevailed with to espouse their true publiick interest, and closely adhere
to it, under the many trials and discouragements they must be sure to meet
with, before they obtain what they pursue.

Which Objection being so experimental as it is, carries with it the greater
force, and is obvious to most men; by reason whereof they rather choose the
bondage whereinto they fall under the power of the sword moderately used, then
to commit themselves to the boundless power of the peoples will unbridled, and
unsubjected unto any rules from inward principles, or outward order and command.

However, in way of answer, there is that to be said, which whether it will
weigh in the judgments of others I know not, but it is considerable with me.

And first, it may be but needful to enquire whence this is, and also what is
that which is wanting to balance and complete the motion of man's will, in the
exercise of its own freedom, that it is so little to be trusted and relied on,
in the pursuit of that which is the common Interest of mankind, and the public
good of humane Societies. And if in this we search to the bottom, we have it
declared in that Scripture, which says, It is not in man to order his own
steps. Man, at his best, stands in need of the ballancing and ruling motion of
Gods Spirit to keep him steadfast; let his nature be made, as it was at first,
holy and righteous, when his will was morally bounded within the excellent
limits that were set unto it by the Law of God, unto which he did bear a
natural and willing conformity in the spirit of his mind, and was under the
dictates of a pure enlightened reason.

And how much therefore more does his nature and will want this ruling and
moving influence now, from the Spirit of God, when it is at its worst, not only
to heal and restore what is lost, but to add, by way of supply, that more grace
that may preserve from the danger of future relapse. And this remedy is not
always at hand, nor in man's power to take up at his pleasure. For as the wind
blows where it lists, and none know whence it comes, and whither it goes;
so is every one that is born of the Spirit of God. And though it be easy with
God to cause such a Nation to be born at once, and to make the Earth bring
forth in a day, by the extraordinary effusion of his Spirit upon all flesh, yet
this is extraordinary, and very remote, as to the redress of the evil now in
question. Nevertheless, the consideration of this takes so far impression
with me, as to conclude no Nation truly free that is in bondage to corruption,
and alienated from the life of God by wicked works, how much soever it be set
at liberty in other respects, to use the power of its own will in providing for
its own Government: But the People of it ought to be as sensible of their great
want and misery, in this respect, as they are forward to complain, and with
great justice also, of the force of the sword, which God permits very
frequently to be kept up over them, till holy and righteous Principles be of
more power and better reception with them.

But secondly, Until such times of refreshing and healing shall come, from the
presence of the Lord, upon the Nations of the World, as is promised in the last
of days; we are to take care in the use of the ordinary means, daily afforded
by Gods Providence, that are most conducing to guide and regulate the will of
the People, unto their making a good choice of the Senate and their own
Deputies, in order to meet together in one general Assembly, by them
acknowledged the free and complete Representation of the whole Nation. And
then, this being once done, and thereby the first great wheel of the
Commonwealth set upon its right hinges, all the other inferior wheels would
quickly be set to keep motion and harmony with that, to the bringing in, with
great facility, a well composed order of Government throughout the whole State.

And this without difficulty may be done, if this one Rule be held unto and
observed; which is, that in the time of the Commonwealths constituting, and in
a Nation much di^ided in affection and interest about their own Government,
none be admitted to the exercise of the right and privilege of a free Citizen,
for a season, but either such as are free born, in respect of their holy and
righteous principles, flowing from the birth of the Spirit of God in them,
(restoring man in measure and degree, as at the first by Creation) unto the
right of Rule and Dominion) or else who, by their tried good affection and
faithfulness to common right and public freedom, have deserved to be trusted
with the keeping or bearing their own Arms in the public defense.

And if unto this selected number of Citizens, the liberty of exercising the
choice of the Magistrates for the whole Body, should be for a season
restrained; and they cast into a military order and discipline (as the
Israelites of old, when they once had turned their backs upon Egypt, the House
of Bondage) and shall become distributed in distinct Tribes and Divisions,
within the borders of their several Habitations or Precincts where they dwell;
it could be no sooner said unto them, as Moses did to the Children of Israel,
Take and choose you able and wise men, such as fear God, men of truth and
hating covetousness, that they may be made Heads over the People, of Thousands,
of Hundreds, of Fifties, and of Tens; but the thing would carry that
self-evidence in it to the minds of the People, how good and possible it is for
them so to do, that they would most cheerfully set about, and accordingly
effect it.

As to what then has been said in this matter, pointing out some
dissatisfaction that rests with me, in reference to the definition you make of
an equal Commonwealth, and the way you find requisite to place the Balance in
it, by an Agrarian and Law for equal interesting the People in the Soil, and an
universal liberty unto election of the Magistrates, through the help of the
rotation and use of the B^llot, the result of all amounts to this; That whilst
holiness in principles, by way of spiritual birth, is wanting amongst the
People, as one chief Ingredient to qualify them to the exercise of the right
of free Citizens, and a tried good affection and faithfulness to common Right
and public Freedom remains undiscovered, the way by you proposed, for the
well constituting a Commonwealth, may bring it to a state and degree of
Freedom very desirable, and which being attained we may be in the fairer and
nearer way to the other.

But where (as you all along most deservedly have regard unto) the foundations
of Government shall be laid so firm and deep as in the Word of God, bottomed
upon that Cornerstone the Lord Jesus, there is a Heavenly Balance to be met
with, which keeps all even. For upon this Stone there are seven eyes; God
himself is he that engraves the graving thereof, and gives forth, according to
that pattern, the order and constitution of Magistracy, in its primitive purity
and perfection; where the Authority and proposing Power, by which to move and
keep the will of the People in its right course of obedience, is first
originally in God and Christ himself, as their Political King and Civil
Legislator; and next under Christ, the Ruling Senate, whose Office it is; and
as you yourself well say, from the excellency of their debate and deliberation,
providently and faithfully unfolded to the People, they do frequently cause and
necessitate the will and the deed in them. So much may one man, for the
excellency of his aid, be as in the place and power of God unto another.

This sort of Government is contained in these following Queries.
Quer. 1. Whether in the restitution of all things, so assuredly promised, and
so often foretold, since the World began, Acts 3. Man himself shall not be
restored to the gift and exercise of Righteousness in his natural judgment and
will, in the perfection, as to kind, wherein he was at first created; (as in
the Type, in a good degree, did befall Nebuchadnezzar in the exercise of
Government, Dan. 4. 34, 36.) to the enabling of whole Nations, in this day of
Gods Power, in such manner to obey Gods Voice and keep his Covenant, as shall
render them unto God a Kingdom and holy Nation, in the relation of his
Subjects; and he shall be to them a King or supreme Legislator, accepted and
voted by the Peoples free and common consent, as Exodus 19. Quer. 2. Whether
such a restored People and holy Nation, made after this manner Gods peculiar
treasure, and he their chief Magistrate, and directed by the Spirit of their
Head, to put themselves in the best capacity they can (first to hear what God
has to propose to them, as the rule of their obedience to him: Secondly, to
exercise that which they agree to bear the stamp and authority of the Wisdom of
the Nation, in matters that appertain to the oversight of the whole Body, in
the hands of a Senate or Council of Elders, for the executive part of the
supreme Power: And thirdly, to give the public vote and suffrage of the whole
People, in a way of assent or dissent, upon all matters proposed by the Senate,
to pass into Laws amongst them, by their own chosen Deputies and
Representative Body, for that purpose constituted by them from time to time, as
need shall require, to join with the Senate) be not that righteous and faithful
City spoken of, Isai. 1. 26. to whom her Judges are restored, as at the first,
and her Counselors as at the beginning, by whose Decrees that Law goes forth,
wherein Christ himself shall appear judging amongst the Nations, and rebuking
many People, until he settle Peace and Righteousness in the Earth? Quer. 3.
Whether such a Ruling Senate, consisting of a competent number of fit and meet
persons to be made Heads of the People, and by their free suffrage elected and
designed to the office of executing the supreme Power, (as the work singly
appertaining to this chief Council of Elders) and also to the exercise of the
Legislative Power, in association with the Representative Body of the People,
to be by them from time to time summoned and called together for that purpose,
in which general and great Assembly to propose all such matters whatsoever as
are to pass into Laws, and to receive the distinct and public vote of the
peoples consent to them, before they be of the force of Laws or binding, be not
the most exact platform of the purest kind of popular Government, and that
which has its foundation and first pattern in the Word of God, in the practice
of Isreal's Commonwealth, and so plainly of Divine Creation and Institution?
Quer. 4. Lastly, Whether the beginnings of such a Government as this, as small
as they may be at first, and accompanied with the mixture of humane frailties
and infirmities, may not however, through the mighty and universal pouring out
of the Spirit upon all flesh, so grow and increase, as at last to come up unto
a perfect day; in such sort as the public sentence and judgment of such a
restored People and holy Nation, in their Assemblies of Judicature, may not so
much be the judgment of Man, as of the Lord himself, their King and Lawgiver,
and be owned by him to be the same here on Earth, with his which is in Heaven,
and therefore to be ratified and made stable, by the Word of his Heavenly
Power, executed by his mighty Angels, as well as by their earthly forces and
strength of men's bodies, against all opposers and rebellious gainsayers, to
the setting up of Christ as King throughout the whole Earth, and causing the
Nations and Kingdoms of this World to become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ, in a visible manner here below, for the space of a thousand years;
in which time the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord
of Hoasts shall reign in Mount Sion and in Jerusalem, before his Ancients
gloriously, showing himself King in Jeshurum, when the Heads of the People and
Tribes of Israel are gathered together before the Lord in the day of their
Assembly?
By this time, I suppose, I have well nigh tired out your patience, having
drawn out my Letter to a greater length then becomes this way of address. But
since my aim in setting these things before your consideration is (as I said at
first) not to put lead on your Chariot wheels, to cause them to drive heavily,
but rather to be an occasion to carry on the Work in a straight line unto its
perfection; you will, I hope, the more willingly bear with me, and not be
offended at this small glimpse, which, duly improved, may at length lead unto a
fuller and clearer prospect into the new Heavens and new Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness, and may in some sort provide us against the time when the
fashion of the old ones shall wear off, and pass away with great noise and
fervent heat, which is the faith and assured expectation of him, who is

Your true Honourer, and real Servant.

FINIS.

