THE VOYAGES Of The Ever Renowned Sr. FRANCIS DRAKE Into the WEST INDIES.

Viz.

His great Adventures for Gold, and Silver, with the Gaining thereof, and an
Account of his Surprising of Nombre de Dios.

A large Account of that Voyage wherein he Encompassed the World.

His Voyage made with Francis Knollis, and others; their taking the Towns of
St. Jago, Sancto Domingo, Carthagena, and Saint Augustine.

His last Voyage (in which he Died) being Accompanied with several Valiant
Commanders, and the Manner of his Burial.

Collected out of the Notes of the most Aproved Authors.

To which is added, An Account of his Valorous Exploits in the Spanish Invasion.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Malthus, at the Sign of the Sun, in the Poultry,
1683.

To the Reader.
IN the following Sheets are presented to thy view the Long and Dangerous
Voyages, with the Heroic Exploits of the Famous Sir Francis Drake, more
concise than they were formerly published. That I may not seem haerere in
Limine, I shall forbear digressing etiher in giving a particular Account of the
Passages herein mentioned; or in Apologizing for the Defects that may be found
in this Treatise; hoping the Courteous Reader will rather look upon the design
than critically inspect the imperfections, or escapes hereof.

That which moved me to the Undertaking hereof, was (next to the reviving the
Memory of this Renowned Gentleman, the Echo of whose praises sometimes
resounded all the World over, and to whom we owe the Discovery of a great Part
of what we now possess of Foreign Plantations) to divert that Spirit of
Contention that is now arisen in every one almost against his Brother, and to
excite, in the Spirits of Young People especially, an Aemulation of this Worthy
Patriot in Advancing the Glory of their Country by Foreign Conquests.

Books lately printed for and sold by Tho. Malthus, at the Sun in the Poultry.
BEntivolio and Urania in six Books, by Nathaniel Ingelo D. D. the fourth
Edition, with large Amendments, wherein all the obscure Words throughout the
Book are interpreted in the Margin, which makes this much more Delightful to
read than the former Editions.

Mr. James Janewayes Legacy, to his Friends, containing twenty seven Famous
Instances of Gods Providence, in and about Sea-dangers and Deliverances, with
the Names of several that were Eye Witnesses to many of them.

An Historical Account of the Heroic Life and Magnanimous Actions of the most
Illustrious, Protestant Prince, James Duke of Monmouth, Containing an Account
of his Birth, Education, Places and Titles, with his Great and Martial
Achievements in Flanders and Scotland, his Disgrace and Departure, both from
Court and Kingdom, with the most material Circumstances that have occurred
since his Return.

The Complete Statesman, demonstrated in the Life, Actions and Politics of
that Great Minister of State, Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury, containing an
Historical Account of his Descent, his Administration of Affairs in the time of
Oliver Cromwell, his unwearied Endeavors to restore his most Sacred Majesty,
his Zeal in Prosecuting the Horrid Popish Plot, several of his Learned
Speeches, his two Commitments to the Tower, the most Material Passages at his
Trial, with many more Considerable Instances, unto his Lordships going for
Holland.

Catastrophe Mundi, or Merlin Revived, in a Discourse of Prophesies, and
Predictions, and their Remarkable Accomplishments, with Mr. Lillies
Hieroglyphics Exactly Cut, and Notes, and Observations thereon, as also a
Collection of all the ancient reputed Prophecies that are extant, touching the
Grand Revolutions like to happen in these latter Ages.

Historical Memoirs of the Life and Death of that wise and valiant Prince,
Rupert, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Cumberland, etc. containing a
brief but impartial Account of his Great and Martial Achievements, during the
time of the Civil Wars, together with his several Engagements in the Wars
between his Majesty and the States General of the United Provinces.

Fifteen Real Comforts of Matrimony, in answer to the late fifteen Shain
Comforts, together with Satirical Reflections on the Whoring and Debauchery of
this present Age. Written by a Person of Honor, of the Female Sex.

Sir Francis Drake REVIVED, Giving an Account of his Surprising of Nombre de
Dios, and of several other notable Achievements performed by him in those
Parts.
ON Whitsun-Eve, May 24. 1572. Captain Drake in the Pascha of Plymouth of 70.
Tuns, his Admiral, with the Swan of the said Port of 25 Tuns, his Vice Admiral
in which his Brother John Drake was Captain, set sail, having in both of them
of Men and Boys 73. sufficiently provided with Necessaries for such a Voyage.

The Wind continuing at N. E. gave us very good Passage, so that in five Weeks
after, we had sight of the Island of Guadalupe, one of the West Indies Islands.
The next Morning June 29th. entering between Dominica and Guadalupe, we descried
2 Canows coming from a rocky Island 3 Leagues off Dominica. Landing on the
South side of it, we remained three days there to refresh our men, and to water
our Ships. There we saw some poor Cottages built with Palmito Boughs and
Branches, but no Inhabitants; the Cottages (probably) serving only for the use
of those that came thither at certain times to fish.

July 1. being the 3d. day after, about 3 in the Afternoon we sailed thence for
the Continent of Terra Firma, and the fifth day we saw the high land of Sancta
Martha; but we directed our Course for a Place, called by our Captain in his
former Voyage, Port Phesant, by reason of the great store of those Fowls, he
and his Company had there, where we arrived in six days. It is a round Bay, and
safe Harbor, not past half a Cables length over at the mouth, but within 8, or
10 every way, of 10, or 12 fathom water, full of good Fish, and of a fruitful
soil.

At our entrance here, our Captain having left his Brother to attend the Ships,
with some few of his Company went to land. But as we were rowing ashore, we saw
a Smoke in the Woods near the place our Captain frequented; therefore our
Captain thought fit ^o take more strength with us, suspecting some Enemy there.
But this smoke was occasioned by a Fire, which one Mr. Garret of Plymouth and
his Company had made, and had continued at least five days before our Arrival.
This John Garret left a Plate of Lead nailed to a huge Tree of near five Fathom
about, in which were Engraven these words:

Captain Drake, if you fortune to come to this Port, make haste away; for the
Spaniards which you had with you here the last year, have bewrayed this place,
and taken away all that you left here. I departed from hence this present 7th.
of July, 1572.

Your very loving Friend, John Garret.


Yet our Captain Resolved to tarry here still he had built his Pinnaces; and
therefore caused the Pinnaces to be brought ashore for the Carpenters to set
up, employing the rest of his Company in fortifying a place he had chosen out
to work in, being 3 Rudes, which he did, with Trees, thirty foot in height,
round, leaving only one Gate to issue at, near the Waterside, which was every
night shut up with a Tree drawn cross it. The Plat was of a Pentagonal form;
two Angles were toward the Sea, and that side between them left open for
launching our Pinnaces; the other four sides were firmly closed up. Without the
ground was rid fifty foot round. The rest was very thick with Trees, of which
many were of those kinds, that are never without green leaves, till they are
dead at the Root, (but there is one kind among them like our Ash, which when
the Sun is vertical to them, and causes great Rains, casts all its leaves in
three days, and in six days again becomes all green) of a prodigious height,
supported with six Buttresses growing out of their Body, in each of which three
men may be so hid, that they who stand in the next Buttress shall not see them.
The Wood of those Trees is as heavy as Brasil, or Lignum Vitae, and is of a
white Color.

The day after our arrival, there came an English Bark of the Isle of Wight,
James Rawse Captain, and John Overy Master, with thirty men. They brought in
with them a Spanish Carvel of Sivel (taken the day before) and a Shallop taken
at Cape Blanch. This Captain was desirous to join with ours, and was received
accordingly.

July 20. Seven days after his coming, having dispatched our Business, we
departed from that Harbor toward Nombre de Dios; within three days we arrived
at the Isles of Pinos, and found two Frigates of Nombre de Dios lading Timber
thence.

By the Negroes in these Frigates we were informed of the State of the Town, and
of a Report, that certain Soldiers were daily expected from the Governor of
Panama for the defense of the Town against the Symerons (a black People, who
fled from the Spaniards their Masters, by reason of their Cruelty, and since
grown into two Kingdoms, the one to the East, the other to the West of the way
from Nombre de Dios to Panama.)

Our Captain set those Negroes ashore, that they might join themselves to their
Countrymen, the Symerons, or at least that he might prevent their going to
alarm the Town with News of his Arrival, Nombre de Dios being far distant from
that place by land; and himself resolved to go thither with all speed and
secrecy.

And so disposing of his Companies, according as they inclined, he left the
three Ships and Carvel with Captain Rawse, and chose into his four Pinnaces,
fifty three of our men, and twenty of Captain Rawses, well armed.

July 28. Thus parted from our Company, we arrived at the Island of Cativaas,
being twenty five Leagues distant, Aug. 2. where our Captain trained his men,
delivering to each their several Arms, encouraging them with certain hopes of
success.

The same day we sailed for Nombre de Dios. Before Sunset we reached Rio
Francisco. Thence he led us hard aboard the shore (that we might not be
descried) to within two Leagues of the Point of the Bay, where we rode till it
was dark.

When our Captain, finding those of our Company proposing difficulties,
resolved to take the opportunity that Night; and so we arrived there at three
of the Clock after midnight. About the same time a Ship of Spain had arrived
there, who suspecting us, sent her Gundeloe to alarm the Town, which our
Captain perceiving, prevented, so that we landed without any difficulty, and
seized upon six Pieces of Ordnance, the Gunner having fled, whereby the Town
was alarmed.

Our Captain left twelve men to keep the Pinnaces, that we might safely retreat
in case of danger, and securing the Platform, he thought it best to view the
Mount on East side the Town, fearing lest there might be Ordnance planted
there, whence we might be annoyed; but seeing no fear of Danger thence we
returned to the City, where we parted; John Oxnam and 16 of his men going about
behind the Kings Treasure house, entered the East end of the Market, and our
Captain by the broad Street passed to the Market place with sound of Drum and
Trumpet. The Firepikes were equally divided betwixt them, and proved no less
advantageous to our men than frightful to the Enemy.

Yet the Inhabitants had put themselves in Arms, and drew up their Companies in
some order at the South-east end of the Market place. And to make a show of far
greater numbers of shot, they had hung lines with Matches lighted athwart the
West end of the Market place, between the Church and the Cross, but perceiving
their Stratagem by us discovered, they fled.

But the Soldiers presented us with a volly of shot, levelling so low, that
their Bullets often times grazed the Sands: And we having once fired upon them,
and feathered them with our Arrows (made on purpose) came to push of Pike, when
our fire-Pikes did us great service, where our men some with their Pikes, and
some with the butt-end of their Muskets so annoyed the Enemy, that they threw
down their Arms to provide for their safety by flight.

In the Chase several of our men were hurt with the Arms which the Enemies had
let fall as they fled, which caused us to desist the pursuit; so we returned
to the midst of the Market place.

Our Captain having taken 2, or 3 Spaniards, commanded them to show the
Governors house where the Treasure was kept. At our coming thither, the great
door (where the Moyls usually unlade) was open, a Candle lighted on the top of
the stairs, and a Gennet ready sadled: By means of this light we saw a huge
heap of Silver, being a pile of Bars about 70 foot in length, 10 in breadth,
and 12 in height; but our Captain forbid any to touch it, but to stand on our
Guard.

There was in the Kings Treasure near the Waterside, more Gold and Jewels than
all our four Pinnaces could carry.

When we were returned to our strength, we were alarmed with news, that our
Pinnaces were in danger to be taken, and that if we got not quickly aboard, we
would be overpowered with Multitudes of Soldiers and Towns People. Our Captain
therefore sent his Brother and John Oxnam to search out the Truth of it, who
found our men in the Pinnaces much frighted, by reason of great Companies they
saw running up and down, some with Matches lighted, some with other Weapons
from the out-parts of the Town, who came often near us, and, firing, retreated.

Presently after there fell a mighty shower of Rain with Thunder and Lightning,
so that before we could recover a shelter, some of our Bow-strings were wet,
and some of our Match and Powder dammaged; which while we were refurnishing,
several of our men were muttering on the foresaid Reports of the strength of
the Town; whereupon our Captain told them, he had brought them to the Mouth of
the Treasure of the World, if they would want it, blame themselves only; and
therefore when the storm was over, unwilling to give his men longer leisure to
demur, or the Enemy further respite, he stepped forward, commanding his Brother
with John Oxnam and their Company to break the Kings Treasurehouse, the rest to
follow himself to keep the strength of the Market place, till they had
dispatched their Business.

But as he stepped forward, he began to faint through much effusion of Blood out
of a wound in his Leg, he received in the first encounter, which though it
smarted, he concealed, till his fainting discovered it, the Blood having filled
the prints our footsteps made, to the great dismay of all our Company, thinking
it incredible, that one man should lose so much Blood, and live.

And therefore though they would have hazarded much for such a Booty, yet would
they not endanger their Captains life, but having given him some Cordial, and
tied up his Leg, they entreated him to go aboard, that his wound might be
dressed, and then return ashore, if he thought fit.

This, when they could not persuade him to (as knowing, that if they went
aboard, they could never recover that state again, in which they now were, and
thinking it more honorable to jeopard his life for so great a Prize, than to
leave such an Enterprise unaccomplished) they with force and entreaty carried
him aboard his Pinnace, abandoning a Rich Spoil to preserve their Captains Life.

Thus we embarkt, July 29 by break of day; many of our men besides our Captain
were wounded, only a Trumpeter slain; whereupon our Chirurgions were busy in
dressing their Wounds, but especially our Captains. And before we departed the
Harbor, we took the aforesaid Ship of Wines belonging to the Spaniards. But
before we had her free of the Haven, they of the Town shot at us. But
notwithstanding we carried our Prize to the Isle Bastimienses, or the Isle of
Victuals, where we staid two days to cure our wounded men, and refresh our
selves.

At our arrival here, the Governor sent to our Captain a Principal Soldier of
the late sent Garrison, to view us, who at his coming protested he came of mere
good Will, for that we had undertaken so great an attempt with so few men; and
that at first they feared we had been French, of whom they expected no mercy,
but perceiving us to be English, their fears were the less, knowing, that though
we took the Treasure, yet we would use no Cruelty toward their persons.

But notwithstanding this fair pretense, his Governor had sent him aboard, by
reason diverse of the Town had affirmed they knew our Captain, who had been
often on their Coast last two years; he desired to know, 1. Whether our Captain
was the same Captain Drake or no? 2. Whether our Arrows, which many of their
men were wounded with, were poisoned? And 3. how they might be cured? Lastly,
what Victuals or Necessaries we wanted, promising to supply us. Our Captain,
though suspecting him a Spy, yet answered his demands; That he was the same
Captain Drake, that it was not his manner to poison Arrows, and that the Wounds
might be cured by ordinary Surgery; as for Wants, he told him, He wanted
nothing, but some of that special Commodity that Country yielded, and therefore
before he departed he meant to reap some of their Harvest they got out of the
Earth.

To this the Gentleman replied, What then was the Reason we departed the Town
at this time, where there is above 360 Tun of Silver ready for the Fleet, and a
greater value of Gold; but when our Captain had declared the cause, he
acknowledged our wisdom in departing, was no less than our courage in
attempting.

Thus with courteous entertainment, after Dinner, he was dismissed in such sort
that he protested he was never so much Honored in his life.

After his departure, the Negroe aforementioned confirmed his report of Gold
and Silver, and told us how we might acquire store of it by means of the
Symerons, whom though he had very much incensed, yet if our Captain would
undertake his Protection, he durst hazard his life, as knowing our Captains
name was most precious among them.

Whereupon we further consulted, and because this place seemed not safe, next
day we Sailed for Port-Plentie where we had left our Ships and recovered it
next night.

At our return to our Ships, Captain Rause doubting of our safe continuance
upon that Coast, departed: our Captain in the mean time having put all things
in readiness resolved with his 2 Ships and 3 Pinnaces to go to Carthagene.

Aug. 13 We came to an Anchor in 3 Fathom Water, between the Islands of
Charesha and St. Bernards. Our Captain led the Pinnaces about the Island into
the Harbor of Carthagene; where he found a Frigate at Anchor, and one man only
aboard, who being asked for the rest of his company, told they were gone ashore
that evening; that 2 hours before night there past by a Pinnace making all
speed they could, and asked him if any English or French had been there lately,
and upon Answer that none had been, they bid them look to themselves: that
after this Pinnace was come to the out-parts of Carthagene many great Pieces
were shot off; whereupon one going to the Topmast espied over the Land diverse
Frigates bringing themselves within the Castle.

This report our Captain credited; and having further examined this old
Mariner, he understood that there was within the next Point a great Ship of
Sivel ready to Sail next morning for Domingo, and taking this old man into the
Pinnace he rowed toward this Ship, which we boarded. As soon as we were on the
Decks we threw down the Gates and Spare-decks to prevent the danger of closs
Fight; and then we cut her Cables, and towed her with our three Pinnaces
without the Island, without danger of their great shot.

Which when the Town heard of, they put themselves into readiness, and came
down to the very point of the Wood, against us.

The next morning we took two Frigates, in which were two of the Kings
Scrivano's with 7 Mariners and 2 Negroes, come from Nombre de Dios, and bound
for Carthagene, to certify them of our aforementioned exploit at Nombre de
Dios. Yet our Captain at the Scrivano's entreaties set all the Company a shore,
and then bare up to the Island of St. Bernards, three Leagues off the Town.

Our Captain now considering that he was discovered, found that he must wait
some time before he could accomplish his design, and likewise that his Pinnaces
must be well manned; in order to which he had a design to burn one of the Ships
and make the other a Storehouse; but finding that his Company would be loath of
that, he thought of another expedient; and therefore sent for Thomas Moon
(Carpenter in the Swan) and desired him to bore several holes in the Well of
that Ship as near the Keel as he could, and that with all secrecy. He was very
averse from doing it, but having heard our Captains reasons, he was at last
persuaded, and did it accordingly.

The next morning our Captain designed to go a Fishing, and going aboard the
Swan he desired his Brother to go with him, who desired him to stay alittle and
he would immediately attend him. Our Captain perceiving the Carpenter had
fulfilled his desire, demanded of them why their Bark was so deep? Whereupon
his Brother sent one down to the Steward to know what was the matter; who going
down immediately alarmed them with news that the Ship was full of Water.
Whereupon all hands were set to work, but all in vain; Our Captain consulting
with them about it, found, that despairing of saving her they referred to him
what should be done: And therefore he proposed to them that he would go into
the Pinnace till such time as a Frigate were provided, and that his Brother
should be Captain in the Admiral, and the Master should be also there with him
instead of this; which seeing she could not be saved he would have fired that
the Enemy might not have her, but first that every one should take out of her
what they lacked or liked. This was put in execution that night, and so our
Captain had his desire, having now men enough for his Pinnaces.

The next day we resolved to seek out a fit place in the Sound of Dorienne
where we might leave our Ship at Anchor undiscovered by the Enemy: that so the
Enemy imagining us departed we might better follow our purposes with our
Pinnaces.

And accordingly we departed for the said Sound, and in 5 days reached it,
where we stayed 15 days, keeping very close, that our Enemies might think we
were departed.

Here we were not Idle, but besides our trimming and fitting our Pinnaces, he
caused us rid a Plat of Ground to build us Houses for our Lodging, wherein the
Negroe was serviceable to us. As also at spare times we had several sorts of
recreations as every man fancied.

After the fifteen days expired, our Captain leaving the Ship with his Brother
took 2 Pinnaces for Rio Grand, and passing by Carthagene, when we were within 2
Leagues of the River we Landed to the Westwards on the Main. Where seeing some
Indians, they asked us what we would have? and knowing we desired fresh
Victuals they brought us some; for which courtesy our Captain sufficiently
rewarded them.

Thence we departed to Rio Grand, where we entered at 3 in the Afternoon. From
thence till night we rowed up the stream, making but small progress. We moared
our Pinnaces to a Tree that night, by reason of a huge shower of Rain with
Terrible Claps of Thunder, (which is usual there and continues about three
quarters of an hour) after which it was very calm, and then we were infested
with Flies called Mushitos (like our Gnats) which bite spitefully; our best
remedy against them was Juice of Lemons.

At Break of day we departed up the River; where we espied a Canow with 2
Indians fishing in the River, but we spoke not to them for being descried, nor
they to us, thinking us Spaniards. Afterward we espied certain houses on the
other side the River. And a Spaniard which kept those houses thinking us his
Country men, made a Smoke, for a sign to us to turn that way, but when we drew
near him, he saw his mistake, and so fled from his houses, which were 5 in
number full of white Rusk, Bacon with several other Provisions, to serve the
Fleet returning to Spain. With store of this we loaded our Pinnaces, and
hastened our departure, by reason of intelligence we had of certain Indians,
that the Frigates (30 in number which usually transport Merchandise out of Spain
to Cartagena, and thence to these houses, and so in Canows up to Nueva Reyno,
and return in Exchange, Gold Treasure and Commodities of that Kingdom) were not
returned from Cartagena since the first report of our being there.

Sep. 10. As we returned to our Pinnaces the Spaniards sent down the Indians of
Villa del Rey, with Bows and Arrows against us, but we rowed down the Stream,
one League, and Anchored till the morning, then we got to the Mouth of the
River, where we unladed our Provisions, cleansed our Pinnaces, and took it in
again, and then went Westward.

Sep. 11. Between Cartagena and Tolou we took 5 or 6 Frigates laden with
Victuals; we set the Men at liberty, having heard all we could of 'em, keeping
only two of the Frigates well stored with Victuals.

Three days after, we arrived at Port-plenty, where we built 4 Storehouses, to
keep our Provision in, several Leagues asunder, that if the Enemy should
surprise any one, we might be furnished by another, our Negroes being very
useful to us in this Work.

At this time Captain John Drake fortunately found out the Symerons as he rowed
aloaf the Shore, by the direction of our aforesaid Negroe, Diego, who calling
to the Symerons, dealt so effectually with them that he gave and received two
men, as pledges of Fidelity, appointing a meeting next day at a River, midway,
between the Cabezas and our Ships, called Rio Diego.

These two being well qualified men, did with all reverence, declare to our
Captain their great joy conceived by his arrival, as knowing him to be an Enemy
to the Spaniards, and therefore were ready to assist him against their Enemies
to the utmost: and that their captain did then stay at the mouth of Rio Diego
to attend his pleasure, and that they would have come by Land to this place,
but that the way is very troublesome, by reason of steep Mountains, deep Rivers
and thick Brakes; desiring therefore our Captain would take order about it: Our
Captain weighing their Speech with former Intelligence, and comparing it with
their great kindness toward his Brother; resolved with his Brother and the two
Symerons, in his two Pinnaces, to go toward the River, which he did that
night; ordering the rest of their company to follow them next morning, because
there was a place of great safety. The safety of it consisted not only that it
was a fruitful Country, and that no Spaniards were there, but especially that
it lies among a great many goodly Islands full of Trees, where, though there
be Channels, yet there are such Rocks and Shoals that no man can enter by
night, nor by day without discovery: whereas our Ship might lie hidden within
the Trees.

Sep. 14. The next day we met with them at the aforesaid place, the rest being
at a miles distance. After we had entertained them, and received testimonies of
their good will, we took 2 more of them into our Pinnaces, leaving our 2 men
with them, appointing a meeting with them and some more at the River Guana. So
we departed toward our Ship.

Sept. 16. Two days after we found her, being much damnified by tempest. And
having repaired her, Sept. 18. Our Captain sent a Pinnace toward the bottom of
the Bay, to found out the Channel, for the bringing her in, and the next day
got her safe into the best Channel; it was 5 miles distant from the Cativaas
betwixt the Island and the Main, being very narrow, and full of bushes. We had
scarce settled there when our 2 men with the Troup of Symerons came in sight of
our Ship, whom we brought aboard.

Our Captain desiring they would put him in a way to procure Gold, they told
him if they had known of it before, they could have given him store of it (as
having taken a great quantity from the Spaniards which they sunk into the
River) which now they could not do, because the Rivers in which it was thrown
were very high, and that the Spaniards in these rainy months use not to carry
their Treasure by Land. This answer satisfied us of their honest meaning
toward us. Therefore our Captain resolved for these 5 months to stay a Shore,
and so Sept. 24. we built houses for our abode that time, and a Fort Triangle
wise, 13 foot high. But after 14 days repose here, our Captain purposing to go
to Cartagena with 3 Pinnaces, left his Brother to govern those left behind with
the Symerons to finish the Fort begun.

Oct. 7. Thus we set Sail and came that night to an Island (which he called
Spurkite, from great store of Birds in that shape.) The next day we were clear
of these Islands, and about 4 days after, near the Island of St. Bernards we
chased 2 Frigates ashore, and recovering one of the Islands we stayed there 2
days to wash our Pinnaces and catch Fish.

Oct. 16. Thence we went toward Tolou and landed in a Garden where certain
Indians delivered us their Bows and Arrows and gave us such fruit, as the place
yielded, for which we requited them. Our Captains design in taking those places
was to learn the true state of the Country and the Fleets.

Thence we went toward Charesha the Island of Cartagena, where we let fall our
Grappers betwixt the Island and the Main over against the goodly Garden Island.
Our Captain, would not suffer us to land there, knowing it would have proved
dangerous; and within 3 hours after, passing by the Point of the Island, we had
a volly of 100 shot from them; and yet but one of our men was hurt.

Oct. 17. This evening we departed to Sea, and the next morning we took a Bark,
which we easily boarded, for that the Captain with most of the Passengers had
gone ashore. She had in her great store of Soap and Sweetmeats bound from St.
Domingo to Cartagena. Oct. 18. The next day we set all the men ashore (save a
young Negroe we kept) but kept the Bark, and in her bare to the mouth of
Cartagena Harbor, and Anchored.

That, Afternoon some Horsemen came down with the Scrivano aforementioned to
the point, and held up a Truce Flag, desiring safe conduct to our Ship; which
granted the Scrivano came a board, and thanking our Captain for former
courtesies, he promised that night to procure us store of Victuals, whatever
displeasure he might incur thereby. But we found this only a device of the
Governor's to delay time till they were of sufficient strength to entrap us;
and therefore we put to Sea.

Oct. 20. The next day in the Afternoon we took 2 Frigates come from Cartagena,
the one of 50 the other of 12 Tuns, having only ballast in them; we kept the
Frigates but set the men ashore in the great Frigates Gundelow.

The next morning they came down to the Wester Point with a Truce Flag; and our
Captain manned one Pinnace and rowed ashore; when we were near the shore the
Spaniards fled into the Wood as afraid of us, but indeed 'twas only to draw us
on; as we reached the Land our Captain leaped ashore in their sight, but made
no stay; when he was come aboard again, we haled off and rode a while; They
came forth again, and sent a youth to demand what was our intent to stay thus
upon the Coast? Our Captain answered, for Traffic; he sent him again to show
him that 'twas prohibit, to Traffic with Foreign People for any thing except
Powder. He answered he was come to exchange his commodities for Gold and Silver
and was purposed to effect it. However he gave this Messenger a Shirt for his
reward.

We heard no answer all that day but kept in our Frigates, keeping good watch
all night. The next morning the wind turned Easterly, and we-saw two Sails
(which were sent from Cartagena to fight us) coming to us; whereupon our
Captain went to encounter them, and approaching them we saw many men aboard
them. The Spaniards on the Shore thought to recover their Frigates (being left
unmanned) while we were busied with the other. But our Captain prevented it,
for leaving John Oxnam to treat those two Ships, he made speed to his Frigates,
and caused the Spaniards consult to save their lives by flight, leaving several
of their weapons behind them. And seeing he could not man them, he burnt the
one and sunk the other. This done he returned to John Oxnam (who all this while
lay silent by the Men of War) and the wind blowing from Sea, we were forced to
bear into the Harbor before them, they supposing we fled; but as soon as we
felt smooth Water, getting the wind, we fought them at advantage, so that they
were willing to press no nigher: and as they let fall their Anchors, we droped
ours in the wind of them. They seeing no gain to be had of us retired to the
Town; but we by reason of bad weather Rode there 4 days.

October. 27. A Frigate came from Sea, and seeing us, ran her self ashore,
unhanging her Rudder and throwing away her Sails; when we were come up to her,
a party came down to the point of the Main, whom we by our shot caused quickly
retire into the Woods. Whereupon we went to Sea with intent to ride at the Rock
called Las Serenas 2 Leagues off, but through tempest were forced to return
into the Harbor. But the Spaniards had a new device; for they sent forth a
Party against us, who at our encountering them fled with intent to draw us after
them, having an ambush set for us; besides, 2 Pinnaces well manned came toward
us and attacqued us boldly; and seeing us bear from them, they concluded of
Victory: But our Captain Commanding his other Pinnace to be brought a head of
him, and to let fall their Grappers each a head the others, environed both the
Pinnaces as for a close fight. We (as well as they) spent Powder apace, but had
but one of out men wounded; what they had we knew not, but their Pinnaces were
shot through in diverse places and the Powder of one of them took fire;
whereupon we bore toward them, which they seeing, betook themselves to their
old Sanctuary.

Nov. 3. Thus seeing little hopes off success in this place, our Captain
thought it best to go Eastward toward Rio Grand to furnish our selves with
Victuals, being now scarce of them, and 2 days after we came to the Villages of
store, where before we had furnished our selves sufficiently, but now found
nothing, to our great grief; the Spaniards having caused the People to fly to
the Mountains, and driven away their Cattle that we might not be relieved;
afterward we saw a Frigate at Sea, and made quickly toward her, hoping to be
relieved thence, but when we had boarded her we found she had neither Meat, nor
Money.

Thus we endured scarcity for 7 or 8 days, bearing room for Santa Martha in
hopes to find Shipping there, and finding none we Anchored under the Western
point; which the Spaniards having notice of, conveyed 30 or 40 shot among the
Clifts, which so annoyed us that we were forced to be gone with all speed. Then
we entered into consultation what to do, the Company being for landing somewhere
Eastward to get Victuals; But our Captain thought it better to bear toward Rio
de Haca or Carizao.

The Company of the other Pinnace answered, that neither their Pinnaces could
hold out, nor they themselves subsist with so slender provision. He answered
they had more than he had, and therefore doubted not but they would trust
providence. And so he hoysed his fore-Sail and set for Carizao, which they
perceiving followed him.

As we had Sailed 3 Leagues we espied a Sail plying Westward, and so joyfully
bare toward her; she, being a Spanish Ship above 90 Tun, shot her Ordinance at
us. We durst not attempt boarding her, it being Stormy, but attended her, and 2
hours after it being Calm, we boarded her, and furnished our selves
sufficiently with Provision.

All things set in order, and the Wind arising, we plied off and on all night;
when it was day the Captain sent Edward Hixom to search out a good Harbor, who
having found one returned, and we came in with our new Prize: Our Captain
promising liberty and all their Apparel to the Spaniards if they would procure
us fresh Water and Victuals, which they did; and toward the evening we came
all aboard again leaving, our late Prisoners, the Spaniards ashore according to
our promise to their great joy, and so set Sail.

At this time a sickness raged among us, and Charles Club one of our
Quarter Masters died of it to our great grief: we impured it to cold, men had
taken lying in the Pinnaces. But however it pleased God, that all the rest of
our Company recovered.

Nov. 15. Next morning our Captain commanded the Minion, his lesser Pinnace, to
hasten before him toward his Ships at Fort Diego within the Cabeza's, to
acquaint them of his coming, and prepare all things for our Land Journey, if so
be they heard any thing from the Symerons of the Fleets arrival.

When we came to our Ship we were surprised to our great Grief, with the news
o^ the Death of John Drake our Captains Brother and one Richard Allen, both
slain in attempting to board a Frigate: The manne^ thus: Having seen this
Frigate at Sea, the Company were very importunate on him to set upon her; he
told them he wanted weapons to assail with, and knew not how strong the Frigate
might be. But this not satisfying he told them that they should not through hi^
Cowardice lose any Prize. Thereupon every man shifted as they could, and
emptyed their Boats of the Planks (that were therein for carrying on their
Fort,) they took such poo^ Arms as they had, and so made toward the Frigate,
and boarded her. But they found her Armed round about whith a close figh^ of
Hides full of Pikes and Calivers which were discharged in their faces; of which
there were several wounded, and John Drake and Richard Allen mortally; but
notwithstanding they got free of the Frigate and recovered their Ship, where
those 2 died.

Thus having moared our Ship our Captain resolved to lie hid, expecting to hear
of the Spanish Fleet, and therefore supplied his Company with the Symerons out
of his aforesaid Magazine, besides wild Beasts out of the Woods. After a Months
Sail most of our men fell sick of a Calenture, and several died, of whom Joseph
Drake, another of our Captains Brothers, was one, whom for the discovering of
the Nature of that disease, our Captain caused be opened by the Surgeon, who
found his Liver swollen, his Heart as it were sodden and his Guts all fair.
Within 4 days the Surgeon that cut him up died also, by reason of an over
strong purgation he had taken.

The Symerons during our absence ranged up and down the Country to learn what
they could for us; now they bring us news that the Fleet was arrived at Nombre
de Dios. Our Captain sent the Lion to descrie the truth thereof; who espying a
Frigate, boarded and took herladen with Maiz, Hens and Pompions from Tolou. The
men therein, who assured us of their arrival, our Captain used very
courteously, guarding them from the cruelty of the Symerons who were thirsting
after their Blood.

And when he prepared for his Journey to Panama, he gave Ellis Hixom charge of
his Ship and Company, and especially of those Spaniards.

All things thus ordered, our Captain conferred with the Symerons about
Provision for this Journey; they told him that great store of Shoes were
necessary, by reason of the many Rivers with Stones and Gravel they were to
pass. All things provided we took our Journey on Shrove Tuesday, Feb. 3. By
this time 28 of our men had died, and a few healthy men were left aboard with
Ellis, who had strict charge not to trust any Messenger that should come in our
Captains name without his handwriting.

We were in all 48, 18 English, and the rest Symerons, who, besides their
Arrows bore our Provision and Victuals, and because they could not carry
enough, by the way they provided us store with their Arrows.

They have each 2 sorts of Arrows; the one to defend himself, and offend the
Enemy; the other to kill his Victuals. These for fighting are somewhat like the
Scottish Arrows only somewhat longer and headed with Iron, Wood or Fish-Bones.
But the Arrows for Provision are of 3 sorts; the first serves to kill any
great Beast near hand, and has an Iron head of a Pound and a half, shaped like
the head of a Javelin, as sharp, as a knife: The second for lesser Beasts, and
has an head of three-quarters of a Pound. The third for all manner of Birds,
and has a head of an ounce weight. These heads tho of Iron, yet kept their
edge long. For these and such uses Iron is of more value here than Gold: and he
that can temper it well is most esteemed.

Every day we marched at Sun Rising, continuing till 10 in the Forenoon, then
resting (near some River) till past 12, we marched till 4 a clock at night,
when we reposed our selves in some convenient place.

When we came to the place we intended to lodge at, the Symerons laid aside
their Burdens, to cut down Poles and Palmito Boughs or Plantain leaves, and
with speed set up six Houses; first fastening 3 or 4 great Posts with Forks,
deep into the ground, upon them they laid one Transome (about 20 foot) making
the sides like the roofs of our Country Houses, Thatching it close with the
aforesaid Leaves, so that it would keep out rain a long time.

We found near the Rivers several Fruits, as Mammeas, Guyavas, Palmitos, Pinos,
Oranges, Limons, etc.

The 3d. day of our Journey they brought us to a Town of their own, situate
upon the side of a Hill near a River, encompassed with a Dike 8 foot broad, and
a thick mud Wall 10 foot high. It had one long and broad Street from East to
West, and two cross Streets narrower; there were in it fifty or sixty
households, which were so cleanly, (that not only the Houses, but Streets were
pleasant. Their Apparel is somewhat after the Spanish fashion. This Town is
distant from Nombre de Dios 35 Leagues, and 45 from Panama, it is sufficiently
stored with Beasts, Fowls and several Fruits.

As for their Religion, they have no kind of Priests, only they hold the Cross
in great reputation: but at our Captains persuasion they were contented to
leave their Crosses and learn the Lords Prayer, and be instructed in some
measure in Gods True Worship. They keep a continual watch in 4 parts within 3
miles of the Town, for fear of the Spaniards, who sometimes by the Conduct of
some Symerons, Captives to them, have come in upon them.

We stayed there all night, during which time they related unto us several
Broils betwixt them and the Spaniards, particularly one: A Gentleman
entertained by the Governor of the Country undertook last year, with 150
Soldiers to put them, Young, and Old to the Sword, being conducted by one of
them that had been taken Prisoner; he surprised it half an hour before day,
whereby many of the Men escaped, but many Women and Children were killed: but
the same morning by Sun rising (their guide being slain) the Symerons assembled
themselves and behaved in such sort, that they drove the Spaniards to such
extremity, that partly by the disadvantage of the Woods, having lost their
guide, and partly by famine, not above 30 of them returned. Their King dwelt in
a City 16 Leagues South-east of Panama, wherein are supposed to be 1700
fighting Men.

Our Captain was kindly entreated by them all, and was desired to abide with
them some time, but he being intent on his Journey, thankt them for their
kindness, and marched on in his intended Journey.

The order of our March was thus; Four of the Symerons as knew the way best
went a mile before us, breaking off Boughs of Trees and throwing them on the
way for a direction to those that followed, 12 of them were our Vantguard, and
12 our Rereward, we in the middle.

Our way through Woods by reason of the shade was cooler than it is in most
parts in England, in the Summer time.

Feb. 11. We came to a High Hill, midway where was a great Tree whence we might
see both the North and South Atlantic Ocean; one of the Symerons took our
Captain by the hand and led him up thither who likewise called us up to it. The
Tree was cut, and several steps made in it to ascend; near unto the top was
made a convenient Bower, wherein 10 or 12 Men might easily sit.

Being thoroughly satisfied with the sight, we descended, and continued our
former Journey; when we came to the Champion Country we found the Grass of an
extraordinary height. The Inhabitants are forced to burn it thrice a year that
their Cattle may feed on it; after which it springs up fresh in 3 days; Its
stalks are as big as a Wheaten reed, and though Cattle feed on it, yet in a few
days it grows so high that they cannot reach it.

After we were come within a days Journey of Panama, for fear of being
discovered, we went out of the ordinary way, and came to a Grove within a
League of Panama; thence we sent a Symeron who had been formerly at Panama, in
habit of a Negroe, to learn on what night (for they travel from Panama to Venta
Cruz by night, by reason they have no shades there, but from thence to Nombre
de Dios by day, for that the Country there abounds in Woods) they were to carry
their Treasure to Nombre de Dios; who returning certified us that the Treasurer
of Lima was to go that night with 8 Moyles laden with Gold, and one with
Jewels. And further, that there were 2 Recoes, 50 Moyles in each, laden mostly
with Victuals, with some little quantity of Silver, to come forth that night
after the other. Hereupon we marched till we came within 2 Leagues of Venta
Cruz; two of our Symerons sent before, found a Spaniard, whom they brought to
us; who examining him were confirmed of the truth of that our Spy had told us.
This Soldier having learned who our Captain was, prayed him to preserve him
from the fury of the Symerons, and that seeing he was a Soldier, and assured
him of more Gold that night than they could dispose of, besides Jewels, etc.
That he would please to let him have so much as might suffice him and his
Mistress to live upon.

Being at the place appointed, our Captain with half his men lay on one side of
the way about 50 paces off in the long Grass; John Oxnam with the Captain of
the Symerons and other half on the other side of the way, the like distance;
but so far distant that by that time the one Company could seize on the
foremost Moyles, the other might take the hindmost, and likeways that if we
should have any Skirmish that night, we might not endamage our own men. We had
not lain thus, much above an hour, when we heard the Recoes coming, and going
betwixt Panama and Venta Cruz. And though strict charge was given that none of
our men should stir as any passed from Venta Cruz, as knowing they had nothing
but Merchandise; yet Robert Pike, one of our men forgot himself and entising a
Symeron with him, went hard by the way side, and a Cavalier from Venta Cruz
coming by, stood up to see what he was, and though the Symeron pulled him down
again, yet the Gentleman took notice of him, seeing one all in White, (for we
had put our shirts over our Clothes that if we should happen to Skirmish with
them we might know our own men in the night) and presently put spurs to his
Horse. This alteration of his Horses pace was observed by our Captain, who
therefore suspected we were discovered, but could not imagine by whose fault.
Yet supposing it might be by reason of the danger of the Place, we lay still in
expectation of their coming, who by this time were within half a League of us,
and had come, but that this Gentleman meeting them reported what he had seen,
and persuaded the Treasurer it was either Captain Drake, or some from him, who,
having been frustrate of their hopes of Treasure from Nombre de Dios, were
resolved to have it here, and thereupon he prevailed with him to turn his Recoe
out of the way, and to let the other Recoes which were laded mostly with
Victuals to pass on, in regard the loss of them would not be considerable. Thus
were we disappointed of a most rich booty.

The other two Recoes coming up we seized upon them. One of their chief
Carriers told our Captain how we were discovered, and withal advised us to
shift for our selves betimes. Whereupon Pedro, the Chief of the Symerons, told
us that there were but two ways for escape, either to Travel back the same
secret way we came, for four Leagues, into the Woods; or else to make a way
through Venta Cruz by our Swords; The latter of which notwithstanding the
dangerousness of it, our Captain chose, as being the shortest way. Therefore
commanding all to refresh themselves, he told them his resolution, asking Pedro
if he would give him his hand, not to forsake him, which he willingly did,
vowing that he would rather dye at his Feet than leave him to the Enemies Fury,
if he held this course. Thus we took our Journey to Venta Cruz with help of the
Moyls, till we came within a Mile of the Town, where we turned away the Recoes,
charging their Conductors not to follow us. There the way is cut through the
Wood, so as two Recoes may pass by one another. For those Woods grow as thick
as our thickest Hedges in England.

A Company of Soldiers came out against us to the middle of this Wood, with
whom a Convent of Friars joined; Our Captain informed of their coming, by two
Symerons sent before, gave charge that none of us should shoot till the
Spaniards had first Fired. When they came up, their Captain charged ours to
yield our selves Prisoners, which our Captain refusing, they immediately Fired,
doing us no considerable hurt, save only John Harris one of our Company was
killed. But our Captain perceiving their Shot slacking, gave us a Sign to
discharge upon them, and then march or wards with intent to close with them.
They retired to a place of greater strength, and we hastened our pace to
prevent it. Which the Symerons perceiving (though frighted with the Shot they
had stepped aside) rushed forwards with their Arrows ready in their Bows, leaping
and dancing, and singing Yo peho, yo peho, and so continued till we overtook
some of the Enemy, who conveyed themselves within the Woods to have taken their
stand at us. But our Symerons brake in through the thickest of them, forcing
them to fly; diverse of our men were Wounded and one Symeron killed, who yet
revenged his own death before he died.

Thus we entered the Town, being about 40 or 50 Houses, having both a Governor
and other Officers, and some fair Houses, with some Storehouses, besides he
Monastery.

We found here 3 Gentlewomen lately delivered of Children who were come hither
from Nombre de Dios to bring forth their Children; because it has been
observed that no Spaniard, or White, could ever be delivered at Nombre de Dios,
but the Children died within 3 days; yet being brought up here or in Panama 5
or 6 years, and then brought to Nombre de Dios, if they escaped sickness six
weeks they lived as healthy as any where. These Gentlewomen at our first coming
were in great fear, yet, our Captain having charged the Symerons to hurt none
save those that were Armed, they received no harm. Having set our Guards on all
passages to prevent danger, we stayed in this Town an hour and a half
refreshing our selves, and our Company and the Symerons had got some Pillage. A
little before we departed 12 Horsemen come from Panama, supposing we had been
gone, entered the Town, but were forced quickly to retire.

Thus having dispatched our business in this Town we marched over the Bridge,
observing the same order as formerly, and our Captain longing to be at his
Ships hastened his Journey as much as possible, by reason whereof we marched
with hungry Stomachs.

In our absence the Symerons we left with our men had built a little Town 3
Leagues off where our Ship lay, where our Captain at their entreaty made some
stay, and supplied us with Shoes, which had been wore out in our Journey.

These Symerons were very serviceable to us, being to us guides,
Intelligencers, Purveyors, etc. and when any of our men was wearied, two of
them would take him up and carry him 2 miles together, and likewise showed
themselves very Valiant.

At our first entrance into this Town our Captain dispatched a Symeron with an
order and token to the Master of our Ship, who being come was quickly set
aboard; and showing a Tooth-Pike of Gold, which he said our Captain had sent
for a token to Edward Hixom with charge to meet him at such a River, tho the
Master knew it was the Captains, yet by reason of his former order he demurred,
which the Symeron perceiving, told him, that because it was night when he was
sent, our Captain could not send a Letter, but with the point of his Knife
wrote upon the Tooth-Pike; whereupon the Master looking upon it, read it, and
being confirmed of the truth of it, prepared accordingly, and repaired to the
mouth of the River of Tortugos, where we met to our mutual rejoicing. We seemed
to those who had been at rest aboard, strangely metamorphosed, which might
probably be through our long Fasting and Travel, but our inward grief for being
frustrate of our design, was no doubt the main cause.

Thus returned from Panama, our Captain purposing further to attempt the same
Journey, he would not suffer the edge of his men to be rebated. And therefore
having a design to attempt in some other places, and particularly Veragua, a
rich Town lying between Nombre de Dios and Nicaragua where is the Richest Mine
of Gold on this North side, he asked his Company their opinions. Some thought
it best to procure more Victuals, that we might keep close till a convenient
time, which might easily be done, seeing the Victual Frigates were not well
Defended, whereas the Treasure Frigates were well Manned. Others were for
intercepting Frigates laden with Treasure, both because we had store of
Victuals, and that they might be had at any time, whereas Treasure was only to
be found when the Fleet is there, which was now. The Symerons being asked their
opinion, declared that near Veragua Sinnior Pezoro (their Master, from whom
they had fled) had dwelt in a strong Store house, above 19 years, who seldom
went abroad; and that he keeps 100 Slaves in the Mines (each being obliged to
bring in daily of gain 3 Pezoes of Gold for himself, and two for his Women (8
s. 3 d. the Pezoe) whereby he had gathered a vast Treasure, being cruel and
covetous, and never went abroad with 5 or 6 men in his Guard, although he was
always in fear. And that if our Captain were so resolved they would so conduct
him thither as he should not be descried, but might surprise them, and that
although his House were very strong yet they could easily procure him access to
his Treasure.

Our Captain having heard all their opinions, concluded to reconcile the 2
first opinions, and therefore sent John Oxnam Eastwards to provide for
Victuals, he himself resolving to go Westwards in the Minion, to lie off and on
the Cabezas to attend the Frigates that transported the Treasure: But disliked
the Symerons proposal, lest our men might thereby be wearied, whom he designed
to strengthen for his next service.

Therefore he dismissed such of the Symerons as were desirous to go, with such
gifts as were most pleasing, entertaining still aboard those that were willing
to stay, and so they steered their course as is said.

The Minion about the Cabexas met with a Frigate of Nicaragua, in which was
some Gold, having a Genoway Pilot, who being civilly used, certified our
Captain of the state of the Town, and Harbor, and of a Frigate wherein was a
Million of Gold, ready to depart in a few days, offering to conduct him to it,
if he would do him his right, for that he know the Channel so well that he
could enter safely by night, and utterly undescried, and that because the way
by Land from the point is far and difficult, and by Sea but 5 Leagues, though
we were discovered, we might dispatch our business before the Town could have
notice. He likewise told he heard of Drakes being on the Coast, whereby they
were greatly afraid, but had not as yet provided themselves against him.

Our Captain hearing this, had a mind to return to his Ship, to have been
better informed of the place by some Symerons there; But the Genoway urged to
lose no time, promising success if we delayed not, and therefore our Captain
following his advice, set in for to enter the Harbor.

But when we came to the mouth of it, we heard a report of 2 Chambers, and
about a League off, 2 Answering them, whereby our Genoway suspected we were
discovered, assuring us that this order was taken since his departure.

But not only this, but providence likewise crossed our designs. For the wind
that formerly was Easterly turned to the West; whereupon we returned to our
Ship, where on Sheer Thursday we met according to appointment with our Bear,
who had emproved his time better than we, having taken a Frigate wherein were
10 men, great store of Maiz, 28 fat Hogs, and 200 Hens. Our Captain unladed her
and made her up for a Man of War, having heard by the Spaniards, that they were
building 2 little Galleys in Nombre de Dios to waft the Chagro Fleet to and
fro, but not yet lanched, Wherefore he purposed to take that Fleet, and, to
encourage his Company, feasted them sumptuously that Easterday being Mar. 20.

The next day with this new Frigate and Bear we set for Cativaas, and landed 2
days after, staying till noon, when seeing a Sail to the Westward, we plied
toward her, and she bare with us till they saw we were no Spaniards, and their
Catain supposing us those English men he had heard of he made toward us.

He was a French Captain of New Haven and being distressed he prayed our Captain
to help him to some Water, for that he had nothing but Wine and Sider aboard,
which had greatly empaired the health of his men. Our Captain sent him some
relief for the present, willing him to follow us to the next Port where he
should be better supplied. He sent our Captain a Case of Pistols and a guilt
Symeter (which had been the late K. of France's whom Mons. Mongomery hurt in
the Eye, and was given him by Mr. Stroffe) and our Captain requited him with a
Chain of Gold, and a Tablet.

This Captain reported to us the first news of the Massacre in Paris at the K.
of Navarres Marriage on St. Bartholomews Day last, of the Admiral of France
slain in his Chamber, and diverse others of the Popish Cruelties. He told what
famous reports he had heard of us; and he desired to know of our Captain what
way he might compass his Voyage. Though our Captain was jealous of him, yet upon
consultation he resolved to take him and divide his men and put them with ours
proportionably, so as we needed not fear much hurt of them, so that we might
both gratify them and serve our own turn. Having thus agreed with him we sent
for the Symerons; two of them were brought aboard our Ship, to give the French
assurance of this agreement.

As soon as we had furnished our selves and refresht the French, which was done
in five or six days, taking twenty of the French and fifteen of ours, with our
Symerons, and leaving both our Ships in safe Road, we manned our Frigate and two
Pinnaces, and went toward Rio Francisco, and because it had not Water enough
for our Frigate we left her at the Cabezas, manned with English and French, to
Robert Doble, to stay there till our Pinnaces returned; and then bare to Rio
Francisco, where our Captains landed, and ordered them, that had the Charge of
the Pinnaces, to be there the fourth day following.

And thus knowing that the Carriages went now daily from Panama to Nombre de
Dios, we went secretly through the Woods, toward the Highway, betwixt them;
it is reckoned five Leagues by Sea but the way we went was seven. When we were
come within an English Mile of the way, we past the night in great silence, in
a convenient place, where we heard the Carpenters working in their Ships, as
they usually do by reason of the heat of the day there. The next morning upon
hearing the great number of Bells, the Symerons rejoiced, as having that
opportunity again, of which we were disappointed before; now they assured us we
should have more Gold than we could bear away, as in truth it fell out: For
there came three Recoes, one of fifty Moyls; the other two of seventy each,
which carried in all near thirty Tun of Silver. We put our selves in readiness,
and went down near the way, where we stayed not long till we saw them, and took
such hold on the foremost and hindermost Moyls, that all the rest stayed and
unladed, as their manner is.

They were guarded with about forty five Soldiers, which occasioned some small
Skirmish, in which Conflict the French Captain was dangerously wounded, and one
Symeron; but in the end we put them to flight, and then we unladed the Moyls.
And being weary we were content to take a little with us as we could easily
carry, hiding the rest in convenient places.

But when we had disposed of all our matters (being about two hours) and were
ready to march back, we heard both Horse and Foot coming, as it seemed to the
Moyls, for they did not follow us, after we entered the Woods; and the French
Captain disabled by reason of his Wounds stayed, hoping thereby to recover his
strength. But after we had marched two Leagues, the French Soldiers
complaining that they wanted one of their Men also; and it was found upon
examination that he had drunk too much Wine, and over-lading himself with
Pillage, and hasting to go before us, lost himself in the Woods; and, as we
afterward knew, he was taken by the Spaniards that night, and upon Torture
showed them where we hid our Treasure.

We marched all that day and the next, to Rio Francisco to meet our Pinnaces;
but when we came thither we saw seven Spanish Pinnaces. Whereupon we were
afraid that they had taken or spoiled ours, our Captain having given them
strict charge to repair thither. But the night before there having fallen much
Rain, and the Wind contrary and boisterous, our Pinnaces could not come
thither, whereby they were preserved from the danger of falling into the
Spaniards hands, who had been sent on purpose to take our Pinnaces, upon their
hearing that we intercepted the Treasure; our Captain fearing lest having taken
our Pinnaces they had forced our Men by Torture to confess where his Frigate and
Ships were; yet he comforted us when we were fearing the worst, and said to us;
It is no time now to fear, but rather to have to prevent that which is feared:
And suppose the Enemy to have taken our Frigates, yet it would require time to
examine Mariners, and to execute their resolution, before which time we might
get to our Ships, tho not by Land, yet by Water. Let us therefore make a Raft
with Trees that are happily brought down the River this last Storm, and put our
selves to Sea; I will be one, who will be the other? John Smith offered
himself, and two Frenchmen that could swim well, and a Symeron, especially
Pedro (who was left behind because he could not Row.) The Raft was fitted and a
Sail of Biscuit. Sack prepared; An Oar was shaped out of a young Tree to serve
for a Rudder. Our Captain at his departure promised, that if it pleased God he
got safe aboard his Frigate, he would in despite of the Spaniards get them all
aboard. Thus they sailed three Leagues sitting continually up to the Waste in
Water, and at every Surge of the Waves to the Armpits, whereby their Skins were
much fretted. At last they see the two Pinnaces, to our Captains great joy, who
knowing them, cheerfully declared to the rest, that they were our Pinnaces, and
that all was safe. But the Pinnaces not seeing the Raft, nor suspecting any
such matter, and Night and Wind growing on, were forced to turn into a Cover
behind the Point to stay that night. Which our Captain seeing put his Rafter a
shore, and ran by Land about the Point, where he found there, who upon sight of
him made as much have to have him Aboard, as being afraid he was chased by the
Enemy, seeing him thus running, and attended by so few. But when he was got
Aboard he rid them of their doubts, showing them a Quoit of Gold, thanking God
that our Voyage was made. And he told the Frenchmen that their Captain, with
two of his Men, were left behind, sore wounded, but it should be no
disadvantage to them.

That night our Captain Rowed to Rio Francisco, where he took in the rest with
the Treasure; and by dawning of the Day sailed back to our Frigate, and from
thence to our Ship, and then divided the Gold and Silver equally betwixt the
French and English.

About a fortnight after, having taken all necessaries out of our Ship, into
our Frigate, and given her to the Spaniards, we had detained all this time, we
set out with the French Ship, Riding some days by the Cabezas. In the mean time
our Captain s^^ twelve of our Men with sixteen Symerons, to try if they could
liberate the French Captain that was taken, or at least, bring away the
Treasure we had hid, John Oxnam and The Sherwell were entrusted with it; For
they would by no means hazard our Captain who yet conveyed them ashore at Rio
Francisco, where he received one of the Frenchmen, who having escaped the
Spaniards, wa^ now coming toward our Pinnace, he told us that within half an
hour after our departure the Spaniards overtook them, and took his Captain, and
his companion; but that he escaped by reason he cast away all his carriage, and
that thereby he made himself fit for flight. As for our Silver we hid, he
thought it was all carried away, for near 2000 Spaniards and Negroes were
digging up all the ground thereabout for it. Notwithstanding this, our Men went
to the place, and for all the narrow search that was made, brought back to our
Frigate 13 Bars of Silver, and some Quoits of Gold. Now we purposed to go
homewards, and our Captain in order thereunto designed to look for a sufficient
Ship to carry so much Victuals as might serve for our Voyage.

The Frenchmen having formerly gone from us, met with us again, and were very
loath to leave us, but accompanied us to St. Bernards, and would further; but
that we heard the Fleet was ready to Sail for Spain, riding near Cartagena.
Thus we departed from them passing by Cartagena in fight of all the Fleet, with
a Flag of St. George in the Main Top of our Frigate, with Silk Streamers and
Ancients down to the Water, Sailing forwards till night, when we lay off and
on, bearing small Sail. About Midnight we took a Frigate come from Rio Grand,
of 25 Tuns, laden with Maiz, Hens, and Hogs, with some Honey, (which was then
very useful, as reviving our crazed People.) The next morning we set the
Prisoners ashore, and without stop Sailed to the Cabezas, where we hove all our
lading ashore, and brought our Frigates on the Carine, and new tallowed them.

Being ready to depart we burnt our Pinnaces, that the Symerons might have the
Iron work; and our Captain desired Pedro with some others of them, to take what
they had a mind to in the Ship, promising to withold nothing from them,
without which we could subsist in our Voyage, and that he would look out some
Silks and Linen for their Wives; which while he was choosing out of his
Trunks, Pedro espied the Cymeter the French Captain had given him, and had a
great mind to it, and being loath to ask our Captain for it himself, he desired
another to do it for him, promising him a Quoit of Gold for his pains, and that
he would give our Captain 4 other great Quoits. Our Captain being accordingly
moved for it, though unwilling to part with it, yet willing to gratify him
that had deserved so well, gave it him. He was exceedingly rejoiced hereat,
declaring, that he would present his King with it, who he knew would make him a
great man for it, and in requital he desired our Captain to accept four pieces
of Gold. Our Captain received it in most kind sort, but put it not to his own
private use, but caused it to be cast to the whole adventure, saying that it
was reason that they which bare part of his burden in setting him to Sea,
should share in the profit.

Thus we took our leave of that People setting over to the Islands of --, and
thence toward Cape St. Anthony; but being to stand for the Havana we plied to
the Windward several days, at which time, we took a small Bark in which were
200 Hides, and a Pump which we set in our Frigate. The Bark, as not useful for
us, we gave them again, and afterward came to Cape St. Anthony, where we
refreshed our selves, and took 250 Turtles by night, which we powdered and
dried for our use.

There were at this time belonging to the several Plantations of the Spaniards
above Two Hundred Frigates some of 120, some of 12, but most of 30 or 40 Tuns,
most of which during our abode in those parts we took, and some of them twice
or thrice, and yet never burnt or sunk any of them unless Men of War sent
against us, or set to entrap us. The Men we used very civilly, either
immediately dismissing them, or if we kept them any time, providing for them as
for our selves, and sheltered them from the Rage of the Symerons. We set Sail
from this Cape of St. Anthony, and performed our Voyage very prosperously. For
whereas our Captain intended to touch at New Foundland there to have Watered,
being very scarce of it, it pleased God to give us such store of Rain Water
that we were sufficiently furnished, and within 23 days, we past from the Cape
of Florida to the Isles of Silley, and so arrived at Plymouth on Sunday about
Sermon-time, August 9th. 1573.

Sir Francis Drake His Voyage about the WORLD.
CAptain Francis Drake having in a former Voyage in the year 1572. and 73. had
some view of the South Atlantic and thereupon conceiving a desire of being
better acquainted with it, tho he was crossed in his design for several years,
partly through secret envy, and partly by his serving here for his Prince and
Country; at length in the year 1577. By Gracious commission from his Sovereign
and by help of diverse Friends Adventurers, he fitted himself with 5 Ships, viz.
the Pelican, Admiral, burden 100 Tuns, Captain General Francis Drake; the
Elizabeth Vice Admiral, burden 80 Tuns, Captain Jo. Winter; the Marigold, a
Bark of 30 Tuns, Captain Jo. Thomas; the Swan, a Fliboat of 50 Tuns. Captain
Jo. Chester; and the Christopher, a Pinnace of 15 Tuns.

These Ships he Manned with 164 able Men, and furnished them with all
necessaries, not forgetting ornaments and delights, having with him several
expert Musicians; he likewise made some Pinnaces, but carried aboard in pieces
for to be set up when occasion served. Thus furnished, we set Sail from
Plymouth, Nov. 15. 1557. at 5 a Clock in the Afternoon; but meeting with
contrary Wind we were forced to put in at Falmouth. The next day there arose
such a Storm, that the Admiral and Marigold were fain to cut their main Mast:
And therefore when the Storm was over we returned to Plymouth to repair our
damages; which done we put to Sea again, Dec. 13. When we were out of sight of
Land we easily conjectured whither our General intended, by his course, and his
appointing Mogadore our place of meeting if any of our Ships should be parted
from the Fleet. The first Land we had sight of, was Cape Cantine in Barbary on
Christmas Day in the Morning. The shore is White sand, the Inland mountainous,
in 32 degrees. 30 min. North lat. Coasting from hence 18 Leagues Southward, we
arrived at the Island Mogadore before named. It is under the King of Fess, in
31 degrees. 40 min. a mile off the shore making a good Harbor between the Land and
it. It is uninhabited, but a League in Circumference, overgrown with shrubs not
unlike our Privet, full of Doves, and much frequented by ravenous Birds. At the
South side of it are 3 hollow Rocks, under which are store of wholesome, but
ugly Fish. We sent a Boat to sound the Harbor, and finding it safe, we brought
in our Ships, Dec. 27. and continued there till the end of the Month, setting
up one of our Pinnaces. The Inhabitants perceiving us, gave us signs of their
desire to be brought aboard, to whom our General sent a Boat, in which two of
the Moors were received, one of ours being left ashore as a Pledge.

We entertained them very courteously that they might thereby understand that
we came in peace, offering to traffic for their Country commodities. To this
they agreed, promising, to bring such things as they had to exchange for ours.
It is a Law among them to drink no Wine, notwithstanding privately they taste
it liberally, as we found. At their return they restored our Pledge. The next
day they brought with them Camels in show laden with Wares; and therefore
according to order (our General being then ashore in the Island) we shut off a
Boat. Our Boat being come to Land, John Fry one of our men mistrusting no
danger, stepped out of the Boat, but was presently laid hold of, and carried
away. The cause of this was a desire the K. had to know whence our Fleet was;
whether it were a forerunner of the K. of Portugals; but he having declared who
we were, was immediately sent back with a present to his Captain. But in the
mean time our Captain resenting it, landed his Company, and marched into the
Country without resistance; wherefore having provided some Wood, and viewed an
old Fort built by the K. of Portugal, now ruined by this K. we departed, Dec.
13. for Cape Blank, so that when Fry returned we were gone, yet the K. sent him
home to England in an English Merchant.

Till Jan. 4th. we had Foul weather; yet we reached Cape de Guerre, where we
took 3 Spanish Fishermen, and carried with us to Rio del Oro under the Trop. of
Cancer where we took a Carvel; from thence we Sailed to Cape Barbas, and took
another Carvel, and Jan. 16. to Blank.

This Cape lies in 20 degrees. 30 min. on the North side resembling the Corner of
a Wall; the Land betwixt it and Barbas is low and Sandy. Here we observe the
South Guards (called the Crosiers) 9 d 30 m. above the Horizon. We took a
Spanish Ship riding here; all her men having fled save two, and carried her
with the rest into the Harbor 3 Leagues within the Cape.

Here, being a plentiful place, our General purposed to stay a while to refresh
his men. During our abode he was visited by the People of the Country, who
brought down a Woman a Moor, with an Infant hanging by her dry dug, having
scarce life in her, to be sold as a Cow and Calf, but our General would not
deal in such goods. They also brought Ambergreece and Gums to exchange for
Water, of which they are very scarce; our General gave them Water, but would
take nothing for it, as also some of our Victuals; their manner of eating
whereof was Inhuman.

Having trimmed our Ships and discharged the Spaniards, save one we took with
us, we departed for the Islands of Cape de Verde, intending there to take in
Water, for that from thence we intended straight for Brazil without touching
Land. And having the Wind at N. E. and E. N. E. Trade Winds being usual in
those places, we Coasted Bonavista, and the next day, Jan. 28. we came to
Anchor in the West part of the Island Maio in 15 degrees. being high Land, save
only the Northwest part, a League from the Sea very low, and is Inhabited by
the Portuguese.

Landing here we found a great many ruinous Houses with a poor naked Chapel.
The Springs and Wells were stopped up, and we could have no Water for our use,
wherefore we marched up to seek some, or at least to see if the People could be
prevailed with to help us. In this Journey we found the soil very fruitful,
full of Fig Trees, and in the Valleys, where their Cottages were, Vineyards
bearing ripe Grapes, tho now in Winter, (the Sun scarce ever withdrawing
himself from them.) There were also Coco Trees, no branches sprouting forth but
at the Top, with several others. We found good Water in several places, but
being far off the Road, we could not carry it to our Ships. The People would
not come near us, keeping themselves close in their Houses.

This Island has great store of Goats, Hens, and Salt made Naturally by the
Suns heat, so that of the product thereof, they keep continual Traffic with
the adjacent Islands. We departed thence Jan. 30. Next day we passed St. Jago
10 Leagues West in the same Latitude, inhabited by Portugals, and Moors. The
Portugals being formerly sole Lords of that Country, used that rigor toward
their Slaves, that they were forced to try some means of help, and thereupon
fled to the Mountainous parts, where by continual escapes increasing to a great
number, they now live in that terror of their oppressors that they endure no
less bondage in mind than formerly in Body; besides the damages in their goods
and Cattle, they suffer daily from them.

On the South-west of this Island, we took a Portuguese laden with Wine, Woollen
and Linen Cloth, etc. bound for Brazil.

As we passed by in sight of 3 of their Towns, they shot off 3 great Pieces,
which we answered.

Twelve Leagues South of St. Jago lies that Island called by the Portuguese
Fogo, the Burning Island, in which rises a steep Hill 6 Leagues high, within
the bowels of which is a constant fire, which breaks out with violence 4
times an hour. Herein is engendered a great quantity of Pumice stones, which
being by the Vehemence of the Fire, carried up into the Air, fall down upon the
Hill, and many times into the Sea. The rest of the Island is fruitful, and
Inhabited by Portugals.

Two Leagues to the South of this Island, lies a pleasant Island, full of
Trees, which are always green, whence it is called the Brave Island, being a
Storehouse of many Fruits, as Figs, Coco's Plantons, Oranges, etc. full of
pleasant streams of Water: But there is no convenient Road for Ships. For after
long sounding, we could find no ground at any hand, neither was it ever known
that any line would fetch ground in any place about the Island. So that the Top
of Fogo, burns not so high in the Air, but that the root of Brava is buried
as low in the Seas. The only Inhabitant of this Island is an Hermit, as we
suppose, for we saw but one House, built as it seems for such purpose; and he
was so delighted in his solitary life, that he would by no means abide our
coming, but fled, leaving behind him a Cross with a Crucifix, and such other
Idolatrous trash.

Here we dismissed the Portugals, taken at St. Jago, and gave them for their
Ship our new Pinnace, with Provision to carry them home.

Having thus taken in fresh Water, we departed, Feb. 2. and fell with the Coast
of Brazil, Apr. 5. 1578. during which Voyage, where we saw nothing but Sea and
Air; as we beheld the wonderful Works of God in his creatures, so likewise we
did taste the goodness thereof, for relief of our necessities. We often had
adverse Winds, and sometimes Calms, and also terrible Lightnings and Thunder,
yet with a mixture of comforts; for it pleased God that (whereas we were but
badly furnished with Water) when we were within 4 degrees of the Line on this
side, and past it so many on the other, we had every day some rain, whereby our
want of Water was much supplied. This was also observable, that notwithstanding
the badness of the passage, and Storms we sometimes had, yet not one of us lost
our company save only the Portugal prize for one day, but next day found us
again.

Among the many strange creatures we saw, we took particular notice of a flying
Fish, as big as the ordinary Pilchards, its fins are of the length of its whole
body, resembling and supplying the use of Wings; for therewith, when it is
chased by bigger Fish, and cannot escape by Swimming, it lifts it self above
the Water, and flies a pretty height, sometimes lighting on Boats or Barks:
The Quils thereof are proportionable, set together, with a thin Film, so that
they would serve for a longer or higher flight, but that the dryness of them is
such, that unless moistened every 10 or 12 strokes, they grow stiff and unfit
for motion. The increase of this Creature is wonderful, which if it had not
been so, their kind could not have been continued, they being a prey to so many
Creatures. And when they flee into the Air, in shunning one hazard, they
commonly incur another by some ravenous Foul.

When we came within 3 Leagues of Brazil, in 31 degrees. 30 min. South latitude,
having 12 Fathom Water, we were descried by the Inhabitants, and we saw huge
fires made by them in several places, which custom though it be universal among
Christians and Heathens, yet is differently used by them, to wit, for a
sacrifice to Devils, with many other conjurations, casting up heaps of sand,
etc. that if any Ships stay upon their Coast, their ministering Spirits may make
wrack of them, which the Portuguese have found to their loss. But this devilish
intent of theirs was of no effect to us, for though we had great Storms, yet we
sustained no damage but the separating our Ships. And seeing we could find no
Harbor thereabout we coasted along Southward, till April 14 in the morning we
passed by Cape St. Mary in 35 degrees. near the mouth of the River Plate, and
running within it 6 or 7 Leagues we came to Anchor under another Cape which our
General after called Cape Joy, because the second day after our Anchoring here,
the Christopher, we had lost in the former storm, came to us again. The cares
our General took besides the main care of effecting our Voyage, were these; to
keep our whole Fleet together; to get fresh Water for our men; and to refresh
them when wearied. And therefore at our departure from Cape Verde, the next
place of meeting, if we should be dispersed, or for Watering, was appointed to
be the River of Plate.

The Country thereabout is temperate, of a sweet Air, and fruitful soil: and
has among other things, plenty of large Deer.

We removed hence 12 Leagues further, where was a long trace of Rocks, not far
from the Main, making a commodious Harbor, especially against the South Wind,
and rode till the 20th day, where we killed store of Seals. We weighed again
hence and sailed further up the River till we had but 3 Fathom, and were in
fresh Water, but because the Winds were strong, and we could have no safe
Harbor there, we went to Sea again, Apr. 27. The Land here lies, S. S. W. and
N. N. E. with shoal water some 3 or 4 Leagues off into the Sea; it is in 36 degrees.
20 min. or better, South. Latitude.

At our coming to Sea the Swan lost company of us. And therefore our General to
prevent the like in those that remained, knowing that the Coast (it drawing now
toward Winter) uses to be subject to tempestuous weather, determined to seek
out some convenient Harbor, and searched all that Coast from 36 to 47 degrees. but
found none. And May 8. by another Storm the Caunter was severed from us. May 12
we saw Land in 47 degrees. where we came to Anchor in such Road as we could for the
time. Our General named the place Cape Hope, by reason of a Bay within, which
promised a convenient Harbor. But by reason of the many Rocks lying off it, we
durst not hazard our Ships into it, without trial first made.

Our General (who never was wont in matters of importance to trust to other
men's care) went himself with some others in a Boat, May 13. to sound it out:
and being now nigh the Shore, suddenly a thick fog arose with a great tempest;
our General thought it now best to return to his Ship but the fog was so thick
that, they could see none of us. Captain Thomas out of love to our General,
hazarded in with his Ship, where he found him, and received him aboard, and
then dropped an Anchor there, and lay safe during the Storm, while we were tossed
at Sea. The next day the weather being fair, our General went ashore, that he
might by making of fires gave signs to the dispersed Ships to come together
again, whereby at last they all met except the Swan and our Portugal prize, the
Mary.

In this place (the people being fled for fear of our coming) we found near the
Rocks, in houses made for that purpose, 50 Ostriches at least, with other Foul,
some dried and some drying for their provision. The Ostriches Thighs were as
big as ordinary Legs of Mutton; they cannot fly, but run so swiftly that a man
cannot overtake them, nor come within shot of them: we found the Instruments
the people use to take them with: Among others this is one; they have a large
Plum of Feathers tied together upon the end of a Staff, in the fore part
resembling the Head, Neck and Bulk of an Ostrich; in the hinder part, spreading
it self out so large as to hide the Body of a man: with this they drive them
into some neck of Land by the Sea, where spreading long Nets, with their Dogs,
they overthrow them. The Country is very pleasant, and of a fruitful Soil.
Being afterward driven to this place again, we had great familiarity with the
people, who rejoyeed at our return, because we had done no hurt this time: But
because this place was not fit for our purpose we departed May 15. and held our
course S. and by W. In 47 degrees. 30 min. we found a Bay convenient for us, in
which we Anchored May 17. and the next day went further in, where we abode 15
days.

The first day of our arrival here, our General sent Captain Winter Southward,
he himself going to the North, in search of the 2 Ships, and it pleased God he
met with the Swan, which he brought with him into the Harbor; where being
unladen, she was cast off, and her Iron work and other necessaries reserved for
use, the remainder being made firewood. The other Ship we could not as yet
hear of.

After a little stay here, some of our men being ashore, in an Island near the
Main, the People of the Country showed themselves to us, with Leaping, Dancing,
Shouting, etc. after their manner; Our General sent a Boat straight to them,
with Knives, Bells, Bugles and such things, whereupon they assembled on a Hill
near the Waterside and sent 2 of their Company, running one after the other
with great grace, but when they drew near, they halted, refusing to come to our
men; which our men perceiving sent such things as they had, and laid them in
their view, and as soon as our men were departed they came and took them,
leaving in exchange thereof Feathers, and Bone made in fashion of a Toothpike,
carved about the top, 6 Inches long. Whereupon our General with diverse others
at low Water went over to the Main.

Against his coming they remained still on the Hill setting themselves all in
one Rank, ordaining one of them to run from one end of it to the other, and
back again, East and West, holding his hands over his Head, and yielding
forward his Body toward the rising and setting of the Sun, and every 2d or 3d
turn erecting it toward the body of the People after their ridiculous manner.
When they saw us ascending the Hill to them, they seemed afraid. Which our
General seeing retired, whereby they were confirmed we had no design to injure
them, and came down with great speed after us, and trafficked with us. The
wares we had from them were Arrows of Reeds, Feathers, and Bones as aforesaid.

They go Naked, except a Skin of Fur they cast about their shoulders, when they
sit in the cold; but when they are doing any work, they gird it about their
Loins. They wear their Hair long, and when they Travel they put it up with a
roll of Ostrich Feathers, using these rolls likewise for Quivers, and for
carrying provision, some on either side within these rolls (for a sign of
honor) have a large and plain Feather showing like horns a far off.

They paint their Bodies, with diverse colors: some wash their Faces with
Sulphur; some paint their whole Bodies black leaving only their Neck white;
some one Shoulder black another white, and their Sides and Legs after the same
manner, the black part has set upon it white Moons, and the white black Suns,
the Marks and Characters of their Gods.

This advantage (I conceive) they have of painting their Bodies; that it Armeth
them against the nipping cold, for the Colors being soakt into the inner part
of their skin, fills up the pores so close that no cold can enter. They have
clean, comely and strong Bodies, they are swift of foot and Active.

It Is strange to think how they having never before known Christians, in a
short time were so kind, judging us a People they ought to serve, not injure,
esteeming our General as a Father, us as Brethren. One of the chiefest of them
receiving a Cap of our Generals went a little from us, and pierced hie Leg with
an Arrow till the Blood streamed, hereby signifying his unfeigned Love. They
were in all, that conversed with us, about 50.

In the Southermost part of this Bay there is a fresh Water River wherein are a
great many Islands, of which some have such store of Seals as would mantain an
Army of men: others are in like sort replenished with Foul. We could not
perceive that People had any Boats, or Canows to come to these Islands. Their
Victuals for ought we saw they eat raw. They go all Armed with Bows an Elve
long, with Arrows of Reeds, and headed with Flint-stone Artificially cut and
fastened.

This Bay by reason of plenty of Seals we called Seal Bay (for we killed 200 in
one hour.) And being now well provided, we Sailed thence June 3. toward the
Pole Antarctick. June 12. we Anchored in a little Bay and stayed 2 days,
discharging our Caunter the Christopher, which we laid up here.

June 14. We departed and kept our course till the 17th. then we Anchored in a
Bay in 50 degrees. 20 min. distant not above a degree off the mouth of the
Streights, through which lay our way to the South Sea.

Here our General altered his course, and steered Northward, to seek after our
Ship we had lost, because that if we entered the Straight without them, it would
go hard with them. And next day being June 19. toward night, within a few
Leagues of St. Julian we found her: and because both Ship and men were
distressed by weather, our General bare into St. Julian, June 20. that he might
repair her, and refresh them. It stands in 49 degrees. 3 min. South. Lat. and
has on the South side of the Harbor picked Rocks, and in the Harbor many
Islands. Being come to Anchor, our General with some of his Company, rowed
further in a Boat, to find out a place for Watering. At his landing 2 of the
Inhabitants (by Magellane called Patagous or Pentagours from their huge
stature, and strength) visited him, seeming to rejoice at his arrival: taking
great pleasure in seeing Mr. Oliver (Master Gunner of the Admiral) shoot an
English Arrow, trying to shoot with him, but were far short of him.

Another of these came up, and checked his fellows for their familiarity with
us, and dealt with them to become our Enemies; which our General and his men
not suspecting, used them as before, and one Robert Winter shooting an Arrow at
length, his Bow-strings broke; which they seeing, fearing that more than our
other weapons, took courage, and coming behind them, while they, suspecting
nothing, were going toward their Boat, shot at him who had the Bow, that he
might not string it again, and wounded him in the Shoulder, whereupon he
turning about was with another Arrow shot through his Lungs, yet he fell not.
And the Master Gunner discharging his Calliver, which miscarried, was slain
outright. In this extremity our General, behaving himself Wisely and
Courageously, ordered his men to shift from place to place, encroaching upon
the Enemy, and to use their Targets and other weapons for their defense, and to
break as many Arrows as they could come by; knowing that their Arrows being
spent, they could have them at their pleasure. And he himself shooting off the
Calliver, dispatched the beginner of the quarrel, who had killed our Master
Gunner, whereby the courage of his partners was abated, so that they were glad
to save themselves by flight. Our General chose rather to depart, than take
revenge, that he might save one of his men who was dangerously wounded, who
notwithstanding dyed 2 days after he was carried aboard. Our Gunners Body being
left ashore that night, our General next day with his Boat well manned, went
ashore to fetch it, which they found lying where it was left, but stripped of his
outer Garment and an Arrow stuck in his right Eye. Both these Bodies were
decently interred in one Grave.

Magellane, rightly termed them Giants; for they differ from the common sort of
men, in Stature, Bigness, Strength of Body and Hideousness of Voice, but they
are not so monstrous or Giant like as reported, there being some English men as
tall as they. But the Spanish cruelties have made them more monstrous in mind
than they are in Body, and inhospitable to Strangen. Notwithstanding, the
terror they conceived of us, so quenched their heat, that they forgot revenge,
and seeming to repent of the wrong done us, suffered us to do what we would for
2 months space without molestation.

To this evil received of them, a greatr was devised among our selves, but it
was detected and prevented in time, which if it had taken, our General and his
faithful Friends, had been murdered, to the final frustrating of our whole
design.

This Plot had been contrived at Plymouth, and was discovered to our General
there, yet our General gave no credit to it, as being a person he had such
affection to. And therefore afterward he not only continued his favor (to this
suspected person) but used him as his bosom friend. And he was often offended
at them who discovered the Treachery to him. But at length perceiving his
lenity did no good, and that his Ambition was not allied, he resolved to call
his practices in question before it were too late. And therefore assembling his
Captains he had him before them, where the Gentleman knowing himself Guilty,
showing great remorse for his unkind dealing, besought them to execute justice
upon him. Whereupon they all adjudged him worthy of death. This judgments was
held ashore in one of the Islands of that Port, which in memory of that was
called the Island of True Justice and Judgment. He desired to receive the
Sacrament before his death, which was granted. And John Fletcher, Preacher of
the Fleet administered it to him: Our General likewise communicating with him:
afterward they dined together as lovingly as ever they had done, and took
their farewell as they had only been going a Journey. After dinner the sentence
was executed upon him, he showing great remorse for that heinous crime, and
great signs of devotion at his death. Afterward we buried him, setting a
Millstone we found there, broke in two, at his head and feet, and engraved
thereod the names of our men that were buried, and a memorial of our Captains
name in Latin.

After he was executed, our General discharging the Mary, our Portugal Prize,
(being leak) defaced her; and having Watered and Trimmed our Ships, and reduced
our Fleet to 3 Ships, besides our Pinnaces, we departed this Port, Aug. 3. and
set our course for the Straight, S. W.

Aug. 20. We fell with the Cape, near which is the entrance into the Straight,
by the Spaniards, called Capo Virgin Maria, appearing at 4 Leagues distance,
with steep gray Cliffs full of black Stars, against which the Sea beating
represents the spouting of Whales, the highest Cape being like Cape Vincent in
Portugal. At this Cape our General caused his Fleet in homage to our Sovereign
Lady the Queens Majesty, to strike their Topsails: and in remembrance of his
Honorable Friend, Sir Christopher Hatton, he changed the name of his Ship from
the Pelicane to the Golden Hind. Which being ended with a Sermon, and Prayers,
and Thanksgiving for her Majesty, etc. we continued our course into the said
Frete, and came into a narrow Strait exceeding dangerous, it lies W. N. W. and
E. S. E. and having lost it we came to a large Sea; the night following, we had
an Island in sight equal to Fogo in height, and burning like it.

It has formerly been reported as truth, that the Seas have a continual
current from East to West in this Straight, but we found it otherwise, the
Ebbings and Flowings being as orderly here as on other Coasts.

Aug. 24. We fell with 3 Islands bearing Triangle wise one from another, in one
of them, being large and Fruitful, our General with some of his men landed,
taking possession of it in Her Majesty's name, and called it the Elizabeth
Island. In the other 2, which were not so large, we found good store of strange
Birds, which could not fly at all, nor run so fast as to escape us; they are
less than a Goose, and bigger than a Mallard, short, and well set together,
having no Feathers, but in stead thereof a sort of hard and matted Down: their
Beeks are like the Bills of Crows, they lodge and breed on Land, where making
earths as Coneys do in the Ground, they lay their Eggs. They feed on the Sea,
where they swim incredibly swift. In one day we killed 3000 of them. These 2
Islands our General named, the one St. Bartholomew's the other St. George's.

In the Island of St. George we found the Body of a man so long dead before,
that his bones fell asunder, being moved out of the place they lay in.

From these Islands to the entry of the South Sea the Frete is very crooked.
And though it be true that Magellane reports of this passage that there are
many fair Harbors and store of fresh Water, yet when any contrary Winds arise,
it is extremely dangerous.

The Land on both sides is high and Mountainous, having on the North and West
the Continent of America, on the South and East nothing but Islands, among
which lie innumerable Fretes into the South Sea, the Mountains are prodigious
for height, being still increased with congealed Clouds, and frozen Meteors,
which are scarce ever diminished by the heat of the Sun.

Yet the plain grounds are fruitful, the Grass plenteous, Herds many of very
strange sorts, the Trees for most part always green, the Air temperate as ours.

When we approached the entrance of the South Sea, we were so shut up to the
Northward, and had such large and open Fretes to the South, we knew not what
way to pass, without further discovery; and that our General, Anchored the
Fleet under an Island, went with some others in a Boat, to find the passage,
which having done they returned, meeting with a Canow under the same Island,
which was made of the Bark of diverse Trees, having a Prow and Stern standing
up, and Semicircle wise yielding inward: the Body of most excellent
Workmanship: so that our General concluded that it was not contrived by the
Art, nor for the use of such rude people as these: it had no other caulking in
the Seams but stitching with thongs made of Skins, and yet kept out the Water,

The People are of a low stature, but compact, they paint as the others do.
Within the Island they had a mean Cottage of Poles covered with the skins of
Beasts.

Their Vessels and Cups are of Barks of Trees. Their working-tools they use are
knives made of huge and monstrous Mussel shells, which after they have broke off
the thin and brittle substance of the Edge, they grind upon stones, till they
have put such an Edge on them that they will cut the hardest Wood, yea the
hardest Bones.

Sept. 6. We got free of these Islands and entered the South Sea; at the Cape
whereof our General intended to have gone ashore, and there after a Sermon
Preached, to have left a Monument of her Majesty, Engraven in Metal; but could
not conveniently.

By all our observations we conluded that this Strait was 150 Leagues in
length, the breadth in some places more, in others less; and in the end found it
to be no Strait, but only Islands.

When our General saw that our men were not able to endure the cold he intended
to have returned toward the Line, lest our men by the excessive cold might
contract some grievous distemper; but it pleased God to thwart his design. For
the 2d. day after we entered Mare Pacificum, a Furious storm with contrary Winds
arose, whereby we were in great Jeopardy of our lives,

In the time of this storm, Sept. 15. the Moon was Eclipsed in Aries, and
darkened about 3 points for 2 hours; but our storm continued 52 days. And Sept.
30th. in the night, the storm increasing, the Marigold was separated from us;
whom we never met again, although our General had ordered, that if any of our
Fleet lost our Company, we should meet again on the Coasts of Peru in 30 degrees.
or thereabout.

From Sept. 7. (when the storm began) till Oct. 7. we could not recover Land
(being driven to 37 degrees. of South. Lat.) and this day toward night entered a
Harbor, on the aforesaid Straight toward the South Sea, hoping to shelter till
the storm were over, but had not been there 3 hours, till by violence of the
storm, our Admiral lost an Anchor by the violence of the Flaw, and also lost
sight of our Vice Admiral the Elezabeth, which we never saw more, for she
arrived in England, June 20. next year. So that now our Admiral was left alone,
and although our General sought the rest of his Fleet carefully, yet could by no
means find them. Thus parted from our friends, we were driven back into 55 degrees.
South Lat. among the Islands aforesaid. And after we had been there 2 days, and
alittle refresht our selves, of a sudden a Tempestuous storm arose, whereby we
were in extreme hazard of our lives, and expected to be swallowed up every
moment. But it pleased God of his infinite mercy, when all our hopes were gone,
miraculously to deliver us. Being thus delivered, we were necessitated to seek
for some place of refuge, both to provide necessaries, and refresh our men. We
returned among the said Islands, where we hoped for better rest, and the rather
because we found the People of that Country traveling from one place to
another, with whom we trafficked for several commodities, and had respite for 3
days, being in continual fear of the imminent dangers, the troubled Seas, and
blustering Winds threatened us; which accordingly happened; for we were
assaulted by a more vehement storm, leaving behind us our Anchor, and a great
part of our Cable, driven betwixt Wind and Water, till we fell with the
uttermost part of the Land, toward the South Pole, when we discovered how far
the same reaches South ward from the Coast of America aforenam'd.

The uttermost Cape of these Islands lies in 56 degrees. where no Mainland nor
Island is to the South, but the Atlantic and South Sea met.

It was hitherto dreamed that these Islands were a Main, and that it was Terra
Incognita, and truly it might be so called before this time, for before this it
was never discovered, that we heard of.

And here we may refute that error, held by many, that it is impossible to
return out of Mare del Zur into the Ocean, by reason of the supposed Eastern
Current, and Levant Winds; for neither did we meet with such Current, nor had
such Winds to carry us through, but always in our passage found it easier to
return into the West Ocean than to go forward into Mare del Zur; whereof we had
much experience, being glad often times to alter our course, and fall a stern
again, with frank Wind, further in one Afternoon, than we could fetch up again
in a whole day with a reasonable gale. They are no less mistaken in alleging
the narrowness of the Frete; for we found the quite contrary.

As we reached the utmost part of these Islands, Oct. 28. our storm ceased.
Here we found the night in the latter end of October. not above 2 hours long, so
that it seems, when the Sun is in the Tropic of Caprioorn they have little or
no night. The Inhabitants Manners Apparel, etc. are, the same with those
aforementioned, before we entered the Streights. Our General called these
Islands Elizabethides.

Oct. 30. We departed thence steering our course North-west, to coast along
Peru (being the appointed place for our Fleet to reassemble) the next day we
came to 2 Islands, wherein were great store of Birds, whereof we were
sufficiently furnished with Victuals; Thence, steering still North-west, we
found our selves, like to have been deceived in taking our rules by the common
Maps, which set down the Coast of Peru to lie 12 degrees. Northwards from the
supposed Straight when it is quite contrary, and therefore we altered our
Course.

That part of Peru all along to the height of Lima being 12 degrees. South of the
Line, is mountainous and barren, except a few places Inhabited by the Spaniards
and some others.

Being thus fallen with the Land, we Coasted along till we came to 37 degrees. and
finding no convenient place, nor likelihood of hearing of our Ships, we ran off
with an Island in sight called by the Spaniards Mucho, where we Anchored Nov.
25. and found it to be a fruitful Island, well stored with all necessaries, as
Sheep, and other Cattle, Maiz, a kind of Grain they make Bread of, Potatos and
such other Roots besides it is plenteous of Gold, etc. The Inhabitants are such
Indians as by the cruelty of the Spaniards, were driven from the Main. With
them our General intended to Traffic for Victuals and Water; and for that end
the same night we arrived, he and some others went ashore, to whom the People
showed respect, making a present to our General; we also presented them such
things as we had, signifying that we came to Traffic, and recruit our selves
with fresh Water; and they promised to furnish us with such things as they
could afford. The next day our General repaired to the shore, and sent 2 of his
men, with their Baricoes to the Watering place assigned, who having past half
of the way, were traitorously slain by the People; who having likewise set an
ambush for our General and the rest of our men that were in the Boat, behind
the Rocks, suddenly wounded most of our men, before they could free themselves;
our General besides several wounds on the face and head, had one passing
through his Nose into the Basis Cerebri. But the worst of all was, we had none
to cure our men save a Surgeons Boy, yet it pleased God they were all cured.
The cause of this barbarity of these Islanders was their hatred to the
Spaniards (whom they suspected us to be.) Our General tho he might have
revenged this with small loss, yet valuing the loss of one of his more than 100
of theirs, he desisted, committing his cause to God. The weapons this People
use in their Wars are Arrows of Reeds with heads of Stones very brittle and
indented, and Darts of a great length headed with Iron, or Bone. The same day
that this happened we departed thence, and because we were nownear the
appointed place of meeting, and partly because our men were crasie, we set in
for some convenient place in the Main, and coming to the Bay called Philips-Bay
in about 32 degrees. we dropped Anchor, and sent our Boat to discover, if the place
could furnish us with such things as we needed; they after long Travel, could
see no appearance of relief, either as to Victuals or Water, seeing nothing
save huge heads of wild Buffs; but in their return, they espied an Indian
fishing in his Canow, whom they brought aboard. Who being courteously
entertained, after we had showed him what we had, and made him understand what
we needed, we sent him away with our Boat and his own Canow to land him where
he would; who at his landing, willed our men to stay till his return, and anon
met 2 or 3 of his friends, to whom he showed his gifts; which gave such
content, that a little after, he with their Governor and others came to us,
bringing with them Hens, Eggs, Hogs and such like, and (that they might remove
suspicion of evil) they sent it in a Canow by it self, and their Governor
entrusted himself to our men, and came to our General. By him we understood, we
could not be relieved here, but he offered to conduct us to a Harbor not far
distant to the Southward, where we might have all necessaries; which our Genesis
accepted of; and Dec. 4. departed hence, and next day came to an Anchor in that
Harbor. It is called by the Spaniards Valperizo, and the Town adjoining St.
James of Chinly; it is in 35 degrees. 40 min. here we had all necessaries in
abundance: amongst other things we found in the Town, diverse storehouses of
the Wines of Chinly, and in the Harbor a Ship called the Captain of Morial, or
the Grand Captain of the South, Admiral to the Islands of Solomon, laden mostly
with the said Wines, and besides, some fine Gold of Baldivia, etc. We spent
sometime in refreshing our selves, and easing this Ship of her burden, and Dec.
8. being furnished with necessaries we departed, returning back to the Line,
with our Indian Pilot, whom our General rewarded to his own content, and set
him ashore again where he desired.

Being thus provided our General was for seeking after our Ships; And
considering that we could not conveniently run in with our Ship to every
Harbor, and that our Boat could not carry men enough, to encounter the violence
of the Spaniards, if we happened to meet them, we determined, as we went toward
the Line to seek out a convenient place, where we might trim our Ship, and
build a Pinnace.

Dec. 19. We entered a Bay to the Southward of the Town of Cyppo Inhabited by
the Spaniards, in 29 degrees. 30 min. and having landed 14 of our men to search, we
were discovered by the Spaniards, who sent out 300 men, 100 of them being
Spaniards, well mounted on Horses, the rest Indians running as Dogs at their
heels all naked. But our men seeing them come, made all their escape, save one
Richard Minivy, who being too bold, would not be entreated to escape with the
rest, but chose either to outbrave them, or die in the place; which he did. His
Body was by the Spaniards beheaded, his right hand cut off, his heart plucked
out, all which they carried away in our sight, the rest of his Body they caused
the Indians to shoot full of Arrows made of green wood, and left it, which we
buried next day. Finding but bad entertainment here we departed, and next day
came to a convenient Harbor to the Northward of it, in 27 degrees. 55 min. South
Lat. where we trimmed our Ship, and built our Pinnace; which done our General,
with some of his Company went in the Pinnace, in search of our Ships, but after
a days sailing, were forced to return by contrary wind.

Jan. 9. we left this place, and Jan. 22. came to an Island in the same height
with the North Cape of Mormorena; here we met with 4 Indians in their Canows,
who promised to bring us to a place where we might Water, but when we came
thither, we scarce found any. As we were searching for Water, we lighted on a
Spaniard sleeping, who had by him 13 Bars of Silver, weighing 4000 Spanish
Duccats which we took. Not far from hence we met with another Spaniard with an
Indian Boy, driving 8 Peruvian Sheep, each Sheep bearing 2 leathern bags, in
each of which was 50 pound weight of fine Silver, which we likewise took.

Beyond the Cape aforesaid we passed several Indian Towns, the People whereof
came to us in Boats made of several Skins, of which 2 being joined together of
equal length in form of a Boat, having in each of them a small Gut, or some
such thing blown full of Wind, whereby it floateth, and is rowed very swiftly;
they exchanged with us Fishes for Knives, Glasses and such like, great rarities
to them.

Not far hence lies Mormorena in 22 degrees. 30 min. where tho 2 Spaniards
governed, yet we exchanged with them for several Commodities: among other
things Sheep which were as big as a Cow, with strength proportioned; on one of
their backs at one time 3 men and a Boy might sit without touching the ground
by a foot, without any trouble; their Wool is very fine, their flesh good, and
they serve in stead of Horses for burdens. Here and toward the province of
Cusko, 100 l. of common earth yields 25 s. of pure Silver, after the rate of
a Crown an Ounce.

Feb. 7. We came to Arica in 20 degrees. which stood in the fruitfullest soil in
all that Coast; it is Inhabited by the Spaniards In 2 Barks here we found Forty
and odd Bars of Silver, each weighing about 20 l. which we took; and so went to
Chowley, Feb. 9. and in our way to Lima we took a Bark laden with Linen: Feb.
15. we arrived at Lima, and tho the Spaniards had 30 Ships in the Harbor, we
Anchored among the midst of them. Lima is in 12 degrees. 30 min. Here we heard of a
Ship that had 1500 Bars of Silver in her besides other things we boarded her
and took what we had a mind to. Here also we had news of the Ks. of Portugal,
of Morocco and Fez all dead in one day at one Battle; also of the death of the
K. of France and the Pope. Lastly here we had notice of a rich Ship laden with
Gold and Silver for Panama, that had set sail from this Haven: Whereupon Feb.
16. we went in pursuit of her. Feb. 20. We fell with the Port of Paita in 4
degrees. 40 m. with St. Helen and the River Gutaquil, Feb. 24. We past the Line 28,
and Mar. 1. Fell with Francisco, where about midday we descried a Sail, and
when we had made up with her and boarded her, we found her to be the Ship we
were pursuing: We found in her some Fruits, Conserves, Sugars, etc. and a great
quantity of Jewels, and precious Stones, 13 Chests of Ryals of Plate, 80l.
weight of Gold, 26 Tun of uncoyned Silver, etc. valued about 360000 Pezoes. We
gave the Master a little Linen for these Commodities, and after 6 days
departed.

And being now come to Cape Francisco in 1 degrees. N. Lat. and hearing nothing of
our Ships all the way, tho we enquired diligently, we concluded they were not
before us; and considering that now was the only time (Summer approaching) for
the discovery of what passage there was to be found about the Northern parts of
America from the South Sea into our Ocean, which our General chiefly designed,
we all willingly consented to seek out a convenient place for furnishing our
selves, and trimming our Ship in order thereto. And so we set on March 7. to
the Island of Caines at which we arrived March 16. and settled in a fresh River
for our purpose aforesaid. In our Journey hither, we met with a Ship laden with
Linen, and China Silk and Dishes, and a Faulcon of Gold with a great Emerauld
in its breast. We departed hence March 24. for our intended discovery, and
passed by the Port Papagaia, and diverse others, and some Gulphs which
continually send forth violent Winds. And understanding that if we did not run
off to Sea we should be troubled with Calms, our General determined to go into
some Port to furnish our selves with all necessaries, that we might go to Sea.
And accordingly April 15. 1679. we entered Guatulco, in 15. degrees. 46. min.
inhabited by the Spaniards, where we had necessaries, as also a Pot as big as a
Bushel full of Ryals of Plate, with a Chain of Gold and Jewels.

From thence we departed to Sea Apr. 16. and sailed 500 Leagues for a Wind, and
until June 23. 1500 Leagues in all, till we came to 42. degrees. of North.
Latitude, where in the Night time we were oppressed with extreme nipping cold,
whereby several of our men's health was impaired, and the day following
notwithstanding the heat of the Sun, the cold was nothing abated, so that the
Ropes of our Ships were frozen, and the Rain which fell was a kind of Icy
substance. And when we came 2 degrees further it was in that extremity, that
our men could not make use of their hands, not to feed themselves; and our Meat
as it was removed from the fire was in a manner immediately frozen, whereby our
men were extremely discouraged; yet by our Generals persuasions, they resolved
to endure a little extremity to obtain agreater Glory.

The Land in that part of America lying nearer the West, than we imagined, we
were nearer it than we were aware; and the nearer it we came the colder it was.
June 5. we were driven on the shore by contrary Winds, and cast Anchor in a
Bay, where we were in danger by reason of extreme flaws that beat upon us, and
upon their intermission were troubled with thick, stinking Fogs.

In this place we could not abide, by reason of cold, and therefore were forced
to go Southwards again. From the height of 48. to 38. coasting along the Land,
we found it to be plain; every hill (which were many but not high) though it
was June, was covered with Snow. June 17. in 38. degrees. 30. min. we found a fit
Harbor and anchored therein, continuing till July 23. and were still molested
with cold. We conjecture upon several reasons that either there is no Northern
passage, or at least not navigable, for to pass by others this seems to confirm
it, that tho we searched the Coast diligently even to 48. degrees. yet found we not
the Land to trend so much as one point in any place toward the East, but
rather running on toward the Northwest.

June 18. The Country People sent out a man in a Canow to us, who directed his
discourse to us all the way as he came; and being come near us, he had a
tedious Oration, using many motions; which ended with great show of reverence
he returned: He came again the 2d. time as also the 3d. after the same manner,
and brought with him, as a present, a Bunch of Feathers artificially gathered
on a string, made for those who guard the Kings Person to wear on their heads,
he brought also a Basket made of Rushes, filled with an Herb, called Tabak. Our
General proffered him several things, but he would receive nothing save a Hat.

June 21. Our Ship being leaky we put in to the shore to repair her; (but to
prevent all danger, our General landed all his men, with necessary Provisions
to build Tents, and make a Fort for us; Which the Country People seeing, came
down in great have to us with such Arms as they had, yet with no intent to hurt
us, their intent being rather to worship us as Gods. And being willed by signs
to lay from them their Bows and Arrows, they did it instantly.

To the intent therefore that this Peace which was desired might be more
confirmed, our General treated them very courteously, bestowing upon them
Shirts, Linen, and other things, to cover their nakedness, withal signifying
unto them, that we were but men as they were, which notwithstanding, we could
hardy persuade them of. They in recompense bestowed on our General and others
of our men, Feathers, Cawls, and Quivers of their Arrows, made of Fawns Skins,
and Skins of Beasts their women wore; and so departed with joy to their Houses;
which are dug round within the earth, having clefts of Wood set up and
joined close at the top, like our Spires; they are very warm and without
Chimneys; Their Door is like an ordinary scuttle in a Ship slope-wise, their
Beds on the Ground with Rushes strewed upon it. Their men for most part go
naked; They are of a tractable and loving Nature; Their only Weapons are Bows
and Arrows, with which tho they are skillful they do but little execution, they
are so slight, being more fit for Boys than men; they are prodigiously strong
and swift. Their Women make themselves loose Garments of a kind of Bulrushes to
cover their lower parts: about their shoulders wearing the Skin of a Deer; They
are very obedient to their Husbands.

When they were returned home they emitted lamentable Cryings, which we heard
tho about an English Miles distance.

Notwithstanding their submissive demeanor, our General thought it best not to
trust them too much, and, therefore with expedition we set up our Tents and
entrenched our selves with a Stone-Wall, that so if they proved perfidious we
might be able to repel them. Two days after a great multitude of them came to
us, bringing presents with them as before, or rather sacrifices, they deeming
us to be Gods.

When they came to the top of the Hill at the bottom whereof we stayed, they
stood, where one with strange gestures delivered a tedious Oration, at the end
whereof all the rest bowing their bodies cried Oh, (as a sign of their assent;)
after which their men came down, leaving their Women and Children, with their
Bows on the Hill, with presents to us, glad that we would receive them of them:
in the mean time their Women fell a Crying, Shreeking, and tearing their Flesh
from their Cheeks, with a fury casting themselves on the Ground, dashing
themselves on hard Stones or any thing it was in their way, those that were big
with Child not abstaining from this madness. Which our General seeing fell a
praying with Hands lifted up to Heaven (showing that God, whom we served, and
they ought to worship, was above) and sung Psalms, and read in the Bible: to
all which they were very attentive, and took such delight in our Singing of
Psalms, that every time they came to us they desired us to sing.

Three days after the greatest part of all that People thereabouts assembled,
with the King attended with his Guard. Before his coming he sent 2 Ambassadors
to signify it to us; in delivery of their message, the one spoke low the other
the same word for word more audibly, which done our General understood by their
signs that they desired a present of him to their Hioh or King; which he sent.

As their King was coming to us, they cried after a singing manner; and as they
drew near their carriage was more grave. In their Front a man bare the Scepter
(a certain kind of black Wood a Yard and a half in Length) before the King,
whereon Hanged 2 Crowns with 3 long Chains, and a bag full of the Herb Tabah.

Next him that bare this Scepter was the King: on his head was a Cawl of
Knitwork somewhat like a Crown: on his Shoulders to his Wast a Coat of Coney
Skins; his Guard had Coats of other Skins, some having Cawls with such
Feathers, or covered with a Down, which grows on an Herb like Lettice: This
Herb is not permitted to be wore by any but those that are about the King, and
the seed of it is used only in sacrifice to their Gods. After these came the
common People, naked, whose long hair was tied in a Bunch behind, in which
stuck Plumes of Feathers, but in the fore part had but one Feather like a Horn.
Every one had his Face painted, but of different colors. Their Women and
Children came last, The Women had Baskets in their Arms, wherein were Bays of
Tabah and other presents: Their Baskets were made of Rushes, yet in such sort
that most part of them would hold Water; they were hanged with pieces of Pearls
Shells, and with 2 or 3 links of the Chains, signifying they were Vessels
dedicated to the use of their Gods.

Our General assembled all his men and ordered them to be in a posture of
defense, that if they attempted any thing against us might we prevent it.

When they came near us they gave us a general Salutation; after which he that
bare the Scepter spoke aloud what another whispered him in the ear for half an
hour, which was ended with a general Amen; and all the rest, save the Children,
came down the Hill setting themselves in their former order.

Being come near us the Scepter-bearer with a stately carriage began a song,
dancing thereto, as also did the King and all the rest, save the Women, who
danced but did not sing. Our General perceiving their simple meaning ordered
that they might have free entrance; they entering continued their Song and Dance
a pretty while, their Women following with their Baskets, their faces etc. torn
as aforesaid.

Afterward they made a sign to our General to sit down, and the King with
others made several Speeches, esiring him by signs to take upon him the
Kingdom, and afterward with one consent they set the Crown upon his Head, with
other Ceremonies, honoring him by the name of Hyoh, ending the Solemnity with
Songs and Dances.

These things our General accepted of, taking them in the Name and to the Use
of Her Majesty. The Ceremonies ended, the common People of them leaving the
King with our General, went among our People, and finding such as pleased their
Fancies (which commonly were the youngest of us) they enclosing them round
offered sacrifices; Crying with lamentable shreeks, weeping, scratching, and
tearing the flesh off their Faces.

After our necessary businesses were dispatched, our General with some of his
Company went up into the Land, to be better acquainted with the Nature and
Commodities of their Country. The Inland we found to be of a very fruitful
soil, Stored with all things fit for man, particularly fat Deer in great
numbers. There were likewise a strange sort of Conies, their heads and bodies
like other Conies, but smaller; their Tails like that of a Rat, and their Feet
like the Paws of a Mole. Under their Chins on each side they have a Bag into
which they gather their meat when their Bellies are full, to feed their young,
or sorve themselves another time. Their Skins are of great account, for their
Kings Holy Days coat is made of them.

This Country our General called Albion, from the White Banks which lie toward
the Sea.

Before our departure thence, our General caused to be set up a Plate of Brass
nailed to a Post, with her Majesty's name and picture, and Arms on a Sixpence,
the day and year of our Arrival, and of their resigning the Kingdom into Her
Majesty's hands, as a Monument of Her Majesty's Right and Title to that Kingdom.

And now the time of our departure approaching, those People, who had formerly
so much joy in our Company, were now sorrowful and dejected beyond all measure,
all their former joy being metamorphosed into Mourning at the report of our
departure.

July 23. They took a sorrowful Welfare of us, entreating us to remember them
in our absence, and to return to them, and immediately ran up to the tops of
the Hills to keep sight of us as long as they could, making Fires on all hands.
Near this place lie some Islands, which we called the Islands of St. James,
where we had a great many Seals and Birds.

Our General now considering, that the cold increased, the Sun being now nearer
the South, left off his design of finding passage through the Northern parts,
and therefore with consent of the rest bent his Course for the Moluccaes and
sailed without sight of Land for 68 days space, and Sept. 30. came to some
Islands, lying in 8 degrees. North. Lat. As soon as we were perceived, a great
number of Canows came toward us, bringing with them Coquo's, Fish, Potato's,
etc.

Their Canows, as most of the Moluccaes are made of one Tree hollowed within
with great art, very smooth; their Prow and Stern were of one fashion, yielding
inward, very high, and hanged full of glistering shells; on each side their
Canows lay out 2 pieces of Timber to keep them from overwhelming.

The People have the nether part of their ears cut round hanging down on their
Cheeks; the Nails on some of their Fingers were an Inch long, and their Teeth
black as Pitch, the color whereof they use to renew with a certain Powder. The
first Company of those Canows, began to Traffic with us peaceably, entreating
us to go nearer the shore, that they might easilier prey upon us. But these
passing away, others came that discovered their Natures, for when they got any
thing in their hands, they would neither give recompense nor restore it; and
being rejected for their bad dealing, they began to resent it, throwing stones
at us which they had brought on purpose; whereupon our General caused let fly a
great Gun; at the noise of which they, frightened, leapt out of their Canows
into the Water, and diving under the Keel of their Boat stayed there till we
were gone a good way from them, and then recovered their Canows and made have
to the shore. Notwithstanding we were afterward troubled with others of the
same gang, and could not be rid of them, till we made them smart. And so we
left this Island October. 23. naming it the Island of Thieves, and October. 16.
fell with 4 Islands in 7 degrees. 5 min. North. Lat. October. 21. we anchored at the
biggest of them called Mindanao. Oct. 25. we passed by the Island Talao, and to
the Northward of it saw 3 Islands, Teda, Selan, Saran: and Nov. 1. we past the
Isle Suaro in 1 degrees. 30 min. and Nov. 3. came in sight of the Moluccaes. They
are 4 high picked Islands very fruithful, yielding abundance of Cloves. East
from them lies a great Island, called Gillola. We intended to go to Tidore, but
coasting an Island of the King of Terenat's his Deputy came off to us, who
entreated our General to stay at Terenate, for that his King would be glad of
his coming, and would assist him to his utmost Power, whereas if he went to
Tidore, (inhabited by Portugals) he would find them deceitful; and besides,
that then his King would not receive us, as being at enmity with them. Hereupon
our General next Morning came to an anchor there, and sent a Messenger to the
King, with a Velvet Cloak for a present: signifying to him, that he desired to
be supplied with necessaries, for which he would give him other goods, and
likewise that it was by persuasion of his Viceroy that he came thither. But
before this the Viceroy had spoke to the King on our behalf, showing how
beneficial an Alliance with us would be to him, and how discouraging to his
Enemies. Whereupon the King immediately sent the Viceroy with others of his
Nobles to our General, to show him that he was ready to do any thing for us
that lay in his power, upon our Prince's account; and that he would shortly
visit us in our Ship. By that time they came to us, our Messengers were at
Court, who were honorably conducted to the King, and most Graciously by him
entertained. Whereupon the Prince hastened his before promised visit; the
manner of his coming was thus:

First, he sent before 3 great Canows wherein were some of his Nobles of all
ages, attired all in white Lawn, or Cloth of Calecute, but with some
difference, their Canow covered from one End to the other with fine Mats, bore up
by a frame of Reeds.

The rest were Soldiers standing orderly on both sides, without whom were the
Rowers, in 3 Galleries on each side, lying off the side 3 or 4 yards, one built
lower than the other; in each of which Galleries was a like number of Banks
that the Rowers sat upon: On the forepart of each Canow sat 2 men, one
holding a Tabret, the other a piece of Brass, who striking therewith by the
sound directed the Rowers to keep their Strokes; and the Rowers ending their
Strokes with a song, gave warning to the others to strike again. They had in
each Canow one small Piece; besides every man had his Sword, Dagger, and
Target, etc. These Canows coming near our Ship rowed round us one after
another, and the men as they passed did us homage, the greatest Persons
beginning; afterward putting our Messenger aboard, they told us that their
King had sent them before him to conduct our Ship into a better Road.

Not long after the King came up with 6 grave Fathers and did obeisance to us
in humble manner. He was of a tall stature, Corpulent, of a Princely
Countenance. His respect among his Subjects was very great, none of his
Councillors daring speak to him but on their Knees.

We received him in best sort we could, as with discharging of Ordinance, and
great store of small shot, sounding of Trumpets, and other Instruments of
Music, wherewith the King was extremely delighted. Besides, our General gave
him some presents. His Brother likewise made us a visit, and was also
courteously entertained by our General. The King when we came to Anchor,
departed, promising to come aboard next day, and in the mean time to send us
necessaries: Which the same night and next morning we had by way of Traffic,
as Hens, Rice, Sugar Canes, Liquid Sugar, a fruit they call Figo the same which
the Portugals name Plantanes, Cocoes and a kind of Meal they call Sago, made of
the tops of Trees, tasting like sour Curds, but melting like Sugar. The
Inhabitants make a kind of Cake thereof which will keep good ten years: We had
also some Cloves. Our General having all things provided, expected the King at
the time appointed; who came not, but sent his Brother with his Apology,
entreating our General to come a shore; that his Brother in the mean while
should remain aboard as a pledge for his safety; but the Company would by no
means permit him, especially for that his Brother had dropped some Words aboard
which gave suspicion of ill intent. Our General therefore in his stead sent
some of his Gentlemen with the Kings Brother to Court, detaining the Viceroy
for a Pledge. They being come near the Castle were received by another of the
King; Brothers and Persons of Quality, and conducted honorably to the Castle;
where being brought into a stately House, a great multitude was there, the
greatest Persons being placed round the House according to their degrees, the
rest remaining without.

The House was four square, covered with Cloth of diverse colors, born up on
a Frame of Reeds, the sides being open, and furnished with seats round; this it
seems was their Council House. At the side of this House next the Castle, was
seated the Chair of State, with a large Canopy over it; the ground also for 10
or 12 paces round it was covered with Cloth of Arras. There were seated 60
Ancient Noblemen, of the Kings Council; at the nether end of the House, were a
great Company of Young men in good attire; without on the right side of the
House were 4 old men attired in long red Garments, their heads after the
Turkish Fashion, who lived as Lidgiers there, to keep continual Traffic with
this People, with several others of foreign Nations.

The King at last coming attended by 8 or 10 Grave Senators had a rich Canopy
born over him, guarded with 12 Lances, the points downwards; our men With His
Brother met him, and were graciously entertained.

The Kings Attire was very sumptuous; From his Waste downwards was all rich
Cloth of Gold, his Legs bare, on his Feet Shoes of Cordivant died red; on his
Cap were diverse Rings of plated Gold, an Inch and a half broad; a great Chain
of Gold about his Neck; on his left hand a Diamond, an Emerald, a Ruby and
Turkey; on his Right hand Rings set with rich Stones.

As he sat in his Chair of State, a Page stood by him with a Fan, richly
embroydered with Saphires. Our Gentlemen having delivered their Message, and
received answer were safely conducted back again.

The Castle was of no strength, there being only 2 Cannons there, and those
unmounted, which were left by the Portugals by whom the Castle was built: Who
by their Tyrannies exercised both on their King and People, which they did to
confirm themselves, so incensed the People that they were forced to leave it
with their furniture in it.

The People are Moors very superstitious in observations of New Moons, and
Fastings; For on those days the Viceroy when aboard of us, would neither eat
nor drink in the day, though in the Night he ate very largely.

While we stayed here a goodly Gentlemen of a discreet behavior came aboard to
view our Ship, and discourse our Captain. He was born in the Province of Baghia
in China, whose Predecessors had reigned there 200 years. The Cause of his
coming from home, was, that being accused of Treason, and tho innocent, yet
could not make it appear, and knowing the strictness of the Law there, he
petitioned the King that he would please to commit his Trial to Gods
providence, and permit him to travel, with condition that if he brought not
home some considerable Intelligence, the King had never before heard of, he
should die; the King granted his suit, and he had been now 3 years at Tidore.
He earnestly entreated our General to declare unto him such if he could, and
likewise all occurrences happening in his long and dangerous Voyage; wherein
our General satisfied him; he likewise informing our General of all things
worth notice in their Country, withal entreating him to go along with him to
China, but our General could not be persuaded thereto.

Oct. 9. We set sail thence, and considering our Ship needed reparation we
determined to seek for a convenient place for that purpose, and Nov. 14. we
arrived at an Island South of Celebes, in 1 degrees. 40 min. South. Lat. which
place being uninhabited gave us more encouragement; and so we anchored, and in
dispatching our business spent 26 days.

The whole Island is overgrown with Wood; the Trees are large, high and
straight, the leaves whereof are like our Broom; among these Trees were a
multitude of Worms (no bigger than Flies) which by night did cast great light.
There was here also a great number of Bats, of the Bigness of a Hen, with fly
wonderfully swift, but their flight is short, and when they light they hang by
the Boughs with their Backs downwards. There was here likewise a Kind of Cray
Fish, of such size that one would satisfy 4 men, being very wholesome Food.
They do not live in the Sea, but dig themselves caves under the roots of Trees,
lodging by Companies; when we came to take them they climbed up Trees to hide
themselves. This Island we called Crab Island. Dec. 12. We put to Sea, and on
the 16 had sight of Celebes or Sillebis; but having a bad Wind, and being
entangled with Islands, and other difficulties and dangers, we could not
recover the North of Sillebis, or continue or course further West, but were
necessitated to steer Southwards, finding that course very dangerous by reason
of the many Shoals; and Jan. 9. when we thought we were past all danger, and
had a prosperous Gale of Wind, of a Sudden, when we were sailing with full
Sail, in the beginning of the first night Watch, our Ship was laid fast on a
desperate Shoal; where we expected nothing but present death. Notwithstanding
having first recommended our selves to God by prayer, we endeavored to use the
means, and in the first place plying our Pumps, we found the leak nothing
increased, which was some, tho small encouragement to us. Our next Essay was
for good ground and anchor-hold to Seaward of us, whereon to hale, by which
means, if by any, our General told us there was some hope left; but when we
sounded, we found that even a Boats length from the Ship we could not find
ground; so that our hopes quite vanished, and nothing but present death, or at
least a lingering death was before us. In those fears and perplexities we spent
this night; next morning we tried to see if we could now find any Anchor-hold,
but this succeeded no better than the former. But it pleased God miraculously
to deliver us, so that we got clear of it.

This Shoal is 3024 Leagues in length, and lies in 1 degrees. betwixt 56 and 57.
min. South. Lat. This was the greatest danger we met with in our whole Voyage.
Yet we were tossed with several storms for 3 weeks after. Jan. 12. being not
able to bear Sail, we dropped our Anchors upon a Shoal in 3 degrees. 30 min. Jan. 14.
We again anchored at an Island in 4 degrees. 6 min. South. Lat. After this we had
foul Weather, so that we were weary of the Coast of Celebes. The farthest Cape
of Celebes is in 5 degrees. South Lat. Jan. 20. We were forced to run with a small
Island not far thence, and sought for a place where we might anchor; when
suddenly a storm arose out of the Southwest, whereby we were in fear of being
cast away on a Lee shore; and had if the merciful Goodness of God had not
wrought our delivery. Having escaped this danger we continued our course till
26 day, when, the winds arising, we could bear no sail till Feb. 1. At which
time we saw very high land, and would willingly have got in there, but that the
weather was so bad. Feb. 3. We saw a little Island, but could not fetch it.
Feb. 6. We saw 5 Islands, one to the East and 4 to the West of us, at the
biggest of which we anchored, and watered. Feb. 8. we departed thence, and
descried 2 Canows, who having seen us before came willingly to us, conducting
us to their Town, not far off named Baratina; it is in 7 degrees. 13 min. South Lat.

The People are Gentiles, of handsome Body, comely Stature, civil Demeanor, just
in dealing and courteous to Strangers. The men go naked save their Heads and
Secret parts, having Pendules at their Ears. Their Women are covered from the
middle to the Foot, wearing Bracelets upon their Arms, for most part of Horn or
Brass, each at least weighing 2 Ounces. With this People Linen Cloth is the
best Merchandise, as also Margareta's and such other things.

Their Island is rich and Fruitful, abounding in Gold, Silver, Tin, Sulphur
etc. Fruits are likewise plentiful as Nutmegs, Ginger, Long-Pepper etc. Here we
spent 2 days, and departed, Feb. 10. In 8 degrees. 4 min. Feb. 12. we espied a
green Land to the Southward, and a little after 2 Islands on the same side, and
one more on the North, all which we past: Feb. 14. we saw other big Islands;
and Feb. 15 past between 4 or 5 big Islands in 9 degrees. 40 min. Feb. 18. we
anchored in a little Island, and departed next day. Feb. 22. we lost sight of
some Islands on our Star-Board side. After this we steered Westward, seeing
nothing considerable, till Mar. 9. in the morning we espied Land, some part
thereof very high, in 8 degrees. 20. min. and bearing farther North, Mar. 10. we
anchored; we first took in Water, and afterward sent our Boat ashore, and
traffiqued with the People of the Country, and next day brought our Ship nearer
the Town; our General sent Linen and Woollen Cloth, and some Silks as a
Present for the King, in requital whereof he returned Rice, Cocoes, Hens, and
other Victuals. This Island we found to be Java, the middle whereof is in 7
degrees. 30 min. South Lat. Mar. 13. Our General with others went ashore, and
complemented the King with his Music, showing him likewise the manner of our
exercising Arms; we were courteously received, and dismissed with promise of
more supplies.

In this Island there is one Chief but many Under-Governors, whom they call
Raias, who live in great love. Marc. 14. we received Victuals from 2 of them,
and on the 15. three of these petty Kings visited our General, who were highly
satisfied with what they saw, and with our entertainment, and on their return
related what they saw to Raia Donan the Chief King, who next day came aboard
us, bringing Victuals with him for our relief. Few days past but one or more of
these Kings visited us, so that we were acquainted with most of them; and our
General always entertained them to the utmost of his Power; especially with our
Music wherewith they were extremely delighted. The People of this place, as
also their Princes, are a loving, and just dealing People, which we found in
our traffiquing with them.

Taking our leaves of them. Marc. 26. we set our course W. S. W. directly
toward the Cape of good Hope, and May 21. we espied a part of the Main of
Africa. We coasted along till June 15. and past the Cape within shot of it.
July 15. we fell with Land again about Rio de Sesto. Jul. 22. we came to Sierra
Leona, and watered in the Mouth of Tagoine, and put to Sea again; here we had
Oisters and plenty of Lemmons. Aug. 15. we were under the Tropic of Cancer
having the Wind at N. E. and were 20 Leagues off land. Aug. 22. we were in the
height of the Canaries. And Sept. 26. It pleased God we safely arrived at
Plymouth, after we had spent 2 Years, 10 Months and odd days, in seeing the
Wonders of the Lord in the Deeps, in discovering so admirable things, and
escaping so many dangers and difficulties in our encompassing the World.

Soli rerum maximarum Effectori,
Soli totius mundi Gubernatori,
Soli suorum Conservatori,
Soli Deo sit semper Gloria.
FINIS.
A RELATION Of Sr. FRANCIS DRAKES West-Indian Voyage: Wherein were taken the
Towns of St. Jago. St. Domingo, Cartagena and St. Augustine.
CApt. Drake having prepared his Fleet, being 25 Ships and Pinnaces, and
assembled of Soldiers and Mariners 2300 embarked at Plymouth, Sept. 12. 1585.
These after mentioned bearing Charge.

Mr. Christ. Carleil Lieut. Genesis Anth. Powel Serj. Major, Capt. Mat. Morgan,
and Capt. Jo. Sampson Corporals of the Field, These were over the
Land-Captains, whose names follow: Capt. Anth. Plat, Capt. Edw. Winter, Capt.
Jo. Goring, Capt. Rob. Pew, Capt. Geo. Barton, Capt. Jo. Merchant, Capt. Will.
Cecil, Capt. Wall. Bigs, Capt. Jo. Hannam, Capt. Rich. Stanton.

Capt. Mart. Frobusher, Vice Admiral in the Primrose, Capt. Fran. Knollis,
Rere-Admiral in the Gallion, Leicester; Mr. Tho. Venner, Capt. in the Elizabeth
Bon-adventure, under the Generals; Mr. Edw. Winter, Capt. in the Aid; Mr.
Christ. Carleil, Lieut. Genesis Capt. in the Tiger; Henry White Capt. of the
Sea-Dragon; Tho. Drake Capt. of the Thomas, Tho. Seely Capt. of the Minion; --
Baily Capt. of the Bark Talbot; Rob. Cross Capt. of the Bark Bond; Geo.
Fortescute Capt. of the Bark Bonner; Edw. Careless Capt. of the Hope; Jo. Erizo
Capt. of the White-Lyon; Tho. Moon Capt. of the Francis; Jo. Rivers Capt. of
the Vantage; Jo. Vaughan Capt. of the Drake; Jo. Varney Capt. of the George;
Jo. Martin Capt. of the Benjamin; Edw. Gilman Capt. of the Skout; Rich. Haukins
Capt. of the Galliot, called the Duck, and -- Bitfield Capt. of the Swallow.

We departed the 14. Sept. and being on that part of the Coast of Spain, called
the Moors, we espied some Ships; The General sent the Vice Admiral to see what
they were; they being Frenchmen bound homewards with Salt, on sight thereof
deserted most of their Ships, and our General having a fancy for one of them,
called the Drake, took her along with him, but paid for her at his return: The
rest were dismissed. Afterward putting off to Sea we met with more French
Ships, returning with Newland Fish, whom our General, after speech with them
dismissed, without doing them any hurt. The next day we descried another Ship
of 240 Tun, and Mr. Carleil Lieut. Genesis took her; the Admiral coming up, the
Master and principal Men of her were examined apart, and she was found to
belong to Spain, tho most of the Seamen belonged to St. John de Luce; This Ship
was laden with Newland Fish, (we call it Poor John) which was distributed
amongst our Ships.

Two days after we put in at the Isles of Bayon, the winds crossing us, and
anchored. But the General ordered all the Pinnaces and Ship-Boats to be manned,
and every man to be furnished with sit Arms; which done, the General went into
his Galley rowing toward the City of Bayon with intent to surprise it; but we
were met by an English Merchant, sent from the Governor to discover us; after
our General had spoke with him, he sent Capt. Sampson with him to the Governor,
desiring to be resolved of 2 Points: To wit, whether there were Wars between
Spain and England? And, why our Merchants were arrested. Our General with
advice of the Lieut. Genesis purposed to get as near the City as they could, that
upon Capt. Sampsons return, if need were, they might make a sudden attempt
before it were dark.

Capt. Sampson returned with this answer, That the Governor said he knew of no
Wars; And as for the stay of the Merchants, that it was the Kings pleasure, but
with no intent to injure them, and that afterward by the Kings Order they were
discharged, for confirmation of which he sent such Merchants as were in Town of
our own Nation: Upon which it was advised, that night to land our Force. The
Governor sent us some refreshment. About midnight a Storm arising, we went
aboard, and before we reached our Fleet, several of our Ships were driven from
their Anchor Holds, of which one was driven back to England, but all the rest
came up to us again. The Storm lasted three days, which being over our Lieut.
Genesis was sent with his and 3 other Ships to Vigo, where he took many Boats, and
some Carvels, laden with things of small Value, mostly Household Stuff, and
among the rest he found one Boat laden with the principal Church-Stuff of the
High-Church of Vigo, where also was their great Cross of Silver, of embossed
Work, double gilt all over. All we had in this place amounted to 30000 Ducats.
The next day the whole Fleet went up to a Harbor above Vigo, where the Lieut.
Genesis stayed our coming. In the mean time the Governor of Galisia had raised
2000 Foot, and 300 Horse, and marched from Bayon to this place, and sent to
parley with our General, which was granted; at their meeting it was agreed, that
we should have Water and other Necessaries, paying for the same.

Afterward we departed for the Canaries; and fell with Palma with purpose to
have landed there, but by reason of the many Guns, that were planted there,
which were discharged upon us, and other inconveniences, we were forced to
alter our Resolution, and determined to land in the Isle of Ferro; and when we
had landed 1000 Men there, and stayed two days, the Inhabitants accompanied
with an Englishman, came to us, declaring their State to be so poor, that they
were ready to starve; which was not untrue; and therefore that night we put to
Sea again.

Nov. 13. We fell with Cape Blancke, and put into the Bay, where were some
French Men of War, whom we entertained courteously, and afterward departed to
the Isles of Cape Verde, and Nov. 16. we saw the Island of St. Jago, and in the
Evening anchored the Fleet between Play or Prdie and St. Jago, and landed 1000
Men under the leading of the Lieut. General, who kept us marching till we came
to a convenient Plain, and when we were all gathered there, he thought it best
to make no attempt till day; after we had taken a little respite, he divided
the Army into three Parts. By that time we were well ranged daylight appeared,
and having advanced hard by the Wall, and seeing no Enemy to resist, the Lieut.
Genesis ordered Capt. Sampson and Capt. Barton with 30 shot apiece, to enter the
Town, which stood in the Valley under us, and after them was sent St. Georges
Cross to be placed toward the Sea, to give advertisement to our Fleet; and
that day, being Nov. 17. all the great Ordnance about the Town, being above 50
Pieces was shot off in honor of our Queens Coronation day. In the mean while
the Lieut. Genesis stayed upon the Hill with most of his Forces till the Town was
quartered out for lodging the Army, which done every Captain took his own
Quarter, and in the evening kept susficient Guard to prevent danger. Here we
stayed 14 days taking such spoils as the place afforded, but found no Treasure.

The Situation of St. Jago is in Form like to a Triangle, having on the East
and West sides 2 Rocky Mountains, on the top of which were built some
Fortifications; one the South side is the Main Sea, and on the North a Valley
between the aforesaid Mountains, the Valley and Town grow very narrow between
the 2 Clifts. In the midst of the Valley comes down a Brook of fresh Water,
which hard by the Sea makes a Pond very convenient for Watering. The Valley at
the Towns End is wholly converted into Gardens, and Orchards, wherein are
diverse sorts of Herbs, Fruits and Trees, among which are the Cocoes and
Plantens; The Cocoes have a hard shell and green Husk over it, bigger than a
man's 2 Fists; of the shell drinking Cups are made, within this shell is a white
Rine resembling the White of an Egg when it is hard boiled, and within that a
Water whitish and clear, about a half Pint, which are very cool, and as some
say restorative. The Planten grows in Cods like to Beans, but bigger, and
when it is ripe, the meat of it becomes yellow, and is very pleasant.

While we abode here a Portugal came hither with a Flag of Truce, to whom Capt.
Sampson and Goring were sent; as they came to him, he asked of what Nation they
were, and being told, he asked if there were Wars between England and Spain,
they answered, our General could best satisfy him in that, and proffered him
safe conduct if he would go to him; but he refused, pretending he was not sent
by his Governor. Then they told him, that if his Governor would consult his own
or his Countries good, his best course were to present himself to our General,
Sir Fancis Drake, whereby he might assuredly find favor, otherwise within 3
days we would march over the Land, and prosecute them with Fire and Sword.

Nov. 24. The Genesis Lieut. Genesis with 600 Men marched to Sancto Domingo, a
Village 12 Miles within the Land, where the Governor, Bishop, and better sort
lodged but found it abandoned.

After we had stayed a while, we marched homewards; as we were on our way, we
saw the Enemy both Horse and Foot, though not of such Force as to encounter us.

Nov. 26. Our General ordered the Army to be embarked into their Ships, and
Capt. Goring and Lieut. Tucker, with 100 Foot were ordered to make a stand in
the Market place, till our Forces were all embarked, the Vice Admiral waiting
to take them aboard. And also our General ordered Capt. Sampson with a Party to
seek out such Munition as was hidden in the ground at the Town of Pray, having
been promised to be showed it by a Prisoner taken the day before. When they
came thither, the Prisoner failed of his promise; and they searching all
suspected places, found a Piece of Ordnance of Iron, and another of Brass. In
the afternoon our General anchored the Fleet before Pray, and went ashore, and
caused us burn the Town, and afterward embarked the same night, and put off
to Sea Southwest.

Before our departure from St. Jago the Genesis administered the Oath of Supremacy
to the Soldiers, as also an Oath for every man to do his utmost for the
service of the Action, and to obey the Orders of the Genesis and his Officers.

All the time of our being here none of the Spaniards came near us: the cause
of which, we conjecture, was the fresh remembrance of Injuries they had done
some of our Countrymen, by reason whereof we left tokens of our discontent.

From hence we put over to the West -Indies, and in our way were afflicted with
a grievous distemper, whereof above 300 died in a few days: This sickness
seized our People, with extreme heat and a burning Ague; and those that
escaped, suffered a great diminution in their strength and wits. In 18 days
space we had sight of the Island of Dominica, which is inhabited by a savage
People, who go all naked, their Skin is colored with paint of a reddish
Tawney; personable and strong men; they admit little converse with the
Spaniards; yet they used us very kindly, helping us with necessaries; they
brought us store of Tobacco, as also a kind of Bread, called Cassado, very
white and savory, made of the Roots of Cassania; for which we gave them Glass,
colored Beads, etc.

From hence we went to the Westwards of St. Christophers Island, where we spent
some days of Christmas, but could see no Inhabitants. Here it was unanimously
resolved, to proceed to Hispaniola. And by the way we met a small Frigate, bound
thither, which we took, and having examined the Men, one of them informed us,
that it was a barren Haven, and the Land well fortified with a Castle, so that
we could not land within 10 Miles of the City; to which place he promised to
conduct us.

Hereupon we went on all this night in our Voyage, and the General put himself
into the Bark Francis, as Admiral, and in the Morning, we came to the aforesaid
place, 10 Miles Westward of Domingo. When we were landed, our General returned
to his Fleet, committing the Charge of us to the Lieut. Genesis We marched at 8 a
Clock, and at Noon we approached the Town, where those of the better sort,
about 150 Horse, began to present themselves, but we so played upon them with
our small shot, that they soon retreated, so that we had leave to proceed
toward the two Gates of the Town, that were next the Sea. They had manned them
both, and planted their Ordnance, and also some Troops of small shot in
Ambuscado by the way side. We divided our whole Force, being 1200, to attack
both the Gates.

Their Ordnance was no sooner discharged on us, doing but small execution, but
our Lieut. Genesis advanced with all speed, to prevent their recharging, and
notwithstanding their Ambuscadoes, we quickly entered the Gates, and forthwith
repaired to a spacious Square before the great Church; whither also came Capt.
Powel with the other Party. This place we fortified and stayed here all day.
After Midnight they that were in the Castle hearing us at the Gates, forsook
it, some flying others taken Prisoners.

Next day we quartered through the Town, and kept this Town a Month. One day as
we stayed here, the Genesis sent on Message to the Spaniards a Negroe Boy, with a
Flag of White; this Boy meeting unhappily with some Spaniards, they struck him
through the Body with one of the Horsemen staves; the Boy notwithstanding
returned to our General, and after he had declared it to him, died forthwith in
his presence. Whereat our General was so incensed, that he caused two Friars,
then Prisoners, to be led out to the same place and hanged, and also dispatched
a Messenger to the Spaniards, declaring that unless the Party who had killed
the Boy were delivered up, every day 2 Prisoners should be hanged so long as
any were left. Whereupon the day following, he was brought to the Towns End to
be delivered up, but our General ordered them to dispatch him: which they did.

During our abode here many Treaties past between them and us for Ransom of
their City, but upon disagreement, all the morning we fired the outmost houses,
which was hard to perform, they being strong stone Houses; and tho for 14 days
20 Mariners spent the whole forenoon in firing Houses, yet not one third part
of the Town was consumed, so that in end being weary of this, we were content
to accept of 25000 Ducats (5 s. 6. d. per Ducket) as a Ransom for the rest of
the Town. I cannot omit the relation of a notable instance of the insatiable
ambition of the Spanish King: As we entered his House there, over against us we
spied a large Scutcheon, the Kings Arms; in the lower part thereof is described
the Globe of the Earth, and a Horse standing, his hinder part within the Globe,
and his forepart without, lifting up as it were to leap, with this Motto: Non
sufficit Orbis, The World is not enough. Which some of the wiser Spaniards,
when they were treating with us, were even ashamed of.

Now tho this is naturally a rich Place yet we had no Treasure here. The reason
is, because the Indians were long ago consumed by the Spaniards Tyranny, and
for lack of People to work, the Golden and Silver Mines are quite given over,
instead thereof using Copper. Their Chief Trade consists of Sugar, Ginger,
and Hides of Oxen and Kine, bred here in infinite Numbers and of vast bigness.
Here also we had Plenty of strong Wine, sweet Oil, Vinegar, Olives, Excellent
Wheat Meal packed up in Wine Pipes, Woollen and Linen Cloth, Silks, etc. all
which were brought out of Spain. We found but little Plate, because they use
much China Wair.

Hence we put over to the Main Land, and came in sight of Cartagena, standing
hard by the Sea. The Harbor Mouth lies 3 Miles Westward from the Town, which we
entered about 3 a Clock in the Afternoon. In the Evening we landed near the
Harbor Mouth, under the Leading of our Lieut. Genesis and afterward about
Midnight marched forwards easily, keeping close by the Sea side. But as we came
within 2 Miles of the Town, their Horsemen met us, and taking the Alarm,
retired upon the first Volley of our shot.

At this time we heard some Pieces of Artillery discharged, with small shot
toward the Harbor, whereby we understood, that, according to our Generals
order the Night before, the Vice Admiral, with Captain Venner, and White, and
Crass etc. with Boats and Pinnaces did attacque the little Fort on the Entry of
the inner Haven, though to small purpose. In which attempt the Vice Admiral had
the Rudder of his Skiff shot through.

The Troops being now in their March half a Mile this side the Town, the Ground
grew straight having the Main Sea on one side, and the Harbor on the other.
This straight was fortifyed with a stone Wall, and Ditch. There was only so
much unwalled, as might serve for passage, and that was well Barricado'd. This
Wall had 6 great Pieces planted on it, which shot directly on our Front. On the
inner side of the Straight, they had brought 2 Galleys to the Shore, wherein
they placed 11 Pieces of Ordnance and 400 small shot, which Flanked our coming
on, and on the Land side in the Guard only of this place 300 shot and Pikes.
They discharged many shot both great and small, but our Lieut. Genesis approached
by the lowest ground, so that most of their shot was in vain; he also forbid us
to shoot till we were come to the Wall side. The first place we came to was the
Barricado's, where we discharged our shot just on our Enemies Faces, and joined
with them, and made them quickly retire; Our Lieut. Genesis slew the Chief Ensign
Bearer of the Spaniards. We followed them into the Town, and won the Mercate
place. At every Streets End they had made Barricado's, but we quickly took them
with small loss. They had set Indians in several corners with poisoned Arrows;
they had also stuck small sticks sharply pointed, and poisoned, in the ground
in our way; but we coming close by the shore shunned most of them.

We stayed here 6 Weeks, and the Sickness aforesaid still continued; Few
escaping, and those that did escape, scarce ever recovered their strength, or
their wits; so that when any spoke foolishly, it was usual to say he had been
sick of a Calenture; The cause of it was supposed to be the Evening Air (they
term it La Serena) which they say produces this distemper to any then abroad
who is not a Native. By reason hereof we gave over our design for Nombre de
Dios and Panama, where all the Treasure was, and thought of returning home.

While we were here one day our Watch espied 2 small Barks at Sea making
toward the Harbor; Whereupon Capt. Moon and Varney with others embarked
themselves in 2 Pinnaces; that they might take them before they knew of our
being there; but they having notice of it ran themselves ashore, and the men
hid themselves in Bushes: Our men immediately boarded them, and were suddenly
shot at by the Spaniards out of the Bushes; whereby Capt. Varney died
presently, and Capt. Moon died of his Wounds some days after; and so we
returned disappointed, having had but few men, far inferior to them in Number.

In this time diverse Courtesies past between the Spaniards and us, and among
others, the Governor, and Bishop of Cartagena with others came to visit our
General.

We began to fire this City as we had done others, but at last they ransomed it
for 110000 Ducats. A far greater Ransom than Domingo, because it is a Place of
greater Traffic (whereas the other is chiefly inhabited by Lawyers and
Gentlemen, being the chiefest Court of Judicature of the Islands about it.) Yet
having warning of our coming they had carried away their Treasure and principal
Substance. The Ransom aforesaid being only mentioned for the Town, on payment
thereof we left it, and drew part of our Soldiers into the Abbey a quarter of a
Mile below the Town, on the Harbor. Whereupon they offered us a Ransom for the
Abbey and the Castle on the Mouth of the Harbor; and when we asked alike for
both; they proffered us 1000 Crowns for the Abbey, and to dispose of the Castle
as we pleased; and therefore we delivered them the Abbey, and blew up the
Castle, and so departed to our Ships, which in the mean while were making all
preparations for their Voyage. This Island is very fruitful, bearing many
pleasant Fruits; it is but 2 or 3 Miles about. After 6 Weeks stay here we put
to Sea, and 2 or 3 days after our Ship we had taken at St. Domingo, fell into a
great leak, and lost Company of us; but next Morning our General missing her
cast about, and at last found her in great distress: whereupon we returned to
Cartagena, where she was unladed, and her Goods and Men disposed in other
Ships: after which we departed, and arrived at Cape St. Anthony, and finding no
Water there, we put to Sea; but were forced to return; and then our scarcity of
Water being greater we were more diligent in seeking after it, and had it in
abundance: In taking in of which our General wrought as hard as the meanest of
his Company, to his unspeakable Praise. After 3 days we departed, and touched
no where, but coasted along Florida, and May 28. we saw a place, on the Shore
built like a Beacon in 30 degrees. We manned our Pinnaces, and went ashore, and
marched up the River side, to see what place the Enemy held, our General
marched with the Companies, the Lieut. Genesis led the Vantguard, and when we had
gone a Mile, we saw a Fort on the other side the River, built by the Spaniards,
and a little Town without Walls 3 Miles above it. We prepared Ordnance for the
Battery, and about Evening our Lieut. Genesis shot off a Piece, which stroke
through their Ensign. In the Night the Lieut. Genesis took a little Rowing Skiff,
and 12 men well Armed, as Capt. Morgan, Sampson, and others, to view what Guard
the Enemy kept; the Enemy seeng him come, took the Alarm, and being fearful,
that all our Force was coming, abandoned the Place when they had shot off some
Pieces. Whereof a Frenchman (a Prisoner) informed us; Thereupon our Genesis and
Lieut. Genesis with some Soldiers, put over to the Fort. In our approach some
that stayed behind shot off 2 Pieces; yet we entered, finding no man there. We
found here 14 great Pieces of Brass Ordnance, and of Money to the Value of 2000
l. Next day we essayed to go to the Town, but could not by reason of Rivers and
broken ground, and therefore were forced to go up the River in our Pinnaces.
When we approached the Land, they discharged some shot on us, and presently
withdrew. And the Sergeant Major finding one of their Horses ready, mounted,
and followed the Chase, and outrunning his Company he was shot through the
Head, and afterward stabbed in several parts of his Body by others, to our
great Grief. In this Place, called St. Augustine, the King kept 150 Soldiers,
and at St. Helena, 12 Miles Northward the same number, to keep other Nations
from inhabiting any part of that Coast. Here it was resolved to assault St.
Helena, and then to seek out our Countrymen in Virginia, in their Plantation
distant thence 6 degrees. Northwards. But when we came by St. Helena, the Shoals
appearing dangerous, and we having no Pilot that would undertake to guide us,
durst not hazard in, but coasted along, and June 9th. on sight of a great Fire,
the General sent his Skiff to the shore, where they found some Englishmen, and
brought them aboard, who directed us to their Port. But some of our Ships being
of great draught, we anchored all two Miles from the shore. Our General wrote
to Mr. Ralph Lane the English Governor, showing how ready he was to supply
their Necessities. Next day Mr. Lane with others coming to him, our Capt.
proffered either to leave a Ship, a Pinnace, and some Boats, with sufficient
Masters and Mariners, with a Months Victuals to stay and make further discovery
of the Country, and so much, as would bring them into England after such time,
if they thought fit; Or if they desired to return into England now, he would
give them Passage; they accepted the former. Whereupon the Ship being received
into Charge by some of their own Company, before they had received their
Provision a storm arose, and continued 3 days, which put all our Fleet in
disorder, besides the loss of Anchors, etc. and that Ship was driven quite
away, and never saw us again till we came to England, with several other losses
Notwithstanding our General proffered them another Ship, tho not so good as the
other, nor the same Provision. Whereupon Mr. Lane, requested our General, that
they might have passage for England; which being granted, and the rest sent for
out of the Country, and shipped, we departed that Coast June 18. and arrived
safely at Plymouth, July 28. 1586.

The total Value of what we got in this Voyage was 60000 l. whereof the
Companies that traveled in the Voyage were to have 20000 l. the Adventurers
the other 40000.

We lost 750 Men in the Voyage.

The Men of note that died were, Capt. Powel, Capt. Varney, Capt. Moon, Capt.
Fortescute, Capt. Bigges, Capt. Cecil, Capt. Hannam, Capt. Greenfield: Tho.
Tucker, Alex. Starkey, Mr. Escot, Mr. Waterhouse, Lieutenants: Mr. Nicholas
Winter, Mr. Alex. Carleil, Mr. Rob. Alexander, Mr. Scroope, Mr. Ja. Dier, Mr.
Peter Duke, with some others.

The Ordnance gotten in all were 240. whereof 203 were Brass, the rest Iron,
and were found in these places;

In St. Jago, 53 Pieces.

In St. Domingo 80, whereof was very much great Ordnance, as Whole Cannon,
Demi-Cannon, Culverins, etc.

In Cartagena 63, and good store of the greater sort.

In the Fort of St. Augustine 14 Pieces; the rest was Iron Ordnance, of which
the most part was gotten at St. Domingo, the rest at Cartagena.

A short and true RELATION of another Voyage, Made by Sir Francis Drake, and
others to the West Indies.
THis Worthy Person, accompanied with those here mentioned undertook this
Voyage:

Sir Francis Drake, Sir Jo. Hawkins Chief Generals, Sir Tho. Baskerfield
Coroner General, Sir Nich. Clifford Lieut. Genesis Capt. Arnold Baskerfield Serj.
Maj. Capt. Nich. Baskerfield, Capt. Barkley, Capt. Grinstone, Capt. Rush, Capt.
Boswell, Capt. Platt, Capt. Chichester, Capt. Stanton, Capt. Fenton.

In the 37. Year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Aug. 28. 1595. We embarked at
Plymouth; thence we sailed toward the Grand Canadoes, and Sept. 6. we espied a
French Man of War, in the Northern Cape, whom we overtook.

Sept. 9. We espied 20 French Men of War, who chased us, but could not fetch us
up, and therefore left us.

Sept. 25. We descried 2 Islands, Hamseroth, and Forta-Fontura, both standing
W. and by S. in 28 degrees. distant one from the other, 4 or 5 Leagues, and from
the Grand Canadoes 10 Leagues.

Sept. 26. We anchored in that part of Canadoes otherwise called, St. John
Decrus, where we endeavored to get to Land in small Boats, but the Enemy
knowing our design, entrenched themselves at the place where we should have
landed, discharging their great and small shot from the Town and Castle,
forcing us to retire with loss of men, the Enemy being near 400.

The same day we departed to a Place where we watered; it lies W. and by N. of
this Town. The Inhabitants of it are Savages; and some of our Men straggling
here were slain, and others bitten with Dogs, they keep on purpose to destroy
strangers. This Island yields much Canadoe Wine, diverse sorts of Grain, Conies
and Partridges. There is another Island (20 Leagues from this) called the
Tenereffe a very high Land.

Sept. 28. We departed toward the West Indies, taking our course S. W. and by
W. on the 29. we sailed S. W. and by S. the 30. S. W. the first of October W.
and by S. the 13. W. in the height of 16 degrees.

The 25 of this Month, the Hope and Adventure fell foul on each other, about
ten at Night, they of the Adventure were forced to cut their Misson, and throw
it overboard.

October. 27. We espied Martinino, an Island inhabited by a barbarous People,
called Canibals; 10 Miles from this Island is another, called Dominica, where
is much Tobacco; the people traffiqued with us in exchange for their Tobacco.
The Weapons they use are Bows and Arrows, made of Reeds, with sharp Pieces of
Braseil on the ends; they wear their Hair long, cut round by their Shoulders.
October. 30. we came to Gordelowpa (distant from this ten Leagues) where are many
Rivers issuing from the Mountains with great force into the Sea. From whence we
sailed toward the River Della-Hatch, N. W. and by N. and Nov. 7. we descried
three Islands of the Trigonies, viz. Mononalla, Rotmido, and Savoa. Nov. 10. we
set sail for John de Portrizo, W. and by N.

These Islands (belong to Virginia) in some of their Harbors 1000 Ships may
ride at Anchor. Novem. 12. we Anchored within 4 Miles of Portrizo, against a
great Fort, where was placed a Piece of Ordnance, which plied us diverse times
with shot. This day Sir John Hawkins died; The same night also (as Sir Francis
Drake, Sir Thomas Baskerfield, and others sat at supper,) Sir Nicholas
Clifford, Capt. Stratford, and Mr. Brut Brown, were wounded with the same
Piece of Ordnance from the Fort; and as Sir Francis Drake was drinking a Cup of
Beer, his Stool was struck from under him, but he received no hurt; Sr.
Nicholas Clifford died instantly of his Wounds. The same night also we went
against the Town, and Anchored.

Nov. 13. Our General called a Council. Next Night 500 Men went with Shot and
Fireworks to burn the 5 Men of War, which rode within the Harbor, one of which
held 400 Tun, the rest smaller. In this Ship was planted much Ordnance, besides
small shot, which played on our Men, and also great store of shot from the
shore. Tho we were no Gainers by this assault, as having lost a Ship and
several Men, yet it was a valiant attempt. All those that were in that great
Ship were slain and drowned save 4. we took up: They told us, that by reason
they had notice of our coming our design was marred: they told us also, that
this Town had in it 3000000 of the King of Spains Treasure: and that they kept
our Men they had taken in the Little Francis, whereupon our General wrote to
the Governor to use them civilly. This Town stands on a small Island,
encompassed with the Sea on one side, and a great. River on the other.

Nov. 15. Sir Jo. Hawkins, and Sir Nich. Clifford were thrown over Board: the
same day we espied a Spanish Carvel, coming toward St. Jo. de Portricho, and
our General sent off some men to take her, but those in the Castle perceiving
it shot off a Piece, whereby they had warning, and ran ashore. Nov. 16. We
departed thence, and sailing 36 Leagues, came to St. Jermans Bay: there we
landed some Companies to Guard the Carpenters that built out Pinnaces. Near
this is a House, called an Ingeneroide, where Sugar is made. This day Captain
Brut died.

Nov. 23. John Standly was had before a Court Marshall. Nov. 22. Sir Tho.
Baskerfield took 2 men of this Island a Negroe and Clemeronne: Nov. 24. the
Ship, the John of Frollony of Plymouth, was burnt in the Bay: the same day we
departed for Crusao, distant from St. Jermans 150 Leagues, and stayed but three
or four Hours. Nov. 29. we espied the Main Land, called the West Indies N. N.
E. from us, we sailed along the Coast to Della Hatch, and the same day anchored
within 10 Leagues of it. Dec. 2. We sailed to the Town all that day, and entered
it at one a Clock at Night, the Enemy had Fled, leaving about 12 Soldiers in
the Town, who gave us a Volley, and then all Fled save 2 we took Prisoners.
They had carried all away, so that we found nothing in the Town.

Dec. 3. The Spaniards parlyed with us for a certain Sum to ransom the Town,
and on the 4th, they brought Pearl, etc. but less in value than we compounded
for; our General refused it, and ordered to burn the Town, which was
accordingly done, at our departure. Dec. 16. the Governor came to Parley: our
Men went to seek for Victuals, and met with the Governor. We took more
Prisoners, and found some of their Goods and carried them away. At our
departure we lest the Town all on Fire, save a Religious House not finished,
and another House the Treasury used to be kept in. In it we found some of their
Treasure and Merchandise. This Country yields store of Cattle and Fowl. The
People are Indians and Negroes, they are wild and savage People, (save those
the Spaniards keep in Subjection) and War against the Spaniards. There is a
Mountain 10 Leagues, hence whereon Snow remains constantly. Dec. 19. we came
to Sancta Martha; the Inhabitants had Fled to the Mountains, but we pursued
them into the Woods, and found some Treasure; the same day we took the
Governors Deputy. Dec. 20. we departed, leaving it on Fire; we were told, that
we were within 3 Leagues of a Gold Mine.

On Christmas day we sailed to Nombre de Dios, and on the 27th. anchored
before it; this day the Serj. Major died. We landed our Men a Mile from the
Town, and marched toward it; the Enemy gave us a Bravadoe of shot and fled
into the Woods, their Goods and Treasure being sent before. They had but 3
Pieces of Ordnance, and one of them broke with a shot. We found some Treasure
in the Woods. Our General had notice of the Governors going to Panama, and Sir
Tho. Baskerfield went with 500 Men to surprise him; in this journey we were in
great Hazard of our Lives, we went but 9 Miles, and could get no farther, being
stopped by a Fort the Enemy had on the Top of a Rock through which we behoved to
march; the Passage was so narrow that but one man at once could go up, so that
we were forced to retire with loss. Several both Commanders and Soldiers were
hurt. Returning to Nombre de Dios, we saw it all on Fire, and thereupon hasted
to our Ships. In this March a Pair of Shoes were sold for 30 s. and a Biscuit
Cake for 10 s. our want was so great.

Jan. 5. We departed, and on the 10th. came to Scoday, it is N. and by W. from
Nombre de Dios; the same day we chased a Spanish Frigate, and on the 11th
brought it to our General. The same day our General commanded all our sick Men
to be carried ashore, and to be looked to in best sort we could. Jan. 22. We
departed back toward Nombre de Dios, and came to Porta Vella Jan. 27. on which
day Sir Francis Drake died, whose Death was much lamented. His Interment was
thus: His Corpse being laid in a Coffin of Lead, he was let down into the Sea,
the Trumpets in doleful manner sounding all the while, and all the Cannons in
the Fleet were discharged. We stayed here till Feb. 8. In this Harbor they were
beginning to build Houses again. The day before we departed the Enemy took 6 of
our Men. Feb. 18. we departed hence, we took our course for Gemico North and by
West. Feb. 2. we descried some Islands called Gourdanes, distant from Porta
Vella 200 Leagues, and West from Gemico. To the East they are high Land, to the
West low; we sailed to the Cape of Corenthus; Feb. 27. we passed the Shoals to
the West of this low Land, one of our Ships being in danger, and Mar. 1. we saw
20 of the Kings Men of War, and afterward fought with them 2 Hours, and
worsted them: we plied the Vice Admiral so hard, that if she had not fled, she
had sunk; and another that was with her, her Powder took Fire. Next day we
sailed to Cape St. Anthony, Thirteen of them following us, when they came nigh
us, we sent 2 Ships to them, but they made away. May 4. we came to St. Anthony,
distant from Cape Corenthus 18. Leagues; thence to Havana 80 Leagues; thence to
the Gulf. The same day we saw Cape Florida, N. W. and by N. from us, and
afterward entered the Gulf in Length 100 Leagues, and passed it next night.
March. 9. we past the Barmuthies. April 8. 1596. we came to the Islands of
Flowers and Cores, inhabited by Portugals; here we watered, and in short time
after arrived at England.

A Brief RELATION Of the Spanish Invasion.
TO conclude, we shall give you a Brief account of the defeat of the Spanish
Armado, being this worthy Gentlemen served in Her Majesty's Fleet set out
against it.

The King of Spain being importuned by the Pope, and some English Fugitives to
attempt a conquest of England, entered into consultation about the manner of it:
The Marquess of St. Cruce, who was to command the Armado, and the Prince of
Parma, were for first surprising some Sea Port Town in Holland or Zealand. But
others alleged that it would be easier to seize some Port in England, which
latter was approved of. And in order thereto he set forth the Armado, being in
all 130 Ships, containing 57808 Tun, wherein were 845 Mariners, 19295 Soldiers
and 2088 Galley Slaves: and were provided with 220000 of Bullets and great
Shot, of Powder 4200 Kintals, (each Kintal 100 l. weight) of Lead for Bullets
1000 Kintals, of Match 1200 Kintals, 7000 Muskets, 10000 Halberts and
Partisans, with store of Murdering Pieces, Double Cannon and Field Pieces,
with all other Provisions necessary for accomplishing their design.

The Marquess of Sancta Cruce dying, Don Lodovicos Peros Duke of Medina
Sidonia, was made General in his Place: Joh. Martinez de Richalde was Admiral;
Don Francisco Bovadille Marshall: Don Martin Alcaron was Vicar General for the
Inquisition, attended with 100 Jesuits: Cardinal Allen was appointed
Superintendent of Ecclesiastical Affairs in England. The Prince of Parma also
built flat bottomed Ships in Flanders, for carrying of Horses, with Bridges
fitted to ship and unship the Horses: he set men at work to make the River
navigable from Antwerp to Gaunt and Bridges, and laded 300 Boats with Munition
and Victuals: 200 more not so big as the former lay ready at Newport Haven, and
37 Men of War at Dunkirk, with all other Provisions requisite to carry on the
design.

He had lying near Newport under the Command of Camillo 30 Companies of
Italians, 2 of Walloons, and 8 of Burguignons. At Dyxmew he mustered 80
Companies of Netherlanders, 60 of Spaniards, and 60 of High Dutch, and 700
Fugitive English commanded by Sir William Stanley, who were in great contempt:
Nor was Stanley, nor the Earl of Westmorland and others, who offered their
service, heard, but barred all access and rejected, as Traiters to their
Country. At Conick also he had 4000 and at Watene 900 Horse commanded by the
Marquess of Guast.

To this Land service came the Duke of Pastrana, the King of Spain's supposed
Base Son, the Marquess of Bourgon, one of Duke Ferdinands Sons, with others of
like Quality.

Pope Sixtus Quintus was very forward in this design, dispersing his
Indulgences and Pardons to all that contributed thereto: and promised likewise
to give a Million of Gold, the one half presently, the other when any notable
Haven in England should be won: but with this Proviso, that England should be
held as Feudatory to the Sea of Rome.

Queen Elizabeth hearing of these great Preparations, having first represented
her case to God, and implored his Protection, she provided what force she could.

The Charge of her Navy she committed to Charles Howard of Effingam Lord
Admiral of England: Her Vice Admiral was the Famous Sir Francis Drake, who were
sent to the West of England. She appointed Henry Lord Seimour, second Son to
the Duke of Somerset, to lie upon the Coasts of Flanders with 40 Ships, to
prevent the Prince of Parma's joining his strength with the Armado. She ordered
the Landforces to be mustered, appointing Duilley Earl of Leicester Lieut.
20000. whereof were disposed along the South Coast. She had also 2 Armies; one
consisting of 1000 Horse and 22000 Foot, encamped near the Mouth of the Thames;
where the Enemy purposed to land; the other led by the L. Hunsdon consisting of
34000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, which were to guard her Person.

Arthur Lord Gray, Sir Francis Knolles, Sir Rich Bingham, and Sir Roger
Williams, were appointed to consult for Managing the Land service. They advised
that all commodious landing Places should be manned and fortified; and that the
Trained Bands throughout the Coast shires should meet upon signal given to
hinder the Enemies Landing. And in case they should land, that they should lay
all the Country about Waste, that the Enemy might have no Food but what they
brought from their Ships, and that they should continually busy the Enemy with
Alarms, but not hazard a Battle till greater Force were got together.

Some also suggested that the Papists at home were more to be feared than the
Spaniards abroad; whereupon some of them were imprisoned. Directions also were
sent to the Deputy of Ireland, how to demean himself in this imminent danger.

In the midst of these Preparations, the King of Spain, to cast a mist over her
Majesty's Eyes, importuned for a Peace, and at last prevailed so far, that a
Treaty of Peace was entered upon, our Queen notwithstanding Resolving to treat
with her Sword in her Hand. And in Febr. she sent her Commissioners into
Flanders, to treat with the Prince of Parma, who pretended a Commission for
that effect, but they were delayed from time to time, and when they proposed
any thing, by one pretense or other it was delayed, till at last they heard of
the Spanish Fleets being near England, at which time they, having safe conduct
from the Prince of Parma, were glad to return in safety.

This Armado, which had the Popes special Blessing, in token of its holy
Warfare, had 12 of its Ships called by the names of the 12 Apostles, their
Ships being of such size that they floated like Castles upon the Waves, set
sail May 20. out of the River Taye, steering its course toward the Groin in
Galizia, the Place appointed for assembling, but whilst they were sailing
thither, a storm arose, whereby they were dispersed, several of them were
disabled, besides 3 Portugal Galleys, which were driven on the Coasts of Bayon
in France, and by the valor of one David Guin an English Slave, and the help of
other Slaves were delivered into the hands of the French.

About the same time the English Fleet, in all about 100 Ships, whereof 15 were
Victuallers and 9 Volunteers of Devonshire Gentlemen, hearing that the
Spaniards were ready to sail, set forth of Plymouth, to meet and fight them by
the way, but before they reached the Syllies, they were driven back by tempest
to Plymouth; only some of their Scouts descried some of the Spanish Ships, that
were dispersed.

News being brought that the Spaniards were in distress, the Lord Admiral
Howard taking advantage of the first fair Wind, lanched forth, July 8th, and
bore his Sails almost within sight of the Coast of Spain, purposing to surprise
their Ships; but the Wind suddenly turning South, and he, wisely foreseeing the
disadvantages of his staying there, returned to Plymouth.

At the same time it was confidently reported, that the Spanish Fleet could not
set forth that Year: and our Queen was so confident thereof, that she ordered 4
of her biggest Ships to be brought to Chatham: but our Admiral foreseeing the
hazard of it, wisely retarded it; which was a singular Providence, for the
Spanish Fleet entered the Channel, July 11th, where Anchoring, they sent to the
Prince of Parma to signify their Arrival, and require him in the Kings name to
forward his Charge for that service.

July 20. At noon they were descried by the English; which was a surprizal to
them, most of their Men being ashore. Nevertheless our undaunted Admiral towed
forth such Ships as he could get in readiness into the Sea. When they were got
out, they saw the Spaniards Ships with lofty Towers, in Front like a half Moon:
they seemed to make for Plymouth, but yet steered their course by toward
Calice, the English suffering them to pass by, that they might chase them in
the Rear with a fore-right Wind.

July 21. The English Admiral sent before him a Pinnace to denounce War by
discharging her Ordnance; himself following in the Ark Royal set upon (the
Admiral he thought, but) Alonzo de Leva's Ship, where they had a fierce
Encounter. Soon after Drake, Hawkins, and Forbusher came up, playing with their
Ordnance on the hindmost Squadron of the Enemies, commanded by Rechalde, who
did all he could to stay his Men from flying, till his own Ship battered with
shot with difficulty was drawn into the Main Fleet. At which time the Duke of
Medina gathered together his Fleet, and kept on his intended course toward
Callice, and caused them to gather themselves up close in form of a half Moon.
But our English Admiral having maintained a hot fight for 2 hours, thought it
best to desist the pursuit, there being not above 30 of their Ships come up
yet. In this fight the Katharine a Spanish Ship, being sorely battered, was
taken into the midst of the Fleet to be repaired; And an huge Ship Biscaie of
Don Oquendo's, in which was a great part of the Kings Treasure, was fired by a
Flemish Gunner, for being misused by them; but the Fire was quickly quenched.
All this while the Spaniards declined fighting, walling in the rest with their
strongest Ships, in which posture they made a flying March toward Calice: and
a great Gallion, wherein was Don Pedro de Valdez, Vasquez de Silva, Alenzo de
Saias, and other Noblemen, being battered with English shot, in avoiding it
fell foul of another Ship, whereby she lost her Foremast, and could not keep
up with the rest, and was cast behind. But night coming on, our Admiral past
her, supposing there was nothing left in her, and fearing to lose sight of the
Spaniards, he followed the Lanthorn of the Spaniards, which he thought was
carried, as was appointed, by Sir Francis Drake; but he was pursuing 2 Ships he
thought Spanish, but when he came up to them, he found they were Friends, and
so dismissed them. Yet by this mistake of his the greatest part of the Fleet
wanting his light was forced to lie still so that he and the rest could not
fetch up our Admiral till next day.

July 22th Sir Francis Drake espied the aforesaid Gallion, and sent forth a
Pinnace to command them to yield: Valdez answered that they were 430, and
himself was Don Pedro, and stood on his honor: the other replied if he did not
yield forthwith, he should know Drake was no Dastard; Pedro hearing that it was
Sir Francis Drake, instantly yielded himself, and coming aboard Sir Francis
Ship protested, they would have died, before they had yielded to any save him,
whom Mars and Neptune always attended, and whose civility to the Conquered had
often been experienced. Sir Francis to requite his Complements, placed him at
his own Table, and lodged him in his own Cabine; the rest he sent to Plymouth,
where they remained Prisoners till their Ransom was paid. The same day Michael
de Oquendo Vice Admiral of the Fleet, his Ship was on Fire, the upper part of
it being burnt; but the Gunpowder in the hold not taking Fire, the Ship fell
into the Hands of the English, and was carried in to Plymouth. All this day the
Admiral spent in setting his Fleet in order, appointing every Ship his Station,
commanding them, on pain of Death not to desert it, and sent one to the Prince
of Parma to acquaint him with his Condition.

July 23. early the Spaniards taking the benefit of a Northerly Wind turned
about against the English; but the English being nimbler than they turned
Westwards, and quickly recovered the Wind of them, and all that day battered
those Wooden Castles: The fight was variable, whilst on the one side the
English bravely rescued the London Ships, and on the other the Spaniards; as
stoutly delivered Richalde; most of the Spanish shot flew over the English
without hurting them, but the English never discharged a shot on the Spaniards
but did Execution. The English Admiral would not hazard a fight by grappling
with them, as some had advised, knowing they had a strong Army in the Fleet,
besides the strength of their Ships, which could not but at extreme
disadvantage be boarded. This day besides other remarkable losses the Enemy
sustained, a great Venetian Ship with other Smaller were taken by the English,
and the Spaniards gathered themselves into a round, their greatest Ships
standing outmost to guard the battered Ships.

July 24th, the 4 great Galliasses fought with some English Ships, who galled
the Enemy with their shot: But our Men wanting Powder, the Admiral sent some
Ships to fetch supply. In the mean while it was ordered by a Council of War
that the English Fleet should be divided into 4 Squadrons, and the Admiral was
Chief, Sir Fracnis Drake led the 2d, Capt. Hawkins the 3d, and Capt. Forbusher
the 4th.

July 25th, at the Isle of Wight there was a sharp Encounter. The St. Ann, a
Portugal Gallion was set upon by some English Frigates, to whose rescue came 3
Galliasses, which the Admiral and Lord Tho. Howard charged so that they could
scarce save her. It was reported, that this day the Spanish Admiral was
grievously rent with great Ordnance, and had been near taken, had not 2 Ships
come up to her; after whose coming they set upon the English Admiral, but she
made her escape. The Spanish Admiral sent again to the Prince of Parma to join
his Fleet with them, and send them supply.

July 26. the English Admiral to encourage his Captains bestowed the Order of
Knighthood, on several that had behaved themselves courageously; And it was
resolved by all, that they would no more assail the Enemy till they came to the
Strait of Calice, where the Lord Henry Seimour with his Ships waited their
coming. And so far was this Armado from terrifying the English Coasts, that,
they hired Ships from all parts on their own Charges, and came to our supply;
of whom were, the Earl of Oxford, Northumberland, Cumberland, with several
other Gentlemen.

July 27. the Spanish Fleet setting forward, anchored before Calice, intending
to join with the Prince of Parma's Forces at Dunkirk. The English followed hard
upon them, and cast Anchor within Culvering shot of them, consisting now of 140
Sail, the Lord Hen. Seimour, and Capt. Winter having joined them. From hence
once more the D. of Medina sent to the Prince of Parma, and several of the
Spanish Nobility went ashore, among whom was the Prince of Ascoli the Kings
Base Son who returned no more; his Ship was afterward cast away on the Irish
Coast. The Prince of Parma being by them persuaded, that the Spaniards had the
better, conceived great hopes of his future Advancement: yet his joy was but
short, for the next Evening he had news of the Spaniards bad success. And
indeed he could not in that Juncture assist them; for his Boats leaked, his
Provisions failed, and his Seamen withdrew from him: as also he could not get
out by reason of a considerable Fleet of Dutch well furnished, that lay before
Dunkirk and Newport.

In the mean while Queen Elizabeth ordered the Lord Admiral to take 8 of his
worst Ships, and fill them with Combustible matter, and to charge their Guns
with Bullets, Stones, Chains, etc. which was accordingly done; and on Sunday
July 28. at 2 a Clock in the Morning they were let drive amongst the Spaniards
under the Guidance of Young and Prowse; who having fired their Trains and
returned, such a sudden Thunderclap was given that the Poor Spaniards were
wonderfully amazed: and to avoid this danger had no other Remedy, but to cut
their Cables and drive at Random, where they had several Disasters, some of
them fell foul upon another, others ran aground on the Sands, and some of them
fell into the English's Hands.

In this surprizal the Duke of Medina ordered the whole Fleet to weigh Anchor
to avoid the danger, which done, to return to their Station; and he accordingly
gave a signal to the rest to do it by discharging his great Guns; but in this
Consternation the Warning was heard but by a few, the rest being scattered.

July 29. After this disaster, the Spaniards in the best order they could came
over against Graveling, where the English deprived them of the convenience of
Calice Road, and kept them from supply out of Dunkirk: And Drake and Fenner
incessantly discharged their Guns on them, as also the Lord Admiral and others:
On the other hand the Duke of Medina, Leva, etc. at last got clear of the
Shallows, yet most of their Ships were pitifully torn and shot through, besides
several that were sunk. The Gallion St. Matthew coming to rescue the St. Philip
was together with the other miserably torn with shot by Seimour and Winter; and
afterward driven near Ostend, and at last taken by the Dutch.

Francisco de Toledo, a Colonel over 32 Bands, his Ship proved so leaky, that
he with some others left her; the Ship afterward was taken by the Flushingers.

The Spaniards disappointed of their brave Designs, were now content to defend
themselves, and the Wind turning S. W. they passed Dunkirk, the English
following them close. And the English Admiral dispatched the Lord Henry Seimour
to the Coast of Flanders, to stop the Prince of Parma's coming out, and to join
with the Hollanders there.

July 31. early, the N. W. Wind blew hard, and the Spanish labored to recover
the Narrow Strait, but were driven toward Zealand. The English gave off the
Chase, as seeing them near Ruin. But the Wind turning S. W. and by W. they got
clear of the Shallows, and that Evening called a Council, wherein it was
resolved to return into Spain by the Northern Passage. And thereupon they
directed their Course Northward, and the English followed them to prevent their
landing in Scotland. Yet most thought they would return again; whereupon our
Queen with a Masculine Courage, viewed her Army at Tilbury, and walking through
the Ranks with a Truncheon in her Hand, wonderfully encouraged all of them. But
the Spaniards betook themselves to an absolute Flight, and bended their Course
toward Norway; and being now freed of the English, consulted seriously what to
do: they were tender of the Popes credit, feared the wrath of King Philip; that
the Glory of the Spaniards would be laid in the Dust; The Invincible Armado
became a Scorn, if they returned so into Spain. On the other hand they
considered, that 5000 Soldiers were slain; many maimed; 12 of their greatest
Ships sunk, lost, or taken; their Cables, Masts or Sails, cut, rent and broken;
their Provisions failing, etc. which things considered, they concluded to go
quickly to Spain. And knowing that the King of Scots would not supply them, nor
the King of Norway, they cast all their Horses and Mules over Board, to spare
their fresh Water. And so steering their Course to sail about Cathenes, and the
Coast of Ireland, they steered between the Orcades and the Isles of Far unto
61. degrees. North. Lat. from whence the Duke of Medina, with his best stored
Ships, took Westwards over the Main toward Biscay, and at last arrived in
Spain: where he was deposed from all his Authority, discharged the Court, and
commanded to live private.

The rest of the Ships being 40, fell nearer with the Coast of Ireland, where
many of them were cast away, such as escaped there, some of them were driven
into the Channel, where some of them were taken by the English, others by
Rochel men, and some of them arrived at New Haven in Normandy: So that of 134
Ships that set Sail out of Lisbon only 53 returned into Spain: of the 4
Galliasses of Naples but one: of the 4 Gallions of Portugal but one: of the 91
Gallions and great Hulks from diverse Provinces but 33. In short, they lost in
this Voyage 81 Vessels, 13500 Soldiers, Prisoners taken above 2000: In England
were taken, Don Pedro de Valdez, Don Vasquez de Silva, and Don Alonzo de Says,
and others; In Ireland Don Alonzo de Luzon, and Roderigo de Less, and others;
In Zeland was Don Diego Piementelli: Yea, there was not a Noble Family in
Spain, but in this Expedition lost a Son, Brother, or Kinsman.

In the aftermentioned Wracks above 700 Soldiers and Sailers were cast ashore
on Scotland, who on Intercession of the Prince of Parma, were after a Years
time sent over into Flanders: But more unmercifully were those Dealt with who
were driven into Ireland; some of them being put to death by their old Friends,
the Irish, others by the Command of the Lord Deputy, who feared lest they might
join with the Irish, to disturb the Peace of the Nation. The Remainder being
terrified therewith committed themselves to Sea in their shattered Vessels, and
were many of them swallowed up by the Waves.

Queen Elizabeth lying one Night in her Army at Tilbury, the Lord Treasurer
Burley came thither, and delivered to the Earl of Leicester, the Examination of
Don Pedro, who was taken and brought into England by Sir Francis Drake; which
Examination (says Dr. Sharp) was thus:

Don Pedro being asked by some Lords of Council, what was the Intent of their
coming? answered, What, but to subdue your Nation, and root it out? What (said
the Lords) meant you then to do with the Catholics? We meant (said he) to have
sent them (good Men) directly to Heaven, as you that are Heretics to Hell. But
(said the Lords) what meant you to do with your Whips of Cords and Wire, you
have such store of in your Ships? What, (said he) we meant to whip you
Heretics to death that have assisted my Masters Rebels, and done such
dishonor to our Catholic King and People. But what would you have done (said
they) with their Young Children? They (said he) that were above 7 Years, should
have gone the same Way their Fathers went, and the rest should have lived.
Only, we would have branded them in the Foreheads with the Letter L. for
Lutheran, and reserved them for perpetual Bondage.

This I take God to Witness, (says my Author) I received of these great Lords
as on Examination before the Council, and by their Commandment published it to
the Army.

The next day (says he) the Queen rode through her Army, attended by
Leicester, Essex, and Norris, and diverse other great Lords, where she made an
excellent Oration to her Army, and commanded a Public Fast to be kept.

After this great Deliverance Queen Elizabeth (who ever held ingratitude Base,
Especially toward her Almighty Protector) as she began with Prayer, so she
ended with Praise and Thanksgiving, commanding Public Thanksgiving to be
Celebrated in the Cathedral of St. Paul's, on Sunday Sept. 18. at which time 11.
of the Spanish Ensigns were hung upon the lower Battlement of that Church.

Queen Elizabeth her self on Sunday Sept. 24. came to St. Paul's, and humbling
her self on her Knees, with audible voice she praised God for that Wonderful
Deliverance wrought to Her and her People.

At Southwark Fair also the Spanish Flags were hung upon London Bridge. But the
solemn Day appointed for Thanksgiving through the Nation was Nov. 19. being
Tuesday, which accordingly was observed with great Joy and Praising of God.

This Admirable Deliverance was congratulated by most other Nations, especially
Reformed, and several Learned Men celebrated the same in Verse, among which I
only mention two: The first is that Poem made by Reverend Dr. Beza, which is
this:

STraverat innumeris Hispanus classibus aequor,
Regnis juncturus Sceptra Britanna suis.
Tanti hujus rogitas quae motus causa? superbos
Impulit Ambitio, vexat avaritia.
Quam been te Ambitio mersit vanissima ventus;
Et tumidae tumidos Vos superastis aquae!
Quam been Raptores Orbis totius Iberos
Mersit inexhausti justa vorago Maris!
At tu, cui venti, cui totum militat Aequor,
Regina, O mundi totius una decus:
Sic regnare Deo perge, Ambitione remota,
Prodiga sic opibus perge juvare pios,
Ut te Angli longum, longum Anglis ipsa fruaris,
Quam dilecta bonis, tam metuenda malis.
SPains King with Navies great the Seas bestrew'd.
T'augment with English Crown his Spanish sway.
Ask ye what caused this proud attempt? 'twas lewd
Ambition drove, and Avarice led the way.
It Is well; Ambitions windy puff lies drowned
By Winds and swelling Hearts, by swelling Waves:
It Is well; those Spaniards who the Worlds vast round
Devoured, devouring Sea most justly craves:
But thou, O Queen, for whom Winds, Seas do war,
O thou the Glory of this Worlds wide Mass,
So reign to God still, from Ambition far,
So still with bounteous aids the Good embrace:
That Thou may England long, long England thee enjoy,
Thou terror of all Bad, Thou Good Men's joy.
The other is that made by Mr. Samuel Ward of Ipswich.
OCtogesimus Octavus, Mirabilis annus
Clade Papistarum, Faustus ubique piis.
IN Eighty eight, Spain armed with potent might,
Against our peaceful Land came on to fight:
The Winds and Waves, and Fire in one conspire
To help the English, frustrate Spains desire.
FINIS.

