Vox Populi: OR THE Peoples Claim TO THEIR PARLIAMENTS SITTING, To Redress
Grievances, and Provide for the COMMON SAFETY; BY The known Laws and
Constitutions of the Nation: Humbly Recommended to the KING and Parliament at
their Meeting at OXFORD, the 21th of March.

Rex merito debet Retribuere Legi, quia Lex tribuit ei, facit enim Lex quod
ipse sit Rex. Bracton, lib. 3. c. 9. fol. 107.

The King ought deservedly to give the Law his due, because the Law gave it
him; for the Law makes him a King.

Prove. 22.28. Remove not the Ancient Landmark (or Bound) which thy Fathers
have set. LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle near the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1681.

Vox Populi: OR, The PEOPLES Claim to their PARLIAMENTS Sitting, to Redress
Grievances and to provide for the Common Safety, by the Known Laws and
Constitutions of the Nation.
Recommended to the KING and PARLIAMENT at their meeting at Oxford, etc.
SInce the Wonderful Discovery and undeniable Confirmation of that horrid
Popish Plot which designed so much ruin and mischief to these Nations, in all
things both Civil and Sacred, and the unanimous Sense and Censure of so many
Parliaments upon it, together with so many public Acts of Justice upon so many
of the Traitors; it was comfortably hoped before thirty Months should have past
over after the Detection thereof, some effectual Remedies might have been
applied to prevent the further attempts of the Papists upon us, and better to
have secured the Protestants in their Religion, Lives and Propertyes. But by
sad experience we have found, that notwithstanding the Vigorous Endeavors of
three of our Parliaments to provide proper and wholesome Laws to Answer both
ends: Yet so prevalent has this Interest been, under so potent a head the D. of
Y. as to stifle in the Birth all those hopeful Parliament-Endeavours; by those
many Surprising and Astonishing Prorogations and Dissolutions which they have
procured, whereby our fears and Dangers have Manifestly increased, and their
Spirits heightened and encouraged to renew and Multiply fresh Plottings and
Designs upon us.

But that our approaching Parliament may be more successeful for our Relief
before it be too late, by being permitted to sit to Redress our Grievances, and
to perfect those Good Bills which have been prepared by the former Parliaments
to this purpose; these following Common Law Maxims respecting King and
Parliament, and the Common and Statute Laws themselves (to prevent such
unnatural Disappointments and Mischiefs) providing for the sitting of
Parliaments till Grievances be redressed, and public Safety secured and
provided for, are tendered to consideration.

Some known Maxims taken out of the Law Books.
1. Respecting the King.
That the Kings of England can do nothing as Kings but what of right they ought
to do.

That the King can do no wrong, nor can he dye.

That the Kings Prerogative and the Subjects Liberty are determined by Law.

That the King has no Power but what the Law gives him.

That the King is so called from Ruling well, Rex a been Regendo [viz.
according to Law] Because he is a King whilst he Rules well, but a Tyrant when
he Oppresses.

That Kings of England never appear more in their glory, splendour and Majestic
Sovereignty, than in Parliaments.

That the Prerogative of the King cannot do wrong, nor be a Warrant to do wrong
to any. Plowd. Comment. fol. 246.

2. Respecting the Parliament.
That Parliaments constitute and are laid in the Essence of the Government.

That a Parliament is that to the Commonwealth which the Soul is to the Body,
which is only able to apprehend and understand the symptoms of all Diseases
which threaten the Body politic.

That a Parliament is the Bulwark of our Liberty, the boundary which keeps us
from the Innundation of Tyrannical Power, Arbitrary and unbounded
Will-Government.

That Parliaments do make new and abrogate Old Laws, Reform Grievances in the
Commonwealth, settle the Succession, grant subsidies; And in sum, may be
called the great Physician of the Kingdom:



From whence it appears and is self evident if Parliaments are so absolutely
necessary in this our constitution, That they must then have their certain
stationary times of Session, and continuance, for providing Laws, essentially
necessary for the being, as well as the well being of the People; and
Redressing all public Greivances, either by the want of Laws, or of the undue
Execution of them in being, or otherwise: And suitable hereunto are those
Provisions made by the Wisdom of our Ancestors as recorded by them both in the
Common and Statute Law:

First, What we find hereof in the Common Law.

The Common Law (says my Lord Coke) is that which is founded in the immutable
Law and light of Nature, Coke lib. 7. Rep. p. 12, 13.
agreeable to the Law of God, requiring Order, Government, Subjection and
Protection, etc. Containing ancient usages, Warrented by Holy Scripture, and
because it is generally given to all, it is therefore called Common.

And further says, Lib. 9. Preface.
That in the Book called The Mirror of Justice appears the whole frame of the
ancient common Laws of this Realm from the time of K. Arthur, 516. till near
the Conquest; which Treats also of the Officers as well as the diversity and
Distinction of the Courts of Justice ( which are Officinae Legis) and
particularly of the High Court of Parliament by the name of Council General or
Parliament; so called from Parler-la-ment, speaking judicially his mind: And
amongst others gives us the following Law of King Alfred who Reigned about 880.

Le Roy Alfred Ordeigna pur usage perpetuel que a deux foits per lan ou plus
sovene pur mistier in temps de peace se Assembler a Londres, Mirror of Justice,
chapter 1. Sect. 3.
pur Parliamenter surle guidement del people de dieu coment gents soy garderent
de pechers, viverent in quiet, receiverent droit per certain usages et saints
Judgments.

King Alfred Ordains for a usage perpetual, that twice a year or oftener if
need be, in time of peace, they shall Assemble themselves at London, to Treat
in Parliament of the Government of the People of God, how they should keep
themselves from Offenses, should live in quiet, and should receive right by
certain Laws and holy Judgments.

And thus (says my Lord Coke) you have a Statute of K. Ld. Cokes Comment upon
it.
Alfred as well concerning the holding of this Court of Parliament twice every
year at the City of London, as to manifest the threefold end of this great and
Honorable Assembly of Estates; As,

First, That the Subject might be kept from offending; that is, that Offenses
might be prevented both by good and provident Laws, and by the due Execution
thereof.

Secondly, That men might live safely and in quiet.

Thirdly, That all men might receive Justice by certain Laws and holy
Judgments; that is, to the end that Justice might be the better administered,
that Questions and Defects in Laws might be by the High Court of Parliament
planed, reduced to certainty and adjudged. And further tells us that this Court
being the most Supreme Court of this Realm, is a part of the frame of the
Common Laws, and in some cases does proceed Legally, according to the ordinary
course of the Common Law, as it appears, 39 E. 3. f. Coke Inst. chapter 29. fol.
5. To be short, of this Court it is truly said, Si vetestatem spectes est
antiquissima, si dignitatem est honoratissima, si jurisdictionem est
capacissima. If you regard Antiquity, it is the most Ancient, if Dignity the
most Honorable, if Jurisdiction the most Sovereign.

And where question has been made whether this Court continued during the
Heptarchy, let the Records themselves make answer, of which he gives diverse
Instances in the times of King Ine, Offa, Ethelbert. After the Heptarchy, K.
Edward Son of Alfred, K. Ethelston, Edgar, Ethelred, Edmond, Canutus. All which
(he says) and many more are extant and publicly known; proving by diverse
arguments, that there were Parliaments, unto which the Knights and Burgesses
were summoned both before, in, and after the Reign of the Conqueror, till Hen.
3. time; and for your further satisfaction herein, see 4 E. 3.25. 49 Ed. 3.22,
23, 11 H. 4.2. Litl. lib. 2. c. 10.

Whereby we may understand,

1. That Parliaments are part of the frame of the Common Law, [which is laid in
the Law and Light of Nature, right Reason and Scripture.]

2. That according to this Moral Law of Equity and Righteousness, Parliaments
ought frequently to meet for the common peace, safety and benefit of the
People, and support of the Government.

3. That Parliaments have been all along esteemed an essential part of the
Government, as being the most ancient, honorable and Sovereign Court in the
Nation, who are frequently and perpetually to sit, for the making and
abolishing Laws, Redressing of Grievances, and see to the due administration of
Justice.

4. That as to the place of Meeting, it was to be at London the Capital City,
the Eye and Heart of the Nation, as being not only the Regal Seat, but the
principal place of Judicature, and residence of the chief Officers, and Courts
of Justice, where also the Records are kept, as well as the principal place of
Commerce and Concourse in the Nation, and to which the People may have the best
recourse, and where they may find the best accommodation.

5. The Antiquity of Parliaments in this Nation, which have been so ancient
that no Record can give any account of their Beginning, my Lord Coke thus
tracing them from the Briteans, through the Saxons, Danes and Normans to our
days.

So that not to suffer Parliaments to sit to answer the great ends for which
they were Instituted, is expressly contrary to the Common Law, and so
consequently of the Law of God as well as the Law of Nature, and thereby
Violence is offered to the Government it self, and Infringement of the Peoples
sundamental Rights and Liberties.

Secondly, What we find hereof in the Statute Law.
The Statute Laws are Acts of Parliament which are (or ought to be) only
Declaratory of the Common Law, which as you have heard is founded upon right
Reason and Scripture; for we are told, that if any thing is enacted contrary
thereto, it is void and null: As Coke Inst. l. 2. c. 29. f. 15. Finch p. 3. 28
H. 8. c. 27. Doct. and Stud.

The first of these Statutes which require the frequent Meeting and Sitting of
Parliaments, agreeable to the Common Law, we find to be in the time of Ed. 3.
viz. 4 Ed. 3. and chapter 14. In these words:

" Item it is accorded that a Parliament shall be holden every Year once, or
more often if need be.

The next is in the 36 of the same K. Ed. 3. c. 10. viz.

Item, For the maintenance of the said Articles and Statutes, and Redressing of
diverse Mischiefs and Grievances which daily happen, A Parliament shall be
holden every year, as at another time was ordained by a Stutate, viz. the
aforementioned, in his 4th year. And agreeable hereto, are those Statutes upon
the Rolls, viz. 5 Ed. 2. -- 1 R. 2. No. 95.

By which Statutes it appears, that Parliaments ought Annually to meet, to
support the Government, and to redress the Grievances which may happen in the
interval of Parliaments; That being the great End proposed in their said
Meetings. Now, For Parliaments to meet Annually, and not suffered to sit to
Answer the Ends, but to be Prorogued or Dissolved before they have finished
their Work, would be nothing but a deluding the Law, and a striking at the
foundation of the Government it self, and rend'ring Parliaments altogether
Useless; for it would be all one to have No Parliaments at all, as to have them
turned off by the Prince before they have done that they were called and
entrusted to do. For by the same Rule whereby they may be so turned off One
Session, they may be three Sessions, and so to threescore, to the breaking of
the Government, and introducing Arbitrary Power. To Prevent such intolerable
Mischiefs and Inconveniences, are such good Laws as these made in this Kings
time, and which were so Sacredly observed in after times, That it was a Custom,
especially in the Reigns of H. 4. H. 5. H. 6. to have a Proclamation made in
Westminster Hall before the end of every Session, An honest and a necessary
Proclamation to be made every Parliament.
That all those who had any matter to present to the Parliament, should bring
it in before such a day, for otherwise, the Parliament at that Day should
Determine. Whereby it appears the People were not to be eluded nor disappointed
by surprising Prorogations and Dissolutions, to frustrate and make void the
great ends of Parliaments.

And to this purpose says a late Learned Author, That if there was no Statute,
or any thing upon record extant, concerning the Parliaments sitting to redress
grievances, yet that I must believe, that it is so by the fundamental Law of
the Government, which must be Lame and imperfect without it; [For, otherwise
the Prince and his Ministers may do what they please, and their Wills may be
their Laws.]

Therefore it is provided for in the very Essence and Constitution of the
Government it self; and this (says our Author) we may call the Common Law,
which is of as much value (if not more) than any Statute, and of which all our
good Acts of Parliament and Magna Charta it self is but Declaratory; so that
though the King is entrusted with the formal part of summoning and pronouncing
the dissolution of Parliaments, which is done by Writ; yet the Laws which
Oblige him (as well as us) have determined how, and when he shall do it; which
is enough to show, that the Kings share in the Sovereignty, that is in the
Parliament, is cut out to him by Law, and not left at his disposal.

The Next Statute we shall mention, 25 Ed. 3. chapter 23. Statute of Provisors.
to enforce this fundamental Right and Privilege, is the 25th. Ed. 3. chapter 23.
called the Statute of Provisors, which was made to prevent and Cut off the
Encroachments of the Bishops of Rome, whose Usurpations in disposing of
Benefices occasioned intolerable Grievances, wherein, in the Preamble of the
said Statute, it is expressed as follows.

Whereupon the Commons have prayed our said Sovereign Lord the King, that since
the Right of the Crown of England, and the Law of the said Realm is such, that
upon the Mischiefs and Damage which happens to his Realm, he ought and is
bounden of the accord of his said People in his Parliament, thereof to make
Remedy and Law, in avoiding the Mischiefs and Damage which thereof comes; That
it may please him thereupon to provide Remedy. Our Soviraign Lord the King
seeing the Mischiefs and Damage before named, and having regard to the said
Statute made in the time of his said Grandfather, and to the Causes contained
in the same, which Statute holds always his force, and was never defeated or
annulled in any point, and by so much is bound by his Oath to do the same, to
be kept as the Law of this Realm, though that by Sufferance and Negligence it
has since been attempted to the contrary: And also having regard to the
grievous Complaints made to him by his People in diverse Parliaments holden
heretofore, Willing to ordain Remedy for the great Damages and Mischiefs which
have happened and daily do happen by the said Cause, etc. By the assent of all
the great Men and Commonalty of his said Realm, has Ordained and Established,
etc.

In which preamble of the Statute we may observe, (1.) The intolerable
grievance and burden, which was occasioned by the illegal Encroachments of the Sea of Rome. (2.) The many Complaints the People had made, who in those dark
times, under Popery were sensible of, groaning under those Burdens. (3.) The
Endeavors used in vain by former Parliaments to Redress the same, And to bring
their Laws in being, to have their Force and Effect. (4.) The acknowledgment of
the King and Parliament, that the Obligation hereto was upon the King.

(1.) From the Right of the Crown, which obliged every King to pass good Laws.
(2.) The Statute in force. (3.) The King's Oath to keep the Old and pass new
Laws for his Peoples safeguard, which they should tender to him. (4.) From the
sense of the People, expressed in their Complaints; and, (5.) From the Mischief
and Damage which would otherwise ensue.

And therefore by the desire and accord of his People, He passes this famous
Law. The Preamble whereof, is here recited.

Another Statute to the same purpose you find 2. R. 2. No. 28. Also the Commons
in Parliament pray, that forasmuch as Petitions and Bills presented in
Parliament by diverse of the Commons, could not heretofore have their Respective
Answers; That therefore both their Petitions and Bills in this present
Parliament, as also others which shall be presented in any future Parliament,
may have a good and Gracious Answer and Remedy ordained thereupon before the
departing of every Parliament: And that to this purpose, a due Statute be
ensealed [or Enacted] at this present Parliament, to be and remain in Force for
all times to come.

To which the King Replied:

The Kings Answer.
THE King is pleased that all such Petitions delivered in Parliament, of things
(or matters) which cannot otherwise be determined; A good and Reasonable Answer
shall be made and given before the Departure of Parliament.

In which excellent Law we may observe, (1.) A Complaint of former remisness,
their Bills having aforetime been passed by, their Grievances Unredressed, by
unseasonably Dissolving of Parliaments before their Laws could pass. (2.) That
a Law might pass in that very Parliament to rectify that Abuse for the future.
And, (3.) That it should not pass for a temporary Law, but for perpetuity being
of such absolute Necessity, that before the Parliaments be dismissed, Bills of
common Right might pass.

And the King agreed hereto.
Suitable hereto, we have my Lord Chief Justice Coke, that great Oracle of the
Law, in his Instit. 4. B. p. 11. Asserting, Petitions being truly preferred
(though very many) have been Answered by the Law and Custom of Parliament,
before the end of Parliament.

This appears says he, by the ancient Treatise De Modo tenendi Parliamentum,
in these Words faithfully Translated. The Parliament ought not to be ended
while any Petition depends undiscussed, or at the least to which a
determinate Answer is not made. Rot. Par. 17. E. 3. No. 60. 25 E. 3. No. 60. 50
E. 3. No. 212. 2 R. 2. 134. 2 R. 2. No. 38. 1 H. 4. 132. 2 H. 4.325. 113.

And that one of the principal ends of calling Parliaments, is for redressing
of Grievances that daily happen, 36 E. 3. c. 10. 18 E. 3. c. 14. 50 E. 3. No.
17. Lions Case, Rot. Par. 1 H. 5. No. 17. 13 H. 4. No. 9.

And that as concerning the departing of Parliaments, It ought to be in such a
manner: says Modus Tenendi. viz. To be demanded, yea and publicly Proclaimed
in the Parliament, and within the Palace of the Parliament, whether there be
any that has delivered a Petition to the Parliament, and has not received
Answer thereto; if there be none such, it is to be supposed, that every one is
Satisfied, or else Answered unto at the least, so far forth as by the Law he
may be. And which custom was observed in after Ages, as you have heard before.

Concerning the Antiquity and Authority of this Ancient Treatise, called Modus
tenendi Parliamentum (says my Lord Coke) whereof we make often use in our
Institutes: Certain it is, that this Modus was Rehearsed and Declared before
the Conqueror at the time of his Conquest, and by him approved for England, and
accordingly be according to Modus held a Parliament for England, as appears 21
E. 3. fo. 60.

Whereby you clearly perceive, that these wholesome Laws are not only in full
agreement with the Common Law and declartive thereof, but in full accord with
the Oath and Office of the Prince, who has that great trust by the Law lodged
with him for the good and benefit, not hurt and mischief of the People, viz.

First, these Laws are very suitable to the Office and Duty of a Ruler, and the
end for which he was instituted by God himself, who commands him to do
Judgment, and Justice to all; especialy, to the Oppressed, and not to deny them
any request for their relief, protection or welfare, 2 Samuel 22.3. 1 Chronicles.
13.1, to 5. 2 Chronicles. 9.8.19.5. etc. Est. 1.13. Our Law Books enjoining the
same, as Bracton Lib. 1. c. 2. Lib. 3. c. 9. fol. 107. etc. Fortiseue, chapter 9.
fo. 15. c. 7. fol. 5.11. Coke 7. Book Reports, Calvin's Case f. 11.

Secondly, they are also in full Harmony with the Kings Coronation Oath
Solemnly made to all his Subjects, viz. To grant, fulfill, and defend all
rightful Laws which the Commons of the Realm shall choose, and to strengthen
and maintain them after his Power.

Thirdly, These Laws are also in full agreement, and oneness with Magna Charta
it self, that Ancient Fundamental Law which has been Confirmed by at least
Forty Parliaments, viz. We shall deny, We shall defer to no Man Justice and
Right, much less to the whole Parliament and Kingdom, in denying or deferring
to pass such necessary Bills which the Peoples needs call for.

Object. But to all this which has been said, it may be objected, That several
of our Princes have otherwise practiced by Dissolving or [as laterly used, by]
Proroguing Parliaments at their pleasures, before Grievances were Redressed,
and Public Bills of Common Safety Passed, and that as a Privilege, belonging
to the Royal Prerogative.

Answ. To which it is Answered, That granting they have so done: First, it is
most manifest that does not therefore create a right to them so to do;
according to that known maxim, a facto ad jus non valet Consequentia,
especially, when such Actions are against so many express and positive Laws,
such Principles of Common Right and Justice, and so many particular Ties and
Obligations upon themselves to the contrary.

Secondly, But if it had been so, yet neither can Prerogative be pleaded to
Justify such Practices, because the King has no Prerogative, but what the Law
gives him; and it can give none to destroy its self, and those it protects, but
the contrary. Bracton in his Comments, page 487. tells us, That although the
Common Law does allow many Prerogatives to the King, yet it does not allow any,
Bracton. p. 487.
that He shall wrong, or hurt any by His Prerogative. Therefore it is well said,
by a late Worthy Author upon this point, That what Power or Prerogative the
Kings have in Them, ought to be used according to the true and genuine intent
of the Government; that is for the Preservation and Interest of the People. And
not for the disappointing the Councils of a Parliament, toward reforming
Grievances, and making provision for the future Execution of the Laws; and when
ever it is applied to frustrate those ends, it is a Violation of Right, and
Infringment of the Kings Coronation Oath, who is obliged to Pass or Confirm
those Laws His People shall choose. And tho He had such a Prerogative by Law,
yet it should not be so used, especially in time of Eminent danger and
distress. The late King in his Advice to his Majesty that now is, in his (...)
239. Tells him that his Prerogative is best showed, and exercised, in
Remitting, rather than exacting the Rigor of the Laws, there being nothing
worse than Legal Tyranny.

Nor would he have him entertain any Aversion or Dislike of Parliaments, The
late King's advice to his majesty.
which in their right Constitution, with freedom and honor, will never Injure
or Diminish His Greatness, but will rather be as interchangings of Love,
Loyalty and Confidence, between a Prince and his People.

It is true, some Flatterers and Traitors have presumed, in defiance to their
Countries Rights, to assert that such a boundless Prerogative belongs to Kings.
As did Chief Justice Trisilian, etc. in R. 2's. time; Advising him that he
might Dissolve Parliaments at pleasure; and, that no Member should be called to
Parliament, nor any Act past in either House, without His Approbation in the
first place; and, that who ever advised otherwise were Traitors. But this
Advice you read was no less Fatal to himself, than Pernicious to his Prince.
Bakers Chron. p. 147, 148, and 159.

King James in his Speech to the Parliament 1609. Gives them assurance, That he
never meant to Govern by any Law, but the Law of the Land; tho it be disputed
among them, as if he had an intention to alter the Law; and Govern by the
absolute power of a King; but to put them out of doubt in that matter, tells
them, That all Kings who are not Tyrants, or Perjured, will bound themselves
within the limits of their Laws. And they that persuade the contrary, are
Vipers and Pests, both against them and the Commonwealth. Wilson. K. J. p. 46.

The Conclusion.
1. IF this be so, That by so great Authority ( viz. so many Statutes in force,
The fundamentals of the Common Law, the Essentials of the Government it self,
Magna Charta, The Kings Coronation Oath, so many Laws of God and Man;) the
Parliament ought to sit to Redress Grievances and provide for Common Safety,
especially in times of Common Danger. (And that this is eminently so, who can
doubt, that will believe the King; so many Parliaments, The Cloud of Witnesses,
the Public Judicatures, their own sense and experience of the manifold
Mischiefs which have been acted, and the apparent Ruin and Confusion that
impends the Nation, by the restless Attempts of a bloody Interest, if speedy
Remedy is not applied.)

Then let it be Queri'd, Whether the People having thus the Knife at the
Throat, Cities and Habitations Fired, and therein their Persons fried,
Invasions and Insurrections threatened to Destroy the King and Subjects, Church
and State; and as so lately told us, (upon Mr. Fitz Harris's commitment,) the
present Design on Foot was to Depose and Kill the King; and their only remedy
hoped for under God to give them Relief thus from time to time, Cut off, viz.
Their Parliaments, who with so much care, cost and pains are Elected, sent up,
and Entrusted for their help, turned off re infecta, and rendered so
insignificant by those frequent Prorogations and Dissolutions.

Are they not therefore justified in their important Cries, in their many
Humble Petitions to their King, Fervent Addresses to their Members, earnest
Claims for this their Birthright here Pleaded, which the Laws of the Kingdom,
consonant to the Laws of God and Nature, has given them?

2. If so, what then shall be said to those who advise to this high Violation
of their Countries Rights, to the infringing so many just Laws, and exposing
the Public to those desperate hazards, if not a total Ruin?

If King Alfred (as Andrew Horn in his Mirror of Justice tells us) hanged
Darling, Segnor, C^dwine, Cole, and Forty Judges more, for Judging contrary to
Law; and yet all those false Judgments were but in particular and private
Cases; What Death do those Men deserve, who offer this violence to the Law it
self, and all the Sacred Rights of their Country? If the Lord Chief Justice
Thorp in Ed. 3's. time, for receiving the Bribery of One hundred pounds was
adjudged to be Hanged as one that had made the King break his Oath to the
People; How much more guilty are they of making the King break his Coronation
Oath that persuade him to Act against all the Laws for holding Parliaments, and
passing Laws therein, which he is so solemnly sworn to do? And if the Lord
Chief Justice Tresilliun was Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered for Advising the King
to Act contrary to some Statutes only; what do those deserve that advise the
King to Act not only against some, but against all these Ancient Laws and
Statutes of the Realm?

And if Blake the Kings Council but for Assisting in the Matter and drawing up
Indictments by the Kings Command contrary to Law, though it is likely he might
Plead the Kings Order for it, yet if he was Hanged, Drawn and Quartered for
that, what Justice is due to them that assist in the Total Destruction of all
the Laws of the Nation, and as much as in them lies, their King and Country
too? And if Vsk the under Sherif (whose Office it is to Execute the Laws) for
but endeavoring to aid Tresitian, Blake and their Accomplices against some of
the Laws, was also with Five more Hanged, Drawn and Quartered; What punishment
may they deserve that Aid and endeavor the Subvertion of all the Laws of the
Kingdom? And if Empson and Dudley in Henry the Eights time, though two of the
Kings privy Council, were Hanged for Procuring and Executing an Act of
Parliament contrary to the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and to the great
vexation of the People; so that though they had an Act of Parliament of their
side, yet that Act being against the known Laws of the Land, were Hanged as
Traitors for putting that Statute in Execution: then what shall become of those
who have no such Act to shelter themselves under, and who shall Act not only
contrary to, but to the Destruction of the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and
how Harmonious such Justice will be, the Text tells us, Deuteronomy. 27.17. Cursed be
he that removes his Neighbors Landmark: and all the People shall say, Amen.

That this present Session may have a happy Issue, to answer the great ends of
Parliaments, and therein our present Exigencies and Necessities, is the
incessant Cry and longing Expectation of all the Protestants in the Land.

FINIS.

