

Familiar and Courtly LETTERS, Written by Monsieur Voiture To Persons of the
greatest Honor, Wit, and Quality of both Sexes in the Court of FRANCE.

Made English by Mr. Dryden, Tho. Cheek, Esquire Mr. Dennis, Henry Cromwell, Esquire
Jos. Raphson, Esquire Dr. --, etc.


WITH Twelve Select EPISTLES out of Aristanetus: Translated from the Greek.
Some Select LETTERS of Pliny, Jun. and Monsieur Fontanelle. Translated by Mr.
Tho. Brown. And a Collection of Original LETTERS lately written on several
Subjects. By Mr. T. Brown.

Never before Published.

To which is added, A Collection of LETTERS of Friendship, and other Occasional
LETTERS, written by Mr. Dryden, Mr. Wycherly, Mr. -- Mr. Congreve, Mr. Dennis,
and other Hands.


London: Printed for Sam. Briscoe, in Russel Street, Covent Garden, and sold by
J. Nutt, near Stationers' Hall, 1700.

To the Honorable Sir Cha. Duncomb, Knight. SHERIFF of London and Middlesex.
Though I am wholly a Stranger to your Person, I am not to your Character; for
who can live in London and not see living Instances of your Charity and
Munificence? You have been the Sanctuary of the Distressed, and even those
unhappy Wretches, who found no Benefit in the Public Deliverance of the
Kingdom, have owed theirs to you. At your own proper Expense, and by a
Generosity peculiar to your self, you have done that which has been reckoned
Piety in the greatest Monarchs and Republics, and what Princes have sent Royal
Fleets into the Streights to perform. You have rescued Numbers of Christian
Captives out of the cruel Hands of Tyrants, professing the same Religion, and
breathing the same Air with themselves. You have redeemed Slaves in a Country
which abominates Servitude, but by a strange Fascination suffers its Natives to
enslave one another: You have delivered them out of an unwholesome nasty
Confinement, where they dragged a Life wretched to themselves, unserviceable to
the Commonwealth, lamentable to their Relations, only to gratify the Revenge
or stupid Malice of their haughty Oppressors.

In the best constituted and most generous Government that ever appeared in the
World, to save the Life of a Citizen, was thought an Action that deserved
nothing less than a Public Reward. You have restored the Lives of a hundred
Citizens, by restoring them to their Health, their Liberty and Tranquillity of
Mind; for what is Life without those Blessings to make it supportable?

Charity, by what Stupidity it so happens I cannot imagine, has not that
Incense paid it, nor makes that Figure in the World that Heroism does. To lay a
whole Country in Ashes, to destroy Millions of poor Wretches, has for several
Ages passed for a Royal Virtue, Mankind has been so sottish, as to deifie those
that have performed these noble Exploits, and advanced themselves by the
Slavery or Destruction of their Fellow Creatures.

But though the present Age pays a servile Adoration to Heroes, yet Posterity
judges of them otherwise; and accordingly we find, that Caesar and Alexander,
who were treated as Gods when alive, are now, when all Occasions of Flattery to
their Persons cease, treated as Robbers and Usurpers.

It is otherwise with Charity: Whatever Acknowledgements the Time it lives in
pays it, Posterity is sure to reward and honor it; Age only serves to extend
it the more, like a well-grown Tree that enlarges its Branches every Spring.
It Is true, it does not delight in Noise and Ostentation; it flies from that
Applause which Heroism courts; it values it self upon no mute Inscriptions and
breathless Statues. It erects to it self living Images, and will be
commemorated with Gratitude, while there is such a Thing as Memory or Gratitude
in the World. The Hero may extort Flattery even from the Slaves he crushes, or
purchase mercenary Praise: but a charitable Man is sure to have the voluntary
Prayers and Blessings of those whom he relieves, and even Calumny it self dares
not attack him. Thus we see you have the general Acclamations and Applauses of
the People, for having done those Actions which the greatest Athenians or
Spartans would have been proud of, in a City which in no respect is inferior
to Sparta or Athens.

Pardon therefore an unhappy Man, who has labored under Affictions, which he
might have prevented if he would have gone upon dishonest Methods, by which
others have not only repaired, but improved their Fortunes, and whose little
All, if it had not fallen into dilatory, I will not say malicious Hands, might
have afforded him a Retreat, if not a comfortable Support: Pardon him, I say,
if having experienced hard Usage in the World, he could not forbear to pay his
Public Acknowledgment to the Patriot that has redeemed so many Sufferers, if he
endeavors to celebrate that Virtue which would have kept him from sinking, and
extolls that Charity that may restore him when he is sunk.

For this Reason I have presumed to dedicate the following Volume of Letters to
your self, which were given me by some of my Friends, who, in commiseration of
my hard Circumstances, were willing to contribute something toward my
Assistance. It does not bccome me, who pretend to be no Judge, to say any thing
of the Performance. The Gentlemen who are concerned in the Collection are too
well known to want my Praises. I hope that they may serve to entertain you at
your vacant Hours, when you can unbend your self from the Hurry of Public
Business. At least I beg you to accept them as a Testimony of my Respect, which
shall be ever paid you by

Your most obedient and most humble Servant,

SAM. BRISCOE.

THE CONTENTS.
Mons. Voiture's LETTERS.
Made English by several eminent Hands.

TO my Lord Cardinal de la Valette. By Mr. Dryden, Page 1 To Mademoiselle
Paulet. By Mr. Dennis, 10 To Mons. de Caudebonne. By the same Hand, 13 To Mons.
de Godeau, 15 A Billet from Madam de Saintot, to Mons. de Voiture, 19 The
Answer of Mons. de Voiture, 20 To his unknown Mistress. By Mr. Dennis, ibid. To
Mademoiselle Paulet. By Mr. Dennis, 22 To the Marchioness of Rambouillet, in
answer to a Letter of Thanks of hers, 24 An Imitation of Mons. de Voiture's
Letter to Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, 27 To the Duke of Enguien, upon the
taking of Dunkirk, 31 To the Duke of Enguien, upon his gaining the Battle of
Rocroy, 34 To Mons. de Balzac, 37 To the Marquess of Pisani, who had lost all
his Money and Baggage at the Siege of Thionville, 43 To Mademoiselle de Bourbon,
a Relation of the Author's being tossed in a Blanket. By Tho. Cheek, Esquire 46 To
Madam de Rambouillet. By Jos. Raphson, 50 To the Cardinal de la Valette. By the
same, 57 To a young Lady, Maid of Honor to her Royal Highness's Daughter. By
Henry Cromwell, Esquire 61 To the Marchioness de Rambouillet, on Absence. By the
same, 63 To Mons. Costart. By Dr. --, 66 To Madam --. By the same, 67 To the
same Lady, 69 To Diana. By the same Hand, 71 To the President of the Household.
By * * *, 72 To Mons. d' Emer, Comptroler - General of the King's Revenues. By
the same Hand, 73 An Abridgment of a Letter to Mons. d' Avaux. By the same
Hand, 74 To Madam --. By Henry Cromwell, Esquire 77 To Mons. de Chaudebonne. By Tho.
Cheek, Esquire 80 To my Lady-Abbess, to thank her for a Cat, which she sent him. By
Mr. Oldys, 85 A Comical Letter out of the famous Mons. de Colletier, to
Mademoiselle de Choux. By Sir D. Clark, Knight. 87
Aristaenetus's EPISTLES.
Translated from the Greek, by Mr. T. Brown.
TWo Ladies that were conquered by a Gentleman's singing, 89 A Lawyer's Wife to
her Friend, complaining that her Husband did not manage her Law-Case so well as
he ought, 92 A Fisherman to his Friend; being a Description of a lovely Damosel
that washed her self in the Sea whilst he was fishing, 95 An Adventure with a
Harlot, 97 A Cure for Love, 100 From a Filt to her serenading Gallant,
acquainting him that his Money would charm her more than his Music, 103 A
Relation of a Maid that fell in love with her Mistress's Gallant, 104 A Letter
of Gallantry from a young Gentleman to his perjured Mistress, 108 A Love-Letter
to his Mistress, 110 An Account of the ill Success of his Friend Damon in his
Amor, 112 A Lady to Gentlewoman to acquaint her, that she was in love with her
Husband, and she with her Page, 115 A Relation of a Lady that satisfied her
Longing with with her Gallant before her Husband's Face, 117
Some Select EPISTLES out of Pliny, Jun.
Made English by Mr. T. Brown.
To his dear Friend Romanus, Lib. 3. 120 To his dear Friend Geminius, Lib. 8.
121 To his Wife Calphurnia, Lib. 8. 124 To the same, Lib. 7. 125 To his dear
Friend Ferox, Lib. 7. 126 To Cornelius Tacitus, Lib. 8. 127 To Cornelius
Tacitus, Lib. 6. 129 To Sura, Lib. 7. 135
LETTERS out of Mons. le Chevalier d' Her. ***
By Mr. T. Brown.
To Mademoiselle de J --, upon sending her a Boar in a Pasty, who had liked to
have wounded him at the Chase, 140 To Mons. C -- on the Cartesian Philosophy,
142 To Madam D -- V -- upon sending her a Black and a Monky, 145 To the same on
the Death of the Monky, 147 To Mademoiselle de C -- upon sending her an Extract
of the Church-register, 149
ORIGINAL LETTERS.
By Mr. T. Brown.
To Dr. Baynard at the Bath, 153 Melanissa to Alexis, being a Defense of Love
against Drinking, 158 To a Litigious Country-Attorney, 167 To Mr. Moult, 171 To
the same a News Letter, 175 To the same, from the Gun Musick-booth in
Bartholomew-fair, 184 A Consolatory Letter to my Lady -- on the Death of her
Husband, 190 To Mr. Moult, upon the breaking up of Bartholomew-fair, 194 To W.
K. Esquire being a Relation of a Journey to London, 200 A Love-Letter from an
Officer in the Army to a Widow whom he was desperately in Love with before he
saw her, 208 An Exhortatory Letter to an old Lady that Smok'd Tobacco, 211 To
Sir W. S. on the two incomparable Pieces, The Satyr against Wit, and Poeticae
Britannici, by another Hand, 212 To a Physician in the Country, being a true
State of the Poetical-War between Cheapside and Coventgarden, by another Hand,
212
LOVE LETTERS.
By Gentlemen and Ladies.

Love Letters, written by Mr. -- to Madam -- 225 to 230 Four Love Letters to a
young Lady by another Hand, 230 to 233 A Letter from a Lady to her Lover in the
French Army, with a Tuft of Hair enclosed in it; 233 To Madam C -- ll's 234
Madam C -- ll's Answer, 236 His Answer to the foregoing Letter, 237 Madam C --
ll's Answer, 239 To Mrs. --, by another Hand, 241 To my Lady --, by the same
Hand, 242 Four Love Letters to an old Lady, 243 To a Lady that had got an
Inflammation in her Eyes, 247 Madam -- to Mr. B --, being an Account of a
Journey to Exon, etc. 251 The Answer, 255 To Dr. Garth, 260 To his Poetical
Friend, advising him to study the Mathematics. Out of Quevedo. By Mr. Savage,
161 To W. Joy, the strong Kentish-man, from the Lady C --, dropped out of her
Foot-man's Pocket, and taken up by a Chairman in the Pall Mall, 265
LETTERS of Friendship.
By several eminent Hands.

MR. Dennis, to Walter Moyle, Esquire 1 Mr. Wycherley, at Cleave, near Shrewfbury.
By the same Hand, 6 Mr. Wycherley's Answer to Mr. Dennis, 12 To Mr. Wycherley.
By -- 15 To Mr. Wycherley. By -- 19 Mr. Wycherley, to Mr. Dennis, 21 To Mr.
Wycherley. By Mr. -- 24 Mr. Wycherley, to Mr. -- on the Loss of his Mistress,
27 Mr. -- 's Answer to the foregoing Letter, 29 Mr. Wycherley to Mr. -- 31 Mr.
Dennis to Mr. Wycherley, 34 To Mr. Wycherley, that a Blockhead is better
qualified for Business than a Man of Wit, 36 To Mr. Dryden, 40 To the same, 43
Mr. Dryden to Mr. Dennis, 46 My Lady C -- to her Cousin W. of the Temple, after
the had received a Copy of Verses on her Beauty, 52 Mr. -- at Will's
Coffee-house, 56 To Walter Moyle, Esquire 61 To Mr. Congreve, 64 To Mr. Congreve,
66 Mr. Congreve to Mr. Dennis, concerning Hemour in Comedy, 69 To Mr. Congreve
at Tunbridge, 86 Mr. Congreve's Answer 87 Six Love Letters to his Charming but
Cruel Mistress, by Mr. -- 92 to. 102 To Walter Moyle, Esquire at the Back in
Cornwall, 102 Mr. -- to Mr. Congreve, 105 Mr. Congreve to Mr. -- 107 To Mr.
Congreve at Tunbridge, 109 Mr. -- to Mr. Dennis, 112 To Mr. Dennis, 213 To the
same. 214
Familiar and Courtly LETTERS, WRITTEN By Mons. VOITURE, TO Persons of the
greatest Wit, Honor and Quality of both Sex, in the Court of France.
Made English by several Eminent Hands.

To my Lord Cardinal de la Velette.
By Mr. Dryden.
My Lord,
I Am satisfied, that you old Cardinals take more Authority upon you, than
those of the last Promotion; because having written many Letters to you,
without receiving one from you, yet you complain of my Neglect. In the mean
time, seeing so many well-bred Men, who assure me that you do me too much
Honor to think of me at all; and that I am bound to write to you, and to give
my Acknowledgments, I am resolved to take their Counsel, and to pass over all
sorts of Difficulties and Considerations of my own Interest. This then will
give you to understand, that six Days after the Eclipse, and a Fortnight after
my Decease, Madam the Princess, Mademoiselle de Bourbon, Madam du Vigean, Madam
Aubry, Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, Mademoiselle Paulet, Monsieur de
Chaudebonne, and my self, left Paris about six in the Evening, and went to La
Bar, where Madam du Vigean was to give a Collation to the Princess. In our
way thither we found nothing worth our Observation; but only that at Ormesson,
an English Mastiff came up to the Boot of the Coach, to make his Compliment to
me. Be pleased to take this along with you, my Lord, that as often as I express
my self in the Plural Number, as for Example, We went, we found, or we beheld,
it is always to be understood, that I speak in the Quality of a Cardinal. From
thence we happily arrived at La Bar, and entered a Hall, were we trod upon
nothing but Roses and Orange-flowers. Madam the Princess, after she had
sufficiently admired this Magnificence, had a mind to see the Walks before
Supper: the Sun was then just sitting in a Cloud of Gold and Azure, and gave us
no larger a share of his Beams, than to supply a soft and pleasing Light: The
Air was not disturbed either with Wind or Heat; and it seemed that Heaven and
Earth were conspiring with Madam du Vigean, in her Treating the fairest
Princess upon Earth. After she had passed through a great Parterre, and Gardens
full of Orangetrees, she arrived at the Entrance of an enchanted Wood, so thick
and shady, that Authors conclude the Sun, since the Day of his Birth, never
entered it, till now that he waited on her Highness thither. At the end of an
Alley, which carried the fight out of distance, we sound a Fountain, which
alone cast up a greater Quantity of Water, than all those of Tivoli together;
about it were placed four and twenty Violins, which had much ado to make
themselves be heard, for the rumbling of the Streams in falling: When we were
got near enough, we discovered, in a cetain Nich, within a Pallisade, a Diana,
of about eleven or twelve Years of Age, and fairer than the Forests of Greece
and Thessaly had ever seen: she bore her Bow and Arrows in her Eyes, and was
encompas'd with all the Glories of her Brother. In another Nich, not far
distant, was another Nymph, fair and gentle enough to pass for one of her
Train: those who are not given to believe Fables, took them for Mademoiselles
de Bourbon and la Priande; and to confess the Truth, they resembled them
exactly. All the Company was in a profound Silence, admiring so many different
Objects, which at once astonished their Eyes and Ears, when on a sudden the
Goddess leapt down from her Nich, and with a Grace, impossible to be described,
began a Ball, which lasted for some time about the Fountain. `Twas somewhat
strange, my Lord, that in the midst of so many Pleasures, which were sufficient
to engage the whole attention of their Spirits, who enjoyed them, yet we could
not forbear to think of you; and it was generally concluded, that something was
wanting to our Happiness, since neither you, nor Madam de Rambouillet were
present. Then I took up a Harp and fung this Spanish Stanza, Pues quiso mi
suerte dura,
Que faltando mi sennor
Tambien faltasse mi Dama.
And continued the rest of the Song so very melodiously, and with such an Air
of Sadness, that there was not one of the Company, but the Tears came into
their Eyes, and they wept abundantly: Their Sorrow had endured much longer, had
not the Violins struck up a Sarabrand, with great speed and presence of Mind;
upon which the Company got upon their Feet, with as much Gayety, as if nothing
in the World had happened, and fell into the Dance; thus leaping, capring,
turning round, and hopping, we returned to the House, where we found a Table
already spread, and served as if it had been served by Fairies. This, my Lord,
is one Passage of the Adventure, which is so stupendous that no words are
capable of expressing it: For there are neither Colors of Speech, nor Figures
in the Art of Rhetoric, which can describe six several sorts of Potages, which
were at once presented to the Sight. And what was particularly remarkable, that
there being none but Goddesses, and two Demigods at the Table (viz.) Monsieur
Chaudebonne and I, yet every one eat as heartily, and with as good Appetites,
as if we had been neither more nor less, than plain Mortals. And to confess the
truth, a better Treat could not have been provided. Amongst other things, there
were twelve Dishes, besides other Eateables in disguise, which were never seen
before on any Human Table; and whose very Names have never been so much as
mentioned in any History. This Circumstance, my Lord, by some disastrous
Accident, has been related to Madam la Mareschalle --, and though immediately
upon it, she took twelve Drams of Opium, beyond her ordinany Dose, yet she has
never been able to close her Eyes, from that fatal Moment. During the first
Course, there was not so much as one single Cup went round to your Health; the
Company was so intent upon the present Affair; and at the Desert, we quite
forgot it. I beg your Permission, my Lord, to relate all things as they passed,
like a faithful Historian as I am, and without Flattery; for I would not for
the World, that Posterity should mistake one thing for another; and that at the
end of two thousand Years hence, or thereabouts, Posterity should imagine your
Health was drunk, when really there was no such thing in nature. Yet I must
give this Testimony to Truth, that it was not for want of Memory: For, during
all Supper-time, you were often mentioned; all the Ladies wished you there, and
some of them very heartily, or I am much mistaken. As we rose from Table, the
sound of the Violins summoned us up Stairs, where we found a Chamber so
gloriously lighted up, that it looked as if the Day, which was now below the
Earth, had retired hither, and was assembled in one body of Light. Here the
Ball began again, in better Order and with more Grace, than it had been danced
about the Fountain: And the most Magnificent Part of it, my Lord, was, that I
footed it there in Person. Mademoiselle de Bourbon, I must confess, was of
opinion, that I danced aukwardly; but she concluded, to my advantage, that I
must be allowed to Fence well; because, that at the end of every Cadence, I put
my self upon my Guard: The Ball continued with much Pleasure till all of a
sudden a great Noise, which was heard without Doors, caused the Company to look
out at the Windows; where, from a great Wood, which was about three hundred
Paces from the House, we beheld so vast a Number of Fireworks issuing out,
that we verily believed all the Branches and Trunks of the Trees had been
metamorphos'd into Guns; that all the Stars were falling from the Firmament,
and that the Element of Fire was descending into the middle Region of the Air.
Here, my Lord, are three Hyperboles tacked together, which being valued at a
moderate Price, are worth three dozen of Fusees at the least. After we were
recovered out of this great Fit of Ecstasy, into which so many Miracles had
plunged us, we resolved on our Departure, and took the way to Paris by the
Light of twenty Flambeaux: We passed through all the Ormessonnois, and the wide
Plains of Espinay, without Resistance, and went through the middle of St.
Dennis. Being placed in the Coach by the side of Madam -- I said a whole
Miserere to her, on your behalf; to which she replied, with much Gallantry, and
no less Civility. We sung in our Journey a World of Songs, Roundeaux,
Roundelays, Lampoons, and Ballads; and were now half a League beyond St.
Dennis, it being two a Clock in the Morning precisely; the Fatigue of the
Journey, Watching, Walking, and the painful Exercise of the Ball, having made
me somewhat heavy, when there happened an Accident, which I verily believed
would have been my total Ruin: There is a certain little Village, situate, say
the Geographers, betwixt Paris and St. Dennis, and vulgarly called, La Valette:
At our going out of this Place, we overtook three Coaches, in which were those
Numerical Violins which had been playing to us. Hereupon, Satan entering into
the Spirit of Mademoiselle, she commanded them to follow us, and to give
Serenades all Night long to the poor innocent People of Paris, who were asleep
and dreamt not of her Malice: This Diabolical Proposition made my Hair rise an
end upon my Head; yet all the Company passed a Vote in Favor of it; and the
word was just ready to be given, but by a signal Providence, they had left
their Violins behind them at la Bar; for which the Lord reward them. From
hence, my Lord, you may reasonably conclude, that Mademoiselle is a dangerous
Person in the Night, if ever there was any in the World: and that I had great
reason at Madam -- 's House to say, that the Violins ought to be turned out of
Doors, when that pestilent Lady was in Company. Well, we continued our way
happily enough, but only that as we entered the Fauxbourgh, we met six lusty
Fellows, as naked as ever they were born, who passed directly by the Coach, to
the terror of the Ladies. In fine, We arrived at Paris; and what I am now going
to relate, is indeed prodigious: Could you imagine it, my Lord? the Obscurity
was so great, that it covered all that vast City; and instead of what we left
it, not full seven Hours before, filled with Noise, and with a Crowd of Men,
Women, Horses, and Coaches; we now found nothing but a deep Silence, a dismal
Desert, a frightful Solitude, dispeopled Streets, not meeting with any Mortal
Man, but only certain Animals, who fled from the Luster of our Torches. But the
remaining part of the Adventure, you shall have, my Lord, another time. As
Boyando tells you, Qui e il sin del Canto; e torno ad Orlando,
Adio Signor, a voi me raccomando.


To Mademoiselle Paulet.
By Mr. Dennis.
Madam,
SO great a Misfortune as mine, wanted no less Consolation than that which I
lately received from you; and I looked on your Letter, as a Pardon which Heaven
granted me after my Sentence: I can call by no other name, the News which
obliged me to return to this Place, and I can assure you that Sentence of Death
is oftentimes less rigorous. But since, in the midst of all my Misfortunes, I
have the Honor to be remembered by you, to complain would be ill-becoming of
me: for methinks he may dispense with the Favors of Fortune, who is happy
enough to obtain yours. This is the Reason that I shall make use of to comfort
my self, for the Necessity of remaining here, and not that which you urged in
yours, That it is better to be an Exile in a Foreign Land, than to be a
Prisoner in one's own Country: For, alas! you know but one half of my Misery,
if you are not convinced that I am both together; and if you judge of the
Matter rightly, you will find that a thing, which seems very inconsistent, is
to be found in me, which is to be banished from the same Person by whom I am
kept a Prisoner. You will find it difficult to interpret this Riddle, unless
you call to mind, that I have always been used to mingle a Dram of Love in my
Letters: For, if as you say, I am allowed some Liberty here, of which I should
be deprived in France; I beseech you let it be that of assuring you, that there
is a great deal of Passion mixed with the Affection which I express for your
Service. I should indeed be Ungrateful, if I should discover but an ordinary
Friendship for a Person who does such extraordinary Things for me; and I am
obliged to fall in love at least with your Generosity. I have been acquainted
what Care a Gentleman and a Lady has taken to enquire of my Welfare, which is
an additional Obligation to one whom they had extremely obliged before. For all
the rest, they have seemed buried in so profound a Silence, that for six Months
together I have heard not the least mention of them. Whether this comes from
their Forgetfulness or from their Prudence, I am unable to determine: Yet
Forgetfulness may be allowed an Excuse for Silence, but a dumb Remembrance is
without Defense. I leave you to conclude, Madam, how much Luster this reflects
upon what you have done for me, and how much I am obliged to you for a long
Letter at a time, when others have been afraid to send me their Service.
Therefore let me assure you, that though I am unable to make suitable Returns to
such Goodness, I esteem it at least, and extol it as it deserves, and that I am
as much as a Man can possibly be,

Madam, yours, etc.

To Monsieur de Chaudebonne.
I Writ to you ten or twelve Days ago, and returned you Thanks for the two
Letters, which I have at length received from you. If you were but sensible of
the Satisfaction they brought with them, you would be sorry for not having writ
to me oftener, and for not frequently repeating the Consolation, of which I had
so much need. Madrid, which is the agreeablest Place in the World, for those
who at once are Lusty and Libertines, is the most disconsolate, for those who
are Regular, or those who are Indisposed. And in Lent, which is the Players
Vacation, I do not know so much as one Pleasure that a Man can enjoy with
Conscience. My Melancholy here, and my want of Company have produced a good
Effect in me; for they have reconciled me to Books, which I had for a time
forsaken; and being able to meet with no other Pleasures, I have been forced to
taste and to relish that of Reading: Prepare then to see me a Philosopher as
great as your self; and consider how fast a Man must come on, who for seven
whole Months has studied, or has been sick: For if one of the chief Things that
Philosophy aims at, is a Contempt of Life; the Stone-colick is certainly the
best of Masters, and Plato and Socrates persuades us less efficaciously. It has
lately read me a Lecture, that lasted seventeen Days, and which I shall not
quickly forget; and which has often made me consider how very feeble we are,
since three Grains of Sand, are sufficient to cast us down. But if it
determines me to any Sect, it shall not at least be that which maintains that
Pain is not an Evil; and that he who is Wise is at all times Happy. But
whatever befalls me, I can neither be Happy nor Wise, without being near to you,
and nothing can make me one or the other, so much as your Presence or your
Example. Yet am I very uncertain when I shall be able to leave this Place, and
expecting both Money and Men, which are coming by Sea, and which are two things
that do not always keep touch with us; I apprehend my remaining here longer
than I could wish; therefore I make it my humble Request to you, That you would
not forget me so long as you have done, and that you would testify, by doing
me the Honor of Writing to me, that you are convinced of the real Affection
with which

I am yours, etc.

To Monsieur de Godeau.
Sir,
You ought to give me time to recover our Tongue, before you oblige me to write
to you: For it appears to me to be something absurd, that I, who have been now
so long a Foreigner, and but just come from breathing the Air of Barbary,
should presume to expose my Letters, to one of the most eloquent Men in France.
This Consideration has kept me silent till now. But though I forbear to answer
your Challenges, I cannot refuse to return your Civilities: By these you have
found a way to vanquish me, in spite of all my Evasions: In my present
Condition it is more reputable to you, to Conquer me this way, than to overcome
me by Force: You would have acquired but small Glory by vigorously attacking a
Man, who is already driven to Extremity, and to whom Fortune has given so many
Blows, that the least may fatisfie to over-whelm him. Amidst the Darkness in
which she has placed us, we can have no Defense; but here all our Art and our
Skill in Parring are useless. The Case perhaps might be otherwise, if you had
set before my Eyes the Sun of which you make mention; and as dejected as you
see me now, I should grow daring enough to enter the Lists against you, if the
Light of that were divided between us equally. It Is more to have that alone on
your side, than all the rest of Heaven. The Beauties which sparkle in all that
you do, are only derived from hers, and it is the Influence of her Rays on you,
which produces so many Flowers. Nothing can ever appear more lively, than those
which you scatter on every thing that comes from you. I have seen them upon the
Ocean's extremest Shores, and in Places where Nature cannot produce, no, not
one Blade of Grass. I have received Nosegays of them, which made me meet in
Deserts, with the choicest Delicacies of Greece and of fruitful Italy: And though
they had been carried four hundred Leagues, neither the length of way, nor of
time had in the least diminished their Luster. They are indeed Immortal and
cannot decay, and so vastly different from all Terrestrial Productions, that it
is with a great deal of Justice, that you have offered them up to Heaven; for
Altars alone are worthy of them. Believe me, Sir, in what I am saying, I speak
but my real Sentiments; when my Curiosity, as you say, had obliged me to pass
the Bounds of the ancient World, to find out rare and surprising Objects, your
Works were the wonderfullest things that I saw, and Africa could show me
nothing more new, and no more extraordinary Sight. Reading them under the Shade
of its Palms, I wished you crowned with them all; and at the very time that I
saw, that I had gone beyond Hercules, I found I came short of you. All this,
which was capable of producing Envy in any Man's Soul but mine, filled mine
with so much Esteem and Affection, that you then took the place there, which
you are now desiring, and perfectly finished what you think you are still to
begin. After the Knowledge which I have bad of you, how can I form such an
Image of you, as you are willing to give me? How can I Fancy you to be that
little Creature you say you are? How could I comprehend that Heaven could place
such mighty things in so small a space? When I give my Imagination a Loose, it
gives you four Yards at least, and represents you of the Stature of Men
engendered by Angels. Yet I shall be very glad to find that it is as you would
have me believe. Amongst the rest of the Advantages, which I expect to derive
from you, I am in hopes that you will bring our Stature into some Credit, and
that it is ours which henceforward will be accounted the noblest; and that by
you, we shall be exalted above those who believe themselves higher than we. As
we pour the most exquisite Essences into the smallest Bottles, Nature infuseth
the divinest Souls into the smallest Bodies, and mixes more or less of matter
with them, as they have more or less in them of their Almighty Original. She
seems to place the most shining Souls, as Jewelers set the most sparkling
Stones, who make use of as little Gold as they can with them, and no more than
just suffices to bind them. By you the World will be undeceived of that sottish
Error of valuing Men by their Weight, and my Littleness with which I have been
so often upbraided by Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, for the future may recommend
me to her. For what remains, the Affection is very Just, which you tell me, she
has for you, and with her, six more of the loveliest Creatures that illustrate
the Light. But I wonder that you should think to get mine by such a Discovery;
and to gain it by the very Means, which were sufficient to make you lose it.
You had need to have a high Opinion of my Goodness, to believe that I can love
a Man who enjoys my Right, and who has obtained the Consiscation of my most
valued Possessions: But yet I am so just, that even this shall be no
Impediment, and I believe you to have so much Justice on your side, that I do
not despair but that we may accommodate even this matter between us. They may
very well have given you my Place without your putting me out of it, and my
room in their Hearts was but very small, if it cannot contain us both. As for
my part, I shall do my utmost, that I may not incommode you there; and shall
take care to take up my Station so that we may not clash, since so powerful an
Interest cannot make me cease to be yours, you may believe, that in spite of
the worst of Accidents, I shall be eternally

Yours, etc.

BILLET from Madam de Saintot, to Monsieur de Voiture.
I Have promised to bestow you, for a Gallant, upon two fine Women, my Friends.
I am confident that you will not find the Exploit too many for you, and do not
doubt but that you will confirm my Promise, as soon as you have but seen them.

The Answer of Monsieur de Voiture.
LEt me see what I love as soon as you can: For I die with Impatience till that
happy Moment. And since, at your Command, I have fallen in Love, it behooves you
to take some care that I am beloved too. I have thought all Night upon the two
Ladies that -- In short, upon you know whom. I write this Billet to one of
them; deliver it, I beseech you, to her, whom you believe that I love the more
passionately of the two. In Acknowledgment of the good Offices which I receive
from you, I assure you, that you shall always dispose of my Affections; and
that I will never love any one so much as your self, till I am convinced that
you have in good earnest a Mind that I should.

To his Unknown Mistress.
WAs there ever so extraordinary a Passion, as that which I have for you? For
my part, I do not know any thing of you; and, to my knowledge I never so much
as heard of you: And yet, I Gad, I am desperately in Love with you; and it is
now a whole Day, since I have sighed, and looked silly, and languish'd, and
died, and all that for you. Without having even seen your Face, I am taken with
its Beauty; and am charmed with your Wit, though I never have heard one Syllable
of it. I am ravished with your every Action, and I fancy in you a kind of I
know not what, that makes me passionately in Love with I know not whom.
Sometimes I fancy you Fair, and at other times Black; Now you appear Tall to
me, by and by Short; Now with a Nose of the Roman Shape, and anon with a Nose
turned up: But in whatever Form I describe you, you appear the Loveliest of
Creatures to me; and though I am ignorant what sort of Beauty yours is, I am
ready to pawn my Soul, that it is the most Bewitching of all of them. If it be
your Luck to know me as little, and to love me as much, then thanks be to Love,
and the Stars. But lest you should a little impose upon your self, in fancying
me a tall fair Fellow, and so be surpised at the Sight of me, I care not for
once, if I venture to send you my Picture: My Stature is three Inches below the
middle one; my Head appears tolerable enough, and is decently set off with a
large gray Head of Hair; then with Eyes that languish a little, yet are
something Hagard; I have a sort of a cudden cast of a Face: But in Requital,
one of your Friends will tell you, that I am the honestest Fellow in the World;
and that for Loving faithfully in five or six Places at a time, there is no Man
alive comes near me. If you think that all this will accomodate you, it shall
be at your Service as soon as I see you: Till that long longed for time, I
shall think of you; that is, of I know not whom. But if any one should chance
to ask me for whom I sigh, don't be afraid, I warrant to keep the Secret; I
would fain see any one catch me at naming you to him.

To Mademoiselle Paulet.
Madam,
There was only one thing wanting to your Adventures, and that was to be a
Prisoner of State; I have given you here the happy Occasion of being such:
Fortune, who has omitted no Opportunity of bringing you into Play, will, in all
probability, make her Advantage of this. I know very well that I bring you into
Danger by writing to you; yet cannot even that Reflection restrain me. From
whence you may conclude, that there is no Risk which I would refuse to run, to
refresh your Remembrance of me, since I can resolve to endanger even you, you
who are dear and valuable above all the rest of the World to me. I tell you
this, Madam, at a time, when I would not lie, no, not in a Compliment: For I
would have you to know, that I am much the better for the Distemper which I
have lately had: It has caused me to assume such good Resolutions, that if I
had them not, I could be contented to purchase them with all my Health. I
plainly foresee, that this will but divert you, you who are conscious to so
much of my Weakness; and who will never believe that I can keep single
Resolutions, I who have broken so many Vows; yet nothing is more certain than
that I have hitherto beheld the Spanish Beauties with as much Indifference, as
I did the Flemish at Brussels; and I hope to grow a Convert in the very Place
of the World in which the Tempter is strongest, and where the Devil resumes as
glorious Shapes as what he put off when he fell. The Reformation is so great in
me, that I have but one Scruple remaining, which is, That I think too often of
you; and that I desire to see you again with a little too much Impatience. I,
who have moderated the rest of my Passions, have been unable to reduce that
which I have for you, to the Measure with which we are permitted to love our
Neighbors; that is to say, as much as we do ourselves; and I fear you have a
larger Share in my Soul, than I ought to allow a Creature. Look out, I beseech
you, for a Remedy for this, or rather for an Excuse for it; for as for a
Remedy, I believe there is none, and that I must be always, with utmost Passion,

Madam, yours.

To the Marchioness of Rambouillet; in Answer to a Letter of Thanks of hers.
Madam,
Though my Liberality should, as you tell me, surpass the Bounty of Alexander, it
would nevertheless be richly recompensed, by the Thanks which you have returned
me for it. He himself, as boundless as his Ambition was, would have confined it
to so rare a Favor. He would have set more value upon this Honor, than he did
on the Persian Diadem; and he would never have envied Achilles the Praise which
he received from Homer, if he could but himself have obtained Yours. Thus,
Madam, on this Pinnacle of Glory on which I stand, if I bear any Envy to his,
it is not so much to that which he acquired himself, as to that which you have
bestowed upon him, and he has received no Honors, which I do not hold Inferior
to mine, unless it be that which you did him, when you declared him your
Gallant. Neither his Vanity, nor the rest of his Flatterers, could ever
persuade him to believe any thing that was so advantageous to him, and the
Quality of Son of Jupitur Hammon, was by much less glorious to him than this.
But if any thing comforts me for the Jealousy which it has raised in me, it is
this, Madam, that knowing you as well as I know you, I am very well assured,
that if you have done him this Honor, it is not so much upon the account of his
having been the Greatest of Mankind, as of his having been now these two
thousand Years no more. However, we here find cause to admire the Greatness of
his Fortune, which not being able yet to forsake him so many Years after his
Death, has added to his Conquests a Person that gives them more Luster than the
Daughters and Wife of Darius; and which has gained him a Mind more great than
the World he Conquered. I ought here to be afraid, after your Example of
Writing, in too lofty a Style: But how can the Writer be too sublime who writes
of you, and of Alexander? I humbly beseech you, Madam, to believe that I have
equal Passion for you, with that which you show for him; and that the
Admiration of your Virtues will oblige me to be always,

Madam, yours, etc.

An Imitation of Monsieur de Voiture's Letter to Mademoiselle de Rambouillet:
Being an Answer to that by which she had informed him, who was then with
Monsieur in Exile, that the Academy designed to abolish the Particle Car, [For.]
That the Reader may be diverted with this Letter, he is desired to suppose,
that there is a Club of Wits erected in London, for the Regulation of the
Tongue, who have a Design to abolish it.

Madam,
FOR, being of so great Importace in our Tongue as it is, I extremely approve
of the Resentment you show for the Wrong they design to do it; and I must needs
declare, that I expect no good from this Club of Wits, which you mention, since
they are resolved to establish themselves by so great an Oppression: Even at a
time like this, when Fortune is acting her Tragedies throughout all Europe. I
can behold nothing so deserving of Pity, as when I see they are ready to
arraign and to banish a Word, which has so faithfully served this Monarchy; and
which, amidst all our English Confusions, has always been of the side of those
who were truly English. For my part, I cannot for my Heart comprehend, what
Reason they can allege against a Word, whose only Business is to go before
Reason, and which has no other Employment than to usher it in. I cannot imagine
what Interest can oblige them, to take away that which belongs to for, to give
it to Because that; nor why they have a mind, to say with three Syllables, that
which they say with three Letters. That which I am afraid of, Madam, is this,
That after they have been guilty of this one Injustice, they will not scruple
at more; perhaps they may have the Impudence to attack But, and who knows if If
may be any longer secure. So that, after they have deprived us of all those
Words, whose business it is to bring others together, the Wits will reduce us
to the Language of Angels; or, if they cannot do that, they will at least
oblige us to speak only by Signs: And here I must confess, that your
Observation is true, viz. That no Example can more clearly show us the
Instability of Humane Affairs. He who had told me some Years ago, that I should
have outlived For, I had thought had promised me a longer Life than the
Patriarchs. And yet we see that after he has mentain'd himself for some
hundreds of Years, in full Force and Authority, after he has been employed in
the most important Treaties, and has assisted in the Councils of our Kings with
Honor, he is all of a sudden fallen into Disgrace, and threatened with a
violent End. I now expect nothing less, than to be terrified with lamentable
Cries in the Air, declaring to the World, that the Great For is dead: for the
Death of the Great Came, or of the Great Pan, was, in my mind, less important. I
know if we consult one of the finest Wits of the Age, and one whom I esteem
with Passion, he will tell us, that it is our Duty to condemn an Innovation like
this, that we ought to use the For of our Fathers, as well as their Sun and
their Soil, and that we should by no means banish a Word, which was in the
Mouths of our Edwards and of our Henry's. But you, Madam, are the Person, who
are principally obliged to undertake his Protection: for since the Supreme
Grace, and the Sovereign Beauty of the English Tongue lies in yours, you ought
to command here with an absolute Sway, and with a Smile or a Frown, give Life
or give Death to Syllables, as uncontrolled as you do to Men. For this, I
believe you have already secured it, from the imminent Danger which threatened
it, and by vouchsafing it a Place in your Letter, have fixed it in a Sanctuary
and a Mansion of Glory, to which neither Envy nor Time can reach. But here,
Madam, I beg leave to assure you, that I could not but be surpised to see how
fantastic your Favors are, I could not but think it strange, that you, who
without Compassion could see a thousand Lovers expire, should not have the
Heart to see a Syllable die. If you had but had half the Care of me, which you
have shown of For, I should then have been happy in spite of ill Fortune: Then
Poverty, Exile, and Grief would scarce have had force to come near me. If you
had not delivered me from these Evils themselves, you had freed me at least
from the Sense of them. But at a time that I expected to receive Consolation
from yours, I found that your Kindness was only designed to For, and that his
Banishment troubled you more than ours. I must confess, Madam, it is but just,
you should undertake his Defense; but you ought to have taken some care of me
too, that People might not object to you, That you forsake your Friends for a
Word. You make no Answer at all to that which I writ about; you take not the
least Notice of that which so much concerns me: In three or four Pages you
scarce remember me once; and the Reason of this is For: Be pleased to consider
me a little more for the future, and when you undertake the Defense of the
Afflicted, remember that I am of the Number. I shall always make use of him
himself to oblige you to grant me this Favor, and to convince you that it is
but my Due; For

I am, etc.

To the Duke of Enguien, upon his Taking of Dunkirk.
I Am so far from wondering that you have taken Dunkirk, that I believe you
could take the Moon by the Teeth, if you did but once attempt it. Nothing can
be impossible to you: I am only uneasy about what I shall say to your Highness
on this Occasion, and am thinking by what extraordinary Terms I may bring you
to reach my Conceptions of you. Indeed, my Lord, in that Height of Glory, to
which you have now attained, the Honor of your Eavour is a singular Happiness;
but it is a troublesome thing to us Writers, who are obliged to Congratulate
you upon every good Success, to be perpetually upon the Hunt for Words whose
Force may answer your Actions, and to be every Day inventing of new
Panegyricks. If you would but have the Goodness to suffer your self to be beat
sometime, or to rise from before some Town, the variety of the Matter might
help to support us, and we should find out some fine thing or other to say to
you, upon the Inconstancy of Fortune, and the Glory that is gotten by bearing
her Malice bravely. But having, from the very first of your Actions, ranked you
equal with Alexander, and finding you rising upon us continually; upon my word,
my Lord, we are at a loss what to do, either with you or our selves. Nothing
that we can say, can come up to that which you do, and the very Flights of our
Fancy flag below you. Eloquence, which Magnifies smallest things, cannot reach
the Height of those which you do; no, not by its boldest Figures. And that
which is called Hyperbole on other occasions, is but a cold way of speaking
when it comes to be applied to you. Indeed it is different to comprehend, how
your Highness each Summer has (...) found out means to augment that Glory,
which every Winter seemed at its full Perfection; and that having begun so
greatly, and gone on more greatly, still your last Actions should crown the
rest, and be found the most Amazing. For my own part, my Lord, I congratulate
your Success, as I am in Duty obliged; but I plainly foresee, the very thing
that augments your Reputation with us, may prejudice that which you expect from
after Ages; and that so many great and important Actions, done in so short a
space, may render your Life incredible to future Times, and make your History
be thought a Romance by Posterity. Be pleased then, my Lord, to set some Bounds
to your Victories, if it be only to accommodate your self to the Capacity of
Human Reason, and not to go further than Common Belief can follow you. Be
contented to be quiet and secure, at least for a time, and suffer France, which
is eternally alarmed for your Safety, to enjoy serenely, for a few Months, the
Glory which you have acquired for her. In the mean time, I beseech you to
believe, that among so many Millions of Men who admire you, and who continually
pray for you, there is not one who does it, with so much Joy, with so much Zeal
and Veneration, as I, who am,

My Lord, your Highness's, etc.

To the Duke of Euguien ( afterward the Great Prince of Conde) upon his
gaining the Battle of Rocroy.
My Lord,
AT a time that I am so far removed from your Highness, that you cannot
possibly lay your Commands upon me, I am fully resolved to speak freely my Mind
to you, which I have so long been obliged to disguise, left it should bring me
into the same Inconvenience, with those, who before me, have taken the like
Liberties with you. But let me tell you, my Lord, you have done too much, to
let it pass without taking Notice of it; and you are unreasonable if you think
to behave your self as you do, without being loudly told of it. If you did but
know how strangely all Paris talks of you, I am very confident that you would
be ashamed of it; and you could not without Confusion hear, with how little
Respect, and how little Fear of Displeasing you, all the World presumes to
discourse of what you have done. I must confess, my Lord, I wonder what you
could mean: You have shown your self Bold with a Vengeance, and Violent to the
last Degree, in putting such an Affront upon two or three old Captains, whom
you ought to have respected, if it had been only for their Antiquity: In
Killing the poor Count de la Fountain, who was the very best Man in the
Low Countries; in Taking sixteen Pieces of Cannon, the proper Goods of the
King's Uncle, and the Queen's own Brother; and in Confounding the Spanish
Troops, after they had shown so much Goodness in letting you Pass. I heard
indeed, you are obstinate as a Devil, and that it was not to much purpose to
dispute about any thing with you: But yet I never thought, that your Heat would
have transported you so far. If you go on at the rate you have begun, you will
shortly grow Intolerable, I assure you, to all Europe, and neither the Emperor
nor the King of Spain will either of them be able to endure you. But now, my
Lord, laying the Man of Conscience aside, and resuming the Man of State: I
felicitate your Highness for the Victory I hear you have gained, the most
complete, and the most important, which has happened in our Age. France, which
you have sheltered from all the Storms that it dreaded, is amazed to see that
you have begun your Life with an Action, with which Caesar would gladly have
crowned his own, and which alone, reflects more Luster upon the Kings your
Progenitors, than all theirs have transferred to you. Well, my Lord, you have
verified what has been formerly said, That Virtue comes to the Caesar's
preventing Time: For you, who are a true Caesar, both in Wit and in Knowledge;
Caesar in Diligence and in Vigilance; in Courage Caesar, and per omnes Casus
Casar; you have outrun the Hopes, and surpassed the Expectation of Men; you
have clearly shown that Experience is necessary to none but ordinary Souls;
that the Virtue of Heroes comes by a more compendious way, and that the Works
of Heaven are finished when but begun. After this I leave you to judge, how you
are like to be received and carress'd by the Lords of the Court, and with what
Pleasure the Ladies heard, that he whom they had seen Triumphant in Balls, had
been Victorious in Armies; and that the finest Head of all France, was likewise
the best and the strongest. There is not a Man even to Mounsieur Beaumont, who
does not declaim in your Praise. They who had revolted against you, are now
reduced; and they who complained that you were always Laughing, have been
forced to confess, that you have shown your self now in good Earnest; and every
one's afraid of being of the Number of your Enemies, since you have defeated
such Multitudes of them. Pardon, O Caesar, the Liberty which I have taken;
receive the Praise that is due to you; and permit us to render to Caesar, that
which is due to Caesar.

To Monsieur de Balzac.
Sir,
IF it be true that I have always kept the Rank, which you tell me I have held
in your Memory: Methinks you have shown but an indifferent Concern for my
Satisfaction, in delaying so long to impart the pleasing News to me, and in
suffering me so long to be the happiest of Men, without dreaming I was so. But
perhaps you were of opinion, that this very good Fortune, was so infinitely
above any thing that I could in reason hope for, that it was necessary you
should take time to invent Arguments, which might render it credible, and that
you had an occasion to employ all the Power of Rhetoric to persuade me, that
you had not forgot me. And thus far at least I must needs confess, that you
have been very Just, that resolving to let me have nothing but Words for all
the Affection you owe me, the Choice which you have made of them, has been so
rich, and so beautiful, that, let me die, if I believe the thing they assure me
of would be of greater Value: This, at least, I Am sure of, that they would
suffice to Counterballance any Friendship but mine. I am only discontented at
one thing, and that is, that so much Artifice and so much Eloquence, should not
be able to Disguise the Truth from me; and that in this, I should resemble your
own Shepherdesses, who are too silly to be beguiled by a Man of Wit. But
indeed, you must excuse me if I am something inclined to suspect an Art, which
could invent Commendations for a Quartan Ague, and an Art which you have at
more command than ever Man had before you. All those Graces, and that Air of
the Court, which I so much admire in yours, convince me rather of the
Excellence of your Wit, than of the Goodness of your Will. And from all the
fine things which you have said in my Favor, all that I can conclude, even
when I am inclined to flatter my self, is, That Fortune has been pleased to
give me a place in your Dreams: Nay, I know not if the very Extravagancies of a
Soul so exalted as yours, are not too serious, and too reasonable, to descend
so low as to me. And I shall esteem my self too obligingly used by you, if you
have but so much as dreamt that you Love me. For to imagine, that you have
reserved a Place for me amidst those sublime Thoughts, which are, at present,
employed, in Recompensing the Virtues of all the World, and Distributing Shares
of Glory to Mankind; to imagine this, would be extreme Presumption in me. I
have too great an Opinion of your Understanding, to believe that you could be
guilty of any thing that is so much below you; and I should be unwilling, that
your Enemies should have that to object to you. I am perfectly satisfied, that
the only Affection which you can have justly for any one, is that which you owe
to your self; and that Precept of Studying One's self, which is a Lesson of
Humility to all besides you, ought to have a contrary Effect in relation to
you, and oblige you to contemn, whatever you find without you. And therefore
here let me swear to you, That without pretending to any Share in your
Affection, I should have been very well satisfied, if you had preserved, with
never so little Care, the Friendship which I have vowed eternally to have for
you, and to have placed it, if not amongst the things which you value, at least
amongst those which you are not forward to lose. But in leaving me here with
that lovely Rival, of whom you made mention of in yours, you have shown, let me
tell you, too little Jealousy, and you have suffered her to gain so much
Advantage of you, that I have reason to suspect that you have conspired with
her, to do me a Mischief. And therefore I have more reason than you to
complain, that she has enriched your self by your Losses, and that you have
suffered her to get into her Power, that which I thought to have secured from
her Tyranny, by entrusting it in your Hands. If you had been willing to have
made never so little Defense, the better part of my self, had yet been our own;
but you, by your Negligence, have suffered her to surprise it; and to advance
her Conquest at such a rate over me, that though I should surrender to you, all
that remains of me, you would not have so much as one half of that which you
have lost. Nevertheless, let me assure you, That you have gained, in my Esteem,
as much as you have lost in my Affection; and that at the very time that I was
beginning to Love you less, I was forced to Honor you more. I have seen
nothing of yours since your Departure, which does not go beyond all that you
had done before: And by your last Works, you have the Honor of Excelling him
who surpassed all others. It cannot therefore but appear strange, that when you
have so much reason to be contented, you should yet be complaining, and that
you your self should be the only great Man who remains dissatisfied with you.
At present all France is listening to you, and you are indifferent to no Man,
who has but learnt to Read. All who are concerned for the Honor of their
Country, are not more inquisitive after what the Marshall de Crequi is doing,
than they are after what is doing by you. And you are the Person who can make
more Noise in your Solitude, than the most Happy and most Renowned of our
Generals, at the Head of forty Thousand Men. Can you wonder then, that with so
much Glory, you should be obnoxious to Envy; and that the very same Judges with
whom Scipio was Criminal, and who condemned Aristides and Socrates, should not
unanimously do Justice to your Desert? The People can plead Prescription for
hating the very Qualities which they admire in any one. Every thing which
transcends 'em, they think affronts 'em; and they can better bear with a common
Vice, than an extraordinary Virtue. So that if that Law was in force amongst
us, of Banishing the most Powerful for Authority or Reputation, I make no
doubt, but that you would stand the Mark of the Public Envy: and I believe
even Cardinal Richlieu would not run greater Hazard. But, for God sake, have a
care of calling that your Misfortune, which is but that of the Age: And
complain no more of the Injustice of Men, since all, who have Worth, are of
your side; and that amongst them, you have found a Friend, whom yet, perhaps,
you may lose once more: At least, I shall do my utmost to put you into a
condition of doing so. For every Man's Darling Vanity, at present, is to be
accounted yours. For my own part, I have always in so public a manner
professed my self so, that if through ill Fortune I should not be able to Love
you so much as I have done, yet here let me swear to you, That you shall be the
only Man to whom I will dare to declare it; and that I will always own my self
to the rest of the World, to be as much as ever,

Yours, etc.

To the Marquess of Pisani, who had lost all his Money and his Baggage, at the
Siege of Thionville.
The Character of the Marquess of Pisani, was a Man of Honor, Generosity, and
Courage; but an Extravagant, Ignorant, Obstinate, Disputing Gamester.

Sir,
THe Man would be to blame, or I have been very much misinformed, who should
upbraid you with having had the Mules to keep, at your Camp of Thionville: The
Devil a Mule have you kept there, Sir. They tell me, that upon the weighty
Consideration, that several Armies have been formerly lost by their Baggage;
you have made all possible haste to be disencumber'd of yours. And that having
often read in the Roman Histories, (this it is to be such a Man of Reading,
look you) that the greatest Exploits that were done by their Cavalry, were done
on Foot, after having voluntarily dismounted in the Extremity of the most
doubtful Battles, you took a Resolution to dispatch away all your Horses, and
have managed Matters so swingingly, that you have not so much as one left. And
now, the important Person stands on his own Legs.

Perhaps, you may receive some small Inconvenience from this: But let me die,
if it be not much for your Honor, that you, as well as Bias, honest old Bias,
I warrent you know him so wondrous well, should be able to say, that you carry
all that is yours about you. No great quantity I must confess of Foppish
Accoutrements, nor a long Train of Led-horses, nor abundance of that which they
call the Ready; but Probity, Generosity, Magnanimity, Constancy in Dangers,
Obstinacy in Disputes; a Contempt of all Foreign Languages, Ignorance of False
Dice, and a surprising Tranquillity upon the Loss of Transitory Things:
Qualities, Sir, which are properly and essentially yours; and of which neither
Time nor Fortune can ever deprive you. Now as Euripides, who was, as you know,
or as you know not, one of the gravest Authors of Greece, writes in one of his
Tragedies, that Money was one of the Evils, and one of the most pernicious
ones, that slew from Pandora's Box; I admire, as a Divine Quality in you, the
Incompatibility which you show for it, and look upon it to be a distinguishing
Mark of a Great and Extraordinary Soul, that you are Uneasy till you are rid
of this Corrupter of Reason, this Pois'ner of Souls, this Author of so much
Disorder, of so much Injustice, and of so many Violences. Yet, I could heartily
wish, that your Virtue were not arrived at such an extraordinary Pitch, and
that you could be brought to some Accommodation with this Enemy of Human Kind,
and that you might be persuaded to make Peace with it, as we do with the Great
Turk, for Politic Reasons, and the Advantage of Commerce. Now upon
Consideration, that it is a difficult matter to be much at one's Ease without
it, and fancying that as I played for you at Narbonne, you threw for me at
Thionville; and that it is perhaps in my Name, that you have packed off your
Baggage, I here send you a hundred Pistols at present in part of Payment; and,
that these may not meet with the same Fate which befell their Predecessors, I
desire you not to defile your Hands with them, but to deliver them to the
French Gentlemen who are with you, for whose sake I chiefly remit them.

I am, etc.

The End of Mr. Dennis's Translation.
To Mademoiselle de Burbon, A Relation of the Author's being tossed in a
Blanket.
By Tho. Cheek, Esquire.
Madam,
LAst Friday in the Afternoon I was tossed in a Blanket; because I had not made
you Laugh in the time that was given me: Madam de Rambouillet pronounced the
Sentence, at the Request of her Daughter, and Mademoiselle Paulet. They had
deferred the Execution to the return of the Princess, and your self; but they
bethought themselves afterward, not to delay it any longer; and that it was
very improper to put off Punishment to a time, which ought to be wholly devoted
to Pleasure. 'Twas in vain to cry out, and make Resistance, the Blanket was
brought, and four of the lustiest Fellows they could get, were picked out for
this Service. I may venture to affirm to you, Madam, that no Man was ever yet
in so exalted a Condition as I was, and I did not believe that Fortune would
ever have raised me so high; at every Toss they threw me out of sight, and sent
me higher than a soaring Eagle. I saw the Mountains crouching far below me, the
Winds and Clouds travel beneath my Feet, discovered Countries that I n'ver had
seen, and Seas I n'ver had thought of. There can be nothing more diverting,
than to see so many things all at once, and to discover half the Globe at one
View. But I assure you, Madam, all this cannot be seen without some
Disturbance; when one is in the Air, and certain of falling down again, that
which frightened me the most was, That, when I was very high, looking downwards,
the Blanket appeared so small that I thought it impossible to fall into it; and
that I confess was some trouble to me: But, among so many different Objects,
which at the same time struck my Sight, there was one which for some Moments
took away my Fear, and touched me with real Pleasure: It is this, Madam, Being
desirous to look toward Piedmont to see what passed there, I saw you at Lions,
as you crossed the Saone; at least, I saw a great Light upon the Water, and
abundance of Rays about the most charming Face in the World: I could not well
discern who was with you, because at that time my Head was lower-most; and I
believe you did not see me, for you looked another way; I made Signs to you as
well as I could: but as you began to look up, I fell down again, and one of the
Tops of the Mountain Tarara hindered you from seeing me: As soon as I came down,
I told 'em that I had seen you, and, as I was going to tell 'em how you did,
they all fell a Laughing as if 'twere a thing impossible, and immediately began
to make me leap higher than before. There happened to me a very strange
Accident, which will seem incredible to those who have not seen it: One time
when they had tossed me to a very great height, in coming down, I found my self
in a Cloud, which being very thick, and I extremely light, I was a great while
entangled in it, before I could fall down again; so that they stayed a long
time below, spreading the Blanket and looking up without being able to imagine
what was become of me. By good Luck there was no Wind stirring, for if there
had, the Cloud in marching would have carried me of one side or the other, and so
I must have inevitably fallen to the Ground, which could not have happened
without hurting me very much. But a more dangerous Accident succeeded this, the
last time they threw me into the Air, I found my self amongst a Flock of
Cranes, who at first were mightily surprised to see me so high; but when they
came near me, they took me for a Pigmy, with whom, you know Madam, they have
perpetual War, and thought I came to 'em as a Spy into the middle Region;
immediately they fell upon me with great STrokes of their Beaks, and with such
Violence, that I imagined my self struck with a hundred Daggers. And one of
them, that had taken me by the Leg, pursued me so furiously, that she did not
leave me till I was in the Blanket. This made my Tormentors afraid to send me
back to the Mercy of my Enemies; who were now got together in great numbers,
and hovered in the Air expecting me again. At last they carried me home again
in the same Blanket, but so dispirited as never Man was: To tell you the truth,
this Exercise is a little too violent for one of my tender Constitution. I
leave it to you, Madam, to judge how cruelly I have been dealt with, and for
how many Reasons you are obliged to condemn this Action; and to deal plainly
with you, you that are born with so many commanding Qualities, should think it
of the highest Consequence to begin betimes to hate Injustice, and to take
those that are oppressed into your Protection: I beseech you then, Madam, in
the first place, to declare this an Outrage you by no means approve; and for
Reparation of my Honor, and my Strength, to order a great Canopy of Gause, to
be set up for me in the blew Chamber of the House of Rambouillet, where I shall
be waited on, and magnificently entertained for a whole Week, by the two Ladies
who were the cause of this Misfortune; that at one Corner of the Room they
shall be continually making Sweetmeats; one of 'em shall blow the Fire, and
the other shall do nothing else but put Syrrup upon Plates to cool, and bring it
me as often as I have occasion. Thus, Madam, you will do a deed of Justice,
worthy of so great and beautiful a Princess, and I shall be obliged to be with
the utmost Sincerity and Respect,

To Madam de Rambouillet.
By Joseph Raphson, Esquire
Madam,
How threatening soever your Letter be, I could not choose but admire its Beauty,
and wonder how you could join the obliging and the terrible Style with so much
Artifice together. You make me think of the Gold and Azure we find on the Skins
of our Snakes, you do as it were enamel the sharpest Reflections, with the
liveliest Colors of Eloquence; and, in reading them, I cannot forbear to be
pleased with those very things which most affright me. You soon began to be as
good as your Word, when you told me that you would no longer smile, then
Fortune frowned on me: In the same Minute she seems to have granted me a little
Repose, you begin to disquiet me, and show me, that though I have escaped the
Dangers of the Seas and Pirates, I am not yet in Safety, and that you are more
dreadful than they. I could not have thought, Madam, that for having refused a
Quarrel with your Dwarf, I should have contracted one with yourself, nor that I
should be obliged to answer a Challenge, because I did a Complement: If you
think I failed in that, you ought rather to call it Respect and Fear, than
Contempt; and believe that the same Creature who difarm'd Monsieur de M -- of
his Sword, made my Pen fall from my Hand. Although he might have some Reason to
complain, yet you had none to take his part against me; and if you wish me Ill
for his sake, I may justly say you quarrel with me on the least Occasion in the
World.

If you are resolved to persecute me, all the Excuses I can allege will
signify nothing; and I can only wonder you take so much Pains to find a
Pretense for it. It will be no Advantage to me, to have come so far through so
many Dangers; I shall find Algiers, wherever you are; and though I am in
Brussels, yet I was never so near Captivity, or being Shipwrack'd. However,
don't persuade your self, Madam, that the Flames of those Animals wherewith you
threaten me, can make me afraid. I have long since learnt to defend my self
from those sorts of Mischiefs; and whatever you can say, I am more apprehensive
of Death from you Eyes, than your Hands. Among all the Passages of your Letter,
which seems to me admirable in all its parts, I take particular notice of what
you say, how great a pleasure it would have been to you, if I had been taken by
the Pirates; I cannot but attribute it to your extraordinary Goodness, that you
could wish I had been two or three Years chained to an Oar in the Turkish
Galleys, that somy Voyage might have been more diversified. 'Twas an ingenious
Curiosity, to desire to know how I could look after and dress the Camels of
Barbary, and with what unshaken Constancy I could bear Bastinado's! After the
rate you talk, I suppose you would have been glad, if I had been empal'd for
half an Hour, to have satisfied you how it felt, and what I thought of it: But
that which is yet more considerable, these kind Wishes, you say, you bestowed
upon me, after you had reassumed the mild Form of Woman, and were somewhat
appeased, and become more Humane; neither can I any more reconcile to Justice
the Quarrel you would pick with me about Alcidalis: Judge, Madam, if being
embarked in the same Seas with him, and in the same Dangers, I could forget
those Perils which I suffered, to recount those he had gone through; and while
I lay under my own Misfortunes, if I could amuse my self to write a History of
his? Notwithstanding I did not omit it in the midst of my Troubles, I writ
above a hundred Sheets of his History, and took a particular Care of his Life,
at a time when I can swear to you, I had none of my own. But don't thence,
Madam, make an Estimate of the Care I take to please my Friends. After I have
rendered you all the imaginable Services I can, those Shadows can only show you
the least part of the Passion I have for your Concerns. If you would know that,
consider it rather in the Cause than in the Effects. But your Imagination, how
lively and wonderful soever it is, falls short of that; and if there is any
thing in the whole World greater then your Soul, and which is beyond its
Comprehension, it is the Respect, Affection, and Esteem it has bred in mine.
Being no less sensible to acknowledge the Obligations I owe to other excellent
Persons, you will think that the Letter I received at the same time with yours,
brought me an infinite Satisfaction, as well as an extreme Honor. You knew
better than any other, the Inclination and Respect I have always had for the
Merits of the Person who writ it, and you may remember in the time of the Civil
Wars between you two, I have sometimes left your part to take his. But this
last Goodness of his has gained something afresh in my Heart; and since I have
received it, pardon me, if you please, that I have esteemed him for some
Moments above any other Person in the World: But that you may not think, Madam,
that it is you who have procured me all the Favors I receive from him, I
assure you that on another Occasion very lately he has done me a piece of
Service, without your being privy to it: Although it is none of those I take the
most Pleasure in receiving, and it has given me a new Subject of reflecting on
my ill Fortune, yet I esteem it a great Honor to owe Obligations to him, which
I should be ashamed to do to any other, and I am glad to receive any Marks of
his Generosity. He Will swear, when you speak to him of it, he knows not what you
mean; and methinks I now see him telling you so: but you know his Humor and
Temper, never to forget to do a good Action, and never to remember it when it
is done. Since the Honor of your Esteem for me, has been the first Motive to
establish me in his Favor, I humbly beg, Madam, your Assistance to return him
those Thanks I owe him, and that way to pay him at least as far as I can at
present. I a thousand times kiss the Feet of that incomparable Person who was
pleased to write with her own Hand the Superscription of the Letter you sent
me, and with four or five Words, render that Present inestimable, which was
extraordinary precious before. You have a great deal of Reason to call her the
most charming and agreeable Person in the World, who can relieve the Distressed
at such a Distance. I with that she, who so well knows how to manage it, may
once have all the Happiness due to so much Goodness, Beauty and Virtue
together, though I know this Wish is very Extensive. I hear that the Lady, which
I used to call the Morning Star, is become Greater and more Admirable than
ever, and that it at the same time enlightens and burns all France; although
its beams scarce reach the dark Shades where we live, yet its Reputation does,
and as far as I can understand, the Sun is not so bright as it. I am glad the
Intelligence that animates it, has lost nothing of its Force and Light, and
that there is nothing but the Soul of Mademoiselle de Bourbon, that can make us
doubt, whether her Beauty is not the most perfect thing in the World. The
manner, as I have seen in one of your Letters, she condoles me in, appears
admirably fine: indeed so many Crosses I have met with, ought to stir up Pity
in her; in her, I say, who is so well acquainted with my Weakness, and who
knows that from my Cradle, I have not had one Day of Repose. It has been
disturbed at the Postscript of your Letter addressed to King Chiquito. In the
Hell of Anastarax I found mine; and there I wandered three Nights and Days,
without seeing a jot of any thing. I am very sorry for it, for I desired above
any thing in the World to have the Comb of King Georgia; I have had a mind to
it above these two Years. But since you pretend to so much Guessing, Imagine if
you please, Madam, all I would farther say, if I durst make my Letter longer.
Guess how much more I honor and esteem, you than I did two Years ago; and
think with how much Passion I am,

Mademoiselle, Yours, etc.
Brussels.
To the Cardinal de la Valette.
By the same Hand.
My Lord,
I Am apt to believe, when you writ me the Letter, you were pleased to Honor
me with, that you thought the Esteem I have always had for you, has acquired
you some Reputation in the World: That on all Occasions, I had given you
infinite Testimonies of the Honor of my Friendship, and had for that reason
lent you two thousand Crowns on an extraordinary Occasion; and that at such a
Time when all your Credit failed you elsewhere; at such a Juncture too, that
otherwise your Reputation must have for ever sunk. At least, after the rate you
return your Thanks, and speak of your self, and me, I have reason to believe,
that in a Dream, you have mistook the one for the other, and put your self in
my Place. Otherwise, my Lord, you would not write after that manner you do,
unless, perhaps you are of Opinion, that there is no greater Good in the World
than to do so to others, and think those oblige you, who give you an
Opportunity of obliging them, and imagine you receive the Pleasures you give:
Certainly if it be so, there is no Man in the World, to whom you are more
obliged than to me; and I deserve all the Thanks you give me, since I have
given you more Occasions than any one else of exercising your Generosity, and
doing Actions of Goodness, which without doubt, are worth more than all the
Good you have done me, or all that you have remaining. Among the great Number
of those I have received from you, and among so many Favors you have been
pleased to bestow upon me, I assure you, my Lord, there are none I Esteem so
much as the Letter, you have done me the Honor to Write to me; and if among so
many Things which affected me with Joy, there is any one Thing that did so
above the rest, I must needs beg your leave to tell you, it is that, where you
mention the two Persons, who deserve all the Respect we can pay them, and to
whom, if we compare them not one to the other, there is nothing under the whole
Heaven, they can be compared to. When I think that I am in their Memory, for
that Moment my Pains cease; and whenever, I represent to my self the Image of
either the one or the other, the very Face of my Fortune seems to be changed,
and that Imagination chaces from my Spirit, the Darkness which oppresses it,
and fills it with Light: But that which is still a greater Happiness, is, though
I am so far from ever having deserved the Honor of their Favor, yet I flatter
my self that I have some share in it; and I am so happy as to believe what you
tell me concerning it. I know one, my Lord, who would not be so easy to be
persuaded, if he were in my place, and who after two Years Separation could not
live in so much Tranquillity, nor with so great Assurance. In the Satisfaction
which that Belief gives me, be pleased to judge if I am much to be lamented,
and if there are not many whom the World calls Happy, that are not so much as
I: Without this I could not defend my self from the general Sorrow which is
here on all sides, nor resist the Melancholy of Monsieur de C --, whom I am
forced every Day to contend with, and who is in Truth much above what is
commonly imagined of him. Besides his Fancy he has taken to let his Beard grow,
which already reaches down to his Middle, he affects a Tone more severe than
ever, and which comes very near the sound of Astolphus's Horn: Unless he were
to treat of the Immortality of the Soul, or of the Supreme Good, and the most
Important Questions of Moral Philosophy, he could not Bawl louder. If
Democritus should come again, though he was never so great a Philosopher, he
would not bear with him, because he was addicted to Laughing; he has undertaken
to reform the Doctrine of Zeno, as too soft; and is going about to make the
Stoics turn Capuchins. So that, my Lord, you don't desire any Advantage to
that People, whose Governor -- you wish him to be.

To a young Lady, Maid of Honor to his Royal Highness's Daughter.
By Henry Cromwell, Esquire
Madam,
HAving been ever sensible of the Power of your Eloquence, assist me, I beseech
you, in returning my Acknowledgements to the fairest, and most generous
Princess of the World: For, I swear, I have been Oppressed with her Bounties, and
must declare, that there is not any thing under Heaven, so Lovely, and so
Charming, as the Mistress whom you serve; I had almost said whom we serve: And,
indeed what would I not give, that I might thus express it? From the first
Moment that I heard her, I presently concluded that there was not in the World
so great a Genius as hers; but the Care she has been pleased to take of me,
above all things amazes me, and I can not sufficiently admire, how, among such
elevated Thoughts, she can have room for any so trivial; and how a Mind, in all
things else so high, can descend so low. The Pastils which were presented me
this Morning, have had a wondrous Effect upon me, and I can not imagine from
whence this Miracle proceeds, unless from a Touch of her Royal Highness's Hand;
for I find my self infinitely better, by having kissed the Paper only that
enclosed 'em: This, as long as I live, shall be my Antidote against all sorts
of Ills, and there is but one, for which so pleasing a Remedy as this can have
no Cure: But lest you should too curiously inquire, what this is I mean, it is
much better that I should explain my self, and tell you, that it is the Trouble,
to have so seldom the Sight of her, and to be destined to live far from the
only Person who deserves to be Adored; if you reflect upon this, it will appear
the greatest of Misfortunes; and it is very hard to be a Man of Honor, and
survive it.

To the Marchioness de Rambouillet, on Absence.
By the same Hand.
Madam,
My Lady, your Mother, must excuse me; but never any thing was so tiresom to me
as Rome: Not a Day passes, but I see something that is wonderful; Masterpieces
of the greatest Artists that ever were; Gardens where there is an everlasting
Spring; Buildings that are not to be equaled in the World, and Ruins yet more
Beautiful than they: But all this that I tell you has no power to divert me,
and at the same time that I see 'em, I wish my self far from 'em: The most
excellent Paintings, Sculptures, and Portraictures of Apelles, Praxiteles de
Papardelle have no Charms for me. I should be amazed at this, were I not
sensible of the Cause, and did not well know that a Person who has been
accustomed to the sight of you, could never be easy when he did not enjoy it:
for to tell you the Truth, Madam, I have the same Sense of you, as of Health; I
never so well know your Value, as when I have lost you: and although, when I am
near you, I manage not always so well as to maintain my self with you, yet from
the Moment that I behold you no more, I seek you with a thousand Wishes. I call
to mind that you are the most precious of worldly Things, and I find by
Experience, that all the Delights of the Earth are harsh and disagreeable
without you: I had more Pleasure some time ago in two or three turns of the
Ruel with you, than I have had since, in seeing all the Vine-yards of Rome, or
that I should have to see the Capitol, though in all its ancient Splendour, with
even Jupiter Capitolinus there in Person; but that you may know that this is no
Raillery, and that I am really as Ill as I express it, it is but eight Days
since, that walking in the Morning with the Chevalier de Jars, I had fallen all
along if he had not received me in his Arms; and the next Evening I swoon'd
once more in the Apartment of the Mareshal de Estree's. The Physicians say that
those are melancholy Vapors, and that these Accidents are not to be neglected;
as for me, since this has taken me two Days successively, and that I was
threatened with something worse, I have neither been stupid nor insensible; but
have taken some Antimony which Monsieur Nerli gave me; this has done me some
good, and I Will bring four Doses with me, which I will persuade the Duchess
d'Ainguillon to take; for there is no Volatile Salt which can have so good
Effect: and this we must be contented with, till he that has given me it,
shall find the Receipt of the Aurum Potabile, which Secret, as he says, he
shall attain to in a Year at least. I hope to leave this place in a Week; you
will be amazed that I can continue so long in a Place which I tell you I have
been so tired with; but I have been kept here till now, by some things which I
will acquaint you with, and which I have not yet been able to dispatch; but I
assure you once more, that I never in my Life was so uneasy and so impatient
to see you; I humbly beseech you to do me the Honor to believe me, and to be
assured that I am much more than I can here express,

Rome.

Madam yours.

To Monsieur Costart.
By --
Monsieur,
You will be surprised that I solicit your Assistance in an Affair on the other
side the Mountains; that I beg your Succor against the Romans: It is not the
first time as you know, that they have disturbed the Quiet of those that
troubled themselves not with them. But I think they were never so unjust to any
body as to me; they never gave Hannibal more Vexation than they will me, if you
do not help me: Quorsum haec, I Will tell you; They have among them an Academy of
Men, that call themselves Humourists, which is as it were fantastical; and
indeed, they must be so to take a fancy to admit me into their Number, and to
advise me of it by a Letter from one of their Society. I must write him an
Answer of Thanks in Latin; and this it is puts me in such pain. But I have been
eased from the Moment that I thought of you, for this methinks is your true
Tallent, and a Man that lives in Poitou, and writes Latin Letters out of
Wantonness, cannot refuse me one. Their Device is a Sun raising Vapors from the
Sea, which falls back again in Rain, with this Motto out of Lucretius, Fluit
agmine dulci: Pray try what you can say upon this, and upon the Honor which
they have done me, and my want of Merit. Monsieur Pauquet will be sure not to
fail us, and he knows more then either you or I: I leave this Matter wholly to
you two; for I am no way capable of it, when you can do it if you please. Me
dulcis domine Musa Lycimnie,
Cantus, me voluit dicere lucidum
Fulgentes oculos, and been mutuis,
Fidum Pectus amoribus.
She has been gone this nine Days: Poor Lycimnia! Without Lying, I love her
better than my self, but not better than you,

I am, Monsieur, etc.

To Madam --
To acquaint me with your Sufferings, is the way to redouble mine; and I, that
have supported my own with so much Patience, doubt whether I shall be able to
bear up under yours. But whatever happens, I cannot endure too much, since it is
for Love of you, and the two Words which you have put in your Billet, out of
Rank from the rest; are enough to render any thing supportable, and make me
cheerfully embrace Martyrdom. I suppose you have no doubt of it, and that you
are assured of my Resolution, since after having warned me of the Mischief you
intend me, you expect that I should come and meet you: and that after Dinner, I
should voluntarily appear in a place where my Pains are to be increased. These
Menaces would terrify any other but my self, and make a wiser Man than I,
provide for his Security: But whatsoever Danger I foresee, it is impossible for
me to disobey you: Or having the Honor of knowing you so well as I do, to
forbear being,

Madam.
To the same.
I Have forgot all that I should say to -- to whom you would reconcile me, and
I assure you'tis not because I have slept since; I am sorry to have so little
Concern for a Person so well recommended to me, and that not being able to
afford her any room in my Affection, she had no more in my Memory. It Is the
part of my Soul in which I may with most Justice allow her a place, being that
which is most opposite to the Judgment, and wherein things past are laid up.
But if I say any thing obliging to her after Dinner, she shall not be able to
complain that I talk to her by heart; for I find that I Am so much a Stranger to
all that I have to say to her, that if you do not quickly relieve me, you shall
see that I know no more than you, either the Words or Time: I wish you knew no
better that of your departure. For without lying, I have not Courage to endure
the bare thought of it, which stifles in me all others. When I think that to
Morrow you will be no longer here, I am surprised that I am to Day in the
World, and I am ready to confess to you that there is some Faction in this
Love, which I testify, when I consider that I yet breathe, and that my
Displeasure has not yet finished my Days. Others have lost their Speech and
confined themselves to inaccessible Solitudes for less Misfortunes than mine. I
own that I could not go so far from you, to vent my Grief, but I am methinks to
be excused for not seeking a Cell in the Deserts of Egypt, since I hope for a
place in that which you are making. It is this Hope only, which keeps me in the
World, and my Life hangs only on this Expectation. I know not whether all that
I here say be within the bounds of a passionate Friendship, but you cannot
accuse me of speaking too intelligibly, since all my words will bear a double
Construction; nor complain that I do not write to you in such Terms as you
desire, since I never met with the Person that should inform me what those are:
So long as some Allowance is made for my Failings, and that I may tell you some
part of my thoughts, I swear to you by the same Affection that I did Yesterday,
that the only Folly I shall ever be guilty of, shall be always to love the most
aimiable Person that ever was, and that I will be content to be hated by you,
when ever I offer you my Friendship.

To Diana.
By the same Hand.
Madam,
IF you be as sensible of the Uneasiness of not seeing what you love, as I am;
if you suffer, during this Absence, any thing like what I endure; What
Considerations, charming Diana, could prevail upon you, to be two Days without
seeing me? Why do not we rather hazard the other Extremity, than this which our
Misfortune reduces us to? Is it reasonable, to hinder four or five People from
prating and observingour Satisfaction we should sacrifice it, and to prevent a
little Noise, endure so much Misery? No, no, my dear Diana, the greatest
Misfortune that can befall us, is to be separated from one another; I know
nothing that we ought so much to fear: Do not think that our Love is a whit the
more private, for the pains we take to conceal it; the Dejection which is
visible in my Countenance, speaks plainer than any body can do. Let us then lay
aside a Discretion which cost us so dear, and give me, after Dinner, an
Oppertunity of seeing you, if you would have me live.

To the President of the Household.
By ***
Sir,
MAdam de Marsilly believes that I have some Interest in you; and I, who am
vain enough to be thought to have it, have not informed her to the contrary.
She is a Lady esteemed at Court, and that may influence the Parliament; and if
she succeeds in a Cause to be heard before you, believing that I have
contributed to her Success, you cannot imagine the Credit it will do me amongst
the better part of the World: I can propose nothing to bias you farther than
by putting you in mind of my Interest, because you know your own can never
engage you. To serve a Friend, and to do Justice, which is all we demand, are
things the severest Judges may be solicited for; and I shall be sensible you do
'em both to me, if you continue loving me as much as you have done hitherto,
and if you believe that I am

Yours.

To Monsieur d'Emer, Comptroler General of the King's Revenues.
By the same Hand.
Sir,
SInce you will not permit me to mention some of your Letters, pray give me leave
to take notice of that you writ to Monsieur d' Arses upon my Account, and to
tell you, there are very few in France, that can write in such a Manner,
particularly where you say that to accommodate my Affair you will advance a Sum
of Money; you must pardon me, if I am of Opinion that to offer twenty thousand
Livers to do a Friend a Service, is so gallant a way of Writing, that there are
few capable of expressing themselves in such a Style: Even we of the Academy of
the Beaux Esprits, are not able to boast of any Turn of Thought equal to this.

The Abridgment of a Letter to Monsieur d'Avaux.
By the same Hand.
VIs ergo inter nos, quid possit uterque vitissim, Experiamur: No, I beg your
Pardon Sir, Apollo tells me I am overmatch'd, and I am resolved to take his
Advice; nor am I concerned that you have so far exceeded me in your last
Letter, because there you have even exceeded your self: I must tell you, I am
jealous of the very Praises you give me; they are so artful and ingenious, that
I should be prouder of being capable of giving, then receiving them; and the
very Words wherein you tell me how much I am above others, show me how much
more you deserve that Compliment; every Line of your Letter is extraordinary,
especially the Picture you draw of Madam de Longueville, which is so ravishing,
that the sight of the Original could not have transported me more. You say it is
wonderful, that at a Treaty for Peace, you cannot be safe in Munster,
notwithstanding the Pass-ports from the Emperor and the King of Spain; that
is, Sir, you cannot be secure in Munster because Madam de Longueville is there.
When you upbraid me, that you have had but one Letter from me in a whole Year,
and that I cannot hold out to Write twice successively with the same Force, I
cannot but acknowledge that even your reprimands are not less obliging than
your Praise, except where you tell me I am fifty Years old, and where you
upbraid me with my Spectacles and gray Hairs. Before I make an end of this
Letter, I must send you the Compliment of Madam de Sable, and Madam
Monthausier: I have shown them both these Passages of your Letter, where you
speak of Madam de Longueville; for the rest, fear not that any shall see it,
especially that part where you speak of fifty Year old. You must know, that
here I am but forty seven, therefore pray let me be no more at Munster. I had
alomst forgot to tell you, those Ladies commanded me to say, that if you speak
but as well as you write, Madam de Longueville cannot be tedious in any place
where you are. They swear there is no Person upon Earth has Wit enough but your
self, and I tell them that I have thought the same thing this five and twenty
Years; but I must detain you no longer, Ne me Crispini Scrinia lippi,
Compilasse putes. Verbum non amplius addam.


To Madam --.
By Henry Cromwell, Esquire
Madam,
THe Letter which you desired to see, is not worth the least Line of that in
which you command it; but you, who were Yesterday so devout, do you make no
scruple to write such Things in the Holy-week, and do you not apprehend the
Consequence of 'em, and what Effect they may have? I had set my Conscience at
rest, and for that reason had resolved never to see you more. But your Letter
has given me a new Disorder; and as well as another, I have suffered my self to
be overcome by your Pearls, and your four thousand Livers. I could not have
thought, that you would ever have made use of such Means, to regain a Lover, or
that these sort of Things could have had any Power over me: And I assure you,
it is the first time that I have let my self be dazzled with Riches. So to tell
you the Truth, the Pearls were never so well set as they are in your Letter;
and your four thousand Franks as you have managed 'em, are worth more than
three hundred thousand: You are an incomprehensible Person, and I can not
sufficiently Admire, how, without reading Herodotus, and making use of the
Saturnalia, you can write such delicate Letters: As for me, Madam, I begin to
imagine that you have deceived us, I believe you are acquainted with the source
of Nilus, and that Spring from whence you draw all these fine Things, which you
say, is much more secret and unknown: in fine, whatsoever your Steward says,
it is not the Marchioness d' Sable, who is the finest Person in the World: you
have more Charms in a corner of an Eye, than there is in all the rest of the
Earth: Nor have all the Charms of Magic a Power comparable to those you write.

To Madam --.
By the same Hand.
YOu may be assured that neither Grief nor Love will ever be the Death of any
Person, since neither the one nor the other have yet killed me; and that having
been too Days without the Honor of seeing you, I have some appearance of Life
remaining: If any thing could have made me resolve upon a Distance from you,
'twas the Belief I had that Death would have been the only Consequence, and
that so great a Pain as that would not suffer me long to have languished:
Notwithstanding, I find, beyond all my Hopes, that I last much longer than I
imagine; and whatsoever Mortal Wounds I have, I believe, my Soul can not detach
its self from my Heart, because it sees your Image there: This is the only
Pretense that I find not to tax it with Cowardice, and the only Reason that
should detain it so long in a Place, where its Sufferings are so great. From
that Hour when you saw me, dragged by four Horses, and tore in pieces at my
Separation from you: I swear to you, that I have not yet dried my Eyes, and
although they can no longer distinguish Colors, or discern the Light, yet will
they serve more faithfully than ever, in assisting me to Weep for your Absence:
Tormented and Languishing as I am, methinks I am left all alone upon the Earth,
or that I have been transported into that corner of the World, where the Sun is
not much oftener seen, than Comets here with us, and where the shortest Night is
three Months long: But this Misfortune would not be the worst that might befall
me, if this present Night of mine lasted no longer; but I doubt if after so
long time I shall see the Light again: Judge, I beseech you, to what Extremity
I am reduced, that being only at the Entrance of so long and melancholy a
Night, I already begin to count the Hours, and every lingering Moment with
Impatience. Oh! that amidst the Darkness that overwhelms me, there were at
least some Intervals of Repose, and that I could sometimes have pleasing
Dreams, but whatever my waking Dreams are, they are never so Extravagant as to
propose to me any thing agreeable; and my Thoughts are only reasonable in this,
that they never promise me any good in this Condition: I believe that I may
swear to you, that the most unfortunate Man this Day in the World, is he who
Honors you the most; and it were impossible that I could have lived so long,
had I not hoped that it would have soon dispatched me: I plainly see that I
have but fifteen Days more to deplore your Absence; and that my Life and my
Misfortunes can endure no longer: This Hope alone has made me suffer both, with
less Impatience; and I believe you are not displeased at it, since all that I
ought to hope, you are willing to indulge me; at least I cannot explain the
last Words you said to me, more advantageously to my self; and whatsoever way I
take it, I cannot see, what better I have ever to expect: nevertheless, you,
who are more discerning, and see much farther than I can, I beseech you tell
me, if my Passion ought not to have an Event more fortunate than this, and what
might have become of me if I had longer survived it.

To Mons. de Chaudebonne.
By Thomas Cheek, Esquire
Sir,
I Write to you in sight of the Coast of Barbary: There is but a Channel
between us of about three Leagues over; though it is the Ocean, and the
Mediterranean Sea together: You would be surprised to see a Man so far off, who
takes so little Pleasure in Rambling, and who was in such haste to return to
you. But the Advice I received, that this Season was very improper for
Navigation, by reason of the great Calms, and that I should find it very
difficult to Embark before September, has given me at once an Inclination, and
Leisure to pursue this Voyage, for I chose rather to suffer the Fatigue of
Traveling, than the Laziness of Madrid. So that after having seen at Grenada
all that remains of the Magnificence of the Moorish King's El Alhambra, the
Zaccatin, and that famous Place the Vivarambla, where I had formerly imagined
so many Tilts and Tournaments, I am just come to the Point of Gibraltar: From
whence, as soon as they shall have equipped me a Frigot, I hope to pass the
Streights, and visit Ceuta, and coming back from thence, to take the Road of
Cales, St. Lucar, and Sevil, and so to Lisbon. Hitherto, Sir, I have not
repented of this Enterprise, which at this time of the Year has seemed rash to
all the World: Andalousia has reconciled me to all the rest of Spain, and
having passed it in so many other Parts, I should be sorry not to have seen it
in the only Place where it appears Beautiful. You Will think it strange, that I
praise a Country, where it is never Cold, and where the Sugarcanes grow: But
in Recompense, I can assure you, they have such Melons, that 'twere worth
coming four hundred Leagues to taste them; and that Country, for which a whole
People wandered so long in the Wilderness, could not be, in my Opinion, much
more delicious than this is. I am attended here by Slaves, who are hansome
enough to be my Mistresses, and it is permitted me everywhere to gather Palms
without Conquest. This Tree, for which all ancient Greece has fought, which is
not to be found in France, but in our Poets, is here no scarcer than the
Olive Trees; and there is not an Inhabitant on this side who has not more of
them, than all the Caesar's. You may behold at one View the Mountains charged
with Snow, and Valleys covered with Fruit. They have Ice in August, and Grapes
in January: Summer and Winter here are always mixed together, and when the Year
grown old in other Countries, and whitens all the Earth, here it is ever green
with Laurels, Orange Trees and Mirtles. I confess, Sir, I endeavor to make it
seem as beautiful to you as I can; and having complained to you formerly of the
Ill I have met with in Spain, if I do not retract what I have said, I think I
am obliged, at least, to represent to the best Advantage, whatever I find
that is Good in it: In the mean time you will wonder, that a Man so much a
Libertine as I am, should be in haste to quit all this, to go and find his
Master. But I Will swear ours is such a One, that there can be no Pleasure, that
ought to be preferred to the Honor and Satisfaction of Serving him. Liberty,
which is esteemed the most charming Thing in Nature, is not so desirable as his
Highness: You know how little I am inclined to Flattery; and one of the most
remarkable Qualities which distinguishes my Lord, is that he cannot suffer it.
But it must be acknowledged, that besides the eminent Virtues which are owing
to the Greatness of his Birth; his Affability, his good Nature, the Beauty and
Vivacity of his Ingenuity, the Pleasure he takes in hearing witty Things, and
the Grace with which he speaks them himself, are Qualities which can hardly be
found any where to that degree, as they appear in him; and if it were only to
see something extraordinary, that I ramble about the World, what need I give
myself the trouble to go so far, when I should do much better to keep near his
Person. I examine every thing I see with more Curiosity than I naturally have,
that when the time serves I may give a satisfactory Account to his Highness:
And I am well assured, that when I shall have once had the Honor to discourse
with him about these Matters, he will know'em ever after better than I do. The
prodigious Memory of this Prince, has been a mighty Comfort to me during my
Absence; for having had the Honor to be in it some time ago, I don't question
but I have a place there still, because I can hardly imagine, that I am so
unfortunate as to be the only thing he ever forgot. His Highness, who never
forgot a Tribune nor an Aedile, nor even a Legionary Soldier, who has once been
named in History, will not, I believe, forget one of his humble Servants; and
the whole Globe being in his Imagination better represented than in any Map of
the World, let me go never so far, I need not fear for that to go out of the
Honor of his Remembrance. Nevertheless, I humbly entreat you, Sir, (you who
with so much Goodness, procure me all sorts of Honors and Advantages) to find
an opportunity to tell my Lord, how much I desire to have the Honor to kiss
his Hand; and the Prayers I make continually for a Life of so great Consequence
to all Mankind. If after this I desire any thing more of you, it is only that
you would be pleased to take care that time shall diminish no part of what you
have so liberally given me in your Affection: But see, how far the Excess of
mine has carried me, that it makes me doubt the most generous Man a live. You
who know, Sir, that in all those that love much, there are always some Motions
that are not conformable to Reason, pardon, (...) beseech you, this Fear, and
consider that (...) am excuseable, being with so much Passion.

Yours, etc.

To my Lady Abbess, to thank her for the Cat which she sent him.
By Mr. Oldys.
Madam,
I Was so perfectly yours before, that I imagined you ought to have believed
there was no need of Presents to secure me to you, nor that you should have
contrived to catch me like a Rat, with a Cat. However, I must needs own, that
your Liberality has created in me some new Affection for you; and if there had
been yet any thing in my Soul that was straggling from your Service, the Cat you
sent me has caught it, and now it is entirely your own. It Is certainly the most
beautiful and jolliest Cat that e're was seen: The greatest Beau-cat of Spain,
is but a dirty Puss compared to him; and Rominagrobis himself, who you know,
Madam, is Prince of the Cats, has no better a Mein, nor can better smell out
his Interest. I can only say, that it is very hard to keep him in, and that of a
Cat brought up in Religion, he is the most uneasy to be confined to a
Cloister. He can never see a Window open, but immediately he is for jumping out
of it; he had e're this leaped twenty times over the Walls, had he not been
prevented; and there is no Secular Cat in Christendom that is more a Libertine,
or more headstrong than he. I am in hopes, however, that I shall persuade him
to stay by the kind Entertainment I give him; for I treat him with nothing but
good Cheese and Naples-Biskets; and perhaps (Madam) he was not so well treated
by you: For I fancy the Ladies of -- don't suffer their Cats to go into their
Cupboards, and that the Austerity of the Convent will not afford 'em such good
Cheer. He begins to grow tame already; Yesterday I thought verily he had torn
off one of my Hands in his wanton Addresses. It Is doubtless, one of the most
playful Creatures in the World; there is neither Man, Woman nor Child, in my
Lodging, that wears not some Mark of his Favor. But however lovely he is in
his own Person, it shall always be for your sake that I esteem him; and I shall
love him so well, for the Love I have for you, that I hope to give occasion to
alter the Proverb, and that hereafter it shall be said, Who Loves me, Loves my
Cat. If besides this Present you will give me the Raven that you promised me;
and if you will send me an Elephant in a Hand-basket one of these Days, you may
as proudly say that you have given me all the sorts of Beasts that I love, and
every way obliged me to be, all the Days of my Life,

Yours, etc.
A Comical Letter, out of the famous Monsieur de Colletier, to Mademoiselle de
Choux.
By Sir D. Clark, Knight.
Madam,
DId you ever see an Almanac in your Life? You Will say this is an odd Question.
I Will give you the Reason then, why I asked it: There Is an odd sort of a Fellow
usually pictured in it, Madam, with the Devil knows how many Darts in his Body.
And what of him? cry you. Why Madam, he is only a Type of your humble Servant,
for that Son of a Whore Cupid has so pink'd me all over with his confounded
Arrows, that, by my Troth, I look like -- let me think, like what; -- like your
Ladiship's Pin-cushion. But this is not all: Your Eyes had like to have proved
more fatal to me than Cupid and all his Roguery: for, Madam, while I was
Star-gazing the other Night at your Window, full of Fire and Flame (as we Lovers
use to be) I dropped plumb into your Fish Pond, by the same Token, that I hissed
like a red-hot Horseshooe flung into a Smith's Trough. 'Twas a hundred Pound to
a Penny, but I had been drowned, for those that came to my Assistance, left me
to shift for my self, while they sorambled for boiled Fish, that were as
plentiful as Herrings at Roterdam. Some of my Fellow Sufferers I caught, of
which I intend to make an Offering to your Ladyship, as well as of, Madam,

Your most devoted Slave, COLLETIER.

The End of the first Part of Voiture's Letters.
Twelve Select EPISTLES, OUT OF ARIST AENETVS, Epist. 2. Lib. 1.
Translated from the GREEK.

I Was a singing to my self one of the newest Songs last Evening in the Piazza,
when a very merry Adventure befell me: Two pretty young Ladies in the bloom of
their Youth, and inferior to the Graces in nothing but their Number, came up
to me, and the Elder of them, with a Look that had nothing of the Air of a
Coquette in it, was pleased to greet me after the following manner:

Whatever you may think of the matter, Sir, you have made two Conquests to
Night by your Voice: Love has found a way to our Souls through our Ears; we are
both subdued by your Harmony, and have had a long Debate with our selves, for
which of us you intended this Entertainment. My own Vanity made me believe it
was meant for me; my Companion here is as positive that the Compliment was
designed for her. Thus not being able to decide the Controversy among
ourselves, which had like to have engaged us in a Civil War, we both agreed to
have it determined by yourself.

Why faith, Ladies, replied I, to them, you are both of you very Handsome; but
the Duce take me if I am in love with either of you: therefore I would advise
you, as a Friend and a Plain-dealer, not to quarrel about such an insignificant
Fellow as I am, but to let all Acts of Hostility cease, and live like good
Neighbors together: Not but that I believe I could be heartily in Love with
both, or either of you at any other time, but at present my Heart is engaged
elsewhere; and I am confident you have more Generosity and Justice than to
usurp the Property of another, or to take up with the Leavings of Love.

Oh! cried they, this is a downright Sham. There is not one handsome Woman in
this Quarter of the Town, yet you pretend to be in Love; it is plain we have
caught you in a Story, therefore you shall swear that you love neither of us.

I could not but laugh at the Proposal: Why, Ladies, said I, every thing I have
is at your Service; but I have a tender Conscience, and would not willingly be
perjured.

That is as we would have it, said one of 'em; we knew the Truth would come out
one way or other, therefore resolve to come along with us, for we will not lose so
fair an Opportunity. With that both the Damsels fell a tugging and hawling me
forward; they plucked one way, and I plucked another; but you know the Proverb,
Two to one is odds at Football; so I was forced to submit to my Destiny, and
go along with 'em whither they were pleased to lead me. So far the Story may be
read or heard by all the World, but what follows is a Secret: In short, not to
set your Mouth a Watering with a Description of every Particular, I was carried
to a Room, where we made an extemporary Bed with Chairs and Stools; so
ingenious is Love when it is put to its Shifts. The two good natured Nymphs
were not disappointed; and your humble Servant went off well satisfied with his
good Fortune.

Glycera to Philinna.
Out of the same, Epist. 3. Lib. 2.

SOme ill Demon certainly owed me a Spite, (by the same Token he more than got
out of my Debt) when I was prevailed upon to marry this dull Phlegmatic Lawyer
of mine; for I Will tell you after what a horrid rate he uses me: Every Night,
when other Husbands, as in Duty bound, solace their poor Wives a Bed, my Man of
Law sits up, pretending he has a Conveyance to draw for my Lord -- and then,
says he, I Am to make a Speech in the Court to Morrow for my Client Sir John --
and if I have it not by heart, there will be the Devil and all to do; with that
he walks about the Room in a meditating Posture, to make me believe he is in
earnest, mumbling I know not what unintelligible Stuff to himself. Since he has
not Assets enough, as far as I can perceive, to discharge the Debt of
Matrimony, why should he marry, I wonder, to inslame his Reckoning? Why should
a Man that does not want a Wife to humble his Constitution, pretend to
Monopolize a young Virgin to himself, especially when he wants either Will or
Ability to do her Justice? Did he choose to make me his Spouse only to deafen me
with impertinent Stories of Executions, Answers, Ejectments, and impertinent
Decrees? Could he think I could ever prove such a supple Slave, as to sit up
all Night to pore over a dull Statute-book? Since I find he puts my Bedchamber
to no other use, then to profane it with nasty Pettyfogging, I am resolved for
the future to have a separate Bed by my self: If this will not reform him, but he
still continues an incorrigible Sot, drudging in other Peoples Business, and
neglecting mine, I am resolved to show him a Rowland for his Oliver, and to
speak to some more able Council to manage my Law-case. This I hope is enough to
make you comprehend my Meaning; you are a sensible Woman, experienced in these
Affairs, and therefore a Hint is sufficient. Consider then, my dear Friend, and
tell me how I must play this Game. You are a Woman, and understand the
Necessities of our Sex, and though I have not named my Disease to you in
downright Terms, (for my Modesty would not give me leave to do that) yet since
you know the Nature of it, I hope you will be my Doctress, and prescribe me a
Remedy. It Is but reasonable, I think, that you, who are my near Relation, and
besides have a good Tallent at Composing of Differences, should stand my Friend
at this Juncture: Besides, as you had a great hand in making this wicked Match,
you are obliged in Honor, to make it supportable to me. But above all, it will
be requisite to be very secret, for should my litigious Blade come to hear that
I apply my self to other Council, he may reject me for good and all, and so
what I get in the Hundred, I may lose in the County.

Cyrtion to Dictys.
Out of the same, Epist. 7. Lib. 1.

DIstracted between Joy and Grief, I write the following Lines to you:
Yesterday I was at my old Recreation of Fishing by the Seaside, and as I was
drawing a thundering Fish out of the Water, so very large that it made my Rod
crack again, behold there comes up to me a pretty Damosel, with a lovely
mixture of Roses and Lillies in her Cheeks, tall and strait as a Cedar that
likes the Ground it grows in. Thought I to myself, I Am a lucky Dog to Day,
Fortune favors me in both Elements, and now I am like to get a better Prize at
Land than I drew just now out of the Water: Honest Friend, cries she, I conjure
you by Neptune, to look after my Clothes a little, while I wash my self in the
Sea. This Request, you may imagine, was not unwelcome to me, because it would
give me an Opportunity to see something. She had no sooner thrown off her
Rigging; but, good Heavens! there was a sight enough to have spoiled the most
virtuous Resolutions of the severest Philosopher: From between her Hair, which
was of a lovely Black, and flowed down in great Quantity, I discovered a pair
of Rosy Cheeks, and an Ivory Neck, that wholly possessed me with Admiration and
Surprise: both these Colors were in the highest perfection, but they derived
no little agreement from the neighborhood of the Black. To return to our
Nymph, she had no sooner undressed, but she plunged foremost into the Waves.
The Sea was as smooth as a Bowling-green, and when she appeared above the
Water, had I not seen her before, I durst have sworn she was one of the
Nereids, of whom the Poets tell us so many Stories. When she had washed as long
as she thought fit, out she came; and from such a sight as this, our Painters,
I suppose, were instructed how to draw Venus rising out of the Sea. I
immediately ran to my lovely Damosel to deliver her her Clothes, and when she
was so near me, could not forbear to touch her Bubbies, and so forth. But to
see what ill Fate attends me! The young Gypsy blushed and frowned at me: But
even her very Anger became her; it gave a fresh Luster to her Beauty, and her
Eyes darted Lightning at me. Then in her Indignation she broke my Rod flung my
Fish into the Sea, and ran away from me, as fast as her Legs would carry her.
Imagine in what a Confusion she left me. I lamented the loss of what I had
taken with so much Pains; but the loss of her, whom I had as it were in my
Hands, afflicted me infinitely more. This Disappointment, in short, so
mortifies me, that I dare no longer trust my self with the cruel Idea of it.

Philochorus to Polyaenus.
Out of the same, Epist. 4. Lib. 1.

LAst Week Hippias and I were taking a turn in the Park, when on a sudden he
thus alarmed me: Friend, says he, prithee mind that Lady yonder that leans upon
her Maid's Arm. How tall! how strait! how well-featur'd she is! By Heavens,
it is a Miracle of a Woman: Let us even cross the Walk and accost her. Why,
replied I to him, you're mad I think: Unless I am mistaken in her Outside,
she is a Woman of Virtue, and consequently no Game for such as you and I: But if
you resolve to proceed, let us view her a little more distinctly before we
board her, for I love to look about me before I leap. My Companion fell a
Laughing, as if he had been distracted, and striking me gently on the Shoulder,
You Are a Novice, said he, I find in these Affairs. Take it from me, all the
Women in the World are made of sinful Materials. One may have more Hypocrisy
than another, but if you put it home to her, I Will engage you will find her made
of true Flesh and Blood. But alas, you are a perfect Stranger to the
Townintrigues, otherwise could you imagine that any Woman of Honor would be
walking here at this time of the Day, and dart her Glances so artfully on all
she meets? Prithee observe how she plays with her Necklace, how slily she
steals her pretty Hand out of her Glove; and as if she went to reform some
Disorder in her Dress, how dexterously she discovers her Breasts? From these
and a thousand other Indications I conclude that this Lady will not let a Man sigh
at her Feet in vain: but what is more convincing, I now tipped the Wink at her,
and she as kindly returned it; therefore let us go and board the Vessel, for I
dare engage she will make no Resistance. He had no sooner spoke these Words, but
he makes directly to the Prize above mentioned, and finding a fit Opportunity,
he thus made his Addresses to her: I swear by your Beauty, the most sacred Oath
to me that can be, you have made your self in a Moment the absolute Sovereign
of my Heart; and if you please to order that Eves-dropping Maid of yours, to
retire to some distance, I have something to communicate to you, which perhaps
you will not be displeased to hear. She accordingly commanded her Attendant to
file off, when the other in this manner persued his Discourse, As I know that
Love is no Camelion to live upon Air, I am not so unreasonable as to demand any
Favors of you gratis: And, on the other hand, Madam, I am sure you are too
conscientious to put too high a Price on 'em. Gold, you know, may be too dearly
bought; but I hope you will comply with the running Market-price; I have Madam,
two things to plead for me, Vigor and Wealth, but I would by my good Will
husband both of 'em so, as to make 'em hold out: Come give me your Answer. The
Lady's Eyes sufficiently declared the Consent of her Heart; she stood still and
blushed, and such a beautiful Red streaked her Cheeks, as we find in the
Heavens when the Sun is just a setting. When my Friend found the Bargain was
now as good as struck, he turned about to me; And what do you think now of my
Skill in these Affairs? you would have diswaded me forsooth, from this
Expedition, but now you see how I have succeeded; for, at the expense of a few
Words and a little Time I have brought the Nymph to surrender. You alas, are
such a Heretic, as to believe there are Women in the World above Flattery,
Corruption and Bribery; but you are in a damned Mistake; follow me, and I Will
show you some Sport: but in the mean time take this for granted, That there is
no Garrison so strong, and no Woman so obstinately virtuous, but by one
Practice or other, both may be brought to take a new Master.

Lamprias to Philippides.
Out of the same, Epist. 16. Lib. 1.

YOu remember me troubled with all the Symptoms of Love, and desire to know how
I got cured of it; I used to entertain my Passion in the Fields and solitary
Groves, which instead of abating, grew every Day fiercer, and raged more
violently in my Breast. As I walked by the purling Streams, May Cupid, said I,
and his Mother, (for they, and only they, know what Torments I languish under,)
give me Courage enough to make a Declaration of my Passion, which hitherto I
have stifled within me. As Love has transfixt with his Darts this tender Breast
of mine, so I hope he will in the same manner, treat the fair Insensible, who
has given me so many cruel Inquietudes. One Day it happened that after I had
amused my self with these Contemplations in the Woods, I found I had Resolution
enough to venture an Interview with my Mistress. I went accordingly to her
House, and had a long Conversation with her, wherein I found the Beauties of
her Mind, to be not at all inferior to those of her Face: Her Looks wore all
the bewitching Marks of the most agreeable Innocence; I admired her Hand, the
whitest and softest in the World: I viewed with sacred Horror, those charming
Eyes, that penetrate quicker and deeper than Lightning. To complete my Ruin,
she showed me a delicious pair of Breasts as it were by accident, on which the
God of Love himself, would be proud to recline his Head. All this while my
Tongue was tied with a religious Awe, and I had not Assurance enough to
acquaint her with my Pain. However, I was very intent on my mental Devotion,
and prayed to Cupid, that since he knew my Imbecility so well (which I wholly
imputed to himself) he would so effectually touch my Mistress's Heart that she
of her own accord, should own her Affection for me. I had no sooner concluded
these pious Ejaculations, but I found the God had heard my Prayers; for my
Mistress, who looked so Coy and Demure at my first coming into the Room, on the
sudden, smiled very graciously upon me, and gently squeezed me by the Hand; and
then no longer able to conceal the Vehemence of her Desires, she impressed so
warm a Kiss on my Lips, that I was in good hopes, the Seal would never have
pared from the Wax: All the Sweets of Arabia the Happy, all the fragrant Odours
of the Eastern World, all the blooming Beauties of the Spring, and the Wealth
of Summer: in short, all the Incense that is offered on the Altars of our Gods,
comes infinitely short of the natural Sweetness of her Breath. But here I will
stop my Narration, for what need I trouble my self to send every Particular to
you, who are old enough to imagine 'em of your self. Only this I will add, That
we strove all Night long, which of us should express their Love in the most
Emphatical Manner; and that, that saucy Intruder, sleep found us too well
employed to offer to interrupt us.

Philomatia to Eumusus.
Out of the same, Epist. 14. Lib. 1.

THis comes to let you know that we are not so bewitched to Music as you
imagine, and that the best Lute and Guitar in the World will make but little
Progress, unless it comes attended with the more powerful Harmony of Money. Why
then do you give your self and me the unnecessary trouble of so many Serenades?
Why must you employ your Hands to show the Passion of your Heart? Why do you
persecute me with your Sonnets, and sing under my Windows? Since Beauty's
Charms do hourly fade,
And a Scandal it is to be reckoned a Maid;
Let not Love's Pleasures be delayed.
You are old enough, one would think, to know that Money atones for all Defects
with us Women, and that Beauty and Vigor have no Merit with us, if they have
no Gold to recommend 'em: But you think me an easy, foolish, good-natured
Creature, who am to be imposed on by any wheedling Stories. You fancied, I
suppose, that I never had been initiated the Mysteries of our Profession and
that I would immediately surrender to you, upon the first stroke of your
Violin, and the first touch of the Lute; but to undeceive you, know that I was
bred up under the most experienced Mistress of her time; who formed my tender
Mind with wholesome Precepts; telling me, that nothing under the Sun was sincere
or desirable but Money; and teaching me to despise every thing but that. Under
her Instructions, and by her virtuous Example, I have profited so much, that I
now measure Love, not by vain empty Compliments, that signify nothing, but by
the Presents that are made me, and by the Almighty Rhetoric of Gold, which
will stand my Friend, when a thousand such fluttering Weather-cocks as you have
left me in the Lurch.

Terpsion to Polycles.
Out of the same, Epist. 7. Lib. 2.

TO convince you how insensibly Love gets Admission into the most innocent
Hearts, be pleased to read over the following Story: A young Country Girl, fell
desperately in Love with her Mistress's Gallant, and took Fire herself, while
she contributed to ease that of others. Being obliged to keep Watch upon the
Stairs, lest the Lovers should be surpised, she could not but often hear their
Murmuring and Sighing: She saw 'em too folded in one another Embraces,
performing the Ceremony of Love; and thus through the Eyes and Ears of this
tender Girl, the God of Love, with his Torch and Arrows plunged himself over
Head and Ears in her panting Breast. She bewailed the Unhappiness of her
Condition, and accused her Destiny for giving her a Mind susceptible of the
most tender Impressions, yet, denying her the Means to satisfy them: Why should
not I, said she, participate Pleasure with my Mistress, since I have a Soul as
sensible as hers? Why should Love, that tramples over all Distinctions of Rank
and Quality, show himself a Dastard only in respect to me? But she did not long
afflict herself with these unprofitable Complaints. Venus would not suffer her
to lose the Time in lazy Wishes, for being sent one Afternoon to invite the
Gallant to her Mistress's Lodgings, without any farther Preamble or Preface,
she accosted him in this manner: Sir, said she, I believe you to be a
Gentleman, and willing to ease the Longing of a young Virgin: If my Face will
go down with you, that, and the rest of my Body are at your Service. You know
well enough what it is to Love, and therefore will have Compassion, I hope, on
one that languishes under that Distemper. The Gentleman without farther ado,
took her at her word, and was so courteous as to play the Priest, since she was
so willing to be the Sacrifice. He soon eased her of that Burden she complained
of, and owned that he never received more Pleasure in his Life. The Kisses of
married Women are generally insipid; the Kisses of mercenary Harlots are
fallacious and deceitful; but those of an innocent, uninstructed Virgin are
true, and consequently delicious. Our Lovers had like to have fainted away
under the Violence of their Agitation; their Souls hovered about their Mouths,
but their uninterrupted Kisses denied them a Passage: While the golden Minutes
passed away in these Transports, the Mistress, who was seized with a Fit of
Jealousy to see them stay so long, stole softly into the Room, and surprised
them in very criminal Circumstances. The unhappy Maid found the first Effects
of her Indignation, whom she thump'd and beat, and dragged by the Hair, but the
poor Wench entreated her to consider, that though her ill Stars had sent her a
Slave into the World, which was none of her Fault, she had as strong
Inclinations as the best of her Sex: that Love was an Imperious Deity; and when
he had once got Entrance into a Heart, would not throw up his Possession, as
she her self could not but know by Experience. Wherefore, Madam, says she, in
consideration of Love, who is our common Master, and whose Yoke both of us
carry, be pleased to forgive this Indiscretion in me: which, after the worst
Gloss you can put upon it, was only the Effect of a foolish Curiosity, from
which the best of Women are not exempt. These Complaints so innocently
delivered, soon appeased her Mistress's Fury, who, taking her Gallant by the
Hand, thus rallied him; I find, cries she, you are of the Humor of some People,
who had rather gather sour Grapes, than stay till they are Ripe. What could
make you so foolishly trifle your time with a silly raw Baggage, that is so far
from knowing how to perform her part in the Chorus of Love, that she does not
yet understand how to level her Kisses aright; which are but a Prologue to the
busier Drama that follows. A Virgin is dull and heavy, and unacquainted with
the true Management of a Passion; whereas, such a Woman, as I am, that has
tried many a Fall with many a Man in her time, needs not the Instructions of
any one, but gives the utmost Satisfaction: In short, a Woman gives, but a
Virgin only receives Kisses, which makes a sensible Difference between them;
And this, continued she to her Spark, you know well enough; but, if you want to
have your Memory refreshed, come to me to Night, and I will make you own I am
in the right.

What happened upon this, I cannot tell, neither am I curious to know, because
all Men affect to Govern themselves by their own peculiar Palates, but
especially in the Business of Love.

A Letter of Gallantry, from a young Gentleman, to his Perjured Mistress.
Out of the same, Epist. 9. Lib. 2.

IF you consider, Madam, what ill Treatment I have had from your Hands, you are
in the right on it to believe that I hate you most mortally; but then if you
reflect what an absolute Empire your Beauty has gained over my Soul, you cannot
but be sensible that it is impossible for me to harbor the least injurious
Thought of you. To convince you how far I interest my self in every thing that
concerns you, I swear to you by that adorable Face, which has made so perfect
a Conquest of me, That next to the Grief of losing you, I am in the next place
concerned to think what Punishments Heaven has in store for you, for affronting
it by so open, so barefaced a Perjury. Love has so effectually stifled all
Resentments within me, that I dare not entertain the least disadvantagious
Wishes against you. But though I am ready to forgive you, I am afraid least the
Powers above should call you to an account for violating their Majesty by a
Crime so provoking. If the thing wholly depended on me, you might fafely stare
Heaven in the Face, after you have so often called down its Vengeance on your
Head; but my Fear is, (and my Concern for you, obliges me to tell you so much)
that the Gods will not be so ready to pardon you, as I have been; and any
Misfortune of yours would asflict me more, than to find my self neglected and
forgotten by you. I impute my Miseries to Destiny, not to you, (you see Madam,
I would rather judge injuriously of Heaven than of your self) and I will never
cease to pray, that Justice it self may be blind, that so you may escape the
Punishments you deserve, and rather than those bright Eyes should suffer any
thing, though they have caused my Ruin. Nay, if it should be your chance to
trespass once more, and offend Heaven again, I hope it will have a due Regard
to the Weakness of your Youth. I am content to sacrifice my Pretensions to you;
I, who would sooner part with the Indies than your self, provided that you be
no Sufferer. Farewell charming Creature, farewell; and may Fate be as indulgent
to you, as I have been: Show me now if you can, a Lover like me, who after such
cruel Usage ever writ so humble a Letter.

Abrocomas to his dear Delphis.
Out of the same, Epist. 21. Lib. 2.

You Will be angry perhaps at the frank Confession, I am going to make to you. I
examine with curious Eyes all the Women I see, I go to all the places of
public Resort, and no Female escapes me; pray, Madam, don't think I do this to
carry on any Intrigue with 'em (for I would not have you put so unjust a
Construction upon my Expressions) it is only to see how much your Beauty
surpasses theirs, and to be able to do the more Justice to your Merits. Yes,
Madam, by Cupid I swear it, who never had a devouter Votary then my self, you
surpass the rest of your Sex in Dress, Beauty, and the Agreeableness of your
Deportment: Your Charms are so conspicuous and shining, that they need no
Artifice to set 'em off: a natural Red adorns your Cheeks; neither do you lie
under any necessity to load your Head with that cumbersome Attire, other Women
take a Pride in. You have the loveliest Hair in the Universe; Who can behold so
black a pair of Eyebrows, in so fair and white a Forehead, and not own himself
your Slave? I dare not trust my Invention, as fertle as it is, with venturing
upon more Particulars. In short, Madam, all the Perfections of your Sex center
in you; and your Empire is never so safe, as when you appear amongst our most
celebrated Beauties. Your sight alone, as it creates our Astonishment, so it
commands our Love; and to make a new Triumph, you need only appear to a new
Beholder. Since my Life is entirely wrapped up in yours, I wish you may live long
and happy. All my Inclinations, all my Hopes and Thoughts terminate in you; and
I earnestly beg of Heaven, that I may always continue in this Opinion. Enjoy
that Conquest therefore which Nature has given you, and I will everlastingly
carry Love's Golden Dart in my Breast. Neither do you endeavor to pluck it out
from thence, for besides that, you are not able to do it, I don't desire to
have it done, for I take pleasure in nothing so much as in my Passion. May it
always be the Scope of my whole Life to love Delphis, and may it be my Fate to
be beloved by her, to be subdued by her Beauty, and charmed by her Conversation.

Oceanius to Aristobulus.
Out of the same, Epist. 20. Lib. 2.

YOu desire to know what Progress our Friend Damon has made in the Affections
of his Mistress, whom he has so long besieged, and I am sorry I cannot send
you so good News as I could wish: He threw himself down at her Feet, and in the
common strain of Lovers; will you not, says he, take compassion on my Youth?
Will you not pity one that dies every Moment for you? Show at least some
Tenderness to the Man, who never was conquered by any Beauty but yours? But she
returned him a Compliment, as cold as if it had come out of the midst of
Tartary: Leave persecuting me, says she, with idle Stories of your Passion,
with your pretended Darts, and your Romantic Flames, for you do but lose your
Time and Labor. The Youth was reduced to the last Despair, when he found
himself thus slighted, and as Anger on these Occasions generally succeeds to
Love, he said the most reproachful bitter things against her, that his
Indignation could inspire him with. When his Fury had spent it self, looking
upon him with a scornful Air, I know, says she, how to punish the Insolences of
your Tongue: All your Sex are perfidious and false; You devour us, nay, you
devour one another. The most savage Beasts in the Woods, unless compelled by
Hunger, seldom attack the Travelers, but when they are taken by you, and have
been debauched with a Domestic Education, they prove erranter Brutes than any
in the Forest; to be short with you, your Perjury and Inconstance teach us to
lay aside all pity, and treat you as you deserve: for in the first Ardors of
your Love, you can lie all Night at our Thresholds on the bare Ground; you can
say the most submissive things in the World; you can whine and cry, and make
Goddesses of us; you have Oaths perpetually at command, and with those Counters
you deceive us; but no sooner have we granted the last Favors to you, but you
grow insolent and haughty; you make us the Subject of your ill-manner'd Mirth,
and you disdainfully reject her, whom the Hour before you adored like a
Divinity. You are all Atheists as to Love, and pretend that Jupiter has other
Business on his Hands, then to trouble himself with the Oaths of Lovers.

Thus the Lady discarded the unfortunate Lyco; and, as partial as I am to my
Friend, I cannot but own there is a great deal of Truth in her Invective.

Chrysis to Myrina.
Out of the same, Epist. 15. Lib. 11.

YOu and I, my dearest Myrina, have long languish'd under the Tyranny of Cupid,
who is the most Fantastical of all the Deities. You are in Love with my
Husband, and it is my unhappy Destiny, (But who can resist the God who commands
all the rest?) to dote on your Page. What Expedient will Love, who uses to be
no Block-head when he is put to his shifts, what Expedient, I say, will Love
find out, to put an end to our present Sufferings? You know I am a constant
Woman at Prayers, and if a Woman ever prays for any thing in good earnest, you
likewise know, it is when she prays for a kind Gallant. Now to be plain with
you, I put up a fervent Petition to Heaven this Morning, that it would furnish
a Remedy for both our Passions; when immediately the following ing Thought came
into my Head: I will not be positive, as our Priests generally are, that this
Whimsie of mine is of Heaven's inspiring; but it seems so easy, so pretty, and
so feasible, that I am resolved with your help to see it put in Execution.

The Stratagem in short is this: Do you pretend to be very angry with your
Page, upon what Occasion you think most proper, whether for tearing your Fan,
beating your Squirrel, or so forth, but be sure to turn him out of your House.
The better to color this Business, I will give you leave to strike him a Blow
or two, but I article beforehand with you, that you shall not hurt him. Upon this
I know he will immediately run to me, as being your greatest Acquaintance, and
I will take care to dispatch my Husband on an Errand to you, under pretense of
interceding for the Boy, that you would be so kind as to take him into your
Service again. By this Means both of us will have a fair Opportunity to
satisfy our Longings, which, for my part, I will see punctually performed,
unless your Page is a very ignorant Devil indeed; and I suppose you will not be
wanting to your self. But, my dear Myrina, remember to keep my Husband with you
as long as you can, for that you know will be for our mutual Interest. I can
tell you beforehand, that you will not be disappointed in my Spark; I that
have so often experienced how well he performs upon Duty, am satisfied he will
outdo a Hero, when Wickedness spurs him on. Farewell.

Stesichorus to Eratosthenes.
Out of the same, Epist. 9. Lib. 1.

TO see now what cunning Gypsies these Women are! The Other Day a certain Woman
of my Acquaintance, walking in the Marketplace with her Husband by her side,
and a Train of Servants at her heels, saw a Gallant of hers at some distance
off, with whom she used to be familiar. She had a mighty longing to whisper
something in his Ear, and if possible to steal a Kiss from him before her
Husband's Face; so to bring the matter about, she pretends to fall upon her
Knee, and her Gallant, who as it seemed, understood her Design, charitably lent
her his Hand to help her up: Then down she tumbles again, and our Gentleman was
forced the second time to give her his Assistance. Oh! my poor Wife, cries the
Cuckold, in a strange Consternation, I hope thou have not hurt thy self.
Troubled with such cruel Fits, cried she; and then she made the third Stumble.
The Gallant on one side, and the Husband on the other did what in 'em lay to
set her on her Legs again, but as her Fits still increast, the Husband, with
the help of the kind Gentleman, was obliged to carry her to the next Tavern:
The Gallant chafed her Hand, and rubbed her Face; and all the while the Fellow
thanked him for the great Pains he took with his Wife: but finding her
Indisposition still increase, he ran down Stairs like Lightning to fetch a
Physician of his Acquaintance to her, not daring to trust his Servants with so
important a Message. In the mean time our Lovers, were not wanting to
administer mutual Consolation to each other: So by that time the Husband came
back with his Doctor, his Wife was exceedingly refreshed. The Gallant was
complimented a thousand times for his Civilities on this Occasion: Sir, says
the Man, I heartily beg your Pardon for the Trouble my Wife has given you. Lord
Sir, answered he, if it was to do ten times again, it would be no trouble. But
indeed 'twas too much, Sir. In Faith, cries the other, I don't think I can ever
do too much for her. I swear but you have, says the Husband, I find she has
put you into a Sweat with helping her. In short, they drank a loving Glass
together; the Wife pretended she was twenty per Cent. better than when she set
out in the Morning; the Gallant was highly satisfied with what he had done, and
the Husband was the merriest Man alive, to see his Wife so miraculously
recovered.

The End of Aristaenetus's Epistles.
Some Select LETTERS, OUT OF PLINY, Junior.
Made English by T. Brown, Gent.
I Am to inform the Reader, that in the following Letters, I have not confined
my self to a literal Version. Where I found any place so perplexed that no
certain Sense could be made of it, or where it could not be understood without
a Comment, (which would have looked ridiculous in such a Collection as this.) I
have fairly omitted it, and sometimes I have made bold to alter a Word or two
to make my Author more palatable to the English Reader. As for the Choice I
have made of the Letters, if they are not the best, I hope they will not
displease.

To his dear Friend Romanus.
Lib. 3.

AT your Request, I have sent you the Panegyric I lately delivered before our
most incomparable Trajan
Prince, although I had sent it to you whether you had desired it or no. Now you
have it before you, I must beg you to reflect upon the Difficulty, as well as
the Nobleness of the Subject. Upon other Occasions, the Newness of the Argument
generally draws our Attention, but here it was impossible for me to say any
thing which all the World did not know before: for which Reason, the Reader
having nothing else to employ him, will only mind the Elocution, in which it is
a hard matter for a Man to succeed well, when that, and only that, is esteemed.
I could wish that the Order, Transitions, and Figures could be considered at
the same time: for in the barbarous Nations, you shall find several that are
able to invent handsomely, and to express themselves magnificently enough;
whereas to dispose of things in their proper Order, and to vary the Figures
with Art and Judgment, is only the Talent of the Learned. I am of Opinion
indeed, that the sublime and pompous Style is not always to be used; for as in a
Picture, nothing sets off the Light so well as an artful Disposition of the
Shades, so an Oration is no less recommended by the Simplicity than the Majesty
of the Diction. But why should I trouble you with these things, who know them
so much better than my self? In the mean time I beg the favor of you, to mark
what places you shall think want Correction; for I shall be the easier inclined
to believe that the rest of the Oration pleases you, when I find you dislike
some Passages in it. Farewell.

To his dear Geminius.
Lib. 8.

'TWas the noblest thing you ever attempted in your Life, to relate the Dacian
War in Verse: For, besides the newness of it, what Subject is more Copious and
Fertile, what more Poetical, and, though we all know it to be true, what more
seemingly Fabulous? You will have a noble Occasion to employ all the Stores of
your Invention: when you talk of Rivers commanded to take a new Course, or
bridled by new Bridges, that before were hardly to be passed in Boats, when you
talk of Armies encamped on the tops of Precipices, and mighty Kings who had
grasped the whole Universe in his Imagination, not only despoiled of his
Kingdom but his Life: In short, when you come to describe two magnificent
Triumphs, both of which were celebrated for the Reduction of a Nation held
Invincible before: The only and greatest Difficulty will be, to express all
this in a Strain equal to the Dignity of the Subject; which even you, my
Friend, will find to be no easy Task, although you have a towering, elevated
Genius, capable of the highest undertakings. Some little Trouble too you will
find it, to soften the Names of these barbarous People, and particularly of
their Towns, so as they shall not shock our Ears, when they come into Verse;
but there is nothing so harsh and dissonant but what may be made harmonious, or
at least tolerable with a little Care and Alteration. Besides, if it was lawful
for Homer to contract, to extend, and turn Words, even of Grecian Extraction,
for the better Cadence of his Verse, why should not the same Privilege be
allowed you, especially since it is not affected but necessary? Therefore, when
after the Custom of the Poets, you have invoked the Help of the Muses, and
especially of your Hero, their greatest Patron, whose noble Achievements and
Actions you are going to Sing, weigh Anchor, put up all your Sails, and if ever
you did it upon any Occasion, so now more particularly hoist your Flag, display
your Colors, and bear down with all the Force of Wit. These Metaphors perhaps
may seem too daring for Prose; but why may I not be indulged to speak in the
Poetical Language to a Poet? But this I bargain with you beforehand, that you
shall send me your Poem in pieces just as you finish it: Nay, even before you
have finished it, by which means it will come the more fresh, like Fruit newly
gathered from the Tree. You will tell me it is impossible that small Pieces
should please so well as an entire Work, or that a Sketch should be so well
liked as a finished Picture: I confess it, and therefore I will consider it as
such, and you shall bestow the last hand upon it at your leisure in my Library.
To your other Favors give me, I beseech you, this farther Mark of your
Friendship, as to communicate to me what you would let no body else see: For
though I may the more commend and value your Writings as I see them come out more
slowly and more correct, yet I shall both Love and Honor your self infinitely
the more, as you send me these things with most dispatch, in their Undress.

To his Wife Calphurnia.
Lib. 8.

YOu send me word, that my Absence does not a little afflict you, and that you
have no other Antidote against your Melancholy but my Letters: It Is no small
Satisfaction to me, that I am always in your Thoughts, and that such Trifles
can contribute to your Diversion. For my part, to let you see my Case is
parallel with yours, I am perpetually reading yours, and the oftener I read
them, the more new they seem to me, and I still discover some fresh Beauties in
'em, which I did not observe before. Though this in some measure alleviates my
Pain, yet it sets me a longing the more for your Company; for if your Letters
are so sweet and entertaining, what Pleasures may I not expect from your
Conversation? Therefore let me conjure you to lose no Opportunities of Writing
to me, though, as I hinted before, at the same time this Commerce delights me, it
gives me some Uneasiness.

To the Same.
Lib. 7.

It Is impossible for me to tell you how much I regret the want of your good
Company, and I have several good Reasons for it: In the first place, there is
Love in the case. Then it is to be considered that you and I never lived
asunder, which is the reason why I pass the greatest part of the Night in
thinking on you. From the same Cause it proceeds, that even in the Daytime, at
those Hours when I used to visit you in your Chamber, my Feet of their own
accord carry me to you, and then when I miss you there, I come back no less
melancholy and sorrowful, than if you had turned me out of your Room. The only
time that I am free from these Inquietudes, is when I am pleading in the Hall,
and drudging for my Friends. Judge then, what a mortified Life I lead, when I
am forced to find Relaxation in Labor, and Comfort in Care and Misery.

To his dear Friend Ferox.
Lib. 7.

YOur last Letter is a convincing Argument that you Study, and that you don't.
You Will tell me I talk Riddles to you, and so I do, till I explain to you more
distinctly what my Meaning is. In short, the Letter you sent me, shows you did
not study for it, so easy and negligent it appears to be; and yet at the same
time it is so polite, that it is impossible that any one should write it, who did
not weigh every word; or else you are certainly the happiest Man in the World,
if you can write Letters so Entertaining, without Care and Premeditation.

To Cornelius Tacitus.
Lib. 8.

I Return you your Book which I read over very carefully, having marked all
along in the Margin what places I thought fit to be altered, and what struck
out; For I am no less inclined to tell the Truth, than you are to hear it. It Is
a plain Case I believe, that no Man suffers himself to be so patiently found
fault with, as he that deserves the highest Commendation. And now I expect my
own Book from you with your Corrections and Amendments. These reciprocal
Offices of Friendship that pass between us give me no little Satisfaction; for
if our Posterity will have any Concern for us, I am pleased to think that they
will tell, with what Amity, Concord, and Integrity, you and I have lived
together. It will be a remarkable, and perhaps the only Instance in History,
that two Men almost of the same Age and Quality, and of some Reputation for
Learning, (I am obliged to speak the more sparingly of you, because at the same
time I speak of my self) should promote one another's Studies so unanimously.
When I was but young, and you had justly acquired a high Character in the
World, even then it was my greatest Ambition to imitate and follow you, though at
never so great a Distance. We had then at Rome several Persons of Wit and
Learning, that were deservedly admired; yet so great a Similitude was there
between our Tempers and Dispositions, that even then I endeavored to Copy
after you. For this Reason it is no small Satisfaction to me, that whenever
there is any Discourse about Learning and Learned Men, you and I are still
quoted together; that when your Name is mentioned, the Company immediately
mentions mine; and that when they prefer a third Man to one of us, they mean it
of both. But it is no matter to me, whether you or I are mentioned first, for if
I am first, it is only because I am the next to you. I don't question too, but
you have observed, that in the last Wills of the Deceased, unless there was
some particular Difference in the Case, you and I have Legacies of the same
Value generally bequeathed us. The Conclusion I draw from all this is, That we
have the greatest Obligations that can be, to entertain the strictest Amity;
since even our Studies, our Manners, our Reputations; in short, the united
Testimony of the World are so many Arguments why the mutual Friendship between
us should still increase. Farewell.

To Cornelius Tacitus.
Lib. 6.

YOu desire me to send you an Account of my Uncle's Death, that you may be the
better able to relate it in your History. I am obliged to you for this Favor,
for I foresee my Uncle's Name will be immortal, if it has the Honor to be
preserved by your Pen: Though it was his Fate to die, like great Cities memorable
for their Calamities, in the Universal Desolation of the finest Part of Italy;
Nay, though he himself has written several learned Volumes, which will propagate
his Memory to future Ages, yet that Eternity which seems to be intailed on
every thing you write, will not a little contribute to perpetuate his Name: For
my part I reckon those Men happy, who by a particular Indulgence of Heaven are
capable of doing things fit to be transmitted to Posterity, or of writing
Works, that deserve to be read; but I reckon those the happiest of all, who
posses both these Advantages: Amongst the Number of these Latter I reckon my
Uncle, by means of yours, as well as his own Writings, upon which account I am
proud to comply with your Desires. My Uncle was then at Misenus, with the Fleet
under his Command in the Harbor, on the 24th Day of August, about one of the
Clock in the Afternoon; when my Mother came to tell him, that she beheld afar
off a Cloud of an unusual Magnitude and Form. He was then hard at Study, but
calling for his Slippers, he got up to the highest part of the House, from
whence he might most advantagiously behold this Prodigy. At so great a Distance
we could not positively tell from whence this Cloud arose, though afterward we
knew it came from Mount Vesuvius: Nothing resembl'd the Shape on it more than a
Pine Tree does, for from a long taper Trunk, it spead itself to a very large
Head, the Reason of which I suppose might be, that when the Wind that carried
it up, began to fail, its own weight made it run out into a great breadth.
Sometimes it looked of a whitish, and sometimes of a black gloomy Color,
according as it carried up with it Earth, or Ashes. My Uncle thinking it
impossible to make a just Observation of this Phenomenon without coming
nearer, commanded a Gally to be got ready, and made an offer to take me along
with him, if I thought convenient. I excused myself to him, and answered, that
I would pass that Afternoon at my Study; and as it happened he had given me
something to transcribe. As he was going out of the House with his Pocketbook
in his Hand, the Seamen affrighted at the present Danger (for the Village lay
under the Mountain, and there was no means of escaping but by Sea) begged of
him not to expose himself to so eminent a Danger. This did not diswade him from
his Resolution; and what he began out of a Spirit of Curiosity he performed
with the greatest Intrepidity. So he ordered the Gally to put out to Sea, and
went himself aboard it, with a Design to assist not only those of Retina, but
the Neighboring Towns, for the Country thereabouts is mighty populous: he
steered his Course toward those places, from whence the affrighted Inhabitants
ran away in great Multitudes; nay, he sailed into the very Mouth of 'em, and
was so free from Fear, that he took particular notice of every Circumstance
almost, relating to this Eruption. By this time the Ashes fell on the Deck,
falling the hotter, and in greater Quantities, as they approached nearer to the
Shore, with a shower of Pumicestones. Then he considered a little with himself
whether he had best tack about, and Sail homewards (which the Pilate advised
him to do) or make for Pomponianum. In this place, though the danger seemed to be
at some Distance from them, yet soon after came upon 'em, he ordered all his
Luggage to be carried on Shipboard, being resolved to make his Escape, though
the Wind sat in a contrary Corner. But as it then blew directly for 'em, my
Uncle persuaded them to be of good Courage. After this he Bathed and was very
cheerful at Supper, or (what in these Dangers is full as great) he seemed at
least to be so. All this while the Flames bro ke out in several places of the
Mountain Vesuvius, which appeared so much brighter in so dark a Night: In this
strange Consternation the Country People left their Habitations, which in their
Absence were devoured by the Flames, and this my Uncle urged as an Argument,
why it was not advisable to quit the place where they were. After this he
composed himself to rest: and slept very soundly, as those which were in the
next Room said. But the Courtyard, through which there was a Passage to the
Dining Room, was by this time so covered with Ashes and Pumice-stones, that
there was no getting out of it for him, if he staid never so little longer; so
being awaked out of his sleep, he, together with the rest that sat up, made
the best of their way to Pomponianum: It was debated among 'em, whether they
should stay within doors, or venture abroad in the open Air, for the Earthquake
was so violent, and the Houses reeled and staggered so, that one would have
thought they had been torn up from their very Foundations. Now they were in the
Fields, they had reason to fear the falling of Pumice-stones, though they were
light and porous, which however of two Dangers were the least: with my Uncle,
Reason overcame Reason, with the rest, one Fear overcame another, and they
carried Pillows on their Heads to break the fall of any thing that might fall
on 'em. In other places it was Day, but here it was as dark as possible
Nightitself could be, though it was somewhat lessened by the Flambeaux and other
Lights. Then it was resolved to go the Seashore, and see how the Sea stood
affected, which still continued very Tempestuous. Here my Uncle, lying along
upon a parcel of Clothes, called once or twice for cold Water, and drank it
off. After this the Flames, and a smell of Brimstone, which used to precede the
Flames made the place too hot for 'em, so they waked my Uncle, who being
supported by two Servants, got up; but in an Instant fell down again, being I
suppose suffocated by the sulphurous Vapors: Three Days after this, his Body
was found whole and entire, without the least hurt or mark upon it, and in the
same Clothes he last put on; in a Posture too, that made him rather look like
one that was asleep then dead. While this happened, my Mother and I were at
Misenus; but this is nothing to the History, and you desired to be informed no
farther, then relates to the Death of my Uncle. I will therefore conclude, but
before I do that, give me leave to add, That I have given you a true and
faithful Account of all the Particulars relating to this Accident, that have
come to my Knowledge. I leave it to you to pick out what you think most proper
for your Purpose; for it is one thing to write a Letter, and another to write a
History; one thing to write to a Friend, and another to address himself to all
the World. Farewell.

To Sura.
Lib. 7.

YOu and I are both at Leisure, you to teach, and I to be informed; I have for
a long while earnestly desired to know, whether there are any such Things in
Reality, as Specter, or whether they are only the Results of a fearful
Imagination: For my part, I am inclined to believe the former, by what
happened, as I have been told the Story, to Curtius Rufus: He was walking up
and down a Portico toward the Evening, when the Shape of a Woman appeared to
him, but much more bigger than the Life, and much more beautiful: This
unexpected Sight strangely surprised him, when the Phantome told him she was
Afric, and came to tell him his Fortune; adding that he was going to Rome,
where he should arrive to the greatest Honors; that he should return back to
this Province in Quality of Governor, and there die. Every thing exactly
happened as the Spectre foretold. The Story goes, that as he was sailing for
Carthage, and coming out of the Ship, the very same Figure met him upon the
Shore, upon which he fell Sick, and remembering what it had formerly told him,
gave over all hopes of Recovery, before the Phisicians thought his Case
dangerous. But what I am now going to tell you, as it is by much stranger, so
it is more terrible than the other. There was a large and stately House at
Athens, but untenanted for the ill Name it lay under; for in the depth of Night
you might hear a Noise like that of the dragling of Chains, which at first
seemed to be further off, but by degrees came nearer and nearer to you: At last
the Ghost appeared, in the Shape of an old Man, Lean and Meager, with a long
Beard, and the Hair of his Head matted; It had Fetters about its Legs and
Manacles on its Hands, which it shaked and rattled. These strange Noises
disturbed the Neighborhood so, that few or none could sleep for them; some
fell sick with watching so long, and their Fears increasing, died soon after;
for though the Spectre was not visible in the Day, yet their Memory still
represented it to their Eyes, and one Fear begot another: For this Reason no
one would dwell in the House, but it stood empty, and was left wholly to the
Ghost, to play his Midnight-frolicks in; however, there was a Bill put over the
Door, to signify that the House was to be Let or Sold, if by chance they could
meet with a Chapman, who knew nothing that it was haunted. It happened that one
Athenodorus, a Philosopher, coming to Athens, read the Bill, enquired after the
Price, and suspecting there was something extraordinary in the Matter, because
it was to be had so cheap, he informs himself of the Neighbors, who fairly
acquainted him with the whole Business: He was so far from being discouraged by
it, that it made him the more eager to strike a Bargain. When it began to grow
dark, he ordered a Bed to be made for him in a Room that faced the Street; he
called for Paper, Ink, and Candle, and ordered all his Servants to withdraw; he
employed his Mind, his Eyes, his Hands in Writing, least his Imagination,
having nothing to take it up, might be at leisure to create Visions and
Specter: All the former part of the Night the Scene continued quiet enough, at
last he heard the rattling of Iron, and shaking of Chains. Our Philosopher did
not so much as lift up his Eyes to see what was the Matter, nor left off
Writing, but endeavored all he could to neglect it; the Noise still
increasing, and moving nearer, so that sometimes it seemed to be within, and
sometimes without the Room, at last Athenodorus looked behind him and saw it,
just as the Neighbors had deseried it to him. It stood still, and beckoned
with its Finger, like a Man that calls to another. He on the other side makes a
sign with his Hand, that it should tarry a little for him, and falls to his
Writing again. All this while the Spectre rattled his Chains over his Head as
he writ, and he looking behind him, found that it beckoned to him as before, so
he took up his Candle in his Hand, and followed it: The Ghost walked leasurely
along as if its Chains did hinder it, after that it turned into the Courtyard,
and immediately vanished under Ground. Our Philosopher took some Leaves and
Herbs that he might know the Place again, the next Day he goes to the
Magistrates of the Town and advised 'em to dig in the place where this
happened: which they accordingly did, and found a parcel of Bones wrapped about
with Iron-Chains formerly belonging to a Body, which Time, and the Earth
together had putrified. These relics were publicly Buried, after which the
House was haunted no more. I am inclined to believe this Story, having had it
so confidently affirmed to me. -- I earnestly entreat you to bestow a little
Consideration to inform me better upon this Point. It Is a Subject worthy of
your deepest Enquiry, though I confess I am not worthy to have you to communicate
your Learned Thoughts to me. Although you can plead on both sides, and manage
an Argument either pro or con, as the Custom of the Gentlemen at the Bar is,
yet I beg you not to employ that Talent here, but fairly to determine the
Point, because I would not be dismissed uncertain or left in suspense, since
this is the Reason of my giving you this Trouble. Farewell.

The End of Pliny's Select Epistles.
LETTERS OUT OF Mons. le Chevalier d' Her. ***
Made English by the same Hand.

To Mademoiselle de J -- Upon sending to her a Boar in a Pasty, who had like to
have wounded him at the Chase.
Madam,
I Have ran the greatest Risk in the World, but at last my Enemy is defeated,
and now I send him to you bound to his good Behavior in Pye-crust. I have
ordered him to be well Spiced and seasoned with Salt, to preserve the Memory of
my Triumph. If I were acquainted with the Secret of the ancient Egyptians, I
would have embalmed him, and made a Mummy of his Body: By that means he would
have lasted numberless Ages, but it unluckily falls out with us Moderns, that
we have no other Secret but this of Paste. Imagine that this Animal you see
before you, had no great mind that I should kill him: As soon as he saw me,
away he scamper'd as if the Devil had been behind him, but on a sudden turned
back upon me with a felonious Intent to Murder me. Upon which I deliberated
with my self what I had best to do. I could not tell but you might have set him
against me, for whenever I see any thing that is dismal or terrible, I
immediately conclude that it comes from you. But after I had well examined the
Boar's Countenance, I could not find that he had so jolly an Air, as even your
Rigours and Cruelties use to be attended with. There was another Difficulty
still behind, and that was to know, whether I had not best die to put an end to
those cruel Torments you make me suffer; but there was too much Self-interest I
thought to take that course, and I humbly conceived it was for your Ladiship's
Honor, that a Lover so faithful as I, should live, although he did not find his
Account in it. Thus the Zeal that I had for your Glory cost the poor Boar his
Life, who little imagined he had to deal with an Adversary that was animated by
so powerful a Motive. In short, I shot my Gentleman dead upon the Spot; and his
Brother Boars I presume will have more Guts in their Brains for the future,
then to pick a Quarrel with such as preserve their Lives on purpose for you. I
should be the happiest Man in the Universe, Madam, if you would feed heartily
upon him out of Revenge, for having been so impudent to put me in peril of my
Life; and if that Consideration make him go down the better with you, I am,

Your most Obedient, etc.

To Monsieur C --
Upon the Cartesian Philosophy.

ANd is it true Sir, that you have lost your Understanding? I hear you are
turned Philosopher of late, and what is more, that you belong to that Sect of
Philosophy, which is the oddest in the World. It seems you don't think there
are such things as Colors: You maintain that Beasts are Machines, and move by
Clock-work: In fine, you turn things topsie turvy after so strange a rate, that
a Man cannot tell what to trust to. I spoke of it the other day to Madam B --
who is very much your Friend, and is heartily afflicted, at the loss of your
Reason: I dare swear she would strangle Des Carts in one of her Garters if she
had him in the Room; for in short, his Philosophy is not to be endured in a
Christian Country; it robs the Ladies of their Beauty, and makes 'em all as
ugly as Witches. If there is no such thing as Colors, there is consequently no
such thing as a fine Complexion; and what will become then of the Lillies and
Roses in the Cheeks of our great Beauties? You Will come off but scurvily, let me
tell you, if you think to appease 'em, by saying that Colors are in the Eyes
of those that look upon 'em, and not in the Objects themselves. The Ladies
will not depend upon the Eyes of other Men for their Complexions, but are resolved
to hold it of themselves and not at the Courtesy of every Spectator. If there
are no Colors in the Night, our Friend Mr. N -- is finely brought to bed, who
fell in Love with Madam L -- merely upon the score of her fine Face, and
married her. It would be a great Mortification to him, after having believed
that he has the finest red and white in the Universe between his Arms, to find
there is no such thing as red and white in Nature. But if the Complexion is a
cheat upon our Senses, what will you say to those Ladies that practice the
Mystery of Painting, and lay on the Carnation and the White as thick as
Plaster? It Is certain nothing can be more real, and so these Ladies will enjoy
a Privilege above the rest of their Sex, I mean that of having a true
Complexion; however, all the World are of another Opinion, and will positively
tell you that theirs is not true.

I desire you to answer this Argument at your leisure; but this is not all, for
Madam De B -- and my self have found out another Objection against your
Philosophy, which you will find it no easy matter to answer. You pretend that
Beasts are no less Machines than Watches; now I dare engage, that if you put a
certain Machine called a Dog, and another Machine called a Bitch together in
the same Room, there will result a third little Machine from their
corresponding together; whereas you may put two Watches together as long as you
live, nay, till Doomsday if you please, and they will never produce a third
Watch between 'em. Now Madam B -- and I find by our Philosophy, that all those
things, that being two, have yet the virtue to make three, are of a Class much
superior to that of Machines. We give you time to consider of an Answer to
these Objections, for we know very well that you must consult your Books,
before you will be able to do it. Madam B -- sends you word by me, that she will
not receive a Visit from you, before you have made some Reparation to her
Complexion: As for me, I assure you, I am a Piece of Clock-work newly wound up,
to go in your Service, am

Your most Obedient Servant.

To Madam D -- V -- Upon sending her a Black and a Monkey.
Madam,
AFric has exhausted herself for you, she sends you too of the oddest Creatures
she produces, and nothing would be wanting to make my Present complete, if I
could send you a Crocodile to keep 'em Company. Both of 'em are in Perfection,
the Black is the saddest Dog of all Blacks, and the Monkey is the most
malicious Devil of all Monkies. I can assure you, that one of these Beasts, has
a mighty Respect for the other, and is a professed Admirer of his Ingenuity and
great Parts. You Will soon discover that this Admirer is the Black. Besides it is
an Article of Faith among those of his Nation, that the Monkies have as much
Reason as themselves, but that they conceal it as much as they can, by not
talking, for fear Men should clap Pack-saddles upon their Backs, and make them
Work for their Living. This Black, Madam, has a particular Esteem for the
Monkey, as having lived under the same Roof many Years with him, and has not a
jot of Understanding more than he has learnt in his long acquaintance with him.
But I have one Advice to give you, Madam, and that is to look him frequently in
the Face: Our Blacks in France turn tawny, and become of an Olive Complexion,
which is enough to scare Lueifer out of his Senses. The Physical Reason of this
is, because the Sun is not strong enough in our Clymate to keep up that
charming Black which it gives 'em in Afric; but, Madam, your Eyes, that are so
lively and piercing, will supply the Defect of the Sun; and will not let him
lose an Ace of his primitive Complexion. I am extremely glad that you will
always have a Slave in your presence to represent me; he is not more yours than
I am; if he gives you any Occasion to have him well Cudgel'd sometimes, to put
him in mind of his Duty, he something resembles me, for the Devil of Rebellion
often tempts me to revolt against you. As for the Monkey pray don't be
surprised, Madam, if you hear Sighs come from him, that are strong enough to
turn about a Windmill, if you see him pass whole Nights without sleeping a
Wink, if you find him as Melancholy as a Horse in a Pound, when he is not in
your Company; in fine, if he eats little and cannot divert himself in any thing,
for I must tell you, Madam, that like a trusty Servant he has learnt all this
of his old Master, who is,

Your most Obedient, etc.

To the same.
On the Death of her Monkey.

I Am told your Monkey is gone the way of all Flesh, at which I am exceedingly
grieved, for I am like to be a great Loser by his Decease, since I have no body
now to put you in mind of me but the Black. The unhappy Creature I suppose
broke his Heart because he was not able to imitate me before you, as well as he
desired: indeed there was nothing which he could not handsomely counterfeit with
infinitely more ease than my Passion; but may his Destiny light upon all the
Rivals you make me who shall have the Insolence to be the Apes of my Affection;
perhaps too the poor thing drew your Displeasure upon himself, for endeavoring
to imitate my Passion, and so unluckily died of Despair. If it is so, I have
nothing left me to do, but to imitate him in my turn, and to die after him. I
am informed you have shed some Tears for him; it is something of the latest to
repent for the ill Usage you have given him, but regulate your Conduct I
beseech you by him, and don't oblige me to die, if you must needs regret me
after Death. It is very probable that if you so heartily lament the Party that
imitated me, you will grieve ten times more for your humble Servant. I am an
Original of Tenderness, and if you lose me, you are not like to find my Fellow
in haste, but must even content your self with very scurvy Copies. But, Madam,
let me conjure you, not to use the Black the worse because he is my
Representative; it would be very hard upon him indeed, if for that Reason he
must meet with the Destiny of the Monkey. Can you suffer nothing to be near
you, that has the Misfortune to bear some Resemblance of my Fidelity and
Devotion for you, but you must kill it by your Cruelty? The Tears I shed for
the Death of the Monkey are better founded than yours, since his Adventure
teaches me what I am to expect. Farewell, Madam, but remember if you please,
that you cannot restore the late Defunct to Life again, but that you have still
the Power to preserve

Your humble Servant, etc.

To Mademoiselle de C -- Upon sending her an Extract of the Church-Register.
Madam,
I Can without Vanity boast, that I make you to Day a very considerable
Present: In short, I give you two whole Years; you thought you were twenty two
Years old, and I bring it you attested in a Paper under Hand and Seal, that you
are but twenty; now I reckon that I give you these Years which I take away from
you, and indeed in those matters we never reckon otherwise. The two Years you
thought had past over your Head, are still to come, and I do my self the Honor
to make you a Present of 'em. I am ready to die for fear, Madam, that you will
not value them as they deserve; But good Heavens! the Man that were able to
make such a Present, to certain Ladies that shall be nameless, what Favors
might he not expect from their Hand? Where is the White and the Red, and where
are the fine Dresses and Compliments that can be put into the Balance with two
complete Years? It is but reasonable, Madam, I think, that you should employ
'em wholly upon me, since you are indebted to me for 'em. When they are gone
and past; you may do what you please, I shall then pretend to have no manner of
Right over you, but with Submission, Madam, from the present Moment till you
are completely twenty two, you wholly belong to me. After that, I leave you
just as I found you, at Liberty to break off, or continue the Commerce,
according as you see convenient; but if I find you not at all inclined to do me
Justice, know, Madam, that I will suffer no one to Love you, upon the Foot of
twenty Years Wherever I go I will tell the Company, that in truth you had not
been so old by two Years if you had not been so minded, but that you refused to
accept 'em from me, and that since you don't Love me, it is but requisite you
reckon your self to be twenty two Years old. You little imagine perhaps to what
strange Hazards you expose your self, by making me Master of the Secret of your
Age: for it is a Secret, Madam, which those of your Sex keep inviolably to
themselves, and perhaps the only one a Woman can keep. Several Ladies have
trusted me with the Affairs of their Families; nay, even with their Love; but I
could never yet meet with one so open-hearted to trust me with her Age. There
are a thousand Women that will run up to the Mouth of a Cannon, that will hang
or drown with as much cheerfulness as if they went to a Gossiping, that will
make you nothing to jump down four Stories: but, I never found a Woman, that
had Courage and Resolution enough to tell her Age. The truth on it is, the older
they are, the more sensible they become of what Importance it is, that they had
not lived so many Years. As for you, Madam, who have not played your Cards so
cautiously as you should have done, you don't know how you will tremble one Day
left I should tell any Tales of you. Your Destiny will depend upon me, and
there is nothing which I cannot force you to comply with, if instead of a
Poniard I send you the Extract of the Church-register. I dare engage that you
laugh at my Menaces at present, and that you think the time is so far off, that
you don't believe I shall ever live to see it. I am afraid indeed you will prove
a Prophetess, for unless you are less rigorous, you will soon dispatch

Your most Obedient, etc.

The End of Monsieur Fontanelle's Letters, under the borrowed Name of the
Chevalier d' Her.
Original Letters.
Lately Written by Mr. Brown.
To his honored Friend, Dr. Baynard at the Bath.
July 6. 99. Dear Doctor,
WHile here in Town we are almost Roasted by the hot Weather, and the Sun plays
so warmly on us, that some People who were of no Religion before, talk of
turning Adamites in their own Defense; I cannot but laugh to think what a
blessed Pickle you are in at the Bath, where such Crowds of you Stew in so
little a Pipkin; where you broil upon the Earth, parboil in the Water, and you
breathe the Composition of Gunpowder; or, were there nothing extraordinary in
your Soil, your Climate, or the Season of (...)ne-Year, where you have pretty
Ladies en(...)sons to set you all on Fire, though you were (...)ples or three
Degrees more to the North than Lapland, and I were Writing to you now in the
midst of January.

This is the first Summer since the Revolution, that the Sun has been pleased
to dispense any Favors to us, for hitherto we have had as little Reason to
complain of his Benignity to us, as the Politiques of our Statesmen. Our
Fruits have ripened without the Influence of the one, as our Affairs have made
a shift to rub on without any great Conjuring on the part of the other. The Sun
that ripens the Grape, will likewise ripen Feavors, and other such generous
Distempers, to the great Joy of the Poets and Physicians; and Phoebus, their
common Father, will encourage his own Tribe, by raising up a new Stock of Wines
and Diseases. Indeed, where you are, it is almost impossible for the Gentlemen
of the Faculty to want Business, for if our last Advices from the Bath, don't
deceive us, you have almost as many Doctors upon the Spot as you have Patients,
that watch the coming in of every Coach, as nicely as a young Boy at the
University do the Return of the Carrier, and ply at all Corners of the Streets,
(...)egularly as the Watermen do at the (...)ple Stairs: But it has long ago
been (...)ed of you, as of the Lawyers, that they will find or make Work
wherever they come; and accordingly I knew a little Town in Essex, where the
Inhabitants, time out of mind, had lived in as uninterrupted Tranquillity, as
the happy Indians did in America, before the Spaniards came to beat up their
Quarters; but upon an Attorney's coming to reside amongst'em, the Face of
Affairs was immediately altered, Tenants conspired against their Landlords,
Hostlers revolted from their Masters, and the Apprentices took up Arms against
their lawful Tyrants: Not a Tithe-egg could be had without an Action, nor a Pig
under a Suit in Chancery, a Spirit of Division had crept into every Family,
Maids betrayed their Mistresses, Girls rebelled against their Grandmothers, and
Sweethearts deserted their confiding Damsels; in short, every Man stood as much
upon his own Guard, as if he had been in an Enemy's Country; these were the
blessed Effects of the Lawyer's living amongst 'em.

Now Doctor, it were a very hard Case, if having so much Credit at the Bath,
you could not do as much for your self, as the above mentioned Attorney did to
promote his own Business; if you could not Philosophically Reason People into
Distempers they were never troubled with, like the Fanatic Parsons that
Fly-blow their Hearers with Scruples they knew nothing of before. If you could
not cure'em of Ails they never felt, and leave behind you Maladies, you never
found upon 'em. But I am informed that the Tub-Preachers are very much
dissatisfied that you invade their Territories, and encroach upon their
Prerogative of Hell. Your hot and cold Baths (they say) put their Brimstone and
Ice out of Countenance; and it is reported, that by the skilful Management of
your Torments, by scalding your Patients at the Bath in July, and freezing them
at Islington in December, you have broke half the Retailors of the Terrors of
Pluto's Kingdom.

But to come now to the News of the Town, we have had an Apparition lately
here, stranger than any in Glanvill or Aubry; for it has appeared in the
Streets at noon Day, and thousands of People are ready to depose that they have
seen it. By this strange Apparition, I mean the White Parson, so called for his
wearing a White Hat-band, Scarf, and Sursingle, by which he distinguishes
himself from the rest of his Brethren. I could wish you had been here in
Holbourn the other Morning, to have seen his Cavalcade: He rode up the Hill as
great as a Prince, and like other Princes signalized his Entry with printed
Declarations, with a great Rabble of loud-mouthed Hawkers, Male and Female,
bellowing it on every side of him; and it is supposed by the Learned in
Astrology, that he will keep this Declaration as Religiously as some other
Princes beyond Sea have kept theirs: In short, he pretends to preach the Gospel
Gratis, and indeed as he manages it, it is pity he should have a Farthing for
it: He calls the rest of his Cloth Hirelings, though unless the Fellow is belied,
he would accept of a Pot of Ale from a Chimney-sweeper, and has preached a
hundred times upon a Joint-stool for a pickled Herring and a Poringer of burnt
Brandy. The Rozinante, on which this Don Quixote rode, had a Laurel-garland
about his Head, and I dare swear, deserved the Bays as well as his Master; for
the Wretch, as I am informed, is troubled with a Whore to his Wife, and his
Muse is an arrant Jilt, the latter is the more common Prostitute of the two.

But, dear Doctor, News are as scarce in Town, as Fees at the Bath and it falls
out unluckily for you and me, that we must change Places, to find what we want;
for I hear you have a Mint at the Bath for Scandal, as we have here for Money;
so that it is but shifting the Scene, and we may draw Bills upon one another, to
answer our several Occasions, till when, I am.

Melanissa to Alexis.
GIve me leave, my dearest Alexis! give me leave, who love you better than my
Life; and if I make bold to reproach you with your Failings, you will easily
forgive this freedom, unless I am mightily mistaken in the Humor of my Alexis,
when you find it wholly regard your own Interest and Welfare.

It is not without a sensible Concern that I see you abandon your self so to
the Bottle of late: A young Fellow, but especially one like Alexis, ought to
devote himself to another Divinity; old Age indeed may be allowed to supply its
defect of Warmth with Wine, but Youth as it needs it not, so Nature advises it
to pursue a more agreeable Game. But can any thing in the World be so absurd as
to surfeit our selves with Cordials when we have not the least Indisposition?

To convince you then that my Complaint is neither junust nor unreasonable, I,
who know so little of the World, and have nothing but Nature to guide me; I who
am a Stranger to Language, and Style, and consequently must maim my Thoughts,
for want of knowing how properly to express 'em, will endeavor to describe to
you, a Night as it passes away in the Embraces of an agreeable Mistress,
accompanied with all the Transports and Tendernesses of Love, and the Night as
it is commonly spent by what the Town call Men of Wit and Pleasantry, at the
Rose or Blew-posts:

The Play is now over, and the Sparks who while it was Acting, rallied the
Vizard-Masques, laughed aloud at their own No-jests, censured the Dress and
Beauty of all the Ladies in the Boxes; and, in short, minded every thing, but
the Representation that brought them thither, begin now to File off, and
gravely debate how and where the Evening is to spent; At last the Tavern is
pitched upon, the Room taken, and our learned Critics in Pleasures seat
themselves round the Table.

The Master of the House is the first Person they send to Advise with; who,
after a few Cringes and Scrapes, tells 'em, He has the best Champagne and
Burgundy in Town, and is sure to ask an exorbitant Price for it, though it is a
vile nasty Mixture of his own Brewing. After a long and foolish Dispute, the
Rate is adjusted, Napkins are called for, the Muff, Sword and Periwigg nicely
laid up, and now something-like Business comes forward.

When these grand Preliminaries are settled, the next important Debate is, what
they must eat; so the Cook is sent for, who recommends to 'em something Nice
and Dear; this Difficulty with much a-do got over, the Glasses plentifully walk
round, to blunt and weaken that Appetite which they pretend to excite by it.

And now their Hearts begin to open, and their Tongues to communicate their
most secret Thoughts. The topping Beauties of the Town are the first Subjects
of their Conversation, and this is so ample a Field, that they soon lose their
way in it; one boasts of Favors received from a Lady, whom perhaps he never
saw any where but at the Playhouse; another tosts a Countess, whom he pretends
to admire in a particular manner, and gives broad Items of an Intrigue between
her and a certain Gentleman that shall be nameless; in short, it is resolved by
the Board, Nemine contre dicente, that there is not one honest Woman in the
three Kingdoms, who has Beauty enough to gain her a Lover.

When this Argument is pretty well exhausted, the next thing they talk of, is
the Authors of the Town, and what Books and Plays have lately appeared: Upon
this Head, every Man in the Company affects to discover a peculiar Taste and
Judgment, and thinks he shows his Wit by finding Faults, where there are none;
the Play, whatever it is, is taken to pieces, the Plot upon Examination, is
found either to be stolen, or not to be well unravel'd, the Scenes are
languishing, the Characters threadbare, or not worth a Farthing; infine, the
Poet is sent to the Devil for want of Wit, as the pert Critic thinks he shows
his, by condemning what he does not understand.

All this while the ungodly Brimmer walks incessantly round the Table, the
Company soon dwindles into private Cabals, every Man talks busily to his
Neighbor, Affairs of State are determined, this Minister is displaced, and
the other Man put into his room; The Proceedings in Parliament laid down
beforehand, and it is concluded what Regiments shall stand, and what be broken;
after this Punctilio's of Honor come to be discussed, the freshest Duels
behind Mountaguehouse, and Chelsey-fields are learnedly run over; such a Man is
a Coward for suffering Captain -- to tread upon his Toes in the Pit, and not
calling him to Account for it; Damn you, cries another, Jack -- is as Gallant a
Fellow as ever drew Sword, and whoever says any thing to the contrary, is a Son
of a Whore and a Villain, and I Will cut his Throat; with that a Bottle is thrown
at his Head, the Glasses goes to rack, the Table is overturned, nothing but
Disorder and Confusion is in the Room, and all this Mirth and Jollity concludes
in Murder.

Or if the Scene does not end altogether so Tragically, but they part Friends
as they came in, ten to one but a merry Frolic is proposed: The Quarters of
some ill-natu-red Coquet are to be beaten up, and her poor Windows must feel
the sad Effects of their Heroic Valor; but while they are carrying on this
Attaque with unparalelled Vigor and Gallantry; behold the Superintendant of
the Night, with his trusty Guard of Mirmidons falls upon their main Body; some
of our Heroes lie sprawling in the Kennel, with their trusty and well-beloved
Periwigs lying by 'em; the embroidered Coat is all over covered with Dirt and
Blood, the well-adjusted Cravat torn to Rags, the Sword either broke or
carried off in the Tumult; and thus, after a well-favour'd Drubbing, our Sparks
make a shift to crawl home to their Lodgings, if the Nocturnal Magistrate and
his Canibals, don't hurry 'em to New-prison or the Round-house, the usual
Sanctuary for such Adventurers.

But suppose nothing of this happens, and our merry Gentlemen get home safe
from the Tavern, without any Disaster or Calamity by the way; yet the next
Morning calls 'em to a severe Account, for the Misdemenors and Intemperance of
the proceeding Night: Their Head aches, their whole Frame is in disorder, they
are incapable of relishing either Books or Conversation; even Music it self,
with all its boasted Efficacy, is not able to allay their Pains, the most
exquisite Dishes are nauseous to 'em, they starve amidst the greatest profusion
of Luxury, and curse that Extravagance over Night that Starves them the next
Day in the midst of Plenty. It Is certain, that I have been favorable in this
Description, it is certain that I have not set down half the Disorders that
accompany a Debauch while It Is a making, nor half the ill Effects that happen
after it. Let us now turn the Tables, to find whether Love can be reproached
with any of these Inconveniences that use to attend Drunkenness: Let us see
how the Moments wear away in the Embraces of a delicious Mistress; and then we
shall soon discover on which side the Advantages lie, and be able to decide
this Controversy.

I know very well that I want Eloquence and Language, to describe the Raptures
and Transports of Love as they deserve; however, I am so well assured of the
Goodness of my Cause, that although I am an unfit Advocate to defend it, yet I
don't much despair of carrying my Point.

The long expected Night at last arrives, when Damon is to be made happy in the
Arms of his beloved Armida, with his Head full of a thousand delightful Idea's;
(for Love is so good-natured, as to pay his Votaries part of their Pleasure
beforehand) he comes to the happy Mansion, where the chief Treasure of his
Soul resides, he knocks gently at the Door; the trusty Maid conducts him by the
Hand in the dark, and leads him to his Mistress's Apartment.

At the first Interview, he is all wrapped up in Silence and Astonishment, his
Thoughts so crowd upon him, that they hinder one another in the Passage; after
he is a little recovered, he endeavors to speak; but, alas! his Eyes talk
infinitely more than his Tongue. On her part, the Confusion is no less, and her
Joys equally tumultuous; thus finding themselves unable to Discourse, they tell
their Passion in Sighs and Glances; they confirm it by repeated Kisses, and at
every Kiss their fluttering Souls meet at their Mouths.

Damon squeezes that Hand, which almost dissolves in the touch; he presses
those glowing Breasts that would warm the coldest Hermit; but all this is
nothing but the Prologue to the succeeding Drama. Love calls upon 'em for a
more substantial Repast, though they are undrest in a Minute, yet this very
Minute seems an Age; and now they are a going to taste all that Felicity, which
Love can bestow, or Humane Nature can bear.

The Candle is put out to hide the Blushes of Armida; she finds her eager Lover
by her side, who cost her so many Tears and Sighs in private. The happy Lover
is lost in a Labyrinth of Pleasure; sometimes he abandons her Breast for her
Mouth, and sometimes her Mouth for her Breast, and is only uneasy he cannot
Kiss 'em both together. He Faints, he grows Giddy with the Excess of Joy:
nothing but half-formed Words and Murmurs can come from him; at last he
approaches Love's Altar, at last he -- But here my Pen fails me, I am forced to
draw a Vail over those Raptures, which it is not in the Power of mortal
Eloquence to represent.

Thus our happy Lovers, after they have repeated Oblations to Love, lay
intranced in one another Arms, and act over in their busy Dreams, the
delicious Scenes that so Transports 'em waking.

The Morning approaches, the blushing Morning awakens the transported Pair.
Amyntas is beholding to its Light, for showing him the Nymph, in whose Embraces
he so agreeably past the Night. She charmed him in the Dark, she ravishes him
in the Light; and the only Uneasiness that attends their Happiness, is
Impatience to repeat the Bliss.

Both the Lovers rise equally satisfied, with having done their Parts, with
Gayety in their Looks, and Satisfaction in their Souls: Parting gives them some
Pain, but that is sufficiently recompensed at their next Meeting.

Thus I have endeavored, my Alexit, to show what a vast Difference there is
between a Night murdered in the Excess of Wine, and a Night consecrated to Love.

Though no Truth is more evident than this; yet our Youth, possessed by what
fatal Stupidity, I cannot tell; generally Devote themselves to the wrong
Divinity. Instead of following the Dictates of Nature, whom they ought to obey,
they treat her like an Enemy, and profane those Altars, they ought to pay their
Devotions at.

I know well enough, that you Gentlemen, don't much care to be Advised by those
frail Things called Women, and perhaps too you will tell me, that Interest has
made me say all this. However, let me conjure you to consider a little upon
what I have offered to you, and believe that no one loves you so dearly and
tenderly as

MELANISSA.

To a litigious Country-Attorney. A Letter of Gallantry.
Worthy Sir,
THat I am no Stranger to your Character (though, I bless my Stars for it, I am
to your Person) you will soon find, if you will give your self the trouble to read
the following Lines: There is no great pleasure indeed in drawing Monsters;
however, since it may be of public Advantage to have 'em described in their
true proper Colors, that others may avoid, and detest 'em, I have ventured at
the Task, that your self, as well as the World, may see by Reflection what you
cannot help to be. To accommodate my self to the Dialect of your Profession, I
will begin my Letter like a Bond, with a Noverint Vniversi: And may all Men
accordingly know by these Presents, That Mr. M. C. is the veriest pettifogging
Rascal that ever scandalized a Green Bag, or came within the Walls of
Westminster Hall.

I have often wondered, that Providence should be at the Trouble and Expense of
Disordering the whole Fabric of Nature, when it has decreed to punish us with
Dearths and Famines, since it may go a more compendious Way to work, and effect
all these Calamities by the Ministry of Lawyers. Give a true Lawyer but Pen,
Ink, and Parchment, and I dare engage he will starve the Country ten Miles
round him. The most odious Animals, and the most contemptible Insects, have
some use or other, living or dead, or at least serve to diversifie the
Universe: Toads, they say, suck up the Venom of the Earth; Snakes are useful
in Medicine; but it would puzle the wisest Naturalist to find out any thing
good in a Lawyer, (I mean such a Fellow as you are) who abhor Honesty, and
Plaindealing, as much as a Miser does Charity, and build your own Welfare upon
the Destruction of those poor Wretches who fly to you for Justice. We see puny
Rascals, of a lower Class, trussed up every Sessions, for petty Roguries to
thine; for easing the Hedges of some lousie Linen, for nimming of Cloaks,
stealing of supernumerary Spoons, etc. when such a Villain, as you reduce whole
Families to Poverty, and set a County together by the Ears, and are so far from
being called to an Account for it, that you get an Estate out of the Public by
Rapine and Extortion, Nose the Parson of the Parish, and Insult over all the
Neighbors; and, though you have Tricks and Evasions enough to escape Justice
here, yet you pay Cent. per Cent. Interest for your Rogury in another World;
the Devil never keeps a Holiday in good earnest, but when an Attorney of your
Stamp makes a perpendicular Leap into his Dominions; and he will no more part
with him, when he has got him into his Clutches, than one of his own Lawyers
will refund a Fee; Possession being eleven Points of the Law in Hell as well as
in Westminster Hall.

Thus, Sir, you see I have made a little familiar with you and your Function,
and perhaps am bolder than welcome: But, Sir, I have a Favor to request at
your Hands, and I tell you beforehand, that you must not deny me. What I have
to propose to you is not unreasonable or difficult; for I don't desire you to
make Restitution of what you have unjustly plundered from so many Families, nor
to build Hospitals, (unless it be one for your Father, who Grazes upon the
Common:) No, Sir, you shall find me the fairest, the easiest Man you ever dealt
with: I am informed your House stands by the side of a famous River, which
looks as if Providence designed you for the End I advise you to: So, Sir, if
you please, one of these fine Mornings to take a Leap into it from your Garret,
it will be the best-natur'd thing you ever did to the World in your Life; you
need not cram your Pockets with Stones or Lead, to make you sink, for your own
Sins are pondrous enough to do your business without 'em, if the Proverb don't
secure you. But, Sir, if this will not do, as perhaps it may not, (for, as I
told you before, you shall find me the most reasonable Man in the Universe) why
then, Sir, I would advise you to hang your self in your Closet, in your Wife's
Garters, or rip up your Guts with a Case-knife, or cut your Jugulars with a
Razor, or take a good large Dose of Opium; or lastly, knock your Brains out
against a Brick-wall: but then, Sir, take my Word for it, you must knock hard;
for, your Neighbors tells me, you have a confounded thick Scull. In short,
Sir, I shall not insist nicely upon the How, the Where, the When, provided the
thing be done in a reasonable Time: and I promise you under my Hand, that the
Bells shall ring merrily, as soon as it is accomplished; and to encourage you
to proceed in this Affair, I can assure you you will Oblige no less than a whole
County by it, and particularly your unknown Servant.

To Mr. Moult.
London, July 25, 99. Dear Sir,
ACcording to Promise I had written to you last Saturday, but that I was
obliged to Accompany some Gentlemen that Morning to Richmond, in Expectation of
hearing fine Music, which never in the Playhouse had passed the Censure of a
Pit-Fop; and drinking true Languedoc, never yet debauched in a Vintner's
Celler. But it happened quite otherwise with us: For the Wine was such
sophisticated Stuff, that I told the Company, it set Drunkenness on the same
Level with Swearing; I mean by disarming it of all Excuses: And as for the
Music, it was so abominable, that half a dozen Welsh-harpers met upon St.
David's Day, to make merry over a Mess of Leekporridge, could not have
tormented the Ears of a Purcel with more discording Thrumthrum. I dare almost
engage, had the same Fellows played upon the same Instruments before the Town
of Jerico, the Walls would have paid the same Compliment to their Harmony, as
they did to that of the Levites, for nothing could have patience to stand still
and listen to their Performances. So, after this double Disappointment, we were
forced, very late in the Evening, or very early in the Morning, (I wont be
positive which) to go back to our Boat, and return for London, reflecting all
the way as severely on our mispent-time, as a Town-lady, who has obliged a Poet
with her Favors all Night, and gets nothing in the Morning for her Pains, but
the Copy of a new Song for Breakfast.

When I had the Happiness of seeing you last in Town, I told you that you
should not fail of having a Letter from me every other Post; I am afraid I
shall be better than my Word, and Persecute you more constantly then a
City-vintner does a Country Parliament Man that chalked it plentifully last
Winter Sessions. Since I have no other way of conversing with you but by
Letters, you may depend upon seeing me twice a Week at least, though were you in
Town I believe I should scarce vissit you so often. But, dear Friend of mine,
this is purely the Effect of Absence. I knew a certain Gentleman, who, when he
was at home with his Wife, scarce vouchsaft to exchange a Word with her once a
Week; but being obliged to take a Journey as far as York, he never failed of
writing to her every Post, and longer Letters too, than a Clergiman does when
he recommends himself to his Patron for a fat Living. The reason of it is
plain, because all Blessings (and such I say is Mr. M -- 's Conversation to me
and every one that knows him) are never thoroughly understood when we have 'em
in our Possession, and are never so much valued as when they are at some
distance from us.

Thus, my dear Friend, for want of something else to entertain you, I have
fallen the Lord knows how, into making Moral Reflections, which was never my
Talent; but if a Man is to govern himself by the Examples he sees in this
wicked Town, I don't know why I should not be allowed to Talk out of my
Element, as well as a Thousand more which I could name to you, were I disposed
to be ill-natured: I could tell you of a certain famous Painter, who
understands his Trade and Business, as well as most Men living, and yet is
perpetually new modeling the Government, and harping upon Politiques, which he
understands just as much as the Lord Mayor and Aldermen do Arabic. I know a
City Physician, who can dispatch his Patients as fast as any of the College,
yet in spite of Nature and his own Genius, will be always murdering of Rhimes,
and feeling the Pulse of the Muses: and another of the Faculty near
Charing Cross, who instead of Galen and Hippocrates is perpetually puzling
himself with Daniel, and the Revelations. I know a Lawyer perfectly well versed
in all Mysteries of Conveyancing, who, by his good Will, Talks of nothing in
all Companies but the Merits of Cows Piss, and the modern Dispute betwixt
Alcali's and Acids. There is also a famous Parson I could mention to you near
St. Dunstan's, who Preaches his Parish fast asleep every Sunday with the Opium
he puts in his Sermon, yet over his Coffee must be settling the Affairs of
Europe, the Succession of Spain, and the Union of the two East India Companies,
of all which he Talks more wretchedly than a Poet or a Beau does of Religion;
though, by the by, this must be said in his Justification, that he Talks much
better of every Thing, than what he was educated to.

I cannot tell how you will relish such an insipid Letter as this, but it is my
Misfortune at present, that I cannot furnish you a better Treat: For my part, I
had rather Rob the Spittle, or quote Second-hand Sayings, from a Second-hand
Wit at Will's Coffee-house, than be beholding to those dull Rogues that Writes
the Weekly Newspapers: However, I hope to make you Amends the next Post; and
in the mean time beg leave to Subscribe my self.

To Mr. George Moult. A Letter of News.
August 14, 99. Dear Sir,
HAving nothing of our own Growth to Entertain you with, I stole into a French
Coffee-house near Soho this Afternoon; where a Parcel of persecuted poor
Hugonots, who had just shifted off their Rags, and crept into good Clothes, by
the help of our English Charity; were railing against the Tyranny of their
quondam K -- g, like so many Alms-folks against the Churchwardons of their
Parish, and expressed as great an Aversion to their own Native Country, as a
Jew to Bacon, or the Scotch Kirk to Lawn-sleeves: Amongst the rest was a
Parson, who calling for a Dish of Tea, the Coffee-man, through good Husbandry,
had converted one of his wooden Shoes (which I suppose he came over in) to the
use of a Sugar-box, which the Preacher took up as a Text, and gave us a very
good Afternoon's Lecture, upon the Miseries of his Country Men, in which the
ungainly Slipper was oftentimes made use of, as a very serviceaable Tipe.

This being over, I began to examine the Foreign Papers, to see what News. But
Europe, as large as it is, being from the farthest Extremity of Spain, to the
remotest Parts of Muscovy, at least two thousand Miles in length (more than I
shall ever be Master off;) Europe, I say, that contains two Empires, fourteen
Kingdoms, and the Devil knows how many Principalities, Dukedoms, Marquisates
and Earldoms, with a Pope at the Head of it too, that loves Mischief as dearly,
as a Friar does Nuns Flesh, is not able at present to furnish out a Letter for
you; but to satisfy you, that I have not been wanting, on my part, to hunt for
Foreign Occurrences; I have here sent you an Abridgment of the most material
Passages in the Outlandish Gazets.

Our last Letters from Warsaw advise, that three Poles were run through the
Guts by three German Soldiers, and that some of the small Diets are broke up in
a Heat; But, alas, what are Murders and Mutinies in Poland? No more than Simony
in a Welsh Bishop. They talk too, that the Cardinal Primate, grumbles in his
Gizard, and is not so hearty to the King as he should be; but when did you know
a Churchman in Authority, and not endeavor to blow up the Coals of Sedition
to the hightest Aggravation, if it lay in his Power? I wish some one or other
would send him over Bishop Overhall's Convocation-book. For certainly what
helped to open the Eyes of the D -- of P -- 's can never fail of working
Miracles, in so enlightened a Country as Poland.

Madrid, July 20. The King of Spain's Health is much altered for the better of
late, he Eats and Walks to a Miracle; for Yesterday at Dinner, he ravenously
devoured a whole Lark, and without any one to support him, made a shift to walk
threescore Foot outright. This Re-establishment of his Health, the Priests,
ten to one, will Father upon some She or He-Saint, that knows nothing of the
Matter; but I heard a merry Gentleman a Day or two ago Account for it
otherwise. As Monica said of her beloved Son St. Austin's Conversion, That it
was impossible for a Son of so many Tears ever to miscarry; so it is impossible,
cries this Gentleman, that a Monarch, whose Health is drank in all the Taverns
in Christendom, which are not Frenchify'd; should do otherwise then find in
himself a sensible Alteration for the better; and I pray to God continually,
that a certain Person, who waits so impatiently for a certain dead Man's
Spanish Slippers, may go bear Foot, and not have so much as a Pair of French
Woodenshooes to keep him out of the Dirt.

Paris, July 23. The King's Statue was lately set up here in the Place de
Vandome; it is a perfect Colossus, and Mons. Geriardin has made it appear, That
our Monarch has been drawn three times bigger than the Life, not only by his
Parsons, his Poets, and his Historiographers, but by his Statuaries too. The
Ceremony of the Erection was very magnificent, several of the Nobility, the
Counselors of the Parliament, and the Principals of the Citizens, assisted at
it in all their Formalities; and if it had been the Custom of the Place, the
City Recorder had made a handsome Speech to the Figure. Our Letters from all
Parts of the Kingdom informs us, that the poor Hugonots are Persecuted ten
times more severely, if possible, than the Witches in Scotland, and it is
thought deserve it as little.

Rome, July 10. Our last Letters from hence advise, that mighty Preparations
are making for the ensuing Jubilee; most of the Charnel-houses and Tooth-drawers
Shops have been disfurnished of late, on purpose to provide Relicts for the
great number of Votaries we expect here. A Carmelite Friar has brought a most
valuable Rarity with him from the Holy Land, which he presented last Week to
his Holiness: It Is the Comb which belonged to the Cock that set St. Peter a
Weeping; and the Pope, they say, designs to make a Present of it to a peculiar
Favorite; we are like to be overrun with Strumpets from all Parts of
Christendom, who flock hither partly to wipe off their old Scores, and partly
to begin a fresh Tick with Heaven. It Is found by a modest Computation at
present, that they are at least ten Harlots to one Churchman already. How will
they be overpowered then, when the whole Posse is got to Rome? However it is
hoped that we shall have a speedy Reinforcement of Brawney well-chin'd
Regulars, and Seculars from the North, to keep the Balance more even between
the Gown and the Petticoat. This is the first time that a Plurality of
Concubines was ever thought a Grievance at Rome.

Amsterdam, July 30. The Magistrates of this Place, lately took into their
pious Considerations, the reforming the Abuses of the Long Cellar, and one of
them proposed to have it locked up; for which he had liked to have been
Dewitted by the Mob, for a Parsel of Saylors hearing of it, gathered in great
Numbers about his House, demolished his Windows, and had proceeded farther in
their Outrage, had not some of the topping Burgomasters pacified 'em, by
telling 'em the old Immunities, and Privileges of the Long Cellar should be
continued to them and their Heirs for ever. It was likewise proposed in our
Council, to have laid some new Penalty upon Drankenness but it being
represented to 'em, that it would incense the People, and bring down the
Excise, for that Reason they went no farther in it. Last Week four Men and as
many Women came from the Duchy of Juliers to this Place, with a Spick and Span
new Religion (as it is reported) the whole Contents of which, may be carried in
the compass of a Snuff Box: They give out that it is the easiest and cheapest
Religion that ever was known, and have offered it to the States for the value
of four thousand Gilders; if it be rejected, they design to Embark for England,
and see what Market they can make of their new Religion at London. Two learned
Critics of the University of Leyden have had a long Contest about the right
Spelling and Writing the Word Idcirco; and, at last, have agreed to referr the
Matter to Dr. B -- y, who being a Person of singular Humanity, it is not doubted
but he will do it to Satisfaction.

Edinburgh, July 29. We have not had for these ten Years last past so
favorable a Summer as now; so that we don't doubt, but that our Sloes will
ripen; and the Kirk has appointed a general Thanksgiving for it: fifty two
Witches are in Custody in several Prisons in this Kingdom, and many terrible
Things are alleged against 'em, and some of them have been such silly Jades to
own themselves guilty, choosing to be burnt outright, rather than live any
longer like Witches. The chief Discoverer of them is Mr. Sawney Cockburn, who
knows all the Witches Forms in the Kingdom; and with his Kirk Terriers will
Unearth you ten of 'em in a Morning: We build great Expectations upon our new
Coloney at Darien, and talk of covering all the Churches in Edinburgh with
Silver in a very short time; but others, who are not altogether so Sanguine,
are of Opinion, that all these mighty Pretenses will fall to the Ground: And
now I am upon this Article, give me leave to tell you, that I heard a
Politician talk in the Rainbow Coffee-house Yesterday upon this Matter; I am
confident, says he, that the Hand of Heaven will appear very Visible in the
Chastisement of the Scots in this new Project of theirs upon America. They have
impudently bid Defiance to Fate, and opposed the Decrees of Providence, for as
God Almighty from Eternity decreed the Germans to be Drunkards, the French to
carry Packsadles, the Jews to be Rascals; so he predestined the Scots to be
Pedlars; accordingly we find, the Germans to this Day get Drunk before Noon,
the French carry Packsadles to this Day, and so will do in Secula Seculorum,
the Jews Cheat on still, and the English Rebel; only the Scots must kick
against the Decrees of Fate, and instead of Pedlars, a Title their Ancestors
Aquiest in for two thousand Year and upward, set up for Merchants, Forsooth;
but if ever they make any thing on it, says he, (and if they are not at last
reduced to their old ancient Pedlarism) I Will forfeit my Reputation of a Prophet
to you, although they have cheated King William out of an Act of Parliament, I
believe they will find it a hard matter, withal their Craft and Cunning, to
cheat Heaven.

Thus, Sir, I have sent you the most important Occurrences I could find in the
Foreign Papers. But as to London, which used to be an inexhaustible Magazine of
News and Scandal, it affords neither at present. Our Beaux are all gone down to
Tunbridge and the Bath, in hopes to make Conquests in both those Places; where
I presume they will succeed as well as our dear Brethren beyond the Twede in
their new Caledonian Plantation; but a Month or two hence they will return to
Town with their Pockets as empty as their Heads. The Lawyers are gone down to
their respective Habitations to sow Dissension amongst his Majesty's liege
People in the Country, and will reap, no doubt on it, a most plentiful Harvest
the next Michaelmas-Term. Our old red-nosed Claret-drinkers have now left us to
recruit, by a Vacation-sobriety, their decayed Carcases, and enable 'em to sit
up whole Nights with the Parliament Men the next Winter. In short, the
Stock-jobbers have left the Change, and the Citizens are half of 'em gone to
Epsom, in order to Cuckold one another, which is the best News at present from
your assured Friend, etc.

From the Gun Music - booth in Smithfield, in the time of Bartholomew-Fair.
Aug. 28. 99. Dear George,
All Things are hushed, as Law it self were dead,
Poor pensive Fleetstreet, droops its mournful Head;
Smooth Alcalies in Peace with Acids sleep;
The Church and Stage no longer Difference keep;
The Pulpit-drums don't beat.
ANd now the Spirit of Versification leaving me in the lurch, I come to tell
you in honest Prose, I mean no more by all this rumbling Stuff, than to let you
know this is the long Vacation, which Lawyers, poor Whores, and Tailors, as
well as many other Trades, curse as heartily together as Ingrossers of Corn do
a plentiful Harvest, or Cole-merchants a warm Winter. Yet though many are glad
this penitential Season is near expired, as for my part, I could heartily wish,
as a Soldier does by the Wars, or a Woman by Enjoyment, it would last much
longer.

You Will tell me, that this is a Paradox; For why the Plague should a Man desire
to be in Town, when it is a Desert in a manner, when all the best Company is
gone to Tunbridge, Epsom or the Bath? All this may be true; but before you and
I part, perhaps I may bring you to be of another Opinion, and reconcile you to
the long Vacation.

In the first place: You must know, that I hate to be in a Crowd; for which
reason I wonder, why so many wise Gentlemen should be so fond to go to the
Jubilee at Rome, where they are like to be thronged and crowded as much as a
Spectator at a Country Bull-baiting, and with almost as bad a Mob (pardon the
Insolence of my Expression) for considering what a vast Multitude of Priests,
Fops and Bigots are gathered together at Rome, from all Corners of the
Universe, I wonder how an honest Man can think himself safe in so dangerous a
Crowd, or a wise Man please himself with the Sacred Farces of a Church Rabble.
In short, I love the long Vacation upon the same account that some honest
Claret - drinkers love walking Home at Midnight, because the Streets are
clearer and not so incommodious as at other times. Besides, London is at no
time of the Year so thinly peopled (God be thanked) but a Man, with a little
Industry, may find Company enough of both Sexes, to the ruin of his Health and
Consumption of his Estate. But this is not all, a universal Spirit of Civility
reigns over all the Town, the Tradesmen are more confiding and the Harlots
better natured.

A Vintner, who, in the hurry of Michaelmas-Term, is as difficult of access as
a Privy-counsellor, will now give you his Company for asking, and perhaps club
his Bottle into the Bargain; and the very individual Damsel, with whom a Month
or two hence, nothing below a Senator will go down, or at least a Man that will
bribe as deep, is now so humbled by the Emptiness of the Town, that for the
Credit of being carried in a Coach to her Lodgings, and the Expense of a Bottle
of Wine, to treat her Landlady, will put on a clean Smock to oblige you,
without so much as exacting Money to pay the Landress.

I could say a thousand things more in behalf of the Vacation, but I shall
content my self at present, that it produces Bartholomew-Fair; and when I have
said that, I think it needs no farther Panegyric. If Antiquity carries any
weight with it, the Fair has enough to say for it self on that Head. Fourfcore
Years ago, and better, it afforded Matter enough for one of our best Comedians
to Compose a Play upon it: But Smithfield is another sort of a Place now to
what it was in the Times of Honest Ben; who, were he to rise out of his Grave,
would hardly believe it to be the Place where Justice Over-do made so busy a
Figure, where the Crop-ear'd Parson demolished a Ginger-bread Stall, where
Nightingales sung Balads and fat Vrsula sold Pig and botled Ale.

As I have observed to you, this noble Fair is quite another thing then what it
was in the last Age, it produces Opera's of its own growth, and is become a
formidable Rival to both the Theaters; It no longer deals in humble Stories, of
Crispin and Crispianus, of Whittington's Cat, with the merry Conceits of King
Edward the Fourth and the Tanner of Tamworth: It beholds Gods descending from
Machines, who express themselves in a Language suitable to their Character: It
trafficks in Heroes, it raises Ghosts and Apparitions; it has represented the
Trojan Horse, the Workmanship of the divine Epeus; it has seen St. George
encounter the Dragon, and overcome him. In short, for Thunder and Lightning,
for Songs and Dances, for sublime Fustian and magnificent Nonsense, it comes
not short of Drary-lane or Lincolnsinn-fields. But, to leave off this Bombast,
with which the Booths have infected me, and deliver my self in a more familiar
Style, you are to know, that, at this present Writing, your humble Servant is
in a Musick-booth; yet, though he is distracted with a thousand Noises and
Objects, as a Maid whirling round with a dozen Rapiers at her Neck, a Dance of
Chimny-sweepers, and a Fellow standing on his Head on the top of a Quart-pot,
he has both Leisure and Patience enough to Write to you.

Smithfield had always the Reputation of being a Place of Persecution, with
this difference, that the Women do that in this Age which the Priests did in
the last, and make as many poor Sinners suffer as by Fire.

Cheap - side Cits come to see horned Beasts brought hither from all Parts of
the World, when they might behold the very same Monsters at home, if they would
but be at the pains of consulting their own Looking-glasses: The pious
Reformers of the City have been long endeavoring to put down this Nursery of
Wickedness and Irreligion, as they call it; but the beloved Wives of their own
Bosoms, and their virtuous Daughters, better understand their own Interest,
than to lose any Opportunity of getting abroad and planting Cuckoldom and
Fornication, as their Mothers did before 'em.

Certainly no Place sets Mankind more upon a level than Smithfield does; Lords
and Bellows-menders, Beaux and Fleaers of dead Horses, Colonels and
Foot-soldiers, Bauds and Women of Virtue, walk Cheek by Jole in the Cloisters,
and jostle one another by Candlelight, as familiarly as Not. Lee's Gods in
Oedipus jostle one another in the dark. The poor Vizard-masks suffer most
unmercifully; no sooner can one of this Character show her Head within this
priviledg'd Place, but she is hurried into a Corner, and a hundred several
Hands are examining at once whether she carries any Contraband-goods about her.

The Woman's Children in the Maccabees, that chose rather to suffer than
pollute themselves with Swines-flesh, would have died ten thousand Deaths
rather than so much as tasted a Pig's Ear in Smithfield, with a thousand of
Prince Molach's Subjects floating in the Sauce about him. But I suppose our
virtuous People swallow Pig and Pork so earnestly to show their Aversion to
Judaism.

So much may suffice at present, for I am just now going to a Puppet-show to
see the Creation of the World and Noah's Flood, which will give me more
Satisfaction, I don't question, than Dr. Woodward's Hypothesis, Mr. Whiston's
Theory, or any new System of our modern Vertuoso's.

I am your most humble Servant.

A Consolatory Letter to my Lady -- on the Death of her Husband.
Madam,
I Was very much surprised to hear that your Ladyship took so much to Heart,
the Loss of your Husband, that your Relations should not be able to Conquer so
obstinate a Grief, or that a Person of your good Sense and Resolution should be
so unfashionable and so weak, as to pay that Respect to the Ashes of the Dead,
which wellbred Women nowadays can scarce afford to the Living; I will not
pretend to attack your Grief in the common Forms, I will not represent to you,
that all Flesh is Grass, that nothing is exempt from the Laws of Fate, and that
it is in vain to regret a Loss which it was not in our Power to prevent; these
threadbare Topics I shall leave to Divines and Philosophers, and shall
content my self, to oppose your Lamentations, with Arguments better suited to
your present Condition. It Is true, Madam, you have lost a Husband, but what of
that? have not Thousands done so before you? but then consider, that his Death
makes room for a new Election. A Widow ought no more to afflict her self for
the Death of her Husband, than a Country Corporation ought to go into Mourning
for the Death of the Member that represented 'em in Parliament; for without
staying for a Writ from the Clark of the Crown, she may proceed to a new Choice
as soon as she sees convenient. Your Husband, God be thanked, has neither
carried your Youth with him into the other World, nor your Jointure; could he
have robbed you of either of those Blessings, you might have just Reason to
complain; but I think a Woman's Condition is not very desperate, when her two
surest Friends, her Beauty and her Wealth stick close to her. As you have
Charms, and Money enough to procure you store of Lovers, so in my Opinion, it
must needs be an agreeable Diversion in your present Sorrow, (for I will allow
you, Madam, to keep up the Appearance of it) to observe the different Style and
Language of your Admirers, one will tell you, that he adores the Perfections of
your Soul, exclusive of all Worldly Considerations; but, Madam, have a care of
these Platonicks, for a Man that makes vigorous Court to the Body, is worth a
Thousand Coxcombs, that pretend to be in Love with your Soul; another will tell
you, that he is ready to hang or drown for your Sake, and desires you to choose
what sort of Death for him you think fit, if you deny him that Blessing wherein
his Life can be only happy. Be governed by me, Madam, and take such a Lover at
his Word, if he decently dispatch himself; you may take it from me, that he
loved in earnest, but if he fails to give you this Testimony of his Affection,
you may conclude him to be a Hippocrite; a third perhaps will boast of his
Acres, and tell you what a large Settlement he will make you, whatever you do,
pray take care of these Smithfield Gentlemen, for not one in a Thousand is
honest at bottom. It will be a pleasant Amusement to you, to manage these
Humble Servants of yours so artificially, as to make all of 'em hope; yet, at
the same time jealous of one another, to steal a kind Glance sometimes at one,
and bestow a gracious Nod sometimes upon another, and after you have thoroughly
examined their several Merits and Qualifications, to proceed in your Choice, as
the Cardinals do at the Election of a Pope, and pitch upon one, which, in all
probability, is likely to make a sede vacant. Thus, Madam, instead of dwelling
upon the Illustrious Qualities of the Defunct, to the usual Method of common
Comforters, I have made bold to lay down before you, the Measures you are to
take with the Living. I confess I have venter'd upon a Task for which I am no
ways fitting: Solomon has told us, That the Hearts of Kings are unsearchable;
which, I suppose, he knew to be so by his own Case; he might have added, when
his Hand was in, That the Hearts of Widows are past finding out: Thus, Madam,
you are not to wonder, if the Directions I have given you, are none of the
surest; however, such as you see 'em, they are at your Service, as is likewise,

Madam, Your most Obedient and Faithful, etc.

To Mr. Moult, upon the breaking up of Bartholomew-fair.
Sept. 12, 99 Dear Sir,
THe Glory is departed from Smithfield, and Intriguing has left the Cloisters;
in short, Bartholomew-fair is over, Et voila mon Ami les miserables Effets d'
une si grand^ Revolution.

Those very individual Persons, who, two Days ago, glittered in Imperial
Tinsel, governed Kingdoms in Imagination, commanded Legions, and talked sublime
Heroic in Tragic Buskins; those very Persons, I say, who put the Sun out of
Countenance in his double Capacity, both as the God of Poetry, and the Governor
of the Day, who, out-shone him at Noon with their brighter Bristol Stones, and
out metaphor'd all Parnassus in the Booth, who commanded Respect from the
inferior Mobb, and drew the Eyes of the whole City, more than a Lord Mayor at
a Public Cavalcade: -- Quis talia fando,
Myrmidonum, Dolopumve, aut duri miles Vlyssis,
Temperet a lachrymis?
Are now, by a most wonderful Revolution of Fate, divested of all their
Splendor and Magnificence, their Troops, their Armies, nay, their very Guards
have deserted 'em; they are now reduced to the common Obscurity of Mankind;
instead of the most exquisite Wine, that used to Crown their Glasses, we find
'em now burying the Regret of their lost Sovereignty in humble Flip, or more
humble Anniseed; and are glad to be trusted for a Dinner at a Boiling-cook's,
and snore contentedly in a Garret.

And those charming Dulcibella's, who, by the unparalleled Luster of their
Eyes, forced Monarchs to lay their Scepters at their Feet, who had the Disposal
of Kingdoms and Dominions, who stole away the Hearts of all Beholders, and,
when ever they pleased, drew either Admiration or Pity from the Spectators, are
now, by their lik^ Inconstancy of Fortune, obliged to return to the Privacies
of a less pompous Life. They, whom Yesterday's Sun beheld so majestically
secure, that they refused a gracious Smile to prostrate Princes; Nunc in
quadriviis, and angiportis,
Glubunt magnanimos Bruti nepotes.
Are now glad to dispense their utmost Favors, for no higher a Bribe than a
Silver-thimble, and a double-guilt Brass-ring at most. They pollute themselves
with the sorrowful Embraces of their Fellow Sufferers: In the Daytime, foot
Stockings, wash Foot-mens Socks, and charitably make up Breaches in old. Muslin
and Lace; regale themselves with a Pint of Milk at Noon, and Gray-pease at
Night, trudge it on Foot from Charing Cross to the Change; and, with their
officious Elbows, remind all the Passers-by of their desolate Condition: In
fine, They, who so lately commanded the whole Universe, are under perpetual
Alarms from Watchmen and Constables; and, though they so often Fee the savage
Justice's Clark, are often forced to submit to the barbarous Discipline of
Bridewell and New-prison.

But though Bartholomew-fair be dead, and buried for a Twelvemonth, yet, it is
some Consolation to us, that it revives in both the Play Houses. Poetry is so
little regarded here, and the Audience is so taken up with Show and Sight, that
an Author need not much trouble himself with what he Writes, so he is but in
fee with the Dancing-masters, and has but Songs enough to lard his dry
Composition. One would almost swear, that Smithfield had removed into
Drury Lane, and Lincolns-Inn-fields, since they set so small a Value on Wit and
Sense, and so such Trifles that have no Relation to the Play. To convince you,
that I have Reason for what I say, I will Transcribe one of their own Bills,
that you may see what sorry Entertainment they are now accostomed to. By the
by, I am to tell you, that some of their late Bills are so very monstrous, that
neither we, nor our Forefathers, ever knew any thing like them, they are as
long as the Title Pages to some of Mr. Prin's Works, nay, you may read the
Gazette, even when it is most crowded with Advertisements, sooner than run over
one of them. In the first Place, here are to be seen, the Mimick Entertainments
of Mr. Clinch of Barnet, who makes a most incomparable Consort with a Pair of
Tongs, and a Key. In the next Place, there is to be a Dance of Bohemian Women;
then the worthy Gentleman that danced the Cheshire-rounds, has been pleased, at
the Instance of several Persons of Quality, to show his Parts upon the Stage.
It were to be wished the War had continued, for then we had not been overrun
with a Parcel of fine light-heel'd Messieurs, who are a greater Nuisance to our
Theater, than the Privateers were to our Merchantmen in the Chanel: We had
Mons. L'Abadie, Mons. Balon, the Famous Burlesque Dancers from Paris, and the
Famous Madam -- Las -- that had the Honor to Dance before the Duke of
Orleance, the Daulphin, and the Lord knows how many Persons of Honor: Besides,
I had liked to have forgot to tell you, that one of their Bills promised us
wonderful Things, from a Gentleman that sung like a Turkey-cock. Shortly, I
suppose, we shall have all sorts of Sights and Shows here, as, Jumping through
a Hoop; for why may we not have that as well as Mr. Symson's Vaulting upon the
Woodenhorse, Dancing upon the high Ropes, Leaping over eight Men's Heads,
Wrestling, Boxing, Cudgeling, Fighting at Back-sword, and Quarterstaff,
Bear-baiting, and all the other noble Exercises, that divert his Majesty's
People at Hockley in the Hole? not forgetting the witty Pranks of Punchinello,
and the merry Conceits of the little Pickle-herring.

What a wretched Pass is this wicked Age come to, when Ben. Johnson, and
Shakespeare wont go down with 'em, without these Baubles to recommend 'em, and
nothing but Farce and Grimaces will go down? For my part, I wonder they have
not incorporated Parson Bu -- ess in their Society, for after the Auditors are
stupefied with a dull Scene, or so, he would make a shift to relieve 'em: In
short, Mr. Collier may save himself the trouble of writing against the
Theaters, for, if these lewd Practices are not laid aside, and Sense and Wit
come in play again, a Man may easily foretell, without pretending to the Gift of
Prophecy, that the Stage will be shortliv'd, and that the strong Kentish Man
will take Possession of the two Play Houses, as he has done of that in
Dorset-garden. I am

Your Humble Servant.
P. S. The only News we have at present, is, that the strong Kentish Man (of
whom you have heard so many Stories) has taken Possession of the Theater in
Dorset-garden; and how they will get him out again the Lord knows, for he
threatens to thrash all the Poets, if they pretend to disturb him in his new
Quarters. Mr. Joseph Hains, was his Master of the Ceremony, and introduced him
in a Prologue upon the Stage; and indeed, who was so fit to do it, as this
Person, whose Breath is as strong, as the Kentish Man's Back. I don't doubt,
but that several of the Ladies, who saw this Prodegy of a Man, longed to try a
Fall with him in Private, like the Woman in Ovid, that was desirous to lie with
Hercules, upon the score of his Strength. Her Words, unless my Memory fails me,
were these, -- Subiit me magna cupido,
Far virum, tulerat qui prius ipse polum.
She had heard that Hercules had bore Heaven upon his Back, which set her
Concupiscence upon Tiptoes, to bear so Heavenly-minded a Champion; like
Citizens, that long to Intrigue with the Minister, in Hopes to partake in his
Godliness.



To W. K. Esquire Being a Relation of a Journey to London.
Sir,
YOu are earnest to know how I got to Town, and what Adventures I met upon the
Road. Since you can condescend to entertain your self with Trifles of this
Nature, be pleased to take them as they follow:

As soon as I came to Reading, I sent the Man of the House, where I lay that
Night, to enquire what Places were taken in the Coach; who brought me word,
that only one Place was taken, and that for a Woman. I presently represented to
my self some Maid, Wife or Widow of Nineteen, with black roguy Eyes, cherry
Cheeks, narrow Mouth, swelling Breasts, and a Breath as sweet as Violets. I
thanked my kind Stars for this favorable Opportunity, and with these pleasant
Imaginations passed away the Night very agreeably. Next Morning, full of these
charming Idea's, I made have to the Inn where the Coach lay: But, good Heavens!
no sooner did I peep within the booted Caravan, but I found my self the most
lamentably disappointed that ever poor Sinner was. Instead of the Beauty I had
represented to my self, behold an old Gentlewoman with formidable Whiskers, her
Nose and Chin as ready to meet as the two Ends of a Half Moon, and a dismal
Forehead-cloth into the Bargain, cooled my Courage. A Man of more Piety than my
self would have thanked Heaven for being so favorable to him, and securing him
from a Temptation; but, In Faith, I could not find in my Heart to do it. Into
the Coach I stepped, but with as much Regret on my side, as a Transport enters a
Virginia Ship, and, without so much as bidding her Ladyship Good Morrow, I
composed my self to sleep as well as I could; and, being pretty well prepared
for it, by what I had been doing the Night before, slept ten Miles
perpendicular, without the least interruption, till we came to Maidenhead.

Here we took up a Captain, and two Gentlemen besides. The Captain was one of
the most agreeable entertaining Gentlemen that ever could have atton'd for my
former Disappointment: He had been in the Service ever since the Campaigning at
Hounslow, since which he had seen most of the Action in Scotland, Ireland, and
Flanders. Our Conversation at first ran upon Politics: Religion succeeded to
that Discourse; and, when we were weary with that Subject, by one unanimous
Consent, we fell upon Women. The Captain, who, as I told you before, was a Man
of Wit and Pleasantry, diverted us extremely upon this Argument: He told us,
that as other Gentlemen devoted their Time to Geometry or Music, or any thing
else which they fancied, he had made it his Business to study Women, and had
arrived to so great a Perfection in this noble Science, that, after the first
Interview, he could as certainly tell how many Days a Woman would hold out, and
when she would deliver, as Monsieur Vauban could tell when any Town would
surrender.

I compare, says he, a Woman to a Fortification; In the first place, because it
is in my own Way. And, secondly, because there is the greatest Resemblance in
the World between them. There Is no Fortification so strong, nor no Woman so
virtuous, but, by open Force or Stratagem, may be made to yield. The World is
at liberty to talk what it pleases; but I positively maintain, that every Woman
is to be taken: They are either to be undermined by Flattery, or won by
Bribery, which we Military Men call Capitulation, or else (but it does not
happen once in a hundred Years) to be managed by downright Strength. Now all
the Art lies to know how to employ these Expedients. Some Ladies will be
flattered into Love, whom all the Bribes that stir about Weminster-hall in a
Session can never move: And others, by far the greatest part of the Sex, are to
be managed by Money, who have too much Discretion to be imposed upon by
Flattery. And there are others too great for Bribery, and insensible to all the
Flattery in the World, that must be vanquished by Force. Though their
Inclinations, Gentlemen, are as rampant as yours, nay perhaps fiercer, yet they
would seem to be forced; they think it is an Excuse for their Infirmity, and
quarrel with you after you have obliged them.

It was my Fortune, Gentlemen, about some eight Years ago, to be quartered upon
an Elder, when some of our Troops were in Scotland: His Wife, as to her Beauty,
was but indifferent, but she was young, and she belonged to the Kirk, which
were two extraordinary Temptations, especially the latter. I offered her half a
Piece, which was a mighty Sum in that Country, but could not prevail. Then I
laid out all my Stock of Rhetoric upon her, and made a Goddess of this
Coquette, but to as little effect as before. At last it came into my Head to
take the following course; I spoke well of the Covenant, and railed at the
Bishops, after I found her communicative enough of her Person. The next Summer
we were sent for over into Ireland, and, after the decisive Battle of the Boyn,
pursued the broken Remains of K. James's Army.

In short, Gentlemen, I have tried all the Tricks in the World with them, and
find, by long Experience, that Flattery does more than sincere Dealing with
them, and Drink more than Flattery, Money more than that, and Religion, I mean
the Pretense of it, more than Flattery, Drink and Money put together. This you
may take for granted, for Spinosa and Vanninus never made a quarter so many
Atheists, as Love.

Since I am upon this Argument, Gentlemen, and we have nothing else to talk of,
give me leave to tell you a short Story relating to this Affair: The Scene lies
in Wales, or the Borders of it, I wont be positive, but I dare swear it will
divert you for want of a better:

In the Country abovementioned lives a Family, very remarkable for their
Godliness, by the same token that there were always three or four Presbyterian
Divines, with as many young Cubs of the Schism, to keep the House in due Order.
From Morning to Night there was nothing but Exhortation, and Use, and
Application was to be heard within the Walls. The Cook exhorted the Butler, the
Groom gave Spiritual Advice to the Gardener: Yet, amidst all this Whining and
Praying, and Singing of Psalms, the Devil, who owed the Family a Grudge, for
making this Mock-War against him, seduced my Lady's Praying-Gentlewoman to
commit Acts of Wickedness with one of the Knight's Praying-Footmen: This
zealous Pair managed the Matter with so little Discretion, that their Amor was
discovered by some of their Fellow Servants; but godly People, you know, think
themselves above Scandal. At last, word was brought to the old Lady, that they
were actually in Bed. At first she disbelieved the News, but finding it
confirmed by other Witnesses, she went to this Scene of Lewdness, taking with
her a Smith to break open the Door, in case of Opposition, and a Nonconformist
Parson to awake their Consciences for them, in case they found them Impenitent.
Upon the first Alarm that my Lady gave them, the Lovers would not answer; but
when they found the Smith began to break open the Door in good earnest, the
Footman got up and opened it. The old Lady could hardly forbear striking them,
so much was her holy Spleen provoked at the Profanation of her House: But she
thundered out Judgments plentifully against them, and the Divine that was with
her did the same. In short, the Footman had his Livery stripped over his Ears,
and the poor Wench was sent Home to her Relations, by the same token that she
attempted to drown her self by the way.

This godly Family was in a strange Disorder to be defiled thus with
Fornication; and the Master of it, being then in London, this unhappy News was
sent to him, withal desiring his Advice to know what must be done upon this
Occasion. He ordered the Bed, upon which this sinful Action had been committed,
to be carried out of the Gates of the House, and there to be burnt. On the Day
when this was put in execution, the discarded Footman chanced to come by, as
Fire was set to the offending Materials, and being told the reason of it, My
Master, says he, might have let this Bonefire alone; for, to my knowledge, if
he is resolved to punish in this manner every Bed that has been accessory to
Fornication, there is not one in the House can 'scape him.

The Captain had just made an end of his Story as the Coach was got upon the
Stones. I took my leave of the Company in the Hay-market, being obliged, as you
know, to visit Mr. C --; by whom I find, that there is no stirring for me out of
Town this Month or two. Had not the end of our Journey caused a Separation of
our Company, I question not but the witty Conversation of my Fellow-traveller
would have furnished me with something farther to have entertained you; but
since our different Affairs robbed me of the Opportunity, I beg you to accept,
at second-hand, what I have borrowed from another to oblige you, and you will
more than recompense the good Intentions of

Your humble Servant.

A Love-Letter from an Officer in the Army, to a Widow whom he was desperately
in Love with before he saw her.
Though I never had the Happiness to see you, no, not so much as in a Picture,
and consequently can no more tell, what Complexion you are of, than he that
lives in the remotest part of China; yet, Madam, I am fallen passionately in
Love with you, and this Affection has taken so deep root in me, that in my
Conscience I could die a Martyr for you, with as much Alacrity, as thousands
have done for their Religion; though they were as ignorant of the Truth, for
which they died, as I am of your Ladyship.

This may surprise you, Madam, but you will cease to wonder, when I shall
acquaint you what it was, that not only give Birth to my Passion, but has so
effectually confirmed it. Last Week, riding into the Country about my lawful
Affairs, it was my Fortune to see a most magnificent Seat upon the Road; this
excited my Curiosity to enquire after the Owner of so beautiful a Pile; and
being told, that it belonged to your Ladyship, I began that very Moment to have
a strange Inclination for you; but when I was farther informed, that some two
thousand Acres of the best Ground in England, belonged to this noble Fabric,
together with a fine Park, variety of Fishponds, and such like Conveniences; I
then fell up to the Ears in Love, and concluded to list my self in the Number
of your humble Servants:

Thought I to my self, the Owner of so many agreeable Things, must needs be the
most charming Lady in the Universe: What though she be old, her Trees are green?
What though she has lost all the Rofes in her Cheeks, she has enough in her
Gardens? What signifies it though she be barren, since her Acres are fruitful?
With these Thoughts, I lighted from my Horse, and on the sudden fell so
enamored with your Ladyship, that I told my Passion to every Tree in your
Park, which, by the by, are the tallest, straitest, loveliest, finest shaped
Trees I ever saw; and have since wore out above two dozen Penknives, in
Engravening your Name upon their Barks.

I will now appeal to your Ladyship, whether any Lover, ever went upon more
solid Motives than my self. Those who are wholly influenced by Beauty, will
infallibly find their Passion decay with that; those who pretend to admire a
Woman for the Qualities of her Mind, ought to consider her Soul abstractedly
from her Body; and he that loves not a Woman for her Flesh, as well as her
Spirit, is only fit, in my Opinion, to make his Court to a Spectre; whereas you
need not question the Sincerity of my Passion which is built upon the same
Foundation with your House, grows with your Trees, and will daily increase with
your Estate: For all I know to the contrary, your Ladyship may be the
handsomest Woman in the World; but believing you are so, but whether you are or
no, signifies not a Farthing, while you have Money enough to set you off, though
you were ten times Uglier than the present red-nosed Countess of --, and older
than the famous Countess of Desmond. I am a Soldier by my Profession, and as I
fought for Pay, so, with Heaven's Blessing, I design to love for Pay; all your
other Suitors would speak the same Language to you, were they as honest as my
self; this I will tell you for your Comfort, Madam, that if you pitch upon me,
you will be the first Widow upon Record, from the Creation of the World, to this
present Hour, that ever chose a Man for telling her the Truth.

An Exhortatory Letter, to an old Lady that smoaked Tobacco.
Madam,
THough the ill-natured World censures you for Smoking, yet I would all vise
you, Madam, not to part with so innocent a Diversion; In the first place it is
Healthful, and as Galen in de usu Partium rightly observes, is a sovereign
Remedy for the Toothache, the usual Persecutor of old Ladies. Secondly,
Tobacco, though it be a Heathenish Weed, is a great help to Christian
Meditations; for which is the Reason I suppose that Recommends it to our
Parsons; the Generality of whom, can no more write a Sermon without a Pipe in
their Mouths, than a Concordance in their Hands: besides, every Pipe you brake,
may serve to put you in mind of Mortality, and let you see upon what slender
Accidents, Man's Life depends. I knew a Country Minister, who on Fast-days used
to mortify upon a Rump of Beef, because it put him, as he said, in mind, that
all Flesh was Grass; but I am sure much more may be learnt from Tobacco. It may
instruct you that Riches, Beauty, and all the Glories of this World vanish like
a Vapor. Thirdly, It is a pretty Play-thing: A Pipe is the same to an old Woman,
that a Gallant is to a young one, by the same Token they make both Water at
Mouth. Fourthly and Lastly, It is fashionable, at least it is in a fair way of
becoming so; cold Tea, you know, has been this long while in Reputation at
Court, and the Gill as naturally ushers in the Pipe, as the Sword Bearer walks
before the Lord Mayor.

I am your Ladiship's humble Servant.

To Sir W. S --.
January 8.
I Have, according to your Order, sent you down by the Canterbury Coach, the
Satyr against Wit, and the Poetae Britannici, two incompar able Pieces in their
Kind, and which will certainly give you a great deal of Diversion, if you are
to be diverted by Dullness and Defamation, or what is as bad as Defamation, by
vile, lousy Panegyric. The former of these two Poems came like Melchisedeck
into the World, without Father or Mother; I mean the Author, for several
Reasons best known to him self, has not thought fit to set his Name before it:
however, he is not so concealed as he fancies himself; for if there is any
certainty in Physiognomy, or the Child to be known by resembling the Features
of the Father, as they say the Austrian Family are by the Lip; it was
undoubtedly written by the City Bard, the same worthy Gentleman, who about
three Years ago lampoon'd K. William in an Heroic Poem, by the same Token, that
he was Knighted for it. I have been told he has disowned the Bastard in several
Companies, but that will not serve his turn: The Grand Jury at Will's have found
the Bill against him; so now he must even take the Brat home, and bring it up
its Father's Religion, Hypocrisy and Backbiting. A Friend of mine the other Day,
sai'd a very pleasant thing, methought upon this Occasion, A Satyr against Wit;
that is, says he, a Satyr against every individual Subject King William has in
his Dominions, for there is never a Man between St. Michael's Mount, in Cornwall,
and Barwick upon Tweed, but thinks himself a Wit, whatever the World may think
of him; nay, I dare engage that the Author himself, for all his Aversion to
Wit, does not believe this Satyr is without it. It Is the most fantastical
Mixture of Hypocrisy and Scandal you ever saw: The Writer of it, (which he
shows by his Scurrility and Want of good Manners) sets up for an Advocate of
Religion, and pretends that a Confederacy is carrying on in Coventgarden, to
Banish that and Learning out of the World. By the terrible Description he makes
of some People, one would be apt to think that the Goths and Vandals, who have
been buried under Ground for so many hundred Ages, were newly sprung up in
Russel Street, and going with Fire and Faggot to set all our Libraries in
Ashes; and when that was done, to knock all the Parsons in the Head, and ravish
all the Women between Temple Bar and White-chappel. But Dr. Otes's forty
thousand Pilgrims, with their black Bills, and so forth, don't smell so much of
Romance. All the Reason I know of he has to make this hideous Outcry, is,
because the Dispensary has made bold to expose the rumbling Fustian of his two
Arthurs, and some honest Gentlemen, that now and then use to drink a Dish of
Tea at Will's, have been guilty of the horrid Sin of speaking the Truth, and
condemning his Rhymes. A strange thing this? that a Man must be an Atheist,
only for calling Dullness by its proper Name, and a Rake, because he has too
much Honesty to Flatter one of the most stupid execrable Poems, that has
plagued the World since the Days of Quarles and Ogilby. As I told you before,
the Author of this incomparable Satyr has been pleased to disown it; but he has
acknowledged enough to do his Business. He has owned to a Person of the
indelible Character, who complimented him upon the Writing of it, and told him,
that an indelible Mark was stamped upon all his Works, that indeed he Corrected
and Revised it (if another had been to Correct it, he would have done it with
Martial's Vna litura;) but indeed did not Write it: However, this is enough in
all Conscience, for next to the Scandal of Writing such a confounded Satyr,
that of Correcting and Revising it, deserves the next place. But in Satyr and
Murder, there is no such thing as Accessories, but every Man is a Principal. It
would look like too Solemn a Confutation of such Ribaldry, to say that the
Gentlemen, whom he has abused, have improved and cultivated our Tongue, have
obliged the World with several Works that will be read with Admiration, and
remembered with Gratitude, when his are forgotten, that they think it no
Disgrace to their Learning, to accompany it with good Manners, that they know
when to unbend themselves to Pleasure, and when to apply to Business, that they
don't affect a Gravity which after all becomes none but mysterious Block-heads,
nor show their Morals, by censuring those of their Neighbors; I say, it would
look too solemn, to say any thing like this in their Justification, since not
only their own Works speak for them, but they are sufficiently commended, by
being made the Heroes of his Libel. Among other merry Doctrines he advances, he
tells the World, that it is impossible for a Man to be a Wit, and not a Rake;
this I suppose he calculated for the Meridian of Cheapside, and for the
Consolation of his City-Friends, whom all the World will clear from the
Imputation of being Wits; and yet, with all due Respect to my Lord Mayor and
Aldermen be it spoken, I believe there are as many of that Character within the
Citywalls, as there are in Covent Garden, and stupid senseless Coxcombs too,
that discredit Pleasure, and Murder that which was designed to enliven
Conversation. He principally levels his Indignation at Mr. Dryden, and among
other Sins, taxes him with Flattery. If Flattery is to be Pardoned in any sort
of Men, it certainly ought to be in the Poets; but for my part, I don't think
them more guilty of it, than the rest of Mankind, who all agree to make their
Courtship to Wealth and Greatness; and if it is a Sin to flatter Greatness,
they do neither better nor worse than all the World, who, perhaps, have not the
same Excuse. If Man were minded to be ill-natured, he might easily turn the
Tables upon the Church, and show that the Parsons have flattered as much as the
Poets. If the Latter in their Epistles Dedicatory bestow Wit and Learning upon
Block-heads, the Former have bestowed Grace, and the Lord knows how many
Christian Virtues upon those that never possessed them. What makes it look
worse in the Parsons than the Poets? Is it, that the Latter are privileged by
Function, whereas the former are Men of Grimace, and are supposed to deal in
nothing but Truth: But it is a Jest, that the City Bard should fall foul upon
any one for Flattery; he that has been guilty of the grossest, vilest Flattery
imaginable, and prostituted the Dignity of an Epic Poem, more than any one
before him. An Epic Poem is a noble magnificent Composition; the chief End of
it is to excite Men to Virtue, by celebrating illustrious Examples, and
proposing them to Imitation. It Is a Public sort of a Building, like that of a
Temple, or a Town Hall; now as a Man that designs to build any such Structure,
if he intends to adorn it with Statues, ought to set up those of celebrated
Men, of Kings, or Princes, or Bishops, and not his Barber's because he Trims
him well, or his Shooe-maker's, because he has got the Length of his Foot: So
in Epic Poem, an Author should only introduce Men of Figure into his Work, and
not throw away his Incense upon mean or obscure Persons, merely because they
are his Friends, and now and then drink a Glass a Wine with him at the Three
Tuns. Yet the Author of the two Arthurs, has not only done this, but has (to
his immortal Credit be it spoken) introduced Satyr into an Epic Poem, which no
one did before him, and I dare swear no one will ever attempt the like after
him, except such a sordid Imitator, as he that has Burlesqued our Savior in
Heroic. But to return to our Satyrist:

You and I, and every Body has been charmed with the honorable Mr. Boyl's
Answer to a stiff haughty Grammarian that shall be nameless, but is known well
enough. Never did Wit and Learning Triumph so gloriously over Dullness and
Pedantry, as in that noble Book; and never was any Argument managed with that
Variety of Learning, and those agreeable Turns of Wit. Accordingly it had not
only a kind Reception in England, but elsewhere. The Foreign Journals, gave it
the Commendation it deserves, and all the Polite Judges in Europe were pleased
to see an arrogant Pedant, that had been crouding his Head twenty Years
together with the Spoils of Lexicons and Dictionaries, worsted and foiled by a
young Gentleman, upon his own Dunghill, and by his own Criticisms. Thus one
would have thought that Mr. Boyl's Merit and Quality would have secured him
from any scurrilous Treatment; and that his Enemies, if he could have any such,
would be content to Envy him in Private, and never have the Impudence to Attack
him in Public. And yet the noble Author of the Satyr against Wit, has
villainously insinuated, that the Gentleman I have been talking of, did not
Write the Book, to which he prefixed his own Name. I will appeal to you,
whether it is possible for any Suggestion to be more malicious and base than
This; and whether the Publisher of it can be used too scurvily, ought to be
treated with any good Manners, which he has so notoriously violated. They talk
of Squibbing him with Epigrams; for my part, I think it is doing him too much
Honor, and making him more considerable than he deserves; however, if they go
on with it, I shall not be wanting to contribute my Quota to so Pious a Design.

It Is now high time to come to the Author of the Poetae Britannici: I do the
Scoundrel too much Honor to name him; but since two or three Advertisements
have set him out in all his Trappings, for once I shall condescend to mention
him: His Name is Cobb, the same numerical Blew-coatboy, that some Years ago
Writ a merry Pindarick upon the Queen's Death, which was presented for
Blasphemy at the Old Bailey. I cannot imagine how it could come into the Head of
so obscure a Wretch, to think he could do any Honor to the Persons he pretends
to commend, or that his Censure should be taken in Prejudice of the meanest
Scribler in Town.

Thus I have given you a short Account of these two Lampoons; I should have
made a Scruple to obey your Commands, (the only time I was ever like to Disobey
you) in sending them down to you, but that I considered with my self, that your
Worship in all probability has been a great Transgressor these
Christmas-holidays, and Trespast most enormously with your Tenants in Roastbeef
and March-beer; for which Reason it may not be amiss for you to do Penance, as
I reckon you will most plentifully, if you can have Patience to Read over the
City Bard's and the Blew-coat Scriber's Poem. I am, with all Respect,

Your most humble Servant.

To a Physician in the Country.
Sir,
WE are almost barren of News; the War betwixt the Northern Crowns, and the
Poetical Physicians is the only Subject at present; Holstein and Riga,
Cheapside and Covent Garden the Scene of all our Coffee-house Debates. What
passes in our two first, the public Prints will inform you; the latter I shall
endeavor to give you some Account of: You are not Ignorant of the Civil War
that is broke out amongst the Subjects of Apollo, and the Disorders in
Parnassus. Two brawny Heroes, the Sons of Paeon, head the opposite Factions;
both have signalized themselves extraordinarily one in four Poems, which he has
Printed, and to'ther in a Poem printed four times. The City Bard takes Arms, to
drive out Wit, as an Evil Counselor from all the Rellins of Apollo. The
Covent Garden Hero rises in its Defense, and maintains its Services. This
Quarrel is so far spread, that it is not like to be decided Proprio Mart; each
Chief has his Faction, the Knight of the Round-table has gathered a Body of
Mercenaries, to whom, on the other side, are opposed a Squadron of Auxiliary
Volunteers; and thus, as in Forty One, Blew-aprons, and Laced-coats are drawn
up against one another, and the Rabble and Gentlemen set together by the Ears;
each Side confident of Success, that trusting to their Multitudes, this to
their Courage and Conduct. The Pestle and Mortar-men are drawn up against the
Esculapian Band; the first, who like Tailors and Women measure the Goodness of
every Thing by the length, assert the good old Cause of long Bills, and long
Poems, against the Jus Divinum of Efficacy and Sense; and think it infinitely
more Meritorious to write three or four Folio's without Wit, than to fill a
small Octavo with it, and prefer the Art of Swelling a Bill, before the Skill
to Cure a Disease. The Cheapside Hero, they say, devotes himself wholly to
their Service, and Rhimes as well as Prescribes to the use of their Shops:
However, this doubty Chief, in the midst of his Cheapside Triumphs, has been
brought under Martial Discipline, and forced to run the Gantlet in
Covent Garden, and switch'd through the whole Posse of Parnassus, for fighting
against the Law of Arms with false Colors. Those that favor his Cause
complain of the Injustice and Indignity of his Punishment, alleging, he
suffers for what he never did. They on the other Hand defend their Proceedings,
and affirm they know him through his Disguise, and that coming upon 'em in
Masquerade, he ought to suffer as a Spy, or an Assassin, and deserves no more
Quarter, than he gives to his Patients. Notwithstanding this, his Party have
rallied once more, and the Mercenaries are brought to the Attack, who hope to
affect that by Stratagem, that they despair of by plain Force; and, like the
Scots at the Bass, since they cannot reduce 'em by Arms, attempt to Poison them
with Stink-pots. At the Head of those, is a Mendicant Rhymer, one that begs
with a Poem, like a Pass in his Hand, and with a sham Brief, as a Sufferer by
Poetic Fire; has Collected the Charity of well-disposed Persons through all
Parnassus for above twice twelve Months; and like a true Beggar, when he has
tired 'em out, falls a Railing: For a Bribe from his Balad-Printer's not large
enough to Rob him of the Benefit of the Act of Parliament, for the Relief of
Poor Prisoners; and the Promise of a Dinner now and then from Sir Arthur, he
has consented to Libel his Benefactors, and return to his old Quarters, and
subsist for the Remainder of his Life upon the Basket. Thus countenanced and
encouraged, he lays about him most desperately, and like one not much concerned
for the Success, draws his Incense, and his Ammunition from the same House of
Office. Friends and Foes are treated alike in Compliment, he paints one with
the same Sir-reverence, that he aims to bedaub the other; and when his Hand is
in, like the Conqueror in Hudibrass's Ovation, bestows his Ordure very
liberally amongst the Spectators. Thus, Sir, I have given you a true Account of
the State of the Poetical War, headed on both Sides by Gentlemen of your
Faculty; among whom, though here has been no Bloodshed, there has been as much
Noise of Slaughter and Execution, as in Holstein, or Livonia. You may expect
more on the same Subject, for the Quarrel is not like to drop, while H -- ns
can tell his Fingers, or P -- subsist on Mumping in Meter.

I am, etc.

LOVE LETTERS, WRITTEN By Mr. -- to Madam --
I Had a Mind to know, Madam, whether you had quarreled with me the other Night,
at the -- or not; and therefore, writing to you Yesterday, I find now that you
are angry at something; but may I be discarded, if I know the Reason: If you
have made a Quarrel on my approving --, I beg your Pardon, and shall henceforth
do Violence to my own Reason, and contradict Mankind to agree with you: It Is
hard to find any Simpathy in Hearts, where there is such Contrariety in
Opinions. I shall therefore, Madam, henceforth square my Sentiments to yours in
every thing; and if you will quarrel without a Cause, I will oblige you, and do
so too. Your Uneasiness, Madam, wrongs either your own Charms or my Sincerity;
either of which is a sensible Abuse to me. It Is a hard Fate, that you cannot
love and be easy, and I cannot desist and live: but I can die to make you
happy; an ill-natured Line or two does the Business; for I cannot bear the
Spleen, the Rheumatism, and your Displeasure at once. So, Madam, strike now,
and for ever quit your self of an unfortunate Man, who has but one Hand, which
he thinks sufficient, since he can thereby ever own himself

Yours.

To the same.
Madam,
Sunday-morning,

NExt to my Prayers, I must address my Devotions to you; to you whom I have
offended, and to whom I must offer a penitential Sacrifice, if an Oblation of a
bleeding Heart can make any Atonement for my Sin, I offer it freely. Heaven is
merciful, and so should you be; I dare not approach, without your Permission:
If you will Sign my Pardon in a Line from your dear Hand, expect me with all
the Joy of a reprieved Malefactor. I am, Madam, happy or miserable, as you
please to make me.

To the same.
WHat shall I say to the dearest Woman upon Earth! Were my Thoughts common, how
easily might they be expressed! But the Expression, like the Enjoyment in Love,
is lost by a too ardent Desire; my Soul plumes it self in the secret Pride of
being beloved by you; and upon so just a Foundation of valuing my self, who can
accuse me of Vanity? I can no more compliment what I love, than I can flatter
what I hate; and therefore when I tell you, that your Charms are more and more
engaging, and my Love improving, believe it for a Truth; hear my Wish, and then
conclude me happy: Oh! could I find (grant Heaven that once I may)
A Nymph fair, kind, poetical and gay;
Whose Love should blaze unsullied and divine,
Lighted at first by the bright Lamp of mine:
Free from all sordid Ends, from Interest free,
For my own sake Affecting only me.
What a blessed Union should our Souls combine!
I here is alone, as she was only mine;
Blessed in her Arms, I should immortal grow,
Whilst in return, I made my Celia so.
Sweet generous Favors should our Loves express,
I Would Write for Love, and she should Love for Verse:
Not Sacharissa's self, great Waller's Fair,
Should for an endless Name with mine compare.
She should transcend all that e're went before,
Her Praises, like her Beauty should be more:
My Verse should run so high, the World should see,
I sung of her, and she inspired me:
The World should see that from my Love I drew,
At once my Theme, and Inspiration too:
Blessed in my Wish, my Fair, I Am blessed with you.


I went abroad Yesterday morning about seven, and returned about one this
morning, slept till past eight, then arose to tell you, that I dreamt of you
all the time, and that I am your own.

To the same.
BY Heavens and Earth (my Dearest) I am tied Neck and Heels with Wine, and
Company! All the Spells of Love cannot undo the Charm; besides, my Dear, I am
almost fudled; I shall stay here at the Rose till toward eleven; it will be a
tedious Walk to go home to Night, considering that you lie upon the same Floor
with the Door: It is not impossible, methinks, for a Man of so much Love to
slip in Incognito. Your -- is with me, there will be a double Pleasure in
deceiving him, and being happy in my dear One's Arms; I shall call at the Door,
and see whether the Coast be clear: however, this, if it succeeds, will make me
the happiest upon Earth --; however, my Dear, run no Hazard that may expose
you; but consider, my Dear, the eager Wishes of the faithfullest, and most
loving of Mankind.

To the same.
IF I did not Love, I would not beg, and if ever you loved, you will grant my
Pardon; your Letter, Madam, has tormented me more than all the Favors of your
whole Sex besides can please me; if I have lost you, I have lost my self, and
shall be lost to all Womankind: My Letter last Night was written in heat of
Wine; so Men guilty of Murder in their Drink, repent it all their Lives; mine
is a greater Crime, for I have stabbed my self, pierced my own Heart, and now it
bleeds with Anguish and Despair.

Stabbed my own Heart, and pierced your Image, there the Remembrance of the
Happiness I have enjoyed, will now prove the greatest Curse; the melting Sighs,
the moving Tears, the Joys, the Raptures that mounted me to Heaven, now cast me
down to Hell: I shall now turn Poet in good earnest; And like poor Ovid,
banished from his Rome,
Curse that destructive Art, that caused his Doom.
In short, Madam, I am Mad, and if I think farther, I shall let the World see
it. Revoke that word, eternal Silence, or you make me eternally Miserable, for
I am now the most Disconsolate of Mankind.

To a young Lady.
By another Hand.
My Dearest Madam,
FOr so I must ever think you, I hope you got safe to London, and that your
Indisposition is abated, which will be the Means to make mine the more
tolerable, since I can more easily bear mine own than yours; You expect I
should tell you, how I am; and excepting a little Melancholy, the Reason of
which you know, I find my self tolerable, my Feavour, I think, did not think
fit to visit me last Night; I ramble out of one Room into another, now and then
I let fall a Tear. I design to come to London, on Sunday next, that my Heart
and I, may be in the same Place; till then, believe me most entirely

Yours.

To the same.
I Cannot help telling my Dearest, how much I am hers, what Pleasure I have in
her Company, what Pain in her Absence; to love her, is but to see her; and to
value her, is only to know her: But pray, my Dear Mrs. --,forget not to drink
some Chocolate with me to Morrow, that I may once say, I spent a Sunday well; I
am sure I shall have some good Thoughts in the Morning, because I shall think
of you; and when I do so, I shall think of one that I passionately Love, and
that I hope is not unmindful of

Hers.

To the same.
TO convince you, I am not given to Change, regard but this Piece of Paper,
it is torn like my Heart at taking leave, and is such a Scribble as I usually
write; I am harsh in my Style, negligent of my Ink, and not too exact in
fashioning up my Letter; and cannot have the least Esteem for my self, but when
I reflect that I have the Honor to be lokt upon as,

Madam, your most Humble.

To the same.
Dear Madam,
It Is to you, I must always address to tell me how I do; it is no matter, though I
should find my self in Health, if your Frowns should tell me otherwise; know
then, Madam, I languish, or revive, as you smile or look out of Humor; and
though, at present, one would guess by my Handwriting, that I am just at the
point of Death; yet, I doubt not, but I shall live tell to Morrow Evening, if
you would but promise, at that time, to come to

Yours.

A Letter from a Lady to her Lover, in the French Army; with a Tuft of Hair
enclosed in it. Out of the French.
Sir,
I Have sent you a Pattern of what you formerly used to like so much, and could
wish the whole Piece with you: I long to see you, and am sorry, that your
Honor is dearer to you, than your Mistress, and that you prefer a Lodging in a
Trench to her Arms. I begin to complain of the length of the Campaign; but if
it be true, that one of these enclosed in this Letter, can draw more than six
Horses, I may have some Hopes they will pull you hither to me; at least all
that is left of you, for I suppose you are too much a Hero, to bring back all
your Limbs with you, or to have any thing entire, but your Heart, at your
return to

Yours.

To Madam C -- ll.
Madam,
IT is not without some Pains, Madam, that I have gathered the following
Account, which if it proves not advantageous to me; it is at least very
satisfactory, to know why I am refused: Because you don't like me. A very
substantial Reason, I must confess; and the only one I believe, on which the
Virtue of your Sex is grounded: For, Madam, I am satisfied, your Fortress is
not Impregnable, and though you will not Capitulate with me, though I offer your
own Terms, I know the Man, to whom you would gladly Surrender upon his. A Song,
or an amorous Copy of Love-Verses, would gain the Point: It Is strange, Madam,
that you should be in Love with the Sons of the Muses; those poor Rogues, that
can only pay with empty Breath, what I, with substantial Gold, would purchase;
and that used to be the most prevailing Argument with your Sex. Adsheart,
Madam, half a Crown damns a Poet at any time, and for a Shilling, you may buy
what he has puzl'd his Brains about half a Year to Collect; then, pray where
lies the Curiosity? Now, I should think, a little Money, or a little Wit, clean
Linen, and a sweet Breath, might be every jot as acceptable. I may reasonably
suppose, your Husband, a very Husband; for Women are generally in Extremes, and
your Sickness of the Fool is increased to a Madness for a Wit. Now, Madam, I
would advise you, to apply a Medium for your Cure, which you may find in your
humble Servant: I am neither Idiot enough, to be called a Driveller; nor Wit
enough, to set up for a Poet: yet, I Will venture a Wager, if you will try, I can
leave you as substantial as either. Consider, Madam, on this Advice, and Heaven
give you Grace to put it in Practice: I shall expect your Answer, or you may
expect the second Part of the same Tune. For in short, Madam, I Love you, and
must, and will Possess: I am resolved not to be uneasy thus, when it is in your
Power to give me Ease. I am, Madam, or will be wholly yours, and I hope to find
one Day the same Conclusion, in a Letter from your dear self.

Madam C -- ll's Answer to --
Could I value a Man upon his Fortune, I should condescend to Converse with a
Fool, though by your Assurance and Vanity, one would take you for a Wit: my
Conversation with the Sons of the Muses, is purely for my Diversion; if I
thought you had Sense enough to make me Sport, I would list you in the Number.
I Am afraid the Product of your whole Life, wont amount to the Value of what you
reckon a Poet's half Year's Pains, unless it were to expose your self, which
they can do better for you: You tell me, you have a sweet Breath, but how can
that be a sweet Breath, which Stinks so Rankly of Nonsense? You propose a
little Money, and a little Wit; but I scorn to be beholding to any Man for the
former, and the latter I have it already, without the Arrogance of Riches, and
the ill Manners of Vanity. My Husband knows me so well by my Company, and you
so well by your Letter, that he has given me leave to Answer it; nay, commanded
me, else I had left you a Prey to your Conceit and Vanity; which in a little
time, will make you fit for the Stage, and so make you good Company for Women
of Sense.

Sir, I advise you to make your Valet transcribe your Letters for you, for your
own hand Spells worse than a Whore.

His Answer to Mrs. C -- ll.
AN Answer, and by the Husband's Command too; better still, I hope you have Wit
enough to make Advantage of the Liberty he gives you: Your Letter, Madam, shows
you a Woman of Sense; and the Scarceness of that Commodity in your Sex, renders
you the more agreeable: And it ought to be taken into consideration by the
Parliament, to prevent the Increase of Fools, that no one Man should engross a
Person of Wit to himself: You are very severe, Madam; but no matter, I had
rather be the Subject of your Thought this way, than not at all; for I may hope
at last to convince you of the Sincerity of my Passion, and Pity is essential
to your Sex. But, what am I doing! this is laboring to be a Fool indeed, and
losing your Opinion of my Vanity; if you will let me enter your List, Madam,
under what Colors you please, I don't question coming off with Credit. And if
you don't confess I have made you as good Sport as any of the Parnassian
Family, I Will give you leave to cashire me the next Moment. I Am glad to find
such a Reformation in your Sex; but, I doubt, Madam, you will hardly persuade
many of 'em to be of your Mind. For I tell you, Madam, Gold is the Women's God;
and there is scarce a Duchess in this Kingdom, that cannot find an use for a
superfluous Sum. I deny your having Wit without Vanity; if you mean in your
self, good Manners obliges me not to contradict you, though I have much ado to
help reminding you of the following Line, in the Letter, it is out, Faith,
before I was aware, your Pardon for that: If you mean the Lover, I must tell
you, Madam, that no Poet is without the Vanity of ten thousand a Year, and I Will
warrant, to assert his own Wit, would venture to Libel a Parliament Man, for
hissing his damned dull Plays, though he had picked his Pocket of half a Crown.
Look ye, Madam, I have no occasion to expose the Product of my Brain; the
Product of my Estate is sufficient to afford me Necessaries; and that is more
than your Poetical Friends can warrant from their spare Diet and hard Study.
And to answer the Postscript, good Spelling is beneath a Gentleman; so much by
way of Answer. Now, Madam, I wish I knew of what Metal, this good Man of yours
is made; for I would fain be acquainted with him, it is the best way of
Intriguing in the World: If he is a Courtier, Flattery makes him my Friend; if
he is a Citizen, Custom in his way of Trade; if he serves the King, a Bribe may
do the Business; if a Man below these, a hard Word, and a big Look makes you
mine; and if I once had Possession, you should find I had Courage enough to
defend my own, though with all the Submission to you imaginable. For believe
me, Madam, to be the sincerest of all your humble Servants.

An Answer.
I AM very glad to hear, Sir, that you are a Member of Parliament, for by that
means you may prefer a Bill in favor of my Sex, that may provide against the
troublesome Suit of those we don't care for. Pray Sir, be kind to the D -- of N
--; I don't think but an Act of Resumption, in ease of a Wife may pass. If an
Act of Parliament make a Cuckold, it may be of dangerous Consequence to all the
Husbands in the Nation; for the Subjects will be for following the Example of
the higher Powers. I imagine you to be of the Court Party, you understand a
Bribe so well; but I can assure you my Husband falls not in your Road; he is no
Courtier, consequently no Knave; no Soldier; so not in your Power to use ill;
no trusting Cit to oblige your Squireship's Acquaintance; nor Fool enough to be
frighted with the Bray of an Ass: thus much by way of Answer to your Wish. And
now, Sir, I tell you, I want much of your Vanity to relish your Flattery; I
have Wit enough to distinguish the Arrogance of a Coach and Six from the
Complaisance of a Man of Sense; I despise your Price, and nauseate your Person;
and if you don't desist, I shall expose your Name in Print; and your Years will
show you Bankrupt in Love, as your Letters does of Sense and good Manners; and
that you are deficient in 'em all, I believe the World will agree with,

Sir, Your humble Servant.

To Mrs. --
By another Hand.
Madam,
I Must acquaint you in short, that you must either pull out your Eyes, or I
must pull out mine; either you must not be Handsome, or I must be Blind. Yet
though my Passion is as violent perhaps as any Man's, you must not expect I
should either Hang or Drown. I should betray great Want of Sense, and little
Knowledge of your Merit, to be willing to leave the World while you are in it.
To deal sincerely with you, Madam, I choose infinitely the Happiness of Living
with you, before the Glory of Dying for you. Besides, I have that good Opinion
of your Sense, to believe you prefer the living Lover to the dead; the Lips
that are warm, to those that are cold; the Limbs which have Motion, to those
which have none. If I must die, Madam, kill me with your Kindness, but not with
your Cruelty: Let me expire rather upon your Bosom, than at your Feet. If you
shall be tenderly inclined to give me a Death of this kind, I am prepared to
receive it on any Ground in the three Kingdoms: Appoint but your place, and I
shall not fail to meet my fair Murderer.

To my Lady --.
Madam,
I Am now at my Lady --, where we have had a very warm Debate: Among many
general Things we happened to fall into a Discourse of Queen Elizabeth, and a
Question arising what Complexion she was of; one Lady said, she was Fair,
another maintained she was Black, a third contended she was Brown. The Dispute
was managed with very great Heat, and little Certainty on all sides. Speed,
Baker, Camden, were consulted; but we found the Historians either silent, or as
much divided as the Company; at last, after a long Debate, it was the unanimous
Resolution of both Ladies and Gentlemen, to refer it to your Ladiship's
Determination, as a Person of greater Antiquity, and consequently of better
Authority than our Chronicles. If you shall do us the favor to give us some
Satisfaction in this Matter, 'twill be a general Obligation to the whole
Company, and a particular Honor done to,

Madam, Your Ladiship's obedient Servant.

To the same. A Love-Letter to an old Lady.
Madam,
PAying a Visit Yesterday to Mrs. --, I was informed of your Ladiship's
Displeasure: What should occasion your Indignation, I cannot well apprehend: I
do assure you, no Man living has a greater Veneration for your Ladyship, or has
been readier upon all occasions to testify it to the World. To convince you of
the Truth of what I say, I will relate to you what happened last Saturday; by
which it will appear, that I have been so far from ridiculing your Ladyship,
which is the Accusation you fasten upon me, that no one could have given
greater Demonstration of his Respect: For being in Company, where mention was
made of your Ladyship, not so honorable indeed as I could have wished, or your
Quality and Character might have required; I took occasion to do Justice to
your Merit: Gentlemen, said I, you do my Lady wrong; for my own part I must
profess, I think her a very agreeable Woman. You cannot be serious sure,
replies a certain Gentleman, who had more Malice than Wit; in my whole Life, I
never saw so hideous a Complexion. Sir, said I, it is unjustly done, to find
fault with a Complexion, which is none of her own; if her Face displeases you,
blame her Woman who made it. But I hope, returned he, you will not deny, but
that she is Red-hair'd: With submission, Sir, I do, to my certain knowledge she
has not one hair on her Head. But then her Teeth, all the World must allow are
execrable. I deny it, Sir, for she has but one that is bad. But you must grant
me her Chin is too long by three Inches. But do you apprehend the Reason? It Is
because her Neck is too short by two. I see, Sir, said he, with some little
heat, you are obstinately bent to oppose the Power of Truth; but I hope you are
not so far prejudiced, as to maintain her Breath to be sweet? That Infirmity,
Sir, replied I, is the Effect of the Foulness of her Lungs, and not of her
Mouth; and, if her Lungs are rotten, is it her Ladiship's Fault, or Nature's.
And then her Ga^e, says he, is the most disagreeble in the World. You have
betrayed at once, Sir, said I, both your Malice, and your Ignorance; if you had
the least Acquaintance with her Ladyship, you must have known better; Alas!
poor Lady! she has not walked without Crutches these ten Years. But then her
Conduct, I hope you will not undertake to justify that; how does it become old
Eve, think you, to Patch, and Paint, Intrigue, read Romances, and Loveverses,
talk Smuttily, look Amorously, dress Youthfully; insomuch, that if it were not
for her Looks, you could not distinguish her from her Daughter. Under favor,
Sir, you mistake, it is her Granddaughter you mean. And then to keep a young
Fellow of five and twenty to satisfy her brutal Lust. It Is false, I have heard
Mr. -- affirm a thousand times she was Insatiable.

He would have proceeded in his Defamations, but I desired him to omit all
farther Discourse on that Subject, for that I could not, with Patience,
support, that a Woman of your Ladiship's Merit, and Virtue, and a Woman for
whom I had so particular an Honor, should be so impudently Vilified and
Blasphemed to my Face.

I hope by this time you are made sensible, Madam, that I am quite another
Per-son, than you apprehended me to be, and that I am so far from having any
disrespectful Thoughts of your Ladyship, that no one of your Grandchildren,
the nearest Relation you have remaining, could have gone farther in your
Vindication. But I would not have you attribute my Defense of your Ladyship,
altogether to Respect; give it a tenderer, and truer Name, and call it Love. I
say Love; for let me die, Madam, if I have not a violent Passion for your
Ladyship. I know you may very well suspect the Truth of what I say; for Love in
me, you will tell me, ought to imply Beauty in you. But Love, you know very
well, creates Beauty no less frequently, than Beauty does Love. And if by the
help of Imagination, I can find out Charms in you, which no Body else can
discover; I think I have reasonable Foundation enough for my Passion: there is
something, I know not where to fix it, it is not in your Face or Shape, or Mien,
or Air, or any part of your Body; much less in your Mind: but something there
is so very agreeable, something I know not what, nor where, so bewitching that
it is not in my power to defend my Heart against you. Perhaps the malicious
World will say you are Old; but we know old Wine intoxicates more than new; and
an aged Oak, is stronger than a young one. It Is with your Ladiship's Beauty, as
with old Buildings when they fall, it destroys with its Ruins. As I profess my
self an Admirer of Antiquity, by consequence I should have no small Passion for
your Ladyship: For I must tell you, Madam, there are finer Fragments of
Antiquity in your Face, than any Greece or Italy can boast of; and more Beauty
lies buried in one Wrinkle of yours, than in the Ruins of the most stately
Arches, or most magnificent Temples. You cannot therefore question the
Sincerity of my Profession, when I tell you I am, Madam, with all Reality,

Your Ladiship's most passionate Adorer, and most obedient, humble Servant.

To a Lady that had got an Inflammation in her Eyes.
Madam,
YOu will hardly believe, perhaps, how much People talk of your Indisposition.
The late Eclipse, when the Sun it self was in Labor, occasioned not half the
Discourse, as the present Distress your Eyes are in, throughout the whole
Empire of your Beauty, that is throughout the whole Kingdom. Nothing is more
generally talked of, or more universally lamented. Those beautiful Eyes, which
were wont to spread Joy in all Hearts, now diffuse Sorrow in every Breast: at
the same time they raise different Passions; the Women pity what they envy, and
the Men lament what they adore. It Is true, there are some discontented Persons,
that perhaps have formerly felt your Rigor, who let drop bold Expressions;
they say, your Eyes are deservedly punished, for the many Violences and
Barbarities they have committed; that it is but just they should be afflicted,
who have made so many poor Men suffer; and that it seems a manifest Judgment of
Heaven, that the Distemper should attacque you in the very Place where you
assault Mankind. These are the Murmurs of some few Men, Madam, whom we except
from the Multitudes who bewail the Calamities of your Eyes.

Sir Thomas --, who you know speaks fine things, did me the honor of a Visit
Yesterday, and commands me to tell you, That had he as many Eyes as Argus, to
give yours one Moment's ease, he would pluck them all out, and throw them, as
he would himself, and his Fetters, at your Feet. For my own part, Madam, who
have but two Eyes, one of 'em is at your Ladiship's Service, the other I am
unwilling to lose, because I am unwilling to lose the sight of you.

Your grave Uncle likewise gives his Service to you; 'twas my Fortune to meet
him at my Lady -- 's Lodgings, where your Ladyship, and your present
Indisposition, being the Subject of our Discourse, the old Gentleman, who
moralizes on every thing under the Sun, lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, and
laying his Hand upon his sage Breast, Alas! says he, see the Vanity of all
Things here below! See, Ladies, see Gentlemen, see how frail is Beauty! how
uncertain its Possession! the finest Eyes in the Universe are in danger of
losing their beautiful Luster! How imperfect are the most perfect Things! Alas,
alas, Vanity of Vanity, all is Vanity, says the Preacher.

When the Oracle had ceased, Sir, said I, (with an affected grave Look) I
remember well, you were wont frequently to tax your Niece with Pride; don't you
think Providence designed this present Affliction as a Lesson of Humility to
her? Does it not seem the very Intention of Heaven, by this Indisposition, that
those very Eyes which may justly make her proud, should teach her to be humble:
that where she is strongest, she should find her self weak: that where she is
most divine, she should confess her self mortal.

Very religiously and solidly reflected, says old Solomon; I profess I am
surprised to find so much Maturity in so much Youth: Go on in the Ways of
Wisdom and prosper.

Thus, Madam, like a faithful Historian, as I am, I have related to you, what
is the Discourse of the World upon this Infirmity; but I am sensible, I have
made your Ladiship's Patience suffer, by the unfashionable Length of my Letter,
which I fear will give your Eyes, in the Weakness they are in at present, too
much pain in the reading. I shall conclude, with my Advice and my Wish: My
Advice, That you would take care of the finest Eyes in the World. My Wish, That
the Flame were removed from your Eyes to your Heart. I am,

Madam, Your Ladiship's most obedient Servant.

To Mr. B -- in Covent Garden. An Account of a Journey to Exon, etc.
Apr. 8. 1700.
AS we have one good Quality in our Sex beyond what yours can boast of, that
is, seldom to make a Promise but with a Design to keep it; I have therefore
been careful to let you see I cannot easily forget any thing which so great an
Obligation as my Word has engaged me to remember: And as there was nothing
needful but a bare Remembrance of my Promise to induce me to preserve it, so I
hope, on your part, there will be nothing more required to render what I have
sent you acceptable than a Willingness to receive it: I confess I have given
you but a rude Account of my Journey, every part just scribled over with as
much freedom as 'twas acted, wanting leisure to put it in any other than a
loose Morning-dress, not questioning but it may please you as well without the
Formalities of Style as a pretty Woman without Stays may some of your
Acquaintance.

In the first place I shall give you a rough Draught of those discording
Mortals our Company was composed of in the Stage-coach, (viz.) A Barrister at
Law, an Attorny's Clark, a Cornish Justice, a Tailor, and a Valet to a
Parliament Man that would be, but some dispute arising in the Election prevents
me fixing his Title, that had I been traveling in a Dutch Scout or a Gravesend
Tilt-boat, I could not have been treated with less Manners, or teas'd with more
Im-pertinence

The Justice, notwithstanding the Government's Care for the Reformation of
Vice, was as drunk as a Dutch Captain before he engages, and, for the first
Day, talked of nothing but Fox-hounds, March-beer, Warrants, Whipping-posts and
Vagabonds, Hallowing as laudably in every interval of his Nonsense, as if he
had been riding threequarter-speed at the very Heels of his Beagles, larding
his other Qualifications now and then with a Scrap of an old Hunting Song, with
a Hey down, ho down, etc. which gave me good reason to suspect he had been much
more conversant with Robin Hood's Balads than with Keeble's Statutes,
understanding the latter I believe as much as a German Jugler does Necromancy,
or a Lord Mayor State Policy.

The Limbs of the Law were much disturbed at his Bawling, for I conceive they
love no Bodies Noise but their own. They desired him to sleep; but he cried,
Zounds, Sir, I win't sleep; I din't care a F -- t for your Anger, I Am a Justice
of Peace, and worth thirty Thousand Pound, and am the head Man where I live;
and By G -- d, if you come to Lancton, I Will give you a Glass of the best
March-Beer you ever drank in your Life: but I will make a Noise if I please. I
was in hopes of seeing Law and Justice fall together by the Ears, but at last
Justice slept and the Law got the better by surviving it.

The Tailor, had you seen him, you would have sworn he had been broke by the
Jubilee Beaus, for he had Lines of Faith in his Face, and his Clothes bore the
Marks of Poverty; he complained very much of Trusting: I find it is a common
Calamity, and ruins more Families than the Royal Oak-Lottery.

The Valet personated his Master to a Tittle, and was as arrogant and noisie as
ever a Country 'Squire in England.

Now, if I were to be hanged, I cannot tell who had most Manners of all these:
The Lawyer slept Dogs-sleep most part of the Way, I suppose the better to
ruminate on the Causes he had in hand. The Clark was as impertinent as a
Midwife at a Gossipping, and I as dull as an old Woman at a Funeral. They
failed not to Eat and Drink heartily upon the Road, nor to make me club to the
Reckoning; Justice and Law were both of a side in that particular; and, the
Court of Equity being very chargeable, I chose to submit upon any Terms, rather
than seek for Remedy.

After the Fatigue of four Days, which might serve for a reasonable Penance for
all the Sins I ever committed in my Life, I arrived at Exon, where we met the
Judges entering the Town in as much Triumph as ever Caesar did Rome after a
Victory; the High Sheriff rode in as much State as a Colonel of the City
Train-bands, and much in the same order, only the Sheriff marched in the Rear
of his Army, and the other in the Front. The next Day being Sunday, called by
the Natives of this Country Maze-Sunday, (and indeed not without some reason,
for the People looked as if they were gallied) I was waked by the tremendous
Sound of a Horse-trumpet, I imagined some Monster was to be seen, and, looking
out of my Window, I saw several sorts, the first were Mrs. Sheriff and her
Husband, (for Women rule in this Climate, and therefore I give her the
Pre-eminence) in a triumphant Chariot (erected on purpose for that Occasion)
with Dick and Doll crouding to see their Worships, as if it had been his
Czarish Majesty; the Custom it seems is to conduct them in this manner to the
most magnificent Church of the place, where we will leave them to their several
Ejaculations.

I am your obliged Servant, You know who.

The Answer.
Madam, Apr. 22. 1700.
I Received your Letter, and am glad to find by it, that you have got that by
making a small Journey to Exeter, for which other People are forced to cross
the Alps, and beat the Hoof to Rome, I mean the Remission of your Sins, which
you think you have made a reasonable Atonement for, by suffering so much from
the Impertinence of the Cornish Justice and the two Limbs of the Law.

But, Madam, don't flatter your self, or think that your Chalk will be so
easily wiped out. You have been a great Sinner in your time, and four Days
Penance in a Stage-Coach will hardly atone for the Sins you have committed:
And, because we are too apt to be over-favourable to our selves, give me leave,
Madam, to awaken your Conscience out of this dangerous State of Security, by
laying before you some of the many Sins you are accountable for:

Imprimis, Here are People in Town that charge you with Murders numberless;
and, unless you heartily repent of them, and promise to commit no more, I find
but little hopes of you. Yes, Madam, you are charged with Murder, with this
horrid Aggravation too on your side, That whereas other Assassines only murder
their Enemies, or such as they suspect to be so, you make no scruple to kill
your Lovers that throw themselves at your Feet, and would purchase a single
Smile from you at a seven Years Service.

In the next place, You are accused of Theft. Set your Hand to your Heart,
Madam, and do but consider how many of those valuable Commodities you have
stolen in your time, yet never had the Conscience to restore them to the right
Owners. What makes the Crime worse in you, you have added Sacrilege to Theft,
and stole away Peoples Hearts at Church, in the time of Divine Service, and in
the sight of Moses and Aaron.

You Will tell me, perhaps, that this is no Theft, and that if Men will put their
Hearts upon you, how can you help it. But Madam, some People gave them you, who
had no right to dispose of them, as I could instance in a thousand married Men
that sighed for you, and, according to the ancient Proverb, the Receiver is as
bad as the Thief, for they stole 'em from their Wives to bestow 'em upon you.

Thirdly and lastly, Madam, you have not only your own Sins but those of other
People to answer for. How many Women have you made guilty of the horrid Sin of
Detraction, and tell a thousand malicious Stories of you, only because you were
handsomer than they, and consulted with that wicked Privy-counsellor, your
Looking-glass, to appear so? How many Men have you made guilty of Perjury, and
made them forsake their former Vows, to sacrifice 'em to you?

Thus, Madam, I have made bold to lay some of your Sins before you. Should I
undertake to send you a full Catalogue of them, I should have as fine time
on it, as the Commissioners, that are to inspect public Accounts. Therefore
never think that your Exeter Journey has compounded for them. I would advise you
this holy Year of Jubilee, to turn your Face toward Rome; but, alas, you would
spoil the Devotion of all the Pilgrims there, that according to our last
Advices, are above a hundred thousand strong. In short, Madam, I don't know
what course to advise to; only don't stay long in the Country, for that would
be to Trespass against a positive Text, and to put your Candle under a Bushel.
Come to Town as soon as you can, and begin to make Restitution in the Place
where you have done the most Mischief.

You desire, in my Answer, I should transmit you some News: I assure you,
Madam, there is not enough stirring about Town to make an Alderman's Jaws wag,
that the City News-hounds sit as hush over their Coffee, as so many Englishmen
in a Tavern when the Drawer has brought the Reckoning: But however, for once, I
will strain a Point to oblige you.

Notwithstanding the late War in Flanders, and the present Year of Jubilee,
have rid the Nation of abundance of Fools, yet Knaves are every Term as thick
in Westminster Hall, and Cuckolds every Day as numerous upon Change, as if they
had still, without loss, preserved their ancient Number.

Marriages this Easter, by the Computation of the Clarks of Maribone, Pancras,
Minories, Dukes-place, and Knights-bridge, are decreased from the last Year's
Account by several Hundreds, to the great disap^pointment of the Clergy; yet
the Number of Maids, it is generally believed, are as few as ever, to the
Discredit of the Protestant Religion, the Dishonor of the Nation, and the
great Scandal of the Reforming-Society.

Poetasters are grown as numerous in this Town as Quack-Doctors at London, and
every one so applies himself to the Stage, that the White-fryars Printers are
quite beggared for want of Balads: Yet Wit, I observe, is as scarce as 'twas in
the time of Jeffry Chaucer, when a Distich of Verses were worth a Page of
Prose, and a Song, with a Fa-la-la Chorus, was much more listened to than a
Sermon.

Discretion in married Women, is here grown as scarce as Modesty in Maids; they
so forward their Daughters, by their own foolish Talk and Example, that the
pretty Miss at Seven, instead of a Rattle, talks of nothing but a Husband, and
the young Lady at Eleven is as ripe in her Thoughts and as pert in her
Behavior as if her Education had been in a Brothel instead of a Dancing-school.

I know, Madam, some of this News must seem strange to a Woman of your Virtues,
but the more surprising generally the more acceptable, especially if it be
true; for which reason I sent it you to supply the scarcity of such as might
have been more welcome, and therefore beg your acceptance of it in room of
better, from, Madam,

Your humble Servant

To Dr. Garth.
WHether your Letter or your Prescription has made me well, I protest I cannot
tell; but thus much I can say, that as the one was the most nauseous thing I
ever knew, so the other was the most entertaining. I would gladly ascribe my
Cure to the last; and, if so, your Practice will become so universal you must
keep a Secretary as well as an Apothecary.

The Observations I have made are these, that your Prescription staid not long
with me, but your Letter has, especially that part of it where you told me I
was not altogether out of your Memory: You Will find me much altered in every
thing when you see me, but in my esteem for your self: I, that was as lank as a
Crane, when I left you at London, am now as plump as an Ortolan. I have left
off my false Calves, and had yesterday a great Belly laid to me. A facetious
Widow, who is my Confident in this Affair, says you ought to Father the Child;
for He that lends a Man a Sword is in some part accessory to the Mischief is
done with it; however, I Will forgive you the inconvenience you have put me to. I
believe you were not aware you were giving Life to two People. Pray let me have
a Consolatory Letter from you upon this new Calamity; for nothing can be so
welcome, excepting Rain in this Sandy Country where we live. The Widow says,
she resolves to be sick, on purpose to be acquainted with you: But I tell her
she will relish your Prescriptions better in full Health: And if at this distance
you can do her no Service, pray prescribe her

Your humble Servant, T. M.

To his Poetical Friend, advising him to Study the Mathematics.
Out of Quevedo.

AT length, my Friend, I begin to awake out of those Dreams and Visions, which
the reading of Verses and Poems has so long plunged me in. My middle Years put
all those Delusions to a stand; I have now some moderate Esteem for other
Thoughts besides Images and Descriptions. I am not in my former Ecstasies at
every Metaphor, and can almost bear the Rapture of a fine Turn. Poetry, believe
me, leads the Reader, as well as the Knight, into an enchanted World: The
Objects are all there dressed in false Colors, and nothing appears in its due
proportion. But if it deceives us in all things abroad, what Disorders and
Confusion does it raise at home? By feeding the Mind with Delicacies, it makes
it mad after Pleasure, and lets all the Passions loose upon us. Our Joys it
blows up too high, and makes our Griefs sit heavier; and, what is yet worse, it
kindles in us that foolish Passion Love, the ruin of our Ease and Dotage even
in Youth.

Whereas Mathematics improves all our Faculties, makes the Judgment stronger
and the Memory take in more. The Dull it teaches to Perceive, and the Giddy to
Attend. It distinguishes between True and False, and enures us to Difficulties:
Besides, it gives us a thousand Advantages in Life. By this the Miser counts
his Bags, and the Countryman knows his Times and Seasons. This gives our
Cannon aim in War, and in Peace furnishes every Workman with his Tools. How
many noble Engines has it invented? In one the Wind labors for us, and another
turns Bogs and Pools into firm Land. This builds us Houses, defends our Towns
and makes the Sea useful. Nor are its Effects less wonderful than advantageous.
The Mathematician can do more things than any Poet ever yet conceived. He in a
Map can contract Asia to a Span, and in a Glass show a City from a single
House, and an Army from a Man. He can set the Heavens a thousand Years forward,
and call all the Stars by their Names. There is scarce any thing without his
reach; He can gauge the Channel of the Sea, and weigh Saturn. He sees farthest
into the Art and Skill of the Creator, and can write the best Comment on the
six Days Work.

Be advised therefore to employ your self rather in the improving of your
Understanding, than debauching of your Passions, and to prefer Realities before
Appearances. In my mind, to make a Dial is harder than to find a Motto to it,
and a Prospect drawn in Lines pleasanter than one in Words. Instead of
Descriptions of cool Groves and flowery Gardens, you may inform your self of the
Situation and Extent of Empires, and while others are wandering in
Elysian-fields and fancied Shades below, you may raise your Thoughts to the
Infinity of Space above, and visit all those Worlds that shine upon us here:
Think most of Mercury when he is farthest off the Sun, and mind little in Venus
but her Periodic Motion.

To let you see I have got the start of you, I now follow the old Rule of,
Nulla dies sine Linea, and am so far advanced in Geometry that I defy any Man
to make a rounder Circle, or cut a Line in two more nicely than my self. I am
well versed in Squares, am no stranger to the Doctrine of Proportion, and have
transposed A, B, C, D, in all the Mathematical Anagrams they are capable of. My
Chamber I have surveyed five times over, and have at length found out a
convenient Place for a South-dial. I am at present about a Bargain of Pins,
which you shall soon see disposed into Bastions and Counterscarps. I felt at
first, I must confess a great Confusion in my Head between Rhimes and Angles,
Fiction and Demonstration. But at length Virgil has resigned to Euclid, and
Poetical Feet and Numbers to their Namesakes in Geometry and Arithmetic. In
short, I write altogether upon Slate, where I make Paralels instead of Couplets
and Describe nothing but a Circle.

Let me for the future therefore catch no Poet in your Hands, unless it be
Aratus or Dyonisius, and follow my Council, unless you can make one of these
Studies subservient to the other, your Poetry wise and learned, and your
Mathematics pleasant and Ingenious. I am, Sir,

Yours, etc.

To William Joy, the strong Kentishman, from the Lady C --. Dropped out of her
Foot-man's Pocket, and taken up by a Chairman in the Pall Mall.
SIR,
I Saw you Yesterday, with satisfaction, exerting your Parts in Dorset-garden;
on that very Theater where I have frequently beheld the Alexanders, the
Caesar's, the Hercules, the Almanzors, the greatest Heroes of Greece or Italy,
of ancient or modern Times, taking Towns, sacking Cities, overturning Empires,
singly routing whole Armies, but yet performing less Wonders than You. Yet, I
must tell you, it grieves me to see so Noble a Talent mis-employed, and that
Strength thrown away upon undeserving Horses, that cannot reward your Labor,
which might much better divert the requiting Woman. Meet me therefore, thou
puissant Man, in another Garden, on a better Theater, where you may employ your
Abilities with more Profit to Yourself and Satisfaction to the expecting

MELESINDA.

The End of the First Part.
LETTERS OF Friendship, AND Several other OCCASIONS: The Second Part.

Written by Mr. Dryden, Mr. Wycherly, Mr. -- Mr. Congreve, and Mr. Dennis.


WITH LETTERS written between Mr. Dennis and Mr. Congreve, Concerning Humor in
Ancient and Modern Comedy.

London: Printed for Sam. Briscoe, in Russel Street in Covent Garden, MDCC.

To the Right Honorable Charles Montague, Esquire. One of the Lords of the
Treasury, Chancellor of the Exchequer; and one of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
SIR,
AS soon as I had resolved to make this Address to you, that the Present might
not be altogether unworthy of you, I took care to obtain the Consent of my
Friends to publish some Letters, which they had writ as Answers to mine.

When I look upon my self, I find I have reason to beg Pardon for my
Presumption: But when I consider those Gentlemen, I am encouraged to hope that
you will not be offended to find your self at the Head of no Vulgar Company; a
Company, whose Names and Desert are universally known, a Company raised far
above the Level of Mankind by their own extraordinary Merit, and yet proud to
do Homage to yours. They are Gentlemen, it is true, who are divided in their
Interests, and who differ in their Politic Principles, but they agree in their
Judgments of Things, which all the World admires, and they always consent when
they speak of you.

In presenting this little Book to you, I only designed to show my Zeal and my
Gratitude; but they assure me unanimously, that I have likewise shown my
Judgment. Though indeed, Sir, the number of the Great, who cast a favorable Eye
upon Human Learning, is not so considerable, but that a Man who would Address
any thing of this nature to one of them, may soon determine his Choice.
Proficients in other Arts are encouraged by Profit, which is their main Design,
but he who bestows all his time upon Human Studies is incited by Glory alone,
and the World takes care that he should have no more than he seeks for. The
Enthusiast, the Quack, the Pettifogger, are rewarded for torturing, and for
deluding Men; but Humanity has met with very barbarous Usage, only for
Pleasing, and for Instructing them. The very Court, which draws most of its
Ornament from it, has but too often neglected it; there Learning in general has
been disregarded: For none but great Souls are capable of great Designs, and
few Courtiers have had Greatness of Mind enough to procure the Promotion of
Science, which is the Exaltation of Human Nature, and the Enlargement of the
Empire of Reason. Our Ministers of State have formerly behaved themselves with
so much Indifference, as if it would have lessened them to have taken any care
of Letters: They have shown themselves as perfectly unconcerned, as if not one
had discovered, that at a time when our Neighbors are grown so knowing, the
Public Safety depends on the Progress of Learning, and that to Patronize
Science, is to take care of the State. Besides, too many of our Statesmen have
been engaged in unjust Designs. Most of our Politicians have done their
Endeavor to encroach on the Crown, or to attempt on the People. Few have had
Capacity and Integrity enough to keep the Balance so steady, as to maintain
Prerogative at once, and assert Privilege; to serve the King Zealously, and
their Country Faithfully; to possess at the same time the Favor of the one,
and the Hearts of the other, to such a degree as to be courted by the People to
serve as their Representative, at the very time that they are employed by the
King in Mat^rs of the highest Importance. Instead of that, most of them have
had reason to be afraid of the King or the Commons; and Men who have been
sollicitous for their own Safety, have seldom appeared concerned for the good
of others. Few then have been and are in a Condition to be Protectors of
Learning, and therefore those happy Few, deserve all the Honors which we are
able to pay them. Of those, Sir, you appear in the foremost Rank, and are to
the Commonwealth of Learning what you are to the State, a great Defense and a
shining Ornament. You have warmly encouraged all sorts of Studies, but have
been justly and nobly partial to those, for which the State has made no
Provision: Which is enough to gain you the Esteem of all who have any Regard
for Learning; and to win the very Souls of all, who, like me, are charmed with
the softer Studies of Humanity. For which your Zeal has been so diffusive, that
it has extended it self even to me, though a bare Inclination to cultivate
Eloquence and Poetry, was the only thing which could recommend me to you: Yet
even this has been encouraged by the Promise of your Protection, and by the
Humanity of your Receiving me: The Access which I have had to you, has been the
greatest Obligation that you could lay upon a Man who has still valued Merit
above all the World, and who has sought his Improvement more than he has his
Advancement. When I have at any time approached you, I have found in you none
of those Forbidding Qualities, of which they accuse the Great: Instead of
those, I have found an Attractive and a Humane Greatness, the generous
Sincerity of the Man of Honor, joined with the Grace and Complaisance of the
Courtier, and a Deportment Noble without Pride, and Modest without Descending.
Nature has made me something averse from making my Court to Fortune: But I am
proud to attend upon real Greatness; and to wait upon you, since first you
encouraged me, has been at once my Duty and my Ambition.

The Permission which you gave me to approach you, was so great an Incitement
to me, that I believe it might have brought me to write well, if I had not a
very just reason to resolve to attempt it no more. You had given me one great
Encouragement before I had the honor to see you, and that was, by leaving off
Writing your self. For Vanity is a greater Incitement to Poets than Pensions,
and even Want depresses the Spirits less than the thought of being surpassed.
Therefore while Mr. Montague sung, he sung alone. We admired indeed our
Conquering Monarch, but we admired in Silence. We revered the Greatness of your
Genius, and neglected our Talents. Indeed the Strength and Sweetness of your
Voice was fit to charm us alone, and we, who followed, were only fit for the
Chorus. But you have left a Province, which you have made your own, to the
Administration of those who are under you, and are gone on in your victorious
Progress to the Acquisition of new Glory. From which I am sensible that I
detract by detaining you: For your Actions are your best Encomiums, and the
loud Consent of the Nation your best Panegyric. It was a glorious one that was
spoken to you by the People of Westminster, in the Request that they made to
you to serve as their Member in the present Parliament, at a time when they
were Caballing all over the Kingdom, and Gentlemen were depriving Peasants of
their little Reason, in order to obtain their Voices; Mr. Montague's Merit,
while he was silent, solicited for him so importunately, that it prevailed
upon a number of considerable Inhabitants of the Politer Parts of the Town, to
come and make it their humble Request to you, to Honor them by Representing
them, which puts me in mind of a Saying of De la Bruiere, That the People are
then at their height of Happiness, when their King makes Choice for his
Confidents, and for his Ministers, of the very same Persons that the People
would have chosen, if the Choice had been in their Power. This, at present, is
our own Case; for doubtless the same People, who, without any Brigue or the
least Corruption, came voluntarily to entreat you to suffer them to place you
in the Great Council of the Kingdom, would, if the Choice had been in their
power, have placed you in the Privy Council; and they who frankly offered to
trust you with the Disposal of the Money which is in their Houses, would have
trusted you, had it been in their power, with the Intendency of that in the
Treasury. So that the Peoples Proffer to Choose you, seems to me to be a loud
Approbation of the Choice, which the King had made before of you, and of your
Ministration upon that Choice. But I injure the Public while I detain you: Yet
give me leave to end with my zealous Wishes for you, that the Happiness may be
multiplied on you, which you so nobly seek to communicate, that you may
increase in Riches and Honors faster than you advance in Years, till you
arrive at that Height of Prosperity which may be answerable to your high
Desert, and till Fortune may be said to pour down her Gifts upon you, in
Emulation of Art and Nature: Yet Envy after all shall be forced to declare,
that Mr. Montague sprung from an Illustrious Stock, and loaded with Plenty and
Honors, is yet Nobler by Desert, than he is by Descent, and Greater by Virtue
than he is by Fortune;

I am, Sir, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, JOHN DENNIS.

TO THE READER.
I Once resolved to have along Preface before this little Book; but the
Impression has been so long retarded by the Fault of those who had the Care of
it, that I have now neither Time nor Humor to execute what I intended. I shall
therefore only give a Compendious Account of what I proposed to have treated of
more at large: I designed, in the first place, to have said something of the
Nature and of the End of a Letter, and thought to have proved that the
Invention of it was to supply Conversation, and not to imitate it, for that
nothing but the Dialogue was capable of doing that; from whence I had drawn
this Conlclusion, That the Style of a Letter was neither to come quite up to
that of Conversation, nor yet to keep at too great a distance from it. After
that, I determined to show, That all Conversation is not familiar; that it may
be Ceremonius, that it may be Grave, nay, that it may be Sublime, or that
Tragedy mnst be allowed to be out of Nature: That if the Sublime were easy and
unconstrained, it might be as consistent with the Epistolary Style, as it was
with the Ditactique; that Voiture had admirably joined it with one of them, and
Longinus with both. After this, I resolved to have said something of those who
had most succeeded in Letters amongst the Ancients and Moderns, and to have
treated of their Excellencies and their Defects: To have spoken more
particularly of Cicero and Pliny amongst the Ancients, and amongst the Moderns
of Balzac and Voiture; to have shown that Cicero is too simple, and no dry, and
that Pliny is too affected, and too refined; that one of them has too much of
Art in him, and that both of them have too little of Nature. That the Elevation
of Balzac was frequently forced, and his Sublime affected; that his Thoughts
were often above his Subject, and his Expression almost always above his
Thoughts; and that whatsoever his Subjects were, his Style was seldom altered:
That Voiture was eafie and unconstrained, and natural when he was most exalted;
that he seldom endeavored to be witty at the Expense of right Reason: but
that, as his Thoughts were for the most part true and just, his Expression was
often defective, and that his Style was too little diversifyed. That for my own
part, as I came infinitely short of the extraordinary Qualities of these great
Men, I thought my self obliged to endeavor the rather to avoid their Faults;
and that consequently I had taken all the care that I could, not to think out
of Nature and good Sense, and neither to force nor neglect my Expressions; and
that I had always taken care to suit my Style to my Subject, whether it was
Familiar or Sublime, or Didactique; and that I had more or less varied it in
every Letter. All this and more I designed to have said at large, which I have
only hinted now in a Hurry. I have nothing to add, but to desire the Reader to
excuse my bad Performance, upon the account of my good Endeavor, and for
striving to do well in a manner of Writing, which is at all times useful, and
at this time necessary; a manner in which the English would surpass both the
Ancients and Moderns, if they would but cultivate it, for the very same Reason
that they have surpassed them in Comedy. But methinks, I have a Title to the
Reader's Favor, for I have more than made Amends for the Defects of my own
Letters, by entertaining him with those of my Friends.

A Collection of Letters.
Written by several Eminent Hands.
To Walter Moyle, Esquire
Dear Sir,
YOU know a grave Fellow assures us, that upon the Cessation of Oracles,
lamentable Cries were heard in the Air, proclaiming along the Coasts the Death
of the Great Pan: And have not you upon this Dearth of good Sense, and this
Cessation of Wit! tell me truly; have not you heard These Sounds upon the
Cornish Shore,
The Sage, Will. Ur. -- is no more?
Gone is the Universal Lord of WIT! He to whom all the Wits paid Homage; For
whom his Subjects set a Tax upon Words, and laid exorbitant Customs on
Thoughts: He Is dead; alas, he is dead!

Dead, I mean, Sir, in a legal Capacity; that is, Outlawed and gone into the
Friars; to go into which, is once more to Outlaw himself: He has done it, Sir,
and ill Fortune has brought him to be a Felo de se that way. For since the Law
thought it but just to put Will out of its Protection, Will thought it but
prudent to put himself out of its Power. And since the Law could use him with
so much Contempt, as to declare to all the World that it does not care for
Will. Vr --;Will, who is extremely stout in Adversity, has declared, by his
Actions, That he does not care for the Law. Virgil tells us in his Sixth Book,
that the Souls in Hell were busied about the same things in which they were
employed upon Earth; even so does Sage Will use the same Nutmeg-grater, and the
same Tea-pot in the Friars, that he handled before in Bowstreet. Thus has he
left the Wits, without any Sorrow, though he loves them, and without taking any
Leave of them. For Will thinks they cannot be long from him; and he says, he
expects that in a very little time his Old Company should be constant at his
New House. And do not thou think that they too have reason to expect the very
same thing? For as the Death of any Man ought to put all his Friends in mind,
that he went before but to lead them the way; so Will's Departure from this
miserable Life, this lewd Covent Garden Life, and his Ferrying from
Somerset-stairs to the infernal Shore of Alsatia, should be a Memento to the
rest of the Wits, that he is but gone whither they all must follow.

To leave off Poetical Similies, this Body Politic is in a cursed Condition;
and cannot keep long together without a Head. The Members are at present in a
grave Debate how to get one. To Morrow the Whole House will resolve it self
into a grand Committee, to consult about Ways and Means of making Provission
for the Common Necessities. Some talk of an Excise upon May-dew, and
Rasberry-brandy: That there will be a Poll, is strongly asserted, in which
every Man is to pay according to his respective Condition. To Morrow it will be
known to how much each Man's Quota amounts. As for Example: How much a Poet is
to pay, how much a Wit, how much a Politician, and how much a Critic. A
Critic, did I say? I beg your Pardon: They have voted Nemine Contradicente,
that they will Cess no Critic till Mr. Moyle returns.

I have given them my Sentiments upon the forementioned Poll, which were, That
it was something hard to make a Man pay for being called, Wit, Poet, or
Critic; That they saw by Experience lately in the State, that poor Dogs
grumbled to pay for their Titles. How then could they think that People would
be contented to be taxed for their Nicknames? That in settling this Tax they
were to take a quite contrary Method, to that which was taken upon settling a
Tax in the State. That in the State, sometimes a Man paid for what he really
had; As for Example, when a Country 'Sqnire paid for his Land or his Money; and
sometimes for what he really had not, as when a Cit that is twice dubbed, Knight
by the King, and Cuckold by his Wife, pays for his Honor, and for his
Children. The First of which is but as it were his, for it is really the
King's; and the Second of which are but as it were his, for they are really the
Courtier's who helped him to his Title. In the State too a Man is made to pay
for something which he does, or for something which he does not. As a Jacobite
pays so much for Swearing when he is Drunk, and so much more for not Swearing
when he is Sober. But that in our Case, if we would be exactly Just, we should
make People pay neither for what they have, nor for what they have not; nor for
what they do, nor for what they do not; But should oblige them to pay only for
pretending to have what they really have not, or for offering to do, what they
are utterly incapable of doing. That thus the Tax would certainly fall upon the
most solvent Part of the Body. For how ridiculous would it be to Tax a Man for
having Poetry and Wit, when they are almost always signs, that he has not a
Farthing to pay? On the other side, how absurd would it be to tax him for a
bare Want of those Qualities? since when a Man is Dull without Pretending, it is
ten to one but he is Poor, for Riches make Men vain, and Vanity makes them
affected. But he who is not much at his ease, is hardly at leisure for
Affection; and I have often seen, that when Vanity has thrown a Fop out of
Nature, Necessity has brought him back again: But a rich Rogue will be sure to
be always Pretending. Fortune takes pleasure in making those Vain, whom Nature
before made Impotent, and both of them often conspire to finish a Coxcomb. Thus
I would have none pay, but they who put Gravity upon us for Wisdom, Visions for
Politics, and Quibbles for Wit; and I would have no Man at any Expense for
being called a Poet, a Wit, or a Critic, unless it be by himself. It would be
equally hard to lay a Tax upon any one, for his Ill Fortune, or for his Ill
Nature, since they are things of which no Man is Master. But what? A Sot cannot
help his Vanity. Agreed: But then it makes him so much happier than he deserves
to be, that he may well be contented to pay for it.

I am your most humble Servant, JOHN DENNIS.

To Mr. Wycherley, at Cleve, near Shrewsbury.
Sir,
WHile I venture to write these Lines to you, I take it to be my Interest not
to consider you, as I hitherto always have done, and as for the future I always
shall, viz. As Mr. Wycherley, as the greatest Comick-wit that ever England
bred, as a Man sent purposely into the World, to Charm the Ears of the wittiest
Men, and to ravish the Hearts of the most beautiful Women: No, Sir, that in
writing to you I may assume some Spirit, I shall at present only consider you
as the humble Hermit at Cleve; Humble even in the full Possession of all those
extraordinary Qualities, the knowledge of which has made me Proud. I must
confess, that I have no great Opinion of that which Men generally call
Humility. Humility in most Men is want of Heat; it is Phlegm, it is Impotence,
it is a wretched Necessity, of which they who lie under it, vainly endeavor to
make a Virtue. But in a Man of Mr. Wycherley's Make, it is Choice, it is Force of
Mind, it is a good, it is a generous Condescension. And what Force of Mind is
there not requisite to bend back a Soul by perpetual Reflection, which would be
always rising, and eternally aspiring by virtue of its in-born Fire? Yet yours,
notwithstanding all its Power, cannot wholly depress its self, nor descend in
every part of it. At the time that your Will vouchsafes to stoop, your
Understanding soars; your Writings are as bold as your Conversation is modest,
(though those are bold, as this is modest with Judgment) and he who would do
you Justice, must needs confess, that you are a very ambitious Writer, though a
very humble Man. Yet your very Ambition has obliged Mankind: It has exalted
Humane Nature, in raising your own by its most noble Efforts; and that without
boasting Pre-eminence. And surely it must be for this very reason that we feel
a secret Pride, when we but read the Discoveries which you have made. Thus I
cannot say what you are without Vanity, for never was Man exempt from it; but I
can say, that you have made use even of Vanity to humble you by way of
Reflection, and that you have avoided that dangerous Effect of it, Vainglory,
the Rock upon which several great Wits before you have been seen to split. For
you have always wisely considered, that Vainglory in the Vulgar may be
supportable, nay may be diverting; but that in great Men it must be
intolerable. That whereas in the First it is want of Discernment, it is Folly,
it is the Extravagance and Blindness of Self-love; in the Last, it is Crime, it is
Malice, it is a secret and proud Design to Mortify and Insult over the rest of
Men, over whom they have so much advantage; That it is for this very reason,
that we so deeply resent and so severely revenge the mortal Affronts we receive
from it. Great Wits were by Heaven predestined to Rule, to rule the Minds of
others, the noblest Empire; but when they grow outwardly Vain they grow
Tyrants, and then their discontented Subjects rebel, and then they despose
those Kings as Usurpers, whom before they obeyed as their lawful Monarchs. But
a moderate, a good, and a gracious Prince, like you, commands their Hearts as
well as their Understandings, and under one whom they love so well, they grow
as proud, as they are pleased to obey. Our violent Inclinations make us belong
to you, and therefore it is the Interest even of our Pride, that you should long
continue in the Place which your extraordinary Desert has attained. Did we
nothing but esteem you as much as we do, we should certainly envy you; if we
did not hate you; for bare Esteem is always forced upon us, whereas Inclination
is much more voluntary: Besides, as a judicious French Man observes, Esteem is
foreign, and comes from abroad, and is therefore received with Grumbling; but
Inclination is our own, and born in our Breasts, and is therefore Caressed and
Cherished. I might add, That upon this account, it is hard to wish well to
those whom we very much esteem, if they have not likewise the Skill to make
themselves be beloved; because barely to esteem depresses the Spirits, as much
as to love very much exalts them; it brings the Soul (...) languid Temper, and
gives it at once (...) horrid Views of another's Excellencies, and of its own
Infirmities; but Affection gives it Agitation and Warmth; and in the View of a
Friend's Desert, it takes too much Pleasure, and too much Pride to consider its
own Defects. It Is true, that you are esteemed at this high Rate, you owe to
your Wit and your Penetration; but that you are esteemed without Envy, that you
are with Joy and Gladness esteemed, you owe to this, that while the force of
your Fancy and Judgment makes all the World admire you, you remain yourself
unmoved by it; that while your Excellence fills all Mouths but yours, you alone
appear to be unacquainted with it. Thus while by the Merit of your
extraordinary Qualities, you are known to surpass all others, it plainly
appears that you have beyond all this a Greatness of Soul, from whence you look
down on your own Merit. An infallible Sign that the Talants which we admire in
you are no Illusions, but real things, things that were born with you, and have
been improved by you, and which you have not acquired: For Men are found to be
Vainer, upon the account of those Qualities which they fondly believe they
have, than of those which they really have; and Hereditary Greatness gives Men
(...) to be humble, whereas Preferment occasions Pride. None but such real
Greatness as yours can capacitate a Man to be truly humble; for the Soul, which
by Nature is not seated high, can hardly be said to descend. If I have insisted
too long on this shining Subject, a Subject which is so conspicuous in you; if
you look upon this tedious Letter, as one of those various Persecutions which
every eminent Virtue provokes; I desire you to consider, that I have so many
Obligations to this very Humility, that I looked upon my self as obliged by
Gratitude to say as much as I have done. For to what I owe the Happiness which
I have frequently received in your Conversation; to that I owe the present
Satisfaction which your Permission to write to you gives me; and to that I am
indebted for the Hopes of your Answers; when I have received them I shall then
believe what you were pleased to tell me when I saw you last, that you are much
more Humble in the clear Air on your Mountain at Cleve, than when you are in
Fog and sulphurous Smoke in Bow-street. But at the same time, the Satisfaction
of thinking that Distance does not make you forget me, will render him very
Proud, who is at present,

Sir, your very humble Servant, JOHN DENNIS.

Mr. Wycherley's Answer to Mr. Dennis.
Dear Sir,
YOu have found a way to make me satisfied with my Absence from London; nay,
what is more, with the Distance which is now betwixt you and me. That indeed
uses to lessen Friendship, but gives me the greater Mark of yours by your kind
Letter which I had missed if I had been nearer to you: So that I, who receive
no Rents here, yet must own if I did, I could not receive greater Satisfaction
than I had from yours, worth even a Letter of Exchange, or Letters Pattents;
For I value your Friendship more than Money, and am prouder of your Approbation
than I should be of Titles: For the having the good Opinion of one who knows
Mankind so well, argues some Merit in me, upon which every Man ought to
consider himself more, than upon the Goods of Fortune. I had rather be thought
your Friend in proof of my Judgment and good Sense, than a Friend to the Muses;
and had rather have you than them thought mine. If I am as you say, at once
Proud and Humble, it is since I have known I have had the Honor to please you;
though your Praise rather humbles than makes me (though a damned Poet) more Vain.
for it is so great, that it rather seems the Railery of a witty Man, than the
Sincerity of a Friend; and rather proves the Copiousness of your own Invention,
than justifies the Fertility of mine. But I fear I am forfeiting the Character
of the Plain-dealer with you; and seem like vain Women or vainer Men, to refuse
Praise, but to get more; and so by returning your Compliments, show my self
grateful out of Interest, as Knaves are punctual in some Payments, but to
augment their Credit. And for your Praise of my Humility, (the only Mark of my
Knowledge, since it is a Mark of my knowing my self,) you have praised that to
its Destruction, and have given me so much, you have left me none. like those
Admirers who praise a young Maid's Modesty till they deprive her of it. But let
me tell you, it is not to my Humility that you owe my Friendship, but to my
Ambition, since I can have no greater than to be esteemed by you, and the
World, your Friend, and to be known to all Mankind for,

Dear Sir, your humble Servant, W. WYCHERLEY.
POSTSCRIPT.
My Dear Friend,
I Have no way to show my Love to you in my Absence, but by my Jealousy: I
would not have my Rivals in your Friendship the C -- s, the D -- s, the W -- s,
and the rest of your Tavern-friends enjoy your Conversation while I cannot:
Though, I confess, it is to their Interest to make you dumb with Wine, that they
may be heard in your Company; though it were more the Demonstration of their Wit
to hear you, than to be heard by you. For my own part, I am ambitious of your
Company alone in some Solitude, where you and I might be all one. For I am sure
if I can pretend to any Sense, I can have no Instruction or Satisfaction of
Life, better than your Example and your Society.

My Service pray, to all my Friends; that is, to all yours whom I know: and be
charitable (as often as you can) to the Absent; which you good Wits seldom are;
I mean be charitable with your Letters to

Your humble Servant.


POSTSCRIPT.
PRay let me have more of your Letters, though they would rally me with
Compliments undeserved as your last has done; for like a Country Esquire, I am
in love with a Town Wit's Conversation, though it be but at a Distance that I am
forced to have it, and though it abuses me while I enjoy it.



To Mr. Wycherley.
Dear Sir,
NOT long after I writ my last to you, I was hurried up to Town by a kind of a
Cholick, which was ended in a Destruction upon one of my Feet. You know, Sir, a
Defluction is a general name which some pleasant French Men have given an
Infant Gout, too young to be yet baptized. But though the Distemper raged in each
Hand, I would in spite of it, answer your admirable Letter, a Letter which I
had certainly known to be yours, though it had been sent me without a Name, nay
and transcribed by a Chancery-Clerk in his own hideous manner of Copying. But I
must confess I was surpised to hear you say in it, that you took the Sincerity
of a Man who so much esteems you for Railery, yet though you declare it, you can
never believe it. I am willing to believe you exceeding humble; but you can
never be humble to that degree, unless your Mind, which resembles your Eye, in
its Clearness, its Liveliness, and in its piercing Views, should be also like
it in this, that plainly discerning all things else, it wants a sight of it
self; but in this it does not resemble it: For it beholds it self by
Reflections, and like a lovely Maid at her Glass, is charmed with the sight of
its own Beauty. This is a sight in which you take Pride as well as Pleasure;
but yours I must confess is a guiltless Pride, it being nothing but first
Motion, which it is impossible for Man to avoid. You have both the Force to
subdue it immediately, and the Art and Goodness to conceal it from us. That it
plainly appears from what I have said, that you do not believe I had any design
to rally you. I am confident that through all my Letter there appears an Air of
Sincerity. But that is a Virtue which has been so long and so peculiarly yours,
that you may perhaps be jealous of it in your Friends, and disclaim some
Virtues which they commend in you only to Monopolize that. You had given me, at
least an occasion to think so, if the Railery in yours had not been so very
apparent, that even I had Eyes to discern that you have been to blame in it,
though I am doubly blinded with Love of you and my self. Yet if you writ it with
a design to Mortify me, assure your self that I shall fortify my Vanity with
that very Artillery with which you have begun to attack it. If Mr. Wycherley
rallies me, it is certain that I have my Defects; but it is full as certain,
that he would never condescend to abuse me at such a distance if he wholly
despised me. Thus, Sir, you see I am as reasonable with my Friend, as a Russian
Spouse is with her Husband, and take his very Railery for a Mark of Esteem, as
she does a Beating for a Proof of Affection. The very worst of your Qualities
gain our Affections: Even your Jealousy is very obliging, which it could never
be unless it were very groundless. But since your very Suspicion is obliging,
what influence must your Kindness have on our Souls? The Wish that I were with
you in some Retirement, is engaging to that degree, that I almost repent that I
so eagerly desired your Conversation before. For if it were possible I would
augment that Desire as a grateful Return to yours. To be with you in Solitude
would make me perfectly happy. Though it were in the Orcades, I would not wish my
self removed to any happier Climate; no, not even to that which contained my
absent Mistress; all that I could do for her on that occasion, would be to wish
her with me. In that Retirement what should I not enjoy? Where I should be
admirably instructed without Trouble, and infinitely delighted without Vice,
where I should be glorious at once with Envy and Quiet. For what could be more
glorious, than to be the Companion of your Retreat! My very Ambition instructs
me to love such Solitude. Though, properly speaking, there can be no Solitude
where you reside: Immortal Company still attends you, and the Virtues, the
Graces, and the Charming Nine, who love the Groves, and are fond of you, follow
you to remotest Retirements. The Comic Muse is more particularly yours; and it
is your peculiar Praise to allure the most Ravishing of all the Sisters after
you into Retirement: To make that Goddess forsake the Crowd with you, who loves
it most of the Nine: You have been constantly her Darling, her best Beloved.
Thus in Retirement with her and you, I should have the Conversation of Mankind;
I should enjoy it with all its Advantages, without its least Inconveniences.
In the Philosophy of your Actions and Words, I should see the Wise, the Good,
and the truly Great; in your Observations, and in your Railery, the Men of
Sense, and the Men of Wit; and in your Satyr, severely pleasant, the Fools and
Rascals exposed by it. In the Postscript to my last, I made an Apology for
usurping a Style so foreign from this way of Writing. I have once more run into
the same Fault in this, but the very Thought of Mr. Wycherley spreads a
generous Warmth through me, and raises my Soul to Rapture. And when a Man writes,
his Soul and his Style of necessity rise together. In my next I have something
with which I must trouble you, that will require another manner of Writing.

I am, etc.

To Mr. Wycherley.
Dear Sir,
I Have been very ill ever since I took my Leave of you, so that I parted in
one Night from all that I value most, that is, from my Health and you. However,
Nature was kind in not failing to supply me with Vigor, till Fortune had
deprived me of your Conversation, and I was got amongst People with whom I
small occasion for Vigor. Yet even here in spite of Sickness and Absence I
have made a shift to Converse with you: For I thought that your Works were the
only things that could make me full Amends for the Loss of your Company: By
them you have been able to give me Joy even in the midst of my Pain. For, the
Country Wife, and the Plain Dealer are Stores of Delight, which you have laid
up by a noble Charity, to supply the Poor in Spirit through all Posterity. So
that I believe that to be one of the Reasons of Fortune's Pique to you, that
you have put it out of her Power for the time to come, to prosecute her Quarrel
to Men of Sense effectually: for by having recourse to you in your Works, they
are sure to become more happy than. Fools, even at the time when they are less
successful. But I can hold up my Head no longer at present, as soon as I am
better you may expect a longer Letter from me.

I am yours, etc.

Mr. Wycherley to Mr. Dennis.
Dear Sir,
I Have received yours of the 20th of November, and am glad to find by it, that
however your Friends are Losers by your Absence from the Town, you are a Gainer
by it; of your Health, which every one you have left behind you, (but Ch --)
may be thought a Friend to: and the more each Man is your Friend, the more he
is satisfied with pour Absence, which though it makes us ill for want of you,
makes you well for want of us: your taking no Leave of me (which you would
excuse) I take to be one of the greatest Kindnesses you ever showed me; for I
could no more see a Departing Friend from the Town, than a Departing Friend
from this Life; and sure it is as much Kindness and good Breeding to steal from
our Friends Society unknown to 'em, (when we must leave 'em to their Trouble)
as it is to steal out of a Room, after a ceremonious Visit, to prevent Trouble
to him, whom we would Oblige and Respect; so that your last Fault (as you call
it) is like the rest of your Faults, rather an Obligation than an Offense; though
the greatest Injury indeed you can do your Friends, is to leave 'em against
their Will, which you must needs do. You tell me you converse with me in my
Writings, I must confess then you suffer a great deal for me in my Absence,
which (though I would have you love me) I would not have you do; but for your
truer Diversion, pray change my Country Wife for a better of your own in the
Country, and exercise your own Plain Dealing there, then you will make your
Country 'Squire better Company, and your Parson more sincere in your Company
than his Pulpit, or in his Cups: But when you talk of Store of Delights you
find in my Plain Dealer, you cease to be one; and when you commend my Country
Wife, you never were more a Courtier; and I doubt not but you will like your
next Neighbor's Country Wife better than you do mine, that you may pass your
time, better than you can do with my Country Wife; and like her Innocence more
than her Wit, since Innocence is the better Bawd to Love; but enjoy my Wife and
welcome in my Absence, I shall take it as civilly as a City Cuckold: I was
sorry to find by you that your Head ak'd whilst you writ me your Letter; since
I fear 'twas from Reading my Works (as you call them) not from your own
Writing, which never gave you Pain, though it would to others to Imitate it. I Have
given your Service to your Friends at the Rose, who, since your Absence, own
they ought not to go for the Witty Club; nor is Will's the Wits Coffee-house
any more, since you left it, whose Society, for want of yours, is grown as
Melancholy, that is, as dull as when you left them a Nights, to their own
Mother-wit, their Puns, Couplets, or Quibbles; therefore expect not a Witty
Letter from any of them, no more than from me, since they, nor I have conversed
with you these three Weeks. I have no News worth sending you, but my next shall
bring you what we have. In the mean time let me tell you (what I hope is no
News to you) that your Absence is more tedious to me, than a Quibbler's Company
to you; so that I being sick Yesterday, as I thought without any Cause,
reflected you were forty or fifty Miles off, and then found the Reason of my
Indisposition, for I cannot be well so far from you, who am,

My Dear Mr. Dennis, Your obliged humble Servant, W. WYCHERLEY.
POSTSCRIPT.
PRay pardon me that I have not sooner answered your Letter, for I have been
very busy this last Week about Law-affairs, that is, very Dull and Idle, though
very Active. Your Friends of the Coffee-house and the Rose, whether Drunk or
Sober, Good Fellows, or Good Wits, show at least their Sense, by valuing you
and yours, and send you all their Service; and never are more Wits and less
Poets, that is, less Liars, than when they profess themselves your Servants.

For News, W -- lives soberly, Ch -- goes to bed early; D'Vrfy sings now like a
Poet, that is, without being asked: And all the Poets, or Wits-at-wills, since
your departure speak well of the Absent. Bal -- says his ill Looks proceed
rather for want of your Company, than for having had that of his Mistress; even
the Quibblers and Politicians, have no double Meaning when they speak well of
you.



To Mr. Wycherley.
Dear Sir,
THE sight of your Letter revived me: It appeared like the Rays of the new Sun,
to one who has wintered under the Pole, and brought with it Light, Warmth, and
Spirit. The Raillery in it was very obliging; for the Lust of Praise is as
powerful with Men, as the Itch of Enjoyment is with Women; and it is as hard
for us to think that our Friends ridicule us when they commend our Wit, as it
is for them to believe that their Gallants abuse them when they extol their
Beauty. Yet generally in both Cases, whatever is said, is said for the
Satisfaction of him that speaks it. But then, as he delights in Deceiving, the
Person to whom he speaks is deceived with Pleasure, and both Parties are
satisfied. But Mr. Wycherley is to be excepted from this general Rule, who
commends his Friend for his Friend's sake. You never are witty to please your
self, to whom Wit has so long been habitual, that you are often hardly moved
your self when you say those admirable things with which we are transported.
Not that I am so far betrayed by Vanity, as to take your Compliments at the
Foot of the Letter, or to suppose that you believed all that you said; but I am
willing, for your sake, to believe that you meant something of it; and that not
being without Kindness for me, (which is only owing to the Sweetness of your
Nature, that is, to your Merit, and not to mine;) your Reason, as the Duke de
la Rochefoucaut says, has been bubbled by your Affection. And here, Sir, I have
much the Advantage of you; for when I declare that I have the greatest Opinion
in the World of you, none will mistrust my Sincerity, and all will applaud my
Discernment; but you cannot express your Zeal at so high a rate for any Friend,
but it must considerably lessen the World's Opinion of your Judgment. But if it
is Mr. Wycherley's peculiar Praise, never to have shown Want of Judgment in any
thing, unless in that only thing in which Error is honorable: How few are
they who are capable of Erring at your Rate!

Vellem in amicia sic erraremus, and isti
Errori virtus nomen posuisset honestum.
And how happy is the Man who has a Friend so accomplished, that Error in him
is Virtue? I am that happy Man, and am so far exalted by my Happiness, that I
am never less humble, than when I subscribe my self,

Dear Sir, Your most humble and faithful Servant.

Mr. Wycherley's to Mr. -- on the Loss of his Mistress.
Dear Sir,
I Have had yours of the 31st of March, to which I should sooner have returned
an Answer, had I not been forced to take a little turn out of Town; but your
Letter to me, brought me not more Satisfaction than your last to Mr. Moyle gave
me Disquiet for you: Since by that I find how uneasy you are. Yet know, my
Friend, from one sufficiently experienced in Love-disasters, that Love is often
a kind of losing Loadam, in which the Loser is most often the Gainer. If you
have been deprived of a Mistress, consider you have lost a Wife, and though you
are disappointed of a short Satisfaction, you have likewise escaped a tedious
Vexation, which Matrimony infallibly comes to be, one way or another; so that
your Misfortune is an Accident which your true Friends should rather felicitate
than commiserate. You told me in your last, that you were no more Master of
your self: Then how should I help Rejoicing at the Restoration of your Liberty?
A Man might as reasonably be sorry for his Friend's Recovery from Madness, as
for his Recovery from Love, (though for the time a pleasant Frenzy;) so that,
your Mistress's Father, has rather been your Doctor than your Enemy: And you
should not be angry with him, if he cures you of your Love-distemper, though by a
Means a little too violent; for next to his Daughter's Cure of Love, his may
prove the best. Well, pray be not angry, that I can be pleased with any thing
that can so much displease you: I own my Friendship for you, has a little
Selfishness in it, for now you cannot be so happy as you would in the Country,
I hope you will make us as happy as we can be in Town, which we shall be as
soon as we have your company: For know, my Friend, change of Air after a
Love-distemper, may be as good as it is after a Fever; and therefore make haste
to Town, where a great many Doctors have engaged to complete your Cure. Your
Friends will do any thing to root out the Remains of your Passion. The Witty
Club will grow Grave to instruct you; and the Grave Club will grow Gay to
delight you; Wh -- will turn a Philosopher; and I will grow a Good Fellow, and
venture my own Health, for the Recovery of your good Humor; for I had rather
be sick in your Company, than for want of it; who am,

Dear Sir, Your most unalterable Friend, and humble Servant, W. WYCHERLEY.
POSTSCRIPT.
PRay pardon me for not writing to you before, or rather for writing to you so
dully now, which I hope will be my best Excuse for my not writing sooner. All
your Friends of the Coffee-house are well; and what is no News to you, are, in
spite of your Absence, your constant humble Servants.



The Answer to Mr. Wycherley.
Dear Sir,
I Have a colorable Excuse for my Silence, for when you went out of Town, you
gave me the hopes of receiving a Letter from you, as soon as you arrived at
Cleve. Besides, since that, I have been a Month in Northamptonshire. But the
Inclination which I have to converse with Mr. Wycherley, is too violent to
receive any Check from Punctillo's. But, alas, I was restrained by too just an
Impediment: For ever since I saw you, I have been so rackt by a cruel Passion,
that I have had no Power to do any thing but to to Complain. And your Portion
of Melancholy is not so small, that you have need to be troubled with another
Man's Spleen. I would be sure to communicate my Happiness to my Friend, nay, I
could be but half happy if I did not communicate it. As in Love I never could
be pleased to a Height with my own Pleasure, if I did not find that it added to
that of my Mistress. But I should impart my ill Humor to my Friend, if I found
that it were not in his Power to ease me, and that it were much in his
Inclination, with as much Regret, as I should acquaint him with his own ill
Fortune, if I were clearly convinced that it were not in my Power to assist
him. You would not advise me to stifle this Passion. You are too well
acquainted with Love, and me, to do that: You know that that would be to
persuade me to a thing which you are already sensible that I am very willing
and very unable to do. I blush while I show this Weakness, but sure there is
some Force of Mind required to show some sorts of Weakness. You remember the
Maxim of the wise Duke: La meme fermete qui sert a Resister al'amour, Sertauffi
queque fois a le render violent and durable. If that be true, I beseech you to
believe that this obstinate Lover is a constant Friend too, and unalterably,

Dear Sir, Your most humble Servant.

Mr. Wycherley's Letter to Mr. --
Dear Sir,
I Lately received from you so kind, and so witty a Reproach for my not writing
to you, that I can hardly repent me of my Fault, since it has been the Occasion
of my receiving so much Satisfaction: But you have had a reasonable Excuse for
your Silence, since you say I promised to write to you first, which is very
true; and I had kept my Promise, but for my Conjecture that you could not stay
so long out of Northamptonshire; nor was I, it seems mistaken in that. But be
assured, dear Sir, I think there can be no better End, or Design of my Writing,
than in its procuring me the Satisfaction of receiving something of yours;
especially, since I have no other way left me now of Conversing with you. But
it seems, you forbear to relieve me out of Charity, since you say your Trouble
was so great, that you were unwilling to communicate it to me to mine. I see
your Wit can do any thing, make an Omission of a Kindness a greater Obligation;
and if you complain but to your Mistress, as wittily as you do to your Friend,
I wonder not at her Cruelty, nor that she should take Pleasure to hear you
Complain so long. But, my Friend, have a care of Complaining to her, with so
much true Sense, lest it should disparage your true Love; and indeed, that I
fear is the only Cause you are suffered to Complain so long, without the
Success which is due to your Merit, Love, and Wit, from one who, you say, has
her self so much; which, with your Pardon, I shall hardly believe, though you are
her Voucher, if she does not do what you would have her; that is, do you and
herself Reason as fast as she can; since she must needs believe you a warm and
sincere Lover, as much as I believe you a zealous and a true Friend. And I am
so well acquainted with Love and you, that I believe no body is able to alter
your Love, or advise your Reason; the one being as Unalterable as the other
Infallible; and you (for ought I know) are the only Man who at once can Love
and be Wise. And to the Wise, you know, a Word is enough; especially since you
gave me a Caution against opposing your Passion; because it would be in vain.
If Love be in you as in other Men, a violent Passion, it is therefore a short
Frenzy, and should be cured like other Distempers of that kind, by your Friends
humouring it, rather than opposing it. Yet pardon me, if I prescribe the common
Remedy of curing one Love with another. But whether you will let me be your
Doctor or no, I must at least wish you well, who am,

Dear Sir, your most obliged affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, W.
WYCHERLEY.
POSTSCRIPT.
PRay thank my Friend Mr. W. -- for putting his Surtout of a Letter over yours
of a finer Stuff, as the Lining of a Garment is often finer than the Outside.
Pray give all the honest Gentlemen of the Coffee-house, of my Acquaintance and
yours, my humble Service; whom, with you I hope to see again, within this three
Weeks, at London.



Mr. Dennis to Mr. Wycherley.
Dear Sir,
A Man who has the Vanity of pretending to Write, must certainly love you
extremely well, if he does not hate you after he has received from you such a
Letter as yours: And he must undoubtedly show a great deal of Friendship, when
he assures you he does not envy you the very Lines by which you commend him. A
Man had need be very well acquainted with the Goodness of your Nature, to be
satisfied that you do not praise with a wicked Design to mortify. There are
few Writers so humble, whom Mr. Wycherley's Commendation would not render vain;
but then there are few Writers so proud, whom the Wit that Mr. Wycherley shows
in commending them, would not humble. So that a Man, who did not know you,
would be apt to believe that whenever you write to Phraise, you do but like a
Wrestler who lifts People up on purpose to throw them down, and the higher he
raises them, makes their Fall the greater. Your Commendation is to a modest
Man, what the second Bottle is to a sober Man; it raises his Vigor while he is
swallowing it; but the Wit is as sure to make the one Melancholy upon mature
Reflection, as the Wine is certain to leave the other Spiritless after the
third Concoction: But our Infirmity cannot be your Fault; to whom we are
obliged for your generous Intentions, which give you such a peculiar
Distinction from ordinary Men of Wit. Indeed, by a just and a noble Confidence,
which you may repose in your self, you may always very safely commend; because
you may be always sure to surpass. It Is prudent and noble at once in a
Conqueror to extol the Conquered: To praise the Excellence which he o'ercomes,
is but to commend himself: Besides, it wins the very Heart and Soul of him that
is overcome, if he has but Virtue enough to be so subdued; and makes him
willing to leave his last Retrenchment. It would long since have had that
Effect upon me, if the rest of your good Qualities had not prevented it; which
have so closely and so entirely tied me to you, that whenever I receive a
Letter from you, my Vanity is sure to gain on the one side, what it is certain
to lose on the other: For if I am mortified as to my own Wit, I do not fail to
value my self upon yours.

I am, etc.

To Mr. Wycherley, That a Block-head is better qualified for Business than a
Man of Wit.
Dear Sir,
THE last time I was at Will's, I had the Mortification to hear, that our
Friend Mr. -- had met with a Disappointment in --; at which, some, who were
present, were glad, affirming, That Success would have thrown him out of his
Element; for that a Man of Wit is not qualified for Business so well as a
Block-head: I have since had some Thoughts concerning that matter which I here
send you, and of which I desire your Opinion.

Upon Reflection I have found out the following Reasons, why Block-heads are
thought to be fittest for Business, and why they really succeed in it.

First, As their Brains are a great deal colder, than those are of Men of Wit,
they must have but very strait Imaginations, and very barren Inventions; from
whence it follows that they have but few Thoughts, and that a few Objects fill
their Capacities.

Secondly, It is reasonable enough to believe, that since they are incapable of
many Thoughts, those few which they have, are determined by their Necessities,
their Appetites, and their Desires, to what they call their Fortunes and their
Establishments.

Thirdly, It is not very hard to conceive, that since a Block-head has but a
few Thoughts, and perhaps but one all his Lifetime, which is his Interest, he
should have it more perfect, and better digested, then Men of Wit have the same
Thought, who perhaps have a thousand every Hour.

Fourthly, It is easy to comprehend, that since such a one has but a few
Thoughts, or perhaps but one, which by often revolving in his Mind, he has
digested, and brought to perfection, he should readily pass from Thought to
Action. For he must grow weary of Thinking so often of one and the same thing;
and since the Nature of the Soul requires Agitation, as soon as his little
Speculation ceases, he must of necessity act to divert himself.

Fifthly, It will be certainly found, that as a little Thought often makes a
Man active in Business, so a little Judgment often makes him diligent; for he
may well be eager in the Pursuit of those things, on which, seduced by Passion
and Vulgar Opinion, he sets an exorbitant Value; and concerning whose Natures
and Incertainty he is not very capable of making solid Reflections. For though
Prudence may oblige a Man to secure a Competency, yet never was any one by
right Reason induced to seek Superfluities.

Sixthly, Penury of Thoughts supposes Littleness of Soul, which is often
requisite for the succeeding in Business: For a Blockhead is sordid enough to
descend to Trick and Artifice, which in Business are often necessary to procure
Success; unless they are more than supplied, by a Prudence derived from a
consummate Experience, or from a great Capacity.

Thus have I endeavored to give the Reason, why a Fool succeeds better in
Business than a Man of Wit; who has a multitude of Thoughts, and which fly at
the noblest Objects; and who finds that there is something so pleasing, and so
noble, in Thinking rightly, and more especially in the sublime Speculations of
exalted Reason, that he finds it intollerably irksome to descend to Action, and
abhors the very Thought of being diligent in things, for which he has an
extreme Contempt.

Thus you (...) that in some measure, a Fool may be said to be better fitted
out for Business, than a Man of Wit. But it is high time to distinguish: For,
first, when I say that a Block-head is fitted for Business, I mean only for
little Business: For to affirm, that he is qualified for Affairs that require
Extent of Capacity, would be a Contradiction in Terms. Secondly, When I affirm,
that a Man of Wit is less capacitated for Business, I mean that he is less so,
as long as he keeps in his natural Temper, and remains in a State of
Tranquillity: But if once he comes to be thrown out of that by the Force of a
violent Passion, and fired with Zeal for his Country's Service, or enflamed by
Ambition, and Business can be made subservient to the gratifying of those
Passions, then I dare boldly affirm, that one Man of Wit will go further than a
thousand of those who want it. Of which it would be easy to give more than one
Instance amongst our present Ministers. But I will be contented with putting
you in mind, that none of the Romans had more Wit than Caesar, and none of the
French than Richelieu.

Before I conclude, I must give you a Caution; which is, That by the Word
Blockhead, I do not mean one that is stupid, but that I apply that word
according to the Language of you Men of Wit, to one who thinks but a little:
And that on the other side, by a Man of Wit, I do not mean every Coxcomb whose
Imagination has got the Ascendant of his little Reason; but a Man like you,
Sir, or our most ingenious Friend, in whom Fancy and Judgment are like a
well-match'd Pair; the first like an extraordinary Wife, that appears always
Beautiful, and always Charming, yet is at all times Decent, and at all times
Chaste; the second like a prudent and well-bred Husband, whose very Sway shows
his Complaisance, and whose very Indulgence shows his Authority,

I am, dear Sir, your most humble Servant, JOHN DENNIS.

To Mr. Dryden.
Sir,
Though no Man writes to his Friend with greater Ease, or with more Cheerfulness,
than my self; and though I have lately had the Presumption to place you at the
Head of that small Party, nevertheless I have experienced, with Grief, that in
writing to you I have not found my old Facility.

Since I came to this place I have taken up my Pen several times in order to
write to you, but have constantly at the very beginning found my self damped
and disabled; upon which I have been apt to believe that extraordinary Esteem
may sometimes make the Mind as Impotent as a violent Love does the Body, and
that the vehement Desire we have to exert it, extremely decays our Ability. I
have heard of more than one lusty Gallant, who, though he could at any time, with
Readiness and Vigor, possess the Woman whom he loved but moderately, yet when
he has been about to give his Darling Mistress, whom he has vehemently and long
desired, the first last Proof of his Passion, has found on a sudden that his
Body has jaded and grown resty under his Soul, and gone backward the faster,
the more he has spurred it forward. Esteem has wrought a like Effect upon my
Mind; my extraordinary Inclination to show that I honor you at an
extraordinary rate, and to show it in words that might not be altogether
unworthy Mr. Dryden's Perusal, incapacitates me to perform the very Action to
which it incites me, and Nature sinks in me under the fierce Effort. But I hope
you will have the Goodness to pardon a Weakness that proceeds from a Cause like
this, and to consider that I had pleased you more if I had honored you less.
Who knows but that yet I may please you, if you encourage me to mend my Fault?
To which, if you know but the Place I am in, Charity would engage you, though
Justice could not oblige you: For I am here in a Desert, deprived of Company,
and deprived of News; in a Place where I can hear nothing at all of the
Public; and what proves it ten times more a Desert, nothing at all of you: For
all who are at present concerned for their Country's Honor, hearken more after
your Preparatives, than those for the next Campaign. These last may possibly
turn to our Confusion, so uncertain are the Events of War; but we know that
whatever you undertake must prove Glorious to England; and though the French may
meet with Success in the Field, by you we are sure to Conquer them. In War
there are a thousand unlook'd-for Accidents which happens every Day, and
Fortune appears no where more like her self; but in a Combat of Wit, the more
Humane Contention, and the more Glorious Quarrel, Merit will be always sure to
prevail: And therefore, though I can but hope that the Confederate Forces will
give Chase to De Lorge and Luxemburgh, I am very confident that Boileau and
Racine will be forced to submit to you. Judge therefore, if I, who very much
love my Country, and who so much esteem you, must not with a great deal of
Impatience expect to hear from you.

I am, Sir, your most humble Servant.

To Mr. Dryden.
Dear Sir,
YOu may see already by this presumptuous Greeting, that Encouragement gives us
as much Assurance to Friendship, as it imparts to Love: You may see too, that a
Friend may sometimes proceed to acknowledge Affection, by the very same Degrees
by which a Lover declares his Passion. This last, at first, confesses Esteem,
yet owns no Passion but Admiration: But as soon as he is animated by one kind
Expression, his Look, his Style, and his very Soul are altered; but as
Sovereign Beauties know very well, that he who confesses he Esteems and Admires
them, implies that he Loves them, or is inclined to Love them; a Person of Mr.
Dryden's exalted Genius, can discern very well, that when we Esteem him highly,
it is Respect restrains us if we say no more. For where great Esteem is without
Affection, it is often attended with Envy, if not with Hate; which Passions
detract, even when they commend, and Silence is their highest Panegyric. It Is
indeed impossible, that I should refuse to Love a Man, who has so often given
me all the Pleasure that the most insatiable Mind can desire; when at any time
I have been dejected by Disappointments, or tormented by cruel Passions, the
Recourse to your Verses has calmed my Soul, or raised it to Transports which
made it contemn Tranquillity. But though you have so often given me all the
Pleasure I was able to bear, I have reason to complain of you on this account,
that you have confined my Delight to a narrower Compass: Suckling, Cowley, and
Denham, who formerly ravished me in every part of them, now appear Tastless to
me in most; and Waller himself, with all his Gallantry, and all that admirable
Art of his Turns, appears three quarters Prose to me. Thus it is plain that your
Muse has done me an Injury; but she has made me Amends for it: For she is like
those extraordinary Women, who, besides the Regularity of their charming
Features, besides their engaging Wit, have secret, unaccountable, enchanting
Graces, which though they have been long and often enjoyed, make them always New
and always Desirable. I return you my hearty Thanks for your most obliging
Letter. I had been very unreasonable if I had repined that the Favor arrived
no sooner: It Is allowable to grumble at the Delaying a Payment, but to murmur
at the Deferring a Benefit, is to be impudently Ungrateful beforehand. The
Commendations which you give me, exceedingly sooth my Vanity: For you with a
Breath can bestow or confirm Reputation; a whole numberless People proclaims
the Praise which you give, and the Judgments of three mighty Kingdoms appear to
depend upon yours. The People gave me some little Applause before; but to whom,
when they are in Humor, will they not give it? and to whom, when they are
Froward will they not refuse it? Reputation with them depends upon Chance,
unless they are guided by those above them: They are but the Keepers as it were
of the Lottery which Fortune sets up for Renown; upon which Fame is bound to
attend with her Trumpet, and Sound when Men draw the Prizes. Thus I had rather
have your Approbation than the Applause of Fame Her Commendation argues Good
Luck, but Mr. Dryden's implies Desert. Whatever low Opinion I have hitherto had
of my self, I have so great a Value for your Judgment, that, for the sake of
that, I shall be willing henceforward to believe that I am not wholly
Desertless; but that you may find me still more Supportable, I shall endeavor
to compensate whatever I want in those glittering Qualities, by which the World
is dazzled, with Truth, with Faith, and with Zeal to serve you; Qualities which,
for their Rarity, might be Objects of Wonder, but that Men dare not appear to
admire them, because their Admiration would manifestly declare their Want of
'em. Thus, Sir, let me assure you, that though you are acquainted with several
Gentlemen, whose Eloquence and Wit may capacitate them to offer their Service
with more Address to you, yet no one can declare himself, with greater
Cheerfulness, or with greater Fidelity, or with more profound Respect than my
self,

Sir, your most, etc.

Mr. Dryden to Mr. Dennis.
My dear Mr. Dennis,
WHen I read a Letter so full of my Commendations, as your last, I cannot but
consider you as the Master of a vast Treasure, who, having more than enough for
your self, are forced to Ebb out upon your Friends. You have indeed the best
Right to give them, since you have them in Propriety; but they are no more mine
when I receive them, than the Light of the Moon can be allowed to be her own,
who shines but by the Reflection of her Brother. Your own Poetry is a more
powerful Example, to prove that the Modern Writers may enter into Comparison
with the Ancients, than any which Perrault could produce in France; yet neither
he, nor you, who are a better Critic, can persuade me that there is any room
left for a solid Commendation at this time of Day, at least for me. If I
undertake the Translation of Virgil, the little which I can perform will show
at least, that no Man is fit to write after him, in a barbarous modern Tongue:
Neither will his Machines be of any service to a Christian Poet. We see how
ineffectually they have been tried by Tasso, and by Ariosto. It Is using them
too dully if we only make Devils of his Gods: As if, for Example, I would raise
a Storm, and make use of Eolus, with this only Difference of calling him Prince
of the Air. What Invention of mine would there be in this? or who would not see
Virgil thorough me, only the same Trick played over again by a bungling
Juggler? Boileau has well observed, that it is an easy matter, in a Christian
Poem, for God to bring the Devil to Reason. I think I have given a better Hint
for new Machines in my Preface to Juvenal, where I have particularly
recommended two Subjects, one of king Arthur's Conquest of the Saxons, and the
other of the Black Prince in his Conquest of Spain. But the Guardian Angels of
Monarchies and Kingdoms, are not to be touched by every Hand. A Man must be
deeply conversant in the Platonic Philosophy to deal with them: And therefore
I may reasonably expect that no Poet of our Age will pre-sume to handle those
Machines, for fear of discovering his own Ignorance; or if he should, he might
perhaps be Ungrateful enough not to own me for his Benefactor. After I have
confessed thus much of our Modern Heroic Poetry, I cannot but conclude with
Mr. Rym --, that our English Comedy is far beyond any thing of the Ancients.
And notwithstanding our Irregularities, so is our Tragedy. Shakespeare had a
Genius for it; and we know, in spite of Mr. R -- that Genius alone is a greater
Virtue (if I may so call it) than all other Qualifications put together. You
see what Success this learned Critic has found in the World, after his
Blaspheming Shakespeare. Almost all the Faults which he has discovered are truly
there; Yet who will read Mr. Rym --, or not read Shakespeare? For my own part, I
reverence Mr. Rym -- 's Learning, but I detest his Ill Nature and his
Arrogance. I indeed, and such as I, have reason to be afraid of him, but
Shakespeare has not. There is another Part of Poetry in which the English stand
almost upon an equal Foot with the Ancients; and it is that which we call
Pindarique; introduced, but not perfected by our Famous Mr. Cowley: and of
this, Sir, you are certainly one of the greatest Masters: You have the
Sublimity of Sense as well as Sound, and know how far the Boldness of a Poet
may lawfully extend. I could wish you would cultivate this kind of Ode; and
reduce it either to the same Measure which Pinder used, or give new Measures of
your own. For, as it is, it looks like a vast Tract of Land newly discovered.
The Soil is wonderfully fruitful, but unmanur'd, overstock'd with Inhabitants;
but almost all Salvages, without Laws, Arts, Arms, or Policy. I remember poor
Not. Lee, who was then upon the Verge of Madness, yet made a sober, and a witty
Answer to a bad Poet, who told him, It was an easy thing to write like a
Madman. No, said he, it is very difficult to write like a Madman; but it is a
very easy matter to write like a Fool. Otway and He are safe by Death from all
Attacks, but we poor Poets Militant (to use Mr. Cowley's Expression) are at the
Mercy of wretched Scribblers: and when they cannot fasten upon our Verses, they
fall upon our Morals, our Principles of State and Religion. For my Principles
of Religion, I will not justify them to you: I know yours are far different.
For the same reason I shall say nothing of my Principles of State: I believe
you in yours follow the Dictates of your Reason, as I in mine do those of my
Conscience. If I thought my self in an Error I would retract it; I am sure that
I suffer for them; and Milton makes even the Devil say, That no Creature is in
love with Pain. For my Morals, betwixt Man and Man, I am not to be my own
Judge; I appeal to the World if I have Deceived or Defrauded any Man: And for
my private Conversation, they who see me every Day can be the best Witnesses,
whether or no it be Blameless and Inoffensive. Hitherto I have no reason to
complain that Men of either Party shun my Company. I have never been an
impudent Beggar at the Doors of Noble Men: My Visits have indeed been too rare
to be unacceptable; and but just enough to testify my Gratitude for their
Bounty; which I have frequently received, but always unasked, as themselves
will witness. I have written more than I needed to you on this Subject: for I
dare say, you justify me to your self. As for that which I first intended for
the principal Subject of this Letter, which is my Friend's Passion, and his
Design of Marriage, on better consideration I have changed my Mind: For having
had the Honor to see my dear Friend Wycherley's Letter to him on that
Occasion, I find nothing to be added or amended. But as well as I love Mr.
Wycherley, I confess I love my self so well, that I will not show how much I am
inferior to him in Wit and Judgment, by undertaking any thing after him. There
is Moses and the Prophets in his Counsel: Jupiter and Juno, as the Poets tell
us, made Tiresias their Umpire, in a certain merry Despute, which fell out in
Heaven betwixt them: Tiresias you know had been of both Sexes, and therefore
was a proper Judge; our Friend, Mr. Wycherley, is full as competent an
Arbitrator: He has been a Bachelor, and Married Man, and is now a Widower.
Virgil says of Ceneus, Nunc vir nunc Faemina Ceneus,
Rursus and in veterem fato revoluta figuram.


Yet, I suppose, he will not give any large Commendations to his middle State;
nor as the Sailer said, will be fond, after a Shipwreck, to put to Sea again.
If my Friend will adventure after this, I can but wish him a good Wind, as
being his; and,

My dear Mr. Dennis, your most Affectionate and most Faithful Servant, JOHN
DRYDEN.

Written for my Lady C --, to her Cousin W -- of the Temple. By Mr. Dennis.
After she had received from him a Copy of Verses on her Beauty.
Cousin,
I Received yours with the Verses enclosed, and here return you my hearty
Thanks for the Face, the Shape, the Mien, which you have so generously bestowed
upon me. From looking upon your Verses I went to my Glass: But, Jesu! the
Difference! Though I bought it to Flatter me, yet compared to you, I found it a
Plain Dealer: It showed me immediately that I have been a great deal more
beholding to you, than I have been to Nature; for she only formed me not
Frightful; but you have made me Divine. But as you have been a great deal
kinder than Nature has been to me, I think my self obliged, in Requital, to be
a good deal more Liberal than Heaven has been to you, and to allow you as large
a Stock of Wit as you have given me of Beauty: Since so Honest a Gentleman as
your self, has stretched his Conscience to commend my Person, I am bound in
Gratitude to do Violence to my Reason, to extol your Verses. When I left the
Town, I desired you to furnish me with the News of the Place, and the first
thing I have received from you, is a Copy of Verses on my Beauty; by which you
dexterously infer, that the most extraordinary Piece of News you can send me,
is to tell me, that I am Handsome. By which ingenious Inference, you had
infallibly brought the Scandal of a Wit upon you, if your Verses had not stood
up in you Justification. But tell me truly, Cousin, could you think that I
should prove so easy a Creature as to believe all that you have said of me?
How could you find in your Heart to make such a Fool of me, and such a Cheat of
your self; to intoxicate me with Flattery, and draw me in to Truck my little
Stock of Wit and Judgment, for a mere Imagination of Beauty; when the real
thing too, falls so infinitely short of what you would make me exchange for the
very Fancy of it? For, Cousin, there is this considerable Difference between
the Merit of Wit and Beauty: That Men are never violently influenced by Beauty,
unless it has weakened their Reason; and never seel half the Force of Wit,
unless their Judgments are sound. The principal time in which those of your Sex
admire Beauty in ours, is between Seventeen and Thirty; that is, after they are
past their Innocence, and before they are come to their Judgment. And now,
Cousin, have not you been commend-ing a pretty Quality in me, to admire which,
as I have just shown you, supposes not only a corrupted Will, but a raw
Understanding: Besides, how frail, how transitory is it! Nature deprives us of
it at thirty, if Diseases spare it till then: By which constant Proceeding, she
seems to imply, that she gives it us as a Gugaw to please us in the Childhood
of our Reasons; and takes it from us, as a thing below us, when we come to
Years of Discretion. Thus, Cousin, have you been commending a Quality in me,
which has nothing of true Merit in it, and of which I have no greater a Share,
than to keep me from being scandalous. So that all I could have got by your
Kindness, if I had parted with my Judgment, in order to reap the Benefit of it,
had been nothing but wretched Conceit, and rediculous Affectation. If I thought
you had enough of the gallant Man in you, to take what I say in good part, I
would advise you to engage no further in Poetry: Be ruled by a Woman for once,
and mind your Cook upon Littleton. Rather Pettifog than Flatter: for if you are
resolved to be a Cheat, you will show at least some Conscience, in resolving
rather to chouse People of their Money, than to bubble them of their
Understandings. Besides, Cousin, you have not a Genius which will make a Great
Poet, and be pleased to consider, that a Small Poet is a scandalous Wight; that
indifferent Verses are very bad ones; and that an insipid Panegytic upon
another is a severe Libal upon your self. Besides, there will start up a Satyr
one Day, and then Woe be to cold Rimers. Old England is not yet so barren, but
there will arise some generous Spirit, who, besides a Stock of Wit and good
Sense, which are no very common Qualities, will not only be furnished with a
sound Judgment, which is an extraordinary Talent; but with a true Taste for
Eloquence and Wit, which is scarce any-where to be found; and which comprehends
not only a just Discernment, but a fine Penetration, and a dilicate Criticism.
Such a Satyrist as this, Cousin, must arise, and therefore you had best take
care, by a judicious Silence, that whenever he appears, he may be sure to
Divert you, and not Afflict you.

I am, etc.

To Mr --, at Will's Coffee-house, in Covent Garden.
I Received your Panegyric upon Pun's, which I so approve of, that I am
resolved to get it printed, and bouud up with Erasmus his Praise of Folly. Yet
to confess a Truth, I was something dissatisfied to see Quibbling commended
with so much Wit: For nothing can be writ with more Wit, than your Letter to
the Reserve of the Quibbles; which I suppose you inserted amongst so many
things which are so finely said, lest these should have rendered you too vain,
or too much have mortified me: But pray, after this Panegyric upon Quibbles,
give me leave to ask you the same Question that the Lacedaemonians asked the
Sophister, who harangu'd in the Praise of Hercules: By the way, did you ever
expect to hear a Quibble compared to Hercules? There Is a Simile for you. I
think, as Novel says, that is New. You, who are cried up for so great a Wit,
tell me, without Envy, could you ever have thought upon that? But to return to
my Question: Here you have spent a great deal of time in the Defense of
Quibbles. Who said a Word against them? The Devil a Syllable did I mention of
them in mine. It is true, I cited honest Mr. Sw --, but it is a hard Case, if
the Quoting an Author must be construed the Condemning his Works: I have a
great Respect and Kindness for Mr. Sw --, as I have for all who have any
Excellence. And truly, I think that for the Management of Quibbles and Dice,
there is no Man alive comes near him. And let me tell you, Sir, for all your
new Emulation, he is a better Quibbler than you. But it is high time to give
over Raillery: For if you were my Father a thousand times, let me die if I
would not rigorously examine that part of your Letter which pretends to defend
Quibbling. You say that I am too Nice, and that my Aversion has something in
it, that is very like Affectation: But here you must give me leave to turn you
own Simile upon you: Can a Man be justly accused of Niceness or Affectation,
because he appears offended at a Stink? When I tell you that Quibbling is
extremely foolish; You know it is foolish enough, you reply; but it is a
foolish thing that diverts. And do you think this Knowledge of it will excuse
the Folly? Give me leave to resume the aforementioned Simile: Suppose a Fellow
who beaks Wind, should say to the Company, while they are cajoling their
offended Noses with Snuff, Look you Gentlemen, I know I am a brutal Dog for
this, this is very nasty, but Begad it is very Diverting: Would the Excuse,
think you, be current? A Quibble diverts: Right; and so does a Hobbyhorse,
which in my Mind, for those who can be diverted without Reason, is the better
Bawble of the two. A Quibble diverts: Jesu! That this should be spoken at
Will's? Can there be a more damnable Satyr upon Wit, than that so many
Gentlemen who have so very much of it, should be fore'd to play the Fool to
divert one another? But, for God's sake, what do you mean when you say a
Quibble diverts you? It makes you laugh, I warrant: Why the greatest Coxcomb
about the Town shall outdo you in Laughing at any time. Nature, who has dealt
impartially with her Children, and who has given them but two Distinctions from
Beasts, Reason and Laughter, has, where she has bestowed the more of the One,
conferred the less of the Other: And therefore a Coxcomb will laugh at nothing.
Ay, that indeed, say you, is a Sign of a Fool. Well, my dear Friend, I have so
much Kindness for thee, that out of thy own Mouth, thou shall not be Judged:
For if a Quibble is not Wit, it is nothing. But it is at as great a Distance
from Wit, as an Idol is from the Deity; and I will no more believe nauseous
Equivocals to be Wit, because some Sots have admired them, than I will believe
Garlic to be God, because the Egyptians adored it: Nay, it is a more damnable
Sign of Stupidity in an English Man, to make Wit of a Quibble, than it was in
the Egyptians, to make a God of their Garlic. But to return from whence I
digressed; I have never appeared so much a Stoic, but that I have been as much
for Diversion as any of you: But then am I for the Diversion of reasonable Men,
and of Gentlemen. If there be any Diversion in Quibbling, it is a Diversion of
which a Fool and a Porter is as capable as is the best of you. And therefore
Ben. Johnson, who writ every thing with Judgment, and who knew the Scum of the
People, whenever he brings in a Porter or Tankard-bearer, is sure to introduce
him Quibbling. But if Punning be a Diversion, it is a very strange one: There
is as much Difference between the silly Satisfaction which we have from a
Quibble, and the ravishing Pleasure which we receive from a beautiful Thought,
as there is betwixt a faint Salute and Fruition. But what would you have us do?
you cry. Men of the greatest Parts are no more to be found with Wit always
about them, than rich Rogues with always the Ready. Why, look you, Sir, as the
first Step to Wisdom is to be freed from Folly; so the first Approach to Wit is
a Contempt of Quibbling. If it happens at any time that you have not your Wit
about you, we will either have patience till such time as you have, or take
good Sense in the lieu of it: If you are not in a Condition to delight us, we
will be contented to be Instructed; we will make your Instruction nourish our
Vanity, so turn even that to Delight. Nay, there is something noble in right
Reason, and consequently something delightful. Truth is so divinely beautiful,
that it must please eternally; but Falsehood is base, and must shock all
generous Minds, and every Equivocal is but ambiguous Falsehood, that is the
pittiful'st, the basest of Falsehood.

To Walter Moyle, Esquire
Dear Sir,
Though you are already indebted a Letter to me, yet I think fit to give you
Credit for another; though perhaps you may little desire to run into Debt this
way: But it is for two Reasons that I give you the trouble of this: For, in the
first place, I am taking a turn for a little time into the Country, and I
design that the Prevention of this should make some Amends for the Delay of my
next. In the Second place, I have made some Provision of Scandal, which I am
willing to make use of, before it grow stale upon my Hands. Just after I writ
my last, I threw my self into a detached Party, which marched from Will's to
Namure; with the same Design that the Volunteers went to Breast, to keep out of
the Fray, and be Spectators of the Action. However, before they were come to
Blows, I went amongst the Tents, and had some Discourse with Major General R
--, whom I found to be Father to Mr. Bays his Parthenope. For the Major General
is a very honest Fellow, who sells Ale by the Town-Wall: We had the
Satisfaction to see that the Town was taken, and the whole Siege was carried on
as Sieges generally are, with a great deal more Noise than Mischief. On Monday
last, which was the Second of September, I traveled into the City, where I had
the Satisfaction to see two very ridiculous Sights. The first was a Bawd carted
for an Action which had some Relation to that memorable Day: For she was
convicted of being an Accomplice in setting Fire to an Ancient and Venerable
Pile of the City; that is, she was found Guilty of being instrumental in the
Clapping an Alderman. I stood in a Bookseller's Shop to see her pass, which
Bookseller was packing up some Scoundrel Authors to send them away to the
Plantations. These Authors are Criminals, which being sentenced to be Burut
here, have at last found Grace, and got off with Transportation. You remember
the terrible News that we heard at P --, which, as it sprung from a ridiculous
Occasion, that is, my Lady Mayoress's Gossipping, has had a comical
Consequence. For the Common Council have made an Order, by which my Lady
Mayoress is dispensed during the Wars, from seeing those Children born in the
City, which are got in the Suburbs; that is, from being present at one of their
Wive's Labors. But it is time to return to the Fair. Last Night I took a turn
in the Cloisters, where I was entertained with a great many Dialogues between
Vizour and Vallancy Wig, upon which I leave you to be Judge, whether my Eyes or
my Ears were the better entertained of the two. For I heard a great deal of
Unintelligible Language, addressed to a great many Invisible Faces. As if,
because the Women had resolved not to be seen, the Men had determined not to be
Understood; and had in revenge eclipsed the Light of their Understanding by
Fustian, as the others had obscured the Luster of their Eyes by Velvet.
Formerly the Ladies made use of White and Red to atract, but within these
thirty Years black has succeeded, and the Devil is found more Tempting in his
proper Color. I have neither time nor place for any more: you shall have the
rest by the first Opportunity.

Yours, etc.

To Mr. Congreve.
Dear Sir,
I Have now read over the Fox, in which, though I admire the Strength of Ben.
Johnson's Judgment, yet I did not find it so accurate as I expected: For first
the very thing upon which the whole Plot turns, and that is, the Discovery
which Mosca makes to Bonario; seems to me, to be very unreasonable. For I can
see no Reason why he should make that Discovery which introduces Bonorio into
his Master's House. For the Reason which the Poet makes Mosca give in the ninth
Scene of the third Act, appears to be a very absurd one. Secondly, Corbaccio,
the Father of Bonario, is exposed for his Deafness, a personal Defect; which is
contrary to the end of Comedy-Instruction: For personal Defects cannot be
amended; and the exposing such, can never divert any but half-witted Men. It
cannot fail to bring a thinking Man to reflect upon the Misery of Human Nature;
and into what he may fall himself without any Fault of his own. Thirdly, The
Play has two Characters, which have nothing to do with the Design of it, which
are to be looked upon as Excrescencies. Lastly, the Character of Volpone is
inconsistent with it self: Volpone is like Catiline, Alieni appetens, sui
profusus; but that is only a Double in his Nature, and not an Inconsistence.
The Inconsistence of the Character appears in this, that Volpone in the fifth
Act behaves himself like a giddy Coxcomb, in the Conduct of that very Affair
which he managed so Craftily in the first four. In which the Poet offends,
first, against that famed Rule which Horace gives for the Characters, Servetur
ad imum, Qualis ab incepto processerit, and sibi constet.
And, Secondly, Against Nature, upon which all the Rules are grounded: For so
strange an Alteration, in so little a time, is not in Nature, unless it happens
by the Accident of some violent Passion; which is not the Case here. Volpone on
the sudden behaves himself without common Discretion, in the Conduct of that
very Affair which he had managed with so much Dexterity, for the space of three
Years together. For why does he disguise himself? Or, why does he repose the
last Confidence in Mosca? Why does he cause it to be given out that he is dead?
Why, only to plague his Bubbles. To plague them, for what? Why only for having
been his Bubbles. So that here is the greatest Alteration in the World, in the
space of twenty four Hours, without any apparent Cause. The Design of Volpone
is to Cheat, he has carried on a Cheat for three Years together, with Cunning
and with Success: and yet he, on a sudden, in cold Blood, does a thing which he
cannot but know must endanger the ruining all.

I am, dear Sir, your most humble Servant.

To Mr. Congreve.
Dear Sir,
I Will not augment the Trouble which I give you by making an Apology for not
giving it you sooner. Though I am heartily sorry that I kept such a Trifle as the
Enclosed, and a Trifle writ extempore, long enough to make you expect a
labored Letter. But because in the Enclosed, I have spoken particularly of
Ben. Johnson's Fox, I desire to say three or four words of some of his Plays
more generally: The Plots of the Fox, the Silent Woman, the Alchimist, are all
of them very Artful. But the Intrigues of the Fox, and the Alchimist, seem to
me to be more dexterously Perplexed, than to be happily Disentangled. But the
Gordian Knot in the Silent Woman is untyed with so much Felicity, that that
alone may suffice to show Ben. Johnson no ordinary Hero. But then, perhaps,
the Silent Woman may want the very Foundation of a good Comedy, which the other
two cannot be said to want: For it seems to me, to be without a Moral. Upon
which Absurdity, Ben. Johnson was driven by the Singularity of Morose's
Character, which is too extravagant for Instruction, and fit, in my Opinion,
only for Farce. For this seems to me, to constit ute the most essential
Difference, betwixt Farce and Comedy, that the Follies which are exposed in
Farce are singular; and those are particular, which are exposed in Comedy.
These last are those, with which some part of an Audiance may be supposed
infected, and to which all may be supposed obnoxious. But the first are so very
odd, that by reason of their monstrous Extravagance, they cannot be thought to
concern an Audience; and cannot be supposed to instruct them. For the rest of
the Characters in these Plays, they are for the most part true, and most of the
Humorous Characters Masterpieces. For Ben. Johnson's Fools, seem to show his
Wit a great deal more than his Men of Sense: I admire his Fops, and but barely
esteem his Gentlemen. Ben. seems to draw Deformity more to the Life than
Beauty: He is often so eager to pursue Folly, that he forgets to take Wit along
with him. For the Dialogue, it seems to want very often that Spirit, that
Grace, and that noble Railery, which are to be found in more modern Plays, and
which are Virtues that ought to be inseparable from a finished Comedy. But
there seems to be one thing more wanting than all the rest, and that is
Passion, I mean that fine and that delicate Passion, by which the Soul shows
its Politeness, even in the midst of its Trouble. Now to touch a Passion is the
surest way to Delight; for nothing agitates like it: Agitation is the Health
and Joy of the Soul, of which it is so entirely fond, that even then, when we
imagine we seek Repose, we only seek Agitation. You know what a famous modern
Critic has said of Comedy:

Il faut que ses Acteurs badinent noblement,
Que son Noeud bien form se denoue aisement;
Que l'action Merchant ou la Raison la Guide,
Ne se perde Jamma dans une Scens vuide,
Que son Style humble and doux se releue a propos,
Que ses discourse par tout fertiles enbons mots,
Soient pleius de Passions finement maniees,
Et les Scenes toujours l'une al'autre liee.
I leave you to make the Application to Johnson -- Whatever I have said my self
of his Comedies, I submit to your better Judgment. For you, who, after Mr.
Wycherley, are incomparably the best Writer of it living, ought to be allowed
to be the best Judge too.

I am yours, etc.

Mr. Congreve, to Mr. Dennis. Concerning Humor in COMEDY.
Dear Sir,
YOu write to me, that you have entertained your self two or three days, with
reading several Comedies, of several Authors; and your Observation is, That
there is more of Humor in our English Writers, than in any of the other Comic
Poets, Ancient or Modern. You desire to know my Opinion, and at the same time
my Thought, of that which is generally called Humor in Comedy.

I agree with you, in an impartial Preference of our English Writers, in that
particular. But if I tell you my Thoughts of Humor, I must at the same time
confess, that what I take for true Humor, has not been so often written even
by them, as is generally believed: And some who have valued themselves, and
have been esteemed by others, for that kind of Writing, have seldom touched
upon it. To make this appear to the World, would require a long and labored
Discourse, and such as I neither am able nor willing to undertake. But such
little Remarks, as may be contained within the Compass of a Letter, and such
unpremeditated Thoughts, as may be communicated between Friend and Friend,
without incurring the Censure of the World, or setting up for a Dictator, you
shall have from me, since you have enjoined it.

To define Humor, perhaps, where as difficult, as to define Wit; for like
that, it is of infinite Variety. To enumerate the several Humors of Men, were
a Work as endless, as to sum up their several Opinions. And in my mind, the
Quot homines tot Sententia, might have been more properly interpreted of
Humor; since there are many Men, of the same Opinion in many things, who are
yet quite different in Humors. But though we cannot certainly tell what Wit is,
or what Humor is, yet we may go near to show something, which is not Wit or
not Humor; and yet often mistaken for both. And since I have mentioned Wit and
Humor together, let me make the first Distinction between them, and observe to
you, that Wit is often mistaken for Humor.

I have observed, that when a few things have been wittily and pleasantly
spoken by any Character in a Comedy, it has been very usual for those, who make
their Remarks on a Play, while it is acting, to say, Such a thing is very
humorously spoken; There is a great deal of Humor in that Part. Thus the
Character of the Person speaking, may be, surprisingly and pleasantly, is
mistaken for a Character of Humor; which indeed is a Character of Wit: But
there is a great Difference between a Comedy, wherein there are many things
humorously, as they call it, which is pleasantly spoken; and one, where there
are several Characters of Humor, distinguished by the particular and different
Humors, appropriated to the several Persons represented, and which naturally
arise from the different Constitutions, Complexions, and Dispositions of Men.
The saying of Humorous Things, does not distinguish Characters; for every
Person in a Comedy may be allowed to speak them. From a witty Man they are
expected; and even a Fool may be permitted to stumble on 'em by chance. Though I
make a Difference betwixt Wit and Humor; yet I do not think that Humorous
Characters exclude Wit: No, but the manner of Wit should be adapted to the
Humor. As for Instance, A Character of a Splenetick and Peevish Humor, should
have a Satirical Wit; a Jolly and Sanguine Humor, should have a Facetious Wit:
The former should speak positively; the latter, carelessly: For the former
observes, and shows things as they are; the latter rather overlooks Nature, and
speaks things as he would have them; and his Wit and Humor have both of them a
less Alloy of Judgment than the others.

As Wit, so, its opposite, Folly, is sometimes mistaken for Humor.

When a Poet brings a Character on the Stage, committing a thousand
Absurdities, and talking Impertinencies, Roaring aloud, and Laughing
immoderately, on every, or rather upon no occasion; this is a Character of
Humor.

Is any thing more common, than to have a pretended Comedy, stuffed with such
Grotesque Figures, and Farce-Fools? Things, that either are not in Nature, or
if they are, are Monsters, and Births of Mischance; and consequently as such,
should be stifled, and huddled out of the way, like Sooterkins, that Mankind
may not be shocked with an appearing Possibility of the Degeneration of a
God-like Species. For my part, I am as willing to Laugh, as any body, and as
easily diverted with an Object truly ridiculous: but at the same time, I can
never care for seeing things, that force me to entertain low Thoughts of my
Nature. I don't know how it is with others, but I confess freely to you, I
could never look long upon a Monkey, without very mortifying Reflections; though
I never heard any thing to the contrary, why that Creature is not Originally of
a distinct Species. As I don't think Humor exclusive of Wit, neither do I
think it inconsistent with Folly; but I think the Follies should be only such,
as Men's Humors may incline 'em to; and not Follies entirely abstracted from
both Humor and Nature.

Sometimes personal Defects are misrepresented for Humors.

I mean, sometimes Characters are barbarously exposed on the Stage, ridiculing
natural Deformities, casual Defects in the Senses, and Infirmities of Age. Sure
the Poet must both be very Ill-natured himself, and think his Audience so, when
he proposes by showing a Man deformed, or deaf, or blind, to give them an
agreeable Entertainment; and hopes to raise their Mirth, by what is truly an
agreeable of Compassion. But much need not to be laid upon this Head to any
body, especially to you, who in one of your Letters to me concerning Mr.
Johnson's Fox, have justly excepted against this Immoral Part of Ridicule in
Corbaccio's Character; and there I must agree with you to blame him, whom
otherwise I cannot enough admire, for his great Mastery of true Humor in
Comedy.

External Habit of Body is often mistaken for Humor.

By External Habit, I do not mean the ridiculous Dress or Clothing of a
Character, though that goes a good way in some received Characters; (but
undoubtedly a Man's Humor may incline him to dress differently from other
People) but I mean a Singularity of Manners, Speech, and Behavior, peculiar to
all, or most of the same Country, Trade, Profession or Education. I cannot
think that a Humor, which is only a Habit, or Disposition contracted by Use or
Custom; for by a Disuse, or Compliance with other Customs, it may be worn off,
or diversifi'd.

Affectation is generally mistaken for Humor.

These are indeed so much alike, that, at a distance, they may be mistaken one
for the other: For what is Humor in one, may be Affectation in another; and
nothing is more common, than for some to affect particular ways of saying, and
doing things, peculiar to others, whom they admire and would imitate. Humor is
the Life, Affectation the Picture. He that draws a Character of Affectation,
shows Humor at the Second-hand; he at best but publishes a Translation, and
his Pictures are but Copies.

But as these two last Distinctions are the nicest, so it may be most proper to
explain them, by particular Instances from some Author of Reputation. Humor I
take either to be born with us, and so of a natural Growth; or else to be
grafted into us by some accidental Change in the Constitution, or Revolution of
the internal Habit of Body; by which it becomes, if I may so call it,
naturalized.

Humor is from Nature, Habit from Custom; and Affectation from Industry.

Humor shows us as we are.

Habit shows us, as we appear, under a forcible Impression.

Affectation shows what we would be, under a voluntary Disguise.

Though here I would observe by the way, that a continued Affectation, may in
time become a Habit.

The Character of Morose in the Silent Woman, I take to be a Character of
Humor. And I choose to Instance this Character to you, from many others of the
same Author, because I know it has been condemned by many as Unnatural and
Farce: And you have your self hinted some Dislike of it, for the same reason,
in a Letter to me, concerning some of Johnson's Plays.

Let us suppose Morose to be a Man naturally Splenetick and Melancholy; is
there any thing more offensive to one of such a Disposition, than Noise and
Clamor? Let any Man that has the Spleen (and there are enough in England) be
Judge. We see common Examples of this Humor in Little every Day. It Is ten to
one, but three parts in four of the Company that you dine with, are discomposed
and startled at the Cutting of a Cork, or Scratching a Plate with a Knife: It
is a Proportion of the same Humor, that makes such or any other Noise
offensive to the Person that hears it; for there are others who will not be
disturbed at all by it. Well; but Morose, you will say, is so extravagant, he
cannot bear any Discourse or Conversation, above a Whisper. Why, it is his
Excess of this Humor, that makes him become rediculous, and qualifies his
Character for Comedy. If the Poet had given him but a moderate proportion of
that Humor, it is odds but half the Audience, would have sided with the
Character, and have condemned the Author, for exposing a Humor which was
neither remarkable nor rediculous. Besides, the Distance of the Stage requires
the Figure represented, to be something larger than the Life; and sure a
Picture may have Features larger in Proportion, and yet be very like the
Original. If this Exactness of Quantity, were to be observed in Wit, as some
would have it in Humor; what would become of those Characters that are
designed for Men of Wit? I believe if a Poet should steal a Dialogue of any
length, from the extempore Discourse of the two wittiest Men upon Earth, he
would find the Scene but coldly received by the Town. But to the purpose:

The Character of Sir John Daw in the same Play, is a Character of Affectation:
He everywhere discovers an Affectation of Learning; when he is not only
conscious to himself, but the Audience also plainly perceives that he is
Ignorant. Of this kind are the Characters of Thraso in the Eunuch of Terence,
and Pyrgopolinices in the Miles Gloriosus of Plautus: They affect to be thought
Valiant, when both themselves and the Audience know they are not. Now such a
Boasting of Valor in Men who were really Valiant, would undoubtedly be a
Humor; for a fiery Disposition might naturally throw a Man into the same
Extravagance, which is only affected in the Characters I have mentioned.

The Character of Cob in Every Man in his Humor, and most of the under
Characters in Bartholomew-fair, discovered only a Singularity of Manners,
appropriated to the several Educations and Professions of the Persons
represented. They are not Humors but Habits contracted by Custom. Under this
Head may be ranged all Country Clowns, Sailers, Tradesmen, Jockeys, Gamesters
and such like, who make use of Cants or peculiar Dialects in their several Arts
and Vocations. One may almost give a Receipt for the Composition of such a
Character: For the Poet has nothing to do, but to collect a few proper Phrases
and Terms of Art, and to make the Person apply them by rediculous Metaphors in
his Conversation, with Characters of different Natures. Some late Characters of
this kind have been very successful; but in my mind they may be painted without
much Art or Labor; since they require little more, than a good Memory and
superficial Observation. But true Humor cannot be shown without a Dissection
of Nature, and a narrow Search to discover the first Seeds from whence it has
its Root and Growth.

If I were to write to the World, I should be obliged to dwell longer upon each
of these Distinctions and Examples; for I know that they would not be plain
enough to all Readers: But a bare Hint is sufficient to inform you of the
Notions which I have on this Subject: and I hope by this time you are of my
Opinion, that Humor is neither Wit, nor Folly, nor personal Defect, nor
Affectation, nor Habit; and yet, that each, and all of these, have been both
written and received for Humor.

I should be unwilling to venture even on a bare Description of Humor, much
more to make a Definition of it; but now my hand is in, I Will tell you what
serves me instead of either: I take it to be, A singular and unavoidable manner
of doing, or saying any thing, peculiar and natural to one Man only; by which
his Speech and Actions are destinguish'd from those of other Men.

Our Humor has relation to us, and to what proceeds from us, as the Accidents
have to a Substance; it is a Color, Taste, and Smell, diffused through all; though
our Actions are never so many, and different in Form, they are all Splinters of
the same Wood, and have naturally one Complexion; which though it may be
disguised by Art, yet cannot be wholly changed: We may paint it with other
Colors, but we cannot change the Grain. So the natural Sound of an Instument
will be distinguished, though the Notes expressed by it, are never so various,
and the Diversions never so many. Dissimulation, may by degrees, become more
easy to our Practice; but it can never absolutely transubstantiate us into
what we would seem: it will always be in some proportion a Violence upon Nature.

A Man may change his Opinion, but I believe he will find it a Difficulty to
part with his Humor; and there is nothing more provoking, than the being made
sensible of that Difficulty. Sometimes, one shall meet with those, who perhaps,
innocently enough, but at the same time impertiently, will ask the Question,
Why are you not merry? Why are you not gay, pleasant, and cheerful? Then
instead of answering, could I ask such one, Why are you not handsome? Why have
you not black Eyes, and a better Complexion? Nature abhors to be forced.

The two famous Philosophers of Ephesus and Abdera, have their different Sects
at this Day: Some weep, and others laugh at one and the same thing.

I don't doubt, but you have observed several Men laugh when they are angry;
others who are silent; some that are loud: Yet I cannot suppose that it is the
Passion of Anger which is in it self different, or more or less in one than
the other; but that it is the Humor of the Man that is predominant, and urges
him to express it in that manner. Demonstrations of Pleasure are as various;
one Man has a Humor of retiring from all Company, when any thing has happened
to please him beyond Expectation; he hugs himself alone, and thinks it an
addition to the Pleasure to keep it secret. Another is upon Thorns till he has
made Proclamation of it; and must make other People sensible of his Happiness,
before he can be so himself. So it is in Grief, and other Passions.
Demonstrations of Love, and the Effects of that Passion upon several Humors,
are infinitely different: But here the Ladies, who abound in Servants, are the
best Judges. Talking of the Ladies, methinks something should be observed of
the Humor of the Fair Sex; since they are sometimes so kind as to furnish out
a Character for Comedy. But I must confess I have never made any Observation of
what I apprehend to be true Humor in Women. Parhaps Passions are too powerful
in that Sex, to let Humor have its Course; or may be by reason of their
natural Coldness, Humor cannot exert itself to that extravagant Degree, which
it often does in the Male-sex: For if ever any thing does appear comical or
ridiculous in a Woman, I think it is little more than an acquired Folly, or an
Affectation. We may call them the weaker Sex, but I think the true reason is,
because our Follies are stronger, and our Faults are more prevailing.

One might think that the Diversity of Humor, which must be allowed to be
diffused throughout Mankind, might afford endless Matter, for the support of
Comedies. But when we come closely to consider that Point, and nicely to
distinguish the Difference of Humors, I believe we shall find the contrary.
For though we allow every Man something of his own, and a peculiar Humor; yet
every Man has it not in quantity, to become remarkable by it: or, if many do
become remarkable by their Humors; yet all those Humors may not be diverting.
Nor is it only requisite to distinguish what Humor will be diverting, but also
how much of it, what part of it to show in Light, and what to cast in Shades;
how to set it off by preparatory Scenes, and by opposing other Humors to it in
the same Scene. Through a wrong Judgment, sometimes, Men's Humors may be opposed
when there is really no specific Difference between them; only a greater
proportion of the same, in one than the other; occasioned by having more Phlegm,
or Choler, or whatever the Constitution is, from whence their Humors derive
their Source.

There is infinitely more to be said on this Subject; though perhaps I have
already said too much; but I have said it to a Friend, who I am sure will not
expose it, if he does not approve of it. I believe the Subject is entirely new,
and was never touched upon before; and if I would have any one to see this
private Essay, it should be some one, who might be provoked by my Errors in it,
to publish a more judicious Treatise on the Subject. Indeed I wish it were
done, that the World being a little acquainted with the Scarcity of true
Humor, and the Difficulty of finding and showing it, might look a little more
favorably on the Labors of them, who endeavor to search into Nature for it,
and lay it open to the Public View.

I don't say but that very entertaining and useful Characters, and proper for
Comedy, may be drawn from Affectations, and those other Qualities, which I have
endeavored to distinguish from Humor: but I would not have such imposed on
the World for Humor, nor esteemed of equal Value with it. It were, perhaps,
the Work of a long Life to make one Comedy true in all its Parts, and to give
every Character in it a true and distinct Humor. Therefore, every Poet must be
beholding to other Helps, to make out his Number of ridiculous Characters. But
I think such a One deserves to be broke, who makes all false Musters; who does
not show one true Humor in a Comedy, but entertains his Audience to the end of
the Play with every thing out of Nature.

I will make but one Observation to you more, and have done; and that is
grounded upon an Observation of your own, and which I mentioned at the
beginning of my Letter, viz. That there is more of Humor in our English Comic
Writers than in any others. I do not at all wonder at it, for I look upon
Humor to be almost of English Growth; at least, it does not seem to have found
such Increase on any other Soil: And what appears to me to be the reason of it,
is the great Freedom, Privilege, and Liberty which the common People of
England enjoy. Any Man that has a Humor, is under no Restraint, or fear of
giving it Vent; they have a Proverb among them, which, may be, will show the
Bent and Genius of the People, as well as a longer Discourse: He that will have
a May Pole, shall have a May Pole. This is a Maxim with them, and their
Practice is agreeable to it. I believe something considerable too may be
ascribed to their feeding so much on Flesh, and the Grossness of their Diet in
general. But I have done, let the Physicians agree that. Thus you have my
Thoughts of Humor, to my Power of Expressing them in so little Time and
Compass. You will be kind to show me wherein I have erred; and as you are very
capable of giving me Instruction, so I think I have a very just Title to demand
it from you; being, without Reserve,

Your real Friend, and humble Servant, W. CONGREVE.

To Mr. Congreve, at Tunbridge.
Dear Sir,
MR. Moyle and I have impatiently expected to hear from you. But if the Well
which you drink of had sprung up from Lethe, you could not have been more
forgetful of us. Indeed, as the Tunbridgewater is good for the Spleen, it may
be said in some manner to cause Oblivion. But I will yet a while hope that Mr.
Moyle and I are not of the Number of Things that plague you: However, I am so
sensible of your being mindful of me in Town, that I should be ungrateful, if I
should complain that you do not remember me where you are. Mr. Moyle tells me
that you have made a favorable Mention of me, to a certain Lady of your
Acquaintance, whom he calls -- But then to mortify the Old Man in me, or
indeed rather the Young, he assured me, that you had given a much better
Character of him. However, for that which you gave of me, I cannot but own my
self obliged to you, and I look upon your Kindness as so much the greater,
because I am sensible that I do not deserve it. And I could almost wish that
your good Qualities, were not quite so numerous, that I might be able to make
you some Return in Specie: For Commending you now, I do you but Justice, which
a Man of Honor will do to his Enemy; whereas you, by partial Praise, have
treated me like a Friend. I make no doubt, but that you do me the Justice to
believe that I am perfectly yours; and that your Merit has engaged me, and your
Favors obliged me to be all my Lifetime,

Dear Sir, your most humble Servant, J. DENNIS.

Mr. Congreve to Mr. Dennis.
Dear Sir,
IT is not more to keep my Word, than to gratify my Inclination, that I write
to you; and though I have thus long deferred it, I was never forgetful of you,
nor of my Promise. Indeed I waited in Expectation of something that might
enable me to return the Entertainment I received from your Letters: but you
represent the Town so agreeable to me, that you quite put me out of Conceit
with the Country; and my Designs of making Observations from it.

Before I came to Tunbridge, I proposed to my self the Satisfaction of
Communicating the Pleasures of the Place to you: But if I keep my Resolution, I
must transcribe, and return you your own Letters; since I must own I have met
with nothing else so truly Delightful. When you suppose the Country agreeable
to me, you suppose such Reasons why it should be so, that while I read your
Letter, I am of your Mind; but when I look off, I find I am only charmed with
the Landscape which you have drawn. So that if I would see a fine Prospect of
the Country, I must desire you to send it me from the Town; as if I would eat
good Fruit here, perhaps the best way were, to beg a Basket from my Friends in
Coventgarden. After all this, I must tell you there is a great deal of Company
at Tunbridge; and some very agreeable: but the greater part, is of that sort,
who at home converse only with their own Relations; and consequently when they
come abroad, have few Acquaintance, but such as they bring with them. But were
the Company better, or worse, I would have you expect no Characters from me;
for I profess my self an Enemy to Detraction; And who is there, that can justly
merit Commendation? I have a mind to write to you, without the Pretense of any
manner of News, as I might drink to you without naming a Health; for I intend
only my Service to you. I wish for you very often, that I might recommend you
to some new Acquaintance that I have made here, and think very well worth the
keeping; I mean Idleness and a good Stomach. You would not think how People eat
here; every Body has the Appetite of an Oastrich, and as they drink Steel in
the Morning, so I believe at Noon they could digest Iron. But sure you will
laugh at me for calling Idleness a new Acquaintance; when, to your Knowledge,
the greatest part of my Business, is little better. Ay, but here is the Comfort
of the Change; I am Idle now, without taking Pains to be so, or to make other
People so; for Poetry is neither in my Head, nor in my Heart. I know not
whether these Waters may have any Communication with Lethe, but sure I am, they
have none with the Streams of Helicon. I have often wondered how those wicked
Writers of Lampoons, could crowd together such quantities of execrable Verses,
tag'd with bad Rhimes, as I have formerly seen sent from this place. But I am
half of Opinion now, that this Well is an Anti-Hypocrene: What if we should get
a quantity of the Water privately conveyed into the Cistern at Will's
Coffee-house, for an Experiment? But I am extravagant -- Though I remember Ben.
Johnson in his Comedy of Cynthia's Revels, makes a Well, which he there calls
the Fountain of Selflove, to be the Source of many entertaining and ridiculous
Humors. I am of Opinion that something very Comical and New, might be brought
upon the Stage, from a Fiction of the like Nature. But now I talk of the Stage,
pray if any thing new should appear there, let me have an Account of it; for
though Plays are a kind of Winter-fruit, yet I know there are now and then some
Wind-falls at this time of Year, which must be presently served up, lest they
should not keep till the proper Season of Entertainment. It Is now the time,
when the Sun breeds Insects; and you must expect to have the Hum and Buz about
your Ears, of Summer-flies and small Poets. Cuckows have this time allowed 'em
to Sing, though they are damned to Silence all the rest of the Year. Besides, the
approaching Feast of St. Bartholomew both creates an Expectation and bespeaks
an Allowance of unnatural Productions and monstrous Births: Methinks the Days
of Bartholomew-fair are like so many Sabbaths, or Days of Privilege, wherein
Criminals and Malefactors in Poetry, are permitted to creep abroad. They put me
in mind (though at a different time of Year) of the Roman Saturnalia, when all
the Scum, and Rabble, and Slaves of Rome, by a kind of Annual and limited
Manumission, were suffered to make abominable Mirth, and Profane the Days of
Jubilee, with vile Buffoonry, by Authority. But I forget that I am writing a
Post-letter, and run into length like a Poet in a Dedication, when he forgets
his Patron to talk of himself. But I will take care to make no Apology for it,
lest my Excuse (as Excuses generally do) should add to the Fault. Besides, I
would have no appearance of Formality, when I am to tell you, that

I am, your real Friend, and Humble Servant, W. CONGREVE.

Letters of LOVE.
Written by --
Dear Madam,
NOT believe that I love you: You cannot pretend to be so incredulous. If you
do not believe my Tongue, consult my Eyes, consult your own. You will find by
yours, that they have Charms; by mine, that I have a Heart which feels them.
Recall to mind what happened last Night: That at least was a Lover's Kiss. Its
Eagerness, its Fierceness, its Warmth, expressed the God its Parent. But oh!
its Sweetness, and its melting Softness expressed him more. With Trembling in
my Limbs, and Fevers in my Soul I ravished it: Convulsions, Pantings,
Murmurings showed the mighty Disorder within me: The mighty Disorder increased
by it. For those dear Lips shot through my Heart, and through my bleeding Vitals,
delicious Poison, and an avoidless, but yet a charming Ruin. What cannot a Day
produce? The Night before, I thought my self a Happy Man. In want of nothing,
and in fairest Expectation of Fortune; Approved of by Men of Wit, and applauded
by others; Pleased, nay charmed with my Friends, my then dearest Friends;
Sensible of every delicate Pleasure, and in their turns possessing all. But
Love, Almighty Love! seems in a Moment to have removed me to a prodigious
Distance from every Object but you alone: In the midst of Crowds I remain in
Solitude. Nothing but you can lay hold of my Mind, and that can lay hold of
nothing but you. I appear transported to some Foreign Desert with you, (Oh that
I were really thus transported!) where, abundantly supplied with every thing in
thee, I might live out an Age of uninterrupted Extacy. The Scene of the World's
great Stage, seems suddenly and sadly changed. Unlovely Objects are all around
me, excepting thee: The Charms of all the World appear to be translated to
thee. Thus in this sad, but oh, too pleasing State! my Soul can fix upon
nothing but thee: Thee it Contemplates, Admires, Adores, nay, Depends on;
Trusts in you alone. If you and Hope forsake it, Despair and endless Misery
attend it.

Dear Madam,
THis I send by the Permission of a severe Father, I will not say a cruel one,
since he is yours. What is it that he has taken so mortally ill of me? That I
die for his Daughter is my only Offense. And yet he has refused to let me take
even my Farewell of you. Thrice happy be the Omen! May I never take my Farewell
of thee, till my Soul takes leave of my Body. At least, he cannot restrain me
from Loving: No, I will love thee in spite of all Opposition. Though your
Friends and mine prove equally averse, yet I will love thee with a Constancy
that shall appear to all the World, to have something so noble in it, that all
the World shall confess, that it deserved not to be Unfortunate. I will for
sake even my Friends for thee: My honest, my witty, my brave Friends; who had
always been till I had seen thee, the dearest part of Mankind to me. Thou shall
supply the place of them all with me. Thou shall be my bosom, my best-lov'd
Friend; and at the same time, my only Mistress, and my dearest Wife. Have the
Goodness to pardon this Familiarity. It Is the tenderest Leave of the
faithfulest Lover; and here to show an Over-respectfulness would be to wrong my
Passion. That I love thee more than Life, nay, even than Glory, which I courted
once with a burning Desire, bear Witness all my unquiet Days, and every
restless Night, and that terrible Agitation of Mind and Body, which proceeded
from my fear of losing thee. To lose thee is to lose all Happiness; Tormenting
Reflection to a sensible Soul! How often has my Reason been going upon it? But
the loss of Reason would be but too happy upon the loss of thee: Since all the
Advantage that I could draw from its Presence, would be to know my self
Miserable. But the time calls upon me: I am obliged to take an odious Journey,
and leave thee behind with my Enemies. But thine shall never do thee harm with
me. Adieu, thou dearest, thou loveliest of Creatures! No Change of Time or
Place, or the Remonstrances of the best of Friends, shall ever be able to alter
my Passion for thee. Be but one quarter so kind, so just to me, and the Sun
will not shine on a happier Man than my self.

Dear Madam,
MAy I presume to beg Pardon for the Fault I committed? So foolish a Fault,
that it was below not only a Man of Sense, but a Man; and of which nothing
could ever have made me Guilty, but the Fury of a Passion with which none but
your lovely self could inspire me. May I presume to beg pardon for a Fault
which I can never forgive my self? To purchase that Pardon, what would I not
endure? You shall see me prostrate before you, and use me like a Slave, while I
kiss the dear Feet that trample upon me. But if my Crime be too great for
Forgiveness, as indeed it is very great, deny me not one dear parting Look; Let
me see you once before I must never see you more. Christ! I want Patience to
support that accursed Thought. I have nothing in the World that is dear to me,
but you. You have made every thing else indifferent: And can I resolve never to
see you more? In spite of my self I must always see you. Your Form is fixed by
Fate in my Mind, and is never to be removed. I see those lovely piercing Eyes
continually, I see each Moment those ravishing Lips, which I have gazed on
still with Desire, and still have touched with Transport; and at which I have
so often flown with all the Fury of the most violent Love. Jesus! From whence,
and whither am I fallen? From the Hopes of blissful Ecstasies to black Despair!
From the Expectation of immortal Transports, which none but your dear Self can
give me, and which none but he who loves like me, could ever so much as think
of, to a Complication of cruel Passions, and the most dreadful Condition of
Human Life. My Fault, indeed, has been very great, and cries aloud for the
severest Vengeance. See it inflicted on me: See me despair and die for that
Fault. But let me not die Unpardoned, Madam; I die for you, but die in the most
cruel and dreadful manner. The Wretch that lies broken on the Wheel alive,
feels not a quarter of what I endure. Yet boundless Love has been all my Crime;
unjust, ungrateful, barbarous. Return of it! Suffer me to take my eternal Leave
of you; when I have done that, how easy will it be to bid all the rest of the
World Adieu.

Dear Madam,
THIS is the third Letter that I have sent you since I came hither: Those which
went before it were all the Overflowings of a Heart more full of Passion than
ever was Man's before. It is impossible for me to be distant from you, but I
must send to you by every occasion. And yet you can resolve to take no Notice
of all my Tenderness: Yes, my dearest, inhumane Creature, you can. You have
been sick, nay dangerously sick, and have never sent to me. Have I left all the
World for you, and could you resolve to leave the World without me; Nay,
without so much as giving me the least Notice of it? Christ! Could you resolve
to leave me to Despair and to endless Misery, without expressing the least
Concern for me! And can I persist in loving one so ungrateful! Is there such
another ungrateful Creature alive! No, there lives not so ungrateful a
Creature, but there lives not one so Charming.

Dear Madam,
CAN you be angry still with your poor Penitent? You cannot have the ill
Nature, sure? Yes, but you can, you say since he could have the Presumption to
be angry with you. But, my Dearest, there is this Difference betwixt your Anger
and mine; Mine was cau'd by the Cruelty of your supposed Infidelity; and yours
by the Kindness of your Lover's Resentment: for if I had not been fond of thee
to the last degree, I had not been so incensed against you. Yet even when I was
most so, I could sooner have plucked out an Eye, than have resolved to have
parted with thee: Nay, I could sooner have torn out both Eyes, if the loss of
both would not have for ever deprived me of the dear, the ravishing sight of
thee. But if you still think that my Anger had Guilt in it, and that I ought to
suffer for it, the means to punish me with utmost Severity, and to make me my
own Tormenter, is to tell me, you love me: Then I shall curse my self and my
Rage, and feel all the Plague of Remorse for having offended thee: I shall look
upon my self as the basest, the most ungrateful of Men for abusing thy
Goodness, and thy charming Tenderness. I shall believe that I can never humble
my self enough, and never suffer enough to deserve Forgiveness. Thus, Madam,
you have your Revenge in your Power. It is a false Modesty which restrains you
from taking it: In order to it, you have nothing to do, but to prove your self
tender, and to show your self grateful. If you must be ashamed, blush at your
Cruelty; blush at your Inhumanity: But Gratitude is Reason, and Love is Nature;
never be ashamed of those. Do but consider, there was a time, when I was happy
in your Esteem; yes, there has been a time, in which I was thought not
altogether void of Reason by you: How then can you blush at the owning a
Passiion, which you command with an absolute Sway, at the very time that it
Tyrannizes over me?

Dear Madam,
MY Friend's Stratagem gave me an opportunity of seeing you, by finding Fault
with you. It must proceed from Design or Madness if I find fault with thee: Thy
lovely Face is the very same that set all my Blood in a flame; and I am sure my
Heart can never be altered. How it trembled in my Breast when I saw you last,
and by its trouble confessed its Conqueror! How it has burnt ever since with
redoubled Fury! When I shall be free from this Flame, Heaven only knows, for
the Hour of my Death Heaven only knows: It Is a Flame that has incorporated with
that of my Life, and both will go out together. In vain I invoke my Reason to
resist my Senses: My Reason finds you more lovely than my Eyes did before;
shows me all the Graces of thy beauteous Mind, and grows pleased and prides
itself in its own Captivity. You accuse me, they say, of some extraordinary
Crime: A Crime against whom? Against you whom I love! Against you, for whom I
could die! Strange Accusation! Yet at the same time you refuse to see me, you
refuse to receive my Letters: And must I be condemned Unheard? Robbers are
allowed to speak before they are sentenced; Murderers have the Privilege to
plead for their Lives: And shall the tenderest Love be denied the Privilege
which is granted to the blackest Malice? I have been guilty of nothing but too
much Love, if too much Love be a Fault. Why have you given Credit to my
Enemies, before you have heard me? I may indeed be convinced of an Error, but I
can never be convicted of a Crime against you. The Man must be mad, nay,
desperately mad, who can design to injure himself; and thou art, by much, the
better, the dearer Part of me. Give me leave to see you once more before I
depart: Let me see once more that Face which has undone me, yet charms me even
in Ruin: O Face industriously contrived by Heaven,
To fix my Eyes and captivate my Soul!
Nay, I will see you, if it be but to upbraid you with your barbarous Wish: If
at the time that you made it, you had struck a Dagger in my Heart, you had
given it a gentler Wound.

The only Wish that I have to make, is to be happy in thee; if that succeeds
not, I have another, and that is, to lie at rest in my Grave.

The End of the Love Letters.
To Walter Moyle, Esquire at Bake, in Cornwall.
Dear Sir,
YOUR long Silence made me conjecture, that you are so intent upon being
Burgess of Bodmyn, that you had forgot the Citizens of Covent Garden: At last I
received an agreeable Letter from you. You had best have a care of talking in
Cornwall, at the rate that you write to your Friends. If you do, the Cornish Men
may not think you rightly Qualified to Represent them. When you left the Town,
you talked of a Critical Correspondence between us: But Idleness on your side,
and ill Humor on mine, have baulked a very hopeful Design. But an Accident has
lately happened, which obliges me to provoke you: For there has just been a
Play acted, called, The Mockmarriage, the Author of which, whose Name I have
forgot, asserts, dogmatically, in his Preface, That he who writes by Rule shall
only have his Labor for his Pains. I know not what this Author can mean by
this: For, whom does he pretend to persuade by this fine Assertion? Not Mr.
Moyle, and me at least. We know indeed very well, that a Man may write
regularly, and yet fail of Pleasing; and that a Poet may please in a Play that
is not regular. But this is eternally true, That he who writes regularly
ceteris Paribus, must always please more, than he who transgresses the Rules.
Nothing can please in a Play but Nature; no, not in a Play which is written
against the Rules: and the more there is of Nature in any Play, the more that
Play must Delight. Now the Rules are nothing but an Observation of Nature: For
Nature is Rule and Order itself. There is not one of the Rules, but what might
be used to evince this. But I shall be contented with showing some Instances of
it, even in the Mechanical Rules of the Unities: And first for that of place;
It is certain that it is in Nature impossible, for a Man who is in the Square
in Covent Garden, to see the things, that at the same time, are transacted at
Westminster. And then for that of Time, a reasonable Man may delude himself so
far, as to fancy that he sits for the space of twelve Hours, without removing,
eating or sleeping; but he must be a Devil that can fancy he does it for a
Week. What I have said may evince a Necessity of observing the Unities of Time
and of Place, if a Poet would thoroughly write up to Nature. And then the Unity
of Action follows on course: For, that two Actions that are entire, and
independent, should happen in the same short space of time, in the same little
compass of place, begin together, go on together, and end together, without
obstructing or confounding one another; this indeed may be done upon the Stage,
but in Nature it is highly improbable. Well then, since the Rules are nothing
but Nature it self, and nothing but Nature can please, and since the more that
any Play has of Nature, the more that Play must Delight, it follows that a Play
which is regularly written, ceteris Paribus, must please more than a Play which
is written against the Rules, which is a Demonstration. Rule may be said to be
a Play; what Symmetry of Parts is known to be to a Face? The Features may be
regular, and yet a great or a delicate Air may be wanting: And there may be a
commanding or engaging Air, in a Face whose Features are not regular. But this
all the World must allow of, that there can never be seen any Sovereign Beauty,
where Air and Regularity of Features are not united. Thus is Rea-son against
this Author; but the mischief is, that Experience is against him too: For all
your Dramatick Poets must confess, that the Plays which they have writ with
most Regularity, have been they which have pleased most. I must trouble you
with another Dramatical Criticism, but not till the next Opportunity.

I am yours, etc.

Mr. -- to Mr. Congreve.
Dear Sir,
I Came home from the Land's End Yesterday, where I found three Letters from
Mr. Dennis, and one from you, with a humerous Description of John Abassus, A
Country Poet.
since the dubbing of Don Quixote, and the Coronation of Petrarch in the
Capitol, there has not been so great a Solemnity as the Consecration of John
Abassus. In all the Pagan Ritual, I never met with the Form of Poetical Orders;
but I believe the Ceremony of Consecrating a Man to Apollo, is the same with
Devoting a Man to the Dii Manes, for both are Martyrs to Fame. I believe not a
Man of the Grave Club durst assist at this ridiculous Scene, for fear of
laughing outright. W. was in his Kingdom, and for my part I would have rather
sat there than in the House of Commons. Would to God I could laugh with you for
one Hour or two at all the ridiculous things that have happened at Will's
Coffee-house since I left it, it is the merriest Place in the World: Like
Africa, every Day it produces a Monster; and they are got there just as Pliny
says they are in Africa, Beasts of different kinds come to drink, mingle with
one another and beget Monsters. Present my humble Duty to my new Lord, and tell
him, that I am preparing an Address to Congratulate his Accession to the Throne
of the Rabble. Tell the Lady, who was the Author of the Hue and Cry after me,
she might have sent out a hundred Hues and Cries before she would have found a
Poet. I took an effectual Course not to be apprehended for a Poet, for I went
down clad like a Soldier, with a new Suit of Clothes on, and, I think there
could not have been a better Disguise for a Poet, unless I had stolen Dr. B --
's Coat. Mr. Dennis sent me down P -- M -- 's Parodie. I can say very little of
the Poem; but as for the Dialogue, I think 'twas the first time that M --
suffered any body to talk with him, though indeed here he interrupts Mr.
Boileau in the midst of the first word. My humble Service to Mr. Wycherley. I
desire you would write me some News of the Stage, and what Progress you have
made in your Tragedy.

I am your affectionate Friend and Servant.

Mr. Congreve to Mr. --
Dear Sir,
I Cannot but think that a Letter from me in London, to you in C --,is like some
ancient Correspondence between an Inhabitant of Rome and a Cimmerian: May be my
way of Writing may not be so modestly compared with Roman Epistles; but the
Resemblance of the Place will justify the other part of the Parallel: The
subterraneous Habitations of the Miners, and the Proximity of the Bajae help a
little; and while you are at B -- let B -- be Cumae, and do you supply the
Place of Sybilla. You may look on this as Railery, but I can assure you,
nothing less than Oracles are expected from you, in the next Parliament, if you
succeed in your Election, as we are pretty well assured you will. You wish your
self with us at Will's Coffee-house; all here wish for you, from the President
of the Grave Club, to the most puny Member of the Rabble; they who can think,
think of you, and the rest talk of you. There is no such Monster in this
Africa, that is not sensible of your Absence; even the worst natured People,
and those of least Wit lament it; I mean, half Critics and Quiblers. To tell
you all that want you, I should name all the Creatures of Coventgarden, which
like those of Eden-garden would want some Adam to be a Godfather and give them
Names. I cannot tell whether I may justly compare our Coventgarden, to that of
Eden, or no; for though I believe we may have Variety of strange Animals equal to
Paradise, yet I fear we have not amongst us the Tree of Knowledge. It had been
much to the Disadvantage of Pliny, had the Coffee-house been in his Days; for
sure he would have described some who frequent it; which would have given him
the Reputation of a more fabulous Writer then he has now. But being in our Age
it does him a Service, for we who know it, can give Faith to all his Monsters.
You who took care to go down into the Country unlike a Poet, I hope will take
care not to come up again like a Politician; for then, you will add a new
Monster to the Coffee-house, that was never seen there before. So you may come
back again, in your Soldier's Coat, for in that you will no more be suspected
for a Politician, than a Poet. Pray come upon any Terms, for you are wished for
by every body, but most wanted by your

Affectionate Friend and Servant, W. CONGREVE.

To Mr. Congreve, at Tunbridge.
Dear Sir,
MY Business and my Thanks for your Kindness, you will find in the Enclosed,
which I had sent by the last Post, had not an accident hindered it. All the
Return that I can make you at present is, to acquaint you with such News as we
have. Our Friend Mr. -- went last Friday to the Bath: He promised to write to
me from that place, but it would be unreasonable indeed to expect it. For W --
takes up his Afternoons, and his Mornings I suppose, are spent in Contemplation
at the Cross Bath. Most of your Friends of the Coffee-house are disper'd: Some
are retreated into the Country in hopes of some Favors, which they expect from
the Muses; two or three of them are retired in Town to ruminate on some
Favors, which they have received from their Mistresses.

So that the Coffee-house is like to grow into Reputation again. For if any one
gives it the scandalous Denomination of the Wits Coffee-house, he must call it
so by Antiphrasis, because there comes no Wit there. Here are two or three
indeed, who set up for Wits at home, and endeavor to pass for Wise at the
Coffee-house: for they hold their Tongues there. Indeed the Coffee-house is
generally the Exchange for Wit, where the Merchants meet without bringing the
Commodity with them, which they leave at home in their Warehouses, alias, their
Closets, while they go abroad to take a prudent care for the vending it. But
you are of the Number of those happy Few, who so abound in Heriditary
Possessions, and in rich Returns from Greece and from Italy, that you always
carry some of it about you to be liberal to your Friends of that which you sell
to Strangers. Mr. -- bables eternally according to his old rate, and as
extravagantly as if he talked to himself; which he certainly does, if no body
minds him any more than I do: He has been just now enquiring, what sort of
Distemper the Spleen is; an infallible sign that he is the only Man in
Covent Garden, who does not know he is an Ass. To make him sensible what the
Spleen is, I could find in my Heart to show him himself, and give it him. If
any thing restrains me from being revenged of his Impertinence this way, it is
the Consideration that it will make him wiser: This Coxcomb naturally puts me
in mind of the Stage, where they have lately acted some new Plays; but had
there been more of them, I would not scruple to affirm, that the Stage is at
present a Desert and a barren Place, as some part of Africa is said to be,
though it abounds in Monsters. And yet those prodigious Things have met with
Success: for a Fool is naturally fond of a Monster, because he is incapable of
knowing a Man. While you drink Steel for your Spleen at Tunbridge, I partake of
the Benefit of the Course; for the Gayety of your Letters relieves me
considerably: Then what must your Conversation do? Come up and make the
Experiment; and impart that Vigor to me which Tunbridge has restored to you.

I am your most humble Servant, JOHN DENNIS.

Mr. -- to Mr. Dennis.
NAmur taken, and a Letter from Mr. Dennis, were two of the most agreeable
Surprises I ever met with. And nothing but the Reflection, how dear the
Conquest will cost us, I mean, the innumerable ill Poems it will produce, could
allay the Pleasure. A -- has watched for a Victory a long time, and will not
miss this Opportunity to mortify the Day of Thanksgiving, and scribble away
the Public Joy. The Devil take Will's Coffee-house: I could be the easiest Man
in the World under my Calamity, if it were not for some of the Company there;
who are now the greatest Enemies I have in the World, worse than the Company
from which I am just now stolen to write this Letter. Among the rest is a
Country Gentleman who dictates Politics abundantly, for with us, as well as at
old Rome, we take Dictators from the Plow, but ours are such as ought never to
remove their Hands from it.

I am yours, etc.

Mr. -- to Mr. Dennis.
WHile you are happy in the Politics of the Grave Club, and the Two
Coventgarden Clubs.
Puns of the Rabble, you have no regard to the forlorn State of your poor
Friend. Before I left London, I fained an hundred agreeable melancholy
Pleasures, with which I might fool away a Retirement; but now I detest being
alone, and question whether Mankind or Solitude be the fitter Subject for a
Satyr. Of this, I am sure, that God Almighty, rather than be alone, created the
--; and Man, rather than be alone, chose a Wife. Whatever advantage I have lost
by my Country Life, I believe, I have gained the Gift of Prophecy in the
Wilderness, for I foretold the Poem with which A -- has visited us.

I am yours, etc.

Mr. -- to Mr. Dennis.
TO your Business hereafter, but first, lets have a Dance, as Mr. Bays says.
When I came home from the West, where I had passed a Fortnight, I found your
three Letters full of Wit and Humor. I was charmed with the Scandal you writ
in the first, and enclosed in the last, viz. A.'s Poem. I found the Preamble
before the Poem to be like a Suterkin before a Dutch Child. I read it over in
great haste, in hopes to be pleased at last with the End of it, but this is the
first time I ever disliked his Conclusion. For he threatens strange things. I
hope, it is only in terrorem, if not, I hope God in his Goodness will send us a
Peace, and prevent his Songs of Triumph. Certainly, since the Devil was Dumb
there never was such a Poet.

FINIS.
ERRATA in Pliny's Letters.
PAge 13. instead of eminent, r. imminent. p. 132. l. 7. instead of make for
Pomponianum, etc. r. go to his Friend Pomponianus, who was at Stabiae, on the
other side of the Bay. p. 132. 1. 10. instead of he, r. Pomponianus had. Ibid,
instead of though the Wind, l. 12. r. had not the. Ibid, l. 13. instead of But as
it then blew directly for 'em, my Uncle etc. r. But the same Wind brought my
Uncle into the Harbor, who, p. 133. l. 6. instead of made the best of their
way to Pomponianuns, r. joined Pomponianus and his Company. These are the
grossest Faults, the rest, which are in no small Number, by reason of the Books
being Printed in the Gentleman's Absence, who was principally concerned, the
Reader is desired to Correct with his Pen.


