Golgotha; OR, A Looking-Glass for London, and the Suburbs thereof.

Showing the Causes, Nature and Efficacy of the present PLAGUES; and the most
hopeful Way for Healing.

With an humble Witness against the Cruel Advice and Practice of SHUTTING -- UP
unto Oppression. Both now and formerly experienced to increase, rather than
prevent the spreading thereof.

By J. V. grieved for the Poor, who perish daily hereby.

Prove. 22. 22, 23. Rob not the Poor, because he is poor, neither oppress the
Afflicted in the Gate. For the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the soul
of those that spoiled them.

Psalm. 41. 1, 3. Blessed is he that considers the Poor, the Lord will deliver
him in time of trouble.

The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; thou will make all
his bed in his Sickness.

London, Printed for the Author, Anno 1665.

GOLGOTHA: OR, A Looking-Glass for London, etc.
WHoever would administer to the Cure, must first consider the Cause and Nature
of any Visitation, and especially reverence any light given from God, who has
been pleased above all to appropriate this of the Pestilence as his imediate
Sword: and has acquainted the sons of men, as with the Causes, so with the
dreadful Efficacy and Nature thereof, Ezekiel. 6. 12. and chap. 33. 27. and 7. 12.
and 13. 15. and has very expressly prescribed the Cure in its season, ver. 16.
2 Chronicles. 7. 14. signifying also when it will be so contagious and incurable, as
the usual way prescribed shall not effect the recovery of either Son or
Daughter, but him or them that find mercy so timely in a right spirit to apply
the Preservative the Lord directs; Jer. 14, 12. Ezekiel. 14. 16, 21. and his
ways are everlasting, Hab. 3. 6. So that the present Age will experience the
advantage of timely applying, or disadvantage of neglecting the ancient Advice
of God, which having no Weekly Intelligencer, or skilful Physician, to set
forth, for lack of knowledge the people perish, and the Plague does double it
self in defiance of all the Directions the most skilful Doctors do
industriously divulge now daily in the world, and that Decree is verifying but
the more apparently, Isa. 2. 17. And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down,
and the haughtiness of men shall be laid low, and the Lord alone shall be
exalted in that day. And to that end therefore I shall endeavor to declare the
Causes of the present Plagues.

The CAUSES.
To speak clearly hereunto, we ought wisely to consider the Constitution of the
Country under Visitation, whether Profane or Professors, whether Egypt or
Israel, or a mingled people much of the same spirit and path, who may be both
then (how-ever they differ in Profession) partakers of the same Plagues, Jer.
9. 26. Rev. 18. 4. Or whether for different Causes. And first, for a people of
an Egyptian oppressing spirit, at enmity with God and Christ, and Saints and
Scripture, whereof this Nation under profession has dreadfully abounded,
exceeding Sodom in odious beastly enmity, and cruel Tumults and Decrees against
the Lord's Name, Ways and People, fulfilling in their Confederacy therein the
Prophecy, Psalm. 83. to the full; Know ye for a certain, as you have lived after
the manner of Egypt, so are you, and now will be more plagued after the manner
thereof, till you in very good earnest let Israel go, Exodus 11. 1 and 12. 33.
yea, till for your own safety you take the good counsel tendered unto you, Psalm.
2. 10, 11. For certain I am, though some of God's Israel may fall by this
Visitation, yet is the Lord hereby gone out further for Salvation with his
Anointed, and this Pestilence is the Harbinger of that Savior, and High-One,
who will surely save his poor People from your fury; who came out to scatter
them as with a Whirlwind, to fulfill the third of Habakkuk; and those of them
whose habitation in this tempest shall be the Most High, shall only with their
eyes behold and see the reward of the wicked, Psalm. 91. 8, 9. It therefore
concerns you his most proud vile Adversaries to see what this Angel did to
Egypt, Exodus 9. 13, 14, 15. compared with Psalm. 78. 49, 50, 51. to Zidon, Ezekiel.
28. 23, 24. to the Assyrian, 2 King. 19. 25. and will do to Gog, Ezekiel. 38. 22.
and the Assyrian-like Adversary in the latter-day, Micah 5. 15. O it concerns
you to bewail your oppression and hacred of the Upright, and to tremble timely
unto true subjection to Him, who is measuring the Earth and driving asunder the
Nations, and bringing the Tents of Cushan into affliction, before whom goes
this Pestilence, Hab. 3. 5, 6, 7. Your way is dark-and slippery, and the Angel
of the Lord does chase you, Psalm. 35. 6. You shall go into the clefts of the
Rocks, and into the tops of the ragged Rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the
glory of his Majesty, Isa. 2. 21. Rev. 6. 16. Yea, flee ye afar off, live ye
alene, there shall the Angel of the Almighty search you, Ezekiel. 33. 27. Amos 9.
2, 5. This is the Word of the Lord against you, save only such as shall be
reckoned Israel, by joining timely and truly to the Lord in the day of these
destructions, Isa. 19. 18.

And in Israel the diverse causes of this Visitation have been also signified
plainly from their God: As,

1. Neglect of his true Worship, Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, Exodus 5. 3. Lev.
26. 25. Deuteronomy. 28. 15, 21. and not being spiritual in them, 1 Cor. 11. 29, 30.

2. False-Worship, or bringing into his Worship the detestible things of men's
devising or invention, to the changing his Ordinances; Ezekiel. 5. 11, 12, 17.
Isa. 24. 5.

3. Unbelief, especially under signs of his Power and Presence; Numb. 14. 11,
12, 37.

4. Carnal security, and Confidence in our own righteousness; Amos 9. 10.

5. Unthankfulness to the Lord under his Salvations; Exodus 30. 12.

6. Pride, Sensuality and Violence, under Fullness and Prosperity; Ezekiel. 7. 10.
to 16. chap. 33. 26, 27. Numb. 11. 33. compared with Psalm. 78. 30, 31.

7. Unprofitableness and impenitency under other Judgments, Jer. 24. 8, 9, 10.
Prove. 29. 1.

8. Fleshly confidence in the Numbers of Israel, 2 Samuel 24. 15.

9. Wandering from the Lord after other lovers, provoking him with their
Abominations; 1 Cor. 10. 8. Jer. 14. 10, 11. Ezekiel. 6. 9, to 12.

10. Making false Refuges in times of Judgment, Jer. 42. 17, 22. compared with
Isa. 30. 1. and chapter 31. 2, 3. Jer. 44. 12, 13.

11. Discontent with the Lord's righteous Judgments on eminent Malefactors;
Numb. 16. 41, 47, 48. And,

12. Harkening to false Prophets, that abuse Promises to comfort the
Impenitent, in want of humble and mournful subjection to the Lord's fore
Judgments for sin, in bringing over them those that hate them, and attempts to
deliver themselves from the Sword of the Enemy by any fleshly strength, without
true repentance for the causes of their captivity; Jer. 27. 8 to 13. chap. 28.
15. and chap. 21. 4. to 9. compared with Isa. 22. 8 to 12.

Moreover, the Pestilence is a sign of, and appointed to prepare for the near
approaching Kingdom of Christ Monarchical in the Earth, Psalm. 89. 23. Hab. 3.
5. Mat. 24. 7.

Now in as much as all the aforesaid Causes for Sin have evidently abounded
even in the Israel of God in this Generation, we have great reason to expect
(however some may flatter themselves) that by this Angel Israel may lose
Children, and in their prayer, Hos. 14. 2. Take away all iniquity, and receive
us graciously; may find it necessary to be brought upon a bed of visitation
and dissolution too, to separate from them some beloved sin, which by no means
short would be purged away, Isa. 22. 14.

Hence God expostulateth with Israel, Amos 4. 10, 11. I have sent amongst you
the Pestilence, after the manner of Egypt, etc. yet have ye not returned unto
me. I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom, etc. yet have ye not
returned unto me. Therefore will I do thus unto thee, O Israel; and because I
will do thus unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. And indeed this is
not only consistent with, but contained in the New Covenant, so to correct; if
need be, to take away the heart of stone, and to make us partakers of his
Holiness. And when I seriously consider what he did to his dear Moses, Eli,
Job, David, Asaph, Hezekiah, Josiah, Asa and others, for less provocation, I
fear much what the Lord may do with me and others of his Children, after so
long Gentleness, Goodness and Forbearance, as necessary to vindicate his Name,
which we have polluted before the Heathen to their hurt: Yea, O the Pride,
Sensuality, Covetousness, Meanness, Indifferency, empty Formality and
Fruitlesness in the Profession of the Worship of God* yea, Apostasy, Perjury,
Treachery, Hypocrisy, and yet Impenitency under all, that might intercede
against Israel to the day! What reason is there upon all, to sigh therefore,
and smite upon the thigh before their eyes, as Ezekiel. 21. 6, 12. and to be apart
in the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, as Zech. 12. 10. Yea, every one
(though upon the highest mountains of Faith and Expectation) to be like Doves
in the Valleys, all of them mourning, every one for his iniquity, prescribed of
God for escape from the Pestilence and other calamities, Ezekiel. 7. 16. and 9. 4.
O therefore that poor sinners also with Israel may embrace the advice in Isa.
2. 10. to enter into the Rock, and there hide in the dust, for fear of the
Lord, and the glory of his Majesty. And, as in ver. 22. to cease more from man,
whose breath is in his nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of? Yet, as
it becomes all humbly to do what they can in a day of such Calamity, I shall
more particularly cast in my Mite toward the Cure of this Contagion, with my
dissent from, and witness against two things directed by the Colledge-Doctors.

The CURE.
In speaking to the Cure, I shall first show what is not likely to effect it;
2dly, What is; and lastly, giving those that have worthily gone before me,
their real due in the prescript of outward Medicines, I shall cast in my Mite
of that sort also, in addition only to any thing I have seen, without
detraction from any, or seeking gain, or the honor which is from men, I trust,
but that which is of God only.

It is not then first to look to the Physicians, how able or eminent soever,
wherein good Asa failed, 2 Chronicles. 16. 12. and has but too many followers.
Neither would this sort at any time (and much less now) be, as other diseases,
much abated by all the Doctors in the world, except to humbled souls, as
Hezekiah, to whom then poor Isaiah went, and may go again successfully with his
bunch of Figs, which gave a reverence to the use of outward means, but in the
second place. Though (till God weary them with his hand) it is feared men will
arrogate his Healings to their Art, when in tender mercy to his People, or for
further probation, it may in a moment cease, or be abated, as at this time in
Holland; not (I believe) as the effect of the Powder, nor Perfume, so much
boasted of in every News-book, I am persuaded to further provocation and
infection, which has doubled weekly since the published stories of the
infallibleness thereof, which consists (I fear) but in the filling the purse of
some of the Projectors. And as to the public Order of the Colledge-Doctors,
though I could wail over the view of those strong-scented Ingredients of Pride
and Presumption in the latter part of their Epistle, as tending to the
infection of themselves, beyond their skill to avoid or cure; and others that
have them in too high esteem, to fulfill the Word of the Lord, Isa. 2. 17, 18.
Yet I count my self, for my Country and Conscience Sake, obliged humbly to
witness against two principal parts of their Advice only: with reverence indeed
to most of their Prescripts, which yet exceed neither their forefathers, nor
add much, if any thing, to the common knowledge, capacity and experience of an
ordinary man, in this day of removing the face of the covering that has been
over the face of all Nations.

But first, their Advice of observing Church-Orders for Prayer, as in former
times, I desire may be carefully mingled with the Counter-Poisons of the
Scripture-discoveries already laid down concerning False-worship and neglect of
true, as principal causes of Contagion, so as the former times they speak of
may be explained to be such, as Phineas, Moses, and Samuel, Noah, Daniel and
Job, David, Jehoshaphat, Isaiah, Hezekiah, Ezekiel, Jeremiah, etc. or men of
like spirit, influenced in Solemn Intercession acceptably to turn away Wrath
from a provoking Generation; and no times wherein the wonderful and horrible
thing is committed in the Land, which is on record to be to Visitation and
Ruin, Jer. 5. 29, 30, 31. else their Direction is hereby dissented from.

But secondly; I humbly dissent also from their Direction for shutting-up unto
such oppression and hazard of both sick and well, shut up, and others, as is
unavoidable ruin to many after the manner thereof, and so an high provocation
to him, who has torn, and who only can heal; who has smitten, and can bind
up, Hos. 6. 1. and who visits with Pestilence (as I have showed) for
violence, and (I fear) increases it for such continuance thereof.

Now because some carelessly dream of Scripture-colour in the case, I shall show
you first how cruelly remote it is from that case.

2dly. How much it errs from that standing Rule amongst men, Mat. 7. 12.
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye
even so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets.

3dly. What ill effects it naturally has toward the increase of Plagues.

4thly. Appeal to the experience of all, reflecting upon former and present
times, both in this and other Neighbor-nations.

First then, the Scripture-case is only in the Plague of Leprosy, when the
party only apparently visited was to be viewed by the High Priest, or his
sons; and being found by him, or them, to be so, was in special oversight to
be separated from the rest of Israel, and shut-up but for seven days, to be
viewed then again by the High Priest, etc. and if found whole, to be cleansed
and restored presently, or otherwise so sequestered for seven days more, until
such recovery, Levit. 13, at large, but not to be shut up after. And Hezekiah
also being cured of his sore, on the third day was to appear in the House of
the Lord, 2 King. 20. 5, 8. Nor is the Scripture color for shutting-up one
well-person, not the sick after such recovery, upon such weekly view of him, if
the case in hand held parallel: but well says the Scripture, The world by
wisdom know not God, 1 Cor. 1. 21. and this their way of being wiser than God,
is as the tender mercies of the wicked, Prove. 12. 10.

2dly. It so errs also from that Rule, Mat. 7. 12. that I dare say the Doctors,
and those who stand upon their Sword to execute this violent Advice upon the
Poor so generally, would not be willing to be so done unto, or have their Wives
and Children so dealt with in their calamity: And he that rolleth a stone so
against the very nature of humanity, may fear it will return again upon him,
Prove. 26. 27. Let me suppose thex case therefore to their consciences.

Whether, if four or five, or more, of the skilfullest and hardiest of
themselves, who have given this Advice as Orthodox, against so many thousand
poor Innocents, were to be coobed-up in one of the poor houses, whereout but
one dyed, and have with them an old woman, or some poor ignorant creature (a
stranger to them, as is usual) for their Nurse, and a sturdy fellow without
with an Halberd (or some stricter Watch, as they have advised for others) to
have each of them no more than the Parish allows; and the Searchers,
Chyrurgions, etc. they have allowed to visit others, to visit them: if in a
month or forty days after the last man of them dies, at such a season, so
used, they do not think in their own consciences, with all their skill, their
carcasses would all or most of them be carried away in the Night-Cart; which
now (for fear thereof) are, many of them, got into their Country-Gardens, after
their Epistolary Vapor and Cruel Direction aforesaid? How then may poor. Women
with child, Widows, helpless, friendless, Fatherless and Sucklings, exposed
(without such help, as many have been) and half dead before, it may be by the
sudden death of their first visited nearest relation, escape the ruin of such
further violence upon them?

Again, I query; If one in the Parish-Meeting-place fall suddenly sick, or dye,
after sitting there in the crowd two or three hours amongst the multitude; were
it not as equal the doors should be shut upon the Assembly, or they in their
several houses shut-up, as that some Families (who were further off from the
single sick person that dyed therein) should be presently so violently used and
exposed? O surely, if we would not be so done unto, these ways then are
unequal, and this violent course not like to abate our Plagues, but is rather a
sign and earnest of further Wrath: And God by leaving the Nation to be in love
with such unnatural Advice) is, it is to be feared, paving a way for his Anger,
in that more general shutting-up, as a just Judgment upon many accounts,
prophesied of such a provoking City, Isa. 24. 10, 11, 12. The City of confusion
is broken down, every house is shut-up, etc.

3dly. It Is full of evil effects, to the increase of Plagues, and that not only
as it provokes God as aforesaid, but naturally distracts men, filling them with
horror of heart, both those that are shut-up, and those that live daily in the
fear thereof; Most that are shut-up being surprised, unprovided, unsettled in
heart and house, needing then most the use of a sure friend, made for the day
of adversity. Pro. 17. 17. An Interpreter, as Elihu speaks, Job 33. 23. one of
a thousand, etc. and are under soul-sinkings, and none to succor them; their
hearts dye within them, as Nabals, upon this bad news; not a friend to come
nigh them in their many, many, heart and house cares and perplexities,
compelled (though well) to lie by, or upon the Deathbed (perhaps) of their
dear relation, dragged away before their eyes, afrighted children howling by
their side, fitted by fainting affliction to receive the impression of a
thousand fearful thoughts of the long night they have to reckon before release,
after the last of the Family, so dismally exposed, shall sink by degrees, one
after another, in the den of this dismal likeness to Hell, contrived by the
Advice of the English-Colledge of Doctors: no drop of water (perhaps) but what
comes at the leisure of a drunken or careless Halbert-bearer at the door: no
seasonable administration being at a certainty then for their support, and
innumerable evils of this sort incident hereunto: whereof if the ear of any
concerned were opened to the cry of the Poor herein, I could (upon knowledge)
instance and give plentiful proof of one months misery and ruin already hereby
upon many, enough to make the ears of every one that hears, tingle; and lay
the blood of Innocents at the door of the Devisers and Prosecutors of this
Barbarism; who also hereby bring no small consternation hourly upon the minds
of those who are at liberty thoughtful (to terror) whose turn may be next to
fall out of the oversight of their nearest Friends, into the hands of the
Halberd, Searchers and Chyrurgion, all strangers to them, so as it may be
plague enough to be haunted with, under such distraction and affliction. Hence
(I say) are a thousand thoughts created, to such, swoondings, faintings, fears,
(fitting for infection naturally) as have occasioned some already to lose their
precious lives, and many have hardly escaped the effect thereof; who otherwise
would not so dread the Visitation, that yet sink down and shiver now through
fear hereof, but upon the sudden sight of a House shut-up, and clusters of
little Children and tender ones in their windows, who might more rationally
continue well by separation as they are able, or might be advised by a more
charitable care of them, than by such miserable, noisome, melancholy, close
imprisonment, which exposes the Well (shut-up) daily to destruction, and also
does really but prepare a more unquenchable stench, and fest to wreak out of
the windows (whilst so shut up) and disperse it self into the City by a more
violent concourse to them at the window (though less to their relief) and by
opening the doors (upon such choaking-up) for the Searchers and Bearers of the
Dead (so daily more prepared for them) and other allowed Visitors, whose walks
are far more perilous than twenty times so many left open to keep themselves
clean and at distance from the Sick and Dead, as else they would, to prevent
their own infection.

Yea, after the House is allowed to be open, and all that are left alive are
well after this usage, both they and it are far more dangerous hereby to
others, than before, they were crowded up so long to such a nasty and infecting
station, being the natural and artificial way also hermetically to effect the
most forcible and noisome putrifactions, when the Embrio shall be unsealed;
common experience having proved it naturally less perilous to go to twenty
visited, kept sweet and clean, than to two so noisomly exposed.

To which I may add, that many for fear thereof do hide their Sores, and (after
a Sweat or two) their Sickness also, and go daily about their business so long
as they can stand, mingled to much more danger every way: Nor dare any do the
office of a Nurse or Friend to those shut-up (however nenecessary for the
present distress) till help can be procured (whereby some have been neglected)
because it is so pen^l, that they must be enclosed then themselves, how
inconsistent soever to their charge and business, by which there comes no small
inconveniency to the Sick, who are forced to take any ignorant Nurse (or worse)
in haste, to their great hazard.

But lastly, I appeal to the experience of this and other parts; how apparently
did the hand of the Lord rest (as the ancient Citizens familiarly do observe)
in the former great Plagues upon this City, when the people were wearied out of
this oppression, under cause enough to mourn unto this day, over the cruelty
every mercinary had opportunity to commit (as now) under color hereof.

Ireland also, about the year 1650, and 1651. (under a far greater Contagion)
was made ashamed hereof, and forced to desist; and what should now encourage
it, under a weekly doubling the destroyed, under (if not directly by) it, since
the Doctors gave this Advice?

And some affirm the Hollanders, from whence the Plague is so soon (it is said)
departed, never practiced it, but ordered the Inhabitants of houses visited, to
walk and air themselves, with some mark of distinction, at times appointed: and
yet I will show you a more excellent way for the quick and through Cure thereof,
now positively, if it be not for too long oppression, transgression and
impenitency irrecoverable, as in Jer. 14. 12. Ezekiel. 14. 16, 21. which God
forbid.

Now the Scripture-means for effectual healing, whilst it is called to day, are
set down as follows.
First, For the Lord's faithful Remnant, grieved, as Lot, for the filthy
conversation of the wicked, and for what has been committed in the midst of
Jerusalem, as Ezekiel. 9. to sanctify a solemn Assembly in the earnestness and
humility, Joel 2. and seriously therein (and in secret) bring forth these sores
before their High Priest in quick and speedy intercession and application of
the Blood of sprinkling, Numb. 16. 16, 46. Exodus 12. 7. 2 Samuel 24. 25.

Secondly, In true sense of, and humiliation for, the Plague of their own
hearts, timely to seek the face of God, and turn from the evil of their doings,
1 King. 8. 37. 2 Chronicles. 7. 13, 14. Ezekiel. 7. 16.

Thirdly, More truly to set their hearts on God, and make the Most High their
habitation, Psalm. 91. 9, 10, 14. and to try the truth hereof as follows.

1. By Faith in Christ Jesus, John 14. 6. to 11.

2. By their Sovereign Love, 1 John 4. 12, 16.

3. By their unfeigned obedience, 1 John 3. 24. but more particularly,

1. To make him more their place of residence and safety, as men do their
habitation, Psalm. 31. 2. and 71. 3.

2. Their place of retirement, and rest from disturbance, Psalm. 37.7. Prove. 24.
15. Isa. 32. 18. Psalm. 116. 7.

3. To have their conversation more in God, as Rev. 13. 6. Phil. 3. 20. that
men may know were to find Professors more at home.

4. To be feeding more in him, John 6. 56. and entertaining their acquaintance
there, Cant. 4. 11. Psalm. 145. 1, to 11. and 66. 16.

5. To be working in him, hiding themselves, and placing their safety and
treasure in him, more, John 3. 21. Psalm. 91. 1, 2. Col. 3. 3. Mat. 6. 19, 20,
21.

O this life of thus inhabiting God, Christ lived; and this manifests Saintship
and sincerity in all ages, Psalm. 90. 1. and 140. 13. And wanderings from hence,
have much exposed God's own People, Jer. 9. 6. and 50. 6, 7.

But this Life in God now, is, both an earnest of our habitation at hand, where
neither sin nor sickness shall a^oy, 1 Cor. 5. 1,6. and is such a present
refuge and safe shelter, as either this Pestilence shall not come at all, or
coming shall not be a Plague, but lose its hurtful nature, to such as do dwell
in, or now truly and timely shall make refuge unto, and reside in him, as their
habitation, Psalm. 91. 1, to 10. Deuteronomy. 33. 27. Psa. 23. 4, 5, 6. Job 5. 22, 23.
Romans 8. 38. 1 Cor. 3. 21.

On then that poor souls, who have no refuge but Country-Houses now, when they
will meet with sorrow enough, as Amos 9. 1. would in the encouragement of the
New Covenant, by the New and Living Way, hasten for refuge unto this safe
Habitation, Heb. 6. 18. Yea, O that that may be now fulfilled, which is written
Psa. 22. 27, 28, 29, 30. All the ends of the world shall remember and turn to
the Lord, and all the kindreds of the Nations shall worship before thee; for
the Kingdom is the Lords, and he is the Governor among the Nations etc. Run ye
then out of the World whose works will be burnt up, ye Righteous, into your
Strong Tower! Turn ye to the Strong Hold, ye wandering Children, hasten into
your Habitation, Prove. 18. 10. And ye Visited ones of God, happy may ye be by
this Visitation, O that you may experience, through Grace, as Hezekiah, that
herein is the life of your Spirit, Isa. 38. 16. and be able, as Job 10. 12. to
say with thankfulness, Thou have vouchsafed me life and favor, and thy
Visitations have preserved my Spirit; and as Psa. 119. 67, 71. experience the
good hereof, Behold, happy is the man who to this end is corrected of the Lord:
for he makes sore, and binds up; he wounds, and his hands make whole, Job
5. 18. Lo, all these things works God oftentimes with man, to hide Pride
from man, to bring back his soul from the Pit, to be enlightened with the light
of the Living, Job 33. 17, 29, 30. Indeed I could dwell on this direction for
our Cure, for the sake of my own soul, and for the sakes of my poor
Countrymen, of every sort, beyond what this Paper may contain, and bring you a
most rare Experiment of one that made Jerusalem run with blood, and was almost
as profound to slaughter, as poor M. G. B. who yet found safety in refuge
hither in his distress; though I confess under less light and warnings by Signs
and Wonders, yet also, being under less stumblings by Professors, I retain my
hope that God may yet show Mercy, even to such as him, making speedy refuge
hither: And I could give blessed presidents also to encourage poor wandering
Children, who have played the Harlot after many Lovers, to return now quickly
to their Habitation, as Jer. 3. 1. But thou have played the Harlot with many
Lovers, yet return unto me says the Lord* Only acknowledge thine iniquity,
etc. ver. 13. toward which I will (...) give you a fourth Scripture-direction
for Cure.

Fourthly then, That the Lords People also humbly accept the punishment of
their iniquity, considering Ezekiel. 14. 23. and declare also all their
Abominations, even before the Heathen, under the hand of the Almighty, Lev. 26.
40, 41. Ezekiel. 12, 16.

And lastly, To wait in hope on God for special execution of Judgment in
general defilement and defection, Number. 25. 8. compared with Psalm. 106. 30. and
Jer. 5. 1. Amos 5. 15. And in all, with bowels of compassion to poor Infants
that know not their right hand from their left, at midnight to awake in the
sense of their calamity, as Lam. 2. 19. Arise, cry out in the night: in the
beginning of the watches pour out thine heart like water before the Lord; lift
up thine hands toward him, for the life of thy young children, that faint for
hunger in the top of every Street. For with the Merciful, thou will show thy
self merciful, etc. Psa. 18. 25. And to you that fear his Name, shall the Sun
of Righteousness arise with healing in his wings, Mal. 4. 2. EVEN SO, COME,
LORD JESUS, COME QUICKLY, Amen.

A little Mite added, to the multitude of outward means, published by many
others, toward Cure and Prevention of the present PLAGUE.
NOw seeing so grent a plenty of outward means already prescribed by the
College in general, and some of their number, and others in particular,
amongst whom one Mr. Dixon has in an ingenious way performed the office of a
real Neighbor, according to Luke 10. 36. I shall but humbly cast in a mite
only of such things as I have observed to be very effectual in the like, and
this Contagion, which I have not yet seen published; And first for the
plenteous use of Spirit of Sulphur, which I advise all to have by them, it
being not above three shillings the ounce, and is very specific to remove
Malignity, to open great Obstruction, quench Cholor, strengthen the Spirits,
and further Sweat, and the effect of other Antidotes, if plenteously and
rightly used.

I advise then, that the general Posset-drinks both for Sweat, and in stead of
Julips, may be made hereof thus; Take White Wind, a pint, and Spirit of
Sulphur, forty drops; mix them, set on three pints of Milk, and when it boyles
up, pour in the White Wind and Spirit, it will make your posset, wherein you
may boil the ingredients for Sweat, directed by the Doctors, or Mr. Dixon, etc.
Butter-bu^-root especially, and cast in half a dram of whole Cochinel; strain
it and give, to cause Sweat plentifully, after a dose of Metridate, or
Venice-Treacle, or thirty drops of Spirit of Hartshorn in the first draught
thereof.

Also for Julip, either the plain Posset before mentioned (before the other
ingredients be in it) or without the Wine, take sixty drops of Spirit of
Sulphur; with it only you may turn three pints of Milk to a clear Whey,
stirring it gently; sweeten it with syrup of Citron, or Oranges, or
Wood Sorrel, or a Syrup made of Sage-flowers, or Mary-gold, made by a strong
infusion, in their own distilled Waters, or in Borrage, or Bawme-waters, the
Marigolds for the Syrrup being first bruised, with which this Whey may be
sweetened: 'Twill be very pleasant and profitable drink for refreshment.

Salt of Sage especially, or of Hartshorn, or Ivory, twenty grains of either
of them in Broth, expel malignity wonderfully: and by such helps added to the
usual Antidotes with proper Cordials and outward applications, God has
comforted me with the Lives of many, in appearance past hope; and I dare do no
less now, than call upon the skilful, as the Disease is extraordinary, timely
to reinforce the ordinary means of their practice to their uttermost capacity,
to reach the head of the Malignity within the bound of discretion (though out
of Old form) the neglect whereof will be as hazardous as the handsing these
edge-tools on the other hand ignorantly.

Jellyes of Hartshorn and Ivory made in White Wind and Borrage, or
Pippin-water, or the like, are needful often; and for Broths, Capon or Cock,
rather than Chicken in this case, and with the help of Cordial and Aromatic
Herbs also, (with coolers) as Marigolds plenteously, Sweet Majorum, Bawm,
Time, Rosemary, with Woodsorrel; and in all Pimpernel, and the roots of
Butter-but, which an eminent Doctor who outlived his Brethren and the sore
long Plague in Ireland, thought he could not too often commend unto me upon his
observations. Sheepshead-broath above all was in esteem there, (perhaps as more
appropriate to the parts affected) though they had Chickens enough.

The Rich in every draught may drink twenty grains of Pearl, and ten grains of
Confectio de Hyacintho, from the first assault of their natural Spirits,
besides their Sweat-drivers.

And the Poor be refreshed as well with a draught of French-Wine and Water,
boiled with a blade of Mace, and an ounce of burnt Hartshorn, or clear
Sack-Posset-drink, made with a quarter of a pint of Sack, and ten drops of
Spirit of Sulphur to a pint of Milk.

In their Broth also of Sheepshead (if they take my advice) a spoonful of
Vinegar sometimes may do well, or four drops of the spirit of Sulphur, about
which the extravagant boast of Mindererus in his 18th Book de Pestilentia, may
(with my own long experience of it) excuse a sober commendation: Of which, and
Spirit of Vitriol, he thus speaks; There is no Putrefaction whose neck they
break not, no Infection which they do not overcome; no pravity of Humors but
they can conquer: Verily, to deal clearly, if I should be forbidden or hindered
from the use of Vitriolated Medicaments, I should never come to cure the
Plague, or always without my weapons.

I have also long used, and commend this Tincture, having found much good
thereby: Take Salts of Sage, Hartshorn, Ivory, Wormwood and Rosemary, equal
parts of each; put them into a Glass, pour into them Spirit of Sulphur six
ounces, Spirit of Vitriol two ounces; shake them often, and let them stand for
use close waxed. Of this or the like (as you can get them) in dangerous
obstructions, turn Posset-drinks as aforesaid, with eighty drops to two quarts
of Milk. Of late, since the Contagion, Ladded to my Glass as much Cochineel as
it will drink* and to the end that all my Spirits might not be sucked up, I
added two parts of sage water: a good spoonful hereof readily turns three pints
of Milk; but because the Curd steals away the best of the Cochinel, I order the
Posset to be made first of White Wind, and then mix the Tincture therewith. But
these are my private Improvements of proper materials, which I mention for an
example, to encourage a little beyond old Authors.

In Swellings and Carbuncles.
In ordinary Swellings the Doctors have directed many apt Poultices; I remember
their Emollient with Mallows, etc. I used to make at the learned direction of
the eldest of them, and other learned Physicians, twenty four years since, in
my Apprentiship, but always with Saffron, which perhaps is forgot: I am sure
it would help Suppuration, and ripen speedily, and cherish the Rising. But they
do well to refer much to Chyrurgions herein: And the Ancient had need to give
the younger Chyrurgions good Instructions in Cases that have not come in their
time. The Irish Chyrurgions (at last, in the failer of other Applications) used
to lance a multitude every morning with good success; which I advised lately to
some that do well, when certainly ripened; but lest they should be too quick or
slow, requires their skill to judge, and conscientious care, as they are tender
of Lives. But Mr. Dixons Soap-Poultice with Figgs, I hope may be effectual, and
save them much labor; and I take leave to advantage it with an offer of Salt
of Tobacco, where it may be had, in the room of Bay Salt, and abundance may be
made thereof quickly; by which, or only mixed with Emollients and Suppurators, I
have sucked out incredible quantities of the thinner matter presently, and the
very root, or last core, soon after, when it has lain very deep in the flesh:
But sometimes the Patient has not been able to sleep for the anguish, in which
case the Poultice, with Mallows, Lilly-roots, Figs, Lintseed, with Hog's Grease,
or Palm-Oyl; may be laid by night, and the other again in the morning: or white
Bread and Milk, with a Lilly-root and Oil only, with advantage, to give ease
for necessary rest.

The Patient must be sure to keep his Bed carefully till the Sore have run two
days at least. I have known strong-men cast away by rising against advice,
before the Swelling be perfect; and greatest care must be used in the coming
out of Sweat, with a comfortable draught before; and before the dressing the
Sore, especially if lanced, which may then best be tented with fine Sponge, to
keep on the running, pressed in Mellilot and Basillicon, but not made too big, to
put the Patient to pain when it swells; which a discreet Chyrurgion can
easily avoid: But in meddling with such Wound, for feat of accidents, he must
not be absent from the party too long, or give notice where he may certainly be
found to give timely ease.

If a Looseness happen in Spots, or whilst a Swelling is rising, or before it be
discharged, let the party presently take two drachms of Diascordium, or
Diascordium and Conserve of red Roses, of each one dram, and Mithridate half
a dram; to which also may be added true Bole, or Confect de Hyacintho, ten
grains: Also in his Drink boil good store of burnt Hartshorn, and some
Bolaustins.

And if the Swelling be too sluggish, or by any accident threaten to retire, it
might be worth the expert Chyrurgions consultation, whether the applying a
Cupping-Glass to it without scarification, might not advantage a Cataplasm or
Dyacilon cum Gummis thereon after, to certain effect.

The party visited, may do well to have the Epispastick-Plaister always by
him, to apply in diverse parts before the Swelling begin to arise; else its
rational not to come too nigh it (if there be need of them at all) left the
Blister detract from the Swelling, and cause it to fall. For example, If the
Swelling arise in the Arm-pit, to lay no blistering application above the
elbow; or if in the groin, not above the knees, etc.

And if any inconveniency be sencibly found in the use of the Sharp-drink, so
frequently as aforesaid, which will soon then, be felt, by the intolerable
sharpness of the Urine or Seige, you may a^ay, or wholly suspend a day or two,
and use Emulsions and softer Julips; sweetened also, with Conserve of Red-Roses,
strained; in case of Cholerich looseness, applying still, suitable
Sweat-drivers, alone or mixed, at discretion. To which end, I would advise all
to have by them at the rate of every six in a Family, these quantities at least
of these common things following, viz. Mithredate and London-Treacle, of each
four ounces; Venice-Treacle and Diascordium, of each two ounces; Conserve of
red Roses and Wood Sorrel, of each four ounces; Spirit of Sulphur (set out of
the way of children and liquorish ignorant ones, that they taste not of it) one
ounce: the Plague-water of Matthias, or at least Treacle-water, half a pint;
Syrup of Woodsorrel, as much: the Plasters to raise Blisters at first
sickning, four ounces; and as much Mellilot to dress them.

By which plain and cheapest things, they may have something material at hand
for sick and well to preserve, till they can apply to their Physician, for want
of which it has gone ill with some shut-up suddenly.

But I desire none to follow any Direction of mine, that do not first consider
humbly the causes of Visitation, and above all, apply the Blood of Sprinkling,
and all other helps, as purchased thereby; and beware lest they render their
Cure impossible through impenitency: Likewise if they first endeavor to set
their house and heart in order, they might more sweetly rest, and make the Cure
the more easy in their sickness.

For Prevention.
A multitude of Antidotes are fairly set down by the Physicians, but in all
(though but that common one of Concerve of Wood Sorrel and Mithridate, or
Venice-treacle; yea in ordinary mornings draughts) I commend the use of true
Spirit of Sulphur. Yet because the Pill Rufus has so good report by the
College, and is especially again commended by Dr. Middlethwite's print for
weekly use, with reverence to them, who may (perhaps) use it themselves, and
for the weak stomach sake of such as cannot well digest dirt, and then wonder
what aile them; I desire it may be washed in Spirit of Wine, by the art of
their Apothecaries, who know there is cause through the shameful adulteration
of the chief materials thereof.

Take then Myrrh six ounces, Aloes half a pound, Mastick four ounces, Saffron
two ounces; infuse them apart in Boultheads in Spirit of Wine close stopped in
Balne^, till the Wine be tinctured of a deep color, then pour the
tinctured-Spirits from the ingredients, and add more Spirits to the feces until
it will yield no more tincture; then filture all the Tinctures through a brown
paper, put it then into a glass body with head and cooler on it, and so distill
off the Spirits gently; and when a Film comes on it, take off the head, and
stir it to a due consistence.

Now this Pill in Surfeits is excellent, and where there is needof Purging,
safe; in violent suspicion of Malignity, having in addition to the three
Ingreedients of Rufus, the cordial friend of Spirit of Wine, and Mastick, to
bridle it; and eminently in that, there is so little lucid Aloes of the four
sorts that is vended by the Druggist, and so much earth and dirt (to the
disadvantage of Pills) both in it and ordinary Myrrh, hereby separated from it,
the terrene and spurious corruption removed, being as much almost in bulk as
all was at first, though spiritless and good for nothing but its center the
Earth, which should not therefore incumber any corner of a wise-man's stomach.

Besides, this child is not only as nobly descended, but of age to speak for it
self sufficiently, and has done good service to many hundred surfeited, crude
and phlegmatic stomachs more certainly.

Two or three Pills at night going to bed, and a draught of warm Broth in the
morning before you go abroad, will make you in love therewith, and you will
find the difference, if you still should be minded to try both for experiment.

A Pill for a Child suspected to have the Worms, or to have been surfeited with
Fruit, or that has a crude phlegmatic stomach, is very excellent, in Syrup of
Violets at night going to bed; and what Pill can be better for old people on
young, who are weak, consumptive, sickly, and obstructed? but I publish it now
rather, for fear of grosser and dul^^^ Purging at such a time (of surfeiting,
etc.) by the very materials thereof, and hope young Physicians will beware of
any violent Purge in symptoms of Pestilence, by which some have been lately
purged away by them unawares, and others hardly recovered: but this can scarce
have an evil effect; for though it work not, it will leave nothing behind; yea,
they will find good, that may never feel any motion thereof.

For such as cannot take any thing more medicinal, a little Conserve of
Roman-Wormwood, or of Wood Sorrel alone, in a morning; or to have two ounces of
Juniper Berries, and a little Sage in each Kinderkin of Beer, is profitable.
The English in Ireland found much benefit by the moderate use of Angelica and
Wormwood-Waters after meals, and with a Toast in a spoonful in the morning:
those, and Juniper-water so taken, maybe profitable to cold stomachs,
especially in Winter; or Coffee, received with thanksgiving (as I fear it too
seldom is) is exceeding wholesome for moist constitutions, though the tippling,
tatling, waste-time, and wantonway therein, is a high provocation to wrath from
God, a stage of wrong to men, whereby also Professors shamefully neglect their
Families and their own poor Souls to mourn at the last, as Prove. 5. 11, 12, 13.

French-Wines, especially advantaged with Marigolds, Clove-gilliflowers,
Juniper Berries, Sage-flowers, Bawm, Rosemary-flowers, Spanish-Angelica-roots,
roots of Sinkfoyl, or of Burnet, Zedoary, Orris, tops of Wormwood, or the like
(as the party may affect, and is able to attain) may be very useful, with
moderation, at meals, etc. the cask or bottle being first smoaked well with
Sulphur, and Vinegers of Elder-flowers, Juniper Berries, Marigolds,
Clove-gilli-flowers, Sage-flowers, Cowslip, Taragon, Mint, Barberries, tender
shoots from the Orange-seeds, etc. to take in Broth; or with Meat, with their
substances, except the Juniper Berries, which being put into the Vinegar whole,
may be taken out, and new ones put in, to carry about and ear, as the Doctors
direct.

Issues for corpulent and rheumatick persons, men, women and children, were
never more necessary, and were used much to good advantage by the English in
the Irish Infection, for want of which many suffer more than an aching-head.

of SMELLS.
Of Smells those are certainly best, that being taken inwardly, are proper for
the heart and head (the chief Seat of the malignity) and suppress vapors too;
the chief are these: Chemical Oils of Rhue, Wormwood, Hartshorn, Amber, Thime
or Origany, Rosemary, Chamomile, Castor, Juniperberries, the stinking Oil of
Sulphur, Castor and Camphir, etc. and that of Tar is a toy now in fashion; but
sweet-scented Pomanders were exploded of the learned Physicians long since, as
a costly mischief, many ways inconvenient; Nor can any of the former in an
Ivory-box more mischieve the brain by heat, (as Pomander-men prate) yet the use
of any are best avoided, except for the present passando by Anoyance; because
by much use they open the pores, and fit the more (as they that come out of
clear air to stinking and thick) to receive in ill scents, longer than they
hold the other to their nose. And of all fumes (if I may not countenance the
idle use thereof) I might affirm and demonstrate Tobacco to be the best;
because it does not vanish away quickly, but possesses and keeps the place,
out of which it drives other anoyances: wherefore Gunpowder, more quickly
vanishing through its nitral part, after long use of it in Ireland, was left,
and Tobacco stood in lasting esteem; as also Brimstone by it self, which will
abide, whereas the Saltpeter-puff is gone in an instant, and makes the Air so
thin, as way is sooner made thereby also for Infection, if you stir abroad:
whereas experience shows that Tobacco, where it is smoaked much, will furnish a
Room for continuance, and they that take it will stink of it long.

I will now end this Subject, with a word of advice to remove a very noisome
cause of Infection, viz. the multitude of dead Dogs and Cats, that float on the
River, and lie on the Shore, as Wind and Tide serves, one of which is more
infectious than as hundred alive; which some already have sadly experienced,
and it is feared more will daily, unless timely removed.

FINIS.

