A Voice to the City, Or, A Loud CRY from HEAVEN TO LONDON Setting before her
Her SINS, Her SICKNESS, Her REMEDIES.

Mich. 6. 9. The Lords Voice cries to the City, hear the Rod, and who has
appointed it. LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXV.

A Voice to the CITY: OR, A loud Cry from Heaven to London, etc.
WHen iniquities are ripe, and a sinful people have filled up their measure,
the holy and righteous God, though he tarry long yet at last visits with severe
Judgments, and breaks out in fury against them, and says them (...); thus he
did by the old World* thus he did by Sodom and Gomorrah; thus he did by
Jerusalem it self, when they despised his M^ssengers, and slew his Prophets,
till wrath brake out upon them, and there was no remedy. Now that you may not
be cheated in the Causes of this so sad a Calamity, nor be abused by a
generation of hard hearted sinners, whose God is their belly, whose constant
practice is to blind the people, that their noon-spots may not be seen, and to
feed you with fallacies, assigning that for a Cause, which is not a Cause, as
in the Primitive times the Heathen Priests and their party would constantly
persuade the Emperors and Rulers, that all Defeats in War, Plagues and
Desolations, came upon them for suffering the Christians to live amongst them.
I say, that you may not be cheated in so weighty a concern, I shall present to
your view the express Causes assigned in the Scriptures, for which God did send
forth his destroying A^gel to depopulate and they wast Cities and Nations.

(...) memorable Plagues we read of, was ^ Phar^^h and his people, Exodus 12.
29, 30. At midnight the (...) all the firstborn of Egypt, and Pharaoh rose up
in the night, he and all his servants, and all the Egyptians, and there was a
great cry in Egypt* for there was not a house where there was not one dead,
that this was the Plague, you may see v. 13. and Psal^ ^. 50, 51. What was the
reason of this, what was Pharoahs provoking sin? It w^^ oppression of the
people of God, be would not give them liberty to serve God, he would not let
them go; they desired neither places of favor nor profit; they petitioned not
for the Temples nor Re(...) only they would have liberty to serve God as (...)
had appointed, but this would not be granted, therefore teh Lord punishes the
Egyptians with this noisome disease.

2. Another sore Plague we read of Numb. 16. and the great cause of this was
offering of strange fire, humane inventions in the Worship of God, and
resisting Moses and Aaron the true Ministers of God; it is true, the men that
did this thing might seem to have humane Authority enough for so doing, for
they were persons of Honor, Rank and Quality, v. 2. They rose up before Moses
with certain of the Children of Israel, two hundred and fifty Princes of the
Assembly, famous in the Congregation, men of renown; and being thus assembled,
they would have fire and Sacrifices as liked them best, or rather, as suited
best with their own lusts; for fleshly Worship best agrees with fleshly
Worshippers, but the holy God who is very precise and jealous in point of
Worship, would not take it at their hands, he'(...) have no services but of his
own making, it must be fire from the Altar, the Spirit of God that must
inkindle our Sacrifices, and the Institution of God that must warrant them*
hereupon God causes the Earth to swallow up the Ringleaders quick, and their
abettors were smitten with the Pestilence, v. 41. Humane Inventions in the
Worship of God, have often times brought the plague upon his people; See Psalm.
106. 29. Thus they vexed him with their inventions, and the Plague brake in
upon them. They would needs adorn the Worship of God with Heathenish Customs,
and make it trimmer than God made, but God abhors this, and will not bear it.
So Ez^ck. 9. there you have the destroying Angel sent forth to smite the City
Jerusalem with the Pestilence, his Commission very large, to spare neither old
nor young, Maid nor suckling Child, and the cause of this severe stroke you
have assigned cap. 8. Those who had professed better things, are now guilty of
Idolatry, they are engaged in heathenish rites and customs; and besides this,
they were grown bloody persecutors and scoffers at Religion, cap. 8. v. 17. Is
it a light thing that they commit the abominations which they commit here, for
they have filled the Land with violence, and have returned to provoke me to
anger, and lo, they put the branch to the nose. They had once left off Idolatry
as abominable, but now they are returned to the vomit, now they are violent
persecutors of such that will not wallow in the same mire with them; now they
are turned jeerers and scoffers, so cap. 9 v. 9. and upon this God tells the
Prophet, v. 10 As for me, mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity,
but I will recompense their way upon their head; so Ezekiel. 5. 11, 12. Wherefore
as (...) says the Lord God, surely because thou have defiled my Sanctuary with
all thy detestable things, and with all thy abominations, therefore will I also
diminish thee, neither shall mine eye spare, neither will I have any pity, a
third part shall dye with the Pestilence, and with Famine shall they be
consumed in the midst of thee, etc.

3. We read of another great Plague, Numb. 25. there were two ingredients in
the provoking-cause of this Pestilence, the one was Idolatry, v. 2, 3. they
joined themselves to Baal-Pe^r, and bowed down to Heathen Gods; the other was
their abominable uncleanness, they were become debauched Whoremongers and
Adulterers, impudent open-faced Letchers, as v. 5, 6. Behold, one of the
Children of Israel brought a Midianitish woman in the sight of Moses, and in
the sight of all the Congregation of the children of Israel. Now the person to
whom this gaudy Harlot was brought by his ranting Pimp, was none of the common
sort, no ordinary person, but a Prince, which made the crime the greater, v. 14
Now the name of the Israelite was Zimri the Son of Sal^, a Prince of the chief
House among the Simeonites, and the name of the Midianitish was Cosbi the
daughter of Zur, he was head over (...) people; and God was angry with Israel
for having among them such loud and loathsome sins, when such as should have
been examples of Honor, Honesty and Sobriety, to the inferior people, were
Encouragers of all manner of leudness; this provoked God to send the Plague
among them.

4. Another sore Plague we read of 2 Samuel 24. and the reason was, because David
(though a good King, and a man after Gods own heart in most things) yet for the
sinfulness of his people, was left to be tempted by Satan to a carnal
con^idence, and vain boasting in the arm of flesh, and therefore would needs
have a Muster-rowl of all the Militia in Israel, he (...) send his
Captain General, and other Commanders, to muster up in every Province the men
that were capable of bearing arms, that he might see his strength, and take
confidence in them; but God would not take this at his hands; whereas David had
been brought to the Crown merely by the hand of God, had lived an exile for a
considerable time, was hunted up and down from one Country to another, had no
safe abiding place, and at last was lifted into the Throne by a mere hand of
providence, though anointed King long before; Now for David to forget that God
that saved him, restored him, and so eminently honored him, and to rely and
trust in the multitude of an Host, to rest upon an arm of flesh, and secure
himself under the wings of a numerous Militia, this provoked God so highly,
that he sent forth the Pestilence, and slew in a short time seventy thousand
men.

5. Another sore Plague we read of Numb. 11. and the sin that provoked God to
smite them at this time, was, their lothing Manna, and lusting after some other
delicacies; they remembered the fleshpots in Egypt, and lusted after them;
(...) was not food for their ustentation, but food for their (...)stentation,
Psalm. 8. 18. They tempted God in their heart, by asking meat for their lust.
When men cannot be content with the good things of a fruitful Land, but must
have such rarities, extracts, cullises* quintessences, as will prompt and
provoke them to uncleanness; this provokes God to anger, this God has expressly
forbidden, Romans 13. 14. Make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof. But if one Warning will not serve the turn, but you must take this
course, see what will be the issue, Numb. 11. 33. And while the flesh was yet
between their teeth, ere it was chawed the wrath of the Lord was kindled
against the people, and the Lord smote the people with a very great Plague. And
as the persons that were guilty of this same, were the great ones, so the
Judgment fell principally upon them, Psalm. 78. 30, 31. They were not estranged
from their lusts* but while the meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God
came upon them, and slew the fattest of them, and smote down the chosen men of
Israel. The Apostle tells us, these things were written for our example, lest
we also be made an example, 1 Cor. 10, 11.

There is also a spiritual meaning of this History; by Manna is meant Jesus
Christ and the Gospel-nourishment, John 6. 31, 32, 33. Our Fathers did eat
Manna in the desert, as its written, he gave them bread from Heaven to eat:
Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily I say unto you, Moses gave you not
the bread from Heaven but my Father gives you the true bread from Heaven, for
the Bread of God is he that comes down from Heaven, and gives life to the
World, it did typifie Spiritual Food, 1 Cor. 10. 3. They did all eat the same
spiritual Food; it shadows out the secret (...)-enjoyments of Christ in his
Ordinances, Rev. 2. 17. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the
hidden Manna. And by the fleshpots of Egypt is typified carnal Ordinances,
fleshly services, calculated merely for the honor and interest of carnal men,
Rev. 11. 8. Their dead bodies also shall lie in the streets of the great City,
which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt: So that Egypt also has a
spiritual meaning, viz. a fleshly bondage, and tyrannical imposition as to the
Worship of God; therefore when men shall be weary of Jesus Christ, shall loath
spiritual food, soul searching and coverting Ordinances, soul-comforting
Communion with Christ, and hanker after, and contribute their uttermost
endeavors for soul-starving, soul-enslaving, fleshly Worship, that may best
comport with their lusts, this great sin provokes God to send the Pestilence
amongst them.

There are many other causes for which God sends this Pestilence amongst a
provoking people, and for which in an extraordinary manner he sweeps away with
the besome of destruction; and makes them sick with smiting them; As Amos 2. 4,
5. Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will
not turn away the punishment thereof, because they have despised the Law of the
Lord, and have not kept his Commandments, and their lies have caused them to
err after the which their fathers have walked. When a people shall forsake the
holy ways of God both as to conversation and worship, and be led by their own
lusts, and fall back to the sins of the generation that went before them, for
which God, in the sight of all men punished them; this is a provoking sin.

And ver. 6. there is another sin mentioned as a cause of wrath and mortality
(...) people, and that is selling the people of God, and bartering away their
lives and liberties for gain, trade and profit. Thus says the Lord, for three
transgressions of Israel and for four, I will (...) turn away the punishment
thereof, because they have sold the righteous for Silver, and the poor for a
pair of Shoes.

In a word, the great God is come out to plead with this Nation for all her
abominations, he has the same controversy with this Land as he had with
backsliding Israel, Hos. 4 1. 2. The Lord has a controversy with the land,
because there is no truth, nor mercy nor knowledge of God in the land, by
swearing, and lying, and killing and stealing, and committing adultery, the
land breaks forth, and blood touches blood therefore shall the land mourn.
Oh how many Highway thefts and open murders do cry for vengeance at this day,
in this lothsom, ranting, open-faced violence, villainy, blasphemy and
debauchery! To make up the sum of their provocations and to complete their
destruction, their Priests who should have stood in the gap to have stayed the
^lague, who should have warned them by their Doctrine, and lead them by their
exemplary conversation, were as bed as the worst, v. 6. My people are destroyed
for lack of knowledge, and ver. 9. There shall be like priest like people, and
I will punish them for their ways, and reward them for their doings. Add one
place more, Zeph. 1 where God threatens to consume all things from the land
^ay, to bring such terrible desolation, that the great men, and rich men, shall
fall down under the stroke, and shall not be able to avoid the calamity, ver.
14. 15, 16, 17, 18. The great day of the Lord is near, and hastes greatly,
even the voice of the day of the Lord the mighty men shall cry there bitterly,
that day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress; and I will bring
distress on men that they shall walk like blind men because they have sinned
against the Lord, and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh
as dung, neither their Silver nor their Gold shall be able to deliver them in
the day of the Lords wrath: but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of
his jealousy, for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell
in the land. Now the great sin of that day are intimated ver. 5. joining
Heathen worship with the worship of God, and v. 6. Apostasy from former
profession and practice of holiness, Those that are turned back from the Lord,
and have not sought the Lord, nor enquired after him; And 2dly, Cheating and
deceitful dealing in trading, ver. 9. I will punish all those that leap upon
the threshold, which fill their masters houses with violence and deceit. 4thly,
A carnal secure spirit, settling themselves in their presert enjoyments, and
concluding, that God will not overturn nor disturb the rest of sinners, nor
bring to pass the great things he has promised; such who have quenched all the
former convictions, extinguished former lights, and though once high in
expectation of Glorious things, even the time of restitution of all things, yet
now are returned to an earthly, worldly, secure frame of heart, ver 12. And it
shall come to pass at that time, that I will search Jerusalem with candles, and
punish the men that are settled on their lees, that say in their heart the Lord
will not do good nor evil. Therefore their goods shall became a booty and their
houses a desolation.

And now, Oh London, harden not thy heart, shut not thine eyes, but behold and
see, whether all these abominations are not in the midst of thee. Now prepare
to meet thy God in Sackcloth and Ashes, humble thy self, and mourn for thy
sins, and turn unto the Lord, that he may turn from his feirce wrath, and not
make thee an utter desolation and hissing, and abhorring and reproach as long
as the world endur(...).

And that I may faithfully help you in your duty, I shall follow the same
method in the Medicines as I have in the Maladies.

1. The first Plague was for oppressing and per secuting the people of God, and
not letting them go to worship as he had appointed; O ye Magistrates, look to
this, your heavy hard upon Gods people, has brought the heavy hard of God upon
this City. Swearing, Whoring, Drunkeness, Sabbath-breaking and other crying
sins ye have left unpunished; but if a company of poor Christians had but met
peaceably in a corner to pray to their God, and exhort one another in the
things that concern their eternal salvation, with what eagerness have you
hunted after them? with what taunts and derision, even bitter and scurrilous
derision have you examined them? with what remorsless severity have you
condemned them? how full of blameless Christians have your prisons bin, for no
other Crime but matters of their God? you cannot say that they were punished
for this or that fundamental error, or destructive opinion, for their judgments
and opinions you never examined; the only crime alleged, was for meeting in
private to worship God. Surely had you been in the primative, the Apostles and
Churches of Christians who differed from the Magistrate in point of worship had
by you fallen under the same condemnation with us. Your Alehouses full of
drunkards, streets and (...) of sportings on the Lords day, some houses full of
Papists at Mass, beastly Pray-houses, with open-face teaching the youth
Ribaldrie and looseness, tolerated, (...) diceased, as if no crime were
punishable (...) praying and preaching in private; the Lord help you to repent
of this, and do (...).

2. The second crime mentioned, was inventions of men in the worship of God,
Now I beseech you as you love your own souls and would have the Plague stayed,
be humbled for this great sin, examine by what Spirit, by what Authority, of
whose composing your worship i^, did God ever command those services,
Ceremonies, Altars, Vestures, Gestures, Saints days, and formalities, in which
is the chief of your worship? did God ever bless them to convert a soul from
Satan to Jesus Christ? did God own them in healing and comforting of a wounded
conscience? are they the best of men, the most holy, and mortified, in whose
souls stead you would venture your souls when you come to dye; that are the
Authors Abettors and zealous followers of such worship? Remember that God would
not bear the ten Tribes for making but one holy day like the Feast himself had
instituted; yet, how many days dedicated to Saints, kept holy to them, and
persons punished that observe them, not, do you observe? a Heathen invention at
first for the renown of their Devils and Heroes, and afterward in imitation of
them taken up by the most ignorant Papists in the most corrupt times of Popery.
Examine whether the Names, Titles, Offices, Dignities and Jurisdictions of the
Ministry are by Divine Appointment, whether they have the characters of a
Gospel Ministry, and the care of Gospel Ministers, and if you find that persons
and things, worship and Ministers have not the stamp of Divine Authority upon
them, oh repent, repent that ever you have provoked God to jealousy, that you
have stirred up his hot displeasure by your making to your selves Graven Images.

3. The third Plague mentioned, was for open-faced uncleanness. And never did
any age abound with such impudent practices of this kind, as this age and
place; great persons whose examples are the Rule of inferiors, have some of
them publicly declared their sin like Sod me, openly showing their nakedness;
others violently forcing women, openly attempting the chastity of some, which
if not rescued, had been violated by them; others murdering persons because
they would not serve their lusts, and many living in professed adultery, owning
of it, and glorying in it, as if the holy God will never visit for these
things. But Whoremonger sand Adulterers God will judge. Therefore ye Adulterers
and Adulteresses, mourn for your sins, go to God by prayer for the pardon of
them, it may be you may yet find grace in his sight: Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked
for sake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto
the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God for he will
abundantly pardon; pray for a clean heart, that God would mortify your heinous
and unruly lusts that war against your souls, and will assuredly bring you to
hell, if ye repent not. To you Magistrates, if you have any pity for your own
souls, or for this great City, Execute judgment upon incorrigible offenders in
this kind; see how this duty zealously performed, stayed the Plague, Numb. 25.
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. And when Phineas the son of Eleazer the son of Aaron
the Priest, saw it, be rose up from among the Congregation, and took a javelin
in his hand, and he went after the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust both
of them through, the man of Israel and the woman through her belly; so the
Plague was stayed from the Children of Israel. And the Lord spoke unto Moses
saying, Phineas the son of Eleazer, the son of Aaron the Priest has turned
away my wrath from the Children of Israel, (while he was zealous for my sake
amongst them, that I consumed not the Children of Israel in my jealousy.)
Wherefore say, behold I give unto him my Covenant of peace, and he shall have
it, and his seed after him, etc. Up and be doing ye Magistrates of this great
City, let your zeal run in the right channel, against the enormous sins of the
times. But be it known unto you, if you shall be negligent and remiss in this
work, God will raise up Saviors, God will spirit some or other that shall
execute Judgment and Justice, and you shall fall in your iniquities.

4. The fourth Plague was for carnal confidence in an A^m of flesh; Because al^
the Arms and Strength of a Nation is for you, therefore you are secure, boast
your selves, and are confident you shall never be broken; you may remember that
as valiant Armies, as succesful Militia's, and as victorious ^leets have been
in other hands; yet how easily did the great God, for causes best known to
himself, take away the hearts, and take the people out of the hands of those
men, who in their day were the terror of the Nations round about them? be not
high-minded, but fear; for if it has been done thus to the green Tree, what
shall bed done to the dry Tree? lay to heart that Scripture, Jer. 17. 5, 6
Cursed be the man that makes flesh his A(...), and whose heart departs from
the Lord, for he shall be like the Heath in the Desert, and shall not see when
good comes, but shall in habit the parched places of the Wildeness. And as to
the diverting the judgments procured by this sin, I advise all persons who have
been hightned by their carnal confidences, to do as David did. 2 Samuel 24 10.
And David's heart smote him after that he had numbered the people, and David said
unto the Lord, I have sinned greatly in that I have done take away the iniquity
of thy Servant, for I have done foolishly. And v. 17. And David spoke unto the
Lord when he saw the Angel that smote the people, and said, I have sinned and
done wickedly, but these sheep what have they done? let thy hand I pray thee be
against me and against my Fathers house. Here was a tender Magistrate, that
preferred his peoples welfare before his own. Oh that great persons would
behold with compassion how many thousands their sins have hurried to the grave,
and that they would repent and turn to the Lord!

5. The fifth great Plague was for loathing Manna, did lusting after Quarles:
if there were no other argument to persons of honor, But the grandeur and
noble housekeeping of their Ancestors, their constant Tables and
Entertainments to the Gentry and Yeomanry of the Country, which now is wasted
upon a few invented Kickshaws to pamper lust, while their empty Mansions in the
Country, and the hungry bellies of poor neighbors, grumble and mourn for their
luxury, whilst their God is their belly, their glory their shame, their lust
the end for which they live; and what a sad reckoning will there be at last,
when God shall call them to account how they have bestowed all that Treasure he
put into their hands, and they have nothing to answer, but, Our cursed Lusts
have swallowed up our Time, our (...), our Bodies, our Soul. As for you that
have sl^ghted Jesus Christ and the Gospel, and have returned to Egypt, see the
just judgment of God upon you, threatened to such, Lzek. 20, 24, 25. Because
they had not executed my judgments, but had despised my Statutes, and polluted
my Sabbaths, and their eyes were after their Fathers Idols, wherefore I gave
them also Statutes that were not good, and Judgments whereby they should not
live.

Let all (...) and backsliders remember from whence they are fallen and repent,
let that dreadful word awaken you, Heb. 10 38. If any man draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him

Let all those who after long banishment and punishment for former sins, have
been restored again, and brought every man again to his place, and yet go on in
their old provocations, let them read Jer. 12. 14, 15, 16, 17. Thus says the
Lord, against all mine evil neighbors that touch mine inheritance which I have
caused my people Israel to inherit, behold I will pluck them out of their Land,
and pluck out the House of Judah from amongst them, and it shall come to pass
after I have plucked them out, that I will return and have compassion on them,
and will bring them again every man to his Heritage, and every man to his Land;
and it shall come to pass, if they will, diligently learn the ways of my
people, to swear by my Name, The Lord lives, (as they have taught my people to
swear by Baal then shall they be built up in the midst of my people; but if
they will not obey, I will utterly pluck up and destroy that people, says the
Lord.

A(...) your Priests more proud, bloody, persecuting, profane and
superstitious, then ever? Is not that word fulfilled in them, Ezekiel 22. 25, 26.
There is a conssiracy of the Prophets in the midst of her; like a roaring Lion,
raving the prey, they have devoured souls, they have taken the Treasure and
precious things, they have made hen many Widows in the midst thereof, her
Priests have violated my Law, and have profaned my holy things; they have put
no difference between the holy and profane, neither have they showed
difference between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my
sabbaths, and I am profaned among them: Nay, if they have put any difference
at all, it has been by contempt and reviling, persecuting and worrying the
godly, encouraging, and taking into their bosom the ungodly, as Ezekiel. 13. 22,
23. Because with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I
^a(...) made sad, and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that be should not
return from his wicked way, by promising him life; therefore ye shall see no
more vanity -- for I will deliver my people out of your hand, Amen.

Art not many of your Gentry more debauched, more full of blasphemous Oaths,
more enemies to boliness, sobriety and civility, than they were before? Assure
your selves both one and other, God will fulfill this word upon you, even
utterly to root you out except you repent.

And as to the common sort, who have been encouraged by your example, are they
not wretchedly poluted? nothing but swearing, cursing, drunkenness, and among
them Hell is broke loose, and the very Reins of Modesty and Humanity, are
relaxed, so that God may justly spread your Carkases as dung upon the face of
the Earth, and make room (by your destruction) for a more righteous and sober
generation.

Now therefore to conclude, You that have any tenderness left, that have not
quite transformed your selves to Beasts and Devils, you that would escape Hell,
you that can with any remorse behold the dying-pale-face of this Nation,
stabbed at the heart by these sins of yours, Oh tremble at the fierce wrath of
God that is gone forth against you, and abhor your selves for all your
abominations, there is yet some encouragement left for you to turn and be
saved, 2 Chr. 7. 13, 14. If I send the Pestilence among my people, if my people
that are called by my Name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my
face, and turn from their wicked (...); then will I hear from Heaven, and will
forgive their sins, and will heal their Land. Be humbled for, and turn from all
your wicked ways, and be upon your faces in the dust for mercy and pardon,
before the destroying Angel arrest you, and you be brought to the Bar of Divine
Justice, where every impenitent sinner will receive this sentence, Depart from
me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

To you that fear the Lord, and tremble at his righteous Judgments,

1. Be not over-confident that you shall not fall in this common calamity, for
though the generality of Gods people shall be ensafed, yet we have deserved by
our sins to perish in this Wilderness, and (...) of this D^sease, to humble the
rest, and to harden the ungodly.

2. Be not surprised with a pannick fear, be not slavishly timorous, for this
rugged, nasty Messenger comes on your Fathers Errand, and his business is to
call you home to your Fathers House, and you have your Fathers Promise to be
with you in the midst of the Valley of the shadow of death.

3. Be much in mourning for your own sins, and the provoking sins of others,
and hereby you will be entitled to a Protection, Ezekiel. 9 Set a mark upon them
that sigh and mourn for all the abominations that are committed, and a charge
is given to the destroying Angel, that he comes not near such.

4. Be flying into special Providence, Psalm. 91.

5. Be eying Jesus Christ our merciful and tender High Priest, who will stand
between the living and the dead, our Passover, who is sacrificed for us, and
the blood of sprinkling shall save us from the Plague of the Plague, the guilt
of sin.

6. Keep up secret Communion with God, that if you should be shut up, and no
body suffered to come nigh you, yet God may be with you, as he has promised,
and stand by you, as he did by Paul. 1 Timothy 4. 16, 17. At my first Answer, no
man stood with me -- but God stood by me, and comforted me.

Lastly, The voice of this Dispensation to you, is, that you set your hearts
and your houses in order, Isa. 38. i. e. Get all scores cleared between God and
your Immortal Souls, in the Blood of Jesus Christ, and so settle your Estates
which God has blessed you with in this World, that when you dye, Christ
himself may entertain you with a Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. Matt. 25.
34, 35.

FINIS.

