A LETTER FROM A Gentleman in Germany, touching the Discovery OF A Strange
Murder, Committed there, by a Person OF QUALITY, UPON A Lustful FRIAR: For
endeavoring to Corrupt his LADY.

Being A Translation.

LONDON, Printed by G. C. for the Author. 1684.

A LETTER FROM A Gentleman in Germany, touching the Discovery OF A Strange
Murder.
Sir,
HAving nothing further of News, more than what I communicate to you in my Last;
I thought fit in order to the Maintenance of the Correspondence between us, to
give you the following Relation: Which for the Stranegness thereof, I Question
not but will meet with a suitable Reception.

A Gentleman of Quality In the Neighborhood of Vienna, having in the late War
Signalized himself in the defense of the said Town, during the time of his
Service, he recieved an accidental Shot from the Enemies Battery, that Disabled
him from the further Engageing himself in that War. Whereupon, this Noble
Gentleman retired himself further up in the Country; where he had a Lady of
such Beauty as attracted the Eyes of ^ll Men: Who residing with her Husband, in
a seat of (...) near adjoining to a Convent, which this Gentleman h^^ formerly
Built; and allowing Maintenance to an Abbot and 12 Friars: It happened that 2
Friars one called Father Constantine, and the other Father Conrade, who were at
continual Variance and Enmity to each other, and could by no Means be
Reconciled; insomuch, that the whole Covent took particular notice thereof: And
it being the Daily Custom of this Gentleman and his Lady, who intended a Life
of Devocion to resort to Prayers every Morning, the Lady being of an Affable
and Courteous Disposition: this good Behavior of hers, bred an uncivil
Boldness in Father Constantine, so that she never came near the Cloister, but
he was still attending her with Bows, Cringes and Complements, and she
suspecting nothing, returned him Thanks: which so far Encouraged the Friar,
that he resolved at last to Write to her, and therein discover his Passion;
which accordingly he did; and with much Difficulty conveyed the same to the
Ladys Hand: Who being much Surprised that such Laciviousness should proceed
from one that Vowed and professed Chastity, was resolved to Discover the same
to her Lord, which she had no sooner done, but he began to Repent him of his
former Charity, in regard of this so great Ingratitude: yet meditateing
Revenge, he ordered his Lady to Write in Answer to this Letter, that she was
very Compassionate of his Love; and that such a Night her Husband being to go
to Court, he should be admitted, and Lodge according to his desire. The Friar
received the Letter with extreme Joy, and accordingly observing the Hour, he
was admitted by the Lady her self,) and Conveyed into a private Chamber: Where
he was no sooner entered, but in came the Gentleman with a Servant or two in
great Fury, without giving him the least time to call to the House or Heaven,
they Strangled the Lustful Friar, and left him Dead upon the Place: Which was
no sooner done, but the Gentleman began to consider the Horror and Danger of
the Fact, both as to his Life and Estate; and after several Projects, he at
last concluded with his Servants to have the Body Conveyed back into the
Monastry, being divided from his own House only by a Stone-Wall; and finding a
Ladder hard by, one of the Servants mounts it with the Friar upon his Back, and
sits with him awhile on the Wall, then drawing up the Ladder, and letting it
down on the other side, he descends into the Convent, where spying the House of
Office, he sets the Body thereon, as upright as possible, and so leaves it, and
Conveys himself over the Wall again, but for have forgot the Ladder, and tells
his Master how he had disposed the Friar; at which being better Satisfied, they
retired to Bed, the matter being concealed from the rest of the Family, being
fast a Sleep: But so it happened, that as soon as the Servant got over the Wall,
Father Conrade being troubled with a Looseness, hasts down to the House of
Office, where by the Light of the Moon, he percieved Friar Constantine, his old
Adversary, got upon the Seat before him, who the louder he called, seemed the
less to Hear; whereat thinking this pretended Deafness was out of Spite to Vex
him, he snatches up a Brick-bat, and striking him on the Breast, down tumbles
Friar Constantine, without Life or Motion; which Conrade seeing, thought at
first to raise him up, but after many Trials finding him to be stone Dead, he
believed he had Killed him; and began to Consult with himself what he should do
in this case, the Gates were fast Locked, and fly for his Life he could not:
But as sudden Extremity sometimes meet sudden Shifts, he spying the Ladder
against the Wall, presently apprehends what had been Whispered of Friar
Constantines Love to the Lady, and lifting him upon his Shoulder, by the help
of the Ladder conveyed him into the Gentleman's Porch, and there left him;
Conveying himself into the Monastry the same way he came, being not in the
least Suspected. In the mean while the Gentleman being troubled in his
Conscience, could not Sleep, but calling up one of Servants bids him listen to
the Walls of the Monastry, which as he was about to do, passing the Porch, he
spies Father Constantine siting upright upon the Bench; at which being greatly
amazed, he run back and acquainted his Master therewith; who no less Surprised,
could not believe the same, till he went down and became Eye Witness thereof;
and being extremely concerned, reflected on himself that Murder was a Crying
Sin, and was seldom or never Concealed; yet recolecting his Memory, he resolved
to try a Desperate Adventure, and put the Discovery upon Chance: And remembering
he had an old Stallion in the Stable that had served him in the War, and
likewise a Rusty Suit of Armor in his Armory; this he commands instantly to be
brought with a Case of Rusty Pistols and a Lance; the Horse was Imediately
made Ready, and the Dead Friar mounted and bound fast to the Saddle; thus like
a complete Knight they turned him out of the Gate to try his Adventures. Whilst
these things were thus fitting, Friar Conrade in the Monastry was no less
perplexed in his Mind than the Gentleman about the Murder; and much Dreading
the strictness of the Law, summond his Wits about him how to escape with his
Life, which he thus Concluded: remembering there was in the Convent a Mare that
was employed to carry Corn to and from a Mill about half a Mile from the
Monastry, and being somewhat Fat, and doubting his Foot-manship, he thought it
was better to trust to 4 Legs than 2; whereupon he calls up the Baker that had
charge of the Beast, and tells him he understood there was some Meal to be
fetched that Morning from the Mill, which was Grinded by that time; and
therefore if he would let him have the Mare, he would fetch it home for him,
and save him the Trouble: The Fellow being glad of the Offer, caused the
Back-Gate to be Opened, out of which the Friar Rid, just at the same time when
the Gentleman and his Servant had turned out Friar Constantine, to seek his
Fortune as aforesaid. Whereupon the Horse presently scents the Mare, and
Gallops after her, but Friar Conrade looking back, was amazed to see an Armed
Knight follow him; but much more when by the Light of the Moon and the Beaver
flying up, he percieved it was Friar Constantine that was thus Armed; and
thereupon flies as fast as he could: but after him, or rather after the Mare
Speeds the Horse: A great Noise there was, and Friar Conrades ill Fate led him
into a certain Turn-again-Lane, where he was overtaken by the Stone-Horse, who
covered the Mare; which caused a great Noise, and Friar Conrades Conscience
thereupon Accusing him, he cries out Guilty of Murder; at the Noise whereof the
People gat out of their Beds and run into the Street; where Friar Conrade
Confessed the Horrid and Unhumane Act he had done, in Murdering one of his
Convent; which was looked upon as a Judgment from Heaven, and believed from the
former Grudge between them. Whereupon Friar Constantine was Dismounted and
carried to his Grave, and Friar Conrade was committed to Prison, Arraigned and
Condemned; but before Execution, the Gentleman posts to the Emperor, and made
his Confession of the whole Fact: Whereupon in respect of his former Service he
was Pardoned by the Emperor; and Friar Conrade Acquitted.

Thus Sir, you have the particulars of this Comical Tragedy; if I may so term
it: Which I hope may Divert you, as it has done us in this Neighborhood. And
in my next, I hope to give you an account of the Surrender of Buda: The Duke of
Lorrain being greatly Enforced by the accession of the Bavarian Troops, which
has Encouraged his Army to a Wonder. This is all at present, with my Service
to your Self and Lady, I remain

Your humble Servant Abraham Vandenberg.
September the 11 th. 1684.
FINIS.

