THE Voice of the Innocent uttered forth: OR, The Call of the Harmless and
Oppressed FOR Justice and Equity.

BEING A brief Relation of some Remarkable Passages, concerning the Trial and
sentencing of five of the People of God called Quakers, at the Sessions holden
at the Castle of Northampton, upon the fourth and sixth days of the second
Month, called April, in the year 1665. Richard Rainsford sitting Judge, there
being present several of those called Justices for the said County; two of
their names are as follows, Henry Yelverton and John Willoughby, etc.

From the People of God called Quakers, who are sufferers in the County Goal of
Northampton for Conscience sake.

Hereunto is added a Postscript.

Acts 5. 38, 39. And now I say unto you, refrain from these men, and let them
alone; for if this Council, or this Work be of men, it will come to naught; but
if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it: lest happily ye be found even to fight
against God. London, Printed in the Year, 1665.

UPon the fourth and sixth days of the second Month, in the year 1665. the
Sessions being holden for the County of Northampton, many of the people called
Quakers, were brought forth to the same: Upon the sixth day of the Month
aforesaid, the Court being set, and Richard Rainsford sitting Judge, four of
the said Prisoners were called to the Bar, whose names are as follows, viz.
William Robinson, Richard Parsons, John Coory, and Elizabeth Harris.
Proclamation was made that all should keep silence, etc.

The first and second Convictions (so called) being read, and their Indictment
also, which was very large; but the substance thereof was to this effect, as
near as can be remembered: That whereas William Robinson, Richard Parsons, John
Coory, and Elizabeth Harris, and every of them, being unlawfully assembled at
Robert Ashby' s house, situate and being in Bugbrook, in the County of
Northampton, with diverse other Malefactors, contrary to the Liturgy or practice
of the Church of England, in contempt to the King, his Laws, and against his
Crown and Dignity, etc.

Judge. William Robinson, what say you; are you guilty or not guilty of your
Indictment?


Prisoner. I was at a Meeting to worship the living God, in Spirit and in
Truth; and I had no evil intent in my heart against the King, Parliament or any
other of the Kings Subjects.


Judge. But was you there only to worship God in Spirit and in Truth, as you
say? And had you no other business there? And did you worship God according to
the form of Worship now established in England by Authority? And had you the
Common Prayer read amongst you?


Prisoner. We meet together to worship God in reality, in Spirit and in Truth;
and I never met under color and pretense, but in obedience unto God, as he
has made known unto me.


Judge. Richard Parsons, what say you; are you guilty of this Indictment? etc.


Prisoner. Not guilty of much that is therein inserted.


Judge. Did you worship God according to the Liturgy, or book of Common Prayer?


Prisoner. Does not the Liturgy allow of worshipping of God in Spirit and in
Truth?


Judge. Yes.


Prisoner. Then I am not guilty.


Judge. How will you be tried?


Prisoner. By the Truth.


Judge. John Coory, are you guilty of this Indictment?


Prisoner. Not guilty of breaking any just Law.


Judge. Did you meet according to the Liturgy? had you the Common Prayer Book
amongst you.


Prisoner. We met together to worship God in Spirit and Truth.


Judge. Elizabeth Harris, are you guilty or not guilty?


Prisoner. Not guilty of meeting under color and pretense of religious
Worship, but in reality, in Spirit and in Truth.

The Prisoners Answers being given, as is before mentioned, it was taken for
not guilty, and so after much ado a Jury was called; their names are as
follows: William Smith, William Bliss, Nicholas Bliss, Robert Bartet,
Robert Barber, William Smalbone, Thomas Henchman, etc.

And these were sworn truly to try and Judge between the King and the Prisoners
at the Bar, and true deliverance make according to their evidence, etc.

Then three Witnesses being called and sworn, viz. James Baker, a very
profane, swearing, drunken man; and Richard Pooley, a profane swearing
fellow; and Henry Addams, being all three soldiers: The Judge asked them if
they saw the Prisoners at the Bar at Robert Ashby's house in Bugbrook, at a
Meeting? unto which they answered, Yes. Then said the Judge, What day was it
upon? and what time of the day? They answered, upon Palm Sunday, about one or
two of the clock in the afternoon. Then the Judge asked the number of the
persons, and what they saw them do there? To which they answered, There was
about thirty persons, and one of them was Preaching and Praying; for he
sometimes stood, and sometimes kneeled down. Then the Judge asked them, whether
they saw the Common Prayer Book amongst them? They answered, No. Then the Judge
spoke to the Jury, and set them in a way, that they might be sure to find them
guilty: they being a company of weak men (and some of them maliciously bent
against truth) not well understanding the weighty matter they were employed in;
so the Jury went forth, and in about half an hours time, returned again, and
brought in their Verdict, that three of the Prisoners were guilty of the third
offense; and the woman they brought in to be guilty of the second offense: Then
said John Randolph a Lawyer, have you not brought them in all alike? Then there
arose some confusion amongst them; but at length the matter was hushed up, and
she found guilty of the third offense, as they account it; but to worship God
in Spirit and Truth is no offense.

But it was observed by many present, that they never saw nor heard of so weak
a Jury to be employed in so weighty a matter.

Then the Judge told the Prisoners, that the Jury had brought them in guilty;
and said he, I am to pass the Judgment of Transportation upon you; and asked
them what they had to say for themselves, that the Judgment of Transportation
might not pass upon them?

John Coory said, We are an innocent People, and do desire to live in the fear
of God. And further, said he, I do believe if we had been drunkards, swearers,
liars, covetous men, proud, coseners, cheaters, hypocrites, or dissemblers, we
should not have been brought here; for that by you is tolerated, or at the
least winked at, and little notice taken thereof.


Judge. Are you a just man? are you without sin?


Prisoner. I am one that fears and serves God daily, and I desire you may
fear and serve the Lord also: And moreover, I have two small motherless
children, and am a poor man; and so it will be good for you to take heed, that
you do not make them fathe^less also; for if you so do, God will reward you
according to your works.


Judge. Its your obstinacy, and your own wilfulness, and I am sorry at my heart
to do it, but only I and the Justices upon the Bench with me, are sworn to do
it; and if we should not, we should prove our selves to be perjured person^,
etc.


Prisoner. Are you sworn to do that which you are sorry for? This is a sad
thing; and surely Gods hand will turn against all unjust Judges, Justices, and
oppressers of his People, and all unjust Rulers whatsoever.

Interrupted.


Judge. You must hearken unto me, and must not speak, you must give ear unto
your Sentence; which was to this effect: That you and every of you, shall be
transported unto the Island of Jamaica, there to remain for the space of seven
years; and if you return again before the time be expired, it must be at your
peril: but this privilege you have, that if you will pay in one hundred pounds
a piece, before the Court be adjourned, you shall be freed from the Sentence of
Transportation.

It may be observed, although Judge Rainsford has before declared himself to
be sorry to proceed with friends in such manner as he did; yet the contrary
plainly appears by his actions: for when as one (called) George Robinson, did
speak to the said Judge, (he being upon the Bench) in the behalf of the said
(now sentenced) Prisoners, and desired moderately to reason in their and his
own behalf, (he being a Prisoner, and his time very near expired which he had
been committed for) but the aforesaid Judge presently gave order for his
further confinement, and bound him to his good behavior (as they call it)
whereby to prevent him of his just Liberty. And thus as of old, Isa. 59. ver.
14. Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off; for truth
is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter.

Daniel Rooe being called to the Bar, and his Indictment read, it being in the
same manner and form as was the other Indictments.


Judge. Daniel Rooe, are you guilty of this Indictment, or not guilty?


Prisoner. I have not transgressed any Law of God, or just Law of good men.


Judge. That Is no matter; are you guilty or not guilty, of the Indictment?


Prisoner. As to that I have said. So this Answer being taken for not guilty,
the Witnesses were called and sworn, being the same persons that witnessed
against the other, and the questions put to them was much like the former, and
the answers to the same purpose: Then the Jury was sworn, which was the same
Jury that went forth upon the other, only the foreman William Smith, was
excepted against, and turned out by the Court. Then the Judge spoke to the
Jury, and said, You have heard, how that the witnesses have evidenced, That
there was praying and preaching, but they did not hear the book of Common
Prayer read amongst them. And also, said he, he himself cannot say they had the
form of Common Prayer used amongst them. And here he laid the main stress of
the matter, and seemed hereby to make it appear to the Jury, That because
Common Prayer was not read, that they were Guilty; and the Jury being a going
forth, the Prisoner spoke unto them, and said, Oh Friends, and Countrymen of
the Jury, I desire you, as in the presence of the Lord, that you take heed what
ye do, for the thing is weighty you have in hand.

So the Jury went forth, and in a short time returned again, and cried, A
Verdict, a Verdict; the Court said, Who shall speak for you? they answered, The
Foreman; then said the Judge, How do you find it, are you all agreed? they
said, Yes, and we find it for the King, etc. Then the Judge said to the
Prisoner, Here you see the Jury has found you Guilty.


Pris. I commit my cause to the Lord, for I have broken no Just Law.


Judge. Well, well, you was at these Conventicles under color and pretense to
worship God.


Pris. I was not there under color and pretense, but in reality to Worship God
in Spirit and in Truth, as I was led and guided by the spirit of the Lord.


Judge. But how do you know its the Spirit of the Lord? you may be deluded, and
led by an evil spirit, for we are not to be led by our own spirits, for some
men's spirits leads them to Murder, and some men's spirits leads them to
Adultery, etc.


Pris. The Spirit of the Lord leads into all truth, and this Spirit is not to
be limited either to Time or place.


Judge. Well, come, have you any thing more to say for your self, why the
Sentence of Transportation should not be passed upon you? if you have, you may
speak, etc.

But the Prisoner said no more: Then was the Judgment of Transportation given,
that he should be transported to the Island of Jamaica, there to remain for the
space of seven years, unless the said prisoner would pay unto the Court one
hundred pounds before the end of the Sessions. So the prisoner was taken from
the Bar, and with the rest returned to prison again.

Now people it may be well for you to take notice, how that the Trial and
Sentence aforesaid, was past upon the Lords people, even the next day following
their pretended Fast, which they kept (as they say) for a blessing upon their
Endeavors in their intended War with the Dutch. But how can a people expect a
blessing from God, when they are smiting with the fist of wickedness, and even
fighting against God and his Worship? Yea, even upon the very day of their
pretended Fast, the Justices met together (as we are credibly informed) to
carry on the aforementioned work, of Trying and Sentencing a people (for
worshipping God) even for Transportation. And so instead of keeping a Fast,
which the Lord has chosen, which is to loose the b^nds of wickedness, and to
undo the heavy burdens, and let the oppressed go free, and break every yoke,
and deal their bread to the hungry, and to bring the poor that is cast ou^ into
their house, and to cover the naked, and not to hide themselves from their own
flesh; I say, instead of these things, the quite contrary fruits are brought
forth (as it was said upon the day and day following their pretended Fast) even
an adding to the bands of wickedness, and laying burdens upon the innocent,
neither do they let the oppressed go free, but rather add to their yoke, and
instead of dealing bread to the hungry, and taking those to house that are cast
forth, they even cast them out of house (and if the Lord does not prevent them)
out of their native Land also.

And this is the measure which has been meated unto the Lords people by this
generation of men, after all the sufferings which has been inflicted upon them
by imprisonment and otherwise, which wo^k of persecution has been much helped
forward by one John Garrett (Steward to the man called Lord Spencer) being a
very great enemy to the appearance of God in any people that differs from the
National Worship, and also by John Witfield, and Thomas Hogg, Priests of those
places where our peaceable meetings have been kept, for they have much stirred
up the people against us, and some have readily answered their desires herein,
and especially one called Captain John Will^ughby, one also in commission to do
justice; who both in Person, and by his Warrant, granted forth unto some of his
soldiers, being lewd wicked men, for the most part, such as the people where
they dwell do very much abhor for their wickedness sake: some of their names
are as follows, viz. James Baker, a chief leader of them, being a Dog-keeper,
a drunken swearing fellow, and Thomas Goodman a Fiddler, a man noted for much
profane gaming, having been accounted their Vice, or fool of their play, and
another Richard Pooley, a profane swearing fellow: And these, with such like
as themselves, the aforesaid John Willoughby, has empowered by Warrant or
otherwise, has come along with them in person to our Meetings from time to
time, halling, beating, bruising and abusing friends, when peaceably met
together for the worship and service of the Lord in truth, and not under color
and pretense, so not liable to the penalties in the late Act; for its known we
are, and have been all along a peaceable people ever since the Lord raised us
up, and the Nation has had great experience of the same; and so its altogether
unequitable and unjust, even the present proceedings of those which do daily
rise up against us, for the exercise of our consciences toward God in the way
of his blessed worship, which he has clearly made known unto us, although we
may not have a Common Prayer Book to read amongst People, as Judge Rainsford
would seem to incense the Jury and others, that we were breakers of the late
Act, because we used not the Common Prayer; which the Lord has let us see the
weakness and unprofitablenesse of those things, and we cannot, like the dog,
return to the old vomit again, and like the sow that is washed, to the
wallowing in the mire; though for the same we suffer; and are counted as
transgressors in the sight of our Judges, but we are clear in the sight of God;
and also the late Act clears us, where our enemies themselves are not Judges,
or where Judgment is given without partiality; and so our cause we commit to
the Lord, even to plead in our behalf, who through his goodness has engaged
us to appear in the behalf of his Name and Testimony, which he has given us to
bear even in this day of our trial and exercise of our faith and patience,
wherein God has preserved us hitherto, in all the dangers and great sufferings
which is known to the Lord right well; and he has furnished us in this our day
with all things answerable to our present necessities; so the glory of his
works belong to him for ever. And so its for conscience sake we are sufferers
this day, and for the worship of God, and not for evil doing, as our enemies
and persecutors would render it. And this we are willing to make known, that so
all might be informed concerning these things, and come to know the truth of
this matter.


Postscript.
ANd now all moderate People may judge, whether here is any matter of Fact
proved, or found to be done (by the aforesaid Innocent harmless People) against
the King, or that might make for the disturbance of the peace of the Kingdom:
And if the Judges and Jurors did but understand themselves, they, as well as
other people, might see that all this that is done against us, is for
worshipping of God in spirit and truth; in which way we worship the true and
living God, who is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth; and
for so doing are we exposed unto this cruel Sentence, even to be banished out
of our native Land; but and if it should be so, we can truly say, Lord forgive
them, and lay not this evil to their charge; but if not, O Lord, thy will be
done: And indeed we might or could not expect, but that the Innocent should be
brought in guilty, when as that wicked man William Smith of Hardingstone was
the Foreman of the (senceless, fearful, and evvious) Jury, who said, that the
three men was guilty of the third offense, and the woman of the second; and
said, that they were all agreed likewise: And when he was reproved for it by
the Judge, and by John Randolph a Lawyer, he said, they were all guilty of the
third offense. And now somewhat more of his actions may be laid open, who was
taken to be a chief instrument for the bringing of the Innocent in (by a false
Verdict) guilty, when no evil could justly be charged upon them, or matter of
wrong done to any, the matter being only for worshipping of God in Spirit and
Truth, which the Scriptures of truth, and the Liturgy does allow of; and
moreover, this old hypocrite spoke against the Common Prayer, and said, as can
be proved, if need be, That he hoped never to see the day, that Common Prayer
should be used again in England; and this was when he went to the Lectors at
Northampton, one week after another, at which time Cains spirit bare rule in
him, for then and by his means, did that honest upright hearted man William
Lov^il of Hardingstone, (called a Quaker) suffer eighteen months imprisonment,
for saying, that those he then called Ministers of Christ, were Ministers of
Satan, and that the Scriptures were not the Word of God, but a true
Declaration of the Word, etc. And now much more might be said concerning this
man, but this is the desire of our hearts, that he, with all the rest of this
wicked generation, may repent of their ungodly actions, and never commit the
like again, but turn unto God by amending their life, and former wicked
conversation before it be too late, and the door of mercy shut against them;
and then may they cry all the day long, and lament bitterly, and shall not be
heard. Therefore hearken and incline your ears, unto what is written unto you,
now whilst you have a day in which you may take counsel, if through wickedness
your hearts be not hardened; but however ye are warned, I mean both Judges,
Justices, Jurymen, and you that bear false witness against your neighbors and
Countrymen, the Innocent, harmless people called Quakers; although Richard
Rainsford styles them impudent, because they so boldly let their doors stand
open when they meet (in the way of Gods blessed Worship) saying, that we were
more bold (in this Country) then the rest of our fraternity, in other
Countries; for, said he, they will keep their doors shut, and set their spies
to see when any comes to apprehend or take them; which thing we do believe is
utterly false, and is not the manner of Gods people so to do: And this know ye
our enemies, and false accusers, that the higher you climb in oppression by
Laws, lies, and false reports, the greater will be your fall into sorrow, and
perpetual misery, for we can and do make our appeal unto that of God in all
your consciences, who of you have we wronged, whose Ox have we stolen? or whose
Ass have we taken away? or what mischief have we hatched? or what insurrections
have we contrived? Has (either) former or latter experience showed any such
thing to be brought forth by us? Declare if you can, or else for ever stop your
mouths for speaking against us, and stay your hands from doing of violence unto
us, for serving and obeying of God, and think not your proceedings can afright
us, for this know, we are upon that Rock against which the gates of hell cannot
prevail. Therefore in vain do ye strive, and to no purpose do you cumber your
selves, and fret like distracted men, for you may as easily stop the Sun from
rising, or stay it from going its course, and setting in its appointed season,
as hinder or stop that good work that God has begun in the hearts of his
people, and will perfect to his praise for ever. Although Richard Rainsford
said in his Charge, speaking of the Quakers, that they had away to stop their
multiplying, and growing numerous; for said he, our Sovereign Lord the King,
with the advice of the wisest men in the Land, have allowed them to meet to the
number of four, besides the family, or them of the house where they meet, but
nothing will serve their turn but thirty or forty, or more, and so brings
themselves under the penalties of the Law, and then we have two Convictions,
and for the third banishment; and if they return again without license, before
seven years be expired, then we have the Gallows and the Halter, and that will
be the end; and we have our sacred Majesty to be our Head, and his wholesome
Laws to be our rule to walk by; we have Goals, Stocks, and Whips, and the
Nation on our side, and what need we fear, we are safe, and have strength
enough, etc.

Oh, but this know, ye stupefied ones, that ye are all this while but mortal
men; and if the hand of God be turned against you, what will all these things
do for you? These cannot deliver you from the stroke of his hand, neither give
you peace in the day of trouble, for our strength is in the Lord, and he is God
over all blessed for ever, unto all eternity; and its not two Convictions,
Banishment to Jamaica for seven years, Goals, Whips, Stocks, or Death, that can
stop our growth, or prosperity in the Truth, hinder or separate us from God, or
the comfortable enjoyment of his good presence, as we abide faithful unto the
end; therefore beware how you proceed, or else you will suddenly be broken, and
split against the same Rock that those that went before you were, who fought
against God and his people as ye do now, making your Goals, Fines, and
Banishment your weapons of defense, which we set in defiance in this Gods
mighty day; and think not that if you should banish many of us out of our
native Land and that we should seal our testimony by laying down our lives (as
many have already done) that this will be a means to establish you, as if you
should never be removed: Oh build not your selves up with such vain hopes, for
these will utterly fail you, and you by so doing will sink into confusion, and
the pit of endless torment and perpetual misery; and the cause of the widows
and fatherless God will plead, and avenge in his own due time, and bring
deliverance to his oppressed people, who put their trust and confidence in him
alone; and although you color over your unrighteous and ungodly proceedings,
with saying, ye are sorry, but this be assured of, it will not excuse you, for
its deceit and hypocrisy, and da^bing with untempered mortar; and though you
may make some silly people think its so indeed, yet I tell you plainly, its all
but a lie, and truth is witnessed, which is become the beesom to sweep liars,
and the refuge of lies into the fire; and thus are your garments stripped off,
and your nakedness is seen, and your shame will also more and more appear, unto
all that have but in the least measure their eyes opened; and you shall become
a byword unto all that knows you both far and near, except you speedily
repent of the evil of your doings.

And now you being warned, are left without excuse, and happy will you be, who
in this the day of your visitation, wherein the Lord waits to be gracious to
your souls and to do you good, do return unto him by speedy repentance before
your day be overpast, that so you may be hid in the day of his fierce wrath,
which will assuredly come upon all the workers of iniquity, which is the true
desire of us who are your friends and Country men, and lovers of the souls of
all mankind. Dear people we know the generality of you is not unacquainted
with the cruelties which many of us who are called Quakers has patiently
endured, through the strength of our God, by the Priests, Magistrates and
People, for many years; we cannot but mention the Priests first, because we
well know they have been, and are the chiefest Agents to instigate the
Magistrates and the common sort of people also, against the innocent suffering
people of the Lord, and their false accusations affirmed by oath has not been
wanting therein; as for instance, Richard Harris, Priest of Kislingbery, who
got a Warrant from John Willoughby, called Justice, to bring before him (the
said Justice) one William Carr of the said Town of Kislingbery; so accordingly
it was done, and there the Priest took an oath against him, and affirmed
(though falsely) that the said William Carr had dispersed treasonable Papers,
amongst the people of the aforesaid Town, and the Paper which he was accused
for dispersing, was not at all tending to any such purpose, neither did the
said William give it to that man which the Priest swore he did, for his
neighbor came along with him to the Justice, and there testified that the said
William Carr was not the man which he had the Paper of, but it was another man
of the same Town which gave it him, yet notwithstanding the said William Carr
was sent to the Goal upon the account aforesaid, viz. for dispersing
treasonable Papers, and there he lay until the next Sessions holden for the
County of Northampton, and then was brought forth, and they knowing they had
dealt deceitfully by him to cast him into prison upon an account which they
could not prove against him, so they mentioned no more the treasonable Paper,
but told him then, if he would take the Oath of Allegiance, he might be set at
liberty, but he conscienciously refusing was sent back to prison again, where
he laid down his life not long after, and left his Wife with six fatherless
children, and notwithstanding the aforesaid Priest has persecuted him unto
death, yet he seeks still to ruin his widow and fatherless children; for he
has caused Sarah Carr widow, the wife of William Carr, to be arrested by a
Writ, and brought from her six fatherless children to the County Goal in
Northampton, where her tender Husband laid down his life, having no other thing
against her but for milk, which Tythe-milk as he calls it, came to the value of
ten shillings, or thereabouts, but he never demanded it of her, but caused her
to be arrested as aforesaid, and brought to the Goal, where she at present
lies for the testimony of a good conscience. And John Whitefield Priest of
Bugbrook, and the aforesaid cruel blood-thirsty Priest Richard Harris of
Kistingbery, these two Priests often instigated John Willoughby (called
Justice) to act as he has done against the innocent people of the Lord, and
when his soldiers has come to a Meeting, by the aforesaid John Willoughbies
order, they have especially called for some friends by their names, who dwelt
at the Towns of Bugbrook and Kistingbery, and took them away from amongst many,
saying, they must have such, however; and two of Bugbrook, called by names
Joseph Gammage and Richard Ashby, was by the soldiers particularly called for
at a Meeting from amongst many, and Thomas Dent of Kistingbery, Miller, those
two Priests (as we understand) had given information against those three
innocent Persons, who by the soldiers was brought to Northampton, before Jo.
Willoughby called Justice, who committed them to the Goal, where the
aforementioned Joseph Gammage and Richard Ashby sealed their testimony with their
blood, and the aforenamed Thomas Dent lies in prison upon the same account
still, and has been prisoner above one year and half; so both these Priests
being guilty of blood, we cannot but mention them amongst the afore-going
cruelties of the Magistrates of this Age and Generation, which they have acted
against the innocent people of the Lord, whom they seek to oppress and lay
heavy burdens upon, yet our hope and trust is in the Lord our God, who we know
is the living God, and will arise in his fierce wrath, and will avenge himself
upon his adversaries, and the adversaries of his chosen people: but this is our
desires unto the Lord, in the behalf of ours and his enemies, that they might
return from the evil of their doings, before the Lord appears in his fierce
wrath, who will bring destruction upon them at unawares, except they repent.

THE END.

