A Healing Question propounded and resolved upon occasion of the late public
and seasonable Call to Humiliation, in order to love and union amongst the
honest party, and with a desire to apply Balsome to the wound, before it become
incurable.
THE Question propounded is, What possibility does yet remain (all things
considered) of reconciling and uniting the dissenting judgments of honest men
within the three Nations, who still pretend to agree in the spirit, justice,
and reason of the same good cause; and what are the means to effect this?

Answ. If it be taken for granted (as on the Magistrates part, from the ground
inviting the people of England and Wales to a solemn day of Fasting and
Humiliation, may not be dispaired of) that all the dissenting parties agree
still in the spirit and reason of the same righteous cause, the resolution
seems very clear in the affirmative; arguing not only for a possibility, but a
great probability hereof, nay a necessity daily approaching nearer and nearer
to compel it, if any or all of the dissenting parties intend or desire to be
safe from the danger of the common enemy, who is not out of work, though at
present much out of sight and observation.

The grounds of this are briefly these. First the cause has still the same
goodness in it as ever; and is or ought to be as much in the hearts of al good
people that have adhered to it. It is not less to be valued now, then when
neither blood nor treasure were thought too dear to carry it on, and hold it up
from sinking; and has the same Omnipotent God, whose great Name is concerned
in it, as well as his peoples outward safety and welfare; Who knows also how
to give a revival to it, when secondary instruments and visible means fail, or
prove deceitful.

Secondly, The Persons concerned and engaged in this Cause, are still the same
as before; with the advantage of being more tried, more enured to danger and
hardship, and more endeared to one another, by their various and great
experiences, as well of their own hearts as their fellow-Brethrens. These are
the same still in heart and desire after the same thing, which is, that being
freed out of the hands of their enemies, they may serve the Lord without fear,
in holiness and righteousness all the days of their life.

As they have had this great good finally in their aims (if Declarations to
men, and Appeals to God signify any thing) so* as a requisite to attain this,
they did with great cheerfulnes and unanimity draw out themselves to the
utmost, in the maintenance of a war, when all other means, first essayed
proved ineffectual. In the management of this war, it pleased God (the
righteous Judge, who was appealed to in the controversy) so to bless the
Council, and Forces of the persons concerned and engaged in this cause, as in
the end to make them absolute and complete Conquerors over their common Enemy.
And by this means they had added unto the natural right which was in them
before (and so declared by their Representatives in Parliament assembled) the
right of Conquest for the strengthening of their just claim to be governed by
National Councils, and successive Representatives of their own election and
setting up. This they once thought they had been in possession of, when it was
ratified, as it were, in the blood of the last King: But of late a great
interruption having happened unto them in their former expectations, and
instead thereof, something rising up that seems rather accommodated to the
private and selfish interest of a particular part (in comparison) then truly
adequate to the common good and concern of the whole Body engaged in this
Cause: Hence it is that this compacted body is now falling assunder into many
dissenting parts (a thing unforeseen, nor unhoped for by the common Enemy all
along as their last relief) and if these breaches be not timely healed, and the
offenses (before they take too deep root) removed, they will certainly work
more to the advantage of our common Enemy, then any of their own unwearied
endeavors, and dangerous contrivances in foreign parts put altogether.

A serious discussion, and sober enlarging upon these grounds, will quickly
give an insight into the state of the Question, and naturally tend to a plain
and familiar resolution thereof.

That which is first to be opened, is the nature and goodness of the Cause;
which had it not carried in it its own evidence, would scarce have found so
many of the people of God adherers to it, within the Three Nations,
contributing either their counsels, their purses, their bodily pains, or their
affections and prayers, as a combined strength; without which, the military
force alone would have been little available to subdue the common Enemy, and
restore to this whole body their just natural Rights in civil things, and true
freedom in matters of conscience.

The two last mentioned particulars, rightly stated, will evidence sufficiently
the nature and goodness of this Cause

For the first of these, that is to say, the Natural right, which the whole
party of Honest men adhering to this Cause, are by success of their Arms
restored unto, fortified in, and may claim as their undeniable privilege,
that righteously cannot be taken from them, nor they debarred from bringing
into exercise, It lies in this.

They are to have and enjoy the freedom (by way of dutiful compliance and
condiscention from all the parts and members of this society) to set up meet
persons in the place of Supreme Judicature and Authority amongst them; whereby
they may have the use and benefit of the choicest light and wisdom of the
Nation that they are capable to call forth, for the Rule and Government under
which they will live; and through the orderly exercise of such measure of
wisdom and counsel as the Lord in this way shall please to give unto them, to
shape and form all subordinate actings and administrations of Rule and
Government, so as shall best answer the public welfare and safety of the
whole.

This, in substance, is the right and freedom contained in the nature and
goodness of the cause, wherein the Honest party have been engaged. For in
this, all the particulars of our civil right and freedom are comprehended,
conserved in and derived from their proper root; In which whilst they grow,
they will ever thrive, flourish and increase: whereas on the contrary, if there
be never so many fair branches of liberty planted on the root of a private and
selfish interest, they will not long prosper, but must, within a little time,
wither and degenerate into the nature of that whereinto they are planted. And
hence indeed sprung the evil of that Government which rose in and with the
Norman Conquest.

The root and bottom upon which it stood, was not public interest, but the
private lust and will of the Conqueror, who by force of arms did at first
detein the right and freedom which was, and is, due to the whole body of the
people: For whose safety and good, government it self is ordained by God, not
for the particular benefit of the Rulers, as a distinct and private interest of
their own* which yet* for the most part, is not only preferred before the
common good, but upheld in opposition thereunto. And as at first the Conqueror
did, by violence and force, deny this freedom to the people, which was their
natural right and privilege; so he, and his Successors all along, lay as bars
and impediments to the true National interest and public good, in the very
National Councils and Assemblies themselves; which were constituted in such a
manner, as most served for the upholding of the private interest of their
Families. And this being challenged by them as their Prerogative, was found by
the people assembled in Parliament, most unrighteous, burdensome, and
destructive to their liberty. And when they once perceived, that by this Engine
all their just rights were like to be destroyed, especially (being backed, as
it was, with the power of the Militia, which the late King, for that purpose,
had assumed into his hands, and would not, upon the peoples application to him
in Parliament part with into the hands of that great Council, who were best to
be entrusted with the Nations safety) this was the ground of the quarrel, upon
a civil account, between the King and his party, and the whole body of
adherents to the cause of the peoples true liberty; whereof this short touch
has been given, and shall suffice for the opening of the first Branch of this
Cause.

The second branch which remains briefly to be handled, is that which also
upon the grounds of natural right is to be laid claim unto; but distinguishes
it self from the former, as it respects a more heavenly and excellent object,
wherein the freedom is to be exercised and enjoyed, that is to say, matters of
Religion, or that concern the service and worship of God.

Unto this freedom the Nations of the World have right and title, by the
purchase of Christ's blood; who by virtue of his death and resurrection is
become the sole Lord and Ruler in and over the conscience; for to this end
Christ died, rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and of
the living; and that every one might give an account of himself in all matters
of Gods worship, unto God and Christ alone, as their own Master, unto whom they
stand or fall in judgment, and are not in these things to be oppressed, or
brought before the Judgment-seats of men. For why should thou set at naught
thy Brother in matters of his Faith and conscience, and herein intrude into the
proper office of Christ, since we are all to stand before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, whether Governors or governed, and by his decision only are capable
of being declared with certainty, to be in the right or in the wrong?

By virtue then of this Supreme Law, sealed and confirmed in the blood of
Christ unto all men (whose souls he challenges a propriety in, to bring under
his inward rule in the service and worship of God) it is that all Magistrates
are to sear and forbear intermedling with giving rule or imposing in those
matters They are to content themselves with what is plain in their commission,
as ordained of God to be his Minister unto men for good, whilst they approve
themselves the doe^s of that which is good in the sight of men, and whereof
earth^y and worldly Judicatures are capable to make a clear and perfect
judgment: In which case the Magistrate is to be for praise and protection to
them. In like manner he is to be a Minister of terror and revenge to those
that do evil in matters of outward practice, converse, and dealings in the
things of this life between man and man, for the cause whereof the judicatures
of men are appointed and set up. But to exceed these limits, as it is not safe
nor warrantable for the Magistrate (in that he who is higher then the highest,
regards, and will show himself displeased at it) so neither is it good for the
people, who hereby are nourished up in biting, devouring, wrathful spirit one
against another, and are found transgressors of that Royal law which forbids us
to do that unto another, which we would not have them do unto us, were we in
their condition.

This freedom then is of high concern to be had and enjoy, as well for the
Magistrates sake, as for the peoples ^ommon good; and it consists, as has been
said, in the Magistrates forbearing to put forth the power of rule and coercion
in things that God has exempted out of his Commission. So that all care
requisite for the peoples obtaining this, may be exercised with great ease, if
it be taken in its proper season and that this restraint be laid upon the
Supreme Power before it be erected, as a fundamental Constitution among others,
upon which the free consent of the people is given, to have the persons brought
into the exercise of Suprem Authority over them, and on their behalf; and if
besides, as a further confirmation hereunto, it be acknowledged be the
voluntary act of the ruling Power, when once brought into a capacity of acting
legislatively, that herein they are bound up, and judge it their duty so to be
(both in reference to God the Institutor of M^gistracy, and in reference to the
whole Body bywhom they are entrusted) this great blessing will here^y be so
well provided for, that we shall have no cause to fear, as it may be ordered

By this means a great part of the outward exercise of Antichristian Tyranny
and bondage will be plucked up by the very roots; which till some such course
be held in it, will be always apt to renew and sprout out afresh, under some
new form or refined appearances, as by late years experience we have been
taught. For since the fall of the Bishops and persecuting Presbyteries, the
same spirit is apt to arise in the next sort of Clergy, that can get the ear of
the Magistrate, and pretend to the keeping and ruling the conscience of the
Governors. Although this spirit and practice has been all along decried by the
faithful adherents to this Cause, as a most sore oppression, and insufferable
yoke of bondage, most unrighteously kept up over the consciences of the people;
and therefore judged by them most needful to be taken out of the way. And in
this matter the present Governors have been willing very eminently to give
their Testimony, in their public Declarations, however in practice there is
much of grievance yet found among us, though more, in probability, from the
officiousness of subordinate Ministers, then any clear purpose or design of
the chief in power.

Having thus showed what the true freedom is, in both the Branches of it, that
shines forth in the righteous Cause, wherein the good people of these Nations
have so deeply engaged: It will not be improper in the next place to consider
two particulars more that give still further light into the matter in question;
as first The qualifications of the Persons that have adhered to this Cause.
Secondly, the capacity wherein they have been found from time to time carrying
it on.

As to their Qualification, they have in the general, distinguished themselves
and been made known, by a forwardness to assist and own the public welfare
and good of the Nation, for the attaining and preserving the just rights and
liberties thereof, asserted and witnessed unto in the true stating of this
Cause, according to the two branches thereof already spoken to. They have
showed themselves, upon all occasions, desirers and lovers of true freedom,
either in civils, or in spirituals, or in both. To express their value thereof,
and faithfulness to the same, they have largely contributed, in one kind or
other what was proper to each in his place to do; which actions of theirs
proceeding from hearts sincerely affected to the cause, created in them aright
to be of an Incorporation and Society by themselves, under the name of the good
Party; having been from the beginning unto this day publicly and commonly so
acknowledged, by way of distinction from all Neuters, close and open Enemies,
and deceitful Friends or Apostates. These, in order to the maintaining of this
Cause, have stood by the Army, in defense and support thereof, against all
opposition whatever, as those that, by the growing light of these times, have
been taught and led forth in their experiences, to look above and beyond the
letter, form, and outward circumstances of government, into the inward reason
and spirit thereof, herein only to fix and terminate, to the leaving behind all
empty shadows, that would obtrude themselves in the place of true freedom.

Secondly, as to the capacity wherein these persons, thus qualified, have
acted, it has been very variable, and subject to great changes: sometimes in
one form, and sometimes in another, and very seldom, if ever at all, so
exactly, and in all points consonant to the rule of former Laws and
Constitutions of Government, as to be clearly and fully justified by them, any
longer then the Law of Success and Conquest did uphold them who had the inward
warrant of Justice and Righteousness to encourage them in such their actings.

The utmost and last reserve therefore which they have had, in case all other
failed, has been their military capacity, not only strictly taken for the
standing Army, but in the largest sense, wherein the whole party may (with the
Army, and under that military constitution and conduct, which by the providence
of God they shall then be found in) associate themselves in the best order they
can, for the common defense and safety of the whole. As not ignorant, that when
once embodied in this their Military posture, in such manner as by common
consent shall be found requisite for the safety of the body, they are most
irresistible, absolute, and comprehensive in their power; having that wherein
the substance of all Government is contained, and under the protection whereof,
and safety that may be maintained thereby, they can contrive and determine, in
what manner this irresistible, absolute, and boundless power, unto which they
are now arrived in this their Military capacity shall have just and due limits
set unto it, and be drawn out in a meet and orderly way of exercise, for the
Commonweal and safety of the whole Body, under the rule and oversight of a
Supreme Judicature; unto the wisdom of whose laws and orders, the sword is
to become most entirely subject and subservient: And this without the least
cause of jealousy or unsafety, either to the standing Army, or any member
thereof, or unto the good people adhering to this Cause, or any one of them;
since the interest of both, by this mutual action of either, will be so
combined together in one (even in that wherein before they were distinct) that
all just cause of difference, fear, animosity emulation, jealousy, or the
like, will be wholly abolished and removed.

For when once the whole body of the good people find that the Military
interest and capacity is their own, and that into which necessity at the last
may bring the whole Party (whereof of right a place is to be reserved for them)
and that herein they are so far from being in subjection or slavery* that in
this posture they are most properly sovereign, and possess their right of
natural sovereignty, they will presently see a necessity of continuing ever one
with their Army raised and maintained by them, for the promoting this Cause
against the common Enemy; who in his next attempt will put for all with greater
desperateness and rage then ever.

Again, when once the standing Army and their Governors shall also find, that
by setting and keeping up themselves in a divided interest from the rest of the
Body of Honest men, they withhold from themselves those contributions in all
voluntary and cheerful assistances, by the affections and prayers, by the
persons and purses of the good party, to the weakening themselves thereby, as
to any vigerous support from them, in the times of most imminent danger
(whereof the late King had an experience, that will not suddenly be out of
memory, when he undertook the war in the beginning of these troubles, against
the Scots, and was, in a manner, therein deserted by all the good party in
England) they will then find (if they stay not till it be too late) that by
espousing the interest of the people, in submitting themselves with their
fellow adherents to the Cause, under the rule and authority of their own
Supreme Judicature, they lose not their Power or Sovereignty; but becoming one
Civil or Politic Incorporation with the whole party of honest men, they do
therein keep the Sovereignty, as originally seated in themselves, and part with
it only but as by deputation and representation of themselves, when it is
brought into an orderly way of exercise, by being put into the hands of persons
chosen and entrusted by themselves to that purpose.

By this mutual and happy transition which may be made between the party of
Honest men in the Three Nations virtually in Arms, and those actually so now in
power at the Head of the Army, how suddenly would the union of the whole Body
be consolidated, and made so firm as it will not need to fear all the designs
and attempts of the common Enemy; especially if herein they unite themselves in
the first place to the Lord, as willing to follow his providence, and observe
his will in the way and manner of bringing this to pass. In which case we
shall not need to fear what all the gates of hell are able to do in opposition
thereunto.

It is not then the standing and being of the present Army and Military forces
in the three Nations, that is liable to exception or offense; from any
dissenting judgments at this time amongst the honest well affected party. In
and with them, under God, stand the welfare and outward safety of the whole
body; and to be enemies to them or wish them hurt, were to do it to themselves;
and by trying such conclusions to play the game of the common enemy, to the
utter ruin and destruction, not only of the true freedom aimed at and
contended for in the late wars, but of the very persons themselves that have
been in any sort active or eminent promoters thereof.

The Army considered as it is in the hands of an honest and wise General, and
sober faithful Officers, embodied with the rest of the party of honest men;
and espousing still the same cause, and acting in their primitive simplicity,
humility, and trust, in reference to the welfare and safety of the whole body,
is the only justifyable and most advantageous posture and capacity that the
good party at present can find themselves in, in order to the obtaining that
true freedom they have fought for, and possessing of it in the establishment
thereof upon the true Basis and foundation, as has been showed of right
Government.

That wherein the offense lies, and which causes such great thoughts of heart
amongst the honest party (if it may be freely expressed, as sure it may, when
the Magistrate himself professes he does but desire and wait for conviction
therein) is in short this.

That when the right and privilege is returned, nay is restored by Conquest
unto the whole Body (that forfeited not their interest therein) of freely
disposing themselves in such a constitution of righteous Government, as may
best answer the ends held forth in this Cause; that nevertheless, either
through delay they should be withheld as they are, or through design they
should come at last to be utterly denied the exercise of this their right, upon
pretense that they are not in capacity as yet to use it; which indeed has some
truth in it, if those that are now in power, and have the command of the Arms,
do not prepare all things requisite thereunto, as they may, and like faithful
Guardians to the Commonwealth, admitted to be in its nonage, they ought.

But if the bringing of true freedom into exercise amongst men, yea, so
refined a party of men, be impossible; why has this been concealed all this
while? and why was it not thought on before so much blood was spilt, and
treasure spent? surely, such a thing as this was judged real and practicable,
not imaginary and notional.

Besides, why may it not suffice to have been thus long delayed and withheld
from the whole body, at least as to its being brought by them into exercise now
at last? surely the longer it is withheld, the stronger jealousies do increase;
that it is intended to be assumed and engrossed by a part only, to the leaving
the rest of the body (who in all reason and justice ought to be equally
participants with the other in the right and benefit of the Conquest, for as
much as the war was managed at the expense and for the safety of the whole) in
a condition almost as much exposed, and subject to be imposed upon, as if they
had been enemies and conquered, not in any sense Conquerors.

If ever such an unrighteous, unkind and deceitful dealing with brethren should
happen, although it might continue above the reach of question from humane
judicature, yet can we think it possible it should escape and go unpunished by
the immediate hand of the Righteous Judge of the whole World, when he arises
out of his place to do right to the oppressed?

Nay if in stead of favoring and promoting the peoples common good and
welfare, self-interest and private gain should evidently appear to be the
things we have aimed at all along; if those very Tyrannical principles and
Antichristian relics, which God by us has punished in our predecessors,
should again revive, spring up afresh, and show themselves lodged also and
retained in our bosoms; rendering us of the number of those that have forgot
they were purged from their old sins, and declaring us to be such as to please
a covetous mind, do withhold from destruction that which God has designed to
the curse of his vengeance: If all those great advantages of serving the Lords
will and design in procuring and advancing his peoples true welfare and outward
safety, which (as the fruit of his blessing upon our Armies) have so
miraculously fallen into our hands, shall at last be wrested and mis-improved
to the enriching and greatning of our selves: If these things should ever be
found amongst us (which the Lord in mercy forbid) shall we need to look any
further for the accursed thing? will not our Consciences show us from the light
of the Word and Spirit of God, how near a conformity these actions would hold
therewith? which sin, Josh. 7. became a curse to the Camp, and withheld the
Lord from being any more amongst them, or going out with their forces. And did
the action of Achan import any more then these two things. First, he saved and
kept from destruction the goodly Babylonish garment, which was devoted by God
thereunto. Secondly, he brought not in the fruit and gain of the Conquest into
the Lords Treasury, but covetously went about to convert it to his own proper
use. To do this, is to take of the accursed thing, which Josh. 7. all Israel
was said to do, in the sin of Achan, and to have stolen and dissembled
likewise, and put it amongst their own stuff. This caused the anger of the
Lord to kindle against Israel, and made them unable to stand before their
enemies, but their hearts melted as water. And thus far the Lord is concerned,
if such an evil as this shall lie hid in the midst of us. But to return to what
we were upon before.

The matter which is in question among the dissenting parts of the whole body
of honest men, is not so trivial and of such small consequence, as some would
make it. It Is in effect, the main and whole of the Cause; without which all the
freedom which the people have or can have, is in comparison but shadow and in
name only, and therefore can never give that peace and satisfaction to the
body, which is requisite unto a durable and solid settlement. This is that
which makes all sound and safe at the root, and gives the right balance
necessary to be held up between soveraignity and subjection, in the exercise of
all righteous Government; applying the use of the sword to the promoting and
upholding the public safety and welfare of the whole body, in preference and
if need be in opposition unto any of the parts; whilst yet by its equal and
impartial administration in reference unto each, it does withal maintain the
whole Body in a most delightful harmony, welfare, and correspondency. The
sword never can nor is it to be expected ever will do this, while the
soveraignity is admitted and placed any where else, then in the whole Body of
the people that have adhered to the cause, and by them be derived unto their
successive Representatives, as the most equal and impartial Judicature for the
effecting hereof.

Where there is then a righteous and good constitution of Government, there is
first an orderly union of many understandings together, as the public and
common Supreme Judicature or visible Soveraignity, set in a way of free and
orderly exercise, for the directing and applying the use of the ruling power or
the sword, to promote the interest and common welfare of the whole, without any
disturbance or annoyance, from within or from without. And then secondly, there
is a like union and readiness of will in all the Individuals, in their private
capacities, to execute and obey (by all the power requisite, and that they are
able to put forth) those sovereign Laws and Orders issued out by their own
Deputies and Trustees.

A Supreme Judicature thus made the Representative of the whole, is that which
we say, will most naturally care, and most equally provide for the Common good
and safety. Though by this it is not denied, but that the supreme power, when
by free consent it is placed in a single person or in some few persons, may be
capable also to administer righteous Government; at least the Body that gives
this liberty, when they need not, are to thank themselves if it prove
otherwise. But when this free and natural access unto Government, is
interrupted and declined, so as a liberty is taken by any particular member, or
number of them, that are to be reputed but a part in comparison of the whole,
to assume and engrosse the office of sovereign rule and power, and to impose
themselves as the competent public Judge of the safety and good of the whole,
without their free and due consent; and to lay claim unto this, as those that
find themselves possessed of the sword (and that so advantagiously, as it
cannot be recovered again out of their hands, without more apparent danger and
damage to the whole body, then such attempts are wortth) this is that Anarchy
that is the first rise and step to Tyanny; and lays the grounds of manifest
confusion and disorder; exposing the ruling power to the next hand that on the
next opportunity can lay hold on the sword; and so, by a kind of necessity,
introduces the highest imposition and bondage upon the whole Body, in
compelling all the parts, though never so much against the true public
interest, to serve and obey, as their sovereign rule and supreme Authority,
the Arbitrary will and judgment of those that bring themselves into rule by
the power of the sword, in the right only of a part that sets up it self in
preference before, or at least in competition with the melfare of the whole*

And if this, which is so essential to the well being and right constitution of
Government, were once obtained, the disputes about the form would not prove so
dificult, nor find such opposition, as to keep up the bone of contention and
disunion, with much danger to the whole. For if as the foundation of all, the
sovereignty be ackowledged to reside originally in the whole body of adherents
to this Cause (whose natural and inherent right thereunto is of a far ancienter
date then what is obtained by success of their arms, and so cannot be abrogated
even by Conquest it self if that were the case) and then if in consequence
hereof, a supreme Judicature be set up and orderly constituted, as naturally
arising and resulting from the free choice and consent of the whole Body, taken
out from among themselves, as flesh of their flesh, and bone of their bone, of
the same public spirit and nature with themselves, and the main be by this
means secured; what could be propounded afterward, as to the form of
administration that would much stick?

Would a standing Council of State settled for life, in reference to the safety
of the Commonwealth, and for the maintaining intercourse and commerce with
Foreign States, under the inspection and oversight of the Supreme Judicature,
but of the same fundamental constitution with themselves, would this be
disliked? admitting their orders were binding, in the intervals of Supreme
National Assemblies, so far only as consonant to the settled Laws of the
Commonwealth the vacancy of any of which by death or otherwise might be
supplied by the vote of the major part of themselves. Nay would there be any
just exception to be taken, if (besides both these) it should be agreed (as
another part of the fundamental constitution of the Government) to place that
branch of Sovereignty which chiefly respects the execution of the Laws, in a
distinct office from that of the legislative power (and yet subordinate to them
and to the Laws) capable to be entrusted in the hands of one single person, if
need require, or in a greater number, as the legislative power should think
fit; and for the greater strength and honor unto this Office, that the
execution of all Laws and Orders (that are binding) may go forth in his, or
their name; and all disobedience thereunto, or contempt thereof, be taken as
done to the peoples Sovereignty whereof he or they bear the Image or
Representation, subordinate to the Legislative Power, and at their will to be
kept up and continued in the hands of a single Person or more, as the
experience of the future good or evil of it shall require.

Would such an office as this, thus stated, carry in it any inconsistency with
a free State? nay, if it be well considered, would it not rather be found of
excellent use to the well-being of Magistracy founded upon this righteous
bottom, that such a Lieftenancy of the peoples sovereignty in these three
Nations, may always reside in some one or more persons, in whose
administration, that which is reward and punishment may shine forth?

And if now it shall be objected, that (notwithstanding all these Cautions)
should once the Sovereignty be acknowledged to be in the diffused body of the
people (though the adherents to this Cause, not only as their natural, but as
their acquired right by Conquest) they would suddenly put the use and exercise
of the Legislative power into such hands, as would, through their
ill-qualifiednesse to the work spoil all, by maladministration thereof, and
hereby lose the cause in stead of upholding and mantaining it.

The Answer unto this is, First that God by his providence has eased our minds
much of this solicitude, by the course he has already taken to fit and prepare
a choice and selected number of the people unto this work, that are tried and
refined by their inward and outward experiences in this great quarrel, and the
many changes they have passed through: In respect whereof well qualified
persons are to be found, if due care be but taken in the choice of them. And if
herein the people of the Lord shall be waiting upon him for his guidance and
presence with them, we may have grounds to hope that God (whose name has all
along been called upon in the managing of this Cause) will pour out so
abundantly of his spirit upon his people attending on him in righteous ways,
and will also so move their hearts to choose persons bearing his Image into the
Magistracy, that a more glorious product may spring up out of this then at
first we can expect, to the setting up of the Lord himself as chief Judge and
Lawgiver amongst us. And unto this the wisdom and honesty of the persons now
in power May have an opportunity eminently to come into discovery. For in this
case, and upon the grounds already laid, the very persons now in power are
they unto whose lot it would fall to set about this preparatory work; and by
their orders and directions to dispose the whole Body, and bring them into the
meetest capacity to effect the same. The most natural way for which would seem
to be by a General Council, or Convention of faithful, honest, and discerning
men, chosen for that purpose by the free consent of the whole Body of adherents
to this Cause in the several parts of the Nations, and observing the time and
place of meeting appointed to them (with other circumstances concerning their
Election) by order from the present Ruling Power, but considered as General of
the Army.

Which Convention is not properly to exercise the Legislative Power, but only
to debate freely, and agree upon the particulars, that by way of fundmental
Constitutions shall be laid and inviolably observed, as the conditions upon
which the whole body so represented, does consent to cast it self into a Civil
and Politic Incorporation, and under the visible form and administration of
Government therein declared, and to be by each individual member of the Body
subscribed in testimony of his or their particular consent given thereunto.
Which conditions so agreed (and amongst them an Act of Oblivion for one) will
be without danger of being broken or departed from; considering of what it is
they are the conditions, and the nature of the Convention wherein they are made;
which is of the people represented in their highest state of Sovereignty, as
they have the sword in their hands unsubjected unto the rules of Civil
Government, but what themselves orderly assembled for that purpose, do think
fit to make. And the sword upon these conditions subjecting it self to the
Supreme Judicature, thus to be set up; how suddenly might harmony,
righteousness, love, peace, and safety unto the whole Body follow hereupon, as
the happy fruit of such a settlemeut, if the Lord have yet any delight to be
amongst us?

And this once put in a way, and declared for by the General and Army (as that
which they are clearly convinced in the sight of God is their duty to bring
about, and which they engage accordingly to see done;) How firmly and freely
would this oblige the hearts and persons, the counsels and purses, the
affections and prayers, with all that is in the power of this whole party to
do, in way of assistance and strenthning the hands of those now in power,
whatever straights and difficulties they may meet with in the maintenance of
the public safety and peace?

This then being the state of our present affairs and differences, let it be
acknowledged on all hands, and let all be convinced that are concerned, that
there is not only a possibility, but a probability, yea a compelling necessity
of a firm union in this great Body, the setting of which in joint and tune
again, by a spirit of meekness and fear of the Lord, is the work of the
present day, and will prove the only remedy, under God, to uphold and carry on
this blessed cause and work of the Lord in the three Nations, that is already
come thus far onwards in its progress to its desired and expected end of
bringing in Christ, the Desire of all Nations, as the chief Ruler amongst us.

Now unto this re-uniting work let there be a readiness in all the dissenting
parts from the highest to the lowest, by cheerfully coming forth to one another
in a spirit of self-denial and love in stead of war and wrath, and to cast down
themselves before the Lord, who is the Father of all their spirits, in
self-abasement and humiliation, for the mutual offense they have been in for
some time past, one unto another, and great provocation unto God, and reproach
unto his most glorious name, who expected to have been served by them with
reverence and godly fear; for our God is a consuming fire.

And, as an inducement unto this, Let us assure our selves, the means of
effecting it will not prove so difficult as other things that have been brought
about in the late war, if the minds and spirits of all concerned were once well
and duly prepared hereunto, by a kindly work of self-denial and
self-abasement, set home by the spirit of the Lord upon their consciences;
which if he please, he may do we know not how soon. Nay if we shall behold
with a discerning eye the inside of that work which God has been doing amongst
us the three years last past, it would seem chiefly to have been his aim, to
bring his people into such a frame as this is. For in this tract of time, there
has been (as we may say) a great silence in Heaven, as if God were pleased to
stand still and be as a looker on, to see what his people would be in their
latter end, and what work they would make of it, if left to their own wisdom
and Politic contrivances. And as God has had the silent part; so men, and
that good men too, have had the active and busy part, and have like themselves
made a great sound and noise, like the shout of a King in a mighty Host; which
whilst it has been a sound only and no more, has not done much hurt as yet;
but the fear and jealousy thereby caused, has put the whole Body out of
frame, and made them apt to fall into great confusions and disorder.

And if there be thus arisen a general dissent and disagreement of parts (which
is not, nor ought to be accounted the less considerable, because it lies hid
and kept in under a patient silence) why should there not be as general a
confession and acknowledgement of what each may find themselves overtaken in,
and cannot but judge themselves faulty for? This kind of vent being much
better then to have it break out in flames of a forward and untimely wrathful
spirit which never works the righteousness of God. Especially since what has
been done amongst us, may probably have been more the effect of temptation then
the product of any malicious design; and this sort of temptation is very
common and incident to men in power (how good soever they may be) to be
overtaken in, and thereupon do sudden and unadvised actions, which the Lord
pardons and over rules for the best: evidently making appear that it is the
work of the weak and fleshly part, which his own people carry about with them
too much unsubdued. And therefore the Lord thinks fit by this means, to show
them the need of being beholding to their spiritual part, to restore them
again, and bring them into their right temper and healthful constitution.

And thus whilst each dissenting part is aggravating upon it self faultiness
and blame, and none excusing, but all confessing they deserve, in one sort or
other, reproof, if not before men, yet to Gods sight: Who knows how soon it
may please God to come into this broken, contrite, and self denying frame of
Spirit in the good people within the three Nations, and own them thus truly
humbled and abased, for his Temple and the place of his habitation and rest,
wherein he will abide for ever? of whom it may be said God is in the Midst of
her, she shall not be moved; God shall help her and that right early, or with
his morning appearance. At which time he will sit silent no longer, but Heaven
will speak again, and become active and powerful in the spirits and hearts of
Honest men, and in the works of his providence, when either they go out to
sight by Sea or by Land, or remain in counsel and debates at home for the
public Weal, and again hear the prayers of his people, and visibly own
them is a flock of holy men, as Jerusalem in her solemn ^easts. I will yet for
this be enquired of by the House of Israel, says the Lord, to do it for them:
And then they shall know that I the Lord their God am with them, and that they
are my people, and that ye my flock the flock of my pasture, are men that have
showed your selves weak sinful men, and I am your God that have declared my
self an all-wise and powerful God, says the Lord God.

Postscript.
Reader,
UPon the perusal of this Discourse thou will quickly perceive that these two
things are principally aimed at in it by the Author. First to answer in some
measure that which is called for by those in power, when they publicly
profess they desire nothing more then conviction, and to find out the hidden
provocations which either have or yet may bring forth the Lord against these
Nations, in the way which at present they are in.

Secondly, To remove out of the minds and spirits of the honest Party, that
still agree in the reason and justice of the good Old Cause, all things of a
private Nature and selfish Concern (the tendency whereof serves but to foment
and strengthen wrath and divisions amongst them) and in Place thereof to set
before them that common and public interest, which (if with sincerity
embraced) may be the means of not only procuring a firm union amongst them,
but also of conserving them herein.

In order to this, the Author has not been willing much to declare his own
Opinion, or deliver any Positive Conclusions, as to discuss the business by
way of question and answer, and thereby make as near a conjecture as he can, of
that, wherein the several dissenting parts may with better satisfaction meet
together, and agree upon a safe and righteous bottom, then to remain at the
distance they do, to the apparent advantage of the Common Enemy, the
approaching ruin of themselves, and needless hazard (if not loss) of the
Cause they have been so deeply engaged in. Especially considering that when
once they shall be found beginning to come forth to one another, in such a
condiscending self-denying spirit, cleansed from the stain of hypocrisy and
deceit, they may be well assured that light will spring up amongst them more
and more unto a perfect day; and then those things which at present we have
next in view, will prove as shadows ready to flee away before the morning
brightness of Christ's Heavenly Appearance and second coming; through which
they will be heightened and improved to their full maturitie, to the bringing
in that Kingdom of his that shall never be moved.

And because an Essay has been already made, in a private way to obtain the
first thing, that is to say, Conviction; which chiefly is in the hand of the
Lord to give; the same obligation lies upon the Author, with respect to the
second, for the exposing of it as now it is unto Public view, and therein
leaving it also with the Lord, for his blessing thereunto.

LONDON, Printed for T. Brewster at the sign of the three Bibles at the
West End of Paul's. 1656.


