TWO TREATISES: VIZ. 1. An Epistle General, TO THE Mystical Body of Christ on
Earth, the Church Universal in BABYLON. II. THE Face of the Times: Wherein is
discovered, The RICE, PROGRESS, and ISSUE, of the ENMITY and CONTEST, between
the SEED of the WOMAN and the SEED of the SERPENT, etc.

The Design of it being, To awaken up the present Generation of God's People,
to a more diligent and curious Observation of the present Signs of the near
Approach of the Day of the Lord.

Both written, By Sir HENRY VANE, Knight, in the time of his Imprisonment.

Printed in the Year, 1662.

AN Epistle General, TO THE MYSTICAL BODY OF Christ on Earth, THE CHURCH
UNIVERSAL IN BABYLON,

Who are Pilgrims and Strangers on the Earth, desiring and seeking after the
Heavenly Country.

Written by Sir HENRY VANE, Knight, in the time of his Imprisonment.

Printed in the Year, 1662.

THE Epistle to the Reader.
READER,
IT might be thought justly due to this Worthy Piece, especially being
Posthumous, that by the Care of some or other it should not come into the
World, without the attendance of some Preface or Epistle to the Reader: But
there being so apposit a Letter written on the sight of it, by a Person that
well knew the Author, all labor is spared the Publisher, save only the
transcribing thereof, and commending it to thee, which follows in these words.

My choice Friend,
THe view I had of that General Epistle, written by that Worthy, Faithful,
Dearly Beloved, and Honored Friend of ours, I cannot pass without some
acknowledgment to his Memory, whose Name lives like a Box of precious Ointment
in the House of God. Who in and through the rich Mercies of the Lord, offered
up himself a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable, in the day of Power from
the Lord, and that willingly and cheerfully, like a Lamb, whose great love and
burning desires were after the Flock, the Sheep and Lambs of the Lord.

Who, that they might be fed and taught, spared not himself in life and death,
by water and blood, to minister unto them; yea, how did the care of all the
Churches fall on him? the whole Flock, the scattered and wandering Sheep on the
Mountains and Hills, solitary in the Fields, dispersed in the Woods, driven
into the Wilderness.

How did his heart in this Epistle long and look after them, and call them
together, under the wing of that one Shepherd? What a blessed Example of
Patience, Faith and Courage has he left them?

And though many Brethren knew not him, yet he knew them, and owned them. If he
was rejected by many, till now by his Death many of those Vails are rent, And
they mourn over him whom they pierced before: Now they see he was a Son and
Heir of the Kingdom, of whom this Nation was no longer worthy.

How had God filled him with the Spirit of Wisdom, Understanding and Knowledge
in all the Works and Workmanship of Gods house, through the spiritual view God
had given him of the heavenly and eternal things themselves, having taken him
up into the Holy Mount with Himself, where he saw what he is made to testify,
that which was from the beginning, the Word of Life which he had seen and
looked on, his hands handled, his heart possessed of that Eternal Love, Truth
and Righteousness with the Father, which was made manifest unto him.

So he believed and bears his Record in Truth, having received Power and Wisdom
to understand all Mysteries, Bezaleel-like, made able to know and search out
the heights and depths, and all the several growths in God's House, to show
forth and to discover the cunning Works of all sorts, the curious workings in
Gold, and Silver, and in Brass; As appears in his Natural, Legal, and
Evangelical Conscience.

Very skilful also are his Carvings and Cuttings of Stones, to set them in
Gold* knowing the value of every of the Precious Stones of Zion, their
Qualities and rare Virtues, each most costly; and to set them every one in
their Order, in their Ranks, Rows and Places, fitted for each Tribe and People,
(the right Stone for each Tribe) how to fix them in the Breastplate of
Judgment, each in his socket of Gold, with their true and right Engravings,
like a Signet; how to call and write upon each its true Name and Work according
to its Nature, (each Work of the Spirit after its kind) For the Gifts, the
Operations, the Administrations of the Spirit are various and manifold, to set
forth the manifold Wisdom of God.

As in the Natural Creation there are bodies Celestial and Terrestial: The
Glory of the Celestial is one, and the Terrestial another* Nay, in the
Terrestial there are varieties. When all the Creatures were made, they were all
brought to Adam; he gave them Names according as they were, to every Creature
his own Name; to the Fishes in the Sea, to the Creeping-things and Beasts in
the Earth, and to the Fowls in the open Firmament of Heaven, each in their
proper places and Elements. The Earth brought forth her variety of Herbs,
Plants, Fruits and Trees, every one after his kind; all which are but the
shadows of the Kingdom above, the things of higher and better natures.

As in the Paradise and Garden of the Lord, there were varieties of Fruits and
Trees both for delight and shade, with the River to refresh them; yea, the very
River divided it self into four heads, to water every quarter, unbowelling it
self to them in equal shares, to feed and make them fruitful.

Such is the Universal Love, the Spring and Fountain of Life, in whom all live,
move and have their being, to gather together all things in one, whether
visible or invisible, as into their head; That as all Mankind are made of one
Blood so all Souls of one Spirit, who breathed at first the Breath of Life into
them, that he that was the first may be the last, the beginning and the ending,
He that was, and is, and is to come: What distance and difference soever there
may seem to be here, yet all the same, to day, yesterday, and for ever, the
same God, the same Father of all, the same Jesus and Savior, the same Spirit
and Comforter; yet the Appearances, Manifestations, Workings and Revelations,
manifold and various: And all, to show forth the Glory, yea, the Riches of the
Glory of Him, that has called us, and works all these in us and for us.

Yea, were not the works of the Tabernacle so? and yet each beautiful in its
place, each work and workmanship; some works of Wood, some of Stone, others of
Brass, some of Silver and over-laid with Gold, the choicest of beaten Gold; and
the more holy and inward, the purer, the inmost the purest of all; each room
and place as it came nearest to the living Oracle (the Mercy-Seat) the
narrower, the finer, the holier: and the more and the farther any thing or
place was distant from thence, the larger and courser; the more outward, the
less holy.

So were the Offerings of the Lord, all pleasant, that came willingly; the
skins, the Badgers skins, the red dyed Rams skins (for the Covering of the
Tabernacle on the outside) good enough, yet very course: the Boards of Shittem
wood, the Curtains, the Pillars of Wood, of Brass, of Wood over-laid with
Gold, each according to its place and service in the Tabernacle, more or less
excellent, as more or less inward or spiritual: So was the Linen, the Purple,
the Blue, the Scarlet, and curious Works; the most curious and pure for the
Vail next the Mercy-Seat.

So was it in the Composition of the Perfume and anointing Oil, after the
curious and choice Art of the Apothecary (that no Composition or Mixture must
be made like it) of the choicest Spices.

So for the Lamps of the Canalesticks to give light, and for the Altar of
Incense evening and morning (Oh! great is the Mystery of Godliness in all these
things) no Lights, but what was made of this pure holy Oil, must burn before
the Lord; if the Priests or Levites did burn any other, they must be cut off.

And so for the Incense of sweet Spices; the Lord, that Spirit, is very
curious, and can soon spy and smell out the Mixtures of Flesh, or any false
Compositions, and abhor them.

So in the Priests Garments for Aaron and his Sons to minister in; the nearer
the Ministration was to the Lord, the Purer and Holier, and the Garments the
more curious. The imbroydered fine Linen Coat, holy and pure; the Robe of the
Ephod, of blue; the curious Ephod with the two precious Onix Stones, and the
engraving therein, set on the shoulder plates; the curious Girdle of the Ephod,
with the wreathes of Gold, and the holy Breast Plate of Judgment, with the
twelve precious Stones coupled to the Ephod, and of the same curious
workmanship; with the curious Girdle, the Miter, the Plate of Holiness, and the
Crown for his head. For the other Priests, not so curious, nor such works, in
regard their Institutions was less glorious.

In all these things, how excellent, how skilful, and what a cunning searching
Spirit of discerning and Judgment, had this wise-hearted Soul (in the
Mysteries) unfolding the Riddles and hard Sayings, still opening them in
Spirit, faithful in all God's House, and keeping nothing of the Counsel of the
Lord back, nor hiding his Light under a Bushel, but setting it up in the
Candlestick, so, that it gave light to many of the Lord's House.

I was one of the number of those, that constantly attending on his Discourses,
as often as I was in Town, knew him more in his Family Exercises and Discourses
for many years than most; from whom I received more help and light in the
knowledge of God, than from all the men in the World besides, and found his
Ministry most searching and trying: What others took for Gold, he proved it to
be but Brass; and some Doctrines that others preferred for Spiritual, he tried,
and found them Carnal.

He had such a Breast Plate of Judgment and Discerning, that he did constantly
bear the remembrance of all the Tribes of Israel on his heart before the Lord,
and distinguished every Tribe after his condition; yea, he had this singular
and peculiar gift of Judgment, to discern the two Natures, the two Seeds, the
two Covenants, to admiration: Many a Soul he has put upon the search, that
thought he had attained and ran well, whom he found to be but in Egypt, or at
least but departing thence.

Shall we say he was a Scholar? Nay, but a Rabbi, a Doctor in the knowledge of
Christ, in whom a greater Fullness of the riches of Wisdom and Knowledge were
treasured up than in most; like that Disciple that lay in Christ's bosom: He
obtained so long a share of his life and growth, having the true sight and
measure of every man's state and growth, yet himself sat on a Rock higher than
all, and was such a blessing in his Witness (and Testimony to the Lord, in his
threefold state, of Life, Death, and Resurrection, and so of our conformity and
likeness to Him therein) that no Book extant, but the Striptures, did ever
clear so much Truth as his Retired Man's Meditations; and this blessed Epistle
now of his, is as a Key that further opens that to the Sons of men, and they
are to be understood better in spirit, and in operation, than in words.

How did he, seeing Truth lay scattered, maimed, and mangled in parts and
parcels, gather it all up? yea, and all the Professions and Professors of it,
and made one whole Garment of Truth amongst them all, and that without any seam
or rent; reconciling and healing all the Wounds and Divisions that have been
amongst good People, from the crown of the Head to the soale of the Foot, in
the Spirit of Love, Righteousness, and true Judgment; assigning every
Profession and Principle, his true and proper place and state in the Body,
whether Natural or Spiritual.

VALE.
To the scattered Seed and Sheep of CHRIST in all Nations, the true Israel by
Faith, unknown for the most part to themselves, but more to the World and
Worldly Christian: Yet, in this their unknown or dispersed Estate, owned of the
Lord, as the Church that are in God the Father, truly pure, Catholic and
Christian, of which Christ Jesus is the alone and immediate Head.
BRethren and Fathers, etc. that in Jesus Christ are dearly beloved, and with
God of great price, Grace and Peace be multiplied unto you, through the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

To you that are unknown and yet well known, it is in my heart to be
representing the knowledge of Him that is invisible, and the view of your
selves in your invisible state, together with those that are your known or
unknown enemies; as that which may prove neither unseasonable nor unprofitable
to you, in this day of Israel's Captivity, but approaching Redemption (which
hastens fast) at which time the Sons of God shall be made manifest.

If Paul, Acts 17. when he passed by, and beheld the Athenians Devotions, with
an Altar, having this Inscription [To the unknown God] took occasion from
thence, to make him known, whom they ignorantly Worshipped; Surely, it ought
not to be accounted blameworthy in any, that sees the Worship and Devotions
now in practice, in the visible Christian Church, to endeavor the
distinguishing the right Catholic Church in its Purity, and way of Worship in
Spirit and Truth, from them, and from their ways of Worship (ignorantly,
however zealously performed) that pass under the name of Christ's Mystical
Body, and his Divine Institutions.

But you, Beloved, are of God, Elected, known as by name, having this Seal and
Mark from the Lord upon you, which is your Stability and sure Foundation; the
Lord knows, who are his. And, let every one that names the name of Christ,
depart from iniquity.

No matter therefore, if these come to you and find you, as to your outward
estate in Babylon; where, (according to what is foretold by the Apostle John,
in the Revelation) your abode is to be, as in a wilderness condition, for 1260
years, now near expired.

And although from that state of servitude and hard bondage, unto which you
have been exposed by the Rulers, no wrestlings or contendings by humane wisdom
and power, have availed to work your deliverance, because the appointed time,
set by God, is not come; Yet, this ought to be your comfort, that so soon as
that time comes, there will then need very little other help than the Grave it
self to cast you forth, as the Womb does her fruit, which it cannot longer
detain. For of this be assured, that Christ's dead body mystical, can no more
be held in its figurative grave, after the set time is come, than his natural
body, could, in his literal grave, Acts 2. 24. where it is said, that after
Christ by wicked hands had been slain, God raised him up, having loosed the
pains of death, because it was not possible he should be held of it; Nor are
you to be too much grieved and discouraged in this your low, depressed and dead
estate, under the rage and indignation of the World and Powers of it, since to
you is the promise of Life and Resurrection, and you are sure for the present
to be fed in the Wilderness, and to be kept green and flourishing in your
inward man, by secret dew, inspired and distilled from Heaven, whatever
perishing and decays are brought upon your outward, where you are bearing the
marks of the dying of the Lord Jesus. Hearken therefore to the Call that is
given you, of retiring inward into the life of your Head and Root, the life
that is hid with Christ in God. And, as the means to be so with more freedom,
labor to keep the door of your sensual part, shut, and fast closed about you
as much as may be, that the noise and diversions of this sinful and unquiet
World may not disturb nor interrupt you. For though, through impatience and
unbelief, you may be arguing and concluding against your selves, as the whole
house of Israel did, Ezekiel. 37. 11. that your bones are dried, your hope is
lost, and you are cut off, for your parts; yet ye shall know that the Lord he
is God, when he has opened, and brought you up, out of your graves, v. 13. He
will then own you visibly, for his people, by wonderfully putting his Spirit
within you, and causing you to live; And when you see this, your heart shall
rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb, and the hand of the Lord
shall be known toward you, his servants, and his indignation toward his
enemies. He has the weapons of his vengeance in readiness, full Vials of his
wrath, to be poured forth by his heavenly Militia and Troops, upon the Beast
and his Worshippers, when all humane means fail. This you are therefore to
know, that though the Saints who have adventured to oppose the Beast, and the
kingdom of Antichrist (all along, contending in a good Cause) have been still
crushed, and subdued, as is foretold, Rev. 13. 7. yet the time is coming, yea,
is even at the very door, for God to take the business into his own hands, and
to put forth the power of his wrath by heavenly Instruments, forasmuch as the
earthly ones (as you have seen) have proved ineffectual. And this ought to be a
teaching to us, to depend upon God, for the avenging of his people, even, when
all humane ability to perform it, is vanished; and not hastily to run out, in
the use of any indirect means, though tempted and allured thereunto.

But, to return to the things which we propound to set before you, in this
Epistle; They are reducible unto these particulars, following:

1. First, The sight and knowledge of Christ, as he is the Invisible and Holy
One, from whom, as from the Head, all natural as well as spiritual good, does
flow.

2. Secondly, Christ's Headship, exercised by him, (ever since his Ascension)
as he is the Son of man, glorified; and this in the two distinct branches and
administrations of it. The one, that, wherein he is the Lord and restorer of
pure, incorrupt Nature, upon the Principles of the first Covenant, renewed, and
confirmed in his blood. The other, that, in which he is the giver of the Holy
Ghost, or, the Minister of the Spirit, and new Name, (as Ointment poured forth)
which, where it is received upon the Principles of the new Covenant, never
fails, but abides with such, for ever.

3. Thirdly, The true Anointed Ones, or Witnesses of Christ, according to both
his beforementioned Administrations and the Anointing, which is given, by the
one and by the other.

4. Fourthly, Those that in Principles, are opposite unto these two Annointings
and the effects of them, declaring their enmity, in and by the continued war
they maintain against them, in the posture of open enemies, or dissembled
friends, both making up, but one and the same Kingdom of Antichrist.

5. Fifthly, What Word and part of his Counsels contained in the Promises and
Prophesies, (not yet accomplished) is the Lord now fulfilling, in the present
dispensations of our day?

1. To the first, It Is the Testimony which came out of Christ's own mouth,
concerning Himself and his Father, Luke 1. 22. That no man knows who the Son
is, but the Father; nor who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal Him: which plainly declares, that the beings both of the Father,
and of the Son, are great and hidden Mysteries. The one as well as the other,
is mystical and invisible, and must be taught and revealed, before it can be
truly and fully known and understood what they are. Agreeable to this, is that,
Joh. 1. 18. No man has seen God at any time, that is, immediately, but by the
means of the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father; he has
declared him. The Son, therefore, who is the only begotten, is said to be the
Image of the invisible God; The first name and similitude whereby God is
possible and capable to be known to others beside himself. For by and from Him,
as the Head, the knowledge and fruit of the whole Deity is derived and
communicated, in such fit Images and lively Representations, as He has
fore-determined within himself, to be known by, unto his whole Creation, from
the beginning to the end thereof. Hence it is, that we find Christ the
Mediator, by the Prophet Isa. 43. 10. speaking of himself after this manner, Ye
are my Witnesses, says the Lord, and my Servant, whom I have chosen. The Lord,
the Mediator, has and owns for his Witnesses, the Woman's Seed, in the head,
and in the members; the promised Seed, in his Servant, the Branch, the chief
and principal one; and in his Brethren, the same Seed; and who are made to bear
his Fathers Name (by Adoption) as well as himself, and to continue it for ever;
that one Seed, Gal. 3. which, says the Apostle, is Christ, the mystical body,
that are Heirs according to promise. Ye are my Witnesses, says this only
begotten, who is from everlasting, that ye may know and believe me, and
understand that I am he. Or, I am the Son, that only does or can reveal who the
Father is, or who I am in mine own Person; for, before me was no God formed, or
nothing formed or to be seen of God, neither shall there be after me; because I
am his complete Name and Manifestation. In me it has pleased the Father all
Fullness should dwell, and this also bodily, in the dispensation of the fullness
of time. By Christ then (as we learn from hence) we are to understand that
Person, in whom God first forms himself, and places his Name, by his
immediate engraving and workmanship, upon the tables of some
Creature-beginning, some other nature begotten by him, in difference and
distinction from his own; and which, as it is his first work, so is it his most
complete and perfect work; that which comprehends all particulars and
individuals in both creations, from first to last; so that, as nothing is
before it, to precede, so, nothing is omitted, to make new, or to come after
it, that is not eminently treasured up and seated in his Person already, who is
the firstborn of every creature, he that was before all things, and by whom
all things consist, made the Alpha and Omega; he that was, he that is, and he
that is to come, the Almighty. In this state of spiritual being and hidden
glory, Christ is truly and properly the Invisible one, which Moses had the
sight of by Faith; foreseeing also his incarnation, as he was to be the great
Prophet, raised up to the People of Israel, who when he comes, should teach
them all things, and declare the mind of God fully, receiving himself the
lively Oracles immediately from God's own mouth.

From hence also it is, by reason that there is such an Invisible one, who is
with God from everlasting, as his mouth, and in the Office of Mediator, that in
Moses his Law, the first and second Commands are so positive and strict, that
we should have no other Gods before the Lord, viz. the Mediator and Redeemer,
that brought Israel out of Egypt, and made himself known unto them by his Name
Jehovah, which imports the execution of his Purpose and Promise, and so, the
Being he gives to what his Word has declared. This Name will be best
interpreted by the opening of another place of Scripture, which speaks of
Christ in this his invisible and mysterious being, Prove. 8 and 9 chap. wherein
the building and workmanship that Wisdom forms for her own house, (the
Sanctuary wherein God records his Name) is most lively and excellently
described, as that which comprehends all the fullness and perfection of all
times and things, past, present, and to come; He that was, he that is, and he
that is to come, the Almighty; Who, as, in one and the same Person of the
Mediator, he is the God that builds all things, so he is also the Building or
House it self, which is his own immediate workmanship, and, as in one total
sum, contains all manner of perfection in it. For it is not the Property of the
first in the Trinity, to execute, but to purpose and contrive what shall be
executed, and by whom; and then, the Execution, though it be by the same Divine
Essence, yet, it is by reason of a second and third property, which is natural
to it; according to which, God, that is One, is also Three; One in Nature and
Spirit, Three in Properties and Operation; a Spirit after such an
incomprehensible manner as is known fully to himself alone, having three
distinct inspiring Properties, whence he gives being to his own Name, or to him
that he purposes within himself, shall bear his Name, and give the sight and
knowledge of his essential Glory and Likeness, unto the understanding of
others, as his own mouth, that is set up, to utter and deliver the lively
Oracle of his Eternal mind.

This Person, whom God from Eternity has designed to this high and great
Office, is he, whom we mean, when we express him under the Title of the
Mediator; the Wisdom and Power, or Understanding and Will, that God has the
image of, within himself, from all Eternity. As it is in him, it is himself;
one that is with him, as brought up by him, that is daily his delight; and
whose delight also is in the habitable parts of God's Earth, and with the sons
of men; The Wisdom and Power of God's Essence, in the form of the highest
Understanding and best Will, purposing to manifest it self, and build it self a
house in some other nature, wherein to well, and therewith to converse, whether
upon terms of pure Justice, or free Grace; and so, to make himself either a
sojourner for a season, or an home and in-dweller, as his place of Rest for
ever.

And by the setting up of this building in the Person of the Mediator, as the
Root and Foundation of all intercourse between God most high, and the work of
his hands in both Creations, let us see the fruit and great benefit which comes
to men, as he himself describes it, Prove. 9. 1, 3. For, by this means the
Beasts are killed, the Lamb is sacrificed, the Wine is mingled, or, the pure
fruit of the Divine Nature is so tempered and prepared, in its manifestation
and daybreak upon the Creatures understanding, by the first mixture of these
two natures in the Person of the Mediator, that it becomes fit drink and
suitable meat for all such, as are to feed at this Table of the Lord.

From hence it is evident, that God is to be looked upon by us, as under one
Consideration, in his own, proper, simple, absolute and incomprehensible
Essence, wherein he is known, and perfectly enjoyed by none but himself, in the
most blessed Trinity; and under another Consideration, according to what he
has eternally purposed, and actually made himself to be, in the Person of the
Mediator, wherein only he can be seen by the Creatures making it unlawful to
own any other image, form, or likeness of him, Exodus 20. 3, 7. or to bow down
to it, or worship it; forbidding unto Angels or Men, all the Imaginations of
God, which they are apt to feign of him from the device of their own hearts, as
the Object of their Worship, upon this very ground, because he has one by him
that he has made the Angel of his face and presence, whom he has employed to
bring them out of Egypt, and who was seen by Moses in the Bush, and showed
Himself to the Church or whole Congregation of the People in the Wilderness,
when they tempted him, in setting up and worshipping a molten Calf, of their
own invention, new and strange gods. This to do before his face, and to own
(besides him, that was the face and mouth of God amongst them) would be a great
provoking, which he told them should not go unpunished: This caused God to say,
Thou shall have no other Gods besides, or before me; that is, not only not in
my sight, but not in preference to him, that I have given to you, as my face
and mouth. Provoke him not, for my Name is in him; intimating withal, that
herein they were the more inexcusable, because they had him with them and
amongst them. In him the light of God's Glory was shining forth as in God's own
face and very similitude, speaking his Mind by his own mouth; and he was to be
incarnate, that the same Word might be near us, even in our mouth and in our
heart, to hear it, and do it. This is the Prophet, like unto Moses, which God
said he would raise up unto them, out of, and from the midst of their Brethren.

Let us then acknowledge this great Mystery of the Father and the Son,
distinguishing what God is by Nature and Essence, from what he gives himself to
be, in the Person of the Mediator, the only begotten, that lies in his bosom;
who yet is also his Messiah, whom he sends and makes his Substitute, by way of
his in-dwelling Deity and Presence, for the performing of all his pleasure in
both Worlds.

The Trinity is the head, and immediate cause of the being and fullness, which
is set up in the Person of the Mediator, whom they not only inspire with each
of their Names and Similitudes, but make him a Vessel of meet use, to convey
the holy Oil, in the way of a twofold Ministry, and Pipe to both Creations; He
therefore became incarnate, that he might make use of no other spoksman,
immediately to interpret and declare the Mind of God unto his People, than the
Son of man glorified, of which we have the lively Type, (Exodus 4. 15, 16.) in
the Office of Aaron to Moses, showing that Aaron was made the mouth to Moses,
and Moses the mouth to God; Aarons Office of spoksman, figuring out that of
Christ's Manhead, and Moses his, that of Christ's Mediatorship in spirits
before his Incarnation; upon which occasion God promises there, in the Type,
that which he fulfills in Spirit and Truth, in Christ's Person. For, as Moses
had Commission to speak to Aaron, as God's spoksman to him; so has the Spirit
of the Mediator to Jesus the Son of man. And as it was Aaron's Office to be
spoksman to the People; so is it the Office of Christ's Manhead, to be the
spoksman of Him that Moses typed out, that great Prophet, the Angel of God's
Face and Presence; and to be to him the Interpreter and Declarer of God's Mind,
and signifier of God's Commands to all in both Worlds. Christ (as he is the Son
of man) is to himself (as he is the Word of God) instead of a mouth or Prophet;
And Christ, as he is the only Begotten, or Word of the Father, is instead of
God, most high unto his own Manhead; answerable to the Promise, made verse. 15.
and thou shall speak unto him, and put words into his mouth, (meaning Moses to
Aaron) and I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you,
(that is, both of you) what ye shall do.

Here we see (and may see it with Admiration, as the Queen of Sheba did in
Solomon's Temple, which was the Type) the Glorious Ascent into the House of
God, and the gradual access which by one spirit, we have through Christ unto
the Father. I would have you know, says the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 3. that
the head of every man is Christ, the head of the woman is the man, and the head
of Christ is God. Christ that is the head of every man, is the head of his own
manhead; and therefore was Christ God's Angel, Messiah, or sent-one, before he
was Man; and had for his Head, the one God and Father of all things.

How God is the Head of Christ, we have showed. The blessed Trinity, is the
Father to that only begotten One, who is the hidden Wisdom, ordained before the
World was, to our glory; The Angel, that is, the Messenger and Mediator of
God's Covenant, of whom he commands us to beware (Exo. 23. 21.) and to obey his
voice; Provoke him not, says he, for he will not pardon their Transgressions;
for my Name is in him. What can be more plain? The most high God has his
Messiah, his Angel or sent-one, invested with his Majesty and Power of Command,
whose Voice must be obeyed as the Voice of God, it being his Office, to be
instead of God to his Church. What he binds is bound, what he remits is
remitted, for the Name of God is in him; He is in likeness and truth, so near
to God, that he is God's equal, the true Michael, that is second with God in
the Throne: and yet, he that is found in the Form of God, and accounts it no
robbery to be equal with God; does not disdain to have also his Equals, the
man, that is, his fellow, the man of his right-haud, whom he has made strong
for himself.

With the most knowing Jews, the acknowledgment of Christ in this his heavenly
and spiritual being before his incarnation, was most usual and avowed. The
Angel that redeemed Jacob, Genesis 48. they call the Divine Majesty, owned for
God, and for Christ, that was tempted in the Wilderness; whose Voice, say they,
is to be obeyed, as the Voice of the living God; and his Office is, to be the
Leader and Guide of the true Israel; the great Prince, that is the Presence and
Majesty of God, and the Lord and Ruler over all the Earth as well as Heaven,
all that is therein being governed by his hand. Unto Him the pure and simple
Essence of God is the Father; and he is set up from everlasting, the Father and
Root, whence that chief Branch springs, that is Jesus the Lord and Christ, in
the capacity of Son to this Father, who must reign till all things be subdued
under him, that is, all inferior Rule, Authority and Power whatsoever, that
officiate, or ought to do so, in his right; But when that is done and finished,
then shall this Son also himself, be subject unto Him, that is, his Father,
that raised him from the dead, and put all things under him, that God may be
all in all.

This occasioned Christ whilst he was on Earth, to say, Joh. 12. 28. Father,
glorify thy Name; speaking therein to God the Mediator; to Him, whose Office
is, to be to him the Mouth of God; from whom, he receives the lively Oracles to
deliver to his Church; as it is written, I will declare thy Name to my
Brethren; in the midst of the Church will I sing Praises unto thee. And again,
I will put my trust in him, even in him who wrought in Christ, when he raised
him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand of the Majesty on high, or
in the heavenly.

This made Christ say, When I am lifted up, I will draw all men unto me; that
is, mediately, and in order afterward, to resign them up unto his Father, and
give up all his interest of Rule in them, unto him; unto whom, as he is his
Equal, (for, says he, I and the Father are one) So also he is his Servant, and
has his Office of Ministry under him. For, the end of Christ's Ministry is, to
unvail the Glory of his Father, and to shine with him as second in the Throne,
which he prefers much before the drawing of all men to himself, to depend and
rest on him only, and not on the Father, in and through him, as well those do
that rest in the knowledge of Christ according to the flesh, and behold not
that vail rent, upon his spiritual Cross, in order to live to him, that died
for them, and rose again.

By what we have already showed, we have, or may have, the sight of him who is
the Holy and Invisible One, from whom, as from the Head, all Natural as well as
Spiritual good does flow.

2. The next thing propounded, is, to set forth the two distinct Branches and
Administrations of this Headship, exercised by Christ, as he is the Son of Man
glorified, ministering the Inspiration, Anointing and Image of God, which is
given according to the Principles and Law both of the first and of the second
Covenant. The influence and effect hereof upon all rational beings, whether
Angels or Men, in their mutable estate or immutable, does proceed from Christ,
as he is the second Adam, that quickening Spirit, who is Lord from Heaven; And
hereof he has his living and undeniable Witness in the Hearts and Consciences
of his Subjects and Followers, from the beginning of the World to the end
thereof.

1. The Headship which Christ exercises by the first of these Ministries, is
that of Supreme Natural Lord and Sovereign over all Creatures; by the breath of
whose mouth they were made, Psalm. 33. Rev. 4. 11. and redeemed by his Blood,
Rev. 5. 9. So that his right of Rule to them and over them, is indisputable,
and their obligation for duty and service to him, indispensable and perpetual.
The Angels that fell, are charged (Jude 6.) with defection from, and rebellion
against this their Prince and Sovereign Lord, leaving and deserting him who was
their appointed Habitation, and Object of Worship and Duty by the very Law of
their Creation. And, unto the same Disobedience and Revolt from Christ, was the
first Adam tempted, who was subjected at first to none but God. While God the
Mediator ruled, and man obeyed, all went right: For God being most perfectly
wise and just, could not err in commanding; but man, though innocent, yet
being free and mutable, was capable to be tempted from his Obedience, as it
fell out. Satan, that by his disobedience had overthrown himself, knew thereby
the way how to overthrow man. He perceived God could not be corrupted nor
tempted to unwise or unrighteous Government; And, if neither King nor Subject
could have been corrupted, the Kingdom must needs have stood. But, he quickly
found, man was frail, though holy, and had not yet attained to his
incorruptible estate, though upright, and was therefore capable to be wrought
upon, and corrupted in his mind, from the simplicity that is in Christ. Man
would be as God, have no guide but his own understanding, hating that just
restraint, which was needful as a bridle, to be put upon him, to keep him from
falling, and which God provided to offer to him, as the means to remain
innocent, and pass out of his mutable into an immutable holy state, without
sin. But this would not go down, nor be born; The resignation of his Will, and
absolute resolution of it into the Will of his Sovereign, by believing, who
required it for his good, would not be hearkened unto. He could not, or would
not, or would not think he was such a fool, as stood in need of being so
absolutely at the will and dispose of another, when as yet he was his own man,
free to continue under the guide of his own self-rule, a thing very beautiful
and good, as he thought, to be put into practice. This was the Choice God had
given unto man, in this his righteous mutable state, either to trust to his own
guidance for the ordering of his steps, according to the Rule set before him,
and the conditional Terms of the Law of Nature, and first Agreement or Covenant
made with him at his Creation; or else, to distrust his own Wisdom, as
insufficient to be his guide, and his own power of Will, that was mutable and
uncertain in its best state, and thereupon commit and resign himself, through
Faith, unto the guidance and power of his Natural Head, Lord and Sovereign, to
do, as by the sight of Faith, he should find him do, and cleave close to him,
whatsoever he should go before him in.

The first of these, the first man determined himself in, and in that Act,
chose for his whole seed as well as for himself, who, if God pleased, might
have been then concluded by it, without any new offer of Grace made unto them,
or their ever being brought to so fair a tender again. But so far was God the
Mediator from applying himself speedily to any severe course of proceeding
against the first Adam and his Posterity, that sinned with him in his loins, as
that he takes this occasion to renew his first Offer, upon the experience Man
now had of trusting to his own wisdom and strength. God freely of his own
accord, makes a Promise to man, of a Redeemer that should come in his own
Nature, and be made flesh, to recover him out of his sinful corrupted state,
and bring him and his Posterity once more, into a state of Reconciliation with
God, that what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh,
might be done by God's sending his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, who by
the sacrificing of himself, condemned sin in the flesh, that the Righteousness
of the Law might be fulfilled in all such, as walk not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit. And here, behold the Righteousness of God, which is, and
declares it self by the Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all, that
believe, making no difference; but as all have sinned, and come short of the
Glory of God, in the Act of our first Parents disobedience; So all should be
restored and brought into a capacity of being justified freely by his Grace,
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, and made the Righteousness of
God in him, against all that can be objected by the Malice of Satan, or from
the Justice of God's Law, that has been broken, and must be satisfied, either
by the person offending, or some other, proper to make Atonement by his
Obedience, in the imputation whereof we may be accounted righteous, as by the
Act of disobedience in the first Adam we were made sinners. This is done by the
Redemption which is wrought for all men, and forgiveness of sins through the
Blood of Christ, either conditionally or absolutely, Col. 1. 20, 23. Hereupon,
God expressly and sincerely declares* he desires not the death of a sinner,
having sent his only begotten Son into the World, that all should live through
him, and none perish or die in their sins, for want of a possible and
sufficient Remedy; even him, whom God has foreordained and set forth, to be a
Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, for the remission of sins that are
past. And this is so far from making void the Law or first Covenant between God
and man, that it does establish it, and much clear up the Justice of God, in
exacting the Debt of Obedience and Allegiance due to him from Man, according to
the Law, when so much Clemency and Forbearance has preceded, and an Act of
Oblivion freely and of Grace has been passed, the benefit whereof is
conditionally extended unto all. Hence it is, that the Office of giving and
putting in execution the Law of God, as it is a Ministry that works wrath, is
committed by the Father unto Christ, as he is the Son of Man; First, to
dispense Judgment with Mercy, great patience and long-suffering; and afterward
without Mercy, as that fiery Indignation, which is reserved for wilful and
hardened sinners.

This Christ does plainly intimate, Luke 12. 10. where he says, Whosoever
shall speak a word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him; but unto
him that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven. For what
else can be the meaning of these words, but that Christ would have his
Disciples know, that Judgment was first committed to him, as he is the Son of
Man, made the chief Officer and Dispenser of God's Justice, whether
distributive or revenging, the exact Rule whereof is given and contained in the
Law of Nature, or Covenant of Works? The Transgressions against this Law are
capable of remission and forgiveness through his Blood, the Intercession
whereof speaks better things than that of Abel, and prevails for gifts even to
the Rebellious, so that they receive not God's grace, nor take his Name in
vain: if they do, he will not hold them guiltless, nor continue any longer to
extend to them the benefit of his Sacrifice. Secondly, Therefore Judgment was
committed to him without Mercy, in reference to such sins, by which the doers
of them blasphemed and resisted the Ministry he was entrusted with, of giving
the Holy Ghost, or inspiring the hearts of the Regenerate with the new Name*
and that saving knowledge of God, which is communicated according to the Law of
Faith, and of the new and everlasting Covenant.

This is the Royal Office and Dignity, which Jesus, as the Son of Man, is
exalted unto, by the personal union which he has with the Word, being made a
meet Minister, in all respects, through his Death and Resurrection, to dispense
God's sovereign Justice, and to execute Judgment and Equity, according to the
Law of Nature, renewed and confirmed in his own Blood. Herein he is King of
Kings and Lord of Lords, the great and Universal Monarch, that is appointed
Lawgiver and chief Judge in Heaven and Earth, to and over all Natural Beings,
whether Angels or men, and is the rewarder of every man according to his works,
with the same measure that any man metes unto another, he measures out unto him
again; and strictly does insist upon, and require that which is just and due to
be paid unto God or man, by the Law and Principles of the first Covenant. He
therefore has the Gifts and Abilities, incident to that Communion with God,
committed to him to dispense, being the Head of God's distributive, as well as
his revenging Justice, and will make it appear, that he desires not to reap
where he has not sown, nor to gather where he has not first strewed, and
dispersed abroad in his bounty and liberality, none being a more cheerful giver
and lender of his Goods than He, looking for nothing again where there is no
ability to pay, not happening through our own default.

This is the Ministry which works Wrath, that is to say, contracts a debt of
Punishment, and of the Curse, to every one that joins issue with God upon the
terms of this Covenant, and continues not in all things written in it, to do
them. And although by this Ministry, and that from Christ himself as he is the
Son of man, there be a life and communication of God's Image given, which, in
it self considered, is pure, holy, righteous, spiritual, and good; yet, it is
but upon such terms, that it may be again withdrawn and revoked by the Giver,
if he please; or may be corrupted or forfeited by the Receiver, and so end in
death and wrath. The proof of this was seen at first, in the Fall of our first
Parents, and is since, in all the Children of Perdition, who, after all their
great and high enlightnings and clensing from all their old sins, fall into a
relapse that is irrecoverable, so as to become trees twice dead, finally to be
plucked up by the roots and burned.

It is Christ in the exercise of this his first Ministry, that we intend, when
we say, that he is the Lord of Nature, and Fountain of all Justice, upholding a
powerful and lasting Witness of himself in the very Natural Conscience, where
he begets and sets up that knowledge, which declares God Just, and the
Justifier of him that either is perfectly righteous in his own person, with the
righteousness that his Law requires; or, that (in default thereof) is righteous
in another, that God has given to be made a Sacrifice for them, that they
thereby might be made the Righteousness of God in him; such, as he is willing
to accept on their behalf, and to reward, not of Debt, but of Grace.

In one of these two ways it is for all men to seek to be justified, to answer
the end of the Law, and to receive the reward of it: But as to those, that
neither in the one nor the other of these ways, desire to approve themselves,
and be found righteous, they are justly convinced of all, and shall be judged
of all, as meet objects for God's revenging Justice, to be showed upon them as
the Judgment that is final, after which, no place is left for Mercy. So then,
in and by this Ministry, that begins in Justice distributive, which is founded
in God's bounty and liberality, by which he gives to all their being, life and
motion, and fills the desire of every living thing; and which ends in
avenging and punishing Justice, upon mercy and bounty abused, (as the known
natural Principles of all Law, and righteous Magistratical Government) God
manifests himself the Fountain thereof, in the Person of Christ the Mediator.
And in this kind of knowledge of God, and obedience to his Law, all mankind are
and must be conversant whether they will or no; and are to show themselves,
either his obedient Subjects, whom he countenanceth, protecteth, and rewards,
in their well-doing; or his rebellious and disloyal Subjects, over whom he will
glorify himself in his avenging Justice and dispensation of Judgment at last,
without Mercy.

A remarkable example of this we may see in the Case of Jacob and Laban, Genesis
31. 44. Laban a Righteous man (at least pretending to it, in his appeal to the
God of Justice) conversing with God, in and under the Law of Nature, and what
of God is to be known under that Ministry, says to Jacob, Come now, after all
our difference and unkindness, thou shall see I will deal righteously with
thee, and put thee to the proof who shall be found more righteous, thou in thy
way of serving God, or I in mine. Let us strike a Covenant, I and thou, and let
it be for a Witness between me and thee; Let Him whom I know and serve by the
Light and Law of Nature, and whom thou servest by a higher Law and Light, that
of Faith, (which does not destroy, but establish the Righteousness of the Law)
let him, whose eye only sees, and before whom we cannot be hid, (either from
his knowledge or his vengeance) watch and mark our carriages, in pursuance of
our Covenant and Agreement; and accordingly be a Witness, for, or against us,
upon the breach thereof. Unto this Jacob cheerfully agreed upon his Principles,
and Laban upon his. In which, it is evident, that the same God and Christ may
be conversed and walked with, upon differing Principles; and that righteous
Agreements may be upheld and maintained by those that own and call Christ to
witness, as he is the Sovereign Minister of God's Justice, whether their
knowledge of him be according to the first or second Covenant, in both which
Christ comes forth, as to his Communications and enlivening Presence in the
hearts of the sons of men; which is the point that we are now upon, and have
cleared in the first branch of it.

The Second (being that which consists in a knowledge and manifestation of God,
that is beyond and above Nature, that which man in his natural make, at best,
reaches not, or has a mind or will to receive) is more difficult to be
expressed, and when expressed, to be understood. For after this manner God is
not seen or communicated unto any, but in a secret and hidden way, which he
makes not common, but reserves for peculiar kindness to those that find grace
in his sight, upon their coming, as Esther did, into the inner Court, to have
this golden Scepter held out to them, by promise, or else they die. God's first
Voice and Manifestation of himself unto the Creature, speaks and declares him
(as we have showed) to be just, in a way of Law and righteous Government, which
he exercises over his Creatures. He is their Soveriegn, they are his Subjects,
in order to receive the reward of Love, or of Wrath: That which this Second
Voice ministers and speaks, is that Love, and the knowledge of God in it, which
he spreads abroad in the hearts of his good and loyal Subjects, after the proof
made of the Loyalty and stedfastness of their Love to him; Not that they love
him first, but of his own Will they are begotten, by the Word of Truth, into
this Love of his, which comprehends them, long before they apprehend it, and
God in it. But he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry; if by Faith
we are taught to wait for him, Whom, having not seen, yet, we love, or, have
secret cleaving to, and earnest longing after: In whom, even whilst we see not,
but find our selves altogether in the dark, and at a loss, as to what may be
seen and known of him by natural Light and Reason; yet, believing, and having
thereby given us the evidence of things, unseen by the natural eye, they become
so real, and are made so certain to us, as we rejoice with joy unspeakable and
full of Glory. We could do no more, were we at the end of our Faith, and did
see, as we are seen, as we shall at the complete Salvation of our Souls.

From him then, that is thus the Love and Joy of the believing Soul, that is to
say, Christ, the Minister of the Spirit, and giver of the holy Ghost, and that
new Name which none know but they that have it, is this Second kind of
Knowledge of God, and Communication of Life from him, that we desire to open
and lay before you.

You have already heard that Christ is the only begotten of God, as he is the
Building and Sanctuary, which he that is the builder of all things, sets up in
himself, for his own use, as his Temple and speaking-place, where to give and
whence to deliver his lively Oracles and Inspirations, of both sorts, with
which he fills all things. In this Heavenly Habitation, God records his Name,
and has the place of his Throne and of his Footstool, with which he will dwell
and tabernacle among his People for ever.

Again, By this workmanship and heavenly building, Christ the Mediator has a
Creature-being given unto him in spirit, before the World was, and is he who
was before all things, and by whom all things consist; is the Angel of God's
Face and Presence, that is by God and with him: First, As his chief Messenger
and Servant, his Messiah; and then, as his Spouse and Equal, that lies in his
bosom, knows all his secrets, and is retained in the most intimate bond of
spiritual marriage-union, that is possible for Creature-nature to be taken into
with God, even by personal union, as the body is with the soul. And thus Christ
is found, even as a Creature in the form of God, and is called Michael, God's
Fellow and Equal, after such a manner, as the body is to the soul, both making
but one person.

Now Christ, as he lies in the Father's bosom, and is the Spouse to the blessed
Trinity, is a higher manifestation of God, than he has sent out from God, as
the Messiah, that bears God's Name only by figure and representation, as his
single Image, which yet speaks truly what God is, and as fully as the Creatures
first vessel of Receipt and Measure, knows how to bear and receive; but does
not speak out all God's fullness, nor show the Original it self, whereof it is
the figure and character, which in its single standing and appearing out of
God, as a thing distinct from God, and not at the same time known to have any
abode in him, after that intimate manner of union and conjunction,
beforementioned, the finite and short-sighted understanding of the Creature is
ready to imagine that manifestation and sight of God's Glory to be all that is
to be known and inherited of God; And to desire, as the Israelites did, (Exodus
20.) in the Person of Moses, as the Type, that God would not add to speak more,
or show forth his naked and unvailed glory to them; but they would content
themselves to hear God speak under the Vail, which Moses had put upon his face,
and not look out after any higher attainment. When God had spoken once, and
showed the Creature as much of himself as it could take in by its first make
and constitution of being upon natural Principles, he proceeds to declare his
purpose to speak again, and form a hearing ear and seeing eye, proportioned to
his second voice, adding this kind of hearing and sight to the sam^
Creature-being, (whose first Principles of Knowledge and Will, a^ too short and
weak to bear this Voice) called in Scripture, the sight and hearing of Faith,
that must be mixed with our natural Principles, as their stability and
consummation, and have the place of guide to them, and Lord over them, that the
Scripture in this sense may be made good, that the elder shall serve the
younger. The Root of this Second sight of God, is wrought out in Christ, as he
is the only begotten that lies in God's bosom, and from thence is made the
Minister and Giver of what himself first receives and enjoys. So that now,
supposing the Spirit of the Mediator, (that is the only begotten and firstborn
of every creature) to be the Root of all natural Principles and Perfection, as
he is the Messiah, and the hearer and obeyer of God's first Voice (of which we
have already spoken) we are now to know, that God proceeds to make the same
only Begotten, to have being and abode in him, as his peculiar possession and
choicest object of his Love, in the relation of his Spouse and Consort. He is
formed and prepared hereunto, by becoming him that is made able to hear,
receive and obey God's Second Voice, his highest, most excellent, and fullest
manner of manifestation of himself to Creature-understanding, with power in the
dispensation of the fullness of time, to become Man, made of a Woman, under the
Law, and afterward raised up from the dead, and made to sit down on the right
hand of the Majesty on high; working out the same work in Jesus his Servant,
the chief and principal Branch, which is first wrought out in himself, as in
the root and head of all natural and supernatural perfection. It is then a kind
of working over the Creature again, out of its first frame and constitution of
being, into a frame and constitution much more excellent and capacious, a state
incorruptible, never needing, nor being subjected to change of any kind,
afterward, which the first building upon natural principles, does, and did
need. This working over, or re-building the Creature again, called in Scripture
Regeneration, is not simply restoration or confirmation, conveying
immutableness to the first Principles, and no more; but it is quite a new
Creation, that takes down of the first building, as much as the Builder
pleases, and leaves no more of it standing, than what is consistent with, and
grows up into perfect harmony, use, and serviceableness to and with the new
addition and enlargement that is made, not destroying the first Image of God in
man. This rebuilding work then produces not a total anihilation of the natural
being, but brings upon the life and manner of operation that flows from natural
principles, such a cess^^ion as amounts to a kind of death, at least to a
bitterness more than death it self, rendering it impossible for the Creature to
live or move any longer unto sin and evil; and quickening it, and raising it out
of this dead state, into the greatest freedom to, and steadfast perseverance in
all kinds of good that is imaginable, as that which becomes most natural and
delightful, the contrary thereunto most grievous and disquietful to it.

This Second Life, which accompanies Salvation, and brings Immortality to
light, is a kind of life from the dead, that the natural beings of Angels and
Men are begotten into, by being made meet Temples and Subjects for the Holy
Ghost, in a state of life eternal, by a union with God that can never be
dissolved. Angels therefore as well as Men, are called Children of the
Resurrection, Luke 20. 35, 36. as they are brought into a state never to change
more.

Hence it is, even amongst these Children of the Resurrection, that the
immortal life, wherewith they are quickened by Christ, as he is the giver of the
Holy Ghost is of two sorts, as to the degree and measure of the glory thereof.
First, Such, wherein Men and Angels are equal: And the Second, Such, wherein
some Men are made in such manner Christ's Equals, the Lamb's or Bridegroom's
Wife that lies in his bosom, that they are the Angels superiors, and are made
joynt-heirs with Christ, of that Name, which he has obtained, better than that
which is the Angels food, that Word of God's mouth that they live upon. So that
now, when we speak of Christ, as the Author of life Eternal, in this second
sort of Ministry, wherein the natural beings of the creature are, as it were,
wrought over again and rebuilt, we would be understood, that there is a birth
of this Immortality, which amounts to the giving of the Holy Ghost, in the
single portion of it, and also in the double portion of it, as we shall
distinctly open in its place; both being distinct from that pure, holy,
righteous life of Nature that was at first given by Creation, or afterward
renewed by a Restoration and kind of new Creation of qualities, but falls short
of true and saving Regeneration, properly and rightly explicated and made
known; by which the natural frame and make of the natural soul and spirit of
man, is in a manner wholly altered and changed, and much for the better,
because it is raised out of its frail, mutable, wavering, as well as sinful,
natural state, into a strong, stable, immutable posture of mind, in
Righteousness and true Holiness, as a Rock and Stone, that the Gates of Hell
cannot prevail against. This further Gift and Grace of God, though it be the
end of Man's Creation, and that which God, as the reward to those that are
obedient under the first Ministry, does promise and hold forth, in a way of
Promise, yet is conditional, and so, that which in Justice God need not confer
upon any that perform not the Condition, but by their sin do forfeit it. And
therefore it so happens, that all who inherit this Blessing, are made receivers
of it, by Promise, and by a second and new Agreement with God, which he enters
into with them, in regenerating them, and makes them new Creatures,
thenceforward to serve him and live to him, in newness of Spirit and Life.

3. We now come to show, according to the Third Particular proposed, who those
be that are Christ's Anointed Ones and Witnesses, under both his forementioned
Administrations, and the Anointing it self, which is given, by the one and by
the other.

Christ is, as we have showed, the Original and primitive Pattern of all
Perfections; the Works, that were finished from the beginning, known to God
from all Eternity, and actually wrought and set up from Everlasting, in the
Mediator, through that Eternal Wisdom, which was by God, as one brought up with
him, Prove. 8. and whom he possessed in the beginning of his way, before his
Works of old, ere ever the Earth was. And what is true in Christ, who is not
only the Root, but the chief and principal Branch, has its Witness, and is
declared in the Work which he begets, and shines forth in, amongst his Members,
knit to him, by an abiding or indissoluable union; all that are Branches in
this true Vine, whose Fruit is such as is cheering, both to the heart of God
and of Man; that is to say, of Man considered in his higher or lower
seize, and growths, up into the knowledge and love of God, as he is Man,
and no more, partaking of the Spirit of God by measure; And, secondly, of Man,
made the only Begotten of God, that lies in the bosom of the Father, and is
anointed with the Oil of gladness above his fellows, which Christ's exalted
Manhead is, and that after such sort, as not to have and inherit the dignity of
it to himself, single and alone, but as the Head and Husband to that General
Assembly of the Firstborn, whose Names are written in Heaven, and have right
to the double portion.

The right opening of this, is the great Key to all our practical and
experimental Knowledge of God, which is found amongst the dispersed Seed of
God, that are either of the one or other birth, Children of the first or second
Covenant, in every Nation, Tongue, Language or Form, truly searing God and
working Righteousness, and therein accepted of God, either through Faith, or
with that common acceptance declared, Genesis 4. If thou do well, shall thou not
be accepted? whilst in the mean time they may be great strangers unto, if not
much prejudiced against one another, for not walking together in one and the
same way of Profession and external Communion.

Give me leave then, to distinguish this Seed of God into Four sorts: Two, that
are Witnesses unto Christ's first Ministry, as he is the Author and Restorer of
the Law and Principles of pure Nature, and is the dispenser of God's Image, and
the manifestation of his Will, upon the terms of the first Covenant; And other
two, that are Witnesses unto the truth of Christ's second Ministry, as he is
the new Creator, that regenerates and makes over again his first work anew, is
the Author of Life from the dead, and bringer of Immortality to light; which is
not done by the first Covenant, nor can be; but, by this second knowledge and
Image of God, begotten and wrought, by, and according to the tenor of the new
and everlasting Covenant.

The first sort of Witnesses we shall speak unto; and rightly to have the
knowledge of them, we must yet further consider Man in his first make, and in
the primitive constitution of being that was given to him in his state of
Innocence before sin entered: So as to enquire, upon what terms Man then stood
with God, and in what respect he was pronounced good in God's eyes, and might
be said to be accepted of him.

Man then had the perfect knowledge of God and of Christ, as his Creator and
Lawgiver (for God created all things by Jesus Christ; by the Word of God's
mouth, in the Mediator, did all things live, move, and had their being) so that
what might be known of God, even of his Eternal Power and Godhead, by the
things that were made, that is, by the means of any created beings, visible or
invisible, it was manifested in man, and was showed to man, by that mixed, com
pound being, which was given him, of an intellectual and sensual or animal
Soul, which furnished him with inward and outward senses, proportioned for such
a knowledge, and which were retained in due subjection and subordination the
one unto the other. From such a prospect and survey of things, as Man at first
was fitted to receive both from within and without him, the invisible things of
the Godhead were clearly seen by him, rendering him without all excuse, being
thereby instructed in the duty of his obedience and subjection to the Law of
God under which he was made, to the glorifying him as God; which as God
expected and required from man, so he owned a liking and acceptance of from
man, with whom he treated, and agreed upon the terms of his personal obedience,
and entire observance of all his Commands, and continuance therein.

Three things man in this state, might, and did experimentally find in himself.

First, The light and manifestation of God's Mind and Will, as a Law within
him, called in Scripture, The Candle of the Lord, the Oil with which God
furnished the Lamp of man's spirit, which he was to take care, that through his
default he did not let it go out, nor diminish; but quicken and renew it, as it
should need, by such means God instituted.

The second thing which man experienced, was, the life of a rational and
intellectual Soul; that is to say, a superior part in the same Soul, affording
the use of inward senses, that by keeping open and awake, he had, as it were,
an intercourse with the spiritual and invisible beings of Angels, and saw the
intrinsic natures of the Creatures.

And thirdly, He found also, a brutish nature, of which he was compouuded and
made, which furnished him with the use and operation of outward senses, by
which he might go abroad, and walk up and down in converse with earthly things
and inhabitants: The fountain of these outward senses, his inferior part, to be
in his soul or spirit. With these he came to perform, and put in execution,
that which the superior and directive part of him, judged right and fit to be
done.

This was the inward and outward order of actings, that Man at first was
created in, with a freedom to make use of this Light within himself, (which
God, as a Talent, had committed to him to employ according to his will) and
rely upon his guidance and the sufficiency of it, to attain the end God set
before him, in the way of his perfect obedience, and keeping out the entrance
of sin, or else upon the sense of the instability he might discern in these
Principles of Freedom, that leave him alone and to himself, and the
Insufficiency to continue by the power of the Grace received in well-doing,
against all resisting and deceiving temptations, to choose rather to make
resignation up of this his Freedom, wherein he was at his own guidance and
dispose, in exchange for a better and more perfect Freedom, that is to say, in
order to be entirely at the will of another, and the leading influence thereof
in all things, even of such another, whose service is perfect Freedom, and who
should be as Surety for the performance of the duty to God's Law, and secure us
from the penalty of the Curse therein threatened against the Transgression
thereof, which was pointed out to Adam in the Tree of Life, as John interprets
by the Promise, mentioned, Rev. 2. 7. To him that overcomes (which is done
through Faith) will I give to eat of the Tree of Life or Immortality, which is
fed on by Faith; through the power of which, the entire resignation of our
will, into the leading and rule of the Spirit and Will of Christ is only
wrought, and of which we shall treat particularly in its proper place, though
this small touch of it is needful here: But the choice which Man made, was, to
lean to his own understanding for his guide, and to trust to the use of his
Freedom, which gave him to be at his own dispose, as sufficient to encounter
with and resist all Temptations, and upon the first encounter failed and
miscarried, and let in Sin, Death and Wrath upon himself and all his Posterity,
as the sad Consequence of that Fact of his.

To be then upon these terms, as Adam was before his fall, personally
righteous, and finding acceptance with God whilst we stand in such Obedience
and Righteousness, is an Effect which Christ in his first Ministry does produce
in the hearts of men, making them in this respect the first sort of the four
Witnesses we have beforementioned, and which, though we have been considering
of them in the Person of the first Adam before the Fall; yet by the same Rule
and Proportion, the Witness is still the same, whether it be communicated
originally at man's Creation, or else by renewal or restoration again after the
fall by the same hand and Ministry which first gave it, which Christ may do if
he please; and that he has done is most obvious and undeniable from the
experience we have had of late years, within these Nations, in a sort of
Professors and Witnesses of Christ, that do exactly go upon this bottom of
Personal Righteousness, wrought by the Principles of pure Nature, renewed and
restored within them, which they assert may be held in perfection whilst we are
here in the body, and by which we may, as by the Light within us, perfectly
subdue our brutish nature, and keep under the body, though all this be
accompanied with mutability, and the acceptance which they find with God is
according to their works, whilst they do well, otherwise sin is at the door,
and the punishment according to the same. This sort of Professors of the Name
of Christ, rise so high in their Testimony concerning him, as to call him, The
glorious Sun of the soul; the Searcher through of all darkness; the Wonderful
Power; the Incomprehensible Wisdom, and Immutable Holiness; a thing that is
invisible to every fleshly thing; the one individual Spirit of Brightness, that
created all souls; and are so dazeled with the Beams of this Glory, (all which
he truly is) that they overlook him too much according to his Humanity, and see
him not as he is the Son of man, in whom Redemption is wrought for us, and the
Atonement for sin made by the price of his Blood, the benefit whereof they
have, whether they confess it or not: These are they, that by the Candle of the
Lord that is lighted within them (the work whereof is written in their inward
parts) though they be not so much hearers of the Law by the Ministry of the
outward Word, yet do they show themselves doors of the Law by the power of the
Light that is within them; doing, as it were, by Nature the things contained in
the Law, and so not having the Law, outwardly considered, are a Law to
themselves, showing the work of it written in their hearts; and by keeping the
Righteousness of the Law, do judge them, who by the Letter transgress the Law,
and do feel Peace and Comfort in their works. In this manner did the Centurian
fear God and work Righteousness, Act. 10. before he heard those words from
Peter, that instructed him in the knowledge of Christ's Death and Resurrection,
and the Peace that comes to the Soul by his Blood, unto the Remission of sins,
by whom all that believe are justified from all things, which they could not be
justified from by the Law of Nature or Works. These ought not to be denied
place in this rank of Christ's Witnesses, whereof we have been speaking, since
they own and declare themselves to be fearers of God and workers of
Righteousness, upon these first principles of it which pure Nature teaches and
plants, where ever it is renewed and restored from the hand of Christ's
liberality and bounty, to put the Receivers of it to the trial, how far they
will show their faithfulness in the measure committed to them, and in what
readiness they are to put these Talents out in the way of exchange to get more,
and not to rest until they obtain that state which is immutable. It therefore
greatly concerns such to look to their standing, which is very slippery and
uncertain, and take heed lest they fall; and to think soberly of themselves as
they ought to think; and not affirm, as they are apt to do, that their Witness
contains in it all that Christ is: lest otherwise, when they come to be weighed
in the balance of the Sanctuary, they be found at last to deny more of Christ
than they confess of him: Nor are they to exalt this part of the Ministry of
Christ, which is but the beginning against that fuller sight and knowledge of
him that is still to be revealed; but this one thing they should do, Forget
that which is behind, and press forward to the mark of the prize of the high
calling which is in Christ: And although it be a commendable thing in them,
even upon their Principles, to spread the knowledge of Christ in all the dark
corners of the world, where the Scriptures and written Word of Truth are not
heard or received, the effect of which labors, with God's blessing, may be the
heightning and refining man's nature, and purging it from filthy lusts and
profaneness, teaching them to fly from the Wrath and Vengeance which awaits
evildoers; Yet this is to be done in subserviency unto, not in opposition
against the right knowledge and powerful Preaching of the Scriptures, those
Divine Oracles which God has preserved for the great benefit and use of his
Church in all times since the first writing of them. By these are witnessed the
righteous Principles and Actings according to the Law of pure Nature, wherein
Man was at first created, and may so often as Christ pleases, be again received
in by that Light with which he enlightens every man that comes into the world,
whereof Christ (as we have showed) is the Author and Dispenser; and under this
first Witness all these are to be comprehended, who approve themselves doers of
the Law, men that fear God and work Righteousness in every Nation, in such
manner as God accepts, though as yet they have not attained to the knowledge of
Christ by the outward Ministry and hearing of the written Word.

But as these are such who pretend, to be doers of the Law by a Light within
them, without dependence upon the Ministry of the written Word, by a Teaching
of the Word, as it is spoken inwardly to the mind by Angels, who are entrusted
with it, Heb. 2. 1. So there is a second sort of Witnesses unto the same
Principles in substance, that is to say, to the life of the Image of God in
pure Nature, wherein man was at first created, as it comes again to be renewed
and restored with power in the soul, by the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and the
Redemption that is by his Blood through the Ministry of the written Word, and
the operation of the Spirit of Christ in the use of those Ordinances and
Institutions of Worship, which he has appointed and revealed in the
Scriptures, according to the several measures of their growth up into this
knowledge of Christ, and faithful walking with him therein, under the variety
of Profession and Forms of visible Worships that are extant, in that which is
acknowledged or witnessed to be the visible Christian Church; which, by the
preaching of the Gospel, upon the Ascension of Christ, and the Ministry of his
Spirit poured forth in the primitive state of it, came to be raised up by God's
visiting the Gentiles, to take out of them a People of his Name, that he might
substitute unto himself as another Israel and holy People and Church of visible
Professors of his Name, in the room and place of the Jews, and the old Law and
Form of Worship that had been in practice among them, Rom 11. which made James,
in Act. 15. 16, 17. apply the words of the Prophets, unto this new Christian
Gentile Church, which says, After this I will return, and will build up the
Tabernacle of David, which is fallen down, and will build again the ruins
thereof; and I will set it up, that the residue of men might seek after the
Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom my Name is called, says the Lord, who
does all these things. Now amongst the visible Members of the Christian Church
(as evidently appears, Gal. 4.) there were a Generation, that under the Name of
Christians and hearers of the Gospel and Ministry of the Spirit, according to
the New Testament, chose still to retain the Principles of the Law and first
Covenant, as the balance of all their Faith, Obedience and Worship, desiring
to be under the Law and Dominion of it, and to cleave to the upholding and
doing those things, which, according to the Judgment of the Apostle Paul, made
them debtors to the whole Law, and struck them clear off from the true
Principles of Grace, that are by the Law of Faith, and of the new and
everlasting Covenant; and of this, they gave but too clear a proof, in that
they gloried in something that was on this side the Spiritual mind, which is
set upon things that are above, and which ought to be died unto by the Doctrine
of the Cross, unto which they show themselves the declared and zealous opposers.

Not, but that in words and profession these pretended as much to own the
Principles of Free Grace, and of the New Testament as any, and have their
approach to it, at least, when they please themselves, some more and some less;
but, when they are brought to the Trial, they quickly show that they are not
able to endure the bridling and restraint which the New Testament puts upon
them, by the Doctrine of the Cross of Christ, to the crucifying that wherein
they desire and affect to glory, from which they are excluded by the Law of
Faith and the New Creature, as we shall show in its place; So that in Truth,
that which these second sort of Witnesses have in their eye, is not the being
and life of the New Creature, but the restoration of the old Adam in his
primitive, righteous and holy state, into which they grow up and are found for
the life of their holiness; and upon that bottom, as a qualification to entitle
them to all the Promises, and their abode and continuance in Fellowship and
Communion with Christ, and Interest in his Death, for the Remission of sins;
They do experience such acceptance from Christ, and are in themselves so
certain of their good Estates to their Eternal Salvation, that they will not
endure to hear, wherein they are in a mistake, nor that it is possible for them
to be better.

These do indeed excel the first Witnesses in the doctrinal part of the
knowledge of Christ, confessing him in that great part of his Priestly Office
(which the others see not) as he bare our Transgressions, and made Atonement
for the sin of mankind, by the Sacrifice of himself; in the benefit of which
Sacrifice they find their outward peace and joy more than in their righteous
works: nay, when as to the light and evidence of their Sanctification, they are
at a loss and in the dark; they have an adherence to the blood of Christ, as
the propitiation for their sins, and his intercession on their behalfs to the
Father, for the obtaining new strength against Corruption, and the renewal of
their former peace and comfort; which experience the first sort of Witnesses
are strangers to, or see no need of, but account themselves Justified as well
as Sanctified by the inward purity and perfection which they have attained with
power over the brutish and sensual Nature, that they are more careful and able
to keep under, than this second sort are.

Nevertheless, The Oil which is given from Christ under this first Ministry in
either of these respects beforementioned, is that Anointing that through the
frailty and weakness of the Vessel that receives it, is not abiding, but at the
best is but as a sojourner, that finds not in these hearts the new man, that is
the place of its rest, Isa. 66. and though it be used by Christ to trim the
Lamp of the spirit of man with, when renewed and restored to the obedience and
subjection that is required by the Law of God, in any degree and measure of
sincerity or chastity of the pure Lamb-like and virgin Spirit, yet being only
in the Lamp, where it spends and consumes and must be duly renewed, and by a
frame of heart meet to receive it, and cheerish it; or else being grieved and
quenched, it suddenly departs: Hence it is, that amongst these two Witnesses
under this Anointing, which is from Christ, and the operation, good, righteous,
holy, and spiritual, and the change made by it, true and real; there are such a
number of visible Professors that prove Hypocrites, Apostates, and fall away
from the Grace and enlightening they have felt and experienced, deceiving both
themselves and others, being not able to hold it out in the day of Trial, nor
to persevere and endure to the end; without, on the other hand, stumbling on
the stumbling stone, and becoming prejudiced against any higher and further
growths up into Christ: or, on the other hand, through fear of loss by
Persecution, are terrified from well-doing (with amazement) or, are bought off
from it with the reward of unrighteousness, as Balaam was; and as Demas who
embraced this present World.

And the Reason of this, as to the one as well as the other sort of these
Witnesses, is, because that is wanting to them which should fix them, and make
them unchangeable in well-doing, and cause them to be Pillars in the House of
God that never go out more. That they are partakers of righteous Principles,
and are qualified with Power to work Righteousness, and this from present
anointing and impression of the true and right Spirit, is not, nor ought not
to be denied them: They may be Virgins, and have Lamps well trimed with Oil
fresh and full, and yet not able to keep this Oil from spending and going out,
nor prevent their own being to seek for want of it, when they should have the
greatest use of it. And indeed, the first sort do confess as much, and own
their Righteousness to be mutable, and they no longer to have certainty in it,
than they can stand in the Obedience; and that their standing or falling, may
be or may not be, as they give their free assent or dissent to the Good and
Evil that presents it self to them. But with many, under the second sort of
Witnesses, it is not so; for they fasten upon the Righteousness of Christ, that
is wrought in his Person, as that which is unchangeable in it self, which it
is, if they do but rightly apply it, and hold it upon the Texnure of the
absolute and better Promises which are by the new Covenant, whereof they make
no doubt but they do. And as to their Sanctification, they have the Law for
their Rule, which in it self is Moral and Perpetual, and so they believe all
real and true Conformity to it, wrought in their hearts, must also be, although
their hearts be not yet made that good soil, that where it has received the
Word, and retained it for a season, are not prepared to keep it for ever, and
to bring forth fruit with that patience, as will lose all other things, rather
than ever be prevailed with, to let it go.

From both these sorts of Witnesses, Christ is Preached, and Righteousness made
known and Propagated in the World, and a Testimony kept up against open
Looseness and Prophanness, Atheism and Idolatry; and by these Spiritual Traders
and Merchants in the Traffic of Christ's Goods and Talents of the Common Gifts
and Graces of his Spirit, there is by some, a right and good use and
approvement made, so as they are at last persuaded to put them to the
Exchangers for their Lord's Advantage, and their own benefit; being willing to
purchase the one Pearl of great price, which is obtained through saving Faith
and Regeneration; for many of these small Pearls that in the Day of Proof and
Trial, will not endure: And those that do eat and drink unworthily of this
Table of the Lord, notwithstanding the many wonderful things they do in his
Name, he will profess he knows them not, but let them see, they have eat and
drunk their own damnation, and left themselves wholly without all excuse: And
therefore, both these degrees and growths up into Christ Jesus, as branches in
the Vine, that after real union, must either by better husbandry applied to
them, come to receive a fastening in and with the Root, that cannot be shaken
nor dissolved, or else prove withered branches, at last that upon trial are
only fit for the fire; Their great care and business should be to make their
Calling and Election sure, and from evidence which cannot fail nor deceive,
experience that the Root bears them, and not they the Root.

And thus we come to the Consideration of the other two sorts of Witnesses,
that are the standing Plants and Olive Trees in the House of God, which are
planted by the Fathers right hand, and none whatsoever can pluck up. In the
former I have spoke to, Christ dwells as in his Tents and mutable habitations,
who in that respect are called Temples of the Holy Ghost, that may so be
defiled, that God may destroy and cast them out of his sight for ever; but
these we now come to describe, do Constitute that Mount Zion that cannot be
moved, that Heavenly Jerusalem, which is made a quiet habitation, a place of
everlasting Rest, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down (as the first must,
in order to be new built in the Regeneration) not one of the Stakes thereof
shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the Cords thereof be broken; but
there the Lord will be for ever, a place of broad Rivers and Streams that shall
spring up into life eternal, and that from the lowest Ebbs, at first no higher
than the Anckles, become still ascending, not only to the height and stature
of man in his fullest perfection, but also above it, till it come to be a River
to swim in, a River, pure and clear as Cristal, that proceeds from the Throne
of God and of the Lamb (the Son of man glorified) in the midst of the street;
and on either side whereof is the Tree of Life, or those who live and feed upon
that incorruptible Fruit.

The work which is wrought by Christ in and upon the two first sort of
Professors of his Name, is that which seals them and binds them fast up in the
bundle of life unto the Redemption that is eternal, and makes them to give
witness to what Christ is and does in his second Ministry, as he sends the holy
Ghost, the Spirit of Truth, which abides in them that are made Receivers of
him, under an Obligation, never to depart from them, nor suffer them to depart
from him; that is, he that stablisheth us in Christ, pouring out that Anointing
which seals us with the Seal of the living God, as with the Name of our
Father in our forehead, the effectual calling of whose Name upon us, by working
in us, and making us fit Vessels to receive it and bear it, is our Adoption,
and that manner of admitting us unto the right and dignity of Sons, which makes
us heirs according to the Promise.

And this is done by Christ, not as Creator, and the Giver of the Law and Life
of pure Nature upon its first Principles; but by Christ as he ministers that
Spirit of Truth, which is the Inspiration before-described, that proceeds from
the Father and the Son, by the operation of the holy Ghost, or third Person in
the Trinity, whose work is Perfection and consummative of what is already in
being, by the Creation and Operation of the Son or Eternal Word; and yet
causes so great an Alteration in the natural being of man, taken at his best,
from what it was before, and that so much for the better; with respect to
abundance and immutability of that which Nature it self calls good and
righteous, that it justly deserves to be called a new Creation, or
Regeneration, that gives a new Creature Being and Life far excelling the first,
and much differing in glory from it. To evidence this,

Let us consider Man in the righteousness of his Natural being, wherein he has
a right understanding of God's mind (in what is required by the Law, which he
consents and agrees to, as that which is righteous, and holy, and spiritual,
and good) and a will to put it in execution, as that which, in the doing
thereof, he does but his duty, and which he is obliged to by GOD, and his own
voluntary Engagement, and to continue therein under the danger of the Curse
upon failer. Here the Command is a Lamp, and the Law is Light, to instruct man
in his Duty; and the Spirit and Mind of man, keeping to this Light, and walking
up to it, and faithfully in it, is in a good and perfect state, by God approved
and justified; so that there be but a continuance in it: And this Christ seems
to acknowledge to him that put him the Question, Luke 10. 25. What shall I do
to inherit Eternal life? In the Answer he gives, bidding him do that which is
written in the Law, which says, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; do
this, and thou shall live: Where then lies the difficulty? what is it that is
yet wanting?

The difficulty lies in man's part, whereof he is not enough sensible, and the
want is, that of a Guide and Surety, to set and to keep man's spirit right in
the doing of that which the Law requires, in the manner God prizes and most
esteems: For there is a way that is right in man's eyes, even in yielding
obedience to the Law of God, wherein man glories, and is puffed up in himself,
but has no praise from God; and this is from that spring and principle of
activity which is seated in the freedom of Will, which is natural to man in his
first righteous Nature, and was found in him before his Fall, and is capable of
Restitution since, nay, is actually restored through the benefit of his Death,
more or less in every man, by that common Light and Grace which Christ does no
more withhold from any man, than he does his Rain from raining upon the Just
and Unjust; but in way of further bounty, does confer in large proportions
where he pleases, a distribution of his Goods and Spiritual Gifts, in which he
causes the Receivers thereof to differ one from another, according to the use
he intends them unto. By which enriching of man's nature upon this his restored
natural bottom of a free active righteous spirit, according to the Law, whilst
the primitive mutability is still continuing with him, he is so far from being
made a New Creature and truly regenerate (as is but too generally conceived)
that nothing but passing under the new Creation-work, translating man out of
his primitive natural freedom and activity, into an activity and Freedom of
another kind, is capable to hinder this first freedom from engendring to
bondage, and the righteousness accompanying it, from failing and ending in the
death of Hypocrisy and final Apostasy; which made Christ, in Joh. 8. 31. to
deal so plainly with the Jews, that in this wavering spirit were for the
present such as passed current for Believers, and were so called by the
Evangelists; but Christ knew they were not of continuance; and so told them,
ver. 31. together with the Remedy which he had by him for the cure of it. For
they stood in need to be made free by the knowledge of the Truth; or rather, to
be known of him that is True; the Son that abides in the house for ever, who is
able to bring them into that state of freedom, that shall make them free
indeed, with an impossibility ever to be imbondaged more, or to serve sin as
their lord and master.

This mutable state, wherein man did at first receive God's Image by Creation,
and does in the way of Restoration again partake of it, by virtue of the
Ministry of Christ's first anointing and comforting Presence, in which he takes
up his habitation in the soul, as a so journer and passenger, although there be
given that knowledge of God's Will and Mind to man, which is true, and as
perfect and full, as the Vessel that takes it can bear; yet the weakness of the
Vessel is such, that it is like the wave of the Sea, tossed with every wind
when temptation arises, and is either of it self apt to mistake and
misunderstand the Rule given him to walk by, or to close and fall in with a
false deceitful spirit, transforming himself into the Image of Righteousness,
and embrace him for the True one: for whatever Image of God that which is a
mere Creature, and no more, is found in, the old Serpent knows how to imitate
and personate the same, in the very likeness wherein it shines forth in
Christ's own Person, and with the same to seat himself in the hearts of his
followers, as in the Temple of God, and to show himself as far as that will go,
for proof and demonstration that he is God, to the imbondaging and carrying
captive by this deceit, all that receive not the Truth in the love of it.

Whereas the Image and knowledge of God, and of his Will, which is given by the
Truth, or by his coming into the Soul, who is the true One, does anoint and
impress the Soul, with that Name of God, which does exclude by the very Nature
of its evidence, all possibility of falsehood, deceit, or uncertainty, as does
the Dayes-spring of Light to the natural eye, which by its self-evidence
assures it. It is that Light wherein is no darkness at all, but is able to
distinguish it self, as that which is separate from the darkness of every
counterfeit and false representation. This comes only by the Law of Faith, and
true Regeneration, that Gift of the Holy Ghost, as he is the Second and better
Comforter, the Spirit of Truth which the World neither does, nor can receive.
Christ therefore calls himself the Truth, as he is the receiver and giver of
this Anointing, as these Rivers of Living Waters flow from him, that fail not,
but are a wellspring unto Life Eternal, as it is written, Joh. 7. This spoke he
of the Spirit, for the Holy Ghost was not yet given, that is in this Ministry,
and by the means of Christ's Manhead, because Jesus was not yet Glorified.
Jesus was a man, and the most perfect righteous natural man which ever was, the
form of which is made in him Incorruptible, having its first mutability fixed,
by being subjected and made a Servant, though the elder, unto a New-spring of
Light and Divine Birth that was added to him, as he became the engrafted Word,
and wherein he and the Father are One, and not he, but the Father does the
work; Therefore he says, in Rev. 1. 18. I am he that lives and was dead, and
behold I am alive for evermore, and have the Keys of Hell and of Death.

According to this pattern of man's Natural Perfection made in Christ
incorruptible, and brought forth in perfect subjection and subservency unto,
and agreement with a more excellent birth of Divine Glory, which Christ's
Man-head is exalted unto, (in which he is according to his Man-head, He that is
above all, one with the only begotten, that is in the Father's bosom, and has
the highest and clearest sight of God, beyond that of Angels themselves) It is,
that all Regenerated ones that are made heirs of the Spirit, in the single
portion thereof, are built up, and are Temples of the Holy Ghost, an
everlasting Habitation of God, through the Spirit.

And because the same Jesus, that after this first pattern of humane Perfection
which is in him, gives only the Witness that he is a mere and perfect man: and
in the exalted and more heavenly state of Manhead which he also has, as he
that God the Father has sealed and admitted to the sight of his own shape and
very similitude, has by Inheritance obtained a more excellent Name than the
Angels, and must also give the Witness of what he is, and in what Glory he
lives, as he inherits the Spirit in this double portion thereof: Therefore by
the same new creating Power, which he is entrusted to administer, as he gives
the Holy Ghost, he produces this second sort of new men, and adopted Children
heirs according to the Promise, upon whom Christ poures out his Spirit, not
only by the measure, and pattern, or Rule of the first Creation, but above it
and beyond it, according to the proportion that his own glorified Manhead has
obtained it in its highest exaltation, admitting them into the same bosom of
the Father with himself, wherein he is as the only begotten; into which bosom,
and most intimate vision of God: neither do the Angels nor first sort of Heirs
and Children of the Son's Kingdom ever arrive, but is reserved to be dwelt
alone in by this Seed of Abraham God's friend, that are made Christ's peculiar
Possession, consisting of a select number of his choice Favorites and Friends
that he Redeems from amongst all other men, to make as the first fruits of his
Creation to God and to the Lamb, who are joynt-heirs with him of the double
Portion, and co-habit together with him in his Father's bosom, where they see
and Inherit his Glory in the Naked and Primitive purity, which it has in the
Breast of God himself; Experiencing as well what the Gift of the Holy Ghost is,
when it is God's Name poured out above measure, as well as by measure; that
which Paul had some taste of, whether in the body or out of the body he could
not tell, upon his being caught up into the third Heavens, to the hearing of
things, impossible for him to utter in his Bodily state, nor others to receive.

And if thus we understand the third Heavens, as indeed we ought, then the
finding out the other two next below them, will not be difficult, since the
second Heaven is that wherein are the Angels and Spirits of Just men made
perfect, upon the laying down the Body; and the first, that Presence of Christ,
and knowledge of his Name, which he vouchsafes unto his Church and particular
Saints, in the converse they have with him here below, in the Body, which Paul
does also call a Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. where he says, Our Conversation is in
Heaven; meaning by the walking with Christ in Spirit, as well as being and
living in it, whilst we are here in this World; in which Christ is able, and
does appear to our Bodily sensual part, before its change, and putting on that
which is Incorruptible, as it must do; and Christ's manhead thus considered, as
it makes this threefold Heaven, was lively represented and described by the
form of building; God caused the Ark to be built up, in Genesis 6. 16. where the
directions that are given, do require Noah to make it of lower, second, and
third stories, or heights, one above another; like the outward Court, the Body
of the Temple, and Holy of Holies, or inmost part of the House, which God
commanded also in Solomon's Temple; and both not without signifying this great
Mystery in the glorified manhead of Christ, by the Spirit and Presence whereof,
he makes a threefold Heaven, and way of converse, with the Sons of men, under
the threefold degrees of Light and Glory; that from his Face, and by the Spirit
of his Mouth are given forth, and has answerable Hearers and Receivers.

1. That Administration of the Light of pure Nature, the effects whereof upon
the hearts of the Receivers, produces healing and restoration of the wound made
by sin, and renews a like frame of Spirit in man, as to the kind of it, wherein
he was at first Created, and is still exercising his first mutable and wavering
Principles, that in time of trial fail, and so end in Apostasy and Death,
through the weakness and fault of the Vessel, not of the Liquor, or Oil which
is poured out, into these Lamps, that in his own Nature is Incorruptible, but
is suffered to leak out by these broken and frail Vessels.

Secondly, The Light of pure Nature and right Reason, fixed and made
incorruptible through Faith and Regeneration, whereby the former frailty and
leaking of the Vessel is perfectly cured, without changing the fashion of it,
any further than what is requisite to bring it into subjection and obedience to
a supreme Judgment and Will, given as its guide and surety, to sustain and
influence the actings thereof throughout.

The Third, is the Light of Divine Love, which he that dwells in, dwells in
God, and is in the Light, as He is in the Light, beholding divine beauty in its
original, where it is most attractive, and binds up the Judgment and Will of
the beholders into its own likeness, most willingly, and irresistably,
transforming them into the thing beloved.

This is the Love which casts out fear, and all torment, in the cleerest
evidence, and greatest assurance that the Creature can possess: And by this
Love it is, when not seen, that Faith works, and the Spirit of Adoption,
crying, Abba, Father; that Spirit and Presence of the Son that is sent into our
hearts, which we are knit into by an inseparable union, and the Soul is formed
thereby into the likeness of him that does beget in either of the two last
degrees of Light and quickening beforementioned: Both which do beget that Seed
of Life in the heart that is immortal, the Princely prevailing conquering Seed
of Believers, that are the true Israel of God, to whom all the Promises are
sure; this is wrought by the coming of the Son in Spirit into the Soul, there
to beget and form his own likeness in our Understanding and Will, the making us
know him that is true, and that we are in him that is true, either according to
this lower or higher birth of himself, of which he calls us to partake, and so
become Witnesses thereof in our selves, and unto others.

This then, is the knowledge of the Truth which we are to understand, does make
the Adopted Children of God free, with another and better kind of Freedom than
that wherein man was at first Created in that mutable and Primitive state of
purity. And what this Freedom is we shall show, that is so worthy to be
obtained and fought after, in exchange for the other. This Freedom consists in
the witnessing every respect which is wrought in the Understanding and Will of
man by Regeneration and Divine birth, of the one or other sort, to render them
of entire use and service, unto that higher and superior Will in the second
Adam the Lord from Heaven, that is made and given of the Father, to be a
quickening Spirit unto them in a twofold capacity; First, of their natural Head
and Sovereign, whom they are to serve as in relation of Subjects to their King
and Lawgiver, and therein fulfill and answer the very end of the Law of Nature,
and actually become those righteous persons against whom there is no Law that
can take hold of them to punish them, or take the least exception to their
perfect Righteousness, that have given to them a constant and perpetual Will to
do right to every one, and love the Lord their God most entirely, by influence
from their Head, who in this respect is the common Parent to both the sorts of
Children, whom he makes free Citizens, and Inhabitants of the Heavenly
Jerusalem, his own glorified man-head, which is the Mother of us all.

But, secondly, Christ, the second Adam, comes forth also in another Headship
to the second sort of these Children, which is, that of Husband and Bridegroom,
gathering them up into a state of higher Love and Duty than that of Servants
and Subjects, and receiving them unto more honorable use, in familiarity,
intimacy, and a kind of equality, comprehending the Love and Duty of righteous
and faithful Servants, but in respect of the nearness of relation and union,
becoming much the more excellent and transcendant. The Inspiration and holy
Anointing which flows from Christ in this twofold Headship of his, into the
hearts of these his Members, has that effect upon them, as joins them to him
in unity and agreement of spirit, (or of judgment and will) and so entirely
possesses them and engrosses them in the service and to the use of their Lord,
that it leaves them at no liberty to (...) the use or service of any other, but
in subordination to his will which excludes sin and all evil, esteeming it
their greatest happi^ thus to be, bound up in a way of love, delight, and
entire ob^nce in the Will of their Head, their second Adam and Lord fr^ Heaven.
Hence they experience that they are not their own in any thing; for, it is not
they that live, but Christ lives in them, and with his Princely prevailing
Influence, as their Head, is their infallible Guide and firm Security in all
their operations, giving them such an abiding and growth up in all things, into
him, in an entire resignation and obedience to his Will, as co-workers together
in every thought, word and work, that they cannot miscarry, nor shall ever be
hurt by the second death, but shall be rewarded with those pleasures that are
at his right hand and at his left, in his Kingdom for evermore. And although
this most perfect Freedom, which is obtained by this binding and conjunction in
unity and agreement of spirit with Christ, be esteemed by the Possessors of it
of price inestimable, yet it is the greatest bondage and cross that can befall
a wicked heart, and is that which is reserved by Christ to be their torment for
ever, (in the end, which will be given by him to his first Ministry, in the
hearts where he is finally rejected) from whom, after he is departed and
withdrawn for a season, as if they should never hear of him, (as indeed they
shall not to their comfort) yet they shall to their terror and sorrow be made
sensible of him, by the fastening which he will make of his Darts of
enlightnings into the minds of the wicked, as sharp Arrows and a gnawing Worm
that shall never dye, when by the breath of his mouth he shall kindle a fire of
Conviction and self-judging in their Conscience, together with the just sense
of his Divine Vengeance, they can no longer flee nor escape from.

But, on the contrary, the truly regenerated souls are made willing and
exceedingly pleased to draw in this yoke with their Head, to see with his eyes,
and act by his quickening in all they do, and to put on with him this lowliness,
meekness and purity of spirit, which feeds on that which is incorruptible, and
is with God of great price, so great, as no righteous workers have his praise
and blessing, but these, who are properly Christ's Mystical Body, the Branches
that abide in him, and whose Fruit is permanent unto Life Eternal: and this
Body or Church of invisible Saints and spiritual Worshippers of the true God,
even whilst they are in their Wilderness and suppressed state, Christ, the
great Overseer of their souls, does feed with Teachers af^^^ his own heart, and
is not wanting by an outward Ministry under him, ^o feed and refresh with Oil,
the Lamps of all sorts that he makes use of as his Witnesses, and bear his
Name, whether according to the knowledge his Will, that is revealed in the
first or in the second Covenant; that so h^ may, by upholding, such an Office
under him, edify all that are under his Charge, as he sees occasion, and is
agreeable to the condition the Church is in, whether of restraint or freedom
from the Powers of the World. By those which Christ puts in to the Ministry of
his Spirit under him, we are to understand such ahe gives his Unction and
Mission unto, as he is the Head of Nature or of Grace, and from their own
Experience are made able to minister the knowledge of Christ in his healing and
restoring work, or in his regenerating and New-creation-building, before
described; giving their Witness according to what they themselves have received
of the Spirit in the three distinct Dispensations of it, before expressed; in
the first of which, because of the mutable state of the operation thereof, both
in themselves as well as in their hearers, they that are eminent Preachers unto
others by the excellency of Gifts with which they are anointed and that from
Christ, may nevertheless themselves be found at last Cast-awayes. But, in the
other two, they which experience the Anointing thereof, become Pillars in the
House of God, that never go out more, and may obtain the highest Order and Rank
of Ministry in the Church, even that of Apostles, in the same way as Paul
himself did, by such a Spiritual Light of Christ, as he says, 1 Cor. 9. 1. Am
not I an Apostle? have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? And as thus the
Apostolical Order came to have being in the Church, by the immediate sight of
Christ in Spirit, as we see in Paul's Case, which comprehends in it all other
the inferior Ranks of Ministers, whether Prophets, Evangelists, or Pastors and
Teachers; So there are of these inferior Ranks (to the Apostles) which hear
and receive the knowledge of the Gospel, and the holy Ghost, either from the
mouths of the Apostles, and by the laying on of their hands, as did the
Evangelists; or by other subordinate instituted means; that is to say, either
inwardly, only by the inspiration of Angels, thereunto sent and authorized by
Christ; as to Philip in the case of the Eunuch's Conversion; and to Abraham,
and the Patriarchs after him, four hundred years together, before the written
Word was given, and who, before the Incarnation, were made use of to give the
Law, which is there called the Word spoken by Angels, Heb. 2. 1. Or secondly,
by the communication of such Gifts, for interpreting and opening of the written
Word, as we find in the Church of Corinth, and this by such Prophetical Gifts,
as not only the Officers did partake of, to fit them for the Ministry; but,
secondly, the very Members of the Church also shared in, for the common
edification of the Body.

So, that, either by inward Inspiration from Angels, under Christ; or, by the
witnessing Spirit of Christ immediately, which is the Spirit of Prophecy; or,
by Gifts of Abilities in a more ordinary way, for the interpreting and opening
the Scriptures, Christ has always had his Laborers in his Harvest. And all
these several Degrees in the Ministry, as they are found in subordination,
subserviency and agreement one with another, in their place and differing
measures, do make sweet harmony, and redound to great profit in the Church. But
if they break their Ranks, and the inferior exalt and lift up themselves in
preference above, and opposition to the superior and greater measures, these
then corrupt and set up for themselves, or are made use of by him that knows
how to transform his ministers into Ministers of Righteousness, to advance his
Kingdom, and turn bitter and implacable Enemies and Persecutors of the Woman's
Seed, and true Spiritual Worshippers. Let it not then be said, that to be
against the Ministry in this last sense, is to be against all Ministry,
especially such who acknowledge Christ the Chief Minister and great Ordainer of
God's Worship, and all those to be his Ministers that have Unction and Mission
from him, in all the Orders and Degrees of them, wherein they are acknowledged
by the Scriptures, whom God has pleased to make use of to bear the Witness
committed to them during Antichrist's Reign, in a suffering, sackcloth,
prophesying state, which will not lose its fruit, but become a sweet savor of
life unto life in them that are saved, and a favor of death unto death in them
that perish.

We now shall proceed to the next Enquiry, which is, Who they are that in
Principles are opposite to these two Anointings, and the Effects of them; and
declare their Enmity by their continued War, in the posture of our Enemies or
dissembled Friends, both making up but the same Kingdom of Darkness, which
since Christ's coming is called Antichrists?

Righteousness and Truth are the two supporters of Christ's Throne; with the
frist, God enlightens and quickens the natural beings of Angels and men, who in
their mutable and uncertain state are possessors of Righteousness in purity and
perfection; whilst they are and may be strangers to Truth, that is, firmness
and certainty, which is as the Crown and Top-stone to the first Building. And
therefore the Light of Truth, (which is a clearness in the Judgment, that had a
right discerning before, that does fix it and ascertain it beyond all possible
doubt and contradiction, and the activity of Truth, which is a stedfastness and
pressing forward in the Will, wherein may be found righteous operation before,
to run in that race, and never fail nor faint) is most necessary to follow and
succeed, where the first goes before, as that which is its consummation and
final perfection.

In the breast where these two Lights meet, embrace, and kiss each other, there
is the true Vrim and Thummim: the Divine enlightened mind, which makes all those
wherein it is found, free Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, and beloved
Children and Subjects of Christ's Kingdom; As it is written, Joh. 3 19, 20, 21.
Light is come into the world. Light in both these respects, is come to dwell
with us in our own nature, when the Word was made flesh, and to be amongst us,
in our mouth and in our heart, to hear it and obey it. Whence it is that this
is said to be the Condemnation of the World, that Light is thus come in the
person of our Redeemer the second Adam, and men have notwithstanding loved
Darkness better than Light, because of the contrariety that is in the evil
deeds of men unto the very nature of Light, which makes manifest and reproves
them, and from thence contracts hatred from evil men, very unjustly, who love
not to be discovered in their wickedness, nor to be under censure and reproof
for it; but perfectly hate thus to be discovered and judged: and that is at
bottom the quarrel and rise of the enmity between the Subjects of these two
Kingdoms, of Darkness and of Light.

Hatred and enmity against the Light of Righteousness and Truth, which shine
forth in Jesus Christ, as in the head, and in his Witnesses and Children, as
the members; in what hearts soever they are found, are in general the opposite
Principles we are now speaking of; and the Root or Cause whence those spring,
is from the love that such hearts at bottom do bear unto evil, that is to say,
to unrighteousness and falsehood, which they prefer and adhere unto before the
Light of the Image of God, which is wrought out in Christ and in his members.

Of these lovers of Darkness more than Light, we are to consider; Either,
first, such as are born blind, and are already darkened in their understandings,
and alienated in their wills by evil works, dead in trespasses and sins.

Or, secondly, such as have their Light freely restored to them again for
asking, and however, so much of it, as may make them sensible of the need of
more, and to discern the means of their perfect cure.

Or, thirdly, Such, as, after their first Light restored, are offered the gift
of a better sight than ever they had at first; which shall not only enlarge
what they had at first, in their primitive purity, but preserve it in an
endless life, without any possible danger ever to lose it more.

For the first; It is the condition of all Mankind in general, and was the
effect that followed upon the sin of our first Parents, by which door Death
entered and passed upon all men, because in them all had sinned. Nor did this
befall the Children merely or principally because of sin, as if that were the
end that God had in it; but, that the works of God's Grace should be manifested
thereby: For, no sooner did the disease and wound appear, but God had provided
a Physician and healing Medicine, which declared the Case, as yet, (which Man
was in) not so desperate, but he might be restored; and not only so, but have
an additional sight given to him, that should make him see better than ever he
did before.

For the second; It is also that state which is common to all that have sinned,
and upon whom Death has passed, as to the alienation of their minds from the
Life of God; whose teeth are set on edge by the sour grapes that were eaten by
our first Parents, and therefore by way of free gift are restored by the
benefit of the Ransom paid by the Redeemer on their behalf, to such a degree of
enlightening and renewed Righteous Life, as is a Lamp or Candle lighted in the
soul of every one that comes into the World; in which little, they are put to
the proof of their faithfulness, how far they care or desire to hearken to it,
or not; that which is the work of the Law written in their hearts by Christ, as
a Record and Witness against them, if it be slighted and abused, whereby there
is a Witness set up in the very natural Conscience, as a light in a dark place,
that is ever accusing or excusing, as the action done does deserve. To this
Light in the Conscience, which is the Law within us, must every one stand or
fall, as to matter of information or proof how that soul has showed it self in
this state, whether a lover of Darkness more than of Light; for, this will
either show it self our Friend or our Enemy, as we behave our selves in
receiving of its instruction, and following its guide, and submitting to its
reproof; For, he that is faithful in the least, is to be presumed he will be
faithful in much; and he that is unjust in the least, will be also unjust in
much; So that Christ may truly and justly say to such, If they have not showed
themselves faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, or uncertain Riches, who will
commit to their trust the true Treasure? And thence it is, that all those who
in this state of proof and trial under this first dispensation of Light,
declare themselves Enemies in a fixed Rebellion, and hardening against the
Teaching and Dictates thereof, they plainly show that they love the Disease
better than the Remedy; and had rather continue blind, than have their sight
and limbs restored, to use them as they ought, and by the Law they are obliged
to do, for running with delight and continuance in the race of God's
Commandments; and had rather perish in their sins, than believe in Christ, and
by believing, be freed and saved from the wrath that is to come.

The Natural Conscience in this sense corrupted, heardned, and become
unreclaimable, by refusing Reproof, and perfectly hating all those that set
about their recovery and restitution out of this their bondage, under what ever
Name or outward Profession of Religion, and Divine Worship it be found in, does
afford the first sort of Subjects, whereof the kingdom of Darkness does
consist; a Region like to that where Abraham (coming in his Travels) did
pronounce, The fear of God is not in this place; nothing of Conscience was
there owned or practiced; but the Contrary, of open Profaneness or Idolatry.

The Third state is that which is not of such general extent, but a more
peculiar condescension and effect of God's bounty and good will to some sinners
beyond others, in admitting them to a farther and higher proof than the former,
and therefore does vouchsafe them a greater measure and gift of the Spirit, and
work of Restoration, out of their natural blindness, and death; for, with a
mighty hand, and a stretched out Arm, and with many Signs and Wonders, he
brings them, as he did Israel of old, out of the house of Bondage, and by the
Angel of his Presence, saved them from the hands of their Enemies, and offered
to lead them into the state of rest and immutability, which he had prepared for
them; and therein did propound to give them a better sight, and fuller fruition
of himself, than in the way of mere Restoration they could attain unto. For,
as to the Restoration and Freedom out of Egypt, God's Work was perfect, and a
just and right God he had showed himself to them; nevertheless, they that were
new come to have the use of their sight, and their feet again to be washed with
Water, and anointed with Oil, and when they were in their blood, God bid them
Live, and made them again living Souls; yet, like an unwise and foolish People,
they very evilly requited this bounty and goodness of the Lord, and of the Rock
that begat them, and of the God that formed them they were very unmindful, and
proved themselves a very froward and provoking Generation, Children in whom was
no stedfastness, nor that cared to use the means to be made so when it was
offered; but they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit: that is, as Steven
interprets it, They blasphemed and resisted the Holy Ghost, and refused the
Teachings of that Miristry by which the Truth is conveyed in the love of it,
which would for ever free them from the power and dominion of sin, and for ever
fix them in the Kingdom of Christ, and make them Pillars in God's Temple, never
to be removed.

These are they, that because they say they see, or have sight enough already,
and neither need nor desire better, therefore their sin remains, and is a sin
unto death; for which, God swears in his wrath, they shall never enter into his
rest. The light of their eye upon this, becomes evil, and hates those that see
cleerer and better than themselves, and cannot endure to hear of new lights
that go beyond theirs, or that is upon the increasing more and more unto the
perfect day.

In this evil mind, there is a lusting to Envy against the* true heirs, and a
saying in the heart, Come, let us kill them, and the Inheritance shall be ours:
which so far does, many times, transport them, that they become the bitterest
Enemies to God's choicest Saints and dearest Children; and when they kill them,
they think they do God service; and when they cast them out, and make them as
the scum and offscouring of the World, they say, Let God be glorified; these
are they that are neither hot nor cold; but under whatever forms of Godliness
and different persuasions they may be in matters of God's Worship, do give
their strength to the common Enemy of the true Saints; and though they can no
more cleave the one to the other, than the Iron to the Clay, yet they both can
sit at one Table, devising the destruction of the true Israelites, and take up
their places in the Feet and Toes of the great Image, that figured out the
universal Kingdom of Antichrist.

These are the Two opposite Principles, unto the Two Anointings, and the
effects of them in and upon the truly Regenerate ones. In these Principles
Satan lodges and dwells, as in his seat and suitable habitation, in the hearts
of his Children, who is the Father of all Unrighteousness and Deceit; these
flow from him as from their Fountain and Wellhead; and he is their
Countenauce, Protection, and Propagation, for the increase and enlargement of
his Kingdom of Darkness.

By the means of this Twofold hatred that Satan begets in the subjects of his
Kingdom, against the Light of God's Glory shining in the Face of Christ, and in
the witness of those that are the Members of his Mystical Body here on Earth,
he blows up a continual War, and keeps on foot a fixed Enmity between the
subjects of the one, and of the other Kingdom; and the Enmity is still the same
in effect, whether it be open and allowed, or dissembled and hid; the hatred
and opposition is not the less in it self, but the last of the two is the
worst, and most dangerous.

This he Heads, with a visible Power, as well as sowes the Seed of it
invisibly, in the Children of his Kingdom; and either by violence or fraud, or
both, has never failed from the beginning of the World to this day (by the
wise permission of God) for the bruising of the Heel of the Woman's Seed in the
Head and Members) to show himself the God, or chief Potentate and Ruler, in and
over the whole World: And so influence, in such manner, all the visible Rule
and Authority, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, that is exercised on Earth, and
is supported by humane Wisdom and Power, centring in the foresaid Principles of
batred and prejudice against Christ and his Kingdom, that he has ever got the
better of it, in the eye of flesh and blood, over the true subjects and
servants of Christ; and has as much as is in him, slain Christ's Witnesses,
and kept them under in a most oppressed and dispersed condition. Of this, the
Seed of Abrabam, beginning in Sem, and so downward until Christ's Incarnation
and Death* (and as the Consequence thereof, the rejection of the Seed according
to the flesh) were the living and known examples in their days, what
Servitudes and Captivities were they not exposed unto, and did they not
undergo? And at last the very visibility of their own Church and State, was
wholly defaced and lost, though both of Divine Constitution, and supported not
only with divine Laws, but with the visible signet of the Divine Presence; and
by whom was this People (upon whom the Name of God was called) brought under,
persecuted, and suppressed, but by those who were foretold by Dan. chapter 2. and
most lively represented and described by that great Image, which was the
subject of Nebuchadnczzar's Dream, that none but Daniel could rehearse and
interpret, signifying the Persons and their Successors, that should be found
possessing the Universal Empire, and Command of the World, during the
continuance of those known Four Monarchs that have followed successively one
after another, according as they were foretold and charactered out some
thousand years ago, and are now standing upon their last legs, the time drawing
on apace, when the spiritual seed of the same Abraham, shall be made heirs even
of the World, by Faith? and what was done by Abraham, in Figure and Type, as to
his Conquest over the Four Kings, Genesis 14. must have its accomplishment in
Reality and Truth, by those of his seed, that are the true Israel in Spirit,
who by the Spirit of Life entering into them at the appointed time, together
with the Charge committed to them, of pouring out the seven Vials of the last
Plagues of God, shall bring the final downfall and destruction of those Four
Monarchs, and in and with it, of the Kingdom of the Beast, and of Antichrist;
and bring home again, and receive the true Lots that have been sojourners in
the Sodom of this World, all this time under the Power of their Oppressors.

And as it did befall Israel after the flesh, that were Abraham's Natural Seed,
under the three first Monarchies, and part of the Fourth, (our Savior
suffering Death Under the Roman Empire) so are the Scriptures very plain and
express (if considered with a spiritual eye) that the Israel after the flesh,
that have been adopted into the room and place of the former, and (though wild
by Nature, yet) engrafted upon the same Stock and Root of the good Olive Tree,
the true anointed One, that is the Father of many Nations, as he is the Second
Adam* whose standing is by Faith, that if they exalt themselves, and become
hardened, and resist the Ministry of the Holy Ghost (as the Jews, that were
their Predecessors, did) Christ will then make it appear (also in the Case of
these latter Jews (who say they are so, but having not the Spirit and Nature of
true Faith in them, do lie, and deceive themselves as well as others) that it
is not they that bear the Root, but the Root that bears them, who therefore can
cast them off, as he did the others; and once more not only shake the Earth,
but the Heavens, although called Christian, to make way for that Kingdom of his
that cannot be shaken, whereof we have already showed; and how nigh this is
accomplishing, and is even at the very doors, we shall have occasion to make
mention of more particularly, as the next and last Particular we are to speak
unto.

For an Introduction whereunto, let me only mind you of some few things that
the Apostle John, in his Book of the Revelations, lays before us on this
behalf, declaring first the things that were to befall the Heathenish Roman
Empire, and the Church of God abiding under its Protection, during the time of
the first Six Seals, which by Computation continued till somewhat more than
four hundred years after Christ j about the end of which period, that Empire,
as Heathen, dissolved, and a new face of things, in Church and State, rose out
of it, at last, for so mnch as concerned that part of the World, which
thereupon in Name became Christian.

And because the Spiritual part of the Church at that same time began to be
most suppressed, being forced to fly from the fury of the Serpent into a
wilderness-state and condition; therefore the visible Constituted Frame of
Civil as well as Ecclesiastical Power, called Christian, were represented unto
John; The First, under the seven-headed and ten-horned Beast that came out of
the Sea; And the Second, under the two-horned Beast that came out of the Earth,
answerable to what was under other similitudes, intimated of them in the Iron
Legs, and the Feet and Toes of Nebuchadnezzar's Image, part of Iron, and part
of Clay; Whereby the Iron legs, are the Civil Power as it became Christian,
and retaining still the Relics of the Roman Empire; and by the Feet, part of
Iron and part of Clay, is meant, the Ecclesiastical State and Power, partly
Papal, and partly Reformed; as an earthly Jerusalem yet visible, and both
enemies to the Jerusalem that is above, and yet not very good friends between
themselves, whose continuance is measured out by the time of the six Trumpets;
that is to say, in the exercise of these three distinct Powers under the Name
Christian; the one, Imperial and Magistratical; the other, Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical; in the two Horns and branches of it, pretended unto, of Divine
Right and Institution; or whether it be more diffusive in a Collective Body of
Church-Rulers; and as more particularly it is expressed to last twelve hundred
and sixty Prophetical days; that is to say, years, in the 11, 12, and 13 Chap.
of the Revelations; and by comparing what is spoken and described in the
foresaid Chapters, with Chapter 17, concerning this Constitution and Face of
the Christian Church and State, that was foreseen to rise up out of the
dissolution of the Heathenish Roman Empire, and the driving into the Wilderness
the Spiritual part of the Church, made up of those who are said, for the
heavenliness of their Principles and Converse, to be those that dwell in
Heaven, chap. 12. verse. 12. and chap. 13. 6. It seems very plain, that upon the
Disputes that was likely to arise in the Christian Ecclesiastical State and
Government, upon the bottom of the Papacy and Rule in the Church, by one
universal visible Head under Christ, here upon Earth, as one of the Horns
belonging to the second Beast, by Daniel called the Little Horn (mentioned
single, because he was most Potent, and for a long time was able to uphold his
Authority without any considerable cruelty and division that was visible) But
in process of time, the separation and division happened, as John (in
mentioning of the two-horned Beast) did foretell, there would always be
within the bowels of the visible Church of the outward Court-worshippers, a
more and a less corrupted and backsliden part, the one of which compared with
the other, would or might be likened to the earthly Jerusalem, in the temper it
was in when Christ was upon Earth, for persecuting the Prophets, and killing
the Heir himself when he came amongst them; As the other might be to Samaria
and the worshippers of Jeroboams Calves, after that he had headed the ten
Tribes in their defection, not only in the Civil State, but from the Purity of
God's visible Worship, kept up according to God's Ordinances. This latter being
the lively resemblance of the Papacy, and all that acknowledge the Papal
Authority, as the chief Ruler and Head of the visible Church throughout the
several States and Dominions of the Christian Empire; the other figuring out
the Jerusalem that now is, and is in bondage with her Children, distinguishing
her self from Popery on the one hand, and from them that dwell in Heaven, as
the true Citizens of the Jerusalem that is above (the Mother of all those that
are Heirs according to the Promise) on the other hand: accounting the one
Babylonish, Antichristian and Heretical; and the other Schismatical and
Erroneous, Fanatical and Blasphemous.

And because the Woman, as the Apostle calls the earthly Jerusalem, (which was
amongst the Galatians in his days, as being in bondage with her Children to
the Law and worldly Rudiments, that perish in the using, Touch not, taste not,
handle not, as Objects of Divine Worship, which feed most the outward senses)
does make a very fair show in the flesh, having the Form of Godliness, but
denying the Power of it; and withdrawing from, and disowning the Children of
the Promise, that are of a more heavenly birth, and of the free Woman:
Therefore we shall find this sort of Professors described by John in his 1
Epist. 2. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had
been of us, they would, no doubt, have continued with us, and not have made a
manifest distinction of themselves from us; that is to say, from being
followers (1 Thessalonians. 2. 14, 15.) of the Churches of God, which in Judea are in
Christ Jesus; that are the Circumcision in Spirit, and have no confidence in
the flesh; For which cause sake, the Thessalonians, in adhering to the
primitive pattern, which showed it self in those Churches, did suffer the like
things from their own Countrymen, the Jews, among whom they lived, as those
Churches of God in Judea did from the Jews there, who both killed the Lord
Jesus, and their own Prophets, and chased out the chiefest of the Apostles from
amongst them; and they pleased not God, and are contrary to all men;
forbidding, under pretense of too much familiarity with the Heathen and
profane World, that the Gospel should be preached unto the Gentiles, whereby
they might be saved, every way filling up their sins, and bringing wrath upon
themselves to the uttermost.

This is the Woman which John saw in Rev. 1. that was drunk with the blood of
the Saints, ver. 6. and with the blood of the choicest Martyrs of Jesus; at
which he wondered with great admiration, as little expecting to find what he
saw, or to read that name written upon her forehead, which he did, of Mystery
Babylon the great, the mother of Fornications and Abominations of the Earth;
with whom the Kings and Inhabitants of the Earth commit Fornication, and have
been made drunk with it: For at last her false, unchaste, whorish spirit to her
Lord and Husband, is discovered and made manifest, by the open rejection of him
in his Members, and by the Combination and Conjunction which she is found in
with the seven-headed and ten-horned Beast and his Adherents, under the Papacy,
thereby to make War with his Witnesses and slay them, and expose their dead
bodies to shame and reproach in the streets of this earthly Jerusalem; who for
her exceeding Apostasy and fierce Enmity against the true Templeworshippers, is
spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified; and
though she have strengthened her self, as one that sits upon many Waters, and
who is the City that reigns over the Kings (or chief eminent Persons, men of
Name) of the Earth, which the Children of the earthly Jerusalem are; yet (says
he) God determines to bring her to Judgment, and, in order thereunto, the
Instruments he will employ therein, are the several Potentates and Kingdoms,
that have given their Power to the Papacy, who, at the time appointed, shall
find it their Interest to agree and become of one mind, in hatred of this
Whore, or unchaste Spouse of Christ, that sits upon Peoples, and Multitudes,
and Nations, and Tongues, and shall therefore combine together to make her
desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire; For God
has put it into their hearts to fulfill his Will, in this Judgment, which they
are to execute, as Nebuchadnezzar formerly did upon the earthly material
Jerusalem in his days; until which be fulfilled, they shall agree and hold
together, giving jointly their Counsel, Authority and Strength in support and
maintenance of the Beast, that is the first and chief Horn of the two-horned
Beast, which is the Papacy. And how to give a right interpretation of the
things in this 17th Chapter, but by this Key, deserves our very serious
consideration, according to the usual understanding of the Papacy to be meant
by this Whore, which is not denied to be a part of Babylon, and a chief part,
and to be also a Whore and Mother of Fornications; but she is so openly and
avowedly, not secretly and under the show of Reformation; and there is not any
mystery or secret in it, to find her out, as there is in the other case.

We come then in the last place, as the Conclusion of the whole, to show what
Word and part of his Counsels, contained in the Promises and Prophecies not yet
accomplished, the Lord is now fulfilling in these present dispensations of our
day; and this, by the comparing Scriptures with Scriptures, and observing what
gradually has been fulfilled since the time of Christ's Ascension to this day,
and what signs he has before given of the times wherein we now are.

There is nothing more positive and express in the Scripture, as may appear by
what has been already mentioned, (and for which many particular Texts might
further be alleged) than this, That there is a Kingdom of the Everlasting
Gospel, which neither can nor shall be shaken, that must be brought upon the
stage here in this World; which shall stand firm as a Rock against all
opposition, and come forth as a stone cut out of the Mountain without hands;
that must break down the visible heads, which the Serpent has kept up in and
over the whole Earth, for these many thousand years together; by the means
whereof the true Children and Heirs have been kept out of their Possession, and
have been necessitated to a Witnessing and Prophesying condition in a way of
Sufferings, and of utmost cruel dealings and oppressions from their implacable
Enemies; to whom it has been given to make and continue War with them, till
the course of Sufferings be finished. Of this bitter Cup, the Captain of our
Salvation drank the deepest draught, and had the greatest share; And lest we
should think he had put an end to the Sufferings of his Members by one Death on
the Cross, he dealt plainly with his Disciples in this point, both before his
Death, and also during the forty days he spent upon Earth after his
Resurrection; for, when the two sons of Zebedee had hopes to have seen him in
his own Person speedily in his Kingdom, before his Sufferings, and were
desirous the one to sit at his right hand, and the other at his left, in that
day of his Glory and Power, he intimates to them immediately that there is a
Preparation requisite to be wrought in all that shall be thought worthy of that
dignity, which is, to drink of the same Cup, and to be baptized with the same
Baptism that he was baptized with, according to that true and faithful saying,
If we die with him, we shall live with him; if we suffer with him, we shall
reign with him. And so, when all the Disciples together, a little before his
Ascension, Act. 1. 6, 8. asked him, saying, Will thou at this time restore the
Kingdom to Israel? his Answer is in effect this to them, That until Israel's
witnessing-work be over and finished, that must prepare them to Rule, and ripen
their Enemies for the Judgment and Destruction appointed unto all ungodly men,
that must first precede; the reigning-work, which they too much looked for, and
thirsted after, would not come, nor the days of it begin. Now this
witnessing-work, which is to be finished by the true Israel of God, as the
needful and requifit Preparation of you to Reign, is, What is to be wrought in
them upon their own hearts; and, what is to be wrought by you as a Testimony
born and given to the World on God's behalf.

And the latter of these is usually made use of by God to accomplish the
former, since all that will live godly in Christ Jesus (showing forth the
Virtues of Him, that has called them in a holy and good Conversation, shining
as Lights in the World) must suffer Persecution, and are sure to be hated and
oppressed by the World and Powers of it, by all ways and means that may prove
their Faith and Patience. And these Trials, which thus give proof of their
Faith, do cause Patience to have its perfect work in them, till which, they are
not those meet vessels fitted for their Master's use, as that he will dignifie
them to appear seated, as on his Throne, in their hearts; and thereby qualify
them with a Power of Rule; so, as at their word, and by their prayers, all
things shall become possible to them; What they bind on Earth, shall be bound
in Heaven; and what they loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven: For greater
works than Christ himself did when he was in the flesh, they shall do, because
he is gone to his Father.

Secondly, The witnessing-work is not only to be wrought in them, to prepare
them, in mind and body, to be meet vessels for the use of their Head (by them
to show forth his Wisdom and Power, to the glorifying of God in their spirits,
and in their bodies, which are his;) but the Light of it must be given out, and
born in the sight, and for the profit and good of others, if the fault be not
in themselves that should benefit by it; unto whom the savor of the knowledge
of Christ, ministered by his faithful Witnesses in their several places, and
callings, will prove in the issue, either a savor of life unto life, or of
death unto death, according as either it is received and valued, or rejected
and expelled. No man (says Christ) when he has lighted a Candle, puts it
in a secret place, neither under a Bushel, but on a Candlestick, that they that
come in may see the light: which Scripture is interpreted, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25.
where the instance is given, in meeting of the whole Church together, in one
place; that is, as many visible Saints and Believers as could well hear one
another, in the place they assembled in for their common Edification. In which
Church-meeting they were as a Golden Candlestick, that did in such manner hold
forth the shining Light of Christ's Truth and Holiness, to those that came in,
and were lookers on, and were not of the Society, that by the Spirit of
Prophecy, which in and among them of that particular Church was exercised, it
so fell out, that whoever came in, desirous to learn and be instructed, he was
convinced of all, he was judged of all, and the secrets of his heart were so
manifest, that falling down on his face, he worshipped God, and went out and
reported, that God was in them of a truth.

This is then the second sort of Witnessing-work which by Christ was entrusted
to his Disciples and Followers, to be exercised and employed in, according to
their several places and callings, till his return, in the day wherein he is to
come and judge the World in Righteousness, that is, take an account, who they
are that have acquit themselves as they ought to do in their
witnessing-stations and callings, and what fruit their witness had, how it took
place in the hearts of others among whom they conversed, and what returns they
met with from a wicked and ungrateful world for all the labor of Love and
Service they showed amongst them: Of all which, Christ intends to take a formal
and judicial account at the time of the end that is set by him to this
witnessing-work, in his witnesses, that upon this employment, Prophesying in
sackcloth, were to continue as in constant war and violent persecution from
the Powers of the world for twelve hundred and sixty years together. At the end
of which time, the Judgment or time of Wrath is to come; not that which is the
final Judgment and Wrath of the great Day, but a like proceeding of God toward
the World, in pleading with it by Fire and Sword, upon the finishing the
Testimony of his Witnesses, as he did by Water upon the first World, where he
made a visible distinction between the Wicked and the Righteous, and between
them that truly fear God and are sincere, and them that fear him not; but are
tainted and corrupted with Hypocrisy and Apostasy, as is plainly expressed,
Rev. 11. 18. And the Nations were angry, and thy Wrath is come, and the time of
the Dead, or the Cause of thy slain rejected Witnesses, that they should be
judged, and an Inquisition made after their Blood, and the hard usage they have
met with in the World, in order now to receive Countenance and Reward for their
Sufferings, according to the nature of them, and the condition and place in
which they gave their Witness, whether they were Prophets or Saints, that fear
God's Name, small or great; and to yield Vengeance and Destruction to
impenitent and hardened Sinners, that they may no longer corrupt the Earth.

And therefore, as in this place we may see, Christ lights up his Candles in
the World, of all sorts and sizes, and indeed in all places of it from East to
West, and has given the Light of his Glory and Kingdom, as that Testimony
which is appointed to be given and preached in all the World, as a Witness to
all Nations; and immediately after this is finished, then the End comes, the
End that God will manifest of his patience and long-suffering which he has
exercised toward the World, in forbearing to avenge the Cause of his Elect,
which has been night and day crying to him, How long, Lord, how long? which in
this day of his Wrath he will avenge, and that speedily, and cut the work short
in Righteousness.

And because we have said, the Candles or Lamps which God lights up in the
World, for this his Witnessing-work, ever since his Ascension to this day,
(according to the Commission he gave to his Disciples, Act. 1. 8. and in them
to all his Saints small and great that fear his Name (as we showed before) are
of several sizes and kinds, it may not be improper to declare them.

As first, Their Witnessing-Lights may be such as are in public Office and
Place in the visible Church; and so are either those that are in the Ministry,
or those that give their Witness, as the Body of some particular Congregation,
that own themselves in the sight of the world as a Golden Candlestick; or some
particular Church-Assembly of visible Saints in order and practice of the
Gospel, according to their measure and light. And under this first head will
fall all sorts of Principles and Professions of Godliness, that make the Rule
of the Word and Spirit of God, (the Balance of the Sanctuary) the Standard by
which they desire to regulate themselves in their Doctrine, Worship and
Conversation, whatever difference in Principles, or Ministry, of the knowledge
of Christ they are under, as has been before opened and distinctly spoken unto.

Secondly, Their Witnessing-Lights may be Public Persons, with relation to
their Office in the Magistracy; For it is by me, says Christ, that Kings
reign, and Princes do Justice: So that in the administration of pure and
impartial Justice, as a Magistrate, in whatever Place and Calling we are set by
God, and a lawful Appointment from men, we keep on the right way, without
turning on the right hand or on the left, for fear or favor, discovering a
just mind, that is, a constant and perpetual, or unchangeable will, to do right
to all, whatever discouragement, opposition and hatred we meet with in doing
our duty. This is a Light before men, which Christ will own in the day of his
appearance, to have been for his Service, and shall not go without its due
reward.

Thirdly, There are also the same witnessing Lights in the lesser spears of
every man's particular station and calling, which shine forth in a personal,
righteous, and blameless conversation; or where their vote or consent is given,
in reference to the good of the Church or State, or to the private Rule which
every Master and Head of a Family is by Christ entrusted with in reference to
his own Children and Family, who are under his charge, and not so much at their
own dispose as his, who has a right over them by God's Law and man's; and by
the duty of this relation, every man may be somewhat directed, even by the
world, what he is, and what Witness he gives, in the measure of the Knowledge
and Light of Christ he has received; and shall accordingly be taken notice of
and judged by Christ, in the day of his Judgment, ministering Perdition to
ungodly men: In this little, a faithfulness to Christ is expected, and that
according to the measure of Light received, and the Anointing we are under, of
which there has already the several degrees and kinds been made known.

The use therefore that Christ makes of this Light in the world, that these
several ways he makes to shine like Lightning from the East to the West, from
Jerusalem to the utmost ends of the Earth, is, as to the world, to leave them
without excuse, and ripen them as white fields, to the harvest of his just
Vengeance, when the time is to put in his Sickle. And as to the Witnesses
themselves, to bring upon them a time of refreshing and rest from the presence
of the Lord in the sight of their very Enemies, where a Table shall be prepared
for them, and their Cup shall be made to overflow.

This then being the Testimony that must be finished, and these the Witnesses
in their several Places and Callings, who have been employed in bearing and
giving their Testimony in the World ever since Christ's Ascension; the course
whereof has had its progress from East to West, and is now come to these
utmost ends of the Earth. The Scriptures do with great clearness, as to the
present dispensations of our day, teach us three things.

First, That this Testimony is now upon its finishing point in the World, and
upon these times are brought all the concurring and forerunning Symptoms and
Characters thereof.

Secondly, That the time of the End, that is to say, the fore-toldof day, in
which Christ is to judge the World in Righteousness, so as to make up his
Jewels on the one hand, and gather them as his precious Fruits into his
Granary; and to kindle an Oven of his fiery Vengeance, to burn up the Wicked
root and branch, and gather together the Tares to be burnt in unquenchable
fire, is at the very doors, and ready to open it self upon us, as the day of
Redemption to the Good, and Terror and Amazement to the Wicked.

Thirdly, That this Day shall begin with the Rising of the VVitnesses, clothing
those that then shall be in the World, with such a Ministry of Power and Glory,
as shall qualify them to discharge their several Witness-bearing Duty, before
specified, with great applause, and good reception from the World. God
permitting none to stand before them that make resistance or opposition, which
shall be as a necessary fore-running dispensation for Christ's Personal
Manifestation and Rule on Earth a thousand years; but by these Savioxrs that
thus shall be brought up upon Mount Zion, as a Stone cut out without hands; New
Heavens and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, shall be constituted,
and the four Monarchies utterly broken to pieces and destroyed; and the Kingdom
of Antichrist, and the Beast, brought to final ruin and destruction.

The very mentioning of these three Particulars, without alleging particular
places of Scripture, will bring them to your mind, which teach and speak
expressly concerning the truth of them, and the matter of fact it self, as to
what progress and course this witnessing-work has made from Judea, where first
it was lighted, step by step, into all Nations and Kingdoms all the World over,
who have been acquainted with these VVitnesses, and have seen their Light
shining in these Golden Candlesticks, and can give an account how from time to
time they have been put out and removed from one place to another, till atlast
the bodies of these two Prophets are found dead in the streets of the earthly
Jerusalem, and spiritual Egypt and Sodom, if they might be suffered to be put
into their Graves; and surely it is not without great wisdom that these
Witnesses are called Two, considering the two distinct Ministries of Christ
which they bear witness unto, and how each Ministry has two, out of whose
mouth it receives its Justification.

But further. That this Testimony is upon its finishing point, let us enquire
whether the last slaying of the Witnesses, declared by the sight of their dead
bodies (Rev. 11.) fit to be put into their Graves, be not already before out
eyes. The right opening and understanding whereof is of great use, as a key to
many other most considerable and difficult Scriptures. These two Witnesses, as
they justify Christ's second Ministry, the knowledge of him in spirit, are the
Saints in their invisible Church State, fled into the Wilderness, from the
violence and rage of Persecution, which Satan stirred up against them by the
visible Church, and Powers of the Civil Rule and Government, called in for
assistance.

How these Witnesses are two, we have showed, being the two Orders of
Believers, which Christ's Mystical Body has been ever consisting of, though
rather mystically figured out, than appearing as they are, in the truth and
brightness of their proper Glory, as Heirs of the Spirit of Promise in the
single and double portion thereof.

These in their Spirit, Nature and Principles have been disowned, persecuted
and slain, by the visible Church, (as much as in them lies) by exposing of them
to the utmost of bodily sufferings and harms; and this from the time that the
visible Church has degenerated, grown Papal, and been defended by the ten
horns of her Civil Government in the Western Empire of the World; and the
sharpest and most bitter Enemies to these two Witnesses are the Reformed part
of the visible Church, who declare their ripeness to be rejected by Christ, and
have the flood of the Papal Power and Tyranny let in upon them, as they hate
and reject the heavenly Seed and spiritual part of the Church, and can find
opportunity to go back again into Conjunction with the Corrupt part of the
visible Church, to hinder the growth of that which is Spiritual, rather than to
go forward and become one with it. So that it might be made appear in the whole
progress the Gospel has made from East to West, the Reformed part of the
Church never lost ground, nor was swallowed up again by the Papal, till it self
first took up its stand, as to going on forward, and refused to be more
Spiritual and Heavenly, being fiercer enemies hereunto, than any other
whatsoever. And the greatest demonstration of this, is given in the last act of
this Enmity that has been acted, and is yet in acting to the last slaughter
which is to be made of the Witnesses in order to expose their dead bodies in
the open streets of this Earthly Jerusalem, where they are as spectacles to be
seen three days (that is, years) and an half, by them of Peoples, and Tongues,
and Kindreds, and Nations, headed by the Papacy, who shall not suffer their
dead bodies to be put in their graves by the Inhabitants of the earthly
Jerusalem, who were willing enough to do it, as exceedingly joyed at the sight
of their dead bodies, but shall rather choose to quit those dead Carkases in way
of contempt from any further prosecution of them; and instead thereof, apply
themselves with the strength of their whole Party, to strengthen and besiege
the earthly Jerusalem, in whose streets the dead Carkases of the Witnesses are
to lie (in a way of open reproach to be gazed upon) and shall make a gathering
against it (as Zach. 14. 2.) as to battle, so as the event of it shall be the
taking of the City, and the utter ruin of that part of the visible Church,
distinguished from the other by the Name of Reformed; which when it happens,
will be a Fourth sign: and by conjecture, this work is already begun, and
materials for this Siege, are not only in readiness, and the Design laid, and
the Parties agreed, that are to undertake it, but the open Defiance to the
Battle is given, and both sides fixed in their resolutions to abide the issue,
which will not exceed the term of three years and an half, before it be fully
decided. Upon which decision, that, according to Dan. 2. 43. is to happen
between these two parts of the visible Church, immediately after they find they
cannot pitch upon the way of piecing up together against those that dwell in
Heaven, though it be both their interests, and that they earnestly desire and
labor it. Nay, this Mount of Olives, on which this second pair of Witnesses,
or visible part of the Church Reformed are, that shall (Zach. 14. 4.) cleave
also in the midst, as not being able to hold longer together, or to fasten
the one to the other; and the one part shall go toward the East, into
downright Popery; the other unto the West, at the vastest distance, and
greatest contrariety one to the other that is imaginable; so as half of this
Mountain of visible Saints in Name shall remove North, deeper into the
Apostasy; and the other half South, nearer to the Heavenly Jerusalem; And in
this state of things, when the Iron shall break the Kingdom of the Clay to
pieces; And again, that Kingdom of Clay shall divide and remove, one half to
the East, and the other to the West, causing a most terrible Earthquake, as in
the days of Uzziah, at which time (of this Earthquake) the tenth part of the
Papal Sea, shall make a final defection from her; and the Lord my God shall
come, and all the Saints with thee; that is to say, He shall Muster up his
Heavenly Troops, and take to himself his great Power, in which he shall begin
to reign, by the executing of his Wrath and divine Vengeance upon his Enemies,
in the pouring out the seven vials, which is the time of the end; that is to
say, of ending the 1260 years for the two Witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloth,
and the Woman's remaining in the Wilderness, and the time when the rising of the
Witnesses does begin, and that Saviors shall come upon Mount Sion, and judge
the Mount of Esau spiritually, as the ten Kings shall judge them outwardly, and
give the flesh of the Whore to be torn in pieces and burnt with fire. These,
with others that might be alleged, are the characters and signs, to prove the
first particular, that the Testimony which Christ declared so long ago, was to
be given by the Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom in all the World, and unto
all Nations, is upon its finishing point.

The Second, which is the ending of that Dispensation, and the beginning of a
new one, by the pouring out of the seven vials, to the utter destruction of
Antichrist's Kingdom, and the cutting out the stone without hands, in
preparation to the perfect deliverance of the Church out of Babylon, and the
complete bringing them out of their Captivity, in order to the actual Restoring
the Kingdom of Israel, is that we shall likewise give some short discovery of.

Two things are comprehended in the Restoring the Kingdom to Israel; First,
Israel it self, the true Inhabitants and Citizens of the New and Heavenly
Jerusalem, must be restored to a Kingdom, that is a visible incorporated
Society of Subjects, relating to the true David their King, as their Sovereign
and only Lawgiver, disclaiming all other reigning or exercising Dominion over
them.

Secondly, Over Israel, thus restored to be a Kingdom, Christ will show and own
himself visibly their King, and the Universal Monarch over the whole World, who
at that time shall be one Commonwealth of Israel, and Children of Abraham,
under one of the two Covenants, yielding either true or feigned Obedience; if
not out of Love, yet from the fear of Wrath and Divine Vengeance, begun to be
revealed and poured forth upon all the Disobedient. For no sooner shall the
Vials begin to be poured out, but the time is come of Christ's Wrath, that is
to say, when he shall come forth in the visible execution of his Royal Office
and Power amongst them, in the hands of his undoubted Officers, executing
Judgment upon all that shall withstand his Peoples Freedom, and coming out from
under their former servitude and bondage under the Kingdom of Antichrist, and
this in order to restore Israel unto such a constitution of a Kingdom which
Christ is to exercise over them, during the space of a thousand years.

And therefore that which first begins this new dispensation, called the time
of the end, is the rising of the Witnesses by an extraordinary pouring out of
the spirit, as the latter rain, which like Life from the dead shall enter into
them and set them upon their feet, and qualify those in office amongst them,
as their Rulers in State or Church, with a like and greater power than was
given in the Type and Figure, to Moses and Elias, at whose word the earth was
smitten with visible plagues and curses as often as they saw cause to promote
the end for which they were sent and employed; and so it must be again, in a
much more glorious dispensation, thereby to restore and constitute Israel into
a Kingdom, in despite of all opposition; which plainly evidences, that such a
dispensation as this, is necessary, as that which must be preparatory and
conducing to give the actual being and constitution of a Kingdom, to a People
that are found in so great and universal a state of servitude and bondage, far
beyond that which Israel was in, to whom Moses was sent to bring them out of
Egypt. Therefore behold the days come, says the Lord, Jer. 23. 7, 8. that
they shall no more say, the Lord lives which brought the Children of Israel
out of the land of Egypt, but the Lord lives, which brought up, and which led,
(a parallel dispensation to Moses his bringing them up, and leading them as a
horse in the Wilderness, Esaias 63.) the seed of the house of Israel out of the
North Country, and from all Countries whither I had driven them, and they shall
dwell in their own land.

The spiritual seed of Israel, driven in the time of the Gentiles into the
Wilderness, and kept slaves to the highest degree, during the reign of
Antichrist, must have a time of gathering and bringing up into their land under
their own King, and the Nation that has kept them in bondage, God himself must
and will judge more signally than he did Pharaoh and the Egyptians; by which
means this stone that has been fallen upon, and suppressed for so many hundred
years, even these fixed, unmovable, chaste followers of the Lamb, must rise
and stand again upon their feet with great power and authority, so as they
shall not only be a burdensome stone for all people that burden themselves
with it, Zach. 12. 3. to the cutting them in pieces, though the people of the
earth be gathered together against them; but verse. 5, 6. In that day says the
Lord, I will make the Governors of Judah like an hearth of fire in a sheaf,
and they shall devour all the people round about, on the right hand and on the
left; and Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, even in
Jerusalem, and the Lord himself shall defend in that day Jerusalem, and he that
is feeble amongst them shall be as David, and the house of David as God, as the
Angel of the Lord before them; so as the Governors of Judah shall say, there
is strength to me, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, in the Lord of Hosts
their God.

I know it is and will be Objected, that these places refer to the conversion
of the Jews, that are the natural seed of Abraham, which are expected to be
first received again, as Life from the dead, before these promises shall be
accomplished. In Answer to which, I shall only say, There will indeed, upon the
rising of the Witnesses, that seed of Abraham appear and be made manifest, that
are the true and proper Jews, a Nation advanced in love and glory from God,
above all other Nations and People, of which an account has been given before;
and then it will be found, no other Jewish Nation are to be eyed, but as they
fall within and are comprehended amongst the Gentile fullness of those Nations
that are to be saved.

FINIS.
THE Face of the Times: WHEREIN Is briefly discovered by several Prophetical
Scriptures, from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Revelation, the
RISE, PROGRESS, and ISSUE of the ENMITY and CONTEST, between the SEED of the
WOMAN, and SEED of the SERPENT, to the final breaking of the Serpent's head, in
the total and irrecoverable Ruin of the MONARCHIES of this World, which have
been spirited, influenced, and headed all along by him, for the bruising of the
Saints Heel (or killing of their Bodies) for the Testimony of Jesus, which by
them has been given forth in the true Spirit of Prophecy.

The Design of this Writing, is,

To ALARM the World, and awaken up the present Generation of God's People in
it, to a more diligent and curious observation of the present Signs of the near
approaching day of the Lord, that they may be more carefully minding and ^oing
what most concerns them, by way of preparation thereunto.

Seeing that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought
we to be in all holy conversation and godliness, looking for and hasting unto
the coming of that day of God, (which will come as a thief in the night)
wherein the heavens being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements shall
melt with fervent heat?

2 Pet. 3. 10, 11, 12. Printed in the Year, 1662.

THE Face of the Times.
IT was the saying of Christ to the Generation he conversed with, while in the
flesh, Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the skies, but can ye not, or
how is it that ye cannot discern the signs of the times? Why do you not set
your selves to observe and spel out the meaning of God's providential voice,
given forth in harmony with his written Oracles, by the Judgments which he is
now executing in the earth, as to that most pertinent and concerning Truth, The
near approach of the day of the Lord? It will surprise and overtake the wicked
that are in darkness, as a thief, and exceeding dreadful will it be to them.
But the Children of Light and of that day, are required to lift up their heads,
when they see the signs thereof, (however dismal to their fleshly part) for
their Redemption draws nigh, Luk, 21. 25, 28.

God is still working and carrying on his designs in the world, on the behalf
of his People, as also overruling all the contrary actings of his and their
enemies, in pursuance of his decree, published at passing that sentence upon
the Serpent, Genesis 3. 15. I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise
his heel.

In the latter branch of this sentence, (which was first put in execution) God
declares himself as to sundry particulars, which do summarily and fully contain
his design and work throughout all ages of the World, till it be accomplished,
and the Mystery of it finished, as he has declared unto his servants the
Prophets, Rev. 10. 7. Then the Saints Turn will come, to act his part in
pursuance of the former branch of the Decree, for bruising of the Serpents
head, and giving an incurable wound to all his adherents.

There is indeed a great mystery in the managing of this war, which God
declares he has founded in the enmity set by him between the seed of the Woman
and seed of the Serpent. Matters are so contrived in the most wise design of
God, that the seed of the Woman must suffer first, and be on the losing hand,
(as to any outward quietness and fair dealing that they are to expect in this
world) for a long tract of time, wherein the headship of this world, the Empire
and Government of the whole earth shall be, as it were, in the hands of the
evil one, who shall be very much permitted to dispose of the powers of it, to
his own instruments and creatures. But at the sounding of the seventh Trumpet,
this time is to end, and be no longer. Then the seed of the woman must break
this headship, which Satan for so long time has exercised over the whole
world, and destroy all those worldly Kingdoms that have been managed under his
influence, to their prejudice. Then Judgment will be given to the Saints of
the most High. They shall take and possess the Kingdom for ever, even for ever
and ever, Dan. 7. Then the Kingdoms of this world shall become the Kingdoms of
our Lord and of his Christ, holding of him as their visible head, who is and
was and is to come, and will take unto himself his great power for that purpose.

The particulars which are summed up, (Genesis 3. 15.) concerning the nature of
this war, and the manner of managing it, (explained since by time and the
history of things in the Scriptures) are these,

1. Let Satan do his worst, and make all the Power and parties he can, amongst
the Sons of Adam, yet God will have a Seed in the World, called there the seed
of the woman, that shall be in a state of fixed enmity and war against him and
his seed.

2. For a long tract of time, Satan shall not be chained up nor restrained from
using all his skill and power, by himself and his instruments, for the doing of
his utmost in a way of war, to ruin, destroy and prevail against the Seed of
the Woman. For this end he shall be permitted to have the subordinate exercise
of the Empire and visible Government of the whole world, to be given and
bestowed as himself will, for the strengthening his interest, and encouraging
of those that will be his creatures, and fall down and worship him.

3. The contrariety of mind and principles between these two seeds, will be so
fixed and unchangeable, that they will never give over contesting and fighting
one with or against another, whatever it cost them, till the heel of the one be
fully bruised, that is, till the sufferings of Christ yet behind in his body
mystical, and every member thereof, be accomplished, by sustaining loss in the
flesh, even to death it self; and the head of the other fully broken, that is,
till the headship and visible Government of the World be wholly taken out of
the hands of Satan and his instruments, and reassumed by Christ into his own
hands, and the hands of fit and meet Ministers and Officers under him.

4. After a long time of patience under bodily sufferings, not loving their
Lives unto the death, the seed of the Woman shall at last certainly and fully
overcome the seed of the Serpent, tread Satan and his kingdom under foot, for
ever and ever. The principal means they shall rely upon for the bringing of
this war to a good issue, is the way of overcoming by the blood of the Lamb,
(or force of Christ's intercession, whose blood cries for vengeance against his
enemies) as also by the word of their Testimony (freely and boldly given forth
by them in their very sufferings, whilst worldly Power stands on the enemies
side) which shall have its effect upon friends and foes, as a savor of Life to
the one, death to the other, a sweet savor to God both ways, prospering in the
thing whereto he sends it, and performing all his pleasure, 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16.
Esaias 55. 11.

Pursuant to this counsel and decree of God, (declared, Genesis 3. 15.) he has
wonderfully and fignally preserved the seed of the Woman, unto this very day.
He has given them being, preservation and protection in the midst of all
enemies, and in despite of all their rage and opposition. He has carried on
his CAUSE, and upheld righteousness on the side of his People, whatever
disguises, reproaches or blemishes have been endeavored to be put upon it, by
the Devil and his adherents. The miraculous preservation of the Woman's Seed,
the Scriptures distribute into three principal Branches, which distinguish the
whole tract of time allotted to them for their sufferings, into three great
Periods and seasons, wherein the seed of the Woman has received variation, as
to the outward form and dispensation of things, though in mind, principles, and
spirit, they continue still the same, in and under all these Changes.

The first appearance of the seed of the Woman, in order to enter the list with
the Seed of the Serpent, we find in the line of Adam, which he begat of Eve,
the Mother of all living. Abel the first Martyr died before he had any issue,
or means to propagate it. God supplied that defect in the line of Seth. In this
new line is carried on the decreed enmity between the two seeds, till the Flood
came and swept away (in a manner) all mankind, from off the face of the earth.
At that time the first war ended. But the foundation and matter of a new war,
in this kind, is contracted into, and found even in the family of Noah. The
first war, begun in Adams line, and continued in Seths, was (in a way of God's
just judgment upon the whole world) brought to an end by the Flood. The seed
of the Woman was now narrowed and diminished into Noah's person and two of his
sons. The seed of the Serpent was contracted into a less room yet, the other
son.

This Epoch of 1656 years, from the Creation to the Flood, is in Scripture
distinguished as one great period of time and revolution of things in the
world, relating to this war between the two seeds, and the event of it. It
began in and with the Patriarchs, in the person of Abel, whom Cain that was of
that wicked one, flew. It continued all along with the Patriarchs and their day
on earth, who lived every one of them hundreds of years: And it had its period
in that universal ministry of God's wrath and vengeance upon the whole world,
which in Scripture is called, THE DAY OF THE LORD.

The second appearance then of the seed of the Woman and seed of the Serpent
also, we find in Noah's family. From the matter and fuel, contracted into this
narrow compass, does the fire of the war between the two seeds break forth
a-fresh, and another world (as it were) and state of things, diverse from the
form, runder the government of the Patriarchs, is brought upon the Stage. This
new and differently stated war, arises and is occasioned from the differing
minds and principles, found in Noah's three sons, Sem, Ham, and Japhet. The
flood having destroyed all the families of the earth, save Noah's only, the
Government of the World came hereby to receive a considerable change, because
the Right of the Empire of the whole world was now by Gods Providence devolved
upon the family of Noah, and in particular, upon himself in person, as the
right heir of it. After him, it came to Sem and his line, by God's special
designation, though Japhet were the eldest.

In Noah's three sons, as in type, the three sorts of principles and minds,
which influence this second world of mankind, are described, and (as I may say)
personated, to the life. These three principles distinguish all persons
descended of Noah's family, throughout the whole world, into three sorts of
Inhabitants.

The same method does John, by way of allegory hold, (Rev. 12. 12.) calling one
sort of them, Inhabitants of Heaven, or those that dwell and have their
conversation in Heaven; corresponding in their Principle and way of Life, with
the Jerusalem that is above.

Another sort he terms, Inhabitants of the Earth, or those that dwell on
Earth; the tribes of the Earth, or citizens of the earthly Jerusalem.

The third are those that dwell in the Sea, or are found in a state of deep
darkness, and alienation from the Life of God, casting up mire and dirt, as
raging waves of the troubled Sea, (Esaias 57. 20.) living in that open
heathenisme and profaneness, that the greatest part of the world choose to abide
in, notwithstanding the offer of Liberty made to them, by the ransom paid on
their behalf in the blood of the Redeemer.

1. The mind that shows it self in the first sort of these Inhabitants, is that
which was in Sem; a holy, spiritual mind, set upon things above, or in heaven,
at Christ's right hand. This, when it comes to operate, is that active, living
Faith of the new creature, which works by love. By this Faith, or in this
spiritual mind and principle of Life and operation, Abel offered unto God a
more excellent Sacrifice than Cain, Heb. 11. 4.

2. The mind that discovers it self in the second sort of inhabitants, (those
that dwell on Earth, citizens of the earthly Jerusalem) is that which was in
Japhet, as a middle wavering state, perswadeable either to good or evil; either
to leave the earth and love of seen things, and to ascend and dwell in the
tents of Sem, in order to be fixed and set on things above, or else to cleave
unto things seen, in affection and desire, and thence to descend, and draw back
to perdition, apostatize and lodge in the heathenish principles of Cham, and so
partake of his curse as well as sin. Those that thus decline from the wavering
spirit and principles of Japhet, to the profane state of Cham, are noted in
Scripture to be such as having known the way of righteousness, do turn aside
from the holy command, and so come to have their lot amongst those that are
twice dead, and plucked up by the roots, whose latter end is worse than their
beginning. For upon such a fatal backsliding, such an irrecoverable fall in
their own persons, they come to be fixed in evil and bound up with the fallen
Angels in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great
day, ^ Pet. 2. 20. Jude, verse. 12. and verse. 6.

This wavering spirit of Japhet, considered singly in its own sphere and
activity, (as neither advancing toward the tents of Sem, and things above; nor
declining to the heathenish and profane state of Cham) is that spirit which
properly constitutes the Israel after the flesh, in distinction from the true
Israel of God, or Circumcision of the Spirit, on the one hand; and the
heathenish uncircumcised Nations, on the other, whilst God kept up the war in
the line of Abraham, or seed of Israel according to the flesh, till Christ's
incarnation. For in Abraham's line, deriving from Heber and Shem, did God renew
and maintain the war with the Seed of the Serpent, and continued it till his
signal rejection of that line, and utter cutting them off from being any more a
Nation and People of themselves, at the last sacking and destruction of
Jerusalem, after the death of Christ, by the hand of Titus Vespasian.

3. The mind that declares it self in the third sort of Inhabitants, who dwell
in the Sea, or in the depth of alienation from the life of God, (without any
sense or feeling of that which is morally and naturally good according to the
Law, hating and despising God's image in any kind, wherever it shines forth)
is that which was in Cham. For this was he cursed and judicially fixed in his
bondage, as a servant of sin, resembled by that servant under the Mosaical
dispensation, who for refusing his freedom when offered, was bored through his
ear, in token of his perpetual servitude, Exodus 21. 6.

1. The first sort of these Inhabitants are heavenly, having a mind and
principles fixed in that obedience of Faith which is acceptable, and by entering
into God's Rest through Faith, do become unmovable in the right way of working
Righteousness, wherein they attain the end of their hope, that is, the
salvation of their souls.

2. The second are earthly, unfixed either in good or evil, wavering between
both, having a mind sometimes serving the Law of God, and sometimes the law of
sin. These, however they may draw near to God with their words and tongue,
their heart is alienated and at a distance from him; at least, may be, for
ought they know, notwithstanding the form of godliness they live in. For they
are not able to make a true and certain judgment of themselves, till they
partake of that Anointing from above that can teach them all things. This is
that only that will enable them to keep the word of Christ's patience in the
day of their trial. Without this Grace extended to them, and possessed by them,
they will become Apostates, forget they have been washed from their old sins,
and will show themselves at last the most hardened and bitter resisters of the
holy Ghost and Power of Godliness.

3. The third are like the Sea, foaming out their own filth, and they are
constant and fixed therein, having minds and consciences seard and made harder
than the nether millstone, in works of darkness. Being past feeling, they have
sold themselves to work wickedness. Peradventure sometime they may be made a
little sensible of the sting and penalties of the Law, so as to make some
slender acknowledgments and feigned professions of obedience and subjection
thereunto, (the Devils also believe and tremble) but no hearty or sincere
repentance from dead works, or pure obedience of love, springing from the
spirit of Adoption, and appearing in a steady amendment of life, is to be found
in them. Yea, they are by God himself judicially hardened, and unchangeably
fastened in their own chosen ways of darkness. They give themselves up to work
all uncleanness with greediness, and God gives them up to vile affections, to
take their course, and fill up the measure of their abominations, till he see
time to strike them once for all.

The first and last of the abovenamed minds or principles, are the two
extremes, in the one or other of which, the middle or second sort of
Inhabitants (that are in the wavering, changeable, contending state, with whom
God is striving by his Spirit) will come at last to be unchangeably fixed. The
perfect and righteous state which Man was at first created in, was this middle,
wavering and unfixed state of perfection which was at first, and upon renewal
thereof is again capable to be guided by the Spirit of God (through Faith) into
a higher and better, or to be tempted and seduced by Satan into a lower and far
worse.

The sinful state likewise into which mankind was plunged by the first
transgression and fall of Man, is not fixed, or made immutable and desperate,
until a new proof and trial be made of all men. In order to this, by virtue of
the Blood of the Redeemer, and through observation of the Rules appointed by
God for recovery out of the Fall, a restitution to the rectified Principles and
Righteousness of our first Creation, is in Christ most certainly attainable by
every sinner, without exception. For by Christ's Blood there is remission to be
had for all sins past, and a new trial is propounded and set before every one
for time to come, upon the terms, and according to the tenor of God's
conditional, or absolute Covenant. Hence it is the War arises, and the Enmity
is set, or comes to be fixed between the two seeds, each serving, as it were,
for the proof and trial of the unmovableness of one another, either in good or
evil.

Through this was occasioned the quarrel between the seed of the Woman, and the
seed of the Serpent, growing up out of Noah's family. The usurpation of the
universal Government of the World in favor and assistance of the Serpent's
seed, was attempted and pursued by Nimrod and his successors. Afterward it
came into Nebuchadnezzar's hands, and by Daniel's interpretation of that
prophetical Image of worldly Monarchy that Nebuchadnezzar saw in a dream, the
continuance thereof in his line and three other successive branches of
Universal Monarchy in the lines of the Medes and Persians, Grecians, and then
Romans, was foretold. All these have been the inheritors of Cham's spirit,
upholding a heathenish state of Idolatry, Ignorance and Profaneness, against the
Kingdom and Obedience of Christ, kept up and witnessed unto, all along, in and
by the line and seed of Abraham, from Sem downward, to the last sack and utter
ruin of the Temple and City of Jerusalem under the Romans. The chief
memorables in this space of time, that concern the opposite interest to these
worldly Monarchies, were the eminent Call of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob to the
Faith, the giving of the Law, the building and rebuilding of the Temple, the
long continuing of the Prophetical Office in the Jewish Church, Christ's
Incarnation, Ministry, Death and Resurrection. About forty years after the
Resurrection of Christ, Jerusalem is destroyed by Titus Vespasian, and there
ended the second great Period and Revolution of this War, that was managed
between the two seeds. All along this second War, the seed of the Serpent was
possessed of the Universal Monarchy of this World, had all the countenance and
assistance which that could afford. The main visible Protection vouchsafed by
God on the other hand, to his Church and People, was continued in the line of
Abraham, accounting from Sem downward, unto God's judicial rejection of that
seed of Abraham according to the flesh, upon their crucifying the Lord of Glory.

In this second War, we find the seed of the Woman bruised still in the heel
and coming off with loss. Yea, upon the winding up of this second great Day or
Period of time, (wherein the Prince of Life was by wicked hands put to death,
and the whole Nation of the visible Church of God on Earth, rejected, and their
Worship profaned and destroyed) the Devil might seem to himself and others to
have come off complete conqueror. But the War is again renewed by the Serpent
and his seed, against the seed of the Woman, who are repeated and brought forth
again by the Regeneration, from amongst the very heathenish Nations of the
World, that were not before accounted by God as a People of his, but given up,
as it were, to the dominion of Sin and Satan.

This third War had its foundation laid in the Incarnation, Death and
Resurrection of Christ, who (though a Son) was taught obedience by suffering,
and in the condition of a sufferer obtained the victory. Through death he
destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil. And by tasting
death for every man, as became the Captain of our Salvation, he was made
perfect through sufferings.

This way of fighting and overcoming the Devil and Sin, was a great mystery
till then, and the most unlikely of all other, ever to break the Serpents head,
and dispossess him and his Instruments of their worldly Thrones and Powers. Yet
in this way of the Cross, by the blood of the Lamb and the word of their
Testimony, do the true Witnesses of Christ manage and carry on this third War.
One thousand two hundred and sixty days, that is, years, have bin allotted
them for prophesying in sackcloth, in a persecuted, wilderness condition. Then
they are to rise out of their graves, stand again upon their feet, and prophecy
with power. It Is past all dispute, that the conquest must fall on the side of
the Lamb and his followers, at the ending of this third great season and
revolution of time, wherein the seed of the Woman has still been on the
suffering hand. The end of their suffering season will be, when the seventh
Trumpet begins to sound, immediately after the effect which the pouring forth
of the Vials shall have upon the Beast and his kingdom.

This is the Rise, Progress and Issue that is given unto things in the third
Age of the World, called Christian, that was made to spring up and have its
being out of the destruction of the Jewish World, Romans 11. 11.

The clear view and prospect of things in this Christian World, (both as to the
Civil and Church Government, as also the War between the two Seeds, brought on
again and continued) was given by Christ unto the Apostle John, and revealed to
him by his Angel in the Book of the Revelation. For there we find the period
that must happen also to this third World, and to the Heavens and Earth, or the
Civil and Church State appertaining to it, and carried on under this
dispensation, in order to give place to a world to come, which is yet to
succeed. This World to come, will be of a more heavenly and spiritual
Constitution, as to the general state and frame of things, which is to be
brought forth by Christ's second appearance, upon the spirits and bodies of
men, on this side their complete and utmost glorification. The final ascending
up to the Father, to sit down at his right hand, is after this world that is
yet to come (or the thousand years Reign of Christ withal his Saints on earth)
shall have had its course.

Unto the risen state of Saints, when they shall begin to come forth in their
victorious posture, and unresistable power of Faith and Prayer, does the
Prophet Hosea seem to refer, chap. 6. verse. 2, 3. After two days (says he) or
great seasons of Affliction and Suffering (already described) he will revive
us, by the WORD's being made Flesh, and the dayspring from on high therein
visiting us. This (Hab. 3. 2.) is called a reviving the work, or preserving it
alive in the midst of the years of Wrath and Oppression from the Serpent and
his seed, that was yet to be under-gone for the space of 1666 years after
Christ's birth, as will appear in its proper place. In the third day (says
Hosea) that is, at the end of it, when the Witnesses are to arise, we shall
live in his sight. By following on to know the Lord, we shall perceive that his
going forth in this his third great revolution of time, has been as the
morning, shining more and more unto a perfect day, and that his coming to us
(according as has been by him purposed) in his first and in his second
Appearance, will be as the former and latter rain unto the Earth.

The former rain of Christ's Spirit, in the season of his first Appearance,
began at the day of Pentecost, in visible gifts and distributions of the holy
Ghost, dividing to every man severally, as himself pleased. By this means he
raised up a Ministry that formed and laid the Foundation of the Primitive
Church. That Church was upheld in its original purity, more or less, as long as
they kept the Word of God's Patience, and withstood the opposition made against
it, after a right manner, by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
Testimony, in the giving whereof, they loved not their lives unto death. This
appeared, all along those hard and cruel Persecutions they under-went, until
such time almost as Constantine came to the Empire.

But to avoid Persecution, Christians then began to mingle Interest with
worldly Powers, and (to please Governors) took their rest in the outward
Court, some outside form of godliness, so as that which we call Christian
Religion, became the Religion of the Empire (or of the body of the Nation unto
which it was received) as commanded and compelled by the Laws of the State, and
power of the Sword. This practice commenced and bears date about four hundred
years after Christ, from which time little of the former rain has fallen upon
such visible or state Christianity, in their Public and National
Meeting-places of Worship. That rain became then hidden Manna, the peculiar
food and refreshing of the Woman and her seed in the Wilderness, where she is
nourished for a time, and times, and half a time. From about the time that
Christian Religion has been made National, and in the Rules, Ordinances and
Doctrines thereof, been embodyed with the Laws of each Nation in the Empire,
and so enforced by the Civil Sword, those that truly keep the Commandments of
God and Testimony of Jesus, have been driven into a state of desolation,
persecution and dispersion, and are so to continue and be warred upon, forty
and two Months, by the Earth and her Inhabitants on the one hand, and by the
Sea and her Inhabitants on the other.

Both these sorts of Inhabitants and Enemies of the Church in the Wilderness,
do make up and constitute but one great City or incorporated Society of the
Serpents seed, spiritually called Egypt and Sodom, under the headship of
worldly Government, as it arises out of the Sea. This worldly Government is
still but the same fourth Beast and universal Roman Empire, in Principles of
opposition to the Kingdom of Christ and Seed of the Woman, as before. It seems
indeed to be now healed and reformed with the show of Christian Religion, under
the headship of Church Government and coercive Power arising out of the Earth,
or apostate Principles of the worldly Church, departing from the Primitive
Power, Purity and Pattern; retaining still something of the form of Godliness,
but denying the Spirit and Power thereof.

The first Beast carries the second, and is willing to be rid upon by it,
finding great benefit and advantage by having the Whore upon their back, for
the propagating of servitude, and rooting out of the earth the pure and chaste
Principles of the Primitive, Apostolic, Catholic Church.

Thus the War is managed between the two seeds in this third day. Toward the
latter end of this day is our lot fallen, who are at present alive in this
world. But before the period, and shutting in of this day, the Sufferings of
the Woman's Seed shall have an end. Then, that Ministry of the Spirit shall come
in, which is compared to the latter rain. This is that which shall break the
Serpents head, utterly tread him, his kingdom and followers under foot. This is
that, which (by the pouring forth of the seven Vials of the wrath of God upon
the kingdom of the Beast, to the utter ruin and destruction thereof) will
prepare the way for the coming down of the new Jerusalem out of Heaven, as a
Bride adorned for her Husband, and so, for the thousand years Reign of Christ
on Earth. At the beginning of that Reign, Satan shall be chained up, and there
shall be no more Sea, or profane worldly-Interest, and beastly Government left.

In the evening-time of this third day or age of the World (wherein we now
live) it shall be light, by the coming on of the Kingdom and Reign of Christ,
with all his Saints, Zech. 14. 5, 7.

This then that we have been describing, is the third signal season or great
revolution of things in this world, wherein the same War that was from the
beginning, has been, and still is carrying on between the two Seeds, under the
name of Christian, or of Christ's followers. The Seed of the Serpent, under
pretense of being for Christ, do prove at last universally against him, most
shamefully and wickedly rejecting him, and falling in with the kingdom of
Antichrist, in direct opposition to his Kingdom. This they will do,
notwithstanding that he has been graciously striving and contending by the
Ministry of the Gospel, to work the whole World into a state of Obedience and
Subjection to the Righteousness of his Scepter. For this end has he been many
hundred years giving forth the light and glory of his Gospel and Kingdom, from
the Eastern parts of the World to the West, and suffered himself all along to
be cast off, and his Members to be oppressed and trodden under foot, by degrees,
in one Nation and Country after another, till at last it came to these Western
parts, and was spread from hence in America, which with these Nations we live
in, seem to be the last piece of Ground this Quarrel is to be fought out in.
Yea, and probably this is the time as well as the place, wherein the Witnesses
are finishing their Testimony, being the last that are signally to be slain by
the Beast, as the proper accomplishment of that Prophecy, Revel. 11. 7. The
Beast is represented here as generally in his ascendant posture, being
gratified with some remarkable Rise in his affairs, as a lightning before
death, to enable him for the accomplishing of this great counsel of God that is
to be acted upon the dead bodies of his slain Witnesses, within the three years
and half before their rising again and standing upon their feet. Then they are
to enter upon the second part of their Prophetical Ministry, compared to that
of Eliah's in Ahab's time, and that of Moses in Egygt, when at their word they
shall shut Heaven that it rain not, have power over Waters to turn them into
blood, and to smite the Earth with Plagues as often as they will.

By them also Heaven shall be opened, and a fuller and more excellent discovery
of Christ in Spirit ministered, than ever yet has been. Amongst them shall be
found those seven Angels, or Officers of the Church, to whom shall be committed
the pouring out of the seven golden Vials, full of the wrath of God. These
Vials contain a like universal Ministry of Wrath and of the Judgment of God by
Fire, upon ungodly men, as was brought by Water upon the old World in the days
of Noah. This ministry of wrath by Fire, shall put a period to the third state
of things in the world, as that by Water did unto the first. Out of the
destruction of the present World and frame of things, by this fiery ministry of
God's wrath, is the thousand years Reign of Christ to spring up, in that
Kingdom of his that shall never end.

And here bear with me in giving (by way of digression) some few broken
Notions, in order to the better and more distinct opening of Christ's Kingdom,
which we shall find (Luke 17. 20, 21. and chap. 19. 11, etc.) to be
distinguished into a Twofold state;

1. A Kingdom inward. The Kingdom of God is within you; and is the dominion of
God in the Conscience and Spirit of the Mind. This Kingdom stands not, nor
comes in or with any outward observation, but is the commanding, ruling
Principle of Life in the true Saint, as a Law written in his inward parts.
Christ's Kingdom, as thus considered, is intended, (Rev. 11. 1.) where it is
called the Temple of God, or the inward Court, and those that worship there,
glorifying God in their Spirits. This Kingdom of Christ is capable of
subsisting and being managed imwardly, in the minds of his People, in a hidden
state, concealed from the eye of the world; By the Power thereof, the inward
senses or eyes of the mind are opened and awakened, to the drawing them upward
to a Heavenly converse, catching and carrying up the Soul to the Throne of God,
and to the knowledge of the Life which is hid, with Christ, in God. Those that
are in this Kingdom, and in whom the Power of it is, are fitted to fly with
the Church into the Wilderness, and to continue in such a solitary, dispersed,
desolate condition, till God calls them out of it. They have Wells and Springs
opened to them in this Wilderness, whence they draw the Waters of Salvation,
without being in bondage to the Life of Sense, and the objects depending
thereon, as touch not, taste not, handle not, which perish in the using.

2. But Secondly, Christ's Kingdom is also outward; appearing to sense, and to
the eye of the sensual or inferior part of the mind, which works only by
bodily organs, judging by the sight of that eye, and the hearing of that ear,
whose life is in and by the body, consisting in bodily exercise, and is
therefore compared (Revel. 11. 2.) to the outward Court, and the Worship
thereunto appertaining. This is the Dominion of God in the Conscience also,
though but in the inferior or sensual part of the mind, where it becomes a Law
in our Members, to put in execution and perform the Law of the Spirit of our
Mind, that so our very bodies may become the Temple of the holy Ghost, and we
may be able to glorify God, not in our Spirits only, but in our Bodies also,
as clean Vessels and earthen Tabernacles, upon which may be written, HOLINESS
TO THE LORD, Zech. 14.

Now the Kingdom of Christ comes not properly to appear in outward show and
visibility, but as it shines forth in this lower and earthly part of the Soul,
witnessing the Dominion and Power of God to be there as a Law and commanding
Principle, in, and over the outward man. With respect to this kind of its
Appearance, in affecting and influencing the bodily part of man, and becoming
the Life thereof, it is capable to come forth in a Power and Glory that is
corruptible, fading, and that wears away; as also in that which is
incorruptible and abides for ever. The first of these is meant, (1 John 3. 1,
2.) where it is said, Now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear
what we shall be: but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him,
(or have the like appearance with him) for we shall see him as he is. The Sons
of God are not yet in the proper appearance of his Sons, but do bear the form
and appearance of the fleshly man, to the making a fair show in the flesh: They
have their Treasure but in an earthen Vessel, unredeemed from its present
bondage unto corruption. But the time is hastening, when they shall in Spirit
shine forth as the Sun in its strength, in the Kingdom of their Father, and
their very bodies shall be as the Firmament, transparent, and of service to
unvail the glory of the inward man, and not cover and disguise it, as now they
do.

But, alas! This fair show in the flesh, which may also be made by those that
are strange Children, passes with most for the Kingdom of Christ, even yet in
these last days, some crying, Lo here; and some, lo there; according to that
form of service and divine worship they are persuaded in their minds, is
according to the Rule of God's Word, though it be but that only which
appertains to the outward Court, which is given up by God into the hands of the
Gentiles, to possess and tread under foot at their pleasure. The Heavens hereof
are passing away with a great noise, and these worldly Elements are melting
apace; As a Vesture they shall be folded up and changed, they shall perish and
wear old as a Garment, whilst Christ's inward and spiritual Kingdom shall
remain, and in its due time come forth in an appearance that shall be lasting
and unshaken for ever. Wherefore we receiving this Kingdom, which cannot be
moved, let us hold fast, and have Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably,
with reverence and Godly fear. For our God is a consuming fire.

But to return, and apply our selves to the subject we were on before, which
is, To give the view of what Word God is fulfilling, and what part of his
Counsel he is executing among us, in this our day. The Heavens are now black
over our heads, the Sun is turned into darkness, the Moon into blood, and men's
hearts are failing them for fear of what God is bringing upon the Earth. Great
distress is in the Land, and upon the Nations; Wrath is coming upon that
People, who say they are Jews and are not, but shall be found liars. The Sea
and the waves also, will roar; the profane heathenish party of men will be in
great perplexity too.

Surely, the Figtree, and all the Trees are shooting forth; and after this
cruel, sharp Winter that is (and for some space is yet to be) upon us, the
Summer approaches that will make amends for all. Great cause there is for the
Sons of God to lift up their heads, as foreseeing that their Redemption draws
nigh.

In this point, the Book of the Revelations will be every day more and more
opened, to give us light and instruction, the Providence of God helping much
every day too, as to the interpretation thereof, together with the Spirit of
Truth, that dwells and lives in the hearts of Saints. Through mercy, the Lord
who is that Spirit, has not been wanting in his Teachings of this kind to a
poor Worm in my present solitude and bonds. I shall have occasion to tell you
by and by, that there appears cause to me of dissent from Mr. Mede, as to some
applications that are made by him in his learned Commentary on that Book, when
I come to speak of some particulars concerning the Witnesses, and their twofold
time and state of prophesying.

1. Their thousand two hundred and sixty years prophesying in sackcloth, in a
persecuted wilderness state.

2. Their prophesying in power and glory, during the space of the pouring forth
of the seven Vials of Wrath, as a fore-running Eliah-like Ministry, preparatory
to Christ's thousand years Reign on Earth. Yet, as to that which Mr. Mede calls
his great Key for the opening of that whole Book, to wit, his Synchronisms or
Contemporations of things, which he finds to agree and fall out together in the
same age and time, I exceedingly reverence his Judgment, and look upon him as
one that has most happily found out the hidden order and method, used by the
holy Ghost in that Prophetical Book.

This method being once known to the very rational judgment of man, that may be
exercised upon the matters contained in that Book, they are thereby rendered
much more easy and intelligible.

Let us also take it for granted, (as that which is the common judgment of
those that acknowledge the Scriptures) that in this Book of the Apocalyps^ are
contained and revealed, in an orderly method, the things which were to fall out
in the course of God's Providence and wise ordering of matters for the good of
the VVomans Seed, during the third Day or Age of the world. This day reaches
from Christ's Ascension (or departure into a far Country) to God's bringing
again this his only begotten Son into the world, that every tongue may confess,
and every knee bow to the honor of his most glorious Name. Then shall he, in
the quality of Universal King, as well on Earth as in Heaven, enter upon and
keep the possession of his Kingdom, against all Usurpers and Opposers
whatsoever.

This space of time between Christ's Ascension to Heaven, and Reign on Earth,
is measured out in three great and distinct Sections or Divisions, in the Book
beforementioned, as Mr. Mede takes notice; and every of these three are again
made to contain in them seven Sub-divisions of that portion of time that is
allotted unto each of them. Hereupon Mr. Mede's own words are, The order of the
Seals, and in them, of the Trumpets, is certain and undoubted, to wit, the
same, which the number to every one ascribed does point out, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7. The rest therefore of the Prophecies in that Book, being compared first
between themselves, and afterward with the Seals, by way of Synchronism, the
Order of the whole Revelation will be evident. This Assertion of his I take to
be most clear.

He therefore begins with that notable quaternion of Prophecies, which are so
very remarkable, by reason of the equality of their times.

1. The first is, the Prophecy of the Woman's remaining in the Wilderness for
a time, times, and half a time, or 1260 days, as is there more manifestly
declared. 2. The second is that of the seven-headed Beast, restored and ruling
forty two months. 3. The third is of the Court (or of the holy City) trodden
under foot by the Gentiles. 4. The fourth and last, is that of the two
Witnesses, prophesying 1260 days, that is, years.
Now although (as Mr. Mede well observes) the character of equality of times
will not be sufficient to evidence that they are the same times, but may be
before or after, yet by other characters which that Book affords, to make out
the demonstration, it seems very clear. These other characters he brings (as
well he may) out of the twelfth Chapter, where it is plain, that when the Dragon
is cast down by Michael out of Heaven, the Woman escapes from his ^^^sence
into the Wilderness, ver. 6, and 14. The Dragon being (...) that he had failed
of his attempt to destroy her in Heaven, re^^^ to his earthly weapons, and
applies himself to make war with the Woman and with the rest of her Seed, to
wit, those which she should bring forth in the Wilderness, ver. 17. And for
this purpose he gave his Power, his Throne, and great Authority to the
ten-horned Beast, out of the Sea ascending, Chap. 13. 1, 2.

By Chap. 11. it appears, that the times of the Beast and of the Prophecy of
the VVitnesses are equal, and that they are finished together at the end of the
sixth Trumpet, which shows they began and held on together, the whole space.
The twelfth verse shows the Ascension of the VVitnesses into Heaven, which puts
a period to their mourning Prophecy, as also that great Earthquake (wherewith
the Imperial City being overthrown, the Kingdom of the Beast comes to be
abolished) noted by the very moment in which the second Woe, which is under the
sixth Trumpet, went out. On this, the third Woe is quickly to ensue, at the
sounding of the seventh Trumpet. In that very moment of time that the
Witnesses, (whom the Beast ascending out of the bottomless pit had slain, being
at the point of finishing their Testimony in sackcloth) were revived by the
spirit of life from God entering into them, and ascending up into Heaven, the
same hour the tenth part of the City fell, by means of the great Earthquake.

Then matters are brought to that pass, that the seventh Trumpet sounding, all
the Kingdoms of the World become our Lord's and his Christ's. In the same
moment also, the Wrath of the Lamb comes to be poured out by the Ministry of
the Vials, and the Temple of God is to be seen in Heaven, ver. 15, 19.

The great Harlot, or mystical Babylon (chap. 17.) is of the same time with the
seven-headed and ten-horned Beast, as are also the hundred forty and four
thousand sealed Ones, being Virgins; these are of the same time with the Whore
of Babylon and the Beast.

The period of the Tyranny of the Beast, and of this Company of the sealed
Virgin-Saints, is at the coming forth of the multitude of Palm-bearers. For,
out of what tribulation could they come, but of the Beast's persecuting the
Saints? Therefore they leave the Tyranny of the Beast behind them, and are of
one Mystical Body or Church with the sealed Ones, and have been under the same
Persecution with them; but are Saints of an inferior rank and station to those
that have the privilege and dignity to be sealed with the Name of the Father
in their foreheads, Chap. 7.

The two ^orned Beast has contemporized with the ten-horned Beast, (Chap. 13^e
Whore with both, and all these three with the Woman in the Wildern^ the
treading under foot the holy City, and the Witnesses (mean time) mourning in
sackcloth. The company also of the sealed Virgins, and the company of
Palm-bearing Virgins, brought from under great tribulation, into a safe and
blessed state, (though no mention be made of their being sealed) these (as to
the season of their tribulation under the persecuting Beast) contemporize with
the Whore and the Beast. All these contemporize one with another, and fill up
the same space of time. After this, succeeds the Ministry of the seven Vials,
at the Rising of the Witnesses, and the moment of their ascending into Heaven.
This will come to pass at the beginning of the sounding of the seventh Trumpet.
Then the triumphing state of the Witnesses will come on. The power of the
Keys, and the pouring forth of the Vials of God's Wrath upon the Kingdom of
the Beast, will be visibly committed to them, and the time of the Beast's and
Babylons inclining to Ruin, or the visibly declining sinking state of both,
will fall in together with this Dispensation of the Vials, to make way for the
Marriage of the Lamb, and the coming down of the New Jerusalem out of Heaven,
to be seen as the Tabernacle of God amongst men here on Earth.

The remaining difficulty then is, to fill up the first of the three great
Sections and Divisions of time, beforementioned, to wit, the space which had
an end put to it by the Woman's actual flight into the Wilderness. This began,
when John received this Prophecy in the Isle of Patmos. Mr. Mede very
judicially summeth it up in these three Particulars.

1. The value and preference which is put by God upon the state of the Church,
as it answers to the inward Court of the Temple of old, comparatively with
those who in their spirit, principle and way, answer but to the outward Court
thereof, and the Worship appertaining thereunto. The former have the true
inward Circumcision of the heart in the spirit, whose praise is not of men, but
of God. The latter are those, who, at best, have but the Circumcision of the
heart in the letter, which labors to show it self in such outward Circumcision
of language and practice, as may serve to keep up a show or form of Godliness
in the sight and to the well-pleasing of man, whilst they are at an utter
distance, even in their hearts, from the very life and power of Godliness, that
springs up from the new nature, that is found in the true Circumcision, which
worship God in the spirit, and answer to the inward Court.

Paul takes notice of this in his time (Gal. 4.) where he distinguishes between
an earthly Jerusalem, that is in bondage with her Children, under the Covenant
of Works or Dominion of the Law, and a Jerusalem above, which is free, and is
the Mother of all that Seed of Abraham, who are Heirs according to the Promise.
These are described (Rev. 12.) by the Woman clothed with the Sun that has the
Moon under her feet, and upon her Head a Crown of twelve Stars. This figurative
description shows the Glory of the City Jerusalem, as it is above, inward and
in spirit, who with her Children is in freedom, under the Covenant and Dominion
of Grace. The same is also signified by the inward Court, appointed to be
measured by the Reed of God, in distinction from the outward Court, which is
not measured, but abandoned and given up, as it were, to the power of the
Gentiles, to be by them trodden under foot, and defiled.

2. In this same space of time, falls out the impregnating of the Woman, or her
growing Great, ready to be delivered of a Manchild. The principal care of the
Apostles, and other Teachers, who succeeded in their Spirit, in the Primitive
Church, (described under the representation of the seven Churches of Asia, and
the Angels or Officers appertaining to them) was, to be doing what had the most
conducible tendency to the hastening and forwarding this birth of the
Man-child, which the Dragon opposed, diligently watched to hinder, resist, and
(if possible) to devour, as soon as born.

3. The seven-headed Dragon's lying in wait, and managing the battle against
Michael and his Angels, about the aforesaid birth, must needs contemporize with
the two forementioned Particulars. All the three do therefore fill up the
first space of time, or age, succeeding the Apostles, measured out by what is
contained in the six first Seals; and was fore told to John, as that which
should happen both to the Church and World, until the Woman's flight from the
Dragon, after this great battle in Heaven, and retiring into the Wilderness,
there to be nourished of God, her appointed time.

These three are the immediate Antecedents of those things, which have been
showed to contemporize under the seventh Seal and six Trumpets; that is to say,
the distinguishing between the inward and outward Court, with the Worship and
Service appertaining unto each; Secondly, The impregnating of the Woman: And
then Thirdly, The battle hereupon arising in Heaven, or within the Primitive
Church, and continuing a long time, till at length the Man-child comes to be
born. Then the Dragon loses his credit and authority in the Church. His
subtilty in accusing and laying false imputation; on the Brethren, the truly
pure and spiritual part of the Church) is detected. Hereupon, he is cast out
into the Earth, confined (as it were) to the outward Court, and the Worshippers
and Service belonging to it, as the only matter for him to work upon, for the
increase of his Kingdom by the number of Hypocrites and Apostates, drawn by him
out of the true Church. They were in truth never of it, though for a while they
were in it. At length, they find it their interest to make a Separation from
it; being sensual, and not having the Spirit, they can no longer endure those
that have it, and that shine forth daily more and more in the Life and
Testimony thereof. The old Dragon became hereby necessitated to manage and
prosecute the War with the earthly Weapons only of worldly Power and
Government, in a way of outward force and compulsion, exercised by the power of
humane Laws, and of the civil Sword. This Power and Sword, the corrupt,
sensual, and malignant Church (founded and consisting in the worshippers and
service of the outward Court) getting into their hands, or engaging it on their
side, by mingling Interest with worldly Governors, committed Whoredom, like
Tire, with all the Kingdoms of the World upon the face of the Earth, Isa. 23.
17. Yea, this Beast with two horns, so influenced, encouraged and backed the
ten horned Beast, that he became thereby fixed and engaged, in his Mind as well
as Power, to continue and carry on the War, forty and two months longer,
against the Woman and her Seed, and to blaspheme God, his Name, his Tabernacle,
and them that dwell in Heaven.

Thus in brief Heads have we seen how the two first great Sections or Divisions
of time, in the third Age, are filled up, to wit, the space from John's
receiving the Prophecy of them in the Isle of Patmos to the end of the first
battle, or war, made in Heaven, and (as the issue of that) the catching up of
the Man-child unto God and to his Throne, and the Woman's actual flight into the
Wilderness, and from thence to the rising of the VVitnesses, which puts a
period to the suffering season, alloted to their Prophesying in Sackcloth. And
as to the third and last Section of time, it is that which is measured out by
the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, and the pouring out of the seven Vials,
which begins with the beginning of that Trumpet, and continues till the Whore
be judged, Babylon sunk, and the whole Kingdom of the Beast for ever ruined and
destroyed. This makes way for the marriage of the Lamb to be celebrated here on
Earth, and so, for the coming on of the Kingdom of Christ into the actual
exercise of a visible ruling Power and universal Empire over the whole World,
for a thousand years.

Having thus had a view of the distinct periods of time, together with the
matter of the Prophesies, which were to be fulfilled in and under each of these
distinct Revolutions, it will yet much prepare and help our understandings,
rightly to discern and look into the Mysteries of this most excellent Book, if
once we can but arrive at a satisfactory opening, and interpreting (at least,
in some chief particulars) the things which are signified under many of the
Figures and Allegorical Expressions, made use of throughout the whole Prophecy.
For Example: Let us consider these; The seven Churches and the Angels of them:
The Throne in Heaven: The sealed Book: The Woman: The Dragon and his Angels:
Michael and his Angels: The Man-child: The throne and seat of the Dragon's
Power and Authority: The outward and inward Court: The Flood, issuing out of
the Dragon's mouth: The distinguished Inhabitants of the Heavens, of the Earth,
and of the Sea: The 144000 sealed Virgins: The Palm-bearers: The Remnant of the
Woman's Seed, that keep the Commands of God and have the Testimony of Jesus: The
seven-headed, ten horned Beast: The Beast's Image: The two horned Beast: The
false Prophet: The Whore: Mystical Babylon: The great City that rules over the
Kings of the Earth: The Number of the Beast's Name: The two Witnesses; their
hidden or obscure Prophesying in Sackcloth; their glorious Appearing and
Prophesying in Power, and in a Wonder-working Ministry, like to that of Moses
and Eliah: The Kingdom of the Beast, and his ascent out of the bottomless pit:
The slaying of the Witnesses, at the finishing of their Testimony, or perioding
of their Sack-cloth-Prophesying, and their lying Dead in the streets of the
great City, spiritually called Sodom and Egypt: The Witnesses rising and
ascending up into Heaven: The coming of the Wrath of the Lamb: The sight of
Heaven opened, with the Temple and Ark therein contained: The Harvest and
Vintage: The marriage of the Lamb: The coming down of the new Jerusalem out of
Heaven; to be as a Tabernacle of God amongst men on Earth, all the Kingdoms of
this World becoming the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ.

The Charge given John, by him that was dead and yet lives for evermore, the
Amen, or everlasting Truth of God (Rev. 1. 18, 19.) was, to write; First, The
things which he had seen, in the description of the fullness and excellency of
Christ's Person, exhibited to him, verse. 12, 17. Secondly, The things which
are, or the state of the Church in his time, as it had for its chief places of
abode, those principal Cities in Asia, by name expressed, (chap. 2 d. and 3 d.)
together with the Representation in them, (as in Type and Figure) of the state
of the Universal Apostolic Christian Church, which was to continue under the
seven distinctions of time, contained under the seven Seals, under the last
whereof, six of the Trumpets were (as 'twere) included. There was that also
found in those seven Asiatick Churches, that did typically represent the
decrease and sinking down of a great Party in the visible Christian Church,
into the Apostasy foretold in this Book of the Revelation, until the very time
of the rising of the Witnesses.

Thirdly and lastly, John was Commanded to write the things which shall be
hereafter, or which were to succeed that present state in which the then seven
Churches were, at that time, respecting as well the Corruption and Apostasy,
coming upon the face of the Primitive Church, as the continuance of it, with
countenance and support from worldly Powers, till the sounding of the seventh
Trumpet. These things that shall be hereafter, (when time shall be no longer,
or when the Mystery of God shall be finished, and all persons and things shall
appear plainly and manifestly as they are) amount, in general, to the
Constitution and Concerns of that glorious state of the Church, which is to be
from thenceforth, for evermore.

To proceed then to the Explicating of many of the chief Allegorical
Expressions in this Book of Revelations.

1. By the seven Churches in Asia, let us understand, as in type, the state of
the Christian Church, characterized and described (as Brightman intimates)
under the distinct periods of time, held forth by the things done, during the
seven Seals, which reach to the sounding of the seventh Trumpet.

2. By the Angels of the seven Churches are to be understood, not only or
principally, the Officers or Persons ministering, but rather the Light of the
Gospel in its distinct measures and degrees, administered according to the
nature of the times and seasons, which the things done under the first six
Seals, did occasion. For upon the rejecting of that, there was caused a gradual
and successive removing of each Candlestick out of its place, and the Church
sinks down at length into an universal Defection and Apostasy, as to the
visible part of it. This renders it, in its concluding and final state, so
naucious and loathsome to God, that he resolves to spue them out of his mouth,
and reject them for ever.

To confirm this, we find each Church to consist of two very different sorts of
Members; one, that are spiritual, prepared with spiritual senses, or ears to
hear what the Spirit says to the Churches: the other, though they have the
name and credit of Church Members, yea, and in process of time, the greatest
visible Power and Sway in it, saying they are Jews or right Heirs of Promise,
yet are they not so, but do lie. They are indeed of the Synagogue of Satan.
They came out from the spiritual and better part of the Church, as no longer
able to join, and go along, or keep pace with them, in their heavenly Life and
Conversation. Being sensual, and having not the Spirit, they separate from the
true spiritual worshipper, seeking their upholding and maintenance in this or
that Form and Way, from the Powers of the World. And having once got worldly
Power and outward strength and force on their side, they resolved to persecute
and make War upon the better and more spiritual part of the Church, with
earthly Weapons, and by compulsion of the Civil Sword.

3. The Throne in Heaven, described in the fourth Chapter, is the Seat which
God has made for himself, in the Creature-being of Christ the Mediator, as his
own Sanctuary, from whence to issue forth all his Authority and Power, decreed
to be by him exercised, whether in Heaven or on Earth, in the capacity of Head
and universal King over all the works of God's hands. He that sits on this
Throne, is the same that (chap. 19.) is clothed with a Vesture dipped in blood,
and whose Name is called the WORD of God. He is said (chap. 5. verse. 6.) to
have seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, sent
forth into all the Earth; and this, by his being made flesh, and by his Death
and Resurrection, in which he showed himself the true Sanctuary, which God
pitched, and not man. This had been, in type, from the beginning, a most
glorious high Throne (Jer. 17. 12.) designed from all Eternity to be the Throne
and the place of the soals of his feet, whose Name is the WORD of God, in order
to dwell in the midst of the Children of Israel for ever, and bear unto their
sight and enjoyment the clear and complete vision of the invisible God.

4. The Book (chap. 5.) written within, and on the backside, sealed with seven
Seals, as it is part of the Vision given to John, is a description of the
inward and hidden meaning of the matter of this Prophecy, whether as to that
which more especially concerns the Affairs of the Church, or that which more
generally relates to the Affairs of the World and the Empire thereof. The seven
Seals with which it is sealed on the backside, do intimate the dark and
mystical movings or dispensations of Gods Providence, that the sevenfold
distinction of time, under the seven Seals and Trumpets should produce, as the
method and way that Christ would take to open and make known the inward
writing, and to give so plain a Vision of it, that he that runs may read it.

The matter of this Prophecy, as it peculiarly relates unto the Church,
contains in it the Church's progress and growth up in all things into Christ
her Head, according to the purpose of the Father, which he purposed in Christ
Jesus before the World was, and this, in despite of all contradiction, or
opposition, from the Serpent and his Seed. In this respect it is, that (chap.
12.) the Man-child with which the Woman was in Travel, comes at last to be
born, and seated on high, above the reach of Satan, as to any hurt that he
could do unto it. In the end, it becomes a Mountain, filling the whole Earth.

As the matter of this Prophecy does more generally relate unto the World, that
lies in the wicked one, and holds of the Serpent, as of its universal Head and
Ruler, it contains the wonderful workings and contrivances of God's Providence,
in favor of his Church, and in rendering to every one according to their works,
filling those that are of the World with the ways of their own choosing. By
this means, his worst enemies are taught and made to acknowledge his Justice
and long-Suffering toward them, in and under all. His steady Counsels lead to
the certain and final treading of all his Adversaries under foot, and to the
exalting of the horn of his Anointed, who is both Lord and Christ.

5. By the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that Worship therein,
appointed to be measured, (chap. 11. 1.) is to be understood the right Worship
of God, as well with respect to the object of it, shining forth in the Person
and Spirit of Christ, inwardly known and conversed with, as with respect to the
worshippers themselves, who are such only as are qualified with spiritual
senses, rendering them meet for such Duty and Service, which they are called to
the performance of in their Spirits, and with their inward man. But that which
consists in the outward and bodily exercise, described by the outward Court, is
given up, to be suppressed and trodden under foot by the Gentiles, for 1260
years, verse. 2.

6. By the Holy City is meant Jerusalem, the City of the great King and Living
God, the incorporated Society of Inhabitants or Citizens, that stand in
relation to Christ, as his Subjects and Servants, under the obligation of one
or other Covenant, that is conditionally or absolutely. Those that are his
Subjects but in the conditional Covenant, are Citizens whose Names are only
written in the Earth, who (upon trial and proof) do not remain so. Though they
say they are Jews, they are not, but do lie. Yea, they evidently discover
themselves in the end, to be the very Synagogue of Satan. But those that are
the Subjects of Christ, absolutely, or in and by the new and everlasting
Covenant, established in all things and sure, they are such Citizens, whose
Names are written in Heaven, among the living in Jerusalem, where they become
Pillars in the House of God, never to go out more, being found in a state of
Life and way of converse with, and worshipping of God in Christ, wherein they
are secured from final Apostasy and Defection.

7. The Earthly Citizens, or the Inhabitants and Children of the Jerusalem on
Earth, do prove at last to be as great enemies to their King, as any among the
heathenish and profane World, when once they revolt from his Scepter, disjoyn
and separate from the spiritual and better part of the Citizens, whose Names
are written in Heaven, or in the Lamb's Book of new creature Life, in a
character that is indeleble, and by virtue of that Covenant which cannot be
broken. And their great Design (when once actually separated from the true
spiritual Worshippers) is, by the calling in of strength and aid from the
profane World, to tread under the holy City, even the very Heavenly Jerusalem,
and so to keep it under, that it may never come to have any Credit, Authority,
or Power in the World.

These Citizens and Inhabitants of the Heavenly Jerusalem, are described (chap.
7.) by those that are sealed with the Seal of the Living God, and are either a
Company certain, and numbered, making up the 144000 there mentioned; or else, a
Company and Society of sealed ones, that in comparison of the former are
numberless, and of a more large and universal extent, called (by way of
distinction) Palmbearers.

The first sort of these sealed ones do answer to the 24 Courses of the Levites
of old, who were given unto God, instead of the firstborn* They stand in a
peculiar relation to, and dependence upon the great High Priest, as their Head,
and do properly constitute and make up that Assembly of the firstborn, whose
Names are written in Heaven. These are a Kingdom of Priests, represented before
the Throne, by the four and twenty Elders.

The second sort of these Citizens and sealed ones, do answer to the whole
Congregation of Israel, distributed into their four parts and stations, round
about the Ark, at a greater distance from the Throne, a Kingdom of common
Subjects, and less priviledg'd Children than the former. Yet, these latter sort
of men shall be recounted as well as the former, to have been born in her, whom
the Most High does establish, Psalm. 87. 5.

Thus, Psalm. 49. there is notice taken of high or noble men, and of low or
common men. These two Orders are eminently found in a state of perpetuity and
continuancy, in Christ's own Kingdom. Both of them have their original and
foundation in the Manhead of Christ, who is one manner of man, as he bears the
form of a Servant, like unto us earthly men, in all things, sin only excepted.
In this capacity he is constituted King over the whole Earth. But he is another
manner of man, as he is called and made an High Priest after the Order of
Melchisedec, without Father, without Mother, without Pedigree or Descent,
having neither beginning of days, nor end of life. It is therefore said of him
in this second sense, Consider how great this man is, unto whom even the
Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of his spoils. And again, the same Apostle
(Heb. 5. 11.) testifies, that of him he had many things to say, that were hard
to be uttered, seeing they were dull of hearing, and slow to discern the
distinction of that excellency and perfection which shines forth in Christ's
own humane nature, in the twofold respect which we have mentioned.

8. By the Two Witnesses then, we are hereby taught to understand those two
sorts of Citizens, or Inhabitants of the Heavenly Jerusalem; the word of whose
Testimony is, according to this their twofold and distinct birth, which makes
them Kings or Priests with Christ, or both; that is, joint or coheirs with
Christ, in the dignity and perfection of his Manhead, in one or both of these
Considerations of it. This is intimated, (Isa. 43. 10.) Ye are my Witnesses,
says the Lord, and my Servant (Christ) whom I have chosen; that ye may know
and believe me, or be one in Judgment and Will with me, and understand that I
am he. Before me there was no God formed, nor shall be after me.

And they are called Witnesses, not only because they know and believe him, and
are one in Spirit with him, as he is a glorified earthly man, and a man also
that is Michael, God's fellow; but as they Prophecy in Sackcloth, or in a
suffering state, not loving their lives unto the death, rather then cease to be
Witnesses and to bear their testimony to the Truth, when called thereunto,
under the greatest contradiction of sinners.

9. By the Woman (chap. 12.) clothed with the Sun, etc. who being with Child,
cried, traveling in birth with a Man-child, and pained to be delivered, is
meant the true Sarah, or spiritual Womb of Christ's dead body, (Romans 7. 4.)
which lawfully discharges us from the Covenant of the Law, or obligation to act
singly by the activity it gives, that we should be married to another, even to
him who is raised from the dead, that we may bring forth fruit unto God, as
quickened into a life and activity much more excellent. There is therefore set
before the eyes of our Faith, the Law of the Spirit of Life that is in-Christ
Jesus, risen from the dead, for us hence-forward to be conformed and live unto,
as that birth of manly perfection, which shines forth in him, who was crucified
indeed in weakness, but was raised in power, or a man of Power, in whose hands
all Power in Heaven and Earth is entrusted. And those who become one, in
conjunction of Spirit with him, by the new and everlasting Covenant, are with
him caught up to the Throne of God, in the one or other capacity (before
intimated) of the two sorts of Citizens, that by the new birth are members of
the Heavenly Jerusalem, and of the remnant of the Woman's Seed, that keep the
Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus.

The great Contest and Battle which happened between the Witnesses on the one
part, (comprehended under the name of Michael and his Angels) and the Serpent
and his brood on the other, was, as the one were Friends, and the other
Enemies, to the Cross and Death of Christ, and as the Judgment, Opinions, and
Practices of the one or other made void, or else established and advanced the
Mystery and Efficacy of the Cross and the Law of it, which those that observe
and follow, peace will be upon them, as on all the Israel of God. In this
Quarrel the Witnesses do fight under the protection and blessing of Michael,
their Head; as the other do under the support and encouragement of the Old
Dragon, their Head.

10. By the Old Dragon we are to understand the Spirit that rules in the
Children of disobedience, who is (for the present) Head and chief Ruler over
the World, as managing the universal Scepter thereof, by Christ's permission.
The Ensigns and Characters of this Empire (according to Scripture phrase) is
seven heads and ten horns, intimating the nature, as well as perfection and
universality of that worldly Power, which is exercised by the Old Dragon, in
waging war against the Woman and her Seed.

This War he is capable to manage, either as an Angel of Light, and a false
Prophet in the Church; or as an universal Monarch and Governor in the World.

In the first Capacity, as this Dragon transforms himself into an Angel of
Light, and Minister of Righteousness, he works with all Power, Signs, and lying
Wonders. As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses and Aaron in their Commission,
so do the Serpent's Seed in Sheep's clothing and Christ's own likeness, resist
the Witnesses in their Testimony, and oppose the Inhabitants of the Heavenly
Jerusalem, by pretending a greater Friendship to Christ, and conformity to his
written Law, in all their words and actions, than the true Seed of the Woman,
having indeed the form of Godliness, but denying the Power and Spirit thereof.
After this manner did the Dragon and his Angels, in the Primitive Church, fight
with Michael and his Angels, to prevent the birth of the Man-child, and to keep
up the Credit and Authority of the Law, and their following after Righteousness
in the Principles, and upon the terms of the first Covenant, in opposition to
the Ministry of the Spirit, according to the Promise and Tenor of the new and
everlasting Covenant. This battle continued, in the Primitive Church, about
four hundred years, and came at last to this issue; Satan was cast down out of
Heaven, upon an evident discovery of his deceitful workings and lying wonders,
in the Teachings and Inspirations which came out of his mouth, as a false
Spirit and Prophet, so that he was not able, singly this way, to bear up any
longer against the Power and Demonstration of the Spirit of Truth, in the mouth
of the Saints, but found himself necessitated to resort to his earthly and
worldly Weapons, the Power of the Civil Sword, that so joining both his
Interests together, that of the Magistrate and false Prophet, he might grow up
into such a formidible posture, as is mentioned, (Chap. 13. 4.) where it is
said, Who is like unto the BEAST, or able to make War with him?

This posture the Apostle John beheld the Dragon putting himself into, when the
seven-headed and ten-horned Beast arose out of the Sea, and the two-horned
Beast out of the Earth. Both of these together do become the Seat or Throne, to
which the Dragon gave up his Power and Authority. The first of these two Beasts
receives him, as the old, unclean, profane, heathenish Spirit; they that are
meant by that Beast, are still the same in Principles, as before, only
outwardly baptized into the name of the Christian Profession or Religion, when
Christian Religion became the Religion of the Roman Empire. Thus was that Beast
healed of its former Wound, when Paganism was destroyed and pulled down.

And because the bare name of Christian Religion, or outside Profession
thereof, without something of real Reformation and Power of inward Principles,
was not of credit or authority enough, to advance Antichrist's Kingdom,
therefore the Ministry of the Law or first Covenant (even the knowledge of
Christ according to the flesh, as it is capable to serve the Serpents Seed for
a cover and vail of their enmity against the Cross of Christ, and Power of his
Resurrection) does spring up over the head (as it were) of the first Beast.
This second Beast, or branch of Antichrist's Subjects and Kingdom, with two
horns, like the Lamb, but speaking as the Dragon, chooses rather to join
Interest with the first Beast, than to suffer the Citizens of the heavenly
Jerusalem to come out of their Wilderness-condition. Yet this earth or miry
clay, cannot (when all is done) cleave heartily and thoroughly to the heathenish
profane Spirit of the first Beast, but at last is preyed upon by it. This
Earthly Jerusalem is unexpectedly surprised, and overflowed as with a flood, by
that profane Interest it ventured to call to its assistance against the true
Seed of the Woman, in which respect it is said that the Earth helps the Woman,
the wrath of the profane party of Antichrist's Kingdom, or of the ten-horned
Beast, being chiefly spent and poured out upon that Professing Party that make
up the second, or two-horned Beast.

11. By the Inhabitants of the Heavens, of the Earth, and of the Sea, (chap.
12. 12.) are meant, First, The Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, who are
under Grace; Secondly, The Citizens of the earthly Jerusalem, who are under the
dominion and curse of the Law; And Thirdly, The profane Party who live under
sin, moving therein, as in their Element, past feeling, by reason of the
blindness and hardness of their hearts. This state of Sin is nevertheless not
unchangeable, nor those that are Captives under it, in a condition
irrecoverable, for Christ died to redeem men out of it.

12. By the seven-headed and ten-horned Beast, arising out of the Sea, is to be
understood the Empire, or Governing Power of the World, in whose hands soever
it be found, as it is made the Seat and Throne of Satan, and promotes the
Interest of the Devils Kingdom in corruption of manners, and profaneness, even
by the countenance of humane Laws, or at least in the execution of them.

13. By the two-horned Beast, arising out of the Earth, we are to understand
the Usurpation of the Prophetical Office of Christ, by a false Spirit, or the
said Office as deceitfully executed in a private Spirit of self-byassed Reason,
in disjunction from the Spirit of the true Head, undertaking to counsel and
lead men in the interpretation of the written Word, or other evident
signification of God's Will. This, once joined with worldly Government and
Power, (made its vassal and ridden by it) is that Spirit and Principle for
promoting of worldly Religion, which is founded in, and supported by humane
Laws, under the Name and Form of Christianity. The two-horned Beast and the
false Prophet are therefore the same, as by comparing chap. 13. verse. 14. with
verse. 20. of chap. 19. is most clear. And the ten-horned Beast is wont also to
be called the Image of the Beast; where ever therefore the Beast and the false
Prophet are mentioned together, (as they are, three times) there by the name of
the Beast is meant no other but the ten-horned Beast; as by the false Prophet,
the two-horn'd. Contrarily; where, with the Beast we find coupled the Image of
the Beast, (as chap. 14. verse. 9, and 11. chap. 15. verse. 2. chap. 16. verse. 2.
chap. 19. verse. 20. and chap. 20. verse. 4.) there, by Beast is to be understood
the false Prophet; and by his Image, the seven-headed and ten-horn'd Beast, as
restored. For this Beast, seeing he acknowledges the false Prophet as his
Restorer, and suffers himself to be guided by him, as his supreme Lord,
(chap. 13. verse. 12, 14, 15.) he is (not without cause) called his Image, not
as representing or bearing the similitude of the two-horn'd Beast, but he is
the Image which the two-horn'd Beast, speaking like the Dragon, did restore,
and which he challenges for his own. To justify this; that very Image of the
Beast, which the false Prophet did give life unto, did cause that whosoever
would not worship the Image of the Beast, should be slain. To conclude, of the
self-same is the Image of the Beast, and the Name or Number said to be, chap.
15. 2. The Name and Number seem not to be called the Name and Number of any
other Beast, than of the two-horn'd, as of the principal Founder and Lord.

14. The Number of the Name of the Beast, being said to be the Number of a man,
signifies that it is the sensual part of man's Wisdom or Reason, become
devilish, by joining in combination with Satan in his revolt from his true
Head, and in exercising enmity against all Righteousness, upon one account or
other.

This sensual part of man's Wisdom savours and minds Earthly or seen things,
and delights in corporeal fleshly objects, whether actually corrupt, or only
corruptible. This is the Wisdom that is prevalent with the generality of men in
the World, according to the Principles of which, the Empire and Government of
the World is managed, and the judgment and interpretation of the very Law and
Word of God is made, for the Rule in matters of Faith and Worship. This Wisdom
is in its best estate, unstable and unfixed, so as from the top and height of
its honor, there is suddenly a being made like the Beast that perishes, and so
a falling short of the true Rest. This was the case of the first Adam, who was
created on the sixth day* and whose unstable perfection is therefore numbered by
six, thrice repeated.

This sensual part of man's Wisdom, is the executing or performing Power of the
Soul, in reference to the dictates and enlightnings that declare themselves in
the intellectual and angelical part of the mind, which many times serves and
approves the Law of God, whilst the sensual part serves and obeyes sin, and as
with a Law of common consent from the Members, opposes and resists the good and
right Rule which shines forth in man's intellect, and which we call sound or
right Reason. But as this sensual part, in its movings and actings, holds
agreement and is in conjunction with the intellectual part, as its Ruler and
Guide, following the dictates thereof; so far the actings thereof are sound and
right, holding conformity to the Law of God. Thus even the sensual part (as
subject to the right dictates of the intellectual) is it self a Rule unto
humane action, and is the principle and foundation of righteous Magistratical
Government amongst men. Now when this Principle in Magistrates, ceases to be
any longer found in a state of downright Paganism, and comes to be healed and
restored out of darkness and profaneness, by receiving of the Scriptures or
written Word of God, (opened and interpreted by such as pretend to be
commissioned and gifted for that purpose) unto which it owes its healing and
restoration, it does by way of acknowledgement receive and set up that
prophetical Office, in an administration, countenanced by humane Laws and the
Magistrates Power. Wherever this kind of Magistracy is, in both the branches
of it, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, (setting up for themselves and their own
Interests, in their own wills, in disjunction from Christ and his Spirit, the
true Head, and in opposition to the Remnant of the Woman's Seed, and their
testimony in word and action) there is the Kingdom and Seat of the Beast and
Antichrist, leading the People over whom it is exercised, into servitude both
of Soul and Body. This is that Principle and Power, that after the limited time
of 1260 years, must fall and be taken out of the way.

15. By the Witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloth, are meant the true
Circumcision in Spirit, who Worship God in Christ Jesus, and live in a
through-resignedness of mind to him that is risen from the dead, who is the
Spirit of Truth which is given them by the Father to be their guide, of whom
and of whose Testimony they are not ashamed, what ever disgrace it be in, or
however rejected by the Government under which the Providence of God has
placed them. They do therefore own it as their Principle, and make it their
practice, to bear and suffer under such worldly Powers and Governments, in
Faith and Patience, whatever befalls them for their Testimony's sake, without
attempting to resist the Powers that are, to disturb their peace or give them
any just cause of offense.

They are called Witnesses, because of the word of their Testimony, which they
forbear not to give in the worst and most suffering times, whatever it cost
them. And they are Two, described by two Candlesticks, or Societies of
Believers, and two Olive Trees or Sons of Oil, because through Faith they are
the receivers of the Anointing which comes from the Holy One, and is Truth and
no Lie. This Anointing proportions it self in its Gift, either according to the
measure it finds the Nature of man capable to take in and possess, without any
new addition of a distinct, superior capacity and reception; or else gives
forth its self in a vast and boundless communication, wherein it is capable to
flow forth into man, and to form in him an answerable Reception thereunto,
(beyond and above that capacity and measure of knowledge and discerning, which
is proper to man in his first make or building) to the extending and enlarging
the intellectual part of man's Being, into a more abundant fruition of God, in
a superiority to that of Angels, even to a joint inheriting, seeing, and
enjoying of God with the exalted humane Nature of the Son of God, in that Name
which he obtains above Angels, and wherein he is more excellent than they. At
this more excellent Name of Christ, as it originally shines forth in Christ's
own Person, every knee must bow, and every tongue confess, to the glory of God
the Father.

These two sorts of Saints are in most intimate Union and inseparable
conjunction with the Lord that Spirit, who is the Son of man glorified or
justified in Spirit, and who has the gift of the Anointing, in both the
respects beforementioned. The one sort of these Saints as well as the other,
do with open face behold (as in a glass) the Glory of the Lord, whether that,
wherein he is perfect man, or that wherein he is more than man, the man that is
God's Fellow and Equal, and so Superior and Head to Angels, Principalities and
Powers, ascended far above all Heavens. And they are changed into the same
Image, respectively, whether of the one Glory or of the other, by the Spirit of
the Lord, or the Lord the Spirit.

These Two Witnesses do live and abide in their Principles and word of their
Testimony, when their persons die, and they have put off their earthly
Tabernacle. For the Witnessing-work is carried on in a succession of new
Witnesses, brought upon the stage of this World, one Generation after another,
during the time declared of 1260 years, whilst they are appointed to prophecy
in Sackcloth. And when that suffering season of theirs shall have an end put
to it, (as it must) the like two Companies and Societies of Saints (spirited
with the same Principles, that these sackcloth or suffering Prophets are of,
both of them making but one Church and House of the Living God) shall be
quickened and raised up in Power, by such a Redemption wrought in and upon
their bodies (even here, in this life) from the bondage of Corruption, as is
called the Adoption of the body, Romans 8. 23. This Adoption or Redemption of the
body, on this side the Resurrection, will hold proportion very much, with
Christ's Transfiguration. This state of the body is prophetically described,
Dan. 12. 3. where we are given to understand that the bodies of the Saints, or
of those that are wise, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and
their Spirits as the Stars for ever and ever. For into such an intimate
relation and conjunction, will Christ, as he is the Head of Angels, take and
adopt the Spirits of Angels, and men regenerated, with himself, and with one
another, as by his own influence on the Spirits of Saints, and by his and the
influence of their own Spirits on their bodily or sensual part, to reduce their
bodies into so near a relation to, and conjunction with the Life of their
Spirits, and Christ in Spirit, as will raise and advance them into a heavenly
frame, and render them meet for so great a glory of Spirit, or eminent exercise
of spiritual Life and Power. This will be a glory of the body, not before
known, as a common and general dispensation, since the World began, nor yet
hardly so eminently experienced even by those few choice Types and Shadows of
it, Enoch, Moses and Elias, or others. This is that state of body, or of the
very outward-man and sensual part of the Saint, whereby Christ will be
glorified in his Saints, and admired in all those that do believe.

A LETTER OF Sir HENRY VANE, To his LADY, from the Isle of SCYLLY.
My Dear Heart,
THe Wind yet continuing contrary, makes me desirous to be as much in Converse
with thee (having this opportunity) as the Providence of God will permit;
hoping these will come safe to your hand. It is no small Satisfaction to me in
these sharp Trials, to experience the Truth of those Christian Principles,
which God of his Grace has afforded you and me, in our measures, the
knowledge, and emboldned us to make the profession of. For surely by this Fiery
Trial, which is from God appointed to try us, no strange or unusual
Dispensation of God has happened to us, differing from that which all his
Servants and Prophets from the beginning of the World to this day, have found
also to be their Lot: Nor is it other, than the Condition (as I may say) and
Law, that all those must come under and submit unto, that will approve
themselves Christ's Disciples indeed, Luke 14. 26, 27. And it is no small
Mercy, that the greatest Extremities we have already under-gone, and which do
as yet threaten, have found that strength and rooting of the Grace and Love of
Christ in our Hearts, which causes us not to despair of being made more than
Conquerors in the end, without desiring those Conditions of peace, (verse. 32.)
which are not consistent with our being such Disciples of Christ, as will
cheerfully (when called to it) forsake all they have, in love to him, and
subjection to his Will.

Why should Christ ask us, Whether we be able to drink of the Cup he drank of,
and be baptized with the Baptism he was baptized with? Was it not, to intimate,
That if we die with him, we shall also live with him; if we suffer, we shall
also reign with him, and have it granted to us to sit down with him, on the
Throne of his Glory, our very Enemies beholding? What would it be less, even in
this world, if he should but please to cause, upon this occasion of our
Suffering, that the Spirit of God, and of Glory, should rest upon us, and bring
forth his Kingdom within us, in Power, giving us that Mouth and Wisdom that
will make us mighty in word and deed; that Faith, to which all things are
possible; that Spirit of Supplication and Prayer, that he will always hear and
immediately answer? God's Arm is not shortened; doubtess, great and precious
Promises are yet in store, to be accomplished in and upon Believers here on
Earth, to the making of Christ to be admired in them. If we come not to live
here, in the actual fruition and full accomplishment of them, (as they will be
experienced by Believers, even on this side the death, or full change of their
mortal body) yet if we die in the certain foresight and embracing of them by
Faith, this will be no small blessing.

This dark night and black shade, which God has drawn over his Work in the
midst of us, may be (for ought we know) the ground-colour to some beautiful
piece, that he is exposing to the Light. His Sons must be manifested and
evidently distinguished from those, who say they are such and are not. There is
a glory to be revealed in them, unto which their Suffering is made the needful
Preparation; and this is called the Redemption of the body. In that day, the
tabernacling of God in men shall be visible. Their very bodies shall be the
Temple of the Holy Ghost. In them, as his Sanctuary, will God dwell for
evermore, whence shall be given forth such visible signs of his extraordinary
Presence, as shall render it past dispute, to the sight of every man, that God
is in them and with them of a Truth.

This state of entire resignedness and subjection of our bodies to our Spirits,
and of our Spirits unto Christ, the Father of them, shall certainly be brought
to the view of the whole World. The eyes of those that see them, shall
acknowledge them; and the ears that hear them, shall bear witness to them, that
they are the Seed and Offspring, which the Lord has blessed.

Our body, thus considered, as capable of such advance and honor, is not
merely the outward case or shell, that must return to dust, but includes also
the bodily, organical state of Life, or that souly, animal Life, which the
Spirit of man exercises in conjunction with his mortal body. In this kind of
Life it is, we see, hear, and speak, have the exercise of our Senses, after a
distinct manner from Angels and intellectual Substances, in a way of operation
inferior to theirs, proper and peculiar to the rational Soul, as needing and
using the earthly Organs or Instruments of the mortal body. There is also in
man, that which is peculiarly called Mind or Spirit, in distinction from his
Soul, or from the souly Life and activity of the same Spirit, in and by its
earthly body, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. The Spirit or Mind of man, (as distinguished from
that life and operation it performs in the mortal body, is capable, even while
in the body, to be awakened by the Father of Spirits, and come forth in a
superior way, even of natural life, received by man in his first creation, to
act as out of the body, or without the use of bodily organs, as an equal or
associate to the very Angels. Now because the bodily and inferior powers of
our mind, are the instruments of that converse we are subjected to in these
days of our vanity, so that if we will be sociable, it must be by the use
thereof, the Apostle James comprehends all the action of these inferior powers
by the sensible organs we make use of in the exercise thereof, under the name
of the tongue, when he says, If any man offend not in word, the same is a
perfect man, and able to bridle the whole body. To bridle and regulate the
tongue, order all the language, action, and expression of the animal powers
aright, is to bridle the whole body, under the government or ruling authority
of the Mind or Spirit, considered in its superior and angelical kind of life
and acting, as out of the body, or above and without the use of bodily organs.
The Mind or Spirit of man thus considered, is as the Pilot that turns the Ship
about, whithersoever he lists. If it well and truly exercise its governing
power, it causes the animal life in all the operations and affections thereof,
to obey its dictates and commands, however fiercely driven by contrary Winds,
false Doctrine, any corrupting violent influences of Devils or men upon it, and
fetches it off from whatever tumultuous disorder, its own sensual lusts and
passions are ready to run it into, Jam. 3. 2, 5.

To be partaker of the Redemption of the body, is to be made this perfect man,
which is taught so to live and act, from right, spiritual Principles, as not to
offend in word, through the Power actually conferred on him and exercised by
him, for the bridling of the whole body, in the sense above declared, and for
the keeping it in subjection to the Spirit or angelical part in him, in
righteousness and true holiness.

This taming of the tongue, or subduing of the bodily part in us to the
spiritual and intellectual, is a work of no small difficulty, a thing that is
not to be purchased but at a dear rate. It may cost us all that we have, and no
ill bargain neither, since by our words it is that we shall be justified, and
by our words we shall be condemned. For until we have brought under our body,
and reduced it into a fixed subjection and entire resignation to our Spirits,
let us boast never so much, that which is perfect is not yet come; even that
perfection which in a very eminent degree shall be experienced by the Saints
here on Earth, on this side the grave, and during their continuance in the
mortal body. This, for ought I can discern, will be the product of the present
sharp and fiery Trials, that God has brought upon his People all the World
over. After they have suffered a while, and the same Afflictions have been
accomplished in the rest of their Brethren that are in the World, they may so
far have the work of Patience perfected in them, as, in this sense, to become
perfect and entire, wanting nothing, and to shine forth as so many bright
morning stars, and fore-running signs of the near approach of the brightness of
the Day of Christ's second coming. This God has set before the eye of my
Faith, as the mark for the price of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus.
This is that perfection, which by conformity with Christ in his Death, and
fellowship with him in his Resurrection, is in a most eminent degree
attainable, before our dissolution and the putting off our earthly Tabernacle.
It shall be so far attained by the Power and Glory of Christ, that is to be
revealed in us, that it shall not much fall short of a very Transfiguration.
And the state of the then glorious Church will be no less than an Heaven upon
Earth, in the new Heavens and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. This
glorious state of things we look for, and therefore are or ought to be hasting
a-pace, unto the coming of that Day of God.

Yet, when I say, until we experience this kind of perfection in Power in us,
that which is perfect is not yet come, my meaning is not, that the
incorruptible Seed and Principles of this very perfection are not already
seated and rooted in the inward man and in the Spirit of the Mind, so soon as
we are regenerated, and that Christ is formed in us, dwelling in our hearts by
Faith. Thus it is, that we are all glorious within. Thus the Kingdom of Heaven
is within us, liken'd to the hidden Treasure, which when a man has found in
the field, he keeps it concealed, till he has sold all that he has, and
bought that field. Faith, which is the substance of things hoped for, and the
evidence of that Glory which does not yet appear, is not unfitly expressed,
when it is called a light shining in a dark place, that is, in our bodily and
sensual part, which continues so for a long time after our new birth. But those
that are all glorious within, must have their time of manifestation, and be
made all glorious without also. The outward-man of the heart, and the outward
Court of the Temple, must come to be measured, and be of account and
estimation, in the sight of the World. Then the whole body shall be full of
light, having no part dark, as when the bright shining of a Candle does give
thee light.

This is the Perfection which is near us, even at the very door, ready to be
testified and witnessed unto, after another manner than those do pretend to,
who are for the subjecting and keeping under the body, but by those mutable and
wavering Principles of Perfection, which amounts but to that visibility of
Saintship, which is the subject of Apostasy, yet has hitherto passed for
current Coin. Nor would I have it thought, that I have already attained the
powerful practice of this holy Duty and Perfection, but it is much in my
desire, aim, and hope. The difficult Circumstances I am in, and that I am still
more and more every day cast into, by God's wise-disposing Providence, to the
sequestring me from the World, and withholding all sensible Comforts from me,
so much as he does, make me, in some sort, confident it is for a good end, and
that out of love and faithfulness I am made to drink of this bitter Cup, the
better to help forward this necessary work in me, and upon me, wherein consists
the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. If I may have and enjoy this, it would
seem a very little matter to me to be in outward bonds, banishment, want, or
any other afflictions. Help me then (in all your solicitudes and cares about
me) to what will further and advance this Work in me.

The Lord grant me and mine to be content, if he deny us to live of our own,
and will bring us to the daily bread of his finding, which he will have us wait
for, fresh and fresh from his own Table, without knowing any thing of it
beforehand. Peradventure there is a greater sweetness and blessing in such a
condition, than we can imagine, till we have tried it. This may add to my help,
even our making little haste to get out of our Troubles, patiently waiting till
God's time come, wherein he will open the Prison doors, either by Death, or
some other way, as he please, for the magnifying his own great Name, not
suffering us to be our own chusers in any thing, as hitherto has been his way
with us.

And why should such a taking up Sanctuary in God, and desiring to continue a
Pilgrim and solitary in this World, whilst I am in it, afford still matter of
jealousy, distrust and rage, as I see it does, to those who are unwilling that
I should be buried and lie quiet in my grave, where I now am. They that press
so earnestly to carry on my Trial, do little know what presence of God may be
afforded me in it and issue out of it, to the magnifying of Christ in my body,
by Life or by Death. Nor can they (I am sure) imagine how much I desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, which of all things that can befall me, I
account best of all. And till then, I desire to be made faithful in my place
and station, to make confession of him before men and not deny his Name, if
called forth to give a public Testimony and Witness concerning him, and to be
herein nothing terrified. What then will the hurt be, that I can or shall
receive by the worst that man can do unto me, who can but kill the body, and
thereby open my Prison door, that I may ascend into the pleasures that are at
Christ's right hand, prepared for those that testify and openly discover their
love to him, by not loving their lives unto the death. Surely this will prove
better, than to prefer sin or evil (so much as in appearance) unto Affliction
and the Cross, which Christ would have me take up daily and follow him in.

If the Storm against us grow still higher and higher, so as to strip us of all
we have, the Earth is still the Lords and the fullness thereof; he has a good
storehouse for us to live upon. There is nothing more destructive to us every
way then the uncertainty we are in.

God can, and (if he think fit) will chalk out some way, wherein he may appear
by his Providence to choose for us, and not leave us to our own choice. And
being contracted into that small compass, which he shall think fit to reduce us
unto, we may perhaps meet with as true inward contentement, and see as great a
mercy in such a sequestration from the World, as if we were in the greatest
outward prosperity.

I know nothing that remains unto us, but like a tossed Ship in a storm, to let
our selves be tossed and driven with the Winds, till he that can make these
storms to cease, and bring us into a safe Haven, do work out our deliverance
for us. I doubt not but you will accordingly endeavor to prepare for the worst.

March 7. 1661.-62.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Epistle to the Reader.
Page 1. line 30. leave out, if, and now.

In the Epistle General.
Page 6. l. 9. f. well, r. dwell. P. 7. l. 30. f. manhead, r. manhood. (the
same word is so misprinted all along, and to be so corrected) P. 8. l. 23. f.
their, r. your. P. 10. l. 39. leave out, or would not. P. 15. l. 17. f. or, r.
nor. and l. 37. r. see him not. P. 21. l. 30, 31. leave out, the fountain of
these outward senses, his inferior part, to be in his Soul or Spirit. and l.
37. f. his, r. its. P. 23. l. 17. r. much as hearers. P. 24. l. 22. f. and, r.
which. l. 23. leave out, in. P. 25. l. 9. f. of his, r. for his. P. 26. l. 10.
f. are, r. seem. l. 40. f. duly, r. daily. and f. by, r. find.. P. 27. l. 9. f.
other, r. one. and l. 40. leave out, not. P. 28. l. 6. f. by, r. amongst. P.
29. l. 7. f. first, r. last. l. 25. f. perfection, r. perfective. l. 29. r. to
the. P. 30. l. 22. f. his, r. Christ's. l. 28. leave out, which. P. 33. l. 1^ f.
nor, r. or. and l. 23. f. by, r. thereby. P. 34. l. 8. f. his, r. its. and l.
28. f. into, r. unto. P. 35. l. 7. r. witnessing in every respect. l. 39. f.
their, r. the. P. 37. l. 3. f. a, r. as. P. 38. l. 27. f. our, r. open. P. 43.
l. 14. f. so, r. to. l. 37. f. Monarchs, r. Monarchies; so p. 44. l. 8. P. 45.
l. 14. f. whereby, r. whereby. P. 48. l. 25. f. heads, r. headship. and l. 35.
f. one, r. his own. P. 52. l. 23. f. directed, r. discerned. P. 53. l. 21. f.
duty, r. duties.

Many other obscurities through the mistake of words, and misplacing of Points,
have happened in the Printing of this General Epistle, by reason of the several
difficulties that attended its Publication: It being twice taken in the Press,
and two Presses, well furnished with Materials, taken away in the doing of it.

Errata in The Face of the Times.
Page 64. line 26. for form runder, read former under. P. 70. l. 33. f. unto,
r. into. and l. 37. leave out, or. P. 78. l. 36. f. o, r. or. P. 95. l. 10. f.
doubtess, r. doubtless.


