VOX JVVENILIS: OR, THE Loyal Apprentices VINDICATION OF THE Design and
Promoters of their late Humble Address to His Majesty.
IT has always been the Policy of our Phanatick Machivilians to obtrude the
Execution of their Rebellious Designs upon the most Rash and unthinking sort of
men: And upon this Account we find in the Story of the late Times, That the
giddy Multitude being betrayed into Insurrections by the specious Pretenses of
Contending for their own Liberties and Rights, was thought the most likely Way
to work the Subversion of the Government, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical.

And for the same Reason were several Apprentices of the City of London imposed
upon, and made use of by the Broachers of that horrid Rebellion: for that some
of them wanting the benefit of Education, and all, of Experience, they might be
the more easily instigated to give the first Onset upon Magistracy. Accordingly
in the Year 1640. May, 9. We find a Paper fixed at the Exchange, to Exhort the
Apprentices to Sack the House of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury at Lambeth;
which about 500 of them were drawn in to Attempt accordingly, though they were
there repulsed, and some of them afterward made an Example for their
Insolence: And this we may conclude was a Project not Originally their own, but
of some Factious Engineers, who thought it their Interest to set them on work.

The next Account we have of them in the History of those Times, is when no
less than 600 were disposed to March to White Hall to demand Justice against
the Earl of Strafford, whereof the greater number were Apprentices.

And again to draw nearer in their Affronts to Majesty, we after hear of
several Mutinous Apprentices, who in a Tumultuous manner resorted to White Hall
and Westminster, to the Affrightment of the King himself.

And to fill up the measure of their Wickedness, In the next place we find many
of them in the Year 1648. Listing themselves into Essex's Army, by the
invitation of the Rebels, who had taken care to free them from their Servitude
upon that Condition.

But the Ingenuous Lads could not always be so abused, For when his Late
Majesty was a Prisoner, in detestation of so vile an Act, we find the
Apprentices take Courage enough to set upon a part of the Trained Bands, and
very fairly rout them; divide themselves into Parties, whereof one goes toward
White Hall, and was there suppressed, But at Night they rally again, Surprise
the two Prisons of Newgate and Ludgate, seize a Drake-Piece from the Lord
Mayor, and in the Morning labor to get Arms, and break open some Salesmens
Shops of Ammunition, and muster the Magazine at Leaden Hall, Crying out FOR GOD
AND KING CHARLES: and though by this bustle they could do the King no Service,
yet we find that Loyalty still sprung in their Hearts; for when General Monk
was on his Journey to London, he receives Advice from Commissary Clarges, that
several Apprentices had made Insurrection in Favor of him against Fleetwood's
Party, and had declared for the restoring A Parliament and Magistracy, which
they said was suppressed by the Committee of Safety (who (by the way) had
Emitted a Proclamation to prevent getting hands to Petitions:) In this Affair
were Twenty wounded, and Two killed, and at last they were all Defeated by
Coll. Hewson.

In short, we find our London Youngsters bravely veering about, and
demonstrating their earnest desire to reestablish King CHARLES the Second, in
His Rightful Throne.

And there he is, and that he may there sit undisturbed and safe from the
Treasonable Designs of any kind of Rebel either Papist or Phanatick, it is the
firm Resolution of the Loyal Apprentices of the City of London never to be
wanting to demonstrate their Loyalty and Readiness to assist the King with
their Lives and Fortunes too when they come to enjoy them: And that no Villain
should dare to affront their good Prince, nor any sly insinuating Rebel have
any Hopes to corrupt their Allegiance as they did heretofore, they have
declared to the World their steady Loyalty, by their late Address which was
presented to his Majesty, and received a favorable Acceptance.

The Subscription of which by many Thousand Hands, is not all neither, For we
make no doubt but that there are Twenty Thousand more, as Brisk and Valiant
Young Men that have not had the opportunity to give this Testimony of their
Loyalty, or else have been forbid to do it by their Ill-Principl'd Masters, or
else whose Names are Lost in Gathering by the Malicious Contrivance of no Good
Subjects to his Majesty, whose wills are as ready, and their Resolutions as
strong to stand by his Majesty, and to Guard his Person from his Enemies under
what names so ever distinguished, and that think their Lives too little to
spend in his Service: And let all the Enemies of King CHARLES II. take this for
granted and Beware.

But since a sort of unmannerly Backbiters have endeavored to represent the
Design and Promoters of our Address in as ugly a Shape as they could; We are
resolved to speak a word in our own Vindication, where by the way we shall not
do Mr. Janeway the honor to take any further Notice of his scandalous
reflections than as they are common to others of his Church. But we will
suppose whatsoever Objections Malice it self can raise against a thing of this
nature.

First, Some suggest that we are set on work by Papists, Jesuits, and the Lord
knows who.

Secondly, Others, That the Authors and Designers of the Address are scandalous
Ruffians, as Mr. Janeway is pleased to call us.

Thirdly, That we procured Subscriptions by indirect Means, drawing in idle
Fellows by Pots of Ale: And that the Subscribers are all Persons of no
Reputation.

Fourthly, Suppose we were never so good Boys, and did it for never so good
Ends; yet, forsooth, it does not belong to us, and that Apprentices ought not
to meddle with State-Matters.

And Lastly, That it is a ready way to create a misunderstanding amongst the
People, And that it being a kind of Combination, may cause a Disturbance
amongst the Youth of the City.

For the first, That we were influenced by Papists, It Is false; for the
Contrivers were all of the Protestant Religion, as it is now Established by
Law: And we are certain there was never a Jesuit in any Corner of the Room
where it was first Debated. And besides, our very Address declares the
contrary; for Papists, as well as others, are the Party we aim at.

To the Second, That the Projectors of this Design are Scandalous Persons and
Ruffians. To the Suggesters of this, the Scotch-man's Answer to Bellarmine is
sufficient; It Is a loud Lie: for we are all Honest, Sober Fellows, and born of
honest Parents.

To the Third, That by indirect ways we procured Hands. We answer, that we
never crossed the Water to the Hope on Bear-Garden days, to offer to get Hands
there; nor were ever concerned to create a Bull-baiting, on purpose to draw the
Rabble in, to fill up our Number, as some of the famous Essex-Patriots did to
fill up their Petition for a Parliament. We never went to any Country-Fairs,
amongst the Ballad-singers; nor in all Humility addressed our selves to the
little Boys of a Free School to pleasure us with two or three hundred Hands. We
never hired any one to subscribe, nor ever told a Refuser that we would put him
in our black Book, as Mr. S. H. did those that would not sign his Good old
Cause-Petition. We never called a Conventicle, to get the Well-Wishers
together: but honestly left our Papers where we thought fit, though the
Republican Rats had so little Manners to gnaw them in pieces when they were
full of Hands.

As to the Persons that subscribed, let those have a care that scandalize any
one Man of them.

And as to the next Objection, and that which has done Us much prejudice in our
Proceedings, That we meddle with State-Matters that don't concern Us.

We Answer, That truly we think it belongs as much to Us to Thank the KING for
His Good Government, and to Testify our Resolutions to Serve and Defend Him,
as it did the Porters and Broom-men that Subserib'd Sir G's. Petition, to tell
His Majesty when 'twas Good for Him to call a Parliament.

But as for State Affairs, we find none in the Address, we purposely did avoid
it; and upon that account, though we love to hear talk of the Succession going
in the right Line, yet we said never a word about it.

But if our Thanking His Majesty for His Gracious DECLARATION be a matter of
State; we Declare, we thought it had been for the satisfaction of Us as well as
Our Masters, or any body else; for when the World made such a Noise about the
Dissolution of the two last Parliaments, and some were so Impudent to speak
hard words of our KING about it; we were very glad at such a time to see His
Majesty Condescend to tell the World, and Us amongst the rest, that He had very
good Reason to do what he did, whereby He removed all cause of Complaints or
Jealousy.

Now as we are infinitely sensible of the Great Benefits and Advantages, which
his Majesty has been pleased to hold forth unto us in This his most Gracious
Declaration; so we likewise Account our selves bound, by All the Ties of
Loyalty and Gratitude, humbly to present our Dutiful Acknowledgements to the
BEST OF SOVEREIGNS, and to declare unto the World our Firm and Unalterable
Resolutions to Expose our Lives and Fortunes in the Support, Maintenance and
Defense of our King and his Government. And though the sense of Honesty,
Justice and Allegiance was the Principal Motive that led us to This Address, we
had likewise some regard in it to the Vindication of our Credits, from the
Infamy that was cast upon us by a Pack of Common Scribliing Rascals, that made
the whole Nation ring with the Story of a Conspiracy among the Apprentices to
Engage the Nation in new Troubles; and the City in a Desperate and Bloody
Tumult, Insomuch that we could not do our selves Right, but by some Public
Manifestation of our Innocence.

Lastly, As to the Pretense of Those that Enviously Reflect upon this our
Proceeding, as a Design to Create Divisions and Misunderstandings among his
Majesty's Subjects, we have Diligently Informed our selves concerning the
Opinions and Practices of those People: and we find them to be, for the most
part Men of Dangerous Principles, as Anabaptists, Separatists, and other sorts
of Dissenters from the Church, and no less Enemies to the Civil Government. So
that their Quarrels to us is not for any fear they have of our Disturbing the
Public Peace; but for the Disappointment which our Conjunction has given to
their Designs; which they can never be able to put in Execution against so
powerful an Opposition.

So that if they call it a Combination we must needs maintain that it is both
an Honest and a Good One, and that it is so far ftom tending to make a Mutiny
and Disturbance, That it has given the City sufficient security against both;
For certainly our very Address it self is sufficient, to convince the World
that we are sensible of our Duty to our Sovereign; and supposing that, The same
Good Principle must necessarily influence us to pay that Obedience and Respect
which is due to all those that are in Authority under him: And seeing all the
Subscribers have therein really devoted themselves to his Majesty's Interest,
it is very improbable that they would make themselves guilty of any thing so
contrary and prejudicial thereunto, as are Mutinous and Disorderly
Insurrections.

And as the Intentions of our Hearts are Fair and Peaceable (for we will rather
dye than entertain so much as the least thought of any unlawful Enterprise) So
was the Time that we Pitched upon for our Address as Seasonable too, and much
more proper, than for the importunity of Peremptory and Factious Petitions. For
when the Phanaticks daily made their Boasts concerning the Number of their
Party; which Confidence made them so bold as to extend their Affronts even to
his Sacred Majesty, and which (for ought we knew) might give them hopes to
attempt the Subversion of the Established Government, which (the better to
Accomplish their Design) they had been so Industrious by Libelling and other
base Methods to defame: And seeing that several Essays were daily made to make
his Majesty's Subjects forfeit their Allegiance; and particularly upon our
selves by some that endeavored to amuse us with unnecessary Fears of the loss
of Religion and Trade, and such like specious pretenses: We thought it not
amiss (at such a time) according to the Example of our Superiors, humbly to
Address our selves to his Majesty, To Acquaint him what a Multitude of Brave
Loyal and True-hearted Lads he has near him, whose Hearty Affections to his
Person and Government, and their Loyal Union among themselves, would make them
not afraid when by him Commanded, To Confront the most Resolute and Formidable
Rebel: and whose Number would render them (if Occasion should be) no
inconsiderable Guard to his Royal Person.

And therein to convince all the Insinuating Factious Crew who endeavor to
seduce us, That we will never again be decoyed out of our Duty to our
Sovereign, and that though the Papists make the Phanaticks their Tools, yet we
will never become the Phanaticks.

To conclude, our Address having been honored with his Majesty's Princely
Approbation; and seeing the Design of it was Peaceable and Seasonable, as well
as Loyal and Dutiful, the World has no Reason to blame it, nor we to be ashamed
to own it.

LONDON: Printed for Charles Read. 1681.


