THE MEMORIAL OF THE HERE VAN DIE, Envoy Extraordinary Of His Electoral
HIGHNESS of BRANDENBURGH. To the High and Mighty the Lords STATES GENERAL of
the UNITED PROVINCES: Delivered May the 29th. 1864.
High and Mighty Lords
THE underwritten Envoy Extraordinary from his Electoral Highness of
Brandenburgh has by special Order of His Most Gracious Master in the last
Conference Represented at large to your High and Mightinesses, Deputies: The
grief which his Electoral Highness had upon him, concerning the Imminent and
almost Inevitable danger into which this State was Involved by the Consequence
of the War between those two Mighty Crowns.

That his Electoral Highness had for many, and Natural Reasons taken to heart,
the Welfare and Conservation of this State, as were it his own, and did always
continue his Sincere and Cordial Friendship.

That his Electoral Highness at Times and Occasions has given evident Proofs
thereof.

That his Electoral Highness had never found Affairs, so Intricate and
Desperate as now.

That there was no properer Means to be thought upon, to avoid their Total
Ruin, then by a most speedy Peace, or Cessation, to make an end of the said
War, and to that end to take a prompt (or ready) Resolution.

That this Work should be taken in hand in good earnest.

That it was not time now to Treat about this or the other Conditions.

That it was to be feared that delay of Time would make it daily more difficult.

That this has been seen already, and was further to be feared.

That it would be hard to answer to God and to Posterity, if through Despair
they should let all things Run on to Confusion, and always to Embrace too late
those Conditions which are no more to be obtained.

That his Electoral Highness has hitherto often diverted, or at least delayed
many Inconveniences like to happen to this State. For to give your High and
Mightinesses time to think upon their Conservation and Safety, and to deliver
themselves out of that Fire which effectually was kindled in the Low Countries.

But that Matters were now gone so far, that his Electoral Highness could see
no further how to do any thing in the Business, but with Grief and Trouble to
behold the Ruinous Effects that may follow, seeing they would not hearken to
his so faithful and often Repeated Warnings.

That time would manifest how Upright and Sincere his Electoral Highness's
Intentions toward this State and the General Welfare has been, and that his
Intentions have been quite contrary to what has often been published by bad
men.

That the Great God who knows his Electoral Highness Mind, That it had an
Aspect that they through Desparate Resolution, or rather Irresolution, would
Involve and Consume themselves, and all their Neighbors into that Fire which
is already kindled.

That by all means we ought to preserve Germany, and to prevent all
Disquietness there.

That they must not flatter themselves here with Hopes of any Forces from those
Quarters.

That his Electoral Highness did request them to Reflect upon all these Things
seriously and without delay; and that he did hope that this his Well-meaning
Representation (to which end his Electoral Highness has sent the underwritten
Express) might take some Effect upon the Minds of the Rulers of this State, and
put your High and Mightinesses in mind in this Distraction, what may be
Convenient for the Preservation of theirs, and their Neighbors Peace, that so
they may by Gods Grace Transfer to Posterity both Religion and Liberty, as the
two dearest and weightiest Pledges which their Forefathers with so much Blood
and Goods have obtained, and not to put the same at once, and with so much
Disadvantage in the Seal.

The Underwritten thought fit to Repeat this by Memorial, That so your High
and Mightinesses might the better apprehend the Well-meaning Representation of
his Electoral Highness, and thereupon without Delay of Time might fall upon the
Business.

Hague 29th May, 1684. Was Signed FRID. WILL. VAN DIE.

LONDON, Printed by Geo. Croom, at the Sign of the Blew Ball over against
Baynard's Castle in Thames Street. 1684.


