Virtue Rewarded; OR, THE IRISH Princess. A NEW NOVEL.

She never saw Courts, yet Courts could have undone
with untaught Looks, and an unpracticed Heart;
Her Nets, the most prepared, could never shun,
For Nature spread them in the scorn of Art.
Gond. lib. 2. Cant. 7. LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, at the Post House in
Russel Street, in Covent Garden. 1693.

THE Dedicatory Epistle To the Incomparable MARINDA.
Madam,
THIS Novel throws it self at your Feet, and pays you Homage as its Master's
Representative:

It has been the product of some leisure hours, and will I hope do me this
second kindness, to divert you in the Reading, as it did me in the Making. I
need not, as others, give any reason for the Dedication; since to be made by
me, is sufficient to entitle it yours:

But that is not the only claim it can lay to your Favor; for in describing
the Marinda of this Novel, I borrow from you, not only her Name, but some of
the chief Beauties I adorn her with:

Though you may imagine she had no mean ones of her own, since (being but a
private Gentlewoman) she could by their help alone make so sudden a Conquest
over the Heart of a Prince, who had certainly (in so many Courts as he had been
in) seen very agreeable Faces, set off with the additional Splendour of Quality,
yet none of them had that effect over him, which hers gained without those
advantages. Besides, her true Character suits very well with you:

She was an Innocent Country Virgin, ignorant of the Intrigues and Tricks of
the Court Ladies; her Virtue, like yours, untainted and undecayed, needed none
of their Artificial Embellishments to guild it over; and that Innocence which
appears eminently in both of you, as little wants these Ladies Artifices to set
it off, as you do their Fucus for your Faces; since true Innocence is as far
beyond Dissimulation, as your Color is beyond all the Paint of the Town; in
both of these you give Nature as signal a Triumph over Art, as ever she had in
any two things whatsoever. I wish I could liken you to her in one thing more;
that is, That your Servant were of as high Quality as hers; but this wish is
made merely for your sake:

For to me, as you are more precious than a Crown, so is the Title of a Prince
inferior to that Glorious one, of being the

Humblest of your Servants.

The PREFACE TO THE Ill-natured READER.
THe Duchess of Suffolk, entertaining once at her Table the Bloody Bonner,
Bishop of London, sat first by the Duke her Husband, but the Duke removing her
thence, she went and sat by the Bishop, saying, That since she could not sit
by him she loved best, she would next him she loved worst:

So dear dogged Reader, from writing an Epistle to her I love best, like the
Duchess, I change and remove to you whom I love worst: for Writers hate none
so much as Ill-natured Readers:

Perhaps you will ask, why then this Epistle to you whom I hate, and not rather
to the Good-natured? Why for the same reason that the Duchess sat by Bonner,
merely to pass my Jest on you; though another may be given, which is, That
since Prefaces were partly designed to make the Reader Indulgent and Favorable
to the Book he is going to read, there is no need of a Preface to others, since
the Good-Natured will be kind to it of themselves; but it is you, that put us to
the trouble of Prefacing. Therefore to indear it the more to you know, that the
main Story is true, I heard of a Gentleman who was acquainted with the Irish
Princess, and knew all the Intrigue, and having from him so faithful a Relation
of it, I made the Scene the very same where it was transacted, the time the
same, going on all the way with the Truth, as far as convenience would permit;
I only added some few Circumstances, and interlined it with two or three other
Stories, for variety sake, which is as necessary to the setting off the true
Relation, and making it pleasant, especially to you nice Readers, as Sauces are
to the dressing up a Dish of Meat, to provoke the sickly Appetite it is
designed for. I Printed it for the ease of her whom it was made for; if you
like it, much good may do you; if you will not believe it, you have Liberty of
Conscience; but whether you believe, or disbelieve, like, or dislike, is
indifferent to me, since in such a trivial thing as this, I no more fear
discredit by writing a bad one, than I could hope for Fame in writing it well.
But I believe you are eager to see what is in the Book, and therefore I Will
detain you no longer.

Farewell.
Virtue Rewarded; OR, THE IRISH Princess.
AS that mighty River which overflows Egypt, and, with its prevailing Torrent,
often drowns those Provinces, which Nature only designed it to water, yet
proceeds at first from such mean beginnings, that most Geographers have been
unable to trace it to its Spring:

So Loves swifter and more violent Stream has its first rise from such small
Channels, such trifling circumstances, that the Heart it self can scarce
perceive its Original; nay very often does not discern its progress, till it is
too strong for it, and so the sudden vigor of its Torrent surprises the unwary
Lover, just as the Zudder Sea, driven with a North-west Wind, breaks the
Diques, and overwhelms the drowzy Hollander, before he suspects any danger. Yet
so Natural is Self-conceit, and so Universal our pretense to Knowledge, that
few there are who will be so Modest, as to own themselves wholly Ignorant of
any thing which you shall ask them a Reason for. Hence it is, that, among other
things, Love too is understood by all, and not one but will give his Verdict of
it as soon as you ask him:

The Statesman will tell you it is caused by want of Ambition; the Merchant
for want of Self-Interest; the Soldier for want of Action, and a thirst after
Honor; and the Scholar will prove to you, that it is gotten by Idleness:

But it is with this, as with the Philosophers Stone, whose mysterious Nature
all guess at, and none know what it is, for it very often breaks all the Rules
that are prescribed against it:

Sets upon the Statesman at Court, and overcomes his Ambition; seizes on the
Merchant in his Counting House, and weighs down his Interest; finds the Scholar
in his Study, and teaches him a new System of Philosophy which baffles all the
old; wounds the daring Soldier, even when he is clad in Steel, and makes him
tamely submit to Captivity, in the very midst of his Conquests:

The Story that I am going to relate will be an excellent proof of this, being
an Instance of an extraordinary sort:

It makes Love triumphant at once over two of these his greatest Enemies, the
Noise of War, and the Vanity of Ambition; and shows you a Prince of great
Valor, guarded equally by both of these, could not defend himself from the
Powerful Eyes of a Forreigner, and one as far beneath him in Quality, as Love
afterward placed her above him, when he lay at her Feet imploring her Mercy.
When our present King had fought the Battle at the Boyn, and drove the Routed
Enemy into Limerick, he endeavored to root up the War, by Reducing that
obstinate City, that durst hold out alone against the force of three Kingdoms,
united in a Royal Army; he had then amongst his Foreign Troops several petty
Princes, who fought under him; some as Volunteers, to learn the Art of War
under so Great, so Experienced a Master; some as Soldiers of Fortune, who
thought by their Valor to recommend themselves to his Favor, and obtain by
that means some Important Charge in the Army, the Honor and Profit of which
might exalt and maintain them suitable to those High Characters which their
Titles deserved. Among the latter sort may be reckoned the Prince of S -- g,
the smallness of whose Principality not affording him an Income agreeable to
his High Title, and Higher Mind, he was resolved to acquire that Plenty which
his Fortune had denied him, and show by his Valor, that he was nothing
beholding to her for giving him Titles, but rather that she was unkind, in not
giving him as plentiful a Revenue, as suited with the largeness of his Heart,
and the vaster extent of his Merit. To this intent he came over Sea in a small
Command, if we consider him as a Prince, though in a Post eminent enough to
give him some occasions of publishing his Valor; 'twas in this Station he was,
when our Forces were from all parts drawing together to invest Limerick, in
order to which our Prince was to march through Clonmell, a City in the County
of Tipperary, situated in a large Plain near the Sewer, now grown obscure,
formerly famous for the great Battle fought just by it, between two Brothers
who were Competitors for the Crown of Mounster; when that famous Island had
five Crowned Heads to Govern its Inhabitants. It was the Chief Street of this
Town our Prince was marching through, on Horseback, at the Head of his Men,
bowing low to both sides, which were filled all along with People, who crowded
thither to see those Arms which were to secure them from the Enemies of their
Liberty and Religion; when lifting up his Eyes toward the Windows, which were
filled with the chief Gentry of the City, he espied in one of them a Beauty
which fixed his sight, as if she alone were worthy his Attention:

He continued looking that way, and turned not his Eyes off the Window, till
the fieryness of his Horse (which could not endure to stand still) had carried
him beyond the House, and left the delightful Prospect behind him; and
afterward he was so wholly taken up with the thoughts of what he had seen,
that he rode on without regarding which way, till one of his Officers rode up,
and told him that his Highness was past the House which was designed him for
his Lodging:

The P. at this began to recollect himself, and giving Orders concerning the
good Behavior of his Soldiers, gave them leave to repair to their several
Quarters, whilst he by the Head Officers was Conducted to his; after some
Ceremonies past they repaired to their rest, and left the Prince at liberty to
take as much of his, as the inquietude of his Thoughts would permit him. He
found himself tired with Traveling, and desirous of rest, yet incapable of
taking any:

He found his Thoughts much disordered, and went to Bed to see whether Sleep
would compose them:

His Soul, like the Bodies of those that have the Rheumatism, seemed very
weary; yet as their Limbs are still uneasy, though on the softest Beds, so was
his Mind; and coveted sleep as much as their Limbs do rest, and could as little
obtain it. O Love, thou most dangerous Distemper of the Soul! most dangerous
because we do not perceive Thee, till Thou art too far gone to be cured:

Thou subtle Enemy! who take the strongest Hearts, because Thou always usest
Surprise; and undermining our Reason, never appearest in the light, till Thou
art too far entered to be driven out: 'Twas thus, Treacherous Deity, Thou did
overcome our Prince, by attacking him when he least was aware of Thee; he
little feared Hostility in a Town which he entered as a Friend; nor did he
expect that one, and that of the weaker Sex, should offer him Violence at the
head of his Battalion. He suspected the true Cause so little, that he wondered
at his own inquietude, and could not imagine what it was that could keep him
awake on a soft Bed, who used to sleep so sound in the Camp on a hard Quilt,
and often on the Ground:

However, awake he lay all night, and did not once close his Eyes, till
daylight shone in at his Window:

At the Sun's first appearance he got up, quite weary of his Bed, where he had
the worst Nights rest he ever took in his Life; for though he had endured the
hardship of many a cold night in Winter Camps; yet they all seemed easy and
pleasant, in comparison of this one Night's Fatigue; for all the thoughts in
those Camps of Blood and War, the dread of a neighboring Enemy, and the next
day's Battle, were not so troublesome to his Repose, as those of his coming
into this Town:

The whole Scene of his entrance intruded into his Thoughts; the Noise and
Hurry of the People was still in his Ears; and the Window, and the Charming
Spectator that looked out of it, seemed still before his Eyes:

Though he scarce mistrusted that it was gone so far with him, as to be in
Love; yet he was very desirous to come in Company with that beautiful-Stranger,
who had been so much in his Thoughts, and to satisfy himself whether she was
really so Lovely, as she appeared at a distance:

But neither knowing her Name, nor the place where she lived, he imagined that
nothing but accident could bring him to a second sight of her; but as he was
musing upon the difficulty of finding her out, Celadon, the Gentleman of his
Horse, came to bid him Good Morrow, and acquainted him, That two or three great
Officers were below, waiting for admittance to speak with him:

The Prince, who was glad of any thing that might be an amusement to his
troubled Mind, sent for them up, and received them with a great deal of
Civility:

After the first Complements, the Prince told them, He had Orders to await the
King's coming to the Town; and after some discourse of the Progress of Affairs
in general, they began to talk of the pleasure of Company, and how they should
spend those few days which they were to pass in the Town:

One proposed Training the Soldiers, another the Tavern, and the third a
Consort of Music; and when every one had past their Votes, the Prince bad
Celadon give his:

This Celadon was a young brisk English Cavalier, of a small Stature, but a
Soul sufficiently Great, and which disdained to think that the littleness of
his Body made him inferior to any one, either in open Valor in the Field, or
the management of an Intrigue at home:

And certainly never was any ones Humor more equally divided, between Love and
War, than his:

He was an exact Volunteer in both, and as he would hazard his Person any time,
and fight for him that would give him the best Promotion, so was he no less a
Soldier of Fortune in Love than War; would change his side often, offer his
Service to every Lady that would accept of it, and still was most hers, who was
readiest to reward him:

He was the Younger Brother of a good Family; and having gone into Foreign
Camps for a Livelihood, he had by his Courage, Wit, and Good Fortune, raised
himself so high into the Prince's favor, as to be made his Gentleman of Horse;
he being to speak in his turn, told the Prince, That since they had left him a
deciding Vote, he was for trying each of them by turns; and if they would begin
with the Music first, he would add to it one of his own most delighting
Divertisements, the Company of Women; and to that purpose, if the Prince
pleased to be that Night at the Ball, he would take care to invite all the
young Gentry of the Town to it:

The Prince told him he was the same he always thought him; that Celadon that
took Love to be as important an Affair of Life, as either Eating or Drinking,
and accordingly provided for it as carefully; this raillery brought on other
discourse, which lasted while Celadon went to make preparations for the Ball;
at last he came back and told them that all things were ready, and the Company
invited. On one side of the Town stood a large Country House, which though not
built after the Dorick Order, or the exacter neatness of Courtly Lodgings, yet
its largeness gave liberty to guess at the Magnificence and Hospitality of the
Owner:

It belonged to the Great Moracho, famous all over the Kingdom for his Riches,
particularly in his flocks of Sheep, as numerous as those of the mighty
Scythian, whose Son was the Terror of the World; or that Rich Man of the East,
whom the Turkish Chronicles make Steward to Alexander the Great:

All his Ground, far and near, was thick covered with his fleecy Wealth:

You would hare thought by their bleatings that you were in Arcadia, and
Shepherdism coming in fashion again: 'Twas this House which was pitched upon
for the Ball; and what place so fit for Dancing and innocent Mirth, as a
spacious Hall, whose Building, Size, and Furniture, altogether rustical,
imprinted such lively Idea's of Country Freedom, and Country Innocence:

Hither Celadon conducted our Prince and his Martial Company; their Music was
as good as the Town could afford, and their Reception suitable to the Riches
and Hospitality of him that entertained them. The Prince, who went thither,
rather to shun his former thoughts, than out of any inclination to the Company,
or the Dancing, sat by, a Looker-on:

Some of the Officers who were not so seriously bent, took out those whose
Face, Mien, or Shape pleased them the best, and in their several Dances either
showed their Skill, or at least pleased themselves with the conceit that they
did so. Celadon, who always employed such a time as this well, was not idle
now; but gazed on one, talked to another bowed to the third, and left none of
the Ladies unregarded; and as a cunning Hound, when he comes among a Herd of
Deer, singles out the best, and never changes Scent, till he runs him down, so
our skillful Hunter, who knew all the Mazes, Turnings, and Doublings in the
course of Love, ranged through all the Company of the fairer Sex, till he
lighted on the handsomest. He would not leave her, till he had prevailed with
her to be his Partner in a Country Dance; and though till she was drawn out few
observed her, because either Chance, or her own Modesty had placed her in a
dark part of the Room, yet when she came into the light, she alone drew the
admiration of all the Men, as she did the envy of the Women:

Her face was oval and somewhat thin, as if grief had but newly left it, yet
her looks were as cheerful, as if it had not left the least impression on her
mind; some signs of the Smallpox were just perceivable, yet they and her
thinness, instead of lessening, served rather to increase the repute of her
Beauty, while they showed how it had triumphed over those two great destroyers
of the handsomest Faces:

Her Forehead was high and smooth, as if no Frown had ever deformed it to a
wrinkle; and as much beyond the whiteness of the rest of her Sex, as theirs is
beyond the browner Complexion of ours; her Neck, and all the parts of her Face
were equally Snowy, except her Cheeks; but they, as if they received their
color from the Rays which her Eyes darted down on them, were of such a lively
Carnation, as if that and the rest of her Face were at a strife, which of those
two Colors were the best. Her Eyes were of the same azure of the clearest
Summer Skies, and, like them too, so shining, that it would dazzle you to look
on them, and her Brows, which grew over them in an exact Arch, were inclining
to a light color, as if they got it from the brightness of those Beams which
shone from beneath them. Her Stature was neither so low as that Sex usually is,
nor so till as to seem too masculine; her Shape was curiously slender, and all
her Limbs after a feminine delicacy, but she had withal a Deportment so Great
and so Majestic, that the comeliness of the stronger Sex was mixed with the
graces of the weaker:

And that the stateliness of her Carriage seemed to command that Love and
Adoration, which the sweetness of her Face did invite to. I will not describe
how she was dressed, let those Ladies be set off with such helps, who like
Peacocks owe their Price to their Feathers; hers were no part of her Beauty,
they were put on for Modesty, not for Ornament; and served her as Clouds do the
Sun, to screen her more glorious Beauties from the Eyes of weak Mankind, who
would else be as infallibly ruined by the sight of the one, as by the excessive
heat of the other. The Prince, who sat looking on the Dance, no sooner saw
her, but he knew her to be the same whom he had seen in the Window, and whom he
so much longed to come acquainted with, he was overjoyed that he had gotten an
opportunity he so little expected; he was so eager to speak to her, and so
impatient till the Dance was over, that any one who had observed him might
easily have perceived it:

As soon as the Dance was ended, he called to Celadon, and telling him that he
could not but be weary, proffered to supply his place: Celadon, with a great
deal of submission told him, that he was willing to resign any place to his
Highness, and so sat down:

In the mean time a Tune began, and the Lady waited for her Partner; but when
she saw the Prince come, she blushed, and desired his Highness would pardon
her, if she prayed him to choose another, because she was weary:

The Prince would not allow of that excuse; but when she Danced several times
wrong, and put the Company out, and was out of Countenance her self, he thought
her blushing proceeded from her not understanding the Dance, and so accepted
the excuse, and sat down with her. Having a mind to discourse with her, and
not having so good a command of the English Tongue, he spoke to her in French,
and asked her, did she understand him? she answered him again in the same
Language:

Sir, I have just such a smattering of it as you have of English, but your
Highness shows me so wise a President, of not venturing to discourse in a
Language which I cannot express my self well in, that I ought to follow it, and
dare no more speak French to your Highness, than you will English to me. Madam,
said the Prince, though you speak the French Tongue so prettily, that one does
not know which becomes your Mouth better, that, or your own, yet e're a one of
them is thrown away on you; for that tempting Face speaks so much of it self,
that had Nature tied up your Tongue, yet your Looks alone have power enough to
lead all Mankind astray, and draw them more attractively after you by their
Eyes, than the most persuading Eloquence can by the Ears. Sir, replied the
Lady, Had your Highness made these Compliments to some celebrated Beauty,
custom would have prepared her an Answer; but to one that is so unused to them
as I am, they come so unexpected, that I must desist Discoursing, as I did just
now from Dancing, not so much because I am weary of it, as because I do not
know how to go on; and really, with us Country Maids, our Tongues walk like our
Feet, and as our Country Dances follow an easy methodical way, so does our
Talk; whilst your Court Wit, like your dances, are so made up of Art in one
place, a cunning Jest, or a hard Step in another; your Fancies, like your Feet,
do caper so high, and are so nimble, that our plainness seems ridiculous in
both, and yours is so difficult to us, that it gives us no hope of ever
arriving to as much as a faint imitation. Dancing, said the Prince, was
designed in imitation of Courtship, the Ladies flying off from the Man to show
her Coyness; her sometimes coming forward, and sometimes retiring, her
inconstancy; and their meeting at last signifies their Marriage; now if the
Fashion be here as it is in our. Country, to kiss at last, in faith, Madam, I Will
leave Poets and Dancing-Masters to show their Skill in Talking and Dancing, and
care not how unskillfully I go on in either, so that I may be sure of my reward
in the end: If you go no farther than a bare kiss, replied the Lady smiling,
few would refuse your Highness that reward, to have the honor of Dancing with
you; but if you carry on the Simile so far as to relate to Marriage, your
Highness should consider, that the sport of Courtship, like that of Dancing, is
quite gone when it comes to the kiss; and no more pleasure remains afterward
to the poor tired Dancers, than that of thinking it over again; for then, as an
old saying of ours has it, our dancing days are gone. As she spoke those words,
the Dance ended, and some of the Company coming up to hearken to their
discourse, the Lady rose from her Seat, and took her leave; the Prince could
neither persuade her to stay, nor to give him leave to wait on her home; then
he desired to know where she lived, but she begged his Pardon:

The Prince, who was resolved to know her, sent his Page to observe her, and to
take notice where she lodged, and so fell in talk with the other Company,
continuing it with one or other, till the lateness of the night broke up the
Ball, and sent every one to his several home; the Prince had not been long at
his, e're the Page came and brought him word, that he had housed the Lady in
the High Street, that she lived there with a Gentlewoman who was her
Mother-in-law:

The Prince who was so uneasy before, and so desirous to see her, since he had
that interview he wished for, began to be more at ease, though more in Love
than before, and whereas his thoughts were formerly distracted several ways,
now they ran all on her; the Ball, the Dancing, and all the rest of the
Entertainment was as faintly remembered, as if he had only seen them in a Dream;
but what she had said or done, was as fresh, as if it were that very moment
acting over again:

One while he fancied he saw her Dancing, another, that he saw with what a
grace she spoke, and every word of her discourse was as ready in his memory, as
if they were the only ones engraven there; no wonder if those who will not give
credit to the Stories of Apparitions, say, the Persons are deluded by the
excess of Fear, and the strength of their own Fancies, for the force of
imagination is as strong in Love as it is in Fear, and makes the cheated
Amourist still think he sees the Fair one, and though she be an hundred mile
off, yet her Face, her Air, her Mien, and every thing that formerly pleased his
sight, seems still to dance before it:

And as the guilty Conscience of the Murderer presents the Fantom of the
Murdered to his view, so Lovers are haunted with Specter too, only the
Murderers appear in a dreadful, the Lovers in a pleasing Form. This Night had
our Prince several of these delightful Visions, which were so intruding, that
neither his Reason could banish them while he was awake, nor Sleep free him
from them in his Dreams; as soon as he waked he sent for Celadon, and having
ordered him to shut the Door, and sit down on his Bedside, he spoke thus to
him.

When you went with me to the Emperor's Court, do you remember how many
excellent Beauties we saw there? What variety too, Black, Brown, and Light, yet
all fair to Perfection; you may remember how indifferent I was to them all,
that I never threw away an hours discourse on them, unless it were to rally the
Pride, the Hypocrisy, the Ambition, and the other Vanities which that Sex is
given to; and then though I seemed in Jest, yet I took what I spoke to be
truth, nor did I think that the low opinion I had of Womankind would ever let
me show them any regard beyond bare Complaisance: But I was deceived, for I
have in these two days had a greater alteration in my humor, than I believed
my whole life could produce: By your words, Sir, I should guess, said, Celadon,
that you are in Love, but the consideration of the place where we are corrects
that thought, since in this Island there is scarce one worthy your high
Affections. I wish you could persuade me to that, replied the Prince; but will
not you recant your own Opinion, when I recall to your mind the Beautiful
Partner you last Night danced with? The young Gentlewoman, replied he, had as
large a stock of Beauty, as the most Romantic Lover can either wish or imagine
in a Mistress; and indeed, if your Highness has a mind to Intrigue away this
Winter that is coming on, I could not wish you a pleasanter than she is likely
to make, if her Wit be answerable to her Beauty: By what small trial I have had
of her, answered the Prince, I believe it falls very little short of it; and if
my Love for her increases a little longer, at the same rate as it has done
since its birth, I fear 'twill outlive more Campaigns with me, than I shall
Winters with her: Why sure, said Celadon, your Highness does not design any
more than a Jest in it; for though her Person deserves a higher station in the
World, yet, since Fortune has given her neither Quality nor Riches suitable to
it, you are not so prodigal a Lover as Mark Anthony was, to quit your
Principality, and your Honor besides, for a Mistress: There Is no need of that,
said the Prince; don't lay such Blockadoes in my way to her; for be it ever so
long, or difficult, I will use both Patience and Diligence to overcome it; for
some way or other I am resolved to enjoy her; and if you will assist me, I
shall not think all that ever I can do for you will make you too large a
recompense. Your Highness, said Celadon, never yet gave me an opportunity to
show my diligence in serving you; but if you please to tell me how you intend
to bring this about, I will follow your directions to the utmost of my Power:
All that I would desire of you at present, said the Prince, is to make me an
English Song, because I am not well enough acquainted with the Tongue; make it
to the Tune we heard sung to Count Epithalamium, and with your Violin and my
Guittar we'll go this Night and Serenade her: I Will take my leave of you now,
said Celadon, and in the Afternoon I Will wait on you with the Song. Celadon
failed not his promise, but came in the Evening, and sat drinking with the
Prince till Midnight, and then they sallied out, to go to the place where they
meant to Serenade, taking the Prince's Page with them, both to carry their
Instruments, and show them the House. When they were come under the Window,
they played a while in Consort, till they thought they had awakened those of
the House, and then the Prince bad Celadon give over, and setting his Guittar
to answer his Voice, with a passionate Air he sang this Song,

WHy should my fair Enchantress sleep,
And yet not dream at all of those,
Whom Love of her in torment keep,
And hinders from the least repose:
She has kindled fires in my breast,
Which keep me still awake,
And robs her Lover of that rest,
Which she her self does take.
When he had Sung thus far he heard the Casement open, and one whisper out of
it: Who are you that distrust your own Person and Wit so much, that you make
your Court by Music, to help out the one; and choose Midnight for the time to
pay your visits in, that Darkness may conceal the defects of the other? The
Prince (because 'twas a Woman's Voice, and because he would willingly have it
so) concluded that it was his Mistress, and therefore answered her: Those,
Madam, who have such Beauty as yours to plead with, ought in their own defense
to come in the dark, because in the light, the sight of you would take up so
much of their thoughts; that when they have most need of them, to express the
greatness of their passion, they would then be at the greatest loss what to say:
You little think how much you are in the right (said she) for could you see me
'twould spoil your Complementing; for there is nothing so much a bugbear to Wit
as an ugly Face: Saying this she clapped to the Window, and nothing which the
Prince could afterward say gained any return. He, thinking his Sport over for
that Night, looked about for Celadon, but no Celadon to be found, nor could the
Page give any tidings of him:

The Prince thought he might be gone home before him, and therefore followed
him, in expectation to know how he came to leave him, and to tell him of his
Discourse with the Lady. Here perhaps the Reader may charge Celadon with
Incivility, in running home before the Prince, when he had promised to keep him
company; but let the hasty Censurer have as much patience as the Prince
himself, who did not expect to see Celadon, till he got to his Lodging, and
when he came there, was as far to seek for him as ever; but the next morning,
the first who came into his Chamber was Celadon, his Complexion was wan, and
looked as if he was much out of order:

The Prince, who guessed he had been upon an Amor, asked him, what made him
look so ill. After having begged your Highness's Pardon, said he, for my
rudeness in leaving you, I Will tell such an accident which befell me since, that
your Highness will think a sufficient punishment for it:

While you were Singing, I saw at a little distance something, which, by the
whiteness, I guessed to be either a Ghost, or a Woman, and as I am not afraid
of either, my Curiosity prompted me to see which it was, I walked that way, and
found it to be, not a Ghost, but which was worse, a Shee-Devil in a Night-rail,
by which I concluded it to be of that Sex which I had most inclination to keep
company with at that time of Night; the place too seemed to favor the
Temptation, being an old Abbey, where there was no body nigh to interrupt us:

When I came near her, she broke silence first, and said, O Lord, Sir, you have
staid very long, I have been waiting for you this hour: Though at first, by her
standing there, I thought her Common, yet these words made me take her for some
Lover who had made an Assignation; I was resolved to personate him whom the
meeting was designed for; and lest she should know my Voice, I answered in a
low tone, that business hindered me, but I would soon make amends for my
absence:

Just as he spoke this last word, be runs to the Chamber Door, and having
seized a Maid of the House, he hall'd her in, crying out, This is the Jilt that
played me the trick, but I Will be revenged on her: The Maid half dead with fear,
could say nothing for her self, but cried to the Prince for help; he seeing her
gentilely dressed, and thinking 'twas his Landlord's Daughter, interposed his
Authority, and ordering the Door to be shut, commanded Celadon to be calmer,
till he enquired into the matter, and asked the Stranger whether she knew what
was the reason of his Anger:

The Maid desiring that his Highness would hear her, and then judge between
them, began thus: I perceive by this Gentleman's Anger, that he has been grossly
abused; that I have been in some sort the cause, I am sorry; but to show you I
am a very innocent one, I Will give you a relation of some passages of my life,
which though publicly known, yet never should have been told you by me, were
it not on such an important account as this, the allaying this Gentleman's rage
against me, and the hindering him from noising any thing abroad, which might be
to the prejudice of my Reputation:

My Father is a Country Gentleman, descended from a good Family, but his
Ancestors were so improvident, as to spend most of their Estate, and leave him
but a small remainder to maintain a great many Children:

I am the youngest of all, the Favorite both of Father and Mother, whose
greatest care has been to Match me so, that they may live to see me happy. I
had choice enough; for these three or four years I have had little rest from
Suitors, who from all parts of the Country solicited me:

My Fortune, I believe, they did not court me for, because I saw several who
had far greater were neglected; People flattered me indeed with the title of a
Beauty, and Fame, who is most commonly a great Liar; did list my Name among her
wonders; whether she was in the wrong or no, I could wish she were, for it has
put me to more trouble than a good Face is worth, to bear with the several
impertinencies of my young Country Servants; though to have seen their several
humors would have been as good as a Comedy to me, had I been merely a
Spectator, but I lost the pleasure because I was an Actress in it my self:

Every one of them had a particular behavior, yet every one something of the
Harlequin in it; and their Courtship was different, according to their
diversity of humors:

One had Confidence, and thought that would gain me, and he would be the most
troublesome, because he would touze me and hale me about, and I had much ado to
defend my self from his rudeness; him I avoided as I would the Devil. Another
would think to gain me by his over-civility, and he would come a great way just to
ask me how I did, and how my Father and Mother did, ask me what a Clock it was,
and what time of the Moon, and where I was at Church last Sunday; and after
some such wise discourse, he would take a kiss and be gone; he was my Chip in
Porridge, I neither shunned his Company, nor cared for it. A third, pufft up
with the good success of having gotten his Father's Maid, or Tenant's Daughter
with Child, believed the same Methods would conquer me, and therefore thought
to entertain me with immodest discourse; my Virtue made me deaf to all he could
say, and for my Reputation sake I avoided him. Then a Widower came, a Cosen,
addressed to me, desiring to be nearer akin, and thought to touch my heart,
but endeavored it after so rude a manner, as if he forgot that 'twas a Maid,
not a Widow, he was Courting:

But it appeared, for all his long practicing Merchandise, that he did not
understand how to Purchase, for all that he had in the World could not buy my
consent to give him mine. A fifth was opinionative of his rustic valor, and
he would aim at conquering his Mistress the same way as Knights Errant did of old,
by quarrelling and beating every one he came near:

But I thought such an over-boyling Courage, which would still expose me to
fears for him, was fitter for a Bravo, than a Husband. The sixth was my true
Country Courtier, who was all Innocence; he had scarce Courage enough to keep
him from swooning, when he came into my Company, unless his Spirits had been
raised beforehand, by a dram of the Bottle, or a belly full of strong drink;
then he would say, his Mother sent him to ask me whether I Would have him; and tell me
a long story of his Ground, his Dairy, and his Cattle; I despised this Milksop,
and thought it a hard bargain to give my self in subjection to the chief Beast,
only to be Mistress of the rest. This was my condition, when a young Gentleman,
a Stranger, came down into our Country to some Friends he had there; and no
sooner saw me, than he increased the number of my Captives, and professed
himself my Servant, but when he first old it me, 'twas with all the Rhetoric
which an ingenious passion could invent, his Eyes, his Actions, and every
gesture so gracefully seconded his Story, that the Lover's part, which the
others acted so ridiculously, became him so well, as if he were only made for
Love. When he paid a visit, if any of the rest chanced to come at the same
time, the Breeding which he brought from Dublin, elevated him so far above
them, in his Discourse, his Carriage, and all he did, that they did look like
our wild Irish to him; but when alone he talked to me of Love, the Music of
his Tongue was so enchanting, I could have staid and listened for ever to him.
Sir, I will say no more in his commendation, for methinks Lovers are so much a
part of our selves, that their praises look fulsome where they come from one
another, I will only tell your Highness that we were but too happy in one
another, till Fortune, who is never constantly kind, contrived a way to part us
asunder:

But why should we curse our ill Fortune, or lay the fault on the Devil, when
any mischance does befall us? Whereas poor Beelzebub is wronged, for he could
not do us half the mischiefs we receive, unless we helped him against one
another, and of all people I think the Envious are his principal Agents, of
which this is a remarkable instance:

There lived in the same House with him, one Capella, a stale Maid, of a good
Family, but a decayed Fortune, and she, it seems, hearing of our Amor, envied
the happiness of it:

I cannot say 'twas out of any violent Love to him, for her being pretty far
advanced in years, and sickly besides, do make me think her Loving time was
past, at least I Am sure it should have been, for her gray Hairs, her
Dwarfishness, her Sickliness, her Pale Ill-favored Face, and her want of a
Fortune to gild all these Imperfections, might have hindered her from thinking
of Marriage, if she had any Wit to consider them; but she will repent the want
of it, when the foolish desire of Intriguing in her old Age, has rendered her
ridiculous to all the Gentlemen, and after wasting her Youth in Pride and
Disdain of those that more than deserved her, make her take up at last, for
want of a better, with a Ploughman, a Groom, or a Footman. I fear your Highness
will think this a very illnatur'd Character, but I will beg you to consider,
that it proceeds from her own deserts, and the resentment an injured Love does
usually raise in our Breasts, against those who are the chief causes of our
unhappiness; as certainly she was of mine, for the Nets she often, and in vain,
spread for others, were now laid for him:

And because she thought the Love of me diverted him; after having with Jeers
and Persuasions, Scorn and Flattery, Anger and Kindness, and all the different
ways she could think on, in vain attempted to shake his Constancy; she was
resolved to make me lose him, though she lost him her self by it; and getting
some of her Relations to represent me to his, as disadvantageously as they
could, they (lest he should loiter away his Youth in Love, and not pursue that
Preferment to which his Genius was likely to raise him) called him up to
Dublin. I, partly to hush the discourse which her Malice had raised of us,
about the Country, partly, because it made me melancholy, to see those
deserted Shades, where I had formerly been so happy, quitted that place, and
chose my Aunt's House, where your Highness is, now, for my retirement. He came
to Town, incognito, to see me, and for fear some of his Friends should hear of
it, our meetings were always in private. An Abbey hard by (being solitary and
free from any company that might disturb us) we pitched upon for our last
nights Assignation:

I was there first, and this Gentleman coming by, I mistook him for the other:

He Will own himself that he began to be too familiar, and lest he should offer
me violence at that time of night, when no body was near to help me, I was
driven to this shift to get rid of him:

I saw which way his nature inclined him, and thence concluded there was no way
to deliver my self, but by putting him in hopes of some better Intrigue; I
therefore told him, I would not detain him from my Mistresses's Embraces, who
had been waiting for him this long while (pretending I mistook him for some
other Gentleman) and so drew him from thence, designing at the first House I
saw any up, to pretend she was there, and so leave him:

I durst not come home with him, lest the vexation of finding himself deceived,
should make him raise the House, and to come home with an Officer at that time
of Night, would have ruined me in my Aunt's good opinion. It fell out as well
as I could wish, for an Alehouse was open, and desiring him to go and enquire
for her there, I bad him good night, and came home as fast as my fear could
carry me:

What became of him after I know not, only desire that he would impute it to
his own Curiosity, if he has suffered; and that both your Highness and he will
be so honorable, as to keep what I have related from others Ears, as strictly
as I would have kept it from yours, had I not been constrained to reveal it in
justification of mine Honor.

The Prince, who had listened with delight to the Love-story, it jumping so
well with the humor he was then in, told the young Gentlewoman, that he had a
great respect for her, as she was a Gentlewoman, and so near a Relation of his
Landladies, but more, as she was Beautiful, Virtuous, and a Lover, and wished
her a great deal of Success. Celadon begged a thousand pardons for the rudeness
his Ignorance had betrayed him to; and that she might be the more inclined to
pardon him, he desired her to stay, and hear the unlucky adventure he had after
she left him. The Prince desired her to seat her self, and Celadon with half a
smile, and a blush together, thus continued his Story. You may remember, Madam,
that I promised you to make amends for my long stay, and went about to be as
good as my word, had not your Virtue and Cunning restrained me more than my own:

And though I have all along said that no Woman could resist Opportunity and
Importunity, yet now I renounce my Error, and could my self become a Proselyte
to Chastity, were I so happy as the Gentleman you waited for, I mean, in having
so Fair, so Virtuous a Mistress, to regulate my wandering desires, and confine
them to her self; as it is, your example, and last nights trick put upon me,
have half Converted me:

I will own to you, that I did really think you had mistaken me for another; I
was big with hopes of the Bliss you promised to conduct me to; and 'twas either
your wisdom, or good luck, not to go into the light with me; I saw indeed so
much of you, as to know you again by your Clothes; but had I seen that alluring
Face, your feigned Mistress had not served your turn; I did not, because I
avoided your seeing mine, for fear you should discover me to be the wrong
Person:

For the same reason, I was loath to ask your Mistress's Name, and chose rather
to enquire for her at a venture, concluding, that if I once came into her
Company, the fear of my discovering her Amor would overawe her, and make her
as kind to me, as if I were the Spark that she waited for:

Besides, the heat of my Inclination pushed me forward at a venture, whether I
succeeded or no:

I went therefore into the House, and asked a Boy at the Bar, whether there was
ever a Gentlewoman there who expected me:

The Boy asked me what her Name was: What Is that to you, said I? Is there ever
a Gentlewoman in the House? The Boy, who understood his Trade, guessed what I
meant; showed me a Room, and sent in a Woman to me:

Her color was very good, for I believe she was Painted, her Look was brisk,
and her Garb gentile enough; for my Garb being pretty rich, they thought to
make a good Prize of me, and therefore sent me, I suppose, the choicest Girl in
the House. I took her to be the distressed Wife of some old Man, who had
married her to make her his Nurse, and therefore told her it belonged to my
Profession to help the distressed. She told me she thought, by my Tone and
Whiskers that I was an Outlandish Man; asked me how long I had been in Town,
and whether I was a mere stranger to that place; pretending as if she was
afraid of my coming to the knowledge of whose Wife she was. I told her I was an
Englishman, had been beyond Sea several years; that I came to Town but two or
three days ago, with the Prince's Troops, and should suddenly be marching to
Limerick, and that therefore she should make the better use of me while I
staid, and never fear a discovery afterward; by this she guessed I should
never be able to find the House again; and that emboldened them to deal as they
did with me; she seemed to be so cautious, out of a fear of her Honor; when
therefore she had gotten as much knowledge of my being a Stranger, as satisfied
her fears, she began to be more familiar with me, and, out of a particular
piece of kindness, would needs send out for a Bottle of Sack for me, saying,
she would drink a health to the good man at home; we both laughed at the
conceit; I, how little he thought of his Horns, and she to think how little I
suspected the Trick she was going to play me:

The Wine she would needs drink mull'd, and, ordering it her self, she infused
either Opiate, or some such Soporiferous draught; we had no sooner drank it
off, than she consented to go to Bed, saying, that her Husband was out of Town,
and the House belonging to a Friend of hers, no body was likely to trouble our
pleasures:

Because I suspected nothing, I never minded how little she drank; and you
know, Madam, we usually indulge Women their liberty in drinking, therefore very
likely she drank less, and so it might have less operation upon her; it worked
so on me, that I did not wake till late in the morning, and when I first opened
my Eyes, I found my self in the innermost part of the Abbey, which I saw you at
last Night; I was laid on a Tombstone, by the side of a great Marble Statue
(the Effigies of some Great Person formerly buried there) I wondered to find
that my Bed and Bedfellow had both suffered such a Niobetick alteration, that
they who were so soft and warm last Night, were become so hard and cold by
Morning; but I wondered more at my self, when I found no Clothes, but an old
Franciscan Habit on me, I began to think of Plato's transmigration, and that I
had died an Officer, and for my lewdness in my former body, was doomed now to
be an abstinent Franciscan: But I had not much time to think, for by this time,
a zealous Neighbor that had seen me asleep, thought he would catch the Friar
napping, and brought a Constable for me; the Man of Authority ordered me
immediately to appear before a Justice of Peace. I was conducted in State
through the Streets, at the head of a Party, more numerous than your Highness's
body of Soldiers; they huzza'd all the way, as if the King were going by; and
methought I went in great Pomp, only my Triumph was after the Roman fashion,
with the Lictor behind me, who every now and then threat'ned me with Bridewell,
the Stocks, and the Gibbet:

In this manner I marched near half a mile to the Justice's, barefooted all the
way, which I think of it self was sufficient penance for my last nights
Debauch:

The Justice asked me a great many impertinent questions; as how I durst appear
there in that Habit? and why I did not go after the French to Limerick? I saw
it best to confess what I was, and told him all the latter part of my
adventure, how that the People of the House knowing, by my own confession, that
I was a Stranger, and not likely to find the House again, had robbed me of all
my Clothes at Midnight, and left me there in an old Habit, which some poor
Holy Brother had formerly given them as the return of a kindness:

The Justice would not believe but this was a Jesuitical evasion of mine, and
therefore bad me, if I was a Soldier, send for some body that I was acquainted
with; I named two or three Officers of my Acquaintance, and the Justice sent
one for them, they were found in a Tavern with a great deal of other Company,
and the fellow delivering his Message publicly, they all came to see the
Novice in his Habit; their Testimony released me, and I was fain to borrow some
Clothes to go home in, having lost a very good Suit of my own, and most part of
the ready Money I have in the World, and have got nothing for it, but the name
of Celadon the Franciscan, which will stick by me as long as I live:

Your Highness may see now the cause of my paleness, is the potion I drank, and
the cold Lodging I had, which if it had not happened at such a hot time of the
year, would have made me dye in a more Religious Habit than ever I lived in.
You, Madam, if you have any such thing as pity in you, will excuse me, and
think that the shame, the loss, and the cold I suffered might be sufficient
cause to make me angry with you, whilst I thought you one of the Accomplices.
The fair Stranger, with a pitying smile, told him, That she was sorry he had
suffered so much by her means, and said, that to show she did no way consent to
it, she would send one who should show him the House; and if he would carry a
Constable with him, he might recover all his things again. The Prince, who had
laughed till he was weary, bad Celadon call up the Centry, him he sent for a
File of Musketeers, and desiring the beautiful Stranger to send a Guide with
them to the House, sent Celadon with them. The young Gentlewoman, bidding the
Prince good morrow, went to her Uncle and Aunt to give them some share of the
Laughter, and ordering one of the Servants to go with the Soldiers to the
House, there Celadon found his last nights Mistress, and having recovered his
Clothes and his Watch, he sent for the same Constable, who had conducted him so
carefully to the Justice's, and leaving his Mistress, and her fellow Nuns to
the public Justice, he came back to the Prince very well satisfied that he had
come off so well, and bought his experience so cheap. Though the oddness of
Celadon's adventure did for some time employ the Prince's mind, yet at last, by
a long chain of thought, he returned to the accustomed Subject his Mistress:

For as the Jack of the Lanthorn is said to lead the benighted Countryman
about, and makes him tread many a weary step in fruitless rounds, yet leaves
him near the same place where it found him at first; so Love's deluding fire,
after enticing the blinded mind through many restless thoughts, brings it about
again to its beloved Idea, that enchanting circle it can never leave; 'twas
this bewitching Passion which brought our Prince from Celadon's adventure to
the fair Strangers, and from hers to his own; and when he called to mind the
Story of her Lover, and his success over her heart, he pleased himself with
hopes of the like Fortune in his own Amor, and thought it very probable, that
a Prince, who had several advantages over one of a private Fortune, might
expect the same success, and not fear the like disappointment, since he had no
power to overawe, or check his Love, or Relations to control it. Finding a
great deal of diversion in this melancholy entertainment, he resolved on a
walk, as well to take the Air, as to prevent the engaging himself in any
Company, which might come to seek him at his Lodgings; when he had walked about
half a mile, he found himself on the top of a Hill, whence after having looked
a while on the adjacent Town, and with a curious Eye searched out that part of
it, which his admired Beauty made happy with her presence, he laid him down
under the shade of two or three large Trees, whose spreading Boughs nature had
woven so close together, that neither the heat of the Sun, nor storm of the
fiercest Wind could violate the pleasant shade, which was made as a general
defense, no less against the scorching of the one, than the nipping of the
other; they seemed to have been first planted there, for the shelter of those
who came thither to drink; for just by there bubbled up a clear and plentiful
Spring, of which, from an ancient Irish Chronicle, let me give you this Story.
Cluaneesha, the only Child of Macbuain, King of Munster, was accused of having
been too familiar with one of her Father's Courtiers; the Fact was attested
upon Oath by two Gentlemen that waited on the King's Person, and to confirm it,
the Princess her self had such a swelling in her, that few doubted but their
Witness was true, and would soon be proved by her being brought to Bed:

Her Father, being old and sickly, was desired, for the prevention of Civil
Wars after his Death, to nominate a Successor:

The People showed their unanimous consent to confer the Crown on her Uncle,
because they would not have a Strumpet for their Sovereign; so the old King was
persuaded to proclaim his Brother Heir Apparent, and condemn his Daughter to a
Cloister:

The Courtier fled beyond Sea, and went a Pilgrimage to the Saint at Posnanie;
the very night that he arrived there, one appeared to the Mother Abbess, in the
form of a Nun glorified, and told her, that she was Edith, Daughter formerly to
King -- but now in happiness; that she loved Chastity and Innocence while she
was on Earth, and therefore defended it still; that she was constrained to
leave the seat of Bliss to protect Virtue, injured in the Person of Cluaneesha;
that the Persons who swore against her were suborned; that the swelling of her
Belly was but a Disease; and that if she and the witnesses would go and drink
of a Well, which sprung out of a Hill near Clonmell, there she would convince
all the Spectators, that what she now told her was true:

The Abbess told this the next day to the King's Confessor, and he told it the
King; the King ordered one who was Confessor to the two Witnesses, to enjoin
them, for their next penance, to drink no other Liquor, but the Water of this
Well, for a Week together; they obeyed him, but it was their last, for it made
them swell as if they were poisoned; in the mean time the Mother Abbess came
down thither with her Royal Novice. She charged them with the Perjury, and they
confessed publicly, that the King's Brother, taking the advantage of that
swelling, which he thought was but a Tympany, suborned them to swear against
her Chastity, expecting that either it would kill her, or at least it might
deceive the People so long till the King was dead, and he in possession of the
Crown:

A certain Citizen of Clonmell, who came among the rest to see them dying, and
heard the Confession, admiring the strange virtue of the Water, went
immediately home to his Wife, and telling her that he was suspicious of her
Honesty, and desired that, to satisfy his Jealousy, she would drink a draught
of Water, and wish it might be her last, if she were unfaithful:

She not having yet heard of the others punishment, and willing to clear her
self, drank of it as he desired, but swelled with it as the others did, and
dyed soon after in great torment. When the Well had grown famous by the
exemplary deaths of the Perjured Witnesses, and the Adulterate Citizen, the
Princess declared she would drink of it too; and that the clearing of her self
might be as public as her accusation was, she sent up to the King, who was
then at Cork, to desire that her Uncle himself might be present when she drank,
to witness her innocence; he excused himself, and would not go, but a great
many of the Court coming thither to see the Princess clear her self, she went
in solemn Procession barefoot, from the City to the Well; and taking up a glass
full of the Water, she protested her Innocence, and using the same imprecation
with the others, if she did not speak the truth, drank it off; but instead of
working the same effect on her, it in a little time cured her of the Disease
she had, recovered her Health, and with it brought her so much Beauty, that all
the neighboring Princes were Rivals for her:

She had designed to build a Nunnery by that Well, but her Father dying left
her the cares of a Crown, which diverted her from it: But the Well was long
after reverenced, and for the quality it had of discovering Unchastity, it was
much resorted to; for the Inhabitants of Ireland (how barbarous soever the
partial Chronicles of other Nation report 'em) were too nice in Amor to take a
polluted Wife to their Bed, as long as this Well would show them which was a
chaste one; but the wickedness of after times grew too guilty to bear with such
Trials; thence by difuse this Well lost its Fame, and perhaps its Virtue. And
now I will no longer tell such Tales, but leave the uncertain Lover to take his
Lot as it comes. Pretty near this Well the Prince lay down, and being pleased
with the murmuring of its Stream running down a descent of the Hill, that, and
his want of Sleep the night before, tempted him to take it now; Morpheus was
ready at his call, and waving his Leaden Rod over him, lulled all his Senses,
till a greater power than he rescued him from sleep, to Charm him in a more
prevailing manner; for as he waked he heard one hemm, and found it was in order
to Sing, for presently the unknown, with a ravishing Air, began this Song.

YIeld, Soldier, yield, give up your Sword,
And don't rebel in vain,
Yield on all conquering Beauty's word,
And take what quarter she will afford,
And you shall wear the lighter Chain.
Why do you put such trust in Art?
In vain, fond Wretch, you Arm,
And think Steel proof against Beauty's dart,
Which will, like lightning, pierce you Heart,
yet do your Coat of Mail no harm.
The excellency of the Voice, and the suitableness of the Sense to his own
condition, made him lie still to hearken to her that Sung it, and listening
very attentively, he overheard another Voice, which breaking silence began
thus. I thank you, dear Marinda, for the Song, I like the Tune you have put to
it, and either that, and the sweetness of your Voice, do make me partial, or
else the Song is very good:

I like the Authority it carries with it, for I am usually well pleased when I
hear those Songs, which attribute so much power to our Sex; but prithee tell
me, why is a Soldier the aim of it? when I have heard you say, that a Soldier
should be your last choice, because they are always abroad, and therefore very
seldom enjoyed after Marriage, and while they are Suitors their Pride makes
them the most troublesome, and the most inconstant of any; when they pay a
visit, if there be a Glass in the Room, they look more on themselves, than on
her they came to see, and as often as they look on their Scarf and Feather,
their Vanity puffs them up so, that if we yield not immediately, they Swear and
Curse, and so fall off, taking it as an unpardonable affront that we don't
admire them at first sight; and when they are beloved, their Self-conceit makes
them place it to the account of their own Merits, and so they value our Love
the less, because they think it their due; nay, and are not contented with a
single Conquest, be it ever so fine a one, and as they do not fight for Malice,
so neither do they court for Love, but out of the pure vainglory of Conquering;
and take as much Pride in having abundance of Mistresses, as abundance of
Soldiers to follow them. You observe right ( said she who was called Marinda)
I Will grant to you, that for these considerations, they are both the worst of
Servants, and worst of Husbands, and yet in a brave Soldier there is something
so Noble, I mean in, his not fearing dangers, and his patient endurance of all
manner of hardships, that were it not for the aforementioned inconveniences of
Absence, Pride, and Inconstancy, I should have a greater value for such a one,
than ever I yet had for any other Employment:

Nay, now Marinda (replied the other) you make good the Character which our Sex
bears among the Men, of being inconstant as the Wind; for 'twas but two or
three days ago you were of a clear contrary Opinion, and you knew the same
qualities of Courage and Hardiness to be then in a Soldier which you do now,
and therefore they are no just reasons why you should alter your mind; they
make some show of being Arguments indeed, but I have observed that Wits, when
they alter their Opinions, whether it be in point of Religion, Allegiance, or
any thing else, never want something to say in their own defense:

Well, since you are so desirous ( said Marinda) to know the cause of this
alteration of humor in me, I Will tell it you; though in doing so, I rather
follow the dictates of Friendship than Discretion, and prove kinder to you than
to my self, in telling you that which I am almost ashamed to think of. You know
that about three or four days ago a Party of Foreigners made their entrance
into this Town, with the Prince of S -- g at the head of them, Curiosity made
me open my Window to see them pass by, either the desire of looking about him,
or the pride of being gazed at, made the Prince ride slower by that place than
ordinary, and he had his design, for I looked as steadfastly on him, as if he
had been the only Pageant there; and though, without doubt, there were several
Officers very brave and fine; yet the seeing him first had so prejudiced me in
favor of him, that I could not think the rest worth the looking on; all the
rest of that day I could not forbear thinking of him, fancying I saw with what
a Grace he sat his Horse, how stately he looked, so far beyond the rest of his
Soldiers, as if nature, as well as Fortune, had marked him out for a Prince
and distinguished him from the rest, as much by his person, as by his power;
and as the thoughts of the day have an effect upon those at night, so I believe
these were the cause of my being disturbed in my Bed with this Dream. The
Prince, methought, in my absence, had hidden himself in my Bedchamber, and,
when I came in, started out upon me:

He had on one side of him a little winged Archer, who bent his Bow, and aimed
at me several times; but just by me there started up a great Gigantick form,
with no other Arms but a Shield, and he, methought, still interposed that, and
with it kept off the Arrows of the other; at length, methought, the Prince
spoke something which tempted my Defender over to his side, and left me to the
Mercy of the young Archer, who shot me through and through; and at the same
instant the Prince came and catched me in his Arms, and told me I was his
Prisoner, at which, methought, I swooned away with a pleasing pain, and at the
fright of it I awaked. People say Dreams are significant, if they are, tell me
what you think is the meaning of this? Why truly, (said the other) any one who
should hear you tell this, might guess, without any great skill in
Fortune-telling, that you are in Love:

If ( said Marinda) I did think a little the day before upon the Prince, which
might have been the cause (as you say) of this Dream, yet those thoughts were
too slightly grounded to be of any long continuance, and I was in hopes in a
day or two to have clearly rooted them out; and the next Afternoon one of my
Acquaintance came to desire my Company to a Ball, I was ready enough to accept
of the proffer, because I imagined that the Music and the Company would cure
me of my thoughtfulness; but (as my ill Fate would have it) it was clear
contrary; for whom should I meet at the Ball but the Prince; you were there,
and saw how I was clearly put out of my Dance, with the confusion his presence
put me in:

He sat down with me, and made me some few Compliments, which though, perhaps,
were coveted by some of the Company, yet had those Ladies seen my inside, as
well as they did my outside, they would rather have pitied, than envied me;
'twas he that sung under my Window last night, and though you mistook him for
your Servant, yet I knew his deluding Voice too well:

His words were so pathetical, and the Tune so moving, that though he had skill
enough at the Guittar, which he played on, yet that kept not time with his Voice
truer than my Pulse and Heart did. Have a care Marinda (said the other) that
you do not engage too far with one who is so much above you; it is not safe
Intriguing with Persons of his Quality; Inferior Lovers may be jested with as
long as we please, and thrown off at will, but such as he seldom leave us
without carrying away our Virtue, or at least our Reputation:

And you will too late curse your own Charms when they have exposed you to be
ruined (like a young Conjurer) by raising a Spirit which you are not able to
lay. I fear ( replied Marinda) he has spied something in my behavior that (he
fancied) favored him, as Men's conceitedness makes them too apt to discover
such things; I am sorry for it, if I did discover any weakness in my self, that
should encourage him to such an attempt:

I am sure my Tongue never dropped the least word in his favor; and if my
tell-tale Eyes, or my Countenance has betrayed me, I Will disfigure this
Countenance, and tear out these Eyes, rather than they shall invite, or assist
any enterprise, to the prejudice of my Virtue. Now though I have told the
Reader the discourse these Ladies had in private, yet let him not expect that I
shall tell him the Prince's thoughts upon it; that I should not be able to do,
though I had been in his heart, for they were so different, that he scarce knew
what to make of them himself:

He certainly had need of a great presence of mind, to resolve upon such a
sudden what to do, whether to discover himself, or no:

If he did, he saw some probability that the Lady might be kinder, when she
knew that he had heard her confessing a Love for him; if he did not interrupt
them, he thought he might hear more; but while he was in this irresolution he
chanced to Sneeze, at which the Ladies arose from the seat which they were on
by the Well, and walked away, very likely because they found some body was
nearer than they had imagined, and were afraid of being overheard in their
discourse:

The Prince lay a while musing on what he had heard, and then went home; he
related it all to Celadon, and asked his advice what use he should make of it:
Celadon told him it was not the safest way to extort a confession of Love from
her, by letting her know he had overheard her, because that might make her
angry at his hearkening, and such a discovery might be too violent for a Maiden
Modesty, and so nice a one as hers seemed to be; he desired him rather to
continue his Addresses, and so bring her by degrees to a voluntary submission;
that this was the more natural and the surer way; that twice or thrice more
being in her Company would ensure his Conquest over her; and what need was
there to hazard her displeasure, by forcing her to confess she loved him, when
he was well enough satisfied of it already? The Prince consented to this, and
contrived this way to see her; he knew the Town was so full of Soldiers, that
every House had some of them in it, he thought hers quartered some Officers,
and enquiring out who they were, he told Celadon that he would go and see them
at their Lodgings:

That Evening they went together to the House, and a Maid showing them into the
Parlour, they found there Marinda and two Strangers, one of which the Prince
knew to be the same he had seen at the Well with her; they would have left the
Room when they saw the Prince come in, but he was too well skilled in War to
let a weak Enemy retreat, he had not sought her out to let her go so easily; he
was thinking of some shift to put off the Officers, whom the Maid was gone to
call, when to his great satisfaction she brought him word, they were not at
home:

He said, that having so pleasing Company, he could very well stay till they
came in, and sitting down, he made a sign to Celadon to entertain the
Strangers, to give him the greater freedom with Marinda, and that he had not
long, for the Mother came in:

Then she (as old Women usually do) took up most of the talk her self, till the
Prince, tired with it, took his leave:

As they walked home, Celadon asked the Prince what he thought of Marinda. I
take her, (said the Prince) to be the most perfect Innocence that ever was
since the fall of Eve: Her words are so Witty, and yet so modest, her humor so
nicely Virtuous, and yet so Civil, that I account the Country Ignorance which
is in her, to be beyond all the breeding in the World. I told her that I made
an advantageous exchange in getting her Company, by their not being within whom
I came to see; she said, she was not of the same opinion, since if Men in
general were as good Company as I, she must needs blame the unkindness of
Nature, which had made her of so unsociable a Sex, that she was neither Wit
enough to converse with Men, nor would the Rules of Virtue give a Maid that
liberty, if she were otherwise qualified for it:

I told her that all who knew her but so much as I did, must needs contradict
her, in that Nature had given her Wit as well as Beauty; that the one was made
to delight the Ears of Men, the other their Eyes; and as without always
closetting her self up, she could not bar us from the last, so neither, without
great injustice, could she deprive us of the one half of our happiness, by
tying her self up to an obstinate silence, merely to deprive us of the other.
She smiled, and said, she had not power enough over her self, to observe that
silence which a Maid ought; but that since Men, by their insinuating discourse,
drew words from her which she should keep in, she would shun the Company of
that deluding Sex, and so keep her self from yielding so much to them, by not
coming within reach of the temptation:

She blushed as she spoke these words, and I might have gained ground mightily
on her yielding heart, if the old Gentlewoman had not unfortunately come in to
her rescue. The prince pleased himself much with the thoughts of his Conquest,
but he knew not what a stubborn Enemy Virtue is, and how difficult it would be
for him to take any advantage over a Heart, which that maintained against him.
Having found so little resistance at his first visit, he believed Celadon's
observation was true, that two or three more would win her; he went often,
under pretense of seeing the Officers, and sometimes met with them, but never
with Marinda; once or twice the Servants said she was abroad, but the last time
he enquired for her, they said she was sick; he fancied that she had ordered
the Servants to deny her, and therefore judged the readiest way to see her
would be by his former Stratagem, a Ball; and that he might not be expected
there, he gave out the Evening before, that he was going for Dublin the next
day to get Orders from the King:

He rode through the Town that Morning, and her House being in the way, he
called at the Door, and asked to speak with one of the Officers that lodged
there, but to the intent that she might take notice where he was going:

When he was out of sight of the Town, he rode back again to his Lodgings
another way, keeping close, that no body might know of his return; and when he
thought the Ball was at the highest, he and Celadon went there together; the
place where they Danced was the same where the first Ball was, the Company
almost the same, only that it wanted the Beautiful Marinda, but in wanting her
it wanted all, nothing there was worthy to entertain our Prince, therefore he
called to Celadon to go with him home; but Celadon was of another mind, he was
not so nice in his choice, to retire himself from such variety of good Company,
merely for the absence of one; he was very little pleased with the
capriciousness of the Prince's humor, and would have willingly staid behind,
if he had thought it would not disoblige him:

But the Prince being desirous to go, they took leave of the Company, and were
going out together, when, at the Door, they were met by a couple of Ladies in a
strange Spanish dress; and their Faces, after the mode of that Nation, had long
Vails over them: Celadon bobb'd the Prince, and desired him to come back to see
what Masks those were, telling him, that under them he might chance to find
Marinda; the Prince was in hopes of it too, and made up to them, but found
himself deceived; for speaking to one of them in French, she seemed not to
understand him, but whispered to the other, and she spoke to him in Spanish,
asking him whether he was not the Prince of S -- g, Commander of the Forces now
in Town? The Prince answered her that he was; but desired her if she could
speak any other language to do it, for he understood very little of that. I
speak, Sir, (said she) a little English, and if your Highness can understand me
better in that, I shall beg the honor of a hearing from you, for I do not know
but it may lie in your Highness power to do me a great kindness:

What is that kindness, pretty Petitioner ( said Celadon) for all your
excellent counterfeiting (Madam) I fancy you are two of this Town, that pretend
some sober business with us now, and design to laugh at us when ye are gone,
for being so little curious, as to see nothing of a Lady but her dress. That
you may not think ( said the other Lady in broken English) that we are not of
this Country, we'll dance you a Sarabrand after the Spanish way, and if that
will not convince you, I can show you so ugly a Face, that mine shall be the
last Veil you shall ever desire to look under:

Let us have the Dance ( said Celadon) and if your Air and Mien be as becoming
as your Shape, I shall venture to look in your Faces, for all your threatening.
The Company left off Dancing to look at these two, whose dress seemed so
extraordinary, and the Prince, who had a mind to see them Dance, ordered the
Music to play such a Tune as pleased them best, and they with their Castinets
acquitted themselves very gracefully, and came off with the commendation of all
the Company:

Their Shapes and Carriage being very near alike, Celadon did not know which to
like best of them; he told them that now he must desire to see their Faces,
that the handsomest might take him all to her self, and free him from the
double Captivity he now lay under, of being a Slave to them both; but one of
them told him they could not grant it, for she had a boon to the Prince, in the
begging of which she must open such private passages of her Life, as would make
her ashamed to be seen by the Man that knew them; but if it e're lay in the
Prince's power to grant her it, then she would turn English Woman, and throw
off her Veil. The Prince said that was a very plausible excuse, and desired
Celadon to urge the Strangers no more, and turning to them, told them, that
whomsoever that Story concerned, he desired she would tell him, and he would,
according to her directions, serve her to the utmost of his power. Both the
Strangers gave him a very low Courtesy, in token of their thankfulness; and
one of them desiring the patience of his Highness, and the rest of the Company,
seating her self in the midst of them who had left their dancing to listen to
her, she began thus,

The Story of Faniaca.
PErhaps this Company, and more particularly that part of it which is of my own
Sex, may censure this freedom in me, and think it too much openness in a Maid,
to discover things of such privacy in a public audience, which the rest of
Womankind make their Closet-secrets; but my Spanish Mistress, upon this very
occasion, told me a Story of a Spartan Boy, who having stolen a young Fox, and
hidden him under his Gown, rather than be discovered, kept him there till he
tore out his Bowels:

So it is with the English Ladies, if once Love enters into their Breasts,
though, like that Fox, it prey upon their Hearts, yet out of Modesty they keep
it secret; and though the closer it is hid, it gnaws the fiercer, yet, like the
poor proud Boy, they hug it to 'em, and conceal it till it ruins them:

But the Spaniards, and those of my Country, who are in a hotter Clime, tie not
themselves up to such cold, such rigid Rules of Honor:

Your Love, like your Winter Sun, is so clouded, that those he should shine on
are never the better for him; ours is so hot and predominant, that there is
nothing can cover him:

Now you your selves cannot give a good reason for this nice piece of Modesty,
which allows you to take a fancy to a fine Dog, a fine Horse, or any thing else
that is handsome, only Man, which is the stateliest, gayest Creature of all,
you must not own a regard for:

Sure this Tyrannical custom was founded at first by some old decrepid Matrons,
that were past the enjoyment of Love themselves; for Nature, that has allowed
you the public freedom of all other pleasures of life, would never consent to
disgrace this sweetest of all:

Whence comes it then, that though most of you are fond of it, yet you manage it
so secretly, as if it were Treason to our Sex to own it? While I am in England
I should dissemble, like the English; but pardon me for once, if I break this
general rule, in searching for a Lover, whom I can never find, but by
discovering my self wherever I come, that some of those who hear me, may chance
to bring the same story to his Ears, that so he may find me again. My Name is
Faniaca, my Father was a Brachman, an Indian Priest in the Province of Antis,
which Country having never been conquered by the Incas, kept up the ancient
Barbarity, not being Civilized by their Laws, as those Nations were, who had
yielded to their Government:

And whereas they with one consent worshipped the Sun, we of Antis had several
Deities, the two chief of which were the Tiger, and a large Serpent, which we
called Amaru: To these it was our custom to sacrifice Human Blood; they
commonly fed on nothing else but Captives, and if we had no Captives, we were
forced to find them the same sort of Food from among our selves:

But we rarely found any such want, for there being an irreconcilable Enmity,
first between us and the Incas, and then with those Indians who took part with
the Spaniards, we had so frequent Engagements, they to extend their Dominions,
and we to defend our own, that scarce a day happened, but brought us in some
new Prisoners; for the Spaniards had a great Colony at Cozco, and from thence
they every now and then sent Parties far into our Country to take Booties, and
make discoveries of the Land, in order to a farther Conquest:

These Parties were commonly made up of Indians, with Spaniards to head them,
because they would willingly spare their own Nation, and Conquer ours at the
Natives expense. These Spaniards still encroached farther on us, till they had
driven us over the Madalena, that great River, being very deep, of a strong
swift Current, and at that place about a League broad, made it seem as if our
differences were now at an end, Nature it self having divided us:

On each side of the River there was a considerable Town, of which, the one was
possessed by their Party, the other by ours; and though sometimes our Fishermen
would meet by chance and kill, or take one another, yet we never gave one
another a troublesome visit on shore, by reason that our Canoes were not big
enough to transport Men in so great numbers, as to dare to Land; and it being
about 300 Leagues down the Sea, we never had seen, or could imagine any which
should hold above ten or twelve men at most; for our Canoes were made all of a
piece, and how to put different Planks together, as Ship-Carpenters do, was an
Art wholly unknown to us:

Some of the Spaniards had taught our Enemies this, and they privately built a
great many large Flat-bottoms, which the Governor of their Town filled with
Indians, and sent a few of his own Contrymen with them; these Forces he sent
over about Midnight, with orders to Land at our Town, kill all the Men, and
sending back the Boats, to keep the Town till he Landed an Army sufficient to
fight his way farther into the Country. In this Town my Father lived, and was
Priest to the Tiger and an Amanu, which were accounted the largest of any
thereabouts, and therefore were worshipped the most, and had their Adorers to
bring them presents from all parts. Those Indians who took the Spaniards part,
were always very inveterate against us, because the Incas made both their
Government and Religion different from ours; as soon therefore as they entered
the Town they killed all, without any distinction either of Sex or Age; I was
awakened out of my sleep with a dreadful cry, such as you may imagine that of a
taken City to be, where their Enemies are so unmerciful:

I straight leapt off my Quilt, and ran into my Father's Room, for when by the
cry I knew our Enemies to be entered, I expected to lose my Life, and therefore
chose to lay it down by him who gave it me:

I found him in a great Consternation, and hanging about his Neck, I expected
the coming of our Enemies* The first who entered the Room was a Spaniard; for
though I had never seen one before, I knew him to be one by his Dress, and a
Helmet which he had on as soon as he entered, I left my Father, and fell at his
Feet to beg both our Lives; and while I was in that posture, he bade his
Soldiers stay back; but one of them cried out, This is the Cupay, (that is the
Devil, or Conjurer) and advancing before the rest, ran at my Father with his
Spear; the Commander immediately broke out of my Arms, which were clasped about
his Knees, and, drawing a Pistol from under his Girdle, shot the Indian dead;
and pulling out the other, he turned about to his Men, and swore that the first
who disobeyed his Orders, as that Dog had done, he would teach him what was the
Discipline of a Soldier:

While they stood all silent, amazed at the speedy Justice he had done on their
Countryman, he came to me, who was lying on the Ground bemoaning my Father,
whose Blood stained the Floor, he raised me from the Ground, and clapping a
Guard of Soldiers on me, (with orders to keep us two from receiving any
violence, upon pain of their Lives) he went away, I suppose, to help his
Part'ners to take the other parts of the Town:

Within an hour after he came back, and pulling a Box out of his Pocket, he
took a Plaster out of it, and put it on my Father's wound, and bad me fear
nothing; assuring me, that he did not come to destroy us, but to reduce us to a
better Government; and as for me, he told me, that if I pleased, he would make
me so happy, that I need not fear any danger, either of Poverty, or Captivity,
from the alteration of my condition:

This, and the approach of daylight, did somewhat comfort me; my Father came
to himself (for loss of blood had made him swoon) and began in the kindest
words he could, to give thanks to the preserver of his Life, who was hugging
and comforting me, when of a sudden we heard the same confused noise in the
Streets, which we heard in the Night:

I thought our Enemies were finishing their Cruelties upon their Captives, and
could not forbear bursting into Tears at their Miseries:

The strange Commander endeavored to comfort me all that he could, saying,
That he could not help what the other Captains did to their Prisoners, but his
own, and particularly my Father and I, should have no violence offered us:

The noise grew louder and louder, as it drew nearer, when looking out of the
Window, we perceived the Antian party driving the Peruvians before them, and
before he could resolve what to do, they were killing his own Soldiers at the
Door; he with a great deal of Courage leaped forward, and after all his men
were killed defended the Door alone; and with his Spear laid the boldest of
them dead at his Feet:

You will, perhaps, think that I was glad of this change of my Condition, to
see my self unexpectedly freed, and my Countrymen revenged of their Enemies;
but I Will assure you I was not; the danger which my generous Defender was in,
weighed down all the Joy of the other, and though my fear made me for a while
stand, as far as I could from the Weapons; yet, at last my desire to save him,
overcame my Cowardice, and running to the door, I placed my self betwixt him
and the Spears, which were bent against him; and cried to my Father to speak to
them to let him alone, my Father was so weak with the loss of Blood, that he
could not come to the Door, but called to them with all the entreating words he
could think on; most of them knew my Father and me, and having a great
Veneration for us (as all our Nation has for their Priests) they gave over
assaulting him:

Only the foremost of them asked me, why I would defend one who was the Enemy
both of our Country and Religion; I told them 'twas to him, that both their
Priest and I owed our safety; that he killed the Man who hurt my Father, and
with a great deal of care dressed his Wound; I desired therefore that, for our
sakes, they would give me his Life:

These words persuaded them to leave him to me; as soon as they were gone, I
went out to see how things went, and brought him word, that a great Party from
the Mountains, was come to our assistance, and that all who set foot on our
Land were killed: And, Madam (said he) shall I be the only man who goes home,
and carries the news of so great a defeat? Or shall it be said, that ever a
Spaniard let a Woman beg his Life of an Indian? Not of one Indian (said I) for
you were overpowered by numbers: No one but you (said he) should have given
Astolfo his Life; but since I receive it from you, I Will make that use of it I
should by serving you, and revenging my self of my Enemies, for this loss and
disgrace I have suffered. I told him, that since he confessed his Life was
mine, and that I had preserved it, it was not generous to use that Life against
my Country; however, I left him to his liberty, and promised him, that at Night
I would send him over in a Canoe to the other side:

When Night came, I was as good as my word; and calling two trusty Men, I
ordered them to row the Stranger over the River, telling them that his presence
would be enough to secure them from the danger of their Enemies:

At our parting he expressed himself very thankful to me for my generous usage
of him, and told me, that e're long he would make me a return, in the mean he
desired me to wear that about my Neck, pulling a Gold Medal, with a Chain of
the same Metal:

I, who had heard of the Spanish Covetousness, gave him a large Golden Wedge,
and desiring him never to be my Country's Enemy, or put himself into the like
danger) I took my leave, and left him to his Fortune, the Men came back before
morning, and brought me word that they had set him safe on shore, and that all
the other side of the River was covered with Men:

This news, which they told about the Town, alarmed us, and that Party which
came down from the Mountains to our assistance, waited to receive them; some of
our Scouts, who rowed as near the other side as they durst, brought us word
that they had abundance of Canoes filled with Men, which made us think they
designed to Land by force, where the others had by Night; but this was but to
amuse and draw our Men that way; for they had provided a great number of Planks
about 20 mile higher, and having lighted on a place where the River ran between
two Hills, and therefore could not extend it self a quarter of a Mile, they
made a floating Bridge, and on that they passed over some Men, before ours knew
any thing of it; they took such care to surprise the Natives, that no one came
to bring us Intelligence of their being Landed, till some of the Planks which
came floating down the River, made us suspect something; we sent some Scouts up
the River, to discover what was the matter, and they brought word that the Enmy
was on this side of the River:

Ours marched toward them as fast as they could to fight them, before any more
came over, and having joined Battle, the first news we heard, was of a great
Victory, we had gained over them; and a great many Prisoners brought us, as the
proof of its being true:

The Indian Prisoners were kept up to feed our Gods; but some few Spaniards
that were taken, as being the Nobler Captives, were to be feasted on; as it was
our Custom to tie our choice Prisoners to a Tree, and a great Fire being made
just by, the Priest was to cut off Slices from the more fleshy parts of them,
and distribute them about to the People to broil and eat:

If the Captive showed any signs of pain, or groaned at his Sufferings, we
counted him of a base Spirit; and after burning his Body, we scattered his
Ashes in the Wind; but if he endured bravely to see his Flesh eaten, we dried
the Sinews and Bones, and hanging them upon the Mountains, we deify'd them, and
went Pilgrimages to them. There were ten Spaniards brought to my Father, and
two or 300 Indians, who were all tied, and secured by a Guard set over them;
the Indians to be a Prey to the Bellies of our Gods, and the Spaniards, to
those of our Soldiers:

As soon as they were brought in, my Curiosity prompted me to see them, but
very little to my satisfaction; for the first I set my Eyes on was he whom I
had set at liberty before:

I was both concerned and amazed to see him there, and uncertain whether I
should do any thing in his favor or no; therefore I pretended not to know him;
till he making as low a bow as his being tied would permit, asked me, did I not
know him whose Life I had saved? Are you he, said I, whom I set free but a few
days ago? I thought your good usage might have made you our Friend, or at least
your dangerous escape might have been a fair warning to you; but since you are
the second time come amongst our Enemies, and are still plotting my
destruction, you shall suffer for your ingratitude, and to show how little I
pity you, I will go to see you Sacrificed, and eat the first bit of you my
self. As for the danger of coming again (answered he) a Spaniard fears none,
but I was so far from plotting your destrustion, that I hung that Medal about
your Neck for my Soldiers to know you by; I had indeed a design upon your
Country; but for you, my greatest desire was, by saving you and your Family,
to show how much I aimed to ingratiate my self into your favor. These are all
but Wheedles (said I) to save your Life; but they shall not serve: No, they
shall not (said he) for since you can entertain such mean thoughts as these of
me, I scorn to take my Life; all the repentance my attempt has brought upon me
is, that it has displeased you; I thought to have requited you for giving me
liberty, and to have made you amends for the loss of your Country, by bringing
you to a better, but since this ill success has prevented me, all that I
desire, is to dye in your favor: The way to do that (replied I) is to dye
undaunted, for then you shall be one of our Gods: I will do so (said he) be you
there, and show but the least sign of pity at my death, and I Will go off with
such a Courage, that him whom you slighted whilst he was alive, you shall adore
when he is dead. Though in a Man's mouth who was at liberty, this would have
looked like a Boast, yet coming from one who did not know but he might suffer
next day, it appeared so brave, that I could not but admire it:

The others held their Tongues, but looked so fierce, as if they kept silence
out of disdain:

I went thence with a great opinion of their Courage, and a secret horror in
my self at the cruelty of our Nation, which gave brave Men such barbarous usage:

I called to mind his professing a design to save me, and carry me to a happier
place; and his telling me of the thing about my Neck, for a Token to know me
by, made me believe it was true; and when I considered of this, I imagined I
ought to save his Life, but I could not tell how to do it without my Father's
consent:

As I came into the Room where he lay ill of his Wound, there was one brought
him word of the death of his only Son; who was found after the Battle among the
Slain, with a Bullet lying in him:

I showed my sorrow in all the extravagancies which our Nation commits on the
like occasions; but my Father only gave a groan or two, as it were to rouse up
his anger, and said, that he would comfort himself for his Son, in revenging
his Death, since all his grief could never raise him to Life again:

That all the Spaniards who were in the Battle were killed, except ten who were
in his Custody, and he would sacrifice each of them, because he would be sure
that his Sons Murderer should not escape; for since he was killed with a
Bullet, he did not doubt but it was a Spaniard shot him. We lay all that Night
awake grieving for my Brother, but the next day, when the first Fury of our
grief was over, and my Father began to talk with me about our Prisoners:
Suppose, Father, (said I) the Spaniard who saved our Lives should be one of
them? If that should come to pass, (said my Father) he had better staid where
he was, than come over to seek his Death here the second time: But, Sir, (said
I) gratitude would oblige us to save his Life, who saved ours first: That we
have done already (said my Father) and so we have returned his kindness; and if
after so hard an escape he should be come again, he does not deserve his Life,
neither would I be guilty of so much injustice to my Son and my Country, as to
save that Man's Life, who has been the Death of the one, and has made a second
attempt to be the Destruction of the other. This arguing of my Fathers seemed
so reasonable, and his Indignation so just, that I could not gainsay it, and
therefore said no more to him, but went back to my Prisoner, and told him, that
I did intend to save him, and his Companions for his sake; but that my
Brother's Body being found shot, had so incensed my Father, that I could not
prevail with him to spare them; and therefore I told them they must prepare
their Courage to dye, as soon as my Father's Wounds would suffer him to assist
at the Solemnity. Well, (says he) since I must dye, and it does not lie in your
power to help it, I am sorry you told me you attempted it, for that shows so
much kindness, that it makes me desirous to live:

I was willing to dye when you upbraided me with the begging my life, but now I
can no longer be suspected to flatter you out of any such hopes, since you say
it is not in your power to help me; I own that my Death is no grievance to me,
only as it prevents my living for you; and all that I Will now desire of you, is
to let me dye the first, that I may not behold the Cruelties exercised on my
Countrymen.

The Love and Courage which I perceived in these words, quite altered the
thoughts I had, of giving him up to my Father's resentments; and from that time
I found something within me so strong on his side, that it over-ballanced the
Duty I should have paid to my Father's will, and my Brother's Blood:

I went to my Father, and told him that he who saved his Life was there, and
urged to him how ungrateful we should be, if we did not restore him to his
Liberty; but my Father answered me with the same Arguments he had done before:

Then I endeavored to corrupt him that was Captain of the Guard that looked to
them, but he was a Blood-thirsty violent natured Man, and not only refused me,
but complained to my Father, who was so angry, that I should endeavor to
release so many of our worst, our most formidable Enemies, the Spaniards, that
he threatened, the next time I attempted the like, he would have me condemned
to suffer with them, as the Enemy of my Country. I knew his violent temper too
well to venture any farther, and gave over all hopes of saving my Prisoner:

The next morning four Indians were to be carried to our Gods to feed upon,
they drew Lots for their Lives, they were blind-folded when they drew, and I
held the Cistern, and decided who the Lot fell upon, and it often grieved me to
doom the poor trembling Slaves; my Prisoner seeing me picking out some of them
for Death, told me, he longed to know when his turn would come; I told him that
his must come as well as the rest; that I had incurred my Father's displeasure
on his account, and left nothing undone which I thought might be for his
safety, that I hoped this was all he could expect, and desired him to own
before his Death that I was out of his debt; yet I had resolved with my self to
keep him till the last, in hopes that before that time the Guards might be
changed, or else my Father's anger might be mitigated, when most of them had
been sacrificed to it:

Two or three days had now past over, in which time my Father had given the
Guards particular charge to beware of the Spaniards, for fear I should free
them; the day come that he found himself well enough to perform the Sacrifice,
and our Spaniards were brought out in the midst of their Guards, to draw Lots
which of them should make our Banquet; by ill chance it fell on my Prisoner; I
changed the Lot, and sentenced one of the others in his stead, but not so
cleverly but that my Father perceived it:

The poor wretch was cut to pieces slice after slice, and lived long enough to
see his own Flesh broiled, and eaten by the Company; you must think this was a
terrible sight to the rest, who saw by their Companion what they were to
suffer. I expected to keep him the same way I had the first day, and went on
the morrow with the same design, little dreaming what would happen; for my
Father, who had seen me play the Jugler the day before, would hold the Pitcher
himself, and the first black Lot was again drawn by my Prisoner:

Upon that the Fire was made to broil his Flesh, he was stripped naked, and tied
to the Tree; he looked about him, without as much as changing Countenance at
his Destiny; but when he turned his Eyes toward me he blushed, I believe out
of shame, to think that I should see him in that helpless condition:

Such a sight as this, which would have drawn pity even from a merciful Enemy;
what effect then do you think it had upon one that loved him? Or rather, what
effect had it not? I blushed and grew pale, Anger, Love, and Fear, succeeded one
another; Anger at the Barbarity of my Contrymen, Love for him, and Fear at
his danger:

But just as my Father's Knife fetched Blood from the brawny part of his Arm
(the place which he first began with) I was not able to bear up any longer, but
fell in a swoon; which my Father perceiving, left him, and catched me in his
Arms; but not having yet recovered strength enough to bear me up, he fell to
the Ground with me, and lighting upon his Wound, rubbed the Plasters off, and
made it bleed afresh:

My Father was immediately taken up on some of their Shoulders, and carried
home, and every one said 'twas an unlucky day, and the Gods were angry, so the
Sacrifice was deferred till the next. When I came to my self, I was very glad
to see the poor Man delivered from immediate death, though it cost some of my
Father's blood, but it almost distracted me, to think what a short reprieve I
had for him, only till the next day; his Fate was now at its Crisis, and within
twenty four hours I must either see him free, or mangled to pieces; all my
former hopes lay in deferring the time till another Guard came, which perhaps I
could have bribed off, or till my Father's mind was altered; but his Anger
continued still; and because he found the Captain of the Guard as violent
against the Spaniards as himself, he ordered him to continue in the same Post,
till all the Spaniards were Sacrificed:

My poor Prisoner's Lot was come, and he to dye the next day, and I had not yet
thought on any way that could prevent it:

After having wracked my Invention a great while, for a way to free him, at
last I lighted on this:

There were two of my Father's Servants, whom I sent formerly to row my
Prisoner over the River; I knew they wished well to him, because when he
entered our House as an Enemy, he had saved their Lives; these two I acquainted
with my design to release him:

I gave them a large Pot full of pleasant Liquor, made of our Sacred Plant the
Coca, and bade them toward Night to bring that to the Guard-house, as a
present from my Father:

Our Guard consisted of a hundred Men, for the preservation of the Temple, and
the Treasures of it, and the Prisoners who belonged to it; so that all these
things might well require the care of an hundred Men:

We had near twice the number of Indian Prisoners, besides the nine Spaniards,
only they were Armed, these were naked and tied:

Out of the Temple I had got Arms enough for them all, and conveyed them into a
Room hard by, to be ready upon occasion; when the two Servants came with the
Liquor, all the Soldiers crowded into the Guard-house, only two who stood to
their Arms at the Prison Door; when the Servants saw them all engaged about the
drink, they left the Guard, and came to give me notice; upon which I took some
Daggers (which our Soldiers had taken from the Spaniards, and hung up in the
Temple as Trophies) these I hid under my Gown, (for the Women of our Nation had
thin silk Gowns to wear in the cool of the Night) and so under pretense of
seeing the Prisoners, I conveyed these unto them:

When I came in I saw my Prisoner asleep, I cut the Cords of his Hands and
Legs, and as I cut them he awaked and found himself loose; thence I went to
another, and still as I loosened them I put a Dagger in their Hands:

I told them I was come to give them all Liberty, if they would show themselves
Men, and Conquer an Enemy whom they would find surprised, and not ready to
oppose them. And my Astolfo (said I) I have done all this for your sake, yet I
will rather stay behind you, and undergo all the punishments that an angry
Father, or incensed Town could inflict upon me, than fly with you, unless you
are as willing to receive me, as I to go. Several of the Indians wept for Joy,
and the Spaniards, for all their Gravity, could scarce forbear it:

My Prisoner said, that he was more glad of my Love, than of the saving his
Life, and would have told me abundance of the like nature, had he not been
interrupted; for one of the Sentinels, not liking my long stay, came to see
what was the matter, and no sooner came in but he was stabbed by one of the
Spaniards; my two Servants had stood all this while at the Door, and when one
of the Sentinels left them to come to us, they dispatched the other; by this
time the Indians had untyed one another, and I carried them to a Chamber hard
by, where I had laid the Arms:

Some of the Guard, hearing a noise, chanced to come out, and mistrusting
something more than ordinary alarmed the rest, but they came a little of the
latest, for we had as many Armed as they; they began a very bloody Engagement,
and a great many were killed on both sides, but our number increasing we
overpowered them, and they fled every way for safety. My Prisoner had given me
in charge to some of the Indians, who were formerly under his Command, and they
kept me in Rear till the Guard fled:

Then Astolfo came to me, and desired me to come down to the River side, before
the Town Guards came upon us, for our noise had alarmed the Town; and there
were at that time five or six thousand Men which were left with us, for fear
those on the other side the River should make another Invasion; but we were too
quick for the uproar, before the Guards came we got to the River, and there
being abundance of Canoes, and the Enemy coming after us, you may guess we did
not stand to Complement who should take Boat first:

The eight Spaniards, Astolfo, the two Indians and my self, took the same Canoe:

We put off altogether as fast as we could, but in a little time we were parted
from the rest, the night being so dark that we knew not which way we went,
though the Wind blew so hard from the other side, that we were afraid 'twould
force us on our Enemies Coast, to our ruin:

Two of our Spaniards tugged against it as hard as they could, till one of them
broke his Oar, and then we gave over striving, and let the Boat go down which
way the River would carry it; the next morning we would have made for Shore,
but having but one Oar the Wind beat us off, and carried us down all that day
and the next night with the Stream. Though the first day we got away we were
very cheerful, yet now wanting Provisions, and being driven down we knew not
whither, dampt the Joy we should otherwise have taken in our Love and Liberty:

I began to reflect on my former actions, and to think this a just punishment
for my undutiful leaving my Father, and my Country; I began to grow faint with
hunger, and he was so troubled to see me in that condition, that in the
greatest danger of his Life I never saw him show so much sorrow. The farther we
Sailed the River still grew wider and wider; on one side we could not Land,
because the Wind would not let us, on the other side we durst not, because
'twas inhabited by those Nations who are mortal Enemies to the Spaniards: We
were now come down a great way, and the River had turned so, that the Wind,
which before was against us, now was for us; we made toward the Land with the
greatest haste that a violent Hunger could make; as we came near the Shore we
discovered a Boat lying under a Rock, we made toward it, and saw only one Man
in it, and he was asleep, so that we were upon him before he awaked; he would
have resisted, but finding it in vain for one Man to fight with eleven, he
yielded up himself and his Boat; in it we found store of Victuals (the richest
prize we could have wished for at that time) and you may think we fell on to
some purpose:

We examined the Fellow, and he said he belonged to a Ship which lay about
sixty Leagues lower; that they sent twenty Men up the River in quest of a Prize
which they were to take, by plundering a little Town thereabouts; he told us,
that there were about so many more left in the Ship, but that the greatest part
of them lay sick of the Wounds they had received in a late Engagement:

We stepped into his Boat, and going down the River, in eight days time we came
within sight of the Ship; then having got out of the Man what intelligence we
thought necessary, we threw him overboard, and made up to the side of the
Pinnace; it being duskish, and they knowing their own Boat again, they mistook
us for their own Men; so that half the Spaniards entered, and had killed all
that were above Deck, before they mistrusted any thing; the rest they took
Prisoners, and (throwing all the Wounded Men into the Sea) because we had not
Provisions sufficient to last us all, they set their Prisoners on Shore, and so
came down the River merrily in a Ship of our own:

The Spaniards fell to searching, and found some Bullion in her, besides a vast
deal of ready money, which, after a just division between us ten, we computed
would amount to near 30000 Ducats a piece, so that with a general consent we
Sailed straight for Spain, intending to Land at the first Port of that Kingdom
which we came to. Now we were happy enough, we had escaped our Enemies the
Indians, and Famine, which had like to have proved a more fatal Enemy than
they; besides the Prize which enriched us beyond our expectation, and came in
good time to help my needy Fortune, who in that hurry of leaving home, had not
remembered to bring any thing of value with me, besides a few Pearl which I
always wore about me. My Servant came and took me in his Arms, congratulating
my escape out of the several dangers we had been in, and thanking me a thousand
times for the kindness I had showed in saving his Life; and more for leaving a
Father, to run the same Fortune with him:

In fine, he promised that he would requite all my kindnesses, by having me
Christened, and marrying me as soon as we came to Spain: And I was so well
pleased with the alteration of my Condition so much for the better, that I
think that Night was one of the pleasantest of my Life. The next Morning we
spied a Sail making up to us, and as soon as it came within reach, it sent a
great Shot to command us to strike Sail; we saw by the bulk that it was a Man
of War, too strong for us to resist:

We, much against our wills, staid for it, and received some of them on board;
in searching our Ship they found diverse Colors, as Pirates usually have; our
Vessel, it seems, had been one, and for their Faults who had owned her, we were
all seized, our Vessel made a Prize, and our Men taken Prisoners:

The Man of War being a Spaniard, the Captain said he would reserve Astolfo and
his eight Countrymen to be tried on Shore, and condemned to the Galleys:

My two Indians (notwithstanding all my entreaties for their Lives) he hanged
on the Ropes before my Face:

But taking compassion on me, he said he would keep me to wait on his Wife:

Accordingly, when we came upon the Coasts of Spain, he sent the nine Spaniards
Prisoners to Sevil; and though I begged him to let me accompany Astolfo, he
kept me at Sea a few days more, and then Landed me at Aveiro, and gave me a
present to a Wife he had there. It would be tedious for me to tell you, how ill
I bore this worst change of my Fortune; I raged, I grieved, till my Sighs and
Tears grew so thick upon one another, that no one could know which was the most
plentiful of their two Fountains, my Heart, or my Eyes. My Mistress, who was a
good natured Gentlewoman, interessed her self in my Sorrows, and would often
enquire what was the reason of my grieving; till at last her Importunities drew
from me the whole Relation, which I have now made to you; she bade me be
comforted, and think no more of him; I told her I could not be satisfied
without him: That opinion (says she) is, I hope, a false one; you must be
comforted either without him, or not at all, for you must never expect to see
him again; for supposing he should escape, being condemned to the Galleys, yet
how is it likely that you, who are a Stranger, should find out a single Man,
and one of no note, in such a large City as Sevill, or one who perhaps, before
you could get thither, would be gone to some other part of the World? I told
her I had an Art, by which I could do more than that; and thus much I knew,
that if I were at my liberty, and had a little traveling Money, I should not
be a year e're I found him She asked what Art that was: It Is what I learned
from my Father, (said I) and is very common among us: She desired to see the
effects of it; I told her I would show it, in resolving whatever question she
would ask me. She bade me tell her where her Husband was at that time, and when
he would come home:

I told her she must buy me a small Drum, which had never been used before, and
I would then tell her that question, and any other. When she heard me affirm it
so confidently, she said she would try me, and bought me a Drum:

I that Night used some Charms over it, which my Father and I had practiced on
such occasions; and the next morning I told her my Master would be at home on
the morrow: I thought (says she (laughing) how you could foretell: Why your
Master is gone into the Straights a cruising, and bade me not expect him these
two Months. I let her enjoy her incredulity, but she had like to have suffered
by it; for she, good Woman, considering that her Captain made long stays and
short returns, had providently looked out for a Gallant, to comfort her in his
absence; but I was yet too much a Stranger to be made acquainted with such
privacies. She had an old Spanish Maid, who was the only Servant she kept, till
I came; this Maid was privy to all her Intrigues. They had at that time pitched
upon a young Gentleman, who had an Estate near the City, he was very fond of my
Mistress, as Men usually are of every new Conquest, and had invited her to
spend a few days, in her Husband's absence, at his Country Seat:

She consented to go with him, and they had assigned a day to go together, and
as it happened, 'twas the very day after that on which my Master was to come
home; but it drawing toward Night, and my Mistress hearing no news of him, nor
seeing any likelihood of his coming, she sent her Maid to invite the Gallant to
Sup with her; me she sent up to Bed, pretending that she had some business for
me to rise very early the next morning:

I lay in the Room over her, and though I went to Bed without the suspicion of
any such treachery against my Master, yet chance discovered it all to me:

I awakened after I thought I had been a pretty while asleep, I fancied I heard
a Man's voice in my Mistresses Chamber, and concluded it was my Master's,
because I thought my Art would not deceive me; however, my curiosity prompted
me to a desire of knowing whether it was he or no:

I got out of Bed softly, and looking down, I saw her sitting at Table, with
three dishes of Meat before her; (which in hungry Spain is a noble Treat) by
her there was seated a fine young Gentleman, he whom I just now described to
you; their discourse, at that instant, happened to be of me. She told him she
had a Slave who pretended to foretell future events; that she had told her that
the Captain would be at home that day; the Gentleman laughed, as he said, to
think that a Slave should be so bold, to impose such a Story on her Mistress;
he laughed at her too, for giving any belief to me; and I laughed at them both,
to think how secure they fancied they were from my Eyes and my Masters, and yet
how much they were mistaken. While I was peeping down, and listening to their
discourse, we heard a loud knocking at the Door; my Mistress cried out
immediately that it was the Captain's knock, and that she was undone, unless
they could hide him somewhere in that Room; for to send him up to mine, was the
way to let me know of it, and being a Stranger, perhaps I might betray him to
her Husband. The Gentleman was young and slender; and his Limbs; which seemed
composed rather for Love than War, showed that he was a very unequal Match for
a great two-handed Sea Captain:

And you have all heard enough of the raging Spanish Jealousy, to think, that
if a young handsome Man had been found there, and at so suspicious a time,
'twould have gone near to have cost all three of them their Lives. The Captain
still knocking harder and harder, made them all at their wits end what to do
with him; at length they bethought themselves of a great Chest, which my Master
had given his Wife full of Plunder, when he first came on shore with me; but
she had taken all those things out, and my Master had filled it with Sea
Biscuit, which he had bought for his Men; the Mistress and Maid emptyed these
Biskets out under the Bed, and begged the Gentleman to try whether he could get
into the Chest; the young Spark was as complying as she could wish him; he made
a quick shift to get in, and his Fear was at that time so strong upon him, that
it would not only have driven him into that, but into a Mouse-hole, if there
had been one in the Room:

As soon as he was in, the Maid let in my Master, who seemed a little angry
that he was kept so long at the door; and seeing the Cloth laid, and the Table
covered with Meat, he asked my Mistress how all that came there, and what she
designed with it? I wondered how she would come off; but she very readily
answered, that she provided it for him, and kept him at the Door while she took
it from the Fire, that he might be the more surprised, to find so good a Supper
ready for him on the Table. He asked how she could provide it for him, since no
Man in Aveiro knew of his coming? My Mistress answered, that the Indian he had
left with her, had told her he would certainly be at home that night. When did
she tell you this? (said he) Yesterday (answered my Mistress) Then, by St.
Jago, she is a Witch, (said my Master) for yesterday morning, till the Storm
came, I did not know (that I should come) my self: I hope, Captain, said my
Mistress, you have received no damage by the Storm: None, said he, but the
spoiling my store of Biscuit, which got wet, and my poor Men are in want of it;
but I will have you, said he (turning to a Cabbin-Boy that waited on him) go
now and call two or three of our Men on Shore, that we may have hands enough to
carry that Chest of Biscuit to the Waterside: Time enough for that to morrow,
Love, (said my Mistress) No, (says my Master) my Men are in present want of it,
and I ought to take care of them, as well as of my self. The Boy went on his
Errand, and my Mistress with a great deal of pain, waited the unlucky coming of
the Seamen to carry the Chest away, and her Jewel that was in it. I had till
this time been an unconcerned Spectator, and only pleased my self with the
fright my Master's coming had put them in, but now I saw I must help them out,
or they had no way of their own to bring them off; dressing my self therefore
as fast as I could, I went down to them; my Mistress, I believe, wondered to see
me there, when she thought I was asleep, yet she did take no public notice of
it, lest my being sent up to Bed, should give my Master the greater cause to
suspect something. After bidding my Master welcome home, I turned to my
Mistress: And did I not tell you, Madam, (said I) that my Master would be at
home to Night? You may see, (said she) by my preparations for him, that I
believed you: I could not forbear smiling to see how she would have imposed on
me, as she did on my Master: But, Madam, (answered I) since I have given you
such a proof of my skill, which (though it has told you this only for trials
sake yet) hereafter may show it self some way, which may prove more serviceable
to you, I would desire one favor of you in its behalf: What Is that? (answered
she) It Is (said I) that you would pardon me for an accident which befell me in
the performance of it: What Is that (says she) I hope you have not raised any
Spirits that have broken our Windows, or done any damage to the House: What if
they have (said my Master) you shall pardon any slight mischief that they have
done: They have done no mischief at all, (said I) pray do not be affrighted,
Madam, and I Will tell you all:

When you were abroad yesterday I set about my Enchantment, to answer your
question, but you came home a little too soon, while I was asking some
questions concerning my own Fortune; hearing you at the Door, and not having
time to lay that Spirit which I had raised, I ordered him to throw the Biscuit
out of the Chest, and enter into it himself; you cannot but have heard how
mischievous Spirits are, while they are at liberty, and to preventy any such
mischief, I confined him there, till your absence should give me leisure to lay
him:

You went soon after to Bed, and I durst not tell you how near the Spirit was
to you, for fear of fright'ning you, nor would at all, had not the present use
my Master has of the Chest, forced me to this discovery:

When my Mistress heard this told, she ran to my Master, and clasping him about
the middle, pretended to be in the greatest fright imaginable; and desired him
to leave me the House to my self, till I had ridded the house of the Devil.
Though the hot Supper, which my Master believed prepared for him, and my
Mistress saying, that 'twas because I foretold his coming, had confirmed him in
the belief of my Art; and the earnestness with which I begged pardon, made him
not question what I said to be true; yet he laughed at the extreme fear, which
his Wife so excellently counterfeited, and said, Never fear, Wife, that Mr.
Devil, who has been so civil as to lie there all last night, will be so rude,
as to disturb us now: Sure, Faniaca, he he will not force us to leave our
Victuals to cool, to dance attendance on him: If he will give us leave to Sup,
we will retire afterward, and give you leisure to dismiss him: Not for the
World, (said my Mistress) I cannot eat one bit, nor enjoy my self one minute,
while the Devil is so near us; dear Love, consider the danger it is to be here,
and let us go to some Neighbors, and leave the Witch and the Devil together:
Since you are so fearful (said my Master) have but patience, till my Men come,
and I Will order them to carry the Chest up Stairs, for I am loath to leave this
hot Supper; but do not show your fear to them, for if they know that his
Devilship is in it, it is likely they will not venture to meddle with it. My
Mistress said, she thought it long till they came; and I dare swear she did not
counterfeit in that, but was at that time as desirous to get rid of her
enclosed Spark, as ever she was to get into his Company:

The Seamen kept her not long in pain, for they came while we were talking of
them:

My Master mentioned nothing of the Biscuit to them, but desired, before he sat
down, that they would remove that Chest up one pair of Stairs for him:

Two of them immediately laid hold on two Rings which were fastened in the
sides of it, and heaved it by degrees up stairs, I lighting them the way; the
Stairs were so narrow that they could not go both on a breast, but one pulled
the Chest up, and the other heaved it after him, by which means our Gallant was
almost stifled in it, for his Head chanced to lie at that end which was
lowermost; therefore, when it was near the top, he not being able to endure it
any longer, stirred about to lie easier, and coughed; at which the Men, being
startled, let go, and the weight of the Chest tumbled it down that pair of
Stairs, and another pair which joined just to it; though the Chest was locked,
yet the tumbling of it made me expect every moment that it would sly open; and
therefore, lest it should discover the Gentleman, I dropped the Candle:

My Mistress shrieked at the noise, and clapped too the Room Door where my Master
was; he stood silent, not knowing what to think of the noise; one of the Seamen
stood by me till the Maid brought us a light, but the other, who bore up the
lower end of the Chest, was driven down all the Stairs before it:

I heard the poor Man groan, and was terribly afraid that it was the
Gentleman's voice, and that the fall had crippled him; I therefore desired them
all to stay in the Room while I went down Stairs, they were willing to obey me,
for the horrid noise had put them in such a Fright, that they stood gazing one
at another, wondering what the event would be:

When I came down, I found the Chest open, and the Gentleman gone; then I
helped the hurt Man up Stairs; his Head was broken, and some parts of his Body
bruised with the fall, but he was more afraid than hurt. Well, said my Mistress
to me, this comes of your raising the Devil. The Seaman, who did not know what
to make of it before, hearing her say it was the Devil, concluded it was so
indeed; and said, He was sure 'twas a cloven Foot trod on him, for he felt it,
and that he saw the Tail of it, as it went out of the House. What, then is he
gone (said my Mistress) Yes, Madam, he is gone (said I) and shall trouble you
no more: A good riddance (said she) of your Mischievous Spirits, pray raise no
more of them: Then, Madam, (said I) you must not give me the occasion. Now my
Mistress's real fear was over, her counterfeit one vanished with it, and
bidding us set Chairs, she and my Master sat down; the wounded Man he sent on
Shipboard to the Chyrurgeon, and having supped and diverted himself with the
poor imprisoned Devil, they went to Bed, where he passed that night with my
Mistress, who would rather have had that Devil for her Bedfellow. The next
morning my Mistress's Confessor came to her; and my Master, who was filled
with the last nights adventure, could not contain himself from communicating it
to the Father, saying, That he had given his Wife an Indian, that could raise
Spirits, and make them tell her things that were doing at ever so great a
distance; relating, withal, what had happened by that means in his House the
night before:

The Holy Man, stroking up his Beard, with an austere look, told him, that this
was no Jest, said, it was making a compact with the Devil, and that his
Christianity obliged him to confess himself an Enemy to all such actions; and
therefore was bound in Conscience to discover this to the Fathers of the
Inquisition; and desired my Master to secure me:

He said this when I was by; I was earnest to know what he meant by the
Inquisition; but when he told me the danger of coming under the clutches of
that bloody Court, and named some of their Punishments, as the Wheel, Immuring,
and other ingenious Cruelties of theirs, I would have given my life for a
Maravedy. When my Master was gone out, I fell down on my knees to my Mistress,
and begged her to give me my liberty, and put me in some way to escape this
barbarous trial, that the Priest would bring me to:

I told her I was loath to mention the kindness I had done her, in conveying
her Spark away, lest that should look like upbraiding her with it; but thus
much I must say of it, that it was that Story which made the Priest so zealous
against me, and that if ever I came before the Inquisition, Self-preservation
would force the truth from me, and that I must confess the Cheat I put upon my
Master, to avoid the imputation of Witchcraft. See answered me very civilly,
that she had such a sense of the kindness I had done her, that she would
requite it with giving me my freedom; and when my Master came home, she was
very urgent till she prevailed with him to do the like; whether she did this
out of gratitude to me, or the fear of my threatening a discovery, I do not
know; but my Master called me to him, and bade me go and hide my self on board
that night, lest the Officers should come to search for me:

The next day he came on board himself, and asked me where I would rather Land,
I told him in England; for I had consulted my Drum, and was informed, that I
should find my Lover in one of the Northern Islands, coming from the Siege of a
City, and the Rumor of the Hollanders just then Landing in England, made me
think that likely to be the place:

We met at Sea with an English Merchant, and giving me a little Money, he put
me on board there; I had, besides, some Money my Mistress gave me at parting,
and a Pearl Necklace, with some Bracelets, which my Master (finding so great a
Prize with us) spared me, when he plundered me at Sea; these sold in England
for two hundred Ducats; with some of this Money I put my self into an English
Garb, keeping my Spanish one by me, and went up to London, and hired my self to
a Person of Quality; and being an Outlandish Woman, and appearing in a very
gentile Dress, I was made her Gentlewoman; I staid with her near a year, in
which time I put up a little more Money, and good Clothes, and learned English
enough, and then I left her, to travel in quest of my Lover:

I went down to Chester, and hearing that there was a War in Ireland, I
embarked for this Kingdom; I have been in Dublin, and am now come hither to
follow the Camp, where I am assured I shall find him:

I get as much as maintains me on the Road, by telling Fortunes to the Gentry,
who sometimes are very liberal to me:

Amongst the different Fates I read, those belonging to Love delight me most,
as being most agreeable to my own temper; and when ever it lies in my way to
forward any of those by my Skill, my being in their Circumstances, makes me the
readier to help them.

She ended thus, to the admiration of all the Company, whose Ears were tied to
the Story; The Prince, who was pleased with the Wit of the Indian, could not
deny her those praises that were due to it; and from her ingenuity in the
management of her intrigue, and her constancy in continuing it so long, he
concluded that the Spaniard must needs be happy in her; and told her, that if
he was in the Army, whether he were in Commission, or a private Soldier, he
would do what lay in his power to contribute to the finding him out for her,
But, he said, he expected a kindness of her in retaliation, and that if he
searched for her Lover, she would (if need were) do him the same service; that
he never gave any credit to Gypsies, or any other Vagabonds that pretended to
her Talent, but since she had proved her Skill in so exemplary a manner, he
would lay aside his former incredulity, and desire she would satisfy his
Curiosity in some things, which it would conduce to his quiet to know. The
Indian said, she would wait on his Highness, at his Lodgings, the next day, and
give him what satisfaction her Art could afford him. But he was not the only
Person that wanted her assistance, neither had the terrors of War so
frightened Love, as to make him wholly abdicate his power over that Kingdom;
but in this Ball he had some Votaries of both Sexes, and the ingenious Indian
told publicly the place where she Lodged, that those whose Modesty restrained
them from speaking to her there, might have a more private opportunity. The
Prince went home well satisfied with the hopes of knowing his Fortune, and told
Celadon that he was so impatient to see the next day, and the Indian that would
satisfy his Doubts, that he found himself not the least inclinable to Sleep;
therefore, if he would make him a Song, in answer to that, which he told him he
had overheard his Mistress singing at the Well, he would that Night go
Serenade her with it; and though he could neither meet with her at the Ball,
nor find her at home, yet this Song would make a discovery which might alter
the reservedness of her Behavior: Celadon made one; about Midnight they
sallied out together, and stopping under her Window, the Prince, with the best
air which his Guittar and Voice could frame, began this Song, to the same Tune
which she had Sung to hers.

THe Soldier yields his vanquished Heart,
As Conquering Beauty's prize;
And though he fears no mortal Dart,
The Thunder of your Frowns he flies,
And dreads the Lightning of your Eyes.
You shall dread this more, said a Voice interrupting him; the Prince looking
about, to see whence the Voice came, saw three naked Swords making toward him:
Celadon came up immediately to his assistance; it being so dark, that neither
Party could see to defend themselves, there had been fair work in a small time,
if some of the Guards, walking the round, had not been pretty near them; when
they came up, the three fled, and the Soldiers knowing the Prince,
Congratulated his Highness's escape, from a Death, which the most unskillful
Enemy might have given him, when there was not light enough to allow him fair
play for his Life:

They would needs wait on him home, and he considering that the noise might
have alarmed some of the Neighbors, thought it best to retire, for fear of
raising a discourse, which might prove prejudicial to his Mistress, and offend
her. The next Afternoon the two Strangers came to wait on the Prince, and
finding him alone, one of them told him, she was come to make good her promise,
that she brought her Companion with her, who understood nothing but Spanish;
however, if his Highness had any secret extraordinary to communicate to her,
she would go with him to another end of the Room; the Prince opening a Closet
Door, retired in thither with her, and opened his mind in these words: Since I
want such advice, as cannot rightly be given, without some foreknowledge of
what will be the issue of it, and since my business is nothing but an Amor,
who so fit to consult about it as you, who are a Fortune Tellers, and a Lover
too? You may understand then, that my business is nothing but Love; it is one
so violent, and yet so unreasonable, that I am unable to curb it, nor have I
any hopes of success, if I let it go on; and it is just with me now, as with a
Soldier, whom his too boiling Valor has engaged so far in the Battle, that
his Enemies have surrounded him; there is no retreating for him, because the Foe
is behind, nor any likelihood of breaking through, because there are too many
before him:

So am I surrounded with difficulties, pushed forward by Love, and opposed by
Despair; carried on by her Charms, and driven back by her Disdain; now I would
know what my success may be, if I go on, and accordingly I will either nourish
this Passion, or tear it from my Breast?

I cannot see, ( said the Indian) what should discourage your Highness from
proceeding, since there are those perfections in your Highness, which give you
desert enough to pretend to the best of Women:

I fancy your Highness has fallen in Love with some one below you, and that
your Love and Ambition are at variance, whether that shall draw Love up, or
Love draw that down:

I know these two generally tend two contrary ways, that one, like Earth,
descending, the other, like Fire, still aspiring upwards.

You guess as right, (said the Prince) as if you had seen my Heart; and if you
can tell me how I shall succeed in my Love, I Will make that, or my Ambition,
conform it self to the other:

I dote on one who is beneath me; when I made my first Addresses, she seemed
Pliant enough, as if she had no aversion to my Love; nay, I overheard her once
confessing to a Confident, that she had a kindness for me; and when I thought
her my own, I found my self most deceived; for some Capricio or other made her,
that she would never since admit me into her Company; I went several times to
enquire for her at home, but the Servant still shifted me off, either denying
her, or pretending she was sick; I contrived last Night's Ball, in hopes to
entice her thither, but it failed; I Serenaded her last Night with a Song, in
answer to one I heard her Sing, that time she confessed a Love for me, but
before it was ended, I was interrupted by some Night Adventurer, who attempted
to kill me, which makes me suspect it is some Rival; inform me by your Art,
whether this is a Favorite that supplants me in her Heart, or whether it be
Virgin Niceness, Hypocritical Modesty, or what else it is that has put this
sudden stop to my Success?

This is a puzzling question ( said the Indian) but give me one Night's time to
consult my Drum about it, and I will bring you an answer. The Prince seemed
well contented, and the two Strangers, taking their leaves of him, left him to
expect the insight the next day would give him of his Fortune. On the morrow
they came again, and the Prince took the Indian into the Closet (as he had done
the day before) and desired her to be as plain as she could, in foretelling him
all that was to befall him in his Love:

First, (said she) your Highness must acquaint me whether you design Marriage,
or no. Marriage! (said the Prince) why did not I confess to you, that she was a
private Gentlewoman, one beneath me? I wonder you should ask such a question:

Pray, Sir, be not angry, ( replied the Indian) for how can I tell your
Highness what success you are like to have in any design, until I know the
design it self? If (answered he) I can enjoy her on any terms, but those of
Marriage, I shall think my self very happy; if not, my Love has so wholly
blinded me, as to make me forget my Interest, and my Honor. Your Highness
(said she) is certainly very prudent, in having so great a command over your
Love; and pray make use of it, when I shall tell you the state of your Affairs:

The Lady you Love, has a Gentleman who loves her as violently as you, only a
more honorable way:

Your Highness's Fortune has altogether the ascendant over his, if you are
inclined to lay hold of that advantage, if not, my Art tells me, that, within a
Week, she will be too far off for you to enjoy, or ever to see her again. And
is this all the hopes you can give me? (said the Prince) Yes, (said she) only
thus much I may add, that your Fortune promises you a great deal of happiness,
if ever you have her; but if you Love, I need not tell you this, for Love
enjoyed is always happy; since, if there be such a thing as happiness, it is to
be in that condition which is most delightful to us; being in possession of
what we Love, is being in the condition which is most delightful to us, and
thence may well pretend to be the highest of Enjoyments. I see you are so
Indulgent (said the Prince) as to humor me in my Love, but that is destructive
to me, and therefore we'll talk of it no more; there is something (said he) by
way of gratification, for the trouble I have put you to:

The Indian told him, she would not receive any such reward, for the unwelcome
news she had brought him; that all the requital she desired, was his Highness's
favor to the Spaniard, if ever she found him:

Only desired his Highness to take her advice, never to put himself to the
trouble of another attempt on his Mistress, unless 'twas with a design of
Marriage, for her Art declared it would prove unsuccessful:

That if his Highness ever wanted her help in this, or any other business, he
might find her in this Town, where she resolved to stay, till the Army was
marched through it to Limerick, because that was the likeliest way to find out
her Lover. With these words she took her leave, and taking her Companion with
her, left the Prince in the greatest distraction of thought imaginable:

The assurance which the Indian had given him, that he must expect no success,
unless in a Virtuous Love, made him resolve to shake off the mean Passion; but
all his endeavors were vain; the more he tried it, the more sensible he grew,
how unable he was to perform it:

He advised with Celadon, and they agreed to carry on the Intrigue, in spite
of what the Indian foretold; and this agreed best with the Prince's humor,
who, though he could not entertain the thoughts of Marrying her, could less
endure the thoughts of losing her. They contrived to have it thought about
Town, that Celadon had fallen into the Prince's displeasure; the Prince showed
the first signs of it in House, and they of the House soon reported it abroad;
Celadon, with a seeming discontent, left the Prince, and went to Lodge with one
of the Officers, at Marinda's Mother's:

There was a young Gentlewoman, a Cousin of Marinda's, and her chief Confident,
the same whom the Prince had heard talking with her at the Well, the only
comfort of her Parents, who were worth above ten thousand Ducats, of which,
their Deaths would leave her the entire Possessour; she was withal very Witty,
and good Humoured; but Nature and Fortune, who not often agree to be over-kind
to the same person, had here followed their usual Custom, making her want in
Beauty, what she had in Riches:

And as her Wit was keen, and sharp, upon all that came into her Company, so
Nature had given you an exact Copy of her inside, by her outside; for her Face
had as much of Satyr in it, as her Tongue; the Chin of it was sharp and long,
the Nose tucked up, as if it fled from her Mouth, which was so wide, as if
Nature had designed it for some Cormorant Body:

Her Face was all over studded with Freckles, which, like the Stars in the
milky way, lay so thick, that you would have thought it one continued
yellowness; only her Cheeks, which had a red Color, but such a tawny one, as
that of blasted Goosberries. This Gentlewoman was then in Town with Marinda's
Mother, who was her Aunt, and she was an excellent help to her Cousin, both
diverting her from Melancholy with her Company, and helping her with her
Advice:

When Celadon came to Lodge there, he became acquainted with her; and having
remembered, that he once had some discourse with her, while the Prince was
entertaining her Cousin, he called to mind, how Witty and Pleasant he that time
found her Conversation:

Their being in the same House, made them often in one another Company, and in
a little time they grew to a great Familiarity. Celadon, hearing what a
considerable Fortune she had, made his Addresses to her in earnest, but found
her still grow strange, when he spoke to her of that, and therefore thought
that something extraordinary was the cause of it: in the mean time the Prince
grew reconciled to Celadon, and as their falling out, was only a pretense for
Celadon's leaving him to Lodge there, so the Prince now made use of that
privilege to his own advantage; for now Marinda could no longer avoid him; and
though she did as often as she could, yet he came so often thither, that
sometimes he lighted on her before she was aware: Celadon's Chamber was on the
same floor with hers, and nothing but a small Gallery divided them; her Chamber
was just at the Stair-head, and the Prince would sometimes, as he came up
Stairs, find her Door open, and then force himself into her Company:

He this way had frequent access to her, yet could never gain from her the
least word in his Favor:

In this posture his Amor was, when an Express came to him, that the King had
set out of Dublin, on his March to Limerick; the Prince gave the Officers
notice to have all the Soldiers in Arms the next day to receive him:

He went straight to see Marinda, because he did not know but the King might
take him along with him, as he came through the Town, and so not give him time
to take his leave of her:

He came into her Mother's, and being used to go often thither to Celadon, went
up Stairs, without speaking to any body; not seeing her below, he went into her
Room, but not finding here there, and seeing her Closet-door open, and a Pen
and Ink on the Table, he pulled the Door close, and sat down to write a Billet
Deux, which he intended to leave for her:

In the mean while Marinda came into the Room, and this Cousin with her, and
sitting down, they carried on a discourse, the first words of which the Prince
did not hear, but the following were to this purpose:

I tell you, Marinda, (said the Stranger) it is in a happy hour for you, that
the King is coming down, for he will take these Soldiers with him, and this
Prince, who is so ungentile to endeavor the ruin of a Gentlewoman:

I should scarce blame him ( said Marinda) for why should a Man be blamed for
prosecuting the way to his own happiness? Nor am I so conceited, as to aim at
Marriage; for what private Gentlewoman could nourish such vain hopes as those,
of being raised to a Princess? It Is more than a bare Prodigy, for Earthquakes,
Inundations, and those wonders of Nature do sometimes happen; but that a Prince
should marry a private Maid, is such a wonder, as I never found mentioned in
all the Chronicles I have read. What? Cousin, (says she) and do you plead for
him! will you ever consent to his Love on dishonorable terms? No, ( said
Marinda) as I do his Cause Justice, so I will my own; had not this news of the
King's coming prevented me, I would have gone with you to your Father's, to
avoid him; now I will deferr it till I hear the Siege of Limerick is over, then
I will retire to your House, or some other Relations, where he shall never
trouble me again, or I him. Ay, do, Marinda, (said her Cousin) fly the Tempter:

But what shall I do with my Lovers? They are both going to the Camp, and will
expect that I give them some satisfactory answer; and I do not know which way
to incline; the one is a Captain of Horse, he is approved of by my Father, but
disliked by my Mother and me, because he is a Papist, and I have another cause
of aversion for him, that is, that he is a Foreigner; I don't fear that all his
Country Jealousy can make him suspicious of such a Face as mine; but those on
the continent make such saucy domineering Husbands, that no freeborn
Irish-woman will endure their slavery:

There is Celadon a good Humoured, Handsome, Witty Fellow, and one that I like
very well; he makes his Courtship so zealously, and swears so seriously that he
Loves me, that I do almost believe him; yet the Fellow is so poor, that I fancy
neither Father nor Mother will ever consent to my having him; prithee tell me
what resolution to take; or whether of the two to favor, my inclination, or my
Obedience. There is ( said Marinda) come to this Town an Indian, who tells
Fortunes very true:

Shall we (said she) put on our Masks, and go to her? No, ( said Marinda) she
will come to me for sending for; I was the first that received her in this
Town, and wellcom'd her as a Stranger, and therefore she is very intimate with
me:

Then pray (said the Stranger) let us send for her immediately: It Is not a fit
time ( said Marinda) but in the Afternoon I will send her a Message by my Maid,
and she shall bring her with her; but we are summoned, here is a Servant come to
call us to Dinner. They went down together, and the Prince stole softly to
Celadon's Room, and finding him within, bade him come along with him to his
Lodgings; and he bearing the Prince company out, no body suspected, but he had
all the while been in Celadon's Chamber. As the Prince walked toward his
Lodging, he told Celadon of his lying hid in the Closet, and all that he
overheard them saying. And now Celadon, (said he) what think you of my
Condition? What should I think, ( answered Celadon) but that you are happy? for
you love and are beloved:

But what good will that Love do me (replied he) since 'twill never avail me
any farther than the bare acknowledgment? Nay, that she Loves me is rather my
unhappiness, for did she not, perhaps she would continue here, and I might have
those smaller satisfactions, the sight of her, and her Conversation:

And I would rather have her Company, though she tortured me with disdain, than
lose her by this effect of her Love. Your Highness ( said Celadon) has better
Politics in War than in Love; if in the Battle your Enemy should fly, would
you grieve that he did not stand longer, does not his flight do better? If she
had strength enough to resist she would stand; but she, like him, in her flight
confesses her weakness, and in retiring before you does seem to say, Come
follow me, and Conquer. Your Highness saw her Cousin, my Mistress, though her
Face is very ordinary, yet her Shape is handsome; she has a very taking Wit,
and I hear she has a Bag of Money would blind one sooner, than the most dazzling
Beauty:

And (as I am a Soldier) though I have a great devoir for all the Beauties of
the fairer Sex, yet, to my thinking, rich Jewels outshine the brightest Eyes,
and the yellow of the Leuidores is a more glorious color, than the fairest
White and Red, that ever made Lover dote, or Poet Rhyme:

I am glad they will send to the Indian, for I Will tell them their Fortunes, and
order them too, but so much to our advantage, that you shall have your
Mistress, and I mine; the way I will go about it shall be this:

Your Highness may desire your Landladies pretty Niece to take her Maid with
her, and go to the Indian to know her Fortune, let her order the Maid in the
mean time to stay at the Door, and when the Servant comes from Marinda, let her
pretend to be the Indian's Servant, and to carry the message up Stairs; let her
bring the Servant down word, that her Mistress, the Indian, is busy with
Company, but will wait upon her Lady in the Evening; then let the young
Gentlewoman gratify the Indian well for telling her Fortune, and tell her that
she has a mind to have a Frollick that Night, and desire the Indian to lend her
one of her Spanish Suits to Masquerade in:

When she has brought this Suit home, I will put it on, and go to Marinda's at
the appointed time; I will personate the Indian, my feigned Voice is shrill
enough to pass for a Woman's, you know I have got a Foreign tone, as well as
she, my height and shape are much the same, and for my Face it is no matter, she
always wears a Veil, so will I, and as to her gift of Fortune-telling, let me
alone to tickle their Fancies. The Prince was mightily pleased with the
Stratagem, and said, Go on and prosper, thou cunning Proteus, and may Celadon
the Prophetess have better luck than Celadon the Franciscan. The Prince sent up
for the young Gentlewoman, and telling her that there was an Indian come to
Town, who showed none but Gentry their Fortunes, he desired her to go this
Afternoon to ask hers; and told her, that she must borrow a Spanish Suit of the
Indian, as for her self:

He gave her a Purse of Gold to pay the expense, and leave as a pawn for the
Clothes, in case the Indian, not knowing her, should be unwilling to venture
them without Security. The young Gentlewoman took her Maid with her, and did
her business as successfully as they could wish:

She had her Fortune told, and the Prince, to whom formerly she made the whole
Relation of her Amor, was desirous to know what the event of it would be. She
told him, that the Indian, smiling, delivered it in these words; Be Constant,
and be Happy. Thank your kind Fortune, Madam, (said the Prince) how many a
Lover would be overjoyed at such a Prediction! He spoke this with a particular
earnestness:

The Fair Virgin gave the Prince thanks, for sending her to know it, and took
her leave of him, not without observing something extraordinary in his
Countenance, by which she guessed that the impartial God of Love, has no more
respect for Persons of Quality, than for their Inferiors. Celadon fell to
shifting himself, and having put on the Indian's Habit, looked so like her,
that the Prince promised himself both Diversion and Success from this
adventure. Celadon staid till it grew duskish, because the Night would help the
disguise; about an hour after he came back again, and gave the Prince this
account of his Success. I have been at Marinda's, she took me into the Closet
(where you was) very cautiously, lest any one should hear but her Cousin and
me, not dreaming who she confessed her self to:

She told me that she did Love you, and yet must dissemble it; that she heard
your Highness had been in the House, and she thought 'twas to see her; that she
expected you would come to take your leave of her, and did not know how she
ought to receive you:

She said that I told her at first, that she should have you, but now desired
me to confess freely, whether I spoke truth then, or did it to flatter her
humor; for if it were so, she would not indulge her self the sight of you any
more, but wean her self from you for altogether. I found by this, that the
Indian had soothed her up with the hopes of your Marrying her; I humoured her
too, and bade her hope the best:

For had I done contrary, that would have contradicted what the Indian told
her, and given her some grounds to suspect me for a Cheat; besides, despair
might have made her refrain your Company for ever:

She sighed, and said, she would ask my Advice, whenever she had occasion for
it. Then her pert Cousin took me up, telling me much the same story that you
overheard her in, and desired to know which of these Lovers she should have:

Your Highness may imagine I gave the Verdict on my own side:

And after threatening her with all the ill fortune, that can be in the other
Servant, I promised her as much happiness in my self; and was so large in my
own praises, that it made me blush, under my Veil, while I uttered them. She
proffered me a reward for what Advice I gave her, yet would not tell me whether
she would take it or no. But when I had parted with them, and thought the Joke
was over, the pleasantest part of it was to come; for at the Door I met a
pretty young Lady, who was come to pay a visit to Marinda: I was at the Ball
(says she) when you professed the faculty you have, in foretelling Events, and
now I have met you in a private House, I must needs make trial of it; saying
this, she took me aside, and having conjured me Secrecy, she told me, that she
lived in Dublin, and was ardently solicited by one K -- k, a great Officer in
the Army; that he made her vast promises of kindness and everlasting Affection;
and she desired to know whether he would prove Constant, if she trusted him:

After having looked fixedly on her Face, and the palms of her Hands, and used
those impertinent Formalities, that your pretended Fortune Tellers do, I bade
her never doubt it, my Life for it he would prove true. She could not conceal
the Joy she conceived, at my favorable answer; and for my good news, and to
bribe me to Secrecy, she clapped a Jacobus into my Hand. I hope your Highness
will not blame me, for cozening the poor Maid, for I thought it might prove my
own case another time, to desire one to have the same good Opinion of me, and
therefore I thought I ought to do, as I would be done by. In the Street I was
stopped again, by a spruce Servant Maid, who making a low Courtesy or two,
desired me to look in her Hand, and give her a proof of my Skill; she brought
me into a Kitchen, to a light, and showed me her Hand, but begged me to be
secret, because it concerned her Reputation:

I told her, she might speak freely to one who knew not her Name, nor was ever
likely to see her again. I am Courted (said she) by an Old Man, who is very
Rich; I love a Young one, who as very poor:

The Young one I dare not marry, for fear of Beggary; the Old one I must not,
because I cannot endure him:

In this uncertainty I would live as I am, were it not that the young Man took
his advantage on me in the Critical minute; and now I must make choice of one,
or the other, for fear of being with Child, and for ever disgraced; tell me, in
this case, which will thrive best with me. I remembered I was Celadon still,
for all my Habit, and therefore considering the necessities of those Youths,
whose niggardly Fortune would not let them Marry, and the Dotage of feeble old
Age, that will needs be Lovers, when their season's past, I advised her to
Marry the Old Man, and keep the Young one; that way (said I) you will enjoy the
Love of the one, and the Riches of the other. Her Master coming in at that
time, and asking what I was, the Maid told him, I was a Fortune Tellers:

Go thy ways, Girl, (said he) and leave me to speak a word to her:

When she was gone, he pulled out a Silver Groat, telling me, I should have
that to resolve him a question. Sir, (said I) though I sometimes tell the Poor
their Fortunes for nothing, yet I never do it to the Rich under half a piece. I
am not one of your ignorant rambling Gypsies; I Will tell you your Fortune, as it
shall fall out to a Hair:

Well, here is half a Piece for you, (said he) if you tell it so exactly, for
it is a thing of moment:

I am about to marry a handsome Girl; the only scruple I have against it, is,
that these young Jigglets are so wild, that I fear 'twill be hard to keep her
constant; tell me therefore, whether she will be true to me, or no? What Age
are you of, (said I)? But threescore and eight, (said he): I looked in his
Hand, and took his Gold, and told him, that the Virgin would prove as honest to
him after Marriage, as she was to her Virtue, before he Weds her. This was a
true answer, for I fancied it was his own Maid that he meant, and how honest
she was, I knew by her own Confession. I went away laughing at the folly of
Covetous old Age, that would throw more Money away, toward the satisfying an
impotent desire, than he would willingly have given a Physician, for the saving
his Life. The Prince laughed at the pleasant use which Celadon had made of his
disguise; and they two debated for a while which was the greater weakness, that
of the Old Man, to trust his Honor to a Young Woman's Virtue; or that of the
Maiden, to trust hers to the Constancy of an Officer. The Prince placed his own
Folly in the first rank; and said, it was greater than the other two, to trust
all the repose and quiet of his Life, to the rigor of a disdainful Woman; to
cringe to one that was beneath him, and submit himself to one, who could not
pretend to a higher Match, than one of his Dependants:

But when Love tock her part, it made him recant all these Reflections, clad
the meanness of his passion in a lovelier dress, and made it seem, either no
fault at all, or one of the least, the most pardonable of his Life. He
commended Celadon's discretion, in indulging her the hopes of Marrying him, for
fear her Virtue should otherwise have made her shun him. The next morning word
was brought to the Prince, that the King was near the Town:

He drew up all his Men, in order to receive his Majesty; and after having
kissed his Hand, and discoursed with him, concerning the preparations requisite
to the Siege, the Prince came home to put all things in readiness for his next
days March:

But that which he accounted the chief, was to take his leave of Marinda. He
found her alone in her Room; and though she seemed uneasy, yet he constrained
her to stay, and hear a long story of his Passion; which he set forth in the
most prevailing words, accompanied with the most winning Carriage, that Art and
Nature, joined together, could invent. At last he gained so much upon her, as
that she consented to receive a Letter from him, while he was in the Camp. He
came back to Celadon with a mixture of Gladness and Sorrow; Gladness at the
favor she had granted him, the privilege of Writing to her; and Sorrow to
think that he must purchase that satisfaction at so dear a rate, as the loss of
her Company, as long as the Siege should continue. I will not set down how many
of these Fits of Joy and Grief he had, whilst he was in the Camp; neither will
I Romance so much, as to white down all the thoughts he had of her, and all the
many wise Dialogues he had with himself about her; those the Reader can better
imagine, than the Author tell; at least, if he has any of the same Passion the
Prince was possessed with:

That will make him sympathize exactly with his Highness's thoughts, as two
Clocks, well made, keep time with one another. Thus much I know, that they were
so importunate with him, that they could neither be lulled asleep, by the
stillness of the Night, nor diverted by the terrors of the Day:

They kept him company continually, followed him even into the Enemies
Trenches, and when Shot of all sorts flew thickest about his Ears, they were
neither stilled by the noise of the greater, nor frightened away by the small.
Among all these thoughts, he did not forget those of writing to her; nor had he
been three Weeks away, when calling to him one of his trustiest Servants, he
ordered him to take Horse for Clonmell, and, with all the privacy imaginable,
deliver her this Letter.

To the most Charming MARINDA.
IF I could think that Absence would have the same effect on you, it has on me,
I should be but too happy:

Might I hope that it has lessened your Disdain, as much as it has increased my
Love, I should be over paid for all the restless hours, and melancholy
thoughts it has cost me. But this is too good Fortune for me to flatter my self
with; nor is it likely, that she who shuns her present Lover, should cherish
his memory when absent. We have blocked your Enemies up, won a Fort from them,
and daily gain more ground:

And O that I were as certain of Conquering you; as of taking the Town! But
you, my lovely stubborn Enemy, hold out against all my endeavors:

All the Assaults I make serve but to show your Obstinacy, and my Weakness, and
help to confirm the improbability of my gaining you. Yet Despair it self shall
not make me give over; but like a resolute General, who will rather dye in the
Trenches, than rise from before the Town which he has once laid Siege to; so
after all your Repulses, my worst of Fortune shall but make me dye at her Feet,
whose Heart I could never gain entrance to. But do not rashly resolve on my
Ruin, but consider, my Lovely Princess, whether it is not juster for your Pity
to indulge that Passion, which your Disdain cannot destroy:

And so instead of proving the death of your Lover, give him his Life, in
letting him live to be

Yours, S -- g.


The Prince awaited the return of his Messenger with a great deal of Impatiency:

The next Evening, as he came from an Assault, his Man came to him; and having
told his Highness that he had performed his Message to Marinda, he gave the
Prince a Letter from her, which he opened, after kissing the Seal, and, with a
great deal of Pleasure, read these words.

To the Prince of S -- g.
WHen I received the Honor of a Letter from your Highness, I was in a great
strait, whether to return an Answer to it or no:

If I did, I thought it would look like Presumption; if not, like Incivility:

In this hard choice I thought it best to err on the kinder side, and rather
incurr the censure of Rudeness, than that of Ingratitude. How little I am
guilty of the latter, your Highness, too well knows, by being witness to a
discourse, which I never designed for your Ears; but since it came to them, I
cannot recant it. And though your Highness talks of despairing to take the
Town, I cannot think you should, when you know how much you have gained of it
already:

But your Highness deals harder with this, than you do with Limerick; you will
offer no Conditions, because you expect it will surrender upon Discretion; you
hope that in vain: for though a Traitor within takes your part, and all the
cunning you have assaults it from without, yet these ways will not render your
Highness Master of this Fort, which will never yield, but upon Honorable Terms.

Your Highness's Most humble Servant, Marinda.


The meaning of this Letter was too plain, to have any false Constructions made
upon it; and the Prince, who saw that he must retire, or engage too far, had
now a greater conflict with his thoughts, than he had before with the Coyness
of his Mistress, he was so equally divided betwixt Love and Interest, that they
governed his Breast by turns, sometimes one having the better, and sometimes
the other. He thought, however, that so kind a Letter as this seemed to require
an answer; and therefore, upon the Army's taking the Irish-Town, supposing that
a little more time would render the King Master of Limerick, he wrote her this
answer, to prepare him a kind Reception, when the Camp should break up.

TO THE Most Charming Marinda.
AS our taking the Irish-Town has prepared our way toward the taking of
Limerick, so I hope the Surrendry of Limerick will prepare mine, toward the
taking that which I value above all the Cities of the Universe, my Lovely
Marinda; and my hopes will be mightily crossed, if one Month does not put me in
possession both of that, and her:

She shall then see how much better conditions we'll give her, than we do to
our Enemies; when we shall make them accept of what Terms the Conqueror
pleases to impose; but my Beauteous Fortress, even when she has Surrendered,
shall choose her own Conditions, and impose what Laws she pleases on her
Conqueror:

Since, as he receives that Title only from her Favors, so will he any time
exchange it, for that of the

Humblest of her Servants, S -- g.


In this Letter, the Prince spoke what he truly thought, that Limerick would
soon be taken; for the King had sent for some heavy Cannon to the Camp, to
throw down the walls, and a breach once made, there were thousands of English
bold enough to have dared all the Enemies Shot, and force their way into the
Town, in spite of all the resistance:

But Fortune had otherwise ordered it, for Sarsfeild with an unusual Bravery,
marched with a small Body of Horse, farther into that part of the Country which
was Subjected to the English Power, than they suspected he durst; surprised the
Convoy, and cutting them to pieces, burnt them, their Carriages and Provisions,
(which they brought for the Army) to ashes; some of the Carriages he nailed up,
and burst the rest; and the Army wanting them to batter the walls, and the
hasty approach of the Winter, not giving them time to send for others, they
raised the Siege; his Majesty went for England; his Forces retired to their
winter Quarters, and our Prince to his Mistress. I trust, the Reader will not
think it prejudicial to our Prince's Honor, to come back without taking the
Town, this was not his fault, but his Fortunes; the days of Errantry are past,
nor have our Warriors now, such Swords as those Knights of old, that could hew
a way through the thickest walls, and do wonders greater than our Age will
believe:

Our Prince did not pretend to impossible Exploits, but as far as pure Natural
Force, and Courage could go; he might have been ranked in the first File of the
Army; he was not ashamed, that he could not do impossibilities, but came back
to Clonmell with as brisk a Look, and as glad a Heart, as if he had Routed
Sarsfeild, and laid Limerick in Ashes. The place where he Lodged before, was
made ready for him, but he had other designs, and therefore Complemented some
of the other Officers with those Quarters, and chose Marinda's Mothers for his.
But when he first accosted his long absent Mistress, 'twas in Terms so
passionate, that the inability of the Author makes, him forbear to express
them; nor could he match them, though he borrowed Apollo's Brain to invent, and
a Quill plucked from one of Cupid's Wings to write them down; neither would he
think it safe to express them to the Life if he could, lest a Passion so well
represented might prove infectious to those that Read it; and such Charming
Words like those in Magical Books, might raise a Spirit in some Fair Reader's
Mind, some rampant Spirit, that would make the Raiser his prey, before she
would be able to lay him again:

Thus much the Author will assure you, that they had as powerful an effect, as
he could desire over his Mistress; or as the most Amorous of my Readers could
wish to have over his own:

She laid aside that reservedness which she observed to other Men, and
confessed her Love, as freely as she gave it him; that Night, he told Celadon
of the welcome he received; and Celadon asked him, whether he intended to Marry
her? This Question put the Prince to a stand, and he asked Celadon whether
there was any possibility of Enjoying her without it: Celadon told his
Highness, he would try, and acquainted him with the way, and the Prince
approving of it, the next afternoon he put it in Execution:

He went to wait on Marinda's Cousin, whom he Courted, and they two being
pretty Familiar, the young Gentlewoman began to talk about the Love the Prince
bare her Cousin; she did it to sound him, and to find whether the Prince's
Affection was real. Celadon, who watched for such an opportunity, said, yes
truly, the Prince had an unfeigned Affection for her fair Cousin, so violent a
one, that notwithstanding the difference of Quality, the Prince would Marry her
if he were single. What, is he Married then said the young Lady, extremely
surpised? Why, did not you know it, Madam, said he? since through inadvertency
I have blabb'd it out, for Heaven's sake do not let it be known that it came
from me, for then I shall be for ever out of the Prince's favor. She promised
she would not, and so left him, to carry the News of it with all speed to her
Cousin. The Prince having left a great part of his Men in Clonmell, was gone
out of Town that Morning at the Head of the rest, accompanying the gross of the
Army which was Marching toward Dublin; and on the morrow about midday, he
took leave of the Officers, to return to Clonmell; he brought but one Man back
to wait on him, who had a Horseman's usual Arms, Sword and Pistols, and the
Prince had a flight Morin on, and a Buff-coat, both which he wore, rather for
the solemnity sake, (because he went with the Army) than for any use he
suspected he should have of them:

Riding along, they came to diversity of Roads; where he and his Man being both
Strangers to the Country, lost their way, nor could they meet with any one to
direct them into it, only the Voice of some body in a wood just before them;
when they drew nearer, they heard the shrieks as of one in distress, and the
Prince Riding up, overtook his Man, and put on as hard as he could to see what
it meaned; coming nigh, he saw by a Hedge side two Men, who had defended a gap
against twelve, one of them was fallen, and blocked up that place in his Death,
which he maintained whilst alive; but was not unrevenged, for two were killed
on the other side, and the other Person stood armed with Anger and Despair, and
with more Courage than Hopes, maintained the Combat against so unequal a
number; the single Person seemed by his Garb to be a Gentleman, he had only a
half-pike, which he managed so actively, that with it, he kept off a row of
pitch-forks and Swords, which assaulted him; behind him, stood Lady and her
Maid, crying out at every thrust they made at him, and calling upon Heaven and
Earth for assistance, against those barbarous Enemies:

The Prince rode up, and commanded them to desist, and let him know what was
the cause of their Quarrel; one of them gave him a short Answer in Irish, and
at the same time made a thrust at him with his Pitch-fork, which by the
Prince's sudden spurring his Horse missed him, and ran the Beast into the
belly, the Prince drawing out a Pistol, returned the Irishman's Complement with
a shot, and laid him dead at his Horse's feet; he had done the same service
with his other Pistol, but that the Beast enraged with the double wound which
Teague's weapon had given him, kicked and flung so, that the Prince was forced
to alight; the Man which waited on his Highness, did more Execution with his
Pistols, and having with them, killed one, and wounded another, he alighted and
drew his Sword to Fight by his Master, who by this time had dispatched two
more, not without receiving a great wound, which one of them with a half-pike
had given him in the side; the Prince enraged at that, fell fiercer on the
rest, and the Stranger who hitherto had been only on the defencive part, having
but one to deal with, gave him his mittimus to the other World, and came up to
fall on those who had more than their hands-full of the Prince and his Man; but
at his coming, finding themselves too weak, they sought that safety in their
heels, which their Swords could not give them; the Prince and his Man had
Jackboots on, and were unable to follow them; and the Stranger was so weary
with the Blood he had lost, and the weariness of so tedious a conflict, that he
had scarce strength enough to keep him on his Legs; however, he used that
little he had in coming up to the Prince, and thanking him for his own Life,
and his beauteous Companions; the Prince told him, he owed it to his own
Valor, and the favor of Heaven, which seldom fails to help the Courageous,
especially when they have Justice on their side:

The Prince ordering his Man to look to the strangers Wounds and bind them up,
went himself to Compliment the Lady upon her delivery:

He found her leaning on her Maid, bewailing the Death of that Stranger who was
killed before he came there, but how was he amazed, when looking in her Face he
found it to be Marinda: When he first came in to her assistance, her Hoods were
over her Face; which was the Reason he did not know her, and the Beavor of his
Morion being down was the cause of the like ignorance in her; though he very
little expected to meet her there, yet the joy to see her safe, overcame his
amazement, and he was about to testify it, with all the ecstasy which his
Passion raised in him:

When she, casting an angry frown at him, said, I thought, Sir, to have given
my Deliverer the greatest thanks for the rescuing yonder Gentleman's Life, and
my Honor, from the Hands of these wicked Villains; but since it is to you I
must pay them; I must at the same time declare, that I had rather they should
have taken my Life, than, forced me to owe it to you; go, leave me to be a prey
to them whom thou have hunted away, for I had rather dye here, bemoaning this
poor Gentleman who fell in the defense of my Honor, than take refuge with you,
who whilst you defend it from others, endeavor to prey upon it your self. He
answered her very mildly, and would fain have expostulated with her concerning
his Innocence, but she sat over the Dead Gentleman bewailing him, and would not
hearken, nor answer one word to what he said; the Prince having found her so
kind at his last seeing her in Clonmell, wondered strangely at this Capricio of
his Fortune, and turning away from her, went to the wounded Gentleman, to see
whether he could unfold him the Riddle. He said, all that he knew of it, was,
that the Dead Gentleman was a professed Servant to her, as he was to her
Cousin, and that Marinda having made a sudden resolution to go for Dublin, they
two proffered to accompany her thither; that she would not let them take as
much as a Man with them, because she would not have any one know which way they
were gone; that she had desired them to avoid the High-roads as much as they
could, because she had no mind to be known by any who came from Dublin-ward;
that in this by-road they met those Rapperees, who bade them deliver; that the
Gentleman who Courted her, shot at one of them and killed him; that then they
all fell upon them two, who had no other way to defend themselves and the two
Women, than by letting them go behind them, and they defend that gap, till some
others Riding that Road might come to their help; that the Gentleman was
killed, as he made a pass at that second Man who lay Dead by him, and that
himself, snatching up the Dead Man's half-pike, as being a better defense than
his Sword, had held them all in play till he came into his Rescue. The Ladies
expressing so great a resentment against him, made the Stranger curious to know
who it was; but the Servant had no sooner informed him that it was the Prince
of S -- g, but he begged a thousand pardons for the rudeness his ignorance made
him commit; and said, that his Highness had acted with a Bravery suitable to
his Quality; and that though he never before had the Honor to know him, yet
what he had seen his Highness perform in this little acquaintance, should make
him respect him more for his Deserts, than his Title. The Prince had very
little relish for all the Praises the Stranger heaped upon him, and only
desired him to prevail with the Lady, to go back to Clonmell with him. While
the Prince's Man went to catch the Horses, the Stranger persuaded Marinda to
return back with him; and getting all upon the Horses, they rode before, only
the Prince got upon his Man's, and the Man on the Dead Gentleman's, and laying
the Body before him, they Rode to the next. Town; the Gentleman's wounds were
slight ones, and needed little Cure, besides rest and a recruit of Blood;
therefore he went with Marinda the next day to Clonmell; but the Prince's wound
was large, and had lost him so much Blood, that his Life was in danger. Marinda
the next day sent him a Surgeon, and a Hearse, to carry the Gentleman to
Clonmell, he was Buried there, and she showed such an excessive Grief at his
Funeral, that no one who knew he Courted her, but thought that she Loved him;
the Prince's being wounded came to Celadon's Ears, but he wondered that it was
in rescuing Marinda, whom he thought all the while to have been at home; he
straight took Horse and came to the Prince, and found him very weak, wanting
rest, and incapable of taking any: to hear that his Rival was so bemoaned by
Marinda, was worse than Poison to his wounds; to have seen her prefer another
before his face; one who was Dead, and insensible of her Kindnesses, before
him, who valued them at so high a rate; and to think, that the other, who was
but ^ private Gentleman, was preferred by his Mistress, before him and all his
Titles, raised a Noble Indignation in him, which bespread his Face with a
redder dye, than that of his Wound. When he had told Celadon her unkind
Behavior toward him; he guessed immediately what was the Reason of it, but
would not tell the Prince, for fear it should incense him:

He only made a slight matter of it, and told his Highness that if he woold
write a Line by him, for a pretense to him to see her, he would soon
accommodate the difference; and set him as much in her Favor as ever; the
Prince seemed to give but little credit to these hopes, but because he would
leave nothing unattempted, ordering that no body should disturb their privacy,
he bade Celadon write, whilst he dictated him these words.

TO THE Incensed Marinda.
IF it be a Fault to have rescued my Fair One from her Enemies; if it be a
Crime unpardonable, to have spent a great part of my Blood in revenging the
death of my Rival, because I did not lay down my Life with his, then will I
offer up the poor remainder of my Blood, to atone for the Cowardice I have been
Guilty of; and shall think my Life sold at too dear a rate, if it should draw
so many precious Tears from your Eyes, as did that happy Gentleman, who even in
his Death triumphed over the Love of his Survivor. But if I was as willing to
expose my self for your sake, and he was the first in your Defense, only by the
good Fortune, of being with you at the beginning of the danger; I know not why
the living Servant should not share more of your favor than the dead one;
since he would have died as willingly at your Feet, had not your Fortune
commanded him to live till he conquered your Enemies. Now he has kept his Life
too long, since it is become odious to you, and would gladly lay it down before
the Face of his incensed Divinity, if his weakness would permit him to come
there:

And if he has any desire at all to live, it is only so long till you let him
know in what he has offended you:

This sure is the least you can grant to one, who was once so happy in your
favor; and it is all the satisfaction your Criminal desires, to know why you
have condemned him, since he has always been the

Faithfullest of your Servants, S -- g.


When Celadon got to Town, he came straight to Marinda's:

She was not to be spoken with, but he met with Diana, (so was his Mistress
called) and after the usual Complements past, he asked her how he should speak
with her Cousin:

No way, (said she) there is no access for you, because you come from the
Prince. Why, Madam, said he, is not Marinda, satisfied that the Prince has
sufficiently hazarded his Life in her defense, but that she will endanger it
farther by her Cruelty? Cruelty! (answered she) why what kindness can he expect
from a Virtuous Woman? Or what would the Wedded S -- g with the Chaste Marinda?
And is that all the reason of her Anger? ( said Celadon,) Has the poor Prince
suffered all this for a word of mine? By Heaven (Madam) the Prince is single,
and I am persuaded has as virtuous designs on your Cousin, as I have on you. If
he has no more on her (answered she) than I have on you, he would never again
be at the expense of a sigh for her:

For your part, I here discharge you my acquaintance; your mischievous Jest has
been the cause of a great deal of Grief, both to my Cousin and me, for the
Gentleman's death, the other Gentleman's weakness, and the endangering the
Prince's Life:

You have jested fairly, you had like to have jested the Prince at once out of
his Life and Mistress, your-self you have jested out of my Favor, I will
assure you; and so farewell good jesting, Mr. Celadon, for if I ever any more
admit of your Jests, I Will give you leave to make a Jest of me as long as you
live. Saying this she flung away into her Cousins Room, and all that Celadon
could say, could not get either of them to speak a word to him. She told
Marinda that the Prince was innocent, and, by Celadon's Confession, had no
designs, but what were honorable and virtuous:

At the same time the Maid came up, and brought them a Letter, which Celadon
sent to Marinda, and the same which he had written from the Prince's Mouth; the
Servant told them that he was returning to the Prince, and desired to see them
before he went, that he might know what Service they had to command him.
Neither of them would consent to see one who had been the Author of their late
troubles:

But Diana told her Cousin that the Prince, who was innocent, ought not to
suffer for him; that she should rather show her self kinder than ever, to one
she had so causelessly tormented: Marinda's own Love did take his part so much,
and join so prevalently with her Cousin's Arguments, that it made her give some
small interval to her Griefs, to pay that which was due to her Love. She wrote
a Letter, and sent it to Celadon, who made what haste he could to leave an
angry Mistress, to see his wounded Prince, and cure his Body, by this sovereign
Ballsom which he brought for his mind. The Prince (when he came before him)
would not stay to tell him how he did, till he first asked how he had
succeeded. As well for you, Sir, (said he) as you can wish, and as ill for my
self; how ill for my self, I will tell you hereafter; how well for your
Highness, this Letter will acquaint you. At these words he gave him the Letter;
and the Prince, with a great deal of haste, breaking it open, found these words.

To the Prince of S -- g.
HOw shall I be silent, when Justice obliges me to confess I have wronged you?
Or how shall I have the face to confess a Rudeness, which a misunderstanding
made me guilty of? I was too rash to condemn you without a hearing; but I hope
your Highness will pardon that rashness, when you shall consider it was in the
defense of (that which I prefer before all things) my Virtue. Through the
weakness of my Sex makes me careful of my life; yet did your Highness need it,
I could willingly expose it as lavishly in your behalf, as you did yours in
mine:

Yet my Innocence (which is dearer to me than that Life) I must not sacrifice,
no, not to you. Your Highness has more Generosity, than to begrudge a Gentleman
a few Tears, who lost his Life in my defense:

They were no more than what I owed both to Gratitude and Humanity:

Neither ought you to infer from thence, that the Dead shares more of my Favor
than the Living:

I would convince you of the contrary, if it were fitting:

But your Highness's condescension must not make me forget, that you are a
Prince, and that my highest deseres rise no higher than to be the

Humblest of your Servants, Marinda.


You deserve all things, Divine Marinda, (said the passionate Prince) what
Title is too High, or Estate too Magnificent to admit you for a Partner? I will
no more indulge this vain Ambition, or let it cross my Love:

Tell me, Celadon, (said he) does not Marinda, with her natural Beauty look
finer than our Proudest Court Ladies, though decked with all their Gaudy Costly
Dresses? Yet that lovely Body is but the Shell of a more glorious Inhabitant,
and is as far out-shone by that more radiant Gust, which lies within, as your
choicest Jewels exceed the luster of the Cask, which holds them:

For her Illustrious mind has got as inexhaustible a store of rare perfections
in it, as the famed Potosi has of Riches:

And as in that the greedy Spanish Conqueror, the farther he diggs, finds
still more new supplies of Ore; so whoever makes himself Master of her richer
Heart, will still discover there new Mines of Radiant Virtues, so infinite they
are, that they would tire the most inquisitive Lover to find them all, and each
of them has such peculiar Charms in it, enough to make him leave his scrutiny
after more, to admire that one which his first search does find. Ah, Sir, (
said Celadon, now your Highness is happy and in favor, you do not consider him
who is clearly cast off by his Mistress, for what he did only with design to
serve you; for it was my telling Diana that your Highness was married, and
confessing the falsehood afterward, has so put me out of her favor, that she
has forbidden me ever seeing her again. Though (said the Prince) that was an
unlucky Policy of yours, yet since 'twas well designed, you shall not suffer
for it, and therefore take my word, that the same day which makes me happy,
shall make you so to; and as our Loves are joined, so shall our Fortunes. Your
Highness ( said Celadon) cannot be more in Love with the perfections of your
Mistress, than seem with the Wit and good Humor of mine:

Besides, her Baggs which are so large and tempting, it would grieve my heart
to part with them, after I was in so fair a way for obtaining her. The Prince
answered, that both their Loves waited only for his Health, and then he would
soon see them consumated. He wrote two or three Letters more to Marinda whilst
he lay ill, but the Reader must excuse me, if I produce them not here, since
Marinda burned them to prevent a discovery; and Secretary Celadon was not so
careful to keep any Copies. Now had the active Sun run through our Celestial
sign, and his pale Sister gone through her Monthly course, and changed her Orb,
whilst the poor Prince kept his Bed, and with the loss of Blood had been as
pale as she; at length the help of Art restored his Health, strengthening Nature
began to exert her power, and though she was not risen of a sudden to her former
vigor, yet she made great advances, and every day perceived her strength
increasing:

His impatient Love would stay no longer than till he was able to travel, and
then it carried him back to Clonmell, to see his long absent Mistress:

He rode to his Lodgings at Marinda's Mothers, but hearing Music in the House,
and the Mirth of Company within, he asked what was the Matter. It Is, (said one)
a preparation for Madam Diana's Wedding, who is just now to be Married.
Married! said Celadon, O that I had either come sooner or later; for my Honor
sake I cannot see my Mistress Married away before my Face, and yet I am come
too late to prevent it; but what can be done on such a sudden I Will do. Saying
this, he alighted, and rushed into the House, and the Prince followed him in to
see what his design was. Celadon entered just as the Ceremony began, and with a
threatening voice cried, I forbid the Banes; and if the intended Bridegroom will
defer his hopes so long, to go aside with me, I will convince him, that my
Title to her is better than his. The Company wondered to see this Challenge
laid to her; her Relations, who were by, expected her to speak; but she was
prevented by the Bridgeroom, who fiercely cried, that it belonged to none but
him, to vindicate his Title to her:

Some Officers were there, the Bridgerooms Friends, and would have taken up his
quarrel, but forbore out of respect to the Prince, expecting what he would do
in it. The Prince knowing the Gentleman to be the same whom he had seen Combat
with so many Enemies, to save Marinda, had such an opinion of his Valor, that
the would fain have decided the Quarrel, without injuring either of the
Pretenders:

Had she been at his disposal, Celadon should have had her, if at her Parents,
they had decided it for the Spaniard: Therefore he thought it best to leave it
to her self, and therefore spoke to this purpose. Gentlemen, I have such an
esteem for you both, that I would not have you fight, since, which ever falls,
the Law will lay hold on the other, and so in striving which shall have the
Lady, both of you will lose her; if you will stand to my advice, let it be
thus. Refer your Cause to the Lady, and give her three days time to consider of
it, in which time let both of you have free access to make your Court to her,
and at the three days end, let her take which she will:

If, Celadon, her choice does decide it against you, you must submit; but if
she like you best, there is no reason why your staying with me in my illness,
should make you lose your Mistress.

The Gentleman said, that, since he owed his Life to the Prince's Valor, he
would not deny him this; and Celadon was glad to win so much to try his Fortune
in. While the three days lasted, the two Suitors took their turns to Court
Diana: On the fourth day, the Music played again, the Priest was present, and
the admiring Company stood in suspense, to see who was the destined Bridegroom.
The Bride stood out, and in making her Choice, spoke thus: You are here come
together, my Relations, and good Acquaintance, to set me Married, and I am
happy in having the choice of two Gentleman, the refused of which may, if his
deserts are answered, have many a better proffer; however, if they were ever so
good, one of them must be rejected, therefore I would not have the disappointed
one take it ill that I refuse him. One of them has been longer my Servant, but
the other was more zealous while he was so:

The Spaniard has been the more Complaisant, but the Englishman the Fonder:

The Spaniard the truer Courtier, but the Englishman the truer Lover;
therefore, as commonly Love is soonest raised in one Breast, by seeing it first
in the other, so the Englishman has the advantage of the Spaniard, and my heart
catched that Passion, as it were by Contagion from his:

Yet, on the other side, I should not forget my Duty; my Father takes the
Spaniard's part, well, but Love takes the Englishman's:

Then I must beg my Father's pardon, if I leave the Spaniard to receive his
reward from him whom he courted, and desire the Company to judge, if I ought
not rather to yield him my Love, who sued to me for it, than to him who Courted
my Parents.

The Company was divided in their opinions, as their Acquaintance biased them;
and some murmured as the Inconstancy of her Humor, whilst others applauded her
Choice. Celadon ran to give her thanks, with all the kindest expressions his
Joy could inspire him with; and his Rival, distracted with Grief and Shame at
his unexpected repulse, stood uncertain on that sudden Emergency, how to behave
himself:

He was awaked out of this Trance, by a Gentlewoman, who came to him, and said,
Take heart, Seignior, be not ashamed of a Denial, which not your want of Merit,
but my Contrivance was the occasion of; 'twas I that persuaded the Lady to
refuse you, and I trust you will pardon me, when I say it was for my own sake
that I did it. Without question the Company thought this an odd sort of
Confidence, for a Gentlewoman to Court a Man, in so kind terms, and so
publicly too:

Her Garb was very fine, her Shape and Air gentile, and her Face, which was one
of the most amiable ones there, spoke her to be in the prime of her years; yet
neither her Dress, Youth, Beauty, or Love, could prevail the least on our
discontented Spaniard, who would not once vouchsafe to look on her. What then,
(said she) is my Constancy thus requited? Or can two years time cause so much
alteration, as to make Astolfo forget me? These words made the Spaniard turn
toward her, and he no sooner saw her Face, but he cried out, am I in a Dream?
Or do I truly behold once again, the Face of my beloved Faniaca? Now, Celadon,
I yield thee up thy Mistress, and quit all my pretensions to her, for this
which I have newly found. Celadon gladly thanked him for his submission to
Diana's Choice, and all the Company bore a part with the Spaniard in the Joy he
conceived at the change of his Mistress:

But the beautiful Indian, who longed to hear how he came for Ireland, said, It
is now, my Astolfo, two years since you and I parted, wonder not then if I am
desirous to know what befell you since that, and how you escaped a Death which
so apparently threatened you; my endeavors to find you out here, made me relate
all the passages of our Acquaintance hitherto, and therefore I believe there is
no accident in the remaining part of your Life, which is too secret for the
Ears of this honorable Company:

I have had none, (said he) which I will not freely tell, but to the
understanding my Relation, it is requisite that this Illustrious Company should
know some things, which for want of opportunity, have as yet been a secret to
you, as well as to them. My Father is a Gentleman of a plentiful Estate near
Sevill, by my Mothers death he was left a Widdower with two Children, Me and a
Daughter, both which he was very fond of, as being his only Comforts, the
Relicts of his deceased Wife, and the Pledges of his youthful Love:

There lived near us an old Couple who had the like number of Children, a Son
and a Daughter, they were intimate Friends of my Father's, and so free with us,
that notwithstanding the severe restraints of our Country upon young Persons,
yet our Families observed no such Custom, but we young ones conversed with one
another with the same freedom as if we had been near Relations:

And as youthful familiarity in different Sexes, usually ends in Love, so it
proved with us, for our Neighbor's Son and my Sister had such a mutual
Affection, that they were never well but in one another Company; and his
Sister, whether by her own inclination, or their setting on, seemed as uneasy
unless when she was in mine; had she been handsome, perhaps I should have taken
as much diversion in his Sister's Company, as he did in mine; but I thought
those Complements thrown away, which were bestowed on an ugly Face; nor could
my Wit help me with one fond Vow or happy Expression, for want of Beauty to
inspire it; This made me avoid her Company to get into his; but when I saw him
shun mine as much, and that he and my Sister coveted to be always together; his
growing more reserved to me than formerly, and some symptoms which I perceived
in my Sister; her frequent sighs at parting, her blushes at meeting him, and
some other slips, which the most dissembling of your Sex find difficult to
hide, gave me apparent cause to think that she loved him. He and I were once as
great as 2 Brothers laid our Breasts open to one another thence his never
discovering the least to me, concerning his passion for my Sister, made his
Love look to me, as if it designed nothing that was honest. I had then to wait
on me a Turkish Captive, who was taken away young, and having been bred up
several years in my Father's House, was very trusty and discreet; I let no one
know my suspicions, but him, and ordered him to be a Spy on all my Sister's
Actions; and if ever he observed any thing remarkable between them two, that he
would acquaint me with it:

He observed my Commands, and one time brought me word, that he had overheard
him and my Sister discoursing; that she desired him to ask her of my Father,
and that very soon, or she should be discovered to be with Child, and so be
disgraced, and turned out of Doors; though this was but what I feared to find
out, yet now I found those fears true, it enraged me both against him and my
Sister:

However, the consideration of her Sex's weakness (which is an unequal
Combatant for Love, when assisted by earnestness and opportunity) made me
pardon her so far, as to leave her to be punished by the ill consequences of
her own Folly; but him I resolved to be revenged on:

Though my blood boiled at the first sight of him, yet I dissembled my anger in
public, and told him that I had something to impart to him, if he would take a
walk with me into the Fields in the cool of the Evening; he consented, and we
went out together; at we walked on talking, I drew him insensibly to a private
place, and then retiring a little distance from him, I bade him draw:

Sure you are in jest (said he) you will not draw that Sword against your
Friend, which you have before now drawn in my defense:

This Sword (said I) was drawn then for my Friend, but now against the worst of
mine Enemies, one who has abused my Friendship, and my Sister's Love:

Yet thus much I will give to our former Affection, Marry her, and salve up the
Injury thou have done her, and I will forgive thee mine:

What, (said he) and are you turned a Bravo to hector me into Marriage? Know
then that I will never do it, neither shall it ever be said, that Guzman valued
his Honor so little, as to make a Wife of his Whore. Whore! (said I) that word
I will engrave on thy traitorous Heart; at these words he leapt back and drew,
I made at him with a great deal of Fury; but being appeased by some Blood I
drew from him, I proffered him again the same conditions of Reconciliation; but
his Rage made him deaf to Reason:

We fought on, till one thrust I made at his Breast ended our difference, by
his fall:

I fled in all haste to the Seaside, where by good chance there was a Ship
under Sail bound for the Indies; I went aboard her; Landed in America amongst
some Soldiers, who were sent to reinforce our Country Garrisons there:

I was a private Soldier, till a Fight that I signalized my self in, raised me
to a Captain's Commission; 'twas in this station I was, when I came acquainted
with you:

You know the Captain of the Man of War, which boarded us, sent me Prisoner to
Sevill, with my other Countrymen:

Near this Town my Father lived; I sent him word of my being in Prison, and he
straight came to see me, but told me, he must not own me for his Son, lest it
should cost me my Life:

He applauded my revenging the dishonor done to my Family; but said, that
there had been Warrants issued out against me, and 500 Ducats, by the
deceased's Friends, promised him that should seize me; that if I should stand a
Trial, and escape the Law, yet their private revenge would reach me; therefore,
he said he would make Friends for me and my fellow Prisoners, that we should be
dismissed, and then he would have me spend some years abroad, and when Time, or
Death had cured the malice of my Enemies, he would get my pardon, and call me
home. I took his advice, and as soon as I was freed, hearing that the
Hollanders were raising Soldiers, for some design they had not yet divulged, I
entered Volunteer into that Party which came for England; you have all heard
how we succeeded, and that instead of a Battle, we came as it were to a
Triumph; for the English came over to our side; thence we took Shipping for
Ireland, and in Dublin I received a supply from my Father, which bought me the
Command of a Troop; I was at the Boyn near Schomberg when he was killed; I lay
in the Camp before Limerick, and took my chance of War, among those Brave Men
that fell in the Trenches; I Quarrelled with the Prince the other Night,
mistaking him for some Rival that Serenaded Diana; but the Guards coming up,
and my finding out my Error, delivered me from his Sword too:

I was afterward engaged with ten Irish at once, and fortunately rescued by
the Prince's Valor; so that my kind Stars preserved me through all these
dangers, to fall the second time a Victim to your Eyes, my former Conquerours;
I Courted I confess that Lady, but it was, because I saw not the least
likelihood, of ever finding my Beloved Faniaca; and therefore, I thought her
Fortune would prove a good shelter for a Punished Man, who had been tossed from
Spain to the Indies, from the Indies to Spain, from Spain to England, from
England hither, and one, that durit not set foot again on his Native Country:

Besides her Wit and good Humor, placed her much in my Esteem, though all
those Perfections vanish in any Woman, when you my incomparable Mistress are
by. Thus the Spaniard ended his Relation, and the Company with no little
pleasure, reflected on the alterations of Fortune; which, after tossing them so
far asunder, by the contrary gusts of Adversity, now by one prosperous Gale,
brought them together to their desired Harbor:

The two Happy Couple, would willingly have prevented all future dangers, by
fastening that indissoluble Knot, which nothing but Death can untye, but Marinda
desired, her Cousin, to forbear hers for two or three days; and the Fair Indian
desired her Spaniard, to defer their Joys so long, it not being fit, that she
should be admitted to so Solemn a Ceremony of the Church, as that of Matrimony,
till she were first listed among the number of her Children:

The Priest who came there no Celebrate their Marriage, performed this
Solemnity, and all the Company wished the Fair Convert Joy:

Mirth and Feasting took up the rest of the day, and made up an entire
Friendship, between the Brisk Celadon, and the Valiant Spaniard, who now
Quarrelled no longer for a Mistress. But if some good natured Reader should be
too much concerned for the Amorous Prince, whose Intrigue seems to have stood
still, whilst the others have run almost to the end of their Race; let him
know, that his went the same pace with theirs; though the Author, to comply
with Marinda's Modesty, brought her not so openly acting the Lover's part, as
he did the brisk Diana, or the bolder Indian; for as the main wheel of a Clock,
though it turns all the rest, yet goes it self with such an insensible motion,
that to an unskilful Eye it seems to stand still; so the Prince's and Marinda's
Amor, was carried on indiscernably to others, and seemed to them to be at a
stand, whilst indeed it was the chief mover of the two other Intrigues, and
pointed out to them the long wished for, the Matrimonial Hour:

You must therefore understand, that after all the dark unsuccessful days which
our Prince had sighed away, in doubtful Hopes, distracting Fears, and his last
black ones of Despair; Fortune vindicated her old Title of Inconstancy, in
being kind to him again, in bringing him that propitious critical minute, in
which they say, the Coyest Lady (if you nick the right time) is to be won:

The Prince exactly hit it in the first Visit he made Marinda; as soon as the
designed Marriage was deferred, and the Company gone, he went to pay his
particular Respects to the Lady of his Vows:

He found her in the Garden with her Cousin, discoursing about the unexpected
breaking off her Marriage, and Celadon according to his privilege, taking her
into an Ally aside, left the Prince in another, with Marinda; and what time
they had there together, he improved to the utmost, in showing her how
sincerely he had been her Servant, from the first sight he ever had of her,
till then; and told her, what he required of her in retaliation, and upon what
Honorable Conditions he expected it; she answered with all the kindness due to
so fond a Lover, and with a mixture of that submissive Civility, which she paid
him as he was a Prince, though one who professed himself her Servant; and that
his Highness might not censure her to have beep either Rude or Cruel in her
Behavior toward him, through the whole course of their Acquaintance; she
desired, that he would hear those things from her Cousin's Mouth, which she
thought not so fit for her own; Diana was called for, and Marinda desiring her
to acquaint the Prince with all she knew of her Thoughts, without disguising
any thing; she Discoursed with Celadon apart, while her Cousin began thus to
the Prince, who was more than ordinarily attentive. When my Cousin ordered me
to tell you her greatest; privacies, those of her Love; she did but give the
Reins to that passion, which has always been too strong for her, since first
the Graces your Highness is master of, reduced her to the condition of a Lover;
and I question not, but she has had undeniable proofs of an equal Affection in
you; or else, (by what I know of her Humor) she would rather have Died, than
once suffered it to be known; your Highness over-hearing our Discourse at the
Well, opened a light to the discovery of that Affection, which otherwise had
been doomed to perpetual obscurity; for though your Highness, did make some
Addresses to her, which as she told me, served to ruin her the more, yet they
would never have proved any advantage to you; since we both thought, that you
spoke out of Raillery more than any serious design; besides* in the highest
tide of her Passion, she professed, he would rather suffer any thing than own
it to you; the first Night your Highness Serenaded her, she showed so little
concern at it, till you were gone, that I thought it had been a Frolic of the
Spaniard's Gallantry, who about that time came acquainted with me, 'twas I
spoke to you out of the window, though when the difference of Voice discovered
my mistake, I broke off the parley; that time the Indian came to Town, and
lighting first into my Cousin's Acquaintance, she told her the Dream she had
about you; I will not tell it over again, because your Highness has heard it
already, only in vindication of the Indian's Skill, let me assure your
Highness, that she told my Cousin, she should have the Gentleman she Dreamed
of; she interpreted the little Archer, who was on your side, to be Love, the
Giant on hers, Honor; that Honor's going over to your side, and leaving her
defenseless, signified, that your proffering to Marry her, would overcome her
obstinacy; and the Cupid's shooting her through, is easy enough to be left to
your Highness's Explanation; the Indian promising her success, made her indulge
that Love, which she bridled before, and brought her abroad to the Ball:
Marinda, Madam, was nor at the last Ball, said the Prince: Yes, Sir, said
Diana, if your Highness remembers, there were two in Spanish Dress, the one was
the Indian, the other Marinda; but sure, said the Prince, Marinda was not not
with her in my Room the next day:

She was with your Highness both times, said Diana; nay, it was she whose
Advice you asked in the Closet; she came home that Night, with all the marks of
a violent Grief, at something which your Highness had said to her, and resolved
withal, never to see, hear, or speak to you more; when she represented the
Fortune Tellers, she forbad your Highness to prosecute the Intrigue any farther,
unless you designed to carry it on Honorably; and your going on with it, by
giving her your Company so often afterward, and the Indians (...) averring
that she was destined for you, made her believe, your Highness had altered your
mind for the better; as you know, Lovers above all People are aptest to believe
things will come to pass fortunately, merely because they would have it so;
this her belief was strengthened by the kind promising Letter you sent her from
Limerick; which Letter, induced me too, to think that your Highness had
designed something to her advantage:

You saw what a free reception she gave you, at your return from the Camp, till
Celadon's telling me that you were Married, dashed all the Joy I conceived at
the prosperity of her Amor, and was very near breaking her Heart, in
endeavoring to gain a Conquest over her Love; but when she found how difficult
that was, she said, she would punish your illegal Passion, and her own at the
same time; and lest a fit of Love should make her recant, she put it in
Execution immediately; there was a Gentleman of a considerable Fortune, who had
seen her at my Father's in Dublin, and fallen in Love with her; this Gentleman
being then come to Clonmell to see her, she desired him to wait on her to
Dublin, and I desired my Servant the Spaniard, that he would accompany her
thither; she told me, that she would rather Marry him whom she did not Love,
than give a longer encouragement to any unlawful Affection, which your Highness
might entertain for her; that would have bereaved you of her for ever, had not
she been met by those Rapperees; her Servant fell there, and though she was
mightily concerned for your Highness's danger, yet her Virtue drew those Tears
from her, which she thought due to her Defender's Misfortune; and might serve
to make you despair, ever coming into her favor again:

But when Celadon undeceived us, by telling me that your being Married, was
only an invention of his own, Shame and Love returned very powerfully upon her;
Shame, that she had used you so ill without a cause; and that Love, which
before was only suppressed by her Resentments, flourished now with greater vigor
than before; This discovery which regained your Highness her Affection, lost
Celadon mine; and my Anger at his crafty deceit, and his being the cause of so
much bloodshed, (though innocently) made me resolve on the same way to get rid
of him, which my Cousin designed against you, that is, by Marrying another; and
the Spanish Gentleman, who had my Father's Consent, coming then wounded from a
Journey which he undertook to serve me; I thought once to reward his Service,
and punish Celadon's Falseness, and imagined I might do it with less
disturbance, whilst your indisposition kept him out of the way; but Fate, which
they say presides over our Marriages, as well as our Deaths, ordered it
otherwise, and brought him just time enough to suspend it. The Prince gave the
most ample demonstrations of Joy, at the setledness which this Relation showed
to be in Marinda's Love; and having thanked the Ingenious Diana for the comfort
she had given him, he walked toward the other Couple; they joined Company, and
the Prince desired Marinda that she would complete his Happiness, by setting
Celadon as high in his Mistress's Favor, as himself was in hers:

The Beautiful Marinda granted him this request, as the first demonstration of
her Obedience; she endeavored it so effectually, that presently she made her
Cousin pardon Celadon's former miscarriage, and receive him again into her
favor; neither did Marinda find it any thing difficult to persuade her to
this; for of all People, Mistresses are the most forgiving, indulgent Persons
to those they Love; and let them dissemble it as much as they please, they
cannot be long Angry at any fault a Lover commits, unless it seem to proceed
from want of Affection; but Celadon not being of that Nature, was soon
forgiven, and as a proof of it, was encouraged to hope she would Vote for him:

The next morning, the Indian came to wait on the two Cousins, and told Diana,
that he who was in Election to be her Husband, was the Spaniard whom she had
been so long looking for; Marinda had invited her to the Wedding, and she came
in a little after the Prince had deferred it, and then seeing it put off, would
not discover her self to the Spaniard; she desired Diana to keep him still in
ignorance, that when he was refused, she might see how he would excuse himself
to her: Diana desired no less than she, that it might be kept secret, lest
Celadon should esteem her love the less, thinking that the Spaniard being owned
by another, made her take him for a shift; this was the result of the three
days Trial, and hence it came to pass, that the Spaniard dejected at the loss
of one Mistress, was elevated by the unexpected finding out another, whom he
Loved better:

The short prorogation of their Marriages, only continued till the Prince had
prepared for his; at last the expected day came, and rewarded the three longing
Lovers with the entire possession of their Mistresses:

The Beautiful Marinda, the Ingenious Diana, and the Pretty Faniaca, submitted
themselves to the power of their Youthful Conquerours. Diana had all the
felicity she could wish, in having him she Loved; the Indian gained not only
her dear Spaniard, but a Fortune with him, for he that day received News from
his Father, that his old Enemy was Dead, his Pardon taken out, and with it, he
had orders to come home, and take possession of an Estate his Father gave him;
the Beautiful Marinda received the reward of her invincible Virtue, in Loving
and being Beloved, and in having gained a Prince, who raised her Quality as
high (in comparison of what she was before) as a Woman's Ambition could desire;
these were the Pleasures of the Wedding Day, heightened by the addition of
Music, Feasting, and Mirth; but the Night came, we must like their Bride
Maids, conduct them to their Beds, and drawing the Curtains leave them there,
to the full Enjoyment of those Pleasures, whose Raptures, none but Experienced
Lovers know, and the Constant ones may expect to attain.

FINIS.

