A pilgrimage into the land of promise, By the light of the vision OF Jacobs
ladder and faith; OR A serious search and prospect into life eternal, pointing
out the way and discovering the passage out of man's mutable state of life, into
a state of immutable righteousness and glory, through the knowledge of Christ in
Spirit.

Written in the year 1662, by HENRY VANE, Knight, toward the latter end of his
prison-state; by himself fully reviewed and perfected, some few days before
his suffering, and left as his last Testimony and service to this present
generation, according to the will of God, before he fell asleep.

HOSEA 12.3.4. and 6. verses. He took his brother by the heel in the womb, and
by his strength behaved himself princely with God.

Yea, he had power over the angel and prevailed: he wept and made supplication
unto him: he found him in Beth-El, and there he spoke with us.

Therefore turn thou to thy God: keep mercy and judgment, and wait on thy God
continually.

Printed in the year 1664.

A TREATISE CONCERNING ETERNAL LIFE.
THe purposes and counsels of Gods mind are first taken within himself, before
they are or can be known to any other. They are therefore called the deep and
hidden things of God. For God is his own counselor. There is none that can
instruct him. His mind is not only comprehensive of all that can be known and
consulted upon, but has those eternal springs of light and power, by which he
is the supreme cause and orderer of all things. And these, as to their manner
and kind of operation, are three. These first and great powers are they, who in
their name and manifestation are the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, by whom the
same God does form and take all his counsels within himself, and put them in
execution according to the purpose of his own mind. These are the several
distinct powers of discerning and will in the same divine essence. With the
first of them, God minds things after his own incomprehensibile manner of
being, knowing and willing them, as God. Of this pattern there is no imitation.
I am, says God, and there is none besides me. With the second, God minds things
on earth or in the world, condescending to proportion himself in his knowledge
and will to the creature, in order to be found in the likeness and fashion of
created nature, and so to act over the law first in himself, that the creature
may be capable to imitate and fulfill it after him. With the third he does so
admirably join and put both these minds into one, and fix them in such most
perfect harmony and love, that they are not to be divided; yet keeps and
upholds in each, their proper and distinct operations.

By this threefold operation, God sets up the eternal law, and causes the
manifestation of that which is the very wisdom and reason of God himself, the
head of Christ, the person of the blessed mediator. For he who thus is three
in counsel, (wherein he decrees and orders all things, giving the law in one
and the same eternal mind) does not execute by himself immediately, but by the
Mediator, his representative or image, the Angel of his presence, in whom his
name or likeness is placed, in order to bear it and bring it forth into the
sight and participation of others. By the immediate operation of the Trinity he
is made and constituted the Lords Christ and true Messiah, the secondary and
executing power, ordained by God, as the breath and voice of his mouth, to
fulfill all his wills and all the counsels of his heart. This is he who was
from the beginning, the breath of God, the inspiration of the Almighty, the
face and image of the invisible God,

First by eternal generation within the mind of God.

2. By everlasting emanation, as the outshining light and express character of
he divine essence.

3. By temporal incarnation and inseparable personal union whith the seed of
David.

According to his eternal generation, he is without Father, without Mother,
without descent, coeternally and coessentially God with the Father, or first
cause of all; no less truly and properly God, then God himself. But that
which he is by everlasting emanation, is the first born of every creature, he
that was before all things, and by whom all things consist. And according to
his temporal incarnation, he was made man, like unto us in all things, sin
only excepted.

He is the inward writing of the eternal law, that is written and lies within
the bosom of the father. None can read or unloose the seals on the backside
of this writing, but the lion of the tribe of Judah, he that from eternity has
known Gods mind and bin his counselor, as the almighty breath of his month,
inspiring and giving life and being to all things, which when put forth, does
execute most exactly all that the dictates of Gods mind require to be done.
Without him is not any thing made that is made; Nay, admit the creature could
receave being without him (which it cannot) yet the eternal law and will of God
could never be known to angels or men, unless revealed to them by this lively
oracle and voice of his month. For all things are delivered to him of the
father, and none knows who the Son is but the Father, nor who the Father is,
but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. No man has seen God at
any time. The only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared him; even he that was in the beginning, was found in the form of God
and thought it not robbery to be equal with God; the WORD in whom is life, and
that life the light of men. By him comes all hearing, understanding and
obedience to be wrought in the creature. The first creature in which it is
wrought, is the building not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, made part
of himself, who as Mediator is a mixed seed of both natures in one person and
Spirit. In this Spirit he comes in the dispensation of the fulness of time, to
be made flesh, and so has in him the voice of God, the voice of the head and
chief of angels, and of the head and chief of men, by means whereof he
speaks and converses with all created understandings, in their own likeness
and language. Thus comes he to be that spiritual ladder and way of graduall
intercourse, by means whereof, the angels that are ascending and descending
upon him, do keep the door open between heaven and earth, and he fills al
things.

This is Gods first, best and most perfect work, finished from the beginning,
the works that are so much the object of Gods knowledge and delight, that he
therein rests, subjecting them no more to change. This is the building not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens, the invisible and exemplary pattern unto
both creations; the rock, whence they flow, Deuteronomy. 32.4. He is the rock, his
work is perfect, or he is the rock that is Gods perfect work; the wisdom
which God possessed in the beginning of his way, (in which he was pleased to
condescend and set forward toward the creation of the world) Prove, 8. and 9.
chapters; which compared with John. 1.1, 2; do evidently show him to be the
WORD that was by God as one brought up with him, who was with God and was God;
Gods love and delight, in whom he was ever rejoicing. He also had his love,
delight or choice, in conformity to the eternal will and purpose of God, among
the sons of men, that he makes the habitable part of his earth, of whom David
was the type and figure, Psalm. 89. where God says (v. 20. etc.) I have found
David my Servant, with my holy oil have Ianointed him. With him shall my hand
be established: mine arm also shall strengthen him. I will beat down his foes
before his face: and plague them that hate him. I will set his hand also in the
sea: his right hand in the rivers. He shall cry unto me, thou art my Father, my
God, and the rock of my salvation. Also I will make him my first borne: higher
then the kings of the earth. I have sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie
unto him. His seed shall endure for ever: his throne as the sun before me.
Again, Psalm. 78; 70, etc. He chose David also his Servant, and took him from
the sheepfolds, from following the ews great with young, he brought him to feed
Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance. So he fed them according to the
integrity of his heart: and guided them by the skilfulnes of his hands. Most of
this is accomplished in Christ, the antitype and Truth, as he is the Son of
Man, of the seed of David according to the flesh, called Gods Servant the
BRANCH, and the Lord our righteousness, the WORD of life, that is the rock of
ages, whence all things are hewn. He is the platform and exemplary pattern of
both worlds, in idea as well as execution, which the divine wisdom contrived
and wrought in God, from all eternity, as its great masterpeice, by which the
worlds were made; Heb. 1.2. Ephesians. 3.9. God made all things by Jesus Christ,
whether visible or invisible. He was the first pattern of all his works.
Consequently, according to this first and perfect pattern was man made, and to
it in some degree and measure restored since his deformation by the fall. In
uprightnes was he made, according to Gods image; God is righteous originally in
his own nature, and both originally and communicatively righteous in Christ,
who made man upright; Eccl: 7.29.

The house which wisdom first builds for her self with seven pillars, is in the
person of Christ, Gods only begotten son. For he that built all things is God:
and this, as the Son over his own house, a house not made with hands: that
eternal house of the Father, wherein are many mansions. The same WISDOM,
after she had built her house, killed her killing, slew her sacrifice, (the
lamb was slain from the beginning of the world) mingled her wine and also
furnished her table. All things being thus made ready for her guests whom she
purposed to invite, she sends forth her servants. She cries upon the highest
places of the city; who so is simple, let him turn in hither: as for him that
wants understanding, she says to him, come, eat of my bread, and drink of
the wine I have mingled. It shall be to your souls as a tree of life, a well
springing up into everlasting life, in every one of you.

But (as we shall show more fully afterward) man in his perfect, innocent
state, professing himself wise (when he should have seen himself simple, or at
most, wise only in part, wanting yet that which should make him fully and
immutably so) became a fool. And because when he knew God, he glorified him not
as God, neither was thankful, he became vain in his imagination, changing the
glory or likeness of the incorruptible God manifested in Christ, into an image
made like to corruptible man, and to birds, four-footed beasts and creeping
things, to the darkning his foolish heart, that changed the TRUTH of God into a
lie (the original and first sin) worshipping and serving the creature more then
the Creator, God, blessed for ever.

Conformity to Christ, the first and most perfect pattern and Rule of all
obedience unto Gods word and declared will, is the TRUTH of God, which the
first Adam changed into a lie, endeavoring (as much as in him lay) to make it
void, and set up some other thing, even himself in the place thereof, (as the
law and Rule of his action) which he was forbidden. In departing from and
disobeying of Christ who was the law of Gods mouth from the beginning, the word
that was commanded to a thousand generations, he tasted the bitter fruit of his
own doings, and was ensnared by the work of his own hands. He was enticed by
his own lust: sin conceaved, which being perfected, brought forth death.

And if it be objected; 'twas impossible the first Adam should sin against
Christ, or the TRUTH of God as it is in Jesus, because where there is no law,
there can be no transgression; when as yet nothing was declared of Christ,
there could be no offense against him.

The Answer is easy and plain. There was both knowledge and need of Christ
before the fall, as well to prevent and keep out sin from entering into the
world, as to expiate and deliver from it by his death, after it was entered,
and secure against its return again. This the Apostle Paul asserts with great
cleernes in his Epistle to the Romans, showing that Adam was but the Image and
figure of him that was to come, Christ, made from the beginning the power of
God unto Salvation, and the righteousness of God that was to be revealed from
faith to faith. This, man at his creation and before his fall could not be
ignorant of. For that which might be known of God in Christ by the book of the
creature, was showed to him and made manifest in him. For the invisible things
of him, (even of Christ, who is the invisible image of God and hidden mystery
ordained for our glory before the world, and kept secret in God) were clearly
seen and to be known by the things that are made, the creatures he produced, to
the making manifest his eternal power and Godhead, thereby rendering them
without excuse that would otherwise be apt to make the forementioned objection,
and on that presumption think themselves at liberty to change Gods truth into a
lie. But hereby every mouth comes to be stopped, and all the guilty world are
subjected to the righteous judgment of God.

Christ, who is the law of Gods mouth, required of man obedience as soon as he
was created. He called upon him to be a hearer of the will of God, which he was
entrusted to reveal, and teach the most acceptable manner of performing. This
did Christ require and teach, as answering the end for which man was at all
made by him at first, or redeemed since; even this, that he should not be his
own, or at his own dispose, but yield subjection to the will of another, set
over him by God, who was to be flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone, and to
be therefore trusted and believed on, as appointed to feed and guide him to life
eternal, and who required that he should glorify God in his soul and in his
body, that were Gods, upon the account of al rights and obligations whatsoever.

Thus was Christ typified to Adam by the tree of life in the midst of the
Paradise of God; as also by the living water, that watered the garden of Eden,
a river clear as crystal, the streams whereof refresh and make glad the city
of God, the Holy place of the tabernacle of the most high, Mount Zion that
cannot be moved, in the midst of whom God dwells, as the place of his rest,
promising to help them with his morning appearance, or the brightness and glory
of his second coming and fuller communication of himself, then Adam received
in his first creation, God was willing Adam should know he was a fountain
without botom; so deep, as not to be drawn dry; and would have him open his
mouth wide that he might fill it. He would have him become a vessel yet more
larg, capacious and fit for his use, then at first he was made. For he gives
not his gifts all at once, but by degrees and after a manner most suitable to
his inexhaustible fulness and infinite wisdom.

God therefore comes forth in Christ as a light and law to man's knowledge and
discerning, instructing him to be the hearer and doer of his will, in and under
a threefold law and rule of righteousness;

1. The law of nature, or book of the creature, visible and invisible.

2. The law of the Scriptures or written book of the revealed will of God.

3. The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, written by the living WORD
himself, in the tables of the heart of the Son of Man, taken into hypostatical
union with him, to be his mouth and spokesman, at whose hand angels and men are
to receave the lively divine oracles of Gods counsel, appointed to be made
known unto them.

This threefold law is, as it were, so many transcribed duplicates and copies
of what is to be found in the living eternal WORD of God, the Original. In
conjunction with this, they are lights and good guides. They are as a first,
second and third stream of one and the same river of pure and clear water, that
gradually lead into that great Ocean of knowledge, light and love, that is to
be found in the original. They are prepared and fitted as the suitable,
adaequate means to be man's guide and Rule, according to his state and measure
of growth up into his head, in and upon whom he may be borne and made to grow
as on his root, that may either receave and retein him in an eternal abode with
him, or else leave, reject and finally cast him off, after proof and trial, as
an unprofitable branch, that has taken Gods name and born his likeness in vain,
and that shall therefore not be held guiltles, but first or last meet with his
due reward. This is seen and found by the experience of angels and men, from
the beginning to this present day.

Of these three laws then we shall treat in their order, very briefly.

1. First, as to the law of nature or book of the creature, it is no other then
the right fashion and make which is given by the creator to the works of his
own hands, as the creature comes fresh and pure out of the mould into which he
cast it in its first creation, bearing his image, superscription or impression.
In a more peculiar manner, he created man in his own image. Through the power
of the enlivening breath from the mouth of the Lord, all things live, move and
have their being; such a being, and such a manner and measure of operation, as
God sees fit for them, and pronounces to be good, though not immutably or
perpetually so, but subject to spending, wearing out and waxing old, as also to
other changes. These are the many things which God creates, which being
animated with life from him, do speak forth the praise and excellency of their
maker, and are as so many kinds of voices and sounds in the world, none of
which are without their signification and teaching to those that have eyes to
se and ears to hear, with skill to spel and put together Gods mind out of
them, as a law and rule for their instruction. The reason and discerning given
to angels and men, does qualify and enable them for this, even to spel out the
mind of God, partly by looking forth into the outward and visible frame of the
creation, but more especially by consulting the light within them, the work or
impression of the law in their own hearts and upon their own beings, which
makes them a law and rule to them selves and to one another. For by the tongue
of man God speaks to angels in the person of Christ. By the tongue of angels he
speaks in and to men. This is the law that was given to Adam in Paradise.

2. As to the law of the Scriptures or written word of God, it is a second
dispensation, a voice of words, and that by men, the Servants and Prophets of
the Lord, who being inspired with ye breath of Gods living WORD, are taught to
think and speak as the Holy Ghost moves them or gives them utterance. Under
these words there is an inward Testimony and writing, which is not of private
interpretation.

These words and divine oracles, committed to writing, are kept by the special
influence of Gods providence, and recorded for the succeeding ages and
posterity of the Church. These oracles, with the help of the same Spirit that
indighted them. (and alone is able to show the right meaning and sound
understanding of them) are able to make men wise unto Salvation, by sending
them to their Savior, the son and living WORD him self, in and with whom
alone, they may have life eternal. All that is thus written and recorded is
that which is given for this very end by inspiration from God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction and for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, and perfected unto all good
works.

Under this dispensation by a voice of words, the seed of faith lies hid. It
was not given till four hundred and thirty years after the promise and the
making known of the law of faith unto Abraham, without and before the written
word. And it was not added to make the promise void, or as a law that in and by
itself could give life, especially life immutable, not subject again to wrath
and the curse. But it had its use and service in subordination and as a
Schoolmaster, pointing to him that was to follow, the seed that was to come. It
was as the baptism of repentance preached by John, which in respect of
transgressions, was to cleanse and prepare the way of the Lord in the hearts of
the Sons of men, dead by nature in trespasses and sins. The Lord that afterward
was to be revealed through faith, would have their souls purged and kept as
well fenced as might be in the mean time, against all impurity of evil doing,
by this law of written words, which was also a witness afterward of Christ's
birth, death and resurrection.

This is a second law that after the fall was given to man as a light or lamp
to his feet and lanthorn to his paths: a light, but under a cover, and in a
dark place, sealed and bound up as amongst Christ's own disciples, who are
taught and learned in the wisdom that is from above. Otherwise, as it may be
used, receaving a sense and meaning from the wisdom of the earthly and sensual
man, or from the subtle skill of the Serpent, it does become the fortress and
strong hold of sin, a ministry of the letter and of death, a most dark and
uncertain guide to any that pretend and profess them selves to be the followers
of it and of the commands in it. For the vision of all is unto them, as of a
book or letter that is sealed, which when delivered to one that is learned
after the manner of men, and not illuminated with the Spirit of TRUTH, saying,
read this I pray thee, he says (or at least should say) I cannot, for it is
sealed and I need one to open it. And when it is delivered to him that is not
learned in any kind, he answers, (if he deal ingennously) I am not learned; I
have not that skill which is required for the reading of it, nor can I se any
more into the true meaning of it, them one that cannot read at all, or tell how
to spell words and put letters together.

The voice and sound of this law is not of that extent as the first, (which is
published by the tongue and speech of angels, and other pieces of the creation)
but is more peculiar to one sort of men, who formerly were they of the seed of
Abraham according to the flesh, unto whom God more especially committed these
his oracles, expecting answerable fruit from all those that having sinned under
this law, were reserved by God to be judged and at last to stand or fall by it.
The rest of mankind amongst the gentiles that lived without this law, were not
to be judged by it; but by their own law, the law of nature, unto which they
are perpetually still obliged. This generation of the fleshly seed of Abraham
is neither literally nor figuratively as yet passed away. For there are too
many that since the light of the Gospel has sinned forth upon them, do yet
desire to be under the law, preferring their station and lot in the earthly
Jerusalem, Mount Sinai, that is still in bondage with her children, and choose
so to remain, rather then to ascend into the Jerusalem that is above and is
free.

These are the branches Spoken of, Romans 11. taken out from among the Gentiles,
upon the rejection of Abraham's natural seed, who contrary to nature are graffed
into the good olive tree, surrogated and taken by God as a nation or people to
himself in stead of the other, in the same relation, under the same Covenant
and law, being made to partake of the root and fatnes of the same olive tree.
These are (notwithstanding all their privileges in this estate) to take heed
of boasting or taking up their rest under the dominion and in the inward
principles of that law which excludes not boasting. If they do, they are
fairly warned that their standing and abode in and with the root, is not so
sure, nor their righteous principles and operations in conformiry to the law,
so fixed, but that they may fall and be rejected as their predecessors the
Jews were before them, to wit, all such of them, whose standing was but by that
Covenant, and not by the law of faith, for want whereof God complains against
them (Heb. 3.) as children of his wrath and provocation, a perverse, crooked
and froward generation, that always err in their hearts and have not known
his ways. At last, they come to nothing; never enter into Gods rest, though
they think themselves (and in some sort are) a nation that works righteousness,
in strict observance of the letter of all Gods Ordinances and commands.

This is the same law that was by God written in the heart of Adam at the
creation, being renewed and published after the fall, first by the ministry of
angels in the hand of a Mediator on Mount Sinai; which word, spoken by angels,
remained steadfast in its revenging property against all that contemned and
disobeyed it. Hence is it said in another place, the law works wrath, and is
sure in inflicting the penalties and curse threatened. It was committed to
writing by Moses, the Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles. Even in the Gospel
the law is fulfilled and made honorable. By the doctrine of it, man is taught
what he ought to do and what not to do. He is bound up to perfect and exact
obedience to it, and by reward and punishment, is either encouraged to
obedience or restrained from disobedience, being left to his own dispose and
choice, as to any thing of prevailing influence which this law dispenses. Yet
is there that in the doctrine of it, which sends all under it to Christ as the
only way and means of their salvation, showing who this Christ is, and that
they must believe in him or perish in their sins, and that by believing in him
they may attein the remission of their sins, and life eternal.

This distinct knowledge of Christ the Redemer, Adam had not, nor properly could
have before the fall. Nevertheless, by the things rhat were made, and from the
voices and significations of Gods mind ministered by the tongue of Angels,
(which Adam in Paradise was capable of hearing and understanding) and out of
the book of the creature, more especially the tree of life, he was (and might
have bin more then he was) instructed in the maine point, as to who and what
Christ was, and how the coming to him and feeding upon him, was the only way
and means to make man immutable in righteousness, by obtaining an inseparable
union with the chief good, without ever falling into sin, yea, as the only sure
means to have prevented the fall.

In the third and last place, there is the law of the Spirit of life which is
in Christ Jesus, the immediate writing and engraving of Gods own mind, true in
it self and true in the receaver of it, the heart of Jesus the Son of man, the
living tables upon which the living WORD by way of self-impression and personal
union, does seal and lay hold on that one seed, which is Christ, making it the
brightness of his glory, the express character of his essential mind, which is
righteousness and holiness itself. This is the WORD that is near thee, in thy
mouth and in thy heart, that thou may do it; that is to say, in the heart
and mouth of Christ the second Adam, and head of al true believers, by him to
be poured out as an anointing for the whole seed, rendering thereby the vision
of Gods mind so plain to them, that he that runs may read it.

The ministry of this law is a voice, that,

First, invites all freely to come to the waters, every one that is a thirst,
and he that has no money, to come, buy and eat: yea, to come and buy wine and
milk without money and without price, that they may eat that which is good and
delight themselfs in fatnes. This first general voice and invitation leaves it
to man's choice whether he will obey and come, or not.

But this law and ministry has also in it a second voice, that carries with it
such a prevailing attractive power, such an unresistible constraining love, as
will receave or admit no denial. It does so powerfully incline the ear and
heart to hear and obey, that by means of this effectual saving grace, there is
made an everlasting Covenant between Christ and the soul, even the sure
mercies of David. Christ himself in this dispensation is given to be a witness,
commander and leader to those that are under it, upon such teams as never to
fail, leave or forsake them.

1. The first of these voices in its ministry, is termed in Scripture the day
of Christ, first appearance, which has already rise^ and had its kingdom in
word and also in Spirit, but sowe^ in weakness. It has shined upon the world,
had its beginning and continuance, and is now drawing very near to its ending,
wherein Christ is to be rejected, and that by his own citizens, a generation
that are inahbitants of the earthly Jerusale^, under the name of Christians,
succeeding their predecessors the jews, (into whose room they are surrogated)
in their froward and bitter principles and Spirit, wherein they please not God,
and are contrary to all men.

This is called the Gospel of the Kingdom, preached (by means of the outward
word, accompanied with the Spirit) to all nations, as a witness, before the end
come; or before that dispensation come, that puts an end to it, as perfective
of it, restoring it out of its dying and declining state, into a brightness and
glory that is everlasting, as shall be declared at the rising of the witnesses.

It began with the ministry of John Baptist, as the voice of him crying in the
wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. It was
continued, increased and carried up to its height, even by the personal
ministry of the Son of God manifested in flesh, who was born of a virgin, died
for our sins and rose again, according to the Scriptures. And by his ascending
up on high, he did lead captivity captive and gave gifts to men, went on in the
greatness of his strengh, conquering to conquer, till the war and opposition
sprang up that was raised against him by the man of sin, and Son of perdition,
for the space of 42 months or 1260 years, to the overspreading the face of the
church with apostasy and thick darkness. Herein so great a progress has bin
made, that we are brought (as it were) to the shutting in of the evening of
this first glorious Gospel day and new Testament ministry in Spirit and by the
written word, to the verifying that Scripture (Luke 17. which says, The days
will come when ye shall desire to se one of the days of the Son of Man, and ye
shall not se it, because the light of it must withdraw, to give place and make
way for the approaching glory of another of the days of the Son of Man, even
that of his second appearance and Kingdom, at which time he shall show himself
the only Potentate over all the earth, KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.

2. The second voice and ministry of the Gospel, above mentioned, performed in
and by Christ's second appearance, is that which (as has bin said) does
powerfully incline and prevailingly work upon the hearts of men for the
obedience of Gods law, binding up their souls in the life that is eternal.
This second appeara^ce, though the younger, does with Jacob lie in the same
womb with the first, in the hearts of all true believers. And though it come
not out first, yet at last it obteins the preeminence and birthright, causing
those that are children of this day, even whilst they are under the first
dispensation, to abide with God as pilgrims and strangers therein, as all their
Fathers were, and by faith to espy this promised land and heavenly country,
whilst at a distance and very far off, (Esai. 33.17.) and to wait for it with
patience, in a certainty of hope and stedfastnes of confidence, till they enter
into, and become actual possessours of it.

The operation and effect which this second day of Christ appearance shall have
upon believers, in its very morning brightness, will render them in their minds
like to the elect angels in obeying the law of God, active, powerful and
steadfast in working righteousness. It will qualify them also with a meet frame
of Spirit for angelical converse, whilst yet in the body, as suitable
associates and consorts with them in Gods service and worship. And from the
powerful influences that shall descend from the intellectual and superior
part of man's mind, quickened with the warmth and life of those holy Spirits in
the hand of Christ, the animal or souly life and bodily nature of man shall be
formed into such subjection as will by degrees work out a perfect redemption of
the body from the bondage of corruption, even in this life, as the needful
preparatory dispensation of Eliah, that first comes and restores all things,
before the personal appearing of the son himself. For although he will first
show himself in the glory of the holy angels, as the bright morning star, in
the beginning of this day, yet is he to come forth also (in the farther
progress of this day) in the glory of his father, and therein to shine forth
as the sun in his strength, after that he has first sent his angels to gather
out of this his Kingdom all things that do offend, and them which do
iniquity, casting them into a furnace of fire. When this preparatory work is
done by the messengers he sends before him, Christ will reveal himself from
heaven, and by that glorious sight which he will give of himself, chang those
that then are alive and remain on the earth, into his own likeness in soul and
body, and gather them unto himself, as meet consorts and associates for him in
that his glorified state, catching them up to him in that heavenly air, or
Spirit, where they are to be ever with the Lord. In effect, the day of Christ's
second appearance brings upon the stage of this world, life from the dead,
working and declaring the first resurrection, mentioned (Revel. 20.) which is
to continue visible to men on earth, one thousand years. The glorious chang
which shall be made in the progress of this day, upon the souls and bodies of
the Saints, shall be such as will no more leave them subject to corruption. For
over them the second death shall have no power.

This is another of the days of the Son of Man, which succeeds the first; is
to continue a thousand years and then also have its end, upon the sons making a
voluntary and entire resignation of this his Kingdom unto his Father, that God
may be all in all. For during this thousand years, the son in his Kingdom
shall be exalted, as he to whom the father has committed all judgment to be
executed, so that what he binds on earth shall be bound in heaven, and what he
looses on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Whom he will he shall slay and whom
he will he shall keep alive, as the most absolute Monarch and only Potentate yt
ever reigned on the earth, to the end that during this season and space of
time, all me^ may honor the son with the honor due to the father, and in this
appearance of the Son se the father as in his vicegerent, and do him homage in
this his living Image, the Lords Christ or anointed one, the man that by God is
ordained to rule the world in righteousness, even all the nations upon the
earth, during this his day, which immediately praecedes the day of eternity and
last judgment, wherein God is to be all in all. The son himself, after that all
things shall have bin subdued and subjected unto him, shall be subject to the
Father that put all things under him.

This second day of the Son of Man, is that one day known to the Lord, not day
nor night, but a kind of middle state between that which is corruptible and
that which is incorruptible. It is neither absolutely one or the other, but a
mixture of both. And it shall come to pass, in the evening of this day it
shall be light, and the passage out of this into the day of eternity, very
pleasing and delightsome. It shall distinguish itself (as has bin already
intimated) into the 3 usual parts of a day, MORNING, MIDDAY, NIGHT.

1. In its morning beauty and appearance, the Eliah comes and restores all
things, as is foretold of him, the BRIGHT MORNING STAR, which is to show to the
kings of the east the near approach of the only begotten Son himself, and be to
them and all other inhabitants on the earth, the sign of the Son man's
approaching and coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.

2. In the noontide of this day of the Son of Man in his Kingdom, shall be seen
the height of the sunshine of that royal power and greatness which shall be
exercised by him in the capacity of universal King over all the earth, the
season wherein there shall be one LORD in his own person visible, and his name
one, throughout the whole world.

3. There shall also be a declining and evening state of this glorious day,
which willingly and cheerfully gives place to the day of eternity, wherein the
father unveyled shall shine forth and be all in all.

How fitly does Ezekiel, in the vision he had of the holy waters, represent and
describe this growing, increasing Kingdom of Christ, revealed in the Gospel the
light of Gods law that shines forth in the Son himself, into the obedience and
power whereof, we are to be changed from glory to glory, by the Lord the Spirit.

The waters issued from under the threshold of the house eastward, on the right
or south side. Ezekiel. 47. Their first coming forth was by measure, the measure
of a man; and gradually, from the ankles to the knees, from the knees to the
loins, from the loins to a river unpassable by man, as mere man, in his first
constitution of being.

2. 2dly then, the same waters came forth in a communication above and beyond
the measure of man's first nature, into a river that man may swim in without
drowning or being at all subject to die any more, how much higher soever it
rise above the head of the natural man, the first Adam. And of this, Noah by
faith was aware, who, that he might obtein a state of safety from the
overflowing flood, (by which all the world, not made believers and taken into
the arc, were drowned) obeyed the counsel and command of God, in building the
arc and going into it after it was built and ready to receave him. Herein have
we a lively type of Christ's humane nature, offered up by the immortal Spirit,
and brought forth into the life that is from the dead, never to die more, but
has the keys of hell and death committed to him.

Unto the likeness of this heavenly building and temple of the living God in
Christ's person, every true believer is fashioned and conformed, and is thereby
made a fit vessel to swim in those waters of life, safely and delightfully,
which by rising up above all the measures and proportions of the first world,
drown them, but are the proper element for those that are saved, to live in.
They are fitted with enlarged hearts and mouths wide enough opened, to take in
and receave those streams and rivers of the emanations of divine bounty and
love, how broad or deep soever they prove, and how high soever they may rise
and overflow. For they have the man Christ Jesus their head, the second Adam,
who as their forerunner, is gone before to prepare the way for them, and as the
true arc in which are many mansions, to receave them into himself, that where
he is they may be also.

Of what has bin already said, this then is the sum. Christ is the eternal
WORD and speaking power of God, by whom are all things. He is also (as has bin
showed) the rock of ages, the place of Gods rest, throughout all generations;
the eternal Sabbath, Heb. 4. wherein God finished his works so fully to his
content, that therein he took up his Rest, even in the person and Spirit of the
Mediator, the mystery, which from the beginning of the world has lain hid in
God, who created all things according to the eternal purpose which he purposed
in Christ Jesus our Lord. Further, This eternal WORD, who is the creator of
all things, visible and invisible, being in the Mediator the image of the
invisible God, does bear the name of the blessed Trinity, and stamps the
impression and character thereof upon all the works of his hands. He is the
Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and Ending of the creation of God. In the Psalms
and Ecclesiastes, God is called by the name of creatours, as being three, or a
threefold cause of the being that is give^ unto the creature;

1. Of the creatures hidden and secret Being, as it subsists and lives in the
mind of God, by way of his purpose and decree, and in his fore knowledge;

2. As this seed of creature-being that lives in God, is brought into its
natural and proper form of life, made a part and member of the first creation,
in a mutable state;

3. As it is changed and translated out of its mutable state and corruptible
fashion, into a form of being and state of life that is immutable; wherein the
first creation is not destroyed or annihilated but consummated and brought to
its final perfection, so as to answer the holy end and design of the Creator,
who as the potter has absolute power over his own clay, to make vessels of
honor or dishonor as pleases him, and in such manner as is exactly consistent
with the wisdom and justice of a most holy God.

The nature of men and angels is formed in Gods likeness, wherein they are made
with hearing ears, seeing eyes and working hearts, to attend unto and observe
the divine oracles delivered to them from the mouth of God, as the law under
which they are created, the rule of their life and actio^, to guide them in the
passage out of their mutable state into that which is immutable, Gods words
therefore do come forth in the threefold dispensation before described,
visible and intelligible words to their minds or creature-understandings,
answerable to the state they are found in and to the degree and measure of
their growth, whereunto they have atteined. For there can be no communion or
intercourse between God and man, but by such divine words as are visible and
intelligible to creature understanding, signifying such things as their eyes
may se, their ears hear, and that are in themselves possible and rational to
be obeyed, which all Gods laws to man most certainly are. Hence is it, thar
John testifies of the WORD of life itself, that it is visible and has bin
heard and seen from the beginning, being no new commandment, but the old, made
visible and intelligible, first by the book of the creature; then, by the book
of the Scriptures, and lastly, by the living mouth and heart of Christ's
manhood, assumed into personal union with the eternal WORD, and thereby made
the brightness of Gods glory, the express image of his essential mind, where
the vision at last becomes so plain to all believers, that he that runs may
read it. The humanity or flesh of Christ singly considered, is no where in
Scripture called the WORD, but at most the engraffed WORD. For the WORD is that
which is made flesh, and dwells in us, which (though after it was born of a
woman and found in fashion as a man, actually partaking of flesh and blood with
the rest of the children, it was seen, heard and handled, as the glory or
manifestation of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth, in the
form of a man) was actually in Being and life from the beginning, (which the
flesh of Christ was not) and was David's Root, the BRIGHT MORNING STAR, the
Lord, the WORD which David in Spirit saw, (Psalm. 110.1.) when he said, the Lord
said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, till I make thy foes thy
footstool.

These things premised, our way will be much more open and clear, to proceed in
what we have propounded, as to a serious search and pursuit after life
eternal. We are hereby naturally lead into the ensuing method, and have our
matter pointed out to us for our discussion and enquiry, in these following
particulars.

1. What are the things that are the subject matter of the command delivered to
man by the divine WORD and oracles of God, that are the law of his mouth,
visible and intelligible to man by the light and law of nature, the light and
law of the Scriptures, the light and law of faith or the law of the Spirit of
life in Christ Jesus. And if the matter be one and the same, that is declared
and made known in and under these three dispensations, wherein is it that they
differ from each other?

2. What is that state of mutability which by nature man is brought into? Is
his mutability lost or no by the fall, as well as his natural righteousness and
purity? may he not yet be changed back again, at least, to a gradual recovery
of his natural righteousness, yea and yet fatther, into a more excellent state
of life and righteousness then at first he received? Is his primitive
uprightnes, in kind, recoverable or no? Is it actually and universally restored
to all mankind by the blood and ransom of the Redeemer, as the means to lead
men to repentance, and bring them all to the practical knowledge of the truth,
by inwardly cleansing and purging them from their old sins and setting them in
the way of that amendment and newnes of life, which God by his law calls for,
and commands from all men every where?

3. Is it possible for man is his mutable state (considered as either before or
after the fall, according to the degree of restoration he does arrive unto) to
hear and obey the things of Gods law, and so to keep the commandments and
demean himself in his actings conformable thereunto, as not to turn from them
or let them depart from his heart all the days of his life, until his
translation into his immutable state?

4. And lastly; What is that immutable state in righteousness and glory, (which
begins in the day of Christ's first appearance, and is perfected by his second)
unto which man is fore-ordeined, and through effectual calling and plantation
with Christ in his death and resurrection, is prepared and made heir of in his
mutable state, in order at last actually to inherit and possess it at Christ's
seconds coming, that other day wherein the Son of Man is to be revealed from
heaven, which has its MORNING, MIDDAY, and EVENing also, that immediately
precedes the last day of eternity, which has no division or parts.

1. First, as for the things of Gods law, or matter commanded unto man, which
God wills that he should hear, understand and obey, (as that on which his life
and death depends, and does therefore with all plains and certainty set before
him, that ignorance or other excuse of any kind may not be pretended by him)
all is reduced by our Savior (who best knows it) into a very narrow compass,
(Luk: 10, 28. in his answer to the lawyer that came to tempt him, saying,
Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?

The question does plainly intimate, first, that some things were to be done by
man, and that by Gods command and instruction, in order to obtein or be made
heir of eternal life. 2. That so doing or working the work of God, the
inheritance is sure.

Christ in his answer denies nothing of this, but thinks fit to try the
knowledge of the lawyer, and answer him according to his own heart and
principles. What is written in the law, (says he) how read thou? The lawyer
replies, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all they
soul, with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy
self. This Christ agrees to be the sum of the things contained in the
commandments of God, which man is to do, and in the doing and obeying
whereof, as he ought and God requires, will make him heir and sure of eternal
life. Therefore all that Christ adds, is, Thou have answered right: this do,
and thou shall live.

But although these few words contein man's whole duty to God and to his
neighbor, yet (as by the following verses does appear, in the parable of the
wayfairing man that fell amongst thieves) there is more in it then at first we
are aware of, to perform this duty to God and to our neighbor, rightly, and
after such manner as is acceptable to God. For, so do to it requires faith,
that faith which works by love, or which makes us new creatures, giving us the
sight of that man in the person of the Mediator, that has seen God, by whose
testimony we also are taught to so him, and know that he is, and what he is,
even the rewarder of all those with eternal life, who diligently seek him. No
man knows who the Son is, but the Father, nor who the Father is, but the Son,
and he to whom the son will reveal him. He that believes on the Son of God,
has this witness in himself, by the sons coming into his heart, and bringing
this knowledge along with him, giving us to know him that is true, and that we
are in him that is true, even in him that is the true God and eternal life. By
such knowledge are we preserved from idols, and setting up some other thing in
our hearts for the true God, or from ignorantly bestowing our worship, love,
and service upon him.

He that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes not the
Record which God gives of his Son, when it is plainly represented and set
before his eyes, in such legible characters that he is able to understand and
perceave the Record, even that God has given unto us eternal life and that
this life is in his Son, and is to be had only in the gift of the Son made to
us, in a most intimate and inseparable union, which he that has, has life: he
that has it not, has not life. Whatsoever comes short of this, let it make
never so fair a show for the present, it will be sure to end in death. Hence is
it, that without faith it is impossible to please God, because otherwise we
cannot know him as we ought, with such certainty as not to mistake him for some
other thing, or some other thing for him. And so also will it be with us as to
our neibour or brother; we shall take him to be our neibour and brother, that
is not he; and he that is not, we shall account to be him. For, not knowing the
very Image and first pattern, set up in Christ, our elder brother, and the lowly
meek spirit in him, which with God is of great price, how can we know the
children and many brethren that are to be conformed to him therein? Unless we
know and love him that begets, how can we know and love them that are begotten
of him? For both he that sanctifies and they that are sanctified are all of
one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren; those, who if we
be are love unto, we thereby know that we are passed from death to life. And if
we love not, but hate them, sitting and speaking against these our brethren,
slandering our own Mothers Sons, we are in Gods account no better then Cain,
wicked munderers, whatever righteous works we are conversant in according to
the letter of the law. Be we as zealous and forward as we will, in offering our
sacrifices and bringing our gifts before the altar, till we be first reconciled
to our brother, we are directed to leave our gift before the altar, as better
not to offer it at all, with a heart which is without that love by which faith
works.

In this sense are we to understand 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. If we have al other
gifts and good things from God, that are possible to be had, and not this love
with them, we are nothing, we are but as sounding brass and tinckling cymballs.

The saying therefore of Christ, do this and thou shall live, according to his
own reading and understanding of the law, is, do this at present, by the light
thou art under; but give not off, be not satisfied til thou come to do it by
faith, as a new creature, with the knowledge and love which faith teaches and
works, and thou art a true heir of eternal life, and shall most certainly
enter into it and possess it for ever. Leave thy sacrifice and thy gift
before the altar, in humility and brokenes of Spirit and in lowlines of heart,
rather then take upon thee to offer it, until thou have the Son given to thee
and art regenerated. For it is better for thee that thou should not vow, then
that thou should vow and not pay. Keep thy foot therefore when thou go
into the house of God (or do enter upon the performance of his worship and
Service in thy natural, mutable frame of Spirit) and be more ready to hear
then to give the sacrifice of fools: for they consider not that they do evil,
even in their very prayers and duties of divine worship. By faith it is, that
the right and steadfast Spirit is formed, the whole and entire heart which God
requires.

We may then take notice, that there is a twofold reading, preaching, hearing,
receaving and obeying of the Word of God and doctrine of his law; the one after
a less, the other after a more excellent way: the one, proportiond to the
sight, hearing, and heart of the natural and earthly man, in his mutable state,
properly called the law; the other, proportioned to the sight, hearing, and
heart of the heavenly and spiritual man, properly called the Gospel.

How read thou, says Christ to the learned lawyer, when he would point out
the law in the former sense; and as to the latter, himself is the reader,
preacher and worker of it, as he is the Son himself and word of faith, which
through our being in him, (in whose manhood it is as in our mouth and in our
heart) is made bread to us, and not only possible, but most desirable and
prevailingly attractive unto us to do and fulfill after him. In this sense it
is, that Christ is the end of the law to all that believe; and the law in its
first kind of teaching or reading, is the Schoolmaster or teacher that sends us
to Christ, and is appointed to keep us under its rule and discipline, till it
put us into the hands of a better and surer guide, which is the Son himself,
who by the voice of his Servant or messenger that he sends before him, gives
notice of his coming. But when he comes himself, he teaches the way of God
more perfectly, the way of knowing and loving God, of fearing him and keeping
his commandments, which is the whole duty of man:

According to this gradual discovery and revelation of the mind and will of God
in his law, there are several degrees of growth and age, that man is or may be
acquainted with, in the conformity and obedience that he is to yield to Gods
holy law and commandment;

1. First, that of childhood, signifying the state of man's mutability and
unstable righteousness, wherein he is wavering, liable to be tossed to and fro,
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, apt to be deceaved;

2. The state of youth, or years of discerning and settled judgment, in those
that by faith are strong, and have overcom the wicked one, in whom the Word of
God is abiding and has taken fast hold and root, importing the life of the
first resurrection in them, (at least, in the principles thereof) over whom the
second death is never to have power;

3. The state of fatherhood and most ripe years, in those that have known him
that is from the beginning, and are one with him, one with the father as Christ
and the father are one, the church that are in God the father, the Bride the
Lambs wife, by whom is made known the manifold wisdom of God and unsearchable
riches of Christ, unto the Principalities and Powers in heavenly places, the
very holy and Elect Angels. This imports the life of the second resurrection
in them, and the highest ascent into union and communion with God.

To all these several kinds of growth, ages, or statures of humane perfection,
the word and law of God is a Rule, suiting itself and commanding the same
Duties to be performed, (as to the knowledge and love which we are to have and
bear toward God and toward our neighbor) accordingly as the heart is
principled and qualified for the performance thereof, with a first, second or
third measure and degree of light, and power from God, enabling thereunto. For
that which God requires of man in the obedience he is to yield unto him, is
according to what he first gives and causes him to have, and not according to
what he has not.

The commandment therefore of God, or the law of his mouth, which conteins in
it and requires from man his whole duty, both toward his God and toward his
neighbor, is (as to the matter of it) the same for the rule of man's walking in
communion with God, either in the first or second Covenant, being that which in
Scripture is called the law, as well as that which is called the Gospel.

1. It is called the law, as it is the divine oracle and righteous command of
the supreme lawgiver, strictly enjoining exact and complete obedience, and
severely punishing the least tittle of disobedience, being dispensed in such
manner as leaves it to man's liberty and fredom of will, to hear and obey, or to
refuse and disobey, at his own peril, upon the penalties and curse declared in
it.

2. It Is called the Gospel or good tidings, as it is the free and gracious
condescension or good will of God, appearing toward man, which God the
Mediator exercises, upon the foresight of what man would do, as left to his
own freewil in and under the law. For this, in pursuance of his fathers
decree, does he cleave unto and lay hold of man's nature or the seed of David
according to the flesh, resolving to bring upon the natural frame of man's
Spirit, as left to his own arbitrary choice and freewil, a most beneficial and
necessary change, through which man is prevailed with to give up and resign
back again that first liberty of his, into the hands of his faithful creator
who first gave it, and to trust him for the restoring it in such manner and
measure back again, as may be best for him and may most certainly and
infallibly attein the end for which it was first given, which was, to fulfill
the righteousness of Gods law. Accordingly does he receave it in a new, a more
excellent and certain manner of hold and exercise, wherein it is made
impossible for him to transgress the law of God by sinning, and most possible
and free for him to run the race of Gods commandments. Through this new
enlargment and fredom of heart, given him by the influencing power of that love
which is stronger then death, man is so bound up in the will of God, so
absolutely subjected to what the law requires, as makes him sure to inherit
eternal life. The living and primitive pattern of this obedience is wrought out
in man's own nature, in the person of the Mediator, and set before his eyes
with an attractive and transforming power, to draw man after him, and transform
him into the same image, from glory to glory, from the glory of his first
creation in conformity to the law in Christ's first appearance, to the glory of
the new creation, in conformity to the Gospel, in his second. And thus Christ
enables his believing followers to fulfill the law after him, who came not to
destroy but fulfill it in the Gospel. And as some are thus changed by the
attractive influence of Christ's constreining love, others (with whom also his
Spirit for a season strives by the same Gospel manifestation of him) are upon
their wilful refusal, hardened and fixed in their disobedience. To such he
becomes a stone of stumbling and rock of offense; even to those, who after this
gracious offer made known unto them, do obstinately despise and reject it,
preferring their first and natural fredom of the Sons of men, to this more
excellent fredom and glorious liberty of the Sons of God. In order to make
trial of them herein, since the fall, Christ has obtained of the father on
their behalf, the restoration of that lesser glory and inferior liberty of
nature (that ought to be resigned for the greater, that excels and is to
remain) by the price and ransom of his own blood, from whence flows a
conditional remission of al sinners, as to sins past, and a free and general
restoration of them to the privilege and benefit of their first natural fredom
and primitive righteousness, in kind, and in such degrees and measure, as is
requisite and sufficient for the making of such a trial, and rendering them
without all excuse, nothing having bin wanting in him to bring them to
repentance and to receave the truth in the love of it. He has given that
former sort of gifts to the rebellious also, that prove enemies and haters of
him in the more excellent gifts and privileges that he offers them also in a
superior dispensation, which cannot be received by them without an obedient
surrender and loss of what already they have received from him, at his
command. He is a propitiation for the sins of the whole world.

Both these divine oracles and manifestations of Gods will, law and Gospel,
were made known to Adam in Paradise; the one typed out in the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, fitly resembling the first created liberty and
fredom of will man was left to the exercise of under the law: the other, by the
tree of life, placed in the midst of the Paradise of God, lively figuring out
the better fredom and lasting holiness, which the Son himself makes us partakers
of in the Gospel, as he is the end of the law to all that believe, and can be
persuaded to trust him, as the Gospel requires.

In both these respects it is, that John says, I write no new Commandment to
you, but an old commandment, which was from the beginning. As it first came
forth in law and Gospel before the fall, it was the law written in Adams heart,
and the Gospel set before the eyes of his mind, by the ministry of angels, in
lively types and figures. This we are to understand by the law of nature, by
which all natural men shall be judged, who never have atteined or lived under the
hearing of the written law or word of God, given afterward in the holy
Scriptures.

2dly: The self-same old commandment of God, that is both law and Gospel, came
forth since the fall, by divine inspiration, in the books of the old and new
Testament, The law was under this dispensation, engraven on tables of stone,
containing the ten commandments. The Gospel was represented in the ceremonial
law of Moses ministry, under the old Testament. Then again, the law is written
in the fleshly tables of Christ's heart, as he was born of a woman, and made
under the law: and the Gospel was represented in the two Sacraments of baptism
and the Lords supper, instituted during the days of Christ's flesh, the
witness whereof is left us upon record in the New Testament, as that
manifestation of Gods will, which the Son himself in and by his first appearance
has brought to light. This we are to understand by the law of the Scriptures,
which are not of private interpretation, nor a prophesy that is come to us by
the will of man, but that which holy men spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, for a sure ground of truth, to be relied upon.

3dly and lastly; the same commandment or word of God which has bin from the
beginning, is to come forth once more, in and by the son's second and personal
appearance in Spirit, a fiery and living law, called in Scripture, the law of
the Spirit of life that is in Christ Jesus, which by faith is espied and seen
as the Land of promise, into which all true believers must enter, and where
they must inherit the immutability and eternal life, promised; a life from the
dead, which those that possess, whether in the glory of the first or second
Resurrection, though as yet but in the seed, shall never die more. The second
death shall not have power over them; but all tears shall be wiped away from their
eyes, and all cause of sorrow or fear.

This is the Son's Kingdom in Spirit, which he receaves and enters upon, by the
appointement of the father. He is pleased to begin it in weakness and subject it
a while to great sufferings, but will shortly enter upon and continue the
exercise of it in power, during the space of a thousand years, wherein he is to
judge the world in righteousness, effectually causing his will to be done on earth
as it is in heaven.

The law under this dispensation, is found as the tables of the Testimony laid
up in the heavenly tabernacle of Christ the Son of Man; a fiery law of
indignation and vengeance, in severity without mercy, upon all wilful,
disobedient sinners.

The Gospel under this dispensation, is as the throne or heaven itself,
together with the earth that is made Gods footstool, or the natural man,
subjected and brought through faith to Gods foot, in a way exclusive to al
boasting. This is the new heavens and new earth of which the new Jerusalem
consists, that comes down from God, written in and upon the heart of Christ's
manhood, glorified, and made immutably holy, shining forth as the living Image
of God, in a twofold form, to wit, in the form of a servant not only made a
Son, which is the first; but exalted to a name above every name, and anointed
with the oil of gladness above his fellows; that's the second.

Thus Christ is the WORD (as is above said) that is commanded to a thousand
generations. He that was, he that is, and he that is to come, the Almighty: He
was both law and Gospel, in the day or under the dispensation of the law of
nature; is the same, in the day and under the dispensation of the law of the
Scriptures; and is to come, and will show himself to be the same also in the day
and under the proper and immediate dispensation of the law of the Spirit of
life, that is in him. This is the spiritual day of the Lord, the thousand years
Jubilee and Sabbath. This third dispensation hastens apace, draw's very near,
and the faithful and upright in heart believe, expect and wait for the coming
of the Lord therein, both as an Eliah, in and by his messengers and Servants,
elect angels and believing men (that shall restore all things, root up every
thing that offends, by a swift execution of vengeance on evil doers, in the
morning of this day) and after that, in his own person, wherein the man Christ
by whom God has ordained to judge the world in righteousness, will show himself
as the great King and bridegroom that has the bride, whose marriage he will
gloriously solemnize on earth, in order to carry her up with him into heaven,
upon the expiration of his thousand years reign, and the Resigning up of his
Kingdom into the hands of this father, that God may be all in all.

That the matter of Gods command and man's duty is the same, as well under the
law as under the Gospel; and in them both, under all the three dispensations
before mentioned, is sufficiently cleared and demonstrated: nor is the
difference less perspicuous, wherein each of them vary one from another.

1. The law of nature writes the matter of the law and duty commanded, upon the
nature and in the very heart of man, teaching and instructing him also in the
nature of the Gospel, the new nature, by the ministry of angels, in most apt,
significant types and figures, suited to his natural understanding.

2dly. The law of the Scripture, first writes the law in tables of stone, and
teaches the Gospel by the types contained in the ceremonial law, or a sort of
ordinances that are worldly rudiments, being but the shadow of the good things
to come, whereof the body is Christ. Afterward therefore, Christ coming in the
flesh, abolishes and abrogates that dispensation of the mosaical ministry, and
in stead thereof, makes the heart and conscience of man in himself and
followers, the fleshly tables, whereon the law is written by the Spirit of the
living God. Hereby, a conformity of holy flesh is wrought in man, like unto the
flesh of Christ, through the hearing of the word. This is the washing of our
body or natural man, with the pure water of the living WORD and Spirit of
Christ, through the ministry of the outward preaching thereof, to the purging
and clensing us from all filthiness of flesh. And this is obtained through the
virtue and price of Christ's blood, together with the atonement and remission of
sins past. Under this dispensation it is, that by the doctrine of the cross,
signified in the Sacraments of baptism and the Lords Supper, and thereby lively
represented to the eyes of the very natural man, he is taught the Gospel a
second time, under the Scripture dispensation of law and Gospel. Nevertheless,
this teaching yet is short of the glory of God to be revealed in and by Christ's
personal appearance in Spirit, which as it is the

3. Third and last dispensation of law and Gospel, so does it differ in
excellency and glory, very much from the other two. For it is the fruit of the
vine, which Christ reservs to drink with his own brethren and faithful
Servants in the Kingdom of his father, or which his father has given unto him;
that those that have continued with the Son in his temptations and followed him
fully in the regeneration, may eat and drink at his table in this his Kingdom,
and sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel, or the natural and
fleshly holy seed, jew or gentile, who at that day shall be found to be but in
their mutable state of righteousness and life. This is the best wine, far
exceeding any before received in types, figures and Sacraments, being that
which Christ keeps till the last, as that fruit of himself the heavenly and
true vine, which will refresh the heart of God and of man, or of the divine and
heavenly man, as well as of the earthly and natural man, brought forth in the
exercise of an immutable righteousness, and made after the power of an endless
life. The former of these is to sit at Christ's right hand, the latter at his
left, in this his Kingdom and glory, unto which both of them are fitted and
prepared by the father, through the lively conformity they are taken into, and
made to bear with Christ, in his death and resurrection.

So much be spoken in way of resolution to the first general query of the 4
above propounded, to insist on in this Treatise; to wit, concerning the subject
matter of the law or command of God, delivered to man by the divine WORD and
oracles of God, under the threefold dispensation thereof, together with the
difference of these dispensations under the law of nature, Scripture, Spirit.
The time of the latter branch of the 2d dispensation, beginning with John the
Baptists and Christ's own personal ministry in the flesh, is now far spent, and
the yet more glorious day of Christ's 2d appearance and dispensation in Spirit,
is at hand.

The second General query to be insisted on, is concerning the mutable state
man was created in at first, and remains in, even after the fall, out of which
he is again capable to be changed, and either restored and regenerated by the
knowledge of Christ in the Gospel, or else cast down for ever, into eternal
perdition.

The WORD that has bin the old Commandment from the beginning, that it may
evidently appear to all understandings to be the word of Truth, does branch
itself forth (as has bin declared) into two Testimonies or witnesses, which
are both of them the law of Gods mouth. The one conteins in it the doctrine of
the law of works, the rule of man's first communion with God, in the first
Covenant: the other, the doctrine of the law and righteousness of faith, the rule
of that 2d communion which God thinks fit to take man into in the spirit of
his Son, which can never be lost (as the first may) but endures to everlasting
life.

Now two Testimonies (according to the law) are sufficient for the discovery
and confirmation of all truth. Answerable hereunto, does he that is Truth
itself, shine and give forth the light of his glory, whose two Testimonies may
either be joined in consortship, harmony and subserviency with and to one
another, in the ministry and dispensing of them, and so become a law of life to
all that hear and obey them; that new song, mentioned Rev. 14.3. sung before
the throne, called chap. 15.3. the song of Moses and of the lamb, sung together
in perfect harmony and agreement, which no man can learn but the 144000
Virgins, that follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, being redeemed from among
men, as the first fruits to God and to the Lamb. But now these two laws or
Testimonies of works and of faith, as they may be taught and dispensed in
difference, disagreement, inconsistency and opposition, one unto the other, may
become a ministry of death, either by setting up and exalting the letter above
and against the spirit, or disjoyning the spirit from the letter, as that which
may be without it and needs no consortship with it. This is the work of the
false, deceitful Spirit, the father of lies, and is not of the Truth.

Now these being the Testimonies which from the beginning are commanded by God
to be heard and obeyed, no sooner was man created in Gods image and endued with
an immortal, intellectual, rational and sensual soul, made a free agent, but
God set them before him, as a meet and capable subject, to be made wise and
happy in the practice of them. The work of the one of them was immediately
written in his heart by the finger of God at his creation; and the word of the
other of them, as soon as he was put into Paradise, was sounding every wherein
his ears, and was exposed to the sight of his mind, in the visible types and
signs of the Sabbath, the institution of marriage, the tree of life, and by
the ministry of the holy angels.

Two things are recorded by Moses concerning the first make and constitution of
being, given unto man by God, at his creation. The first, we find Genesis 1.26,
27. where the counsel is taken by the blessed Trinity, his creatours, within
themselves, saying; Let us make man in our image, after our likeness, and let him
have dominion over the visible creation, and be fruitful, multiply and
replenish the earth, ruling over every living thing that moves upon the earth.
So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him, male
and female created he them.

God is in his being the highest reason, and the operation or work of his mind
is discovered and made known by the word of his mouth. These two powers in him
are retained in most absolute agreement and usefulnes each unto the other.
Answerable to this pattern in great, is man made in little, as to his Spirit and
soul, with this only difference, that the work of man's mind in reference to
Gods law, and his word and outward action in reference to his mind, have not
immutability in them, but may disagree and change from their first harmony and
primitive pattern, set them in God. The powerful impression of this pattern on
the spirit and soul of man, was such, as in respect thereof it is said, God
made man upright or perfect, formed his mind in perfect agreement and likeness of
operation with his own mind, and in full consent and liking of his law, as
that which is holy, righteous, Spiritual and good, given for man to obey, as
his duty. He disposed him also by a natural bent and inclination of mind, to
do good, resist evil, love righteousness and hate iniquity. This was the state
of man's Spirit or soul, as yet separate from his body, and not partaker of
that flesh and blood, which was afterward formed out of the dust of the earth.

The second thing therefore noted concerning man's building or creation, is,
that he also became a living, sensual or animalish soul, actually clothed with
bodily organs, that God formed for him out of the dust of the ground; Genesis 2.7.
And he breathed into his nostrills the breath of life, or sent man's soul that
was before created in Gods image, into that body so appointed and given to it
by God, as the earth wherein the seed of man's Spirit was planted, and the field
in which it was made to grow, by reason whereof man became a living soul; that
is to say, by the most intimate union and inhabitation, thus wrought by God
between the spirit and body of man, there was an awakening and bringing into
actual exercise, the sensual and bodily nature of his mind, by sitting to it
these meet organs. Nevertheless, that which was before in the state of a soul
separate, an equal and associate to angels, comes by this means to be abased
and made of little reputation, being brought to a kind of equality with the
beasts that perish.

And in like manner, as thus the spirit of man was after its first creation,
embodied and made flesh, as a dark shadow of what is done to him, it is said to
have bin so with the heavens and earth, when created: yea, even every plant of
the field had a state of being, before it was put in the earth; and every herb
of the field, before it grew; Genesis 2.4, 5,

Now through the intimate union and conjunction that man's body is taken into
with his soul, it is made a living, acting, speaking creature, participant
with his rational and intellectual spirit, and in fellowship there with, meet
to have and exercise dominion, as God appointed, over every living creature
that moves upon the face of the earth. Thus the bodily life of man, became in
itself as an Eden, the garden of God and the field that he had blessed and made
fruitful unto every good word and work, in subserviency and subjection of
desire to man's intellectual and angelical part, which by the very order and law
of nature, (as having not only priority, but eminency of being) was given to
it, both as Lord and husband, a superior and yet a kind of equal, joined with
it in such a harmonious consistency, that the actings of both natures made up
but the complete and entire Act of man's judgment and will. Thus was man
created male and female in the spirit and person of Adam, before Eve was
created, as Genesis 1.27. and 2.28.25. do show. And he received a charg from God,
to keep this body in subjection to the dictates of his mind, and not suffer it
to usurp authority over that part in him which is most the man, to wit, the
angelical or intellectual part. When God had thus planted the garden of Eden or
pleasure and delight, in this spiritual sense, as well as in an outward and
literal, he puts man's spirit into it, giving him the keeping, dressing and
Rule of it, with this express command, saying, of every tree of the garden
thou may freely eat; but of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall
not eat of it: for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. For
out of the ground the Lord God had made to grow every tree that is pleasant to
the sight and good for food: the tree of life also in the midst of the garden,
and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

Thus was there a paradise without man and within him, a garden of pleasant
fruit, which he might take delight and pleasure in, and which he was appointed
to dress and keep in the order wherein God had delivered it over to him, and
to improve it to the end for which he was brought into it by God. And for his
instruction herein, he was commanded and allowed the use of the outward as well
as the inward senses of his mind, with this only caution and Restriction, that
he should by no means, nor upon any pretense whatsoever, hearke^ to or obey the
voice of his sensual and brutish nature, how rational so ever the judgment of
it (which is but flesh) might seem to be, considered as in its own single
operation, tempting and drawing off the consent and love of the intellectual
part, from the straight rule of its duty, required in Gods law. For the spirit
of the mind, which is the stronger and better part in man, as that which is
immortal, remains under the moral and perpetual convictio^ of, as well as
obligation to the righteousness required in the law of God, the light of which,
although it may be smoothered for a time, ca^ never be wholly extinguished, but
is that work of the law in the heart that is and will be unalterably either
excusing and encouraging or accusing and torme^ting the mind, as cause is give
by every ma^s works. It is therefore called the conscience that servs in stead
of a thousand witnesses, and when it is awake, does always consent to the
goodness and righteousness that is in the law. By this rule therefore, sin could
not make its approaches, but warning would be given, and to know evil barely in
the abstract, without consenting to it or becoming one with it, in approbation
and delight, was not the thing which God forbade him; but the feeding on it
with consent and delight, upon the beholding of its desireablenes in the
judgment of the outward senses and as it gratified the brutish lust and desire
of the flesh, so as thereupon to be drawn into a compliance, and induced to
make it the Act of the whole man, suffering sin thereby not only to conceave
but to be perfected. Hence is it said, 1 Timothy 2.13, 14. that Adam was first
formed, then eve; And Adam (or the intellectual and superior part in man) was
not in the Transgression, or could not be deceaved by sin, but saw cause enough
to dissent from and resist it. It was the woman, the sensual part, that was
deceaved and was in the Transgression, being of such power, as not only to
entice, but so to fetch over the consent of the mind, as to make it the act of
the whole man. And sin being once thus perfected, brought forth death. All this
came by man's ill use of that liberty and freedom he was left unto, whilst under
the dominion and teaching of the law of works, which commits unto man the
keeping and Rule of his own soul, upon severe penalties, in case of failer,
and strictly commands the thing to be done, as that which on all accounts it
was man's duty to do, but lays no prevailing restraint on him to the contrary,
as the law of faith does. The law therefore did in effect show unto man, that
the right way of keeping his soul, according as is commanded, is through the
prevailing power of faith, whereby man keeps not himself but is kept unto
salvation by his faithful creator, to whom he has committed the keeping of his
soul in weldoing.

This was held forth to Adam in the institution of the Sabbath day, the day of
the spirit and true Rest. It is both a day of most powerful restraint and of
greatest liberty to man; a day, that most powerfully and effectually restrains
man from sin and all approaches toward it, and that as powerfully binds him up
unto God and his service, which is the most perfect freedom. Whilst the bent
and inclination of man's will was in its primitive purity, he was left freely to
the exercise of his own liking; and on that account, trusted with the keeping
of his own soul, in the state which God at first delivered it over unto him,
which being mutable, and not trial-proof, in the time of temptation failed. But
let us now consider a little what it was which God delivered to Adam, with such
charg and command to keep, or to restore, to him as good as he found it. The
Lord committed to his charg and keeping, his precious soul and body, and his
own image that was by him imprinted and stamped thereupon, as his own coin
and proper goods, to be therefore employed for his use, to his service, and
according to his will, only. Man received himself, or came thus out of the
hands of God, without the least blemish, and so was to keep himself without any
diminution or wast, or be exchanged to the profit and advantage of the giver.

Man, thus made in Gods image, with a mind like in operation unto Gods, might
very well be trusted to do his own liking. Howbeit, there was hereby planted
in him at his creation, a free principle of well and evil doing, in either of
which, he had a capacity to act, but not properly a freedom, by reason of the
dominion of the law which he was made under, and bound in the obligation of
duty to conform unto. In this sense, man was a servant to the law and under the
authority of it, even whilst he enjoyed his primitive natural freedom, which
consisted in the right and privilege conferred by God upon him, of living
according to his own will, and being at his own free motion and dispose, til
taken from him forcibly, or that he willingly yield himself up to the service
of another, as he did at first unto his God, most freely and willingly
consenting to have his law exercise dominion over him.

A power then to will and not to will at his own free motion and choice, God
gave to man upon trust or conditionally, that he should be ruled by his law,
and be careful to keep himself in all his actings, most exactly and uncha^gably,
in agreement and harmony with that. On this condition, Man was at his liberty
to do this or that, which best liked himself, in all other things. He had power
to kill and power to keep alive, in a way of just Rule and magistratical
government. He had also in himself a power to do good and a power to do the
contrary, which is evil; a power to chang and turn away from doing the good he
ought to do, and a power to turn to the evil, he ought not to do. A capacity
or power in him to do thus, he had from God, and it was not sin. But his
choosing to exercise this left hand branch of his primitive fredom, in turning
unto and delighting in sin, against the law of God which he knew, rather then
delighting himself in the exercise of the right hand branch of his fredom, to
good, in obedience and conformity to the law of God, this was his inexcusable
miscarriage and sin, let him pretend what he will or can.

Now although this were man's natural right, after this manner to be free, as
that which in itself is lawful and good, if well managed, and conducted to the
end for which it is given; yet, the being and standing which is given unto man
in this fredom, is most slippery and dangerous, and any long continuance
therein, is not at al to be coveted after, when restored since. For this is not
the fredom with which God himself is free, or with which Christ the Son is
free, or does make the true heirs of his Kingdom free with, nor yet is it the
fredom of the holy and elect angels, or of the spirits of just men made
perfect, who yet all are most free agents. God himself is the freest of all;
yet he cannot but will good, as of his own nature bound up unto it. He cannot
sin or lie. Of this fredom does the man Christ partake, and by and under him
elect angels and men have their share in it; and in and by the exercise
thereof, do inherit the life that is eternal and unchangable.

Such true freedom does import a powerful binding up and restraining of the
mind from al possibility of doing evil, as evil is taken for sin and the
transgression of the law: and as powerful a bent and disposition of will, to
do what is good, right and acceptable in the sight of God, without any
possibility of hindrance, resistance or discontinuance, in him who wills or
does it. The obteining this latter and most excellent fredom, is the end for
which the first or natural fredom was at all given; God would not have his
servants in their first make, bound up immutably, even to that which is their
duty; but by and with their own free consent, being in a capacity to dissent,
but at their peril. Neither will he have any debarred and for ever excluded
from this first fredom, but those that wilfully reject it, that so the doing
good after the power of an endless life, and the committing of sin with a
hardened and impenitent heart, may be found in both sorts of men, a most free
and voluntary act, and each receave their reward according to their works.

By the impression of righteousness which man is under from God, as he is made
in Gods image, he has an aptitude, a strong bent, lively inclination and
disposition of mind to the right and just which is contained in the law of God,
and wherein man's whole duty does consist. But because (as has bin said) man is
by nature (not withstanding all this) left at such a liberty, as that he is not
by any certain, prevailing and overcomming power over and against whatsoever
shall make resistance, with held and restrained, kept and bound fast to his
duty; at this door, through the weakness of the flesh, sin entered, and death
by sin passed upon all men, because in Adam the common parent, all men had
sinned.

This door unto sin is kept open, so long as man's natural freedom continues
with him, either as received at first, before the fall, or by way of
restoration through the redeemers blood, since, which we shall speak unto in
its proper place. That which opens this door, is man's own lust, as it is
written; Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot
be tempted with evil; neither tempts he any man. But every man is tempted,
when he is drawn away by his own lust, and enticed. The^, when lust has
conceaved, it brings forth sin; and sin, when it is finished, brings forth
death.

The mind of God is above all temptation to evil. The mind of man is not so,
(though formed in Gods image) whilst he is yet under the law and its dominion,
and has not atteined unto nor bin brought under grace. So long then as man
lives in, and will not part with his primitive, natural fredom, nor resign it
through faith, in exchang for a second gift of it from God, in a better kind
and way, he is still under the dominion of the law; and not only accountable for
the breaches of it and transgressions against it, but under the inevitable
condemning and revenging power thereof, that will first or last execute the
curse threatened upon all evil doers. But he that is under grace, is become dead
to the law, being crucified with Christ, or fastened and bound by the power of
the death and cross of Christ, with such a bent of mind and hatred against sin,
as nothing can alter or chang: and is so quickened and made free and a live unto
righteousness, as nothing can hinder the course and duration of it. By this
means the door of the mind is so fixed and fast shut against all sin, as it is
not in the power of the gates of hell, ever to set or break it open more.

In the mind of man, we are to acknowledge (as has bin already intimated) two
parts; 1. the spirit of the mind, the superior and intellectual part,
equalizing man with angels. 2dly, the sensitive and inferior part, which
abases man into the likeness and into a kind of equality with the Beasts; and is
indeed, capable to make him a beast, yea, actually, and that too generally,
does make men so. This inferior part of man's spirit, is as the door of his
mind, the mouth or instrument of its co^verse, inward or outward and in
distinction from the first and superior power (the spirit of the mind) is
called in scripture, flesh, or the sensual and living soul. Hence that of the
Apostle, Romans 7.25. So then I myself, with my mind, do serve the law of God:
but with my flesh, the law of sin. So also our blessed savior, observing the
fleshly drowsines of his disciples, that they could not watch one hour with
him, at such a pinch of straits as he then was in; the spirit (says he) is
willing: but the flesh is weak.

This was the lusting flesh in man, eve^ in paradise, whilst in his innocency;
and through its weakness, was the door of the mind set open to let in temptation
and sin. For it is soon taken and deceaved, and is weak in resisting evil. And
it is as soon weary of weldoing, if the way to persevere in weldoing, be
through the cross and all kinds of streights, hardships and disappointments
unto the flesh, even to this fleshly and sensual part of man's mind. For no
sooner does this come into activity and liberty, by the conjunction and
fellowship it is taken into, with the intellectual and superior part, the
spirit of the mind, but it is apt to run wild, fly out and grow untamed and
extravagant, as that which loves not to be accustomed to the yoke, and held in
subjection to the spirit of the mind, as that is subjected to the law of God.
It is apt to judge itself wise enough to make its own choice, and to trust to
its own single judgment in all its actings. And in case it be crossed and not
complied with by the dictates of right reason in its superior part, it is apt
to murmr and be sullenly rebellious, so as to forbear to do its office and
duty to its head and Lord, the spirit of the mind. In order to bribe off and
gain the consent and approbation of the superior and ruling power of the mind,
to the way and course it desires to take, it will invent many fair, specious
and plausible pretenses; make false representations of things, fascinating
appearances, and mists, to delude and blind the superior discerning of the
mind. It will turn every stone to obtain its end, spreading before the spirit
of the mind, flattering speeches, as nets and bands, to take and ensnare it, as
the strong man Samson was served by his Dalilah. This demeanor and practice of
the woman, the female and inferior power of the mind, toward its Lord and
husband, the superior, is most lively described by Solomon, Eccles. 7.26. I
find (says he) more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is snares and
nets, and her hands bands: who so pleases God, (which without faith is
impossible) shall escape from her; but the sinner shall be taken by her, he that
is a sinner through unbeleife. The spirit of man's mind, by refusing and
resisting that offer and work of the spirit of God, whereby it should be
brought into a most free subjection and captivity to the law of faith, becomes
a sinner, and so comes to be taken by the nets and snares, the enticing words
and pretenses of its inferior power, and in downright terms at length to be
wholly captivated and subjected under the usurped commanding influence of that
sensual life, it ought to rule over.

This was the lusting flesh in Adam, as also in Eve, before the fall, which the
Serpent knew how to tempt and gratify. And such did the weakness of this flesh
prove, that it was not able to withstand or resist the temptation. All that the
serpent aimed at, was but to prevail with this flesh, to think itself so wise
and sufficiently able to move and act by the strength and excellency of its
own single judgment, as that it might safely undertake to do what should be
found most liking and agreeable to its own sense, and refuse the contrary,
without being bound up to any necessary dependence upon or holding conformity
and agreement in its actions, either with the right dictates of the intellectual
part, or with the righteous rule of Gods law. This once obtein'd, Satan had his
end. For he well knew, that (this being granted) all the rest of the evil he
desired to bring into man, and by him into the world, would easily and quickly
follow. And this was so pleasing and gratifying a bait to the flesh, the
assuming a power to direct its own steps, take its own course and way, that
it was quickly swallowed down by man, without any due deliberation or pause
upon the matter, suspecting no hurt as yet, till the lust that thus was
conceaved, came to be finished, and to take along with it the spirit of the
mind, corrupting and seducing that also from the simplicity that is in Christ,
and thereby turning the soul from the truth of God declared in his law, to the
lie and deceit of Satan conceaved in his crafty suggestion. Thus by degrees was
man brought to worship and serve the creature, that is, the devil, more then
the creator, under whose law he was first made, and who is the only true God,
blessed for ever.

Unto this the Scripture witnesses, Romans 1:22, 23. Professing themselves to
bewise, they became fools: and changed the glory (WORD, or Image) of the
incorruptible God, into an image made like to corruptible man, and unto birds,
four-footed beasts, and creeping things. This man came to, by preferring the
counsel of a fallen angel, that was gratifying and desirable food in the eye
of flesh, before the holy law and commandment of the living and eternal God,
which by the eye of his spirit or superior part of his mind, he saw and knew
himself obliged to the observation of.

For this cause, God gives men up to the course and full sway of their own
wills and vile affections, leaving them as bondslaves to sin and Satan,
children of wrath and disobedience, in whom the Prince of the air seats
himself as in his throne, carrying them captive to his will. Man's continuance
in honor and in Gods image wherein he was created, was but a very little
while; He quickly found out and followed many inventions, contrary to Gods
express command, written in his mind, as also signified by the sundry pieces
of the creation, and sounded out by an audible voice to him, from God himself.

Sin, being (after this manner) the voluntary and free act of our first
parents, not only conceaved, but finished in the disobedience by them wrought,
and persected; the wages of it, which is death, they immediately received. For
being presently alienated from the life of God, or the righteousness performable
by them in that image of God wherein they were created, they became dead in
trespasses and sins. The image of God in man was defaced, changed into an image
(in some sort) of the devil. All pronesse and inclination of the will to good,
was forthwith worn off and lost, upon the fall; and not only so, but contrary
qualities thereunto possessed the mind. Thus man's primitive freedom and
alacrity to righteousness, was turned into vile subjection and service to the
devil, and to all manner of unclean affections and unrighteous actions.

Nevertheless, this sudden and unexpected chang in man, (brought about by the
subtilty and influencing power of the Serpent, by reason of the weakness of the
flesh, that discovers itself in man's mutable state) is not such, but that this
deadly wound is capable of healing, and man capable of being thereby restored,
yea, to be made not only as good but better then he was at first, through the
virtue and efficacious power of Christ's sacrifice and death, which was not only
a general propitiation and atonement of sins past, but also for the
sanctifying and purifying man's nature for time to come, after a more excellent
manner through regeneration, then it was by creation. Unto this regenerate
state, our first parents were called by the voice and doctrine of the Gospel,
speaking to them in and on the seventh day, as the only way and means to have
prevented the fall, and kept out sins entrance upon the nature of man. For when
God committed to the keeping of Adam, his own soul, (in the good estate
wherein he had set it, by making man in his image and after his own likeness)
it was not without a most special charg, to keep this choice jewel safe and
uncorrupted, at the peril of his very life, till changed into a better state.
This God required him to do, in the use of the best ways and means that should
be afforded him, even by taking fast hold of instruction, not letting her go;
but keeping her as his life; yea, keeping his heart above all keepings, as that
from whence are the issues of life.

To this end was the tree of life placed in the midst of paradise, open to his
sight, that he might have the view of it. And by what was figured and signified
to him in this tree, was it declared, how the keeping of his soul might be by
another, even by the Son of God or by the Holy Ghost, the spirit of truth,
dwelling in the heart by faith, which the worldly or fleshly mind does not,
cannot receave, but by such an act of absolute resignation of itself in
obedience to the will of the Son of God, as is more hateful to it then the
worst of evils. Yet is there no other way possible for man to keep his soul
safe for any long continuance, and in the hour of trial, when assaulted by the
power of darkness.

The counsel and instruction given by the word of the Gospel in the tree of
life, was, that if man found upon full debate and consideration within himself,
that he was not like to continue long safe in his own hands, neither could
with certainty keep himself pure and incorrupt as the law required, that then
he would be content to accept for his guardian and keeper, the Son of God
himself, in whose person the judgment and will of man is fixed, so as to be the
corner stone to all the rest of the heavenly and spiritual building, even the
effectual means to fix and make immutable in righteousness both men and angels,
that will be prevailed with to let him take the charge of ruling and keeping
their hearts, in such manner as pleases him. This is the only way for man to
become free indeed, with a better freedom then that of nature, abovementioned;
even with the freedom wherewith Christ himself is first made free, as he is the
son of man in heaven, who came down from heaven before he ascended up again
thither; John, 3.13.

This good will and gracious offer of the Son of God, figured out in the tree
of life, our first parents either neglected and slighted, or the way of his
keeping them did not please them, but the suggestions of Satan were rather
hearkened unto, that they might safely lean to their own understanding, as the
best and surest way to keep their souls safe. This understanding, how subject
it was to be wrought upon and to turn from the truth (though fully convinced of
it) by the enticing power of the flesh or the sensual and inferior faculties
of man's mind, has bin already showed.

Adams sin then was not only and merely the transgression of the law, but was
mixed with somewhat an ignorant rejecting and contemning of the offer of the
Gospel, which was the only sure means to have translated him (without sin at
all intervening) out of his righteous mutable state into an immutability in
righteousness.

But such is (and was from the beginning) the tender mercy and long-suffering
of God, our mediator and Redeemer, to Adam's posterity, even in their fallen
state, that he not only renews and repeats to man his former gracious offer of
Salvation through faith, and the knowledge of himself in the Gospel, but
reveals over and besides this, the means and way, how through faith in his
blood, all mankind may be again restored and obtain remission of sins. All
that will, may return again by virtue of Christ's death, into that mutable
state of righteousness and holiness, lost in Adam, as the common salvation and a
forerunning dispensation to the gift of the son himself, according to the
promise. And may it not reasonably be expected that from the experience of the
general love and good will which Christ has thus showed in common toward all
men, that they should be easily prevailed with to give up their souls
absolutely into his hands, through that faith that is more precious then gold,
unchangable and never failing, through the power whereof we are made more then
conquerours over all enemies, even through him that has thus loved us with an
unchangable and everlasting love.

For surely, in this God has greatly commended his love unto all mankind, that
when they were without strength Christ died for the ungodly, or for all
sinners, whilst yet in their sins. Much more then will the current of his love
run toward us, being once justified by his blood, that through him we may be
saved to the uttermost from the wrath to come. For if when we were enemies, we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled,
shall we be saved by his life.

This was in effect the voice and doctrine of the Gospel, which God himself
preached to our first parents, immediately after their disobedience, and at the
very same time that he passed his righteous sentence against them for their
sin, Genesis 3.15. In this Scripture God promises the sending of his own Son in
the likeness of sinful flesh, to condemn sin in the flesh, and make atonement by
the sacrifice of it, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in all
those who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit.

And most expressly and particularly is the Gospel as well as the law preached
by God to Cain, Genesis 4.7. and in him to all mankind, whether ever they reap the
saving benefit by it or no, as to life everlasting, any more then he did. To
him it is that God says; If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? Is
there not a means sufficient and able to bring thee, even thee back again
into reconciliation and acceptance with God, through the ransom that is paid in
Christ's blood? But if thou do not well, sin lies at the door, that is to
say, the wages and punishment of sin. And this yet is not all; For if thou
objectest, what will it advantage me, to have sins past remitted and the breach
made up, if there be yet no effectual remedy provided and afforded, to prevent
a relapse into sin (more fatal and irrecoverable then the first fall) and a
provoking of God afresh, by reason of the unsubjectednes that the flesh or
sensual part of the soul is apt to fly out into, and that prevailingly and
finally, against the restored and anew enlightened spirit of the mind, as it
fell out with man at first? To this God answers; it shall be subject to thee,
and thou shall rule over it. It shall be given again into thy hand and power to
subdue and bring under, if the fault be not in thy self. Why therefore art thou
wrath? and why is thy countenance fallen, as if I were partial in my dealing,
and that my ways were not equal?

Q. But what is it, does or can enable cain or any other man since the fall, to
do the good God speaks to him of, and avoid the evil he forbids, as also to
suffer according to the will of God, and that patiently, though for doing well?

Answ: Surely, there are means provided in and by the Redeemer, and the work of
redemption given to him the promised seed to finish, which has a virtue and
sufficiency to free and save all men from the evil, danger and curse that is
come upon them by Adams transgression, and to restore them again to their
primitive state of purity and freedom, if the fault be not in themselves. And
when they are brought so far on their way again, toward the end (for which
they were at first created, and since redeemed) that is to say, the inheritance
of life eternal; then is renewed unto them by Christ, the offer of saving them
to the uttermost, past all danger of a relapse, and of giving them that better
fredom wherewith the son is willing to make them free indeed, unchangably
subjecting them to the leading and Rule of his spirit, cohabiting in and with
the heart that is regenerated, making it thereby fit to receave and entertein
him, and bringing into it that state of life, over which the second death has
no power.

Hence is it, Christ is said to be the savior of all men, but especially of
those that believe. And his will is, that prayer and giving of thanks be made
for all men, of all sorts and degrees, from the highest to the lowest. This is
good and acceptable in his sight, who is the God and savior, that gave himself
a ransom for all men, and who therefore will have all men to be saved, as
least, so far as to come to the knowledge of the truth, and have the offer of
it, in a state of free exercise of their will and arbitrary choice, that
according as they are prevailed with, either to receave it in the love thereof,
or to reject it as a stone of stumbling and rock of offense, hateful to them,
they may obtein eternal salvation, or incur the pains of eternal damnation. And
yet those that are saved, are to acknowledge and experience, that it is of mere
grace and not of themselves, nor of works, least any man should boast. But it is
wrought by the faith that excludes boasting, setting up such a workmanship or
building in the heart of every true believer, whereby he is created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, that are before prepared and ordained of God, that they
should walk in them. They therefore which truly and savingly believe in God,
will be always careful to maintein good works.

Oh the great mystery of Godliness, that reconciles absolute empire and
sovereign command in one great king! He makes his absolute dominion to consist
with the truest, best and most absolute liberty of all his good subjects, as
showing, that in his service is the most perfect fredom. To be left therefore
by him, in such a state of fredom, which may either be lost by us and given up
to the will of another, or plucked out of our hands by the force of avenging
justice, (justly condemning those to perpetual servitude, that despise and
reject their own truest fredom when offered to them) proves in conclusion the
certain way to the greatest servitude and most miserable bondage we can bring
ourselvs into. His way is in the sea; his path in the deep waters; his
footsteps are not known. For it is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy. Yet all are set in a capacity, to will
their own good or evil; to run their race and shape their course, by free
choice. But the one seed only, that is, Christ and his fellow-heirs according
to promise, are the winners and overcommers, that reach the mark, get the prize
and attain the crown of eternal life. All others fall short of the glory of
God, and by their own consent and choice are most justly debarred from the
prize, and for ever excluded from the recompense of reward.

But can the Leopard chang his spots? can those that are in a fallen state and
accustomed to do evil, ever learn to do good, after the manner Adam did it in
his primitive rectitude, or in that newnes of Spirit and life, which those that
are made free with a better fredom then Adam's was, are created and enabled in
Christ Jesus, to work and come forth in the exercise of? Let us hear what the
Scripture in this case says; Esaias. 1.16, 20. Wash ye, make ye clean: put away
the evil of your doings from before mine eyes: cease to do evil, learn to do
well: seek judgment or knowledge: relieve the oppressed: judge the fatherles:
plead for the widow. Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord:
though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow: though they be red
like crimson, they shall be as wool. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat
the good of the land. But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the
sword. So Esaias 55.1, 5. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters,
etc. Is this only spoken to the jews, a people then in covenant, or to all
mankind? Se what Peter himself was taught to confess and acknowledge in this
matter, Act. 10.28. The Lord has showed me, that I should not call any man
common or unclean, not conceave him to be so rejected and laid aside by God, as
not to be in a capacity to have the means afforded him, of being brought to
repentance and unto the knowledge of the truth. Consider also the witness given
by the Apostle Paul, Act. 17. where he preaches the knowledge of God, as of him
that made the world and who gives to all, life, breath, and all things. Yea, he
made of one blood, all nations of men, who were at first his offspring, created
in his image, and caused them to dwell on all the face of the earth. He was
bountiful unto them, even in those times wherein he suffered all nations to
walk in their own ways, doing them good, and giving them rain from heaven and
fruitful seasons, that he might not leave himself without a witness, and that
they by such teachings might seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after and
find him, who is not far from every one of us. And although he winked at the
former times of ignorance, yet now, since the manifestation of Christ, the
promised seed, in the flesh and in the form and fashion of a man, like unto us
in all things, sin only excepted, he commands all men every where to repent. If
they refuse and prove disobedient, he will take an account of it in that day
wherein he has appointed the world to be judged in righteousness by that man
which he has ordained, Jesus Christ, who will have no respect of persons; but
as many as he shall find to have sinned without law, shall perish without law:
and as many as have sinned in the law, shall be judged by the law, in that day
when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel.

We se then very evidently, what Gods command is to all men universally, after
the fall. It is no new commandment, but that which has bin from the
beginning, which is, that all men every where do repent, and use the means
provided for them in the promised seed, to be washed from their old sins and to
come to the knowledge of the truth, or the way wherein to be assuredly saved and
inherit eternal life. This commandment is in effect the same it was before sin
entered into the world, save only as it now relates to the use of the means of
being cleansed from the filth and thraldom of sin, in order to come to the
knowledge of the truth, by hearing the voice of the Gospel, or words by which we
may be saved from eternal wrath. Thus was it with the centurion. This testimony
was given of him, Act. 10.2. that he was a devout man, one that feared God,
gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God always. All this he did, before
he had those words preached to him, whereby he and all his house should be
saved; Actor: 11:14.

It is the beginning of wisdom to be addicted to the fear of the lord, to have
a strong bent and affection of heart to keep his commandment, and pray
always. This comes by the voice and operation of the law, as repeated and
renewed in the blood of Christ to us, and ministered either inwardly to our
hearts by the voice of angels; or in the powerful ministry of the written word,
to our outward ears. The former of these ministries, the gentiles were always
capable of, and indeed directly under, who were or are without the written law
or knowledge of the Scriptures: the other, the jews, or inhabitants of the
earthly Jerusalem among Jews or gentiles are under, who rest in the law or
written word, making their boast of God therein, having the form of the
knowledge and of the truth in the law. Both these notwithstanding the chang that
may be brought upon them thereby, are but under the dominion of the law, liable
still to the curse and to a final and total relapse back again under sin and
wrath, if they take not very good heed, and so may come to be trees twice dead,
and be pluckd up by the roots.

For such enlightened and restored ones as these may prove to be (as well of the
one kind as of the other) if they shall sin wilfully, after that they are come
to the knowledge of the truth, there remains then to them no more Sacrifice for
sin, but a most certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation,
which shall devour the adversaries; even all the dwellers in that earth, which
drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, but in stead of bringing forth
herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, do bear thorns and briars, which
causes them to be rejected, makes them nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be
burned. But if the same earth, in stead of bringing forth thorns and briars,
does become ground prepared and made fit to receave the immortal and
incorruptible seed, by the word of God, which abides and lives for ever, and
to bring forth the proper fruits thereof with patience, meet for him by whom it
is dressed, it will be sure to receave blessing from God, even to be blessed
with the having of those better things that are accompanied with salvation. For
he that is faithful in that which is least, by the same grace laying hold on
him, and keeping him from evil, becomes also faithful in much. And he that is
unjust in the least, even in the use of his least natural fredom, will be unjust
also in much, even in the highest atteinments, which he can arrive unto, in
that his mutable state, and whilst in his own keeping.

Without blood there is no remission of sins. But through the sprinckling of
the blood of Jesus, who is our passover, whose blood speaks better things then
that of Abel, the wrath and severity that is by the law is either mitigated,
and all proceedings in the way of revenging justice for a time (at least)
respited, and the persons reprieved, upon condition of repentance and amendment
of life; or else totally and finally remitted. This latter is the case of al
true believers, that are in Christ Jesus by the new and everlasting Covenant.
Thus is that saying made good, Iam: 2:13. He shall have judgment without mercy
that has showed no mercy; and mercy rejoices against judgment, on behalf of
all that are justified freely by grace, through the eternal redemption which
Christ has obtained for them. So then, though al have sinned and come short of
the glory of God, he has not so concluded and shut them up in their
disobedience and unbeleif, but in and through the blood of Christ he is ready
to show mercy of one kind or other unto all.

I. First, such mercy as is intimated in that parable, Matthew. 18. v. 23. to the
end; where the lord at first, upon the reckoning he made with his servant,
pronounced judgment upon him, commanded him, his wife, children and al he had,
to be sold and payment forthwith to be made; (which in effect, was executed in
the case of our first parents) but afterward, upon the servants repentance and
humbling himself, beseeching from his Lord only patience, and promising he
would pay him all, his Lord was moved with compassion, showed him mercy in
loosing him, and freely forgiving him the debt. But this mercy (as appears
after) was not that which is called Gods sure mercies, such as David had,
because capable of revocation, upon the servants abuse of it, in showing no
mercy afterward to his fellow servant, which renewed his Lords wrath again
toward him, so that he delivered him over to the tormenters, til he should pay
all that was due unto him. He also made it a ruled case for all in the like
condition, saying; If ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother his
trespasses, so shall my heavenly father (says Christ) do unto you, that is,
not forgive you your trespasses. And Luke 13.7, 9. the same truth is confirmed
in another parable, where the Lord of the vineyard says to the dresser of it,
behold 3 years I come, seeking fruit on this figtree, and find none: cut it
down, why cumbreth it the ground? He answering, said, Lord, let it alone this
year also, til I shall dig about it, and dung it: and if it bear fruit, well: if
not; after that, cut it down.

This first sort of Gods mercies to sinners, is conditional, and universal,
common to the whole posterity of Adam. He is moved with a general pity and
tenderness toward them in the day of their nativity, when no eye has
compassion on them. Yea to some of them also, he is pleased to show more
particular kindness, so that of his own accord, passing by and seeing them in
their blood, he bids them, live; he spreads his skirt over them, to cover their
nakedness, makes that the season of his love appearing to them, teaching them to
deny ungodlines, and adorning them with his own comelines. Notwithstanding all this, they trusting to their beauty and righteousness in this dispensation wrote
in and put upon them, do fall, and make themselves worse by their apostasy, then
Sodom or Gomorrha. Then the Lord judges it equal, that such righteous men as
these, when they turn from their righteousness (as they finally may) and commit
iniquity, should die in it, and also hereupo^ have all their sins committed
before their conversion or change to that state of righteousness, afresh imputed
to the^, though before, God had declared, they should not be mentioned, but
buried in oblivion, and that in the righteousness which they did, they should
live.

Thus is the Lord many a time full of compassion to unworthy sinners, whose
hearts are not right with him, so as to be steadfast in his Covenant; Psalm: 78.
He forbears howsoever to destroy them, til he has made proof of them to the
utmost. Therefore turns he his anger away from them again and again, and stirs
not up al his wrath. He deals with them according to the multitude of his
loving kindnesses, and the variety of mercies that are in him. There are no
sort of sinners then, who in a less or greater degree, taste not of these
riches of Gods mercies, the more of which is showed to them and abused and
sinned against, the more is their condemnation heightened. For by such
demeanor, they do crucify to and in themselves the son of God afresh, and put
him to open shame, counting the very blood of the Covenant, wherewith they have
bin sanctified, an unholy thing, and doing despite to the spirit of grace.

With these kinds of mercies Christ is the savior of al men, a propitiation
for the sins of the whole world. And thus God is in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their sins; and he not only commands, but
beseeches al men to be reconciled to him, to lay hold on his strength, and be
at peace with him, as not having received in vain the grace he has begun to
bestow upon them.

But besides these his common mercies, declaring his good will to al men, as not
taking pleasure in the death of any sinner, he has also his choice and
peculiar favor and loving kindness for some, as it is written, I will give ye
the sure mercies of David, absolute, irrevocable gifts. Those that after this
manner find favor in his eyes, have the remission of their sins confirmed with
an oath, that their iniquities shall never be remembered any more, and that his
mercy toward them shall never fail, he will not leave nor forsake them. My
mercy will I keep for him for ever more; my Covenant shall stand fast with him.
His seed also will I make to endure for ever: and his throne as the days of
heaven. Their transgressions shall not hinder the good I have purposed to them.
For notwithstanding their unworthines, for which I will chastize them with the
rod and with stripes, yet my loving kindness will I not utterly take from them,
nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the
thing that is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will
not lie unto David, (the man that is after my own heart) nor to his seed after
him, that walk in the steps of his Spirit and faith. Psalm 89. I will build him
a house, and establish it for ever, by an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all
things and sure. In this most gracious promise David acknowledges al his
salvation to be, and all his desire; 2 Samuel: 23.5.

Mercies of both these kinds are with God, who is rich, and plentiful in
goodness, having none like him. He is a God that pardons iniquity and passes
by the trangressions of the remnant of his heritage. He reteineth not his anger
for ever, because he delights in mercy. He will turn again, he will have
compassion upon the remnant of his heritage, subdue their iniquities, and cast
al their sins into the midst of the sea. But as to the rest of mankind, that
prove disobedient, or have received the grace of God (the former sort of
mercies) in vain, that word shall be made good upon them which the Lord spoke
concerning the Sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2. 30; I said indeed, thy house and the
house of thy father should walk before me for ever: but now be it far from me;
for them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed. This shows what condition was implied, upon which God made that
promise.

Since then by man came death, by man also is come life and resurrection from
the dead. And this is revealed to fallen man, in the good tidings of the
promised seed, who (as has bin said) declares himself the savior of al men,
but especially of those that believe. He has a common stock and Treasury of
goods and spiritual gifts, wherewith the whole world (more or less) is
watered, fed and enriched by him. For he causes his rain to descend and sun to
shine on the unjust as well as on the just. But over and besides all these,
whether natural or spiritual gifts, he has an inheritance incorruptible and
undesiled, that fades not away, the heavenly and true Treasure which he gives
and commits to those who are by him found or rather made faithful in the little
that at first is trusted to their use and management, Luk: 16. And he causes
them to possess it in an hereditary right, as coheirs with the only begotten
Son, children of the promised Spirit, either in the single or double portion
thereof.

This is he that is appointed by the father, to turn men back again to God,
out of their fallen, sinful state, by a repentance, not to be repented of. By
his name and faith in his name, whoever calls upon him, shall be saved from his
sins, and be ledd on in the way to life eternal. He was made a sacrifice or
sin-offring for us, that we might become the righteousness of God in him. Thus
God found it consistent with his justice as well as his goodness, to grant
remission of sins to all that should seek unto him for it, by the mediation of
his Son, who is the righteousness of God, that without the law is manifested,
being witnessed unto by the law and the Prophets, to and upon all that believe,
without respect of persons. Him has God set forth and made manifest to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, declaring his righteousness to be that
which procures remission of sins and Gods passing over all that is past, in the
way of his forbearance and reprieve, til farther trial and proof had of the
whole world, as well as to be absolutely and immutably the justifier of all that
believe in Jesus, with the faith that abides trial, and by which the world is
overcome.

The difficulty which yet remains, is that which the Apostle Paul was sensible
of, Romans 10. where he affirm's that whosoever believes in Jesus, shall not be
ashamed, and that there is no difference between the jew and the Greek, because
the same Lord over al is rich unto all that call upon him; (Whosoever therefore,
being sensible of his lack of wisdom, shall call upon his name, he shall not be
upbraided nor sent away empty, but have the means revealed to him, whereby to
make him wise unto salvation) But how shall they call on him, says the Apostle,
in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? and how shall they
preach, except they be sent? and who are they that God sends with these his
glad tidings, the very feet of whom ought to be beautiful in our eyes, and the
report they make, and witness they bear, most acceptable to us? The answer
there to these and the like questions, is very short. So then faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God: not by that word, whose sound goes
forth into all the earth, and into the ends of the world. When the Lord gives
forth this general word or command, he has a great army of preachers, ready to
be sent on his message. Great is the company of those who are ready, willing,
and have an aptitude in them to publish it. This David well knew, when be gave a
description of three sorts of preachers, within his observation.

The first sort, he mentions Psalm. 19. The heavens declare the glory of God,
and the Firmament shows his handy work, even in the mediator, as in them he
made a tabernacle for the sun, which as a bridegroom coming out of his
chamber, shines more and more, unto a perfect day. His going forth is from one
part of heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it; so that there is nothing
hid from the heat (and light) thereof. Thus also God brought forth Abraham,
showed him the stars of heaven, and said, so shall thy seed be, preaching Christ
to him, in and by the sight of those heavenly bodies. And Abraham believed, and
it was accounted to him for righteousness. In like manner were the wise men of
the east brought to the knowledge of Christ in his kingly power and office, by
the sight give^ to them of his star, a star that made him known to the^, and
went before them to conduct them to a sight of him in his own person, which is
all that this sort of messengers or preachers of Christ can do. Thus the book of
the creatures, by Gods special Ordination and institution, in the way of types
and figures, through the ministry of angels, does teach and preach the
righteousness of God, which is in Christ, in order to lead us to the personal
sight of him, that we may in the end hear himself speak. After this manner the
righteousness of God in Christ, is and may be manifested, without the law or
written word.

Secondly; In the same Psalm he mentions another sort of preaching and teaching
of the knowledge of Christ; and that is out of his law, the law of his written
word, the ministry whereof is for the converting of men's Souls, and it is a
sure Testimony, that makes wise the simple: more to be desired then gold; yea,
then much fine gold: sweeter also then honey, and the honeycomb. The righteous
statutes and judgments of God signified in his written word, rejoice the heart,
and are true and righteous altogether. His commandment is pure, enlightening
the eyes. Concerning the law or command of God, thus manifested, Christ says,
search the Scripturs, whose true office is not only to revive and instruct you
in that law that was written in your hearts at the creation and lost by the
fall, but to send you to me also, that by obteyning a personal sight of me in
spirit, you might be farther instructed in the knowledge of me. But ye will not
come unto me, that ye may have life.

Thirdly and lastly, (Ps: 8:2:) David shows that there is another sort of
preachers that God sends as laborers into his harvest, saying, out of the
mouths of babes and sucklings have thou founded or ordained strength, because
of thine enemies, and that thou might still the enemy and the avenger. These
babes and sucklings Christ himself interprets and expounds to us (Luke 10.21.)
first, of those his sent ones, seventy in number, which he immediately
authorized and qualified by commission from himself, sending them two by two
before his face, as his harbingers and forerunners, into every city and place
whither he himself would come. Secondly he expounds it of those babes and
children of the fathers begetting, to whom he reveals those things which he had
hid from the wise and prudent. One of these babes Peter is acknowledged by
Christ to be, (Mat. 16.17,) when he called him the rock. Christ hereupon owned
him as one of the blessed seed, who had that sight and knowledge of Christ in
spirit, given to him, which none but the father could reveal. Flesh and blood
could neither give nor receave it. For such knowledge of Christ requires a
spiritual eyesight and discerning, peculiar to these children and babes of the
fathers own begetting, the plantation of his own right hand, of whom Christ
says, (Mat. 13.16, 17.) Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears,
for they hear. Verily, I say unto you, many prophets and righteous men have
desired to se those things which ye see, and have not seen them: and to hear
those things which ye hear, and have not heard them. For all things are
delivered to me of my father: and no man knows the son but the father:
neither knows any man the father, save the son, and he to whomsoever the son
will reveal him.

This sight of the Father and Son, in their mutual relations to, and fruitions
of each other, gained by the personal sight of Christ in spirit, is mentiond by
Paul, 1 Cor. 9.1. when he says, Am not I an Apostle? have not I seen Christ?
or, am not I one of those that by the sight of Christ in spirit and the
revelation of the Son in me, have received grace and Apostleship to the
obedience of faith among al nations, for his name? These are the pure in heart
and poor in spirit, that are taught after this most excellent manner to se God
and have the knowledge of Jesus Christ, in order thereby to be made ministers
and witnesses, as well of the things at first see^ by them, as of those also
wherein afterward Christ yet reserus himself farther and more fully to appear
unto them. These speak the things which they know; testify that which they have
see^, whether their witness be received or no, having themselv; first heard
the record that God gives of his Son, and set to their seal, that God is trues

This is the threefold cord, the lines whereof are streched out over all the
world and to the ends of the earth, by the quickening power of the living WORD.
He rides upon the heaven of heavens of old. Lo, he sends out his voice in
each and in all these his dispensations, and that a mighty voice, sharper then
any two-edged sword, peircing, even to the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit, and of the joints and marrow, a discoverer of the thoughts and intents
of the heart. Neither is there any creature, that is not manifest in his sight.
All things are naked and open to the eyes of this our great savior and
redeemer. And as he speaks immediately by himself, by the voice of his own
mouth, so does he also send out his voice by his hosts or armies of angels,
those ministers of his, which do his pleasure and signify his commands to
others, which they receave, as always attending and harkening to the voice of
his word.

The word therefore, as at first it is given in a fore-running and preparatory
dispensation to the Sons appearance in his own person, is called Heb. 2.2. the
word spoken by angels, the command whereof is so steadfast, that every
transgression and disobedience thereof, receaves a just recompense of reward.
By the Rule and authority of the holy and elect angels, exercised according to
his word and law, was God the Mediator Pleased to put and keep in subjection
the whole first creation, even man also, who in his first and mutable state, is
the chief and highest member thereof, next under the angels themselves.

By means of this angelical ministry and Rule under Christ, or in the hand of
the Mediator, the righteousness of God, wrought out in the person of the
redeemer, is made manifest without the law, to the gentiles that are without
law, that is, the knowledge of the Scriptures or written word; as also by the
law, to the jews, that are in and under the teaching of Gods written oracles,
and do or may there find the witness and manifestation thereof. In and by these
it does appear, that Jesus Christ died for our sins and is risen again for our
justification. By jews in this case we are not only to understand the seed of
Abraham according to the flesh, but those also among the gentiles who are
planted into the same good olive tree, Christ, on the same terms of mutability
as they were, liable to be broken off again; and those also that are after the
spirit, true heirs according to the promise, who are in like manner under this
dispensation and teaching, til the seed himself come and take them from this
Schoolmaster, in order to bring them under the most lively effectual teaching
and instruction of his own mouth, and by his own personal appearance in
spirit to them, either as the day star arising in their hearts and giving forth
the glory of his first appearance in his own face as he is the Son of man, in
the form of a servant, and fashion of the first Adam, made immutable; or 2dly,
as the sun in its strength, breaking forth in their souls that are gathered to
him, appointed and qualified to be with him in the Kingdom of his father, and
admitted to the peculiar privilege of beholding his glory in the face of his
most exalted and heavenly manhood, as he is the only begotten, lying in the
fathers bosom, he that is above all. What he has seen and heard in the
beholding of the fathers shape and very similitude, that he testifies; but no
man receaveth this his testimony, that is but a mere man and no more; For it is
not, it cannot be conveyed or communicated unto any, but with unspeakable words
which it is not possible for man in the single capacity of his first nature and
make, though become immutable, to receave or utter, so much do they surpass
all the knowledge as well as expression of mere man.

Under the voice of this threefold ministry, God the mediator (who is the
possessour of heaven and earth, the maker of them and all therein) has made of
one blood al nations of men for to dwell on the face of the earth; has
distributed to al of them, and determined the bounds of their habitations, as
also the different and proper means to bring them back to himself, by
repentance from dead works and faith toward the living God. He has awakened
that light in every one that comes into the world, that shall move and call upon
them at some time or other, upon occasion of sundry concurring providence, to
seek the Lord, if happily they may feel after him and find him, who is not far
from every one of us. It ought not then to be a thing incredible with us, but
that by these means provision is made by God in Christ, and care taken, not
only for the restoring of man again unto that righteousness and purity of
nature which he lost, and to the exercise of that kind of freewil which he
enjoyed at creation, but yet farther, to regenerate and beget him into a more
excellent fashion of being and heavenly frame of Spirit, in and by which the
end of his first creation is fully answered, and the law of it accomplished. Of
this we shall now in the third place proceed to treat, by way of answer to

3. The third general Query, which is this.

In what sense is it possible for man in his mutable state, considered either
before or after his fall, (according to the degree of restoring, healing grace,
which he does or may arrive unto) to hear and obey the things of Gods law,
without turning from it finally; and, in so doing, to grow up out of his
mutable into his immutable state, and be made heir and possessour of life
eternal?

To understand this the more plainly and distinctly, and to prevent prejudices
and mistakes, we shall discuss this subject under these 4 particular enquiries
following, as branches of this 3d maine point and general query.

1. Whether was man at first created in a capacity of being, and aptitude of
mind, possible to obey and fulfill the law of nature, so to as answer the end
of his creation; til brought under a second work of Gods hand, called the new
creation, and thereby cast into a new mould and frame of being?

Secondly, whether man by sin, be so unmade again and corrupted, so disordered
and disabled, that by the blessing and virtue of Christ's blood, and the proper
and fit means that by the father are put into the hands of the Mediator, he is
not in a capacity and possibility, notwithstanding his loss by the fall, to be
restored and made able again to obey Gods law, with the same kind of ability
God gave him at first? And upon such restoration, is he not obliged to set
about it? at least, to show his good will, and sincere inclination of mind
there unto, according to the measure of the ability he receaves?

3. How was man to employ and make use of his natural ability and strength,
given for the performance of Gods law? and according to what rule might or
ought he to have walked with God, either before or after the fall, which would
infallibly guide and unmoveably keep him in the way to eternal life? a way,
which is called the way of holiness, such as the unclean pass not over, and
the wayfaring men though fools, cannot, or shall not err therein, and at the
end whereof is immortality and eternal blessedness?

4. How comes man in a judicial manner to be hardened by God, and made a
vessel of wrath, fitted and appointed to everlasting destruction? And when is
it, that he shall be denied any farther benefit by the Sacrifice or Christ's
death, and no more permitted to change his mind and turn from his evil ways,
though he should seek it with tears, but be in a certain expectation of the
unquenchable flames of Gods wrath, ordained for the punishing and devouring of
all fixed and impenitent sinners?

To the first of these enquiries.

The creator did at the beginning put a created ability and principle of
motion into the creature. But the strength and power of this first impression
is not sufficient for the continued motion of every respective creature in its
kind, but a perpetual concourse and cooperation of the creator is needful
thereunto. Then doubtless man, who was made in Gods image, a rational and
free agent, the masterpiece of the visible creation, ought not to think
himself exempt from such a dependence, nor to covet or desire to be made
perpetual, upon such terms as would in effect dethrone his creator and make
more Gods then one. The end for which man was at all created, was to be
perpetually moving in love and service to his creator, as a vessel prepared
with meetnes for the use of his Lord, in whatever he should be commanded by
him, for the advancement of his praise and glory. Now, as love is the end and
perfection of the comma^deme^t, so is it the first and chief principle out of
which all true obedience to the command must proceed, and a duration and
perpetuity in this love and duty is absolutely necessary to man's hapines and
continuance in Gods favor and good liking. For until a man keep Gods
commandments out of this principle, and be sure of its unchangeablenes, he
neither can be said to walk in that Covenant or agreement with God, nor ever
be sure of keeping the condition of that Covenant, upon which God promises to
be his God, and to be and abide in love and communion with him for ever. And it
is most unquestionable, that the Lord will faithfully perform his promise and
his oath, the two immutable things wherein he cannot lie. The only doubt is,
whether man in this first make and frame of mind, be able to perform the duty
required of him. Every benefit requires answerable duty. Gods bounty then to
man in giving him his being, creating him in his own image and likeness, must
needs lay a strong obligation upon him to love God with the love that he
requires. And if this love be made by God a necessary condition of man's
obteining eternal life, it is certainly possible for man to perform this
condition, even, to love the Lord his God with all his heart, soul, mind and
strength, either in the power of what he has, or of what by the same gracious
and liberal hand of God he may be made to have. For an impossible condition is
all one with a negative, as if God should say, that eternal life and
blessedness is utterly impossible and altogether vnatteinable for man.

The nature of man is most drawn and commanded by love. This is that which
swayes and carries it in its motions after the object which it pursues. Now the
appearance which God gives of himself in his Son, (the image of the invisible
God, the brightness of his glory and express character of his person) is the
most beautiful and desirable object that can come into the mind of man, for
his fruition and inheritance. And he is not only lovely in himself, but full of
love to man. He has such love in him to man's nature, as he has not to any
besides; no, not to the angels. For he took not on him the nature of angels,
but the seed of Abraham, which thereby came to be knit in personal union with
the only begotten Son of God. And yet farther, the love of God in Christ
toward men is most largly and liberally diffusive, to the filling all those
that do become willing receavers and enterteiners of it, with its own fulness
and unsearchable riches of divine treasure, showing itself not in word only,
but in deed and in truth, to all those that are taken into cohabitation with
it, as the habitable part of its earth. The cords of this love are the cords of
a man, attracting by arguments exceedingly adaequate and suited to the reason
and understanding of man. Where lies then this great mystery, that it should be
impossible for man to continue in the love which God commands and declares, as
the law he is to observe and perform, upon the severest penalties of his
displeasure? Is it not rather indeed a gross mistake for any to think or say
so? And are we not rather to conclude and affirm, that it was not only
possible for man to have performed this great and comprehensive duty of
continuing in the love of God, (which is the fulfilling of all law) before his
fall, but is so still, by such restoration of strength and ability as men do
receave by the virtue of Christ's death and resurrection?

Man in his first creation was furnished with an ability to be his own keeper
in that righteous and good frame wherein he came fresh and lively out of Gods
hands, with which he girds himself and goes whithersoever he will. He was
created unto good works, that he should walk in them: he had the enlightening
and quickening influence of Gods spirit to assist and direct him therein. Yea,
he was so intimately joined with the Lord the spirit, in love, likeness and
agreement, that it may truly be said, his soul was (as it were) a part of his,
joined and continued to him as the habitable part of his earth, the temple
which he built for himself to dwell in. And must it not needs be very irksome
and painful, to depart, be cut of, disioynted and separated by our iniquity,
from him that is our life? But as man has thus a righteous and reasonable
soul, which ought to be guided by the mind and law of his God, so has he also
a power of girding and turning himself, according to the free motion of his
own will. He has in his soul a changable principle, which can move and
conclude either way, to good or evil, according to the differing report and
representation that is made to him, by the one or other part of his mind, that
is, his intellectual or sensual nature, of both which he is composed, as has
bin showed. So then according to the arguments given by these different parts
of his composition, on the one hand or on the other, (being furnished with a
competent measure of divine light to discern and conclude aright, as to the
way he should go) God leaves him so far forth in the hand of his own counsel,
as to be at liberty to choose and determine within himself, as it shall seem
best to him. In this unconstant and moveable estate of man, this dividednes and
wavering of mind, inclinable to good, and also to evil under the show of good,
man being left free and without constraint, what is it possible for him to do?
can he love the Lord his God with all his heart, soul, mind and strength, and
his neighbor as himself, and can he continue so to do, unchangably and
perpetually?

The answer very briefly may be,

1. That it is possible for man to be perpetually moved in and by that love to
God, which is required by the law.

2. It is possible for man, considered either as before or since the fall, to
move himself in the performance of this his duty, for a much longer
continuance, then he shows himself willing and inclinable to do it, in his
mutable state.

3. It must reasonably be supposed, that while man reteins such a changable
principle and fountain of action in him, as the freedom of his own will, and
to be in his own keeping and at his own dispose, his obedience to Gods law
and his walking with him must needs be (as God him self complains) at an
all-adventures and without any stedfastnes in his Covenant. But he that as
single and at his own dispose, in the freedom of his own will, cannot keep
himself firm and steadfast in the performance of his duty, may so yield
himself to be bound up in the will and motion of another, who is unchangable,
that he may be kept in the power thereof, unmovable and free from all danger
of departing or turning aside to the right hand or to the left, from the holy
and straight way of Gods Commandments. And this seeming bondage to the will of
another, is the truest, greatest and most absolute freedom, being that which
falls to man's share as he comes to be actually united with Christ in the band
of the choicest and most excellent marriage union.

We may then safely conclude, that it was possible for man, by the ability and
strength of nature given him before the fall, to have stood and continued
longer in his duty then he did. For before any danger appeared of his
discontinuance herein, or that any temptation thereunto discovered it self, a
way was set open to him in the tree of life, (wherein he was taught how he
ought to resign up himself to the teaching and will of another) whereby such a
change might have bin brought upon him through a new creation, and the coming
of the son of God to dwell in his heart by faith, even that faith which works
by a love stronger then death, as would have rendered him unmovable in his duty
and love to God.

It must needs then be acknowledged to be man's own fault through unbeleife to
resist and harden himself against that working of the holy Ghost which brings
upon us the pangs of the new birth, as a needful preparation thereunto. This
was the folly of Ephraim, that unwise son, who stayed long in the place of the
breaking forth of children, (Hosea 13.13.) as having no mind to endure the
pangs required to the birth of the immortal seed. This was great folly in our
first parents, but it is far greater and more dangerous in any restored but to
some graduall exercise of the like ability since the fall, when proof has bin
made by man at his best estate, in his primitive purity, what this first
ability and sufficiency of nature does amount unto, as to the keeping out of
sin. For what can the man (in this case) do, that comes after the king? If the
armor with which our first parents were armed against the great Goliath, did
(upon experience) fail them, surely though it be prepared to be put on again
by their posterity, and attempted anew, never so often, it is and will be found
always best for us with David to forbear making use of it with any confidence
in such selfsufficiency, and to resort to the more sure and effectual weapons,
mentioned, (2 Cor: 10:4: and Ephesians. 6:11, 17.) and to put on the whole armor of
God; to arm ourselvs with the same mind that was in Christ Jesus, that may
make us inclinable and ready so to suffer in the flesh as to cease from sin, or
so to crucify the flesh by the powerful operation of this heavenly mind in and
upon us, as thereby to put an end to all the motions of sin in our fleshly and
sensual part, which is the door by which at first sin entered.

This brings us to the second particular enquiry, in order to the clearing up
the third general Querie in this discourse, concerning the loss and deprivall
(which happened unto man through his sin and disobedience) of that natural
ability and aptnes of mind which he had in his primitive purity to love and
serve God according to his duty. And how far is man (by the virtue of Christ's
blood, duly applied to him) capable of restitution into the exercise thereof,
so as to be once more put upon the proof and trial, whether in the day of
temptation he will hearken to the voice of the gospel, by the washing of
regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost, which purifies the heart from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, not only from the blood or natural pollution,
from which before it was not cleansed, but also from all those things whereby
man could not be cleansed and freed by the law of Moses, by the best natural
ability and strength received by him in his first creation, or renewed and
revived in him since?

In answer to this, we shall as little as may be repeat what has bin mentioned
before, but rather refer to it. Only here is the proper place to reassume the
pursuit of what was but lightly touched before, concerning the conditional
Covenant, made by God with Cain, after the fall, which is necessarily implied
Genesis 4.7. and may safely be concluded on;

1. Because Cain owned himself a visible worshipper of God, and brought of the
fruit of the ground, an offering unto the Lord.

2. Because God in effect ownes as much himself, when he speaks to this
purpose, if thou do well, I will be as good as my agreement with thee, thou
shall be rewarded. But if thou do ill, know that the Covenant I have made with
thee, is but conditional, and works wrath upon thy disobedience, whereby the
punishment of thy sin will hasten apace upon thee, and be near thee, even at
the door. And that thou may certainly know, thou will be without all excuse
for thy disobedience, if thou persist in it, do not think to lay the fault
any where but in the free motion of thine own will, which thou art restored to
the exercise of. For although through the fall, thy lusting proud flesh and
sensual part of thy mind has gotten the Dominion and usurped authority over
thy intellectual and most purely rational part, it shall be subject to thee
again, as it ought by the law and order of nature. For thou shall be more and
more renewed into a strength and ability to rule over and keep it to its duty,
if the fault be not in thy self.

This conditional Covenant with the benefits of it, thus renewed between God
and Cain, is that which is renewed by the same blood of the Mediator between
Christ and all the posterity of Adam, vertually and radically. This is that
which Christ has obtained at the fathers hands to be anew entered into with
man, for his farther proof and trial. Unto this ministry Christ is enabled and
qualified, either by himself or by his messengers and servants, to bring back
again the whole world unto God, according to that invitation of his, Isai.
55.1.2. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has
no money: come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk, without money and
without price. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and
your labor for that which satisfies not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat
ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatnes. All this
yet lies short of the saving grace and sure mercies of the new and everlasting
Covenant, which is propounded by itself afterward, v. 3. So then, thus far the
Gospel is and may be received by Cain, and those of whom God swears in his
wrath, that they shall never enter into his Rest. Unto these the promise is
made conditionally of entering into Rest, and they fall short of it through
hardness of heart and unbeleife. The WORD preached unto them does not profit
them, as to eternal salvation, because they are not united to it by faith, or
have not the inseparable union contracted between the Son of God and them, in
the Covenant ordered in all things and sure, which true saving faith works.

The word therefore and command of God, consisting in a conditional and in an
absolute Covenant from the beginning, are the same two Testimonies of the law
and Gospel still, or rather the two Testaments that are in force with mankind
by the death of the Testatour, the Lord Jesus Christ. By the first of these,
man is renewed and restored out of the fall, and brought in some degree to the
fruition and exercise of his first righteousness and freedom of will, in order
to the making proof and trial of him once more. And by the second of them, he
is regenerated and begotten of the immortal seed, into an immutability in
righteousness and glory, in a life that is from the dead, incapable ever to be
lost or fail more.

These two Testimonies and Testaments of God, are visible words, inward,
spiritual words and lively oracles, that create their own suitable organs and
vessels in the minds of men, for their reception. And there is an inward sight
of them to be had by man as well as an outward hearing, to which purpose it is
said, 1 John 1.1. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which
we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled of the word of life: that declare we unto you. That which John saw,
heard and handled, was from the beginning, and was seen, heard and handled from
the foundation of the world, at sundry times and in diverse manners, under
former dispensations, till at last the dark shadows of him vanished, and the
true light itself began to shine and dawne in his own personal appearance,
first in the flesh, and then afterward in the Spirit.

There are therefore inward and spiritual senses, whereby the man of God sees,
hears, tastes, savours and handles the word of God. Such senses there must be,
because there is an inward as well as an outward man of the heart, which must
not want his due powers and faculties, any more then the other. For since the
words themselves are divine, even words of spirit and life, how can they be
otherwise perceaved then by senses suited to their nature, spiritual senses,
distinguished from those of the animalish, outward man of the soul, which is
not at all skilled in that manner of knowing and discerning.

From the exercise of spiritual life and the senses thereof, proceeds the
spiritual taste, savor and approbation of those divine words, that are the
significations of Gods will and law to us. Unto such experienced men, skilled
in the words of truth, we may appeal, as to the true and full significancy of
divine oracles (which the disputer of this world in the perverse and
presumptuous use of his natural senses and understanding, contradicts and
blasphemes) do you not see this truth? do you not handle with your hands this
Word of life? do you not taste that the Lord is gracious? This is the much more
excellent way of understanding the Scriptures, when after such a spiritual
manner we relish, handle, se, taste and have a share in what we know of the word
of God, as the Apostle prays, Phil. 1.9. For this I pray (says he) that your
love may abound in knowledge and in all judgment, or in every spiritual sense.

He that was from the beginning is Christ, the living WORD of God, the WORD
wherein was life, and that life the light of men, even of every man that comes
into the world. He is the light of men, in and under a threefold dispensation
or manner of ministry. He is the word of God God to men, that makes with them
either a conditional and dissoluble Covenant, or an absolute and everlasting
Covenant that can never be dissolved.

The first of these is the word of the beginning, by which God begins to make
himself known and declare his will in his law to all men, that law, by which
they must one day be judged.

The second is the word of the oath, containing a free promise to some, and a
gracious receaving of them into his love, therein to abide for ever; but a
final and judicial rejection of others, concerning whom he therein swears,
that they shall never enter into his Rest, but be given up to the ways that
they have chosen, and fixed in their own delusions, in the everlasting chains
whereof he binds them up and reservs them with the fallen angels to the
judgment of the great day. This is that which is the end and consummation-work
both ways, to all that have passed under the first Testament or conditional
Covenant.

Christ, considered as he is the word of the beginning, the author and minister
of the conditional Covenant, and of the life and quickening proper thereunto,
has a coming forth in light and life unto men, which is called his first
appearance, which he dispenses in the capacity of the promised seed, pursuant
to the manifestation of Gods will unto man in paradise, immediately after his
fall. He is therein declared the savior and redeemer of man, he by whom alone
is remission of sins, and all those that believe not on him shall perish in
their sins. For as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so has the
father provided that the WORD made flesh be lifted up in the sight of all men
and preached to them, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but
have everlasting life. And God would have men know, that he so loved the world
as that he gave his only begotten Son to take and bear away their sins, and
lead them into the way of salvation, in stead of condemning them upon the fall
of our first parents, as he might justly have done. He then that believes in the
Son of God, is not or shall not be condemned. But he that believes not, that
is, receavs not his word in the love thereof, is condemned already, because he
has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. The justice of
such condemnation will show itself in this, that when this light is come into
the world, men have chosen and loved darkness better then light: yea, to
discover the evil of their mind, they hate the light and (as near as they can)
shun all appearance of it, least they should be reproved thereby and convinced
of their evil deeds, and be converted, and God should heal them.

But how is Christ (the savior and redeemer) lifted up before the eyes of all
men? and how comes he with light into the world, or into the mind of the
natural man, who receavs not the things of the spirit of God, but accounts
them foolishnes? Yea he cannot know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, and are therefore too deep for him to fathom, too high and heavenly
for him to reach, being destitute of spiritual senses and discerning suitable
thereunto.

By way of answer to this, we must be careful rightly to distinguish and
divide the word of truth, which (as has bin said) has a first voice and the
light of its first appearance, as also a second voice and the brightness of a
second coming. It is by means of the first voice, and the light and life
ministered in and by the first Testament and conditional Covenant, that the
spirit of the natural man is enlightened, quickened and wrought upon, which is
the very same that at first gave him his make and primitive being in Gods
image; and now by renewing it self and coming with healing and restoration in
its wings, man's flesh is made fresher then a child's, and he returns to the
days of his youth, that is, his first days of primitive purity. This the
natural man receaves as the gift and effect of his bounty that is his Redeemer
and Savior, who is so gracious as to say, and that effectually; deliver him
from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom; Job 33.24.25. But all this
quickening and enlightening is but conditional and may be lost again, though
abundantly sufficient to make a full and complete trial of him that receavs
it, in order to his final salvation or damnation.

But for a second and fuller answer, we are to know, that this word of the
beginning and voice of Christ's first appearance, may and does come forth in a
threefold light and workmanship upon the heart and spirit of the natural man.

1. In that which is a lamp and light in the mind, a work of the law, or a
conformity to Gods commandment, contained in his conditional Covenant,
wrought in the heart, and manifesting itself to the inward senses of the
natural mind by the ministry of angels, with which Christ does enlighten more
or less every one that comes into the world, and in a more particular manner
those that are without law or the knowledge of the Scriptures and written word
of God. This means of knowledge being by the providence of God with held from
them, so as that they are ignorant of what it speaks to other men that live
under the sound thereof, he is pleased to wink at and pass by the day of this
ignorance, neither will he proceed with them in judgment, according to the
things they know not, but according to the things they know, and have the taste
and experience of within themselves. And these are the invisible things of God,
even his eternal power and Godhead, the WORD by which all things were created,
and whose offspring and likeness we are, according to what we may feel in the
inward man of our heart, which was his workmanship, created by him with a
strong bent and living conformity unto righteousness and true holiness. To this
sort of men the WORD has an inward voice and way of teaching, which speaks in
them and makes them a rule unto themselves in their hearing and obeying this
inward operation of the word. Their inward sight and hearing is truly and
properly obeying, which afterward is perfected in outward action and practice.
Such hearers and doers of the law of God, fulfilling the condition, shall be
justified, and God will make good that word of his Covenant to them, if thou
do well, thou shall be accepted and rewarded. Concerning these (though as to
the outward man they be as yet in uncircumcision, yet keeping the righteousness
of the law, according to what they know) it is said, that their uncircumcision
shall be counted for circumcision, and the want of what they are ignorant of, not
imputed to them; Romans 2. These who by nature (renewed by the Redeemer, though
yet unknown to them, according to the witness given of him in the written
word) approve themselves faithful to their light, in exercising all good
conscience, to the fulfilling of the law, shall condemn them who by the letter
and form of knowledge in the law, are found transgressors of it, when tried
and judged by the rule they profess to live under.

The chief thing that by way of caution and warning is to be said to this first
sort of righteous men, is this; that they take heed to themselves in this their
slippery standing, so as to continue under the hearing and teaching of this
voice of the Lord, in that soft, pliable and tender frame of heart, in that
humble, meek and yiedling temper of spirit, that does become the vessel of
clay in the hand of the potter, and the creature under the instructing word of
the creator, the turning away and settled departure from which, is eternal
death. For the Lord leaves it to the power, will and choice of the natural
man, when he comes to be thus renewed and enlightened by Christ, whether he will
hearken to what he has yet farther to say unto him or not, according to those
frequent expressions in the Scripture, if ye be willing and obedient; if ye
refuse and rebel; and again, whether they will hear, or whether they will
fobear. So likewise John. 7.17. If any man do his will, he shall know the
doctrine whether it be of God; or, he shall know more and more, till at last he
attein that knowledge wherein eternal life consists; according to that of our
savior, John. 12. yet a little while is the light with you, (the light of his
then personal appearance in the flesh) walk while ye have the light, lest
darkness come upon you, and you be as he that knows not whither he goes. While
ye have the light, believe in the light, that is, be faithful to it, hear and
obey it in the present voice and teaching you are under, and it will never
leave leading you forward, till it has brought you to him, or to that last and
highest manifestation of the truth, whereby ye shall be made children of the
light, or of the day, even of that wisdom which is from above.

This sort of obedience is that of man's restored freewill by light from the
inward word, which is good and pleasing unto God, till man be taught the way of
hearing and obeying him more perfectly, and after a more excellent manner, in
the way everlasting. The disobedience also of man in this state, is a free and
voluntary act, whereby he hardens his heart against the voice and calling of
God, and resists the holy Ghost in the work of life and immortality, which his
office is to set up in every truly regenerate soul. It is the whole duty of
the natural man to fear God and keep his commandments, who will bring every
work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or whether it
be evil. Unto this all promises and threatenings of God, all temporal and
Spiritual blessings do tend, even to render man obedient to his God, in
hearing his voice, walking in his ways, and keeping his commandments. This in
effect is the maine scope both of the law and of the gospel. And whatever we
do in way of obedience, that falls short of walking unmoveably and universally
in all the commandments of God, with our whole heart, how good or pleasing
soever it may seem to us, it is not acceptable nor pleasing unto God. Let no
man therefore deceave his own Soul or dissemble with God, (who searches and
knows the hearts and the reins) nor let any pretend inability or infirmity,
since he is near to every one of us, upon whose name if we call, he will save
us from our sins and make our reconciliation once more with God, if the fault
be not in ourselvs: Yea, he will save us to the uttermost, if we continue in
our obedience, and in a pliablenes of spirit to the voice and words of his
mouth, that will be a sure guide to us, till it have brought us into that
kingdom of his, that cannot be shaken.

These are the first sort of servants and subjects that may be found faithful
and obedient unto the word and command of God, which was from the beginning.
These are they that fear God and work righteousness, by an inward teaching,
suited to the spiritual senses of the natural mind, which is the same with
the light and law of pure nature. Now of these, some, and those the greatest
part by far, (being wholly left to their own choice and in the hand of their
own counsel) continue not in their obedience, but perish through a hardness
and impenitency of heart, in which they rebel against the increasing measure
of light with which the holy Ghost would enlighten them, in order to the
enlarging of their hearts to an entire and steadfast walking with God in that
Covenant of his that cannot be dissolved. But others of them, through Gods free
and peculiar preventing grace, are withheld from so sinning against God, and
are laid hold on and apprehended by the son's coming into their souls and
contracting a most intimate and inseparable marriage union with them, fastening
them to himself, the rock af ages and chief corner stone, by whom their bow is
made to abide in strength, and their arms are made strong by the hands of the
mighty God of Jacob. Thus of servants, they do with the eunuch and centurion
(who were converted by Philips and Peter's ministry of the outward word) become
Sons, that are heirs according to the promise, or else, they are admitted
immediately to the fight of Christ in spirit, as Paul was in his conversion,
unto which heavenly vision they prove not disobedient, being taught not only to
live in the Spirit, but to walk after the Spirit. This then that we have bin
speaking of, is the first light and workmanship that Christ in his first
appearance may and does visit the sons and daughters of men with, even those
that are not yet brought to the knowledge of his voice, in and by the holy
Scriptures.

There is then a second degree of light and glory, wherein Christ breaks forth
in the workmanship of his Spirit upon the hearts and minds of men, which
compared with the first, is a more excellent and near approach to the sight of
the Son himself, testifying most particularly in what manner and at what time
the WORD was to be made flesh, and in that flesh to be crucified and die for
our sins, and to rise again into a life wherein he was never to die more.

Now the voice of this word is from divine inspiration, moving in the hearts
and speaking by the mouth of Moses and other the Servants, the Prophets of the
Lord, in the old Testament, to John the Baptist; and afterward, by the holy
Evangelists and Apostles, containing the doctrine of both Covenants, that of
works and that of faith, the law and the Gospel; These divine words and
oracles were committed to writing and preserved for the use of the Church, from
Moses his time downwards to this present day, by Gods especial and admirable
providence, called the holy Scriptures, which are able to make us wise unto
Salvation, through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. They are not of any
private interpretation, but attended with the ministry of the holy Ghost, in
his various distributions and gifts, dividing unto every one severally, as
himself pleases, to the making the doctrine flowing from this word, pure and
converting the soul, that also which is an enlightening of the eyes, and a
washing of the heart with clean water from its old sins; it is profitable also
for reproof, correction and instruction in righteousness, to the making the man
of God perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good word and work, even such
hearers of the word and doers of the work as prove blessed in their deed, if
the fault be not in themselves, in failing to perform the condition of the
Covenant, through that faith which excludes boasting, and fails not.

This second sort of hearers and doers of the word, are they that are alive
unto God through Jesus Christ, by hearing the voice of the living word, in and
through the ministry of the outward letter of the Scriptures, testifying of
Christ and of the work of redemption given to him by the father to finish, and
of his coming, not by water only, but by water and blood, to the paying a
ransom for our sins, and for the planting of us into a likeness with him, both
in his death and resurrection.

Under this second dispensation (which is the ministry of the outward and
written word, accompanied with the presence and power of the holy Ghost and his
gifts) there is a workmanship of Christ, formed in and upon the heart,
consisting of several degrees and growths up into him who is our head, the
good olive tree, that is willing, ready and able to receave us into himself, as
our spiritual root, which bears us and fills us with the oil and fatnes that
springs up from the same into every branch and member of his body, considered
either as his body is his living flesh, ot as it is his flesh crucified;

1. As it is the mannah and living bread that is the life of the world or of
the worldly Church and enlightened natural man, that may eat and drink in his
presence, at this his table, and eat and drink his flesh and blood to their
own damnation.

2. There be those that feed upon the crucified flesh, the carcass or dead
body of Christ, out of whose weakness comes strength, and from whose crucifying
comes that meat which perishes not, but is bread that nourishes to eternal
life. Thus it is written, Romans 14. None of us that live, lives unto himself,
and none of us that die, do or ought to die unto our selves. But whether our
faith be weak and low, and our natural ability to hear and obey, active and
strong in us; or whether the work of our faith be strong and powerful, and our
natural activity weak and low, yea brought into the very grave with Christ, the
life or the death is not to be to ourselvs, but to Christ. In and with him must
we live, and in and with him must we die. Whether then we live with Christ by
faith, as it is weak, or whether we die with Christ by faith as the work of it
in us is powerful and strong, we should live to the Lord and die to the Lord,
that so living and dying we may be found amongst the number of those that are
the Lords. For this end, and to enable us to effect this work of faith, whereby
we may live and also may die to the Lord, and in neither sin nor serve our
selves, Christ both died and rose again, and is become Lord both of the dead
and of the living, even in this sense before opened. To this agrees what the
same Apostle testifies, 2 Cor. 4:12.13. compared with 1 Cor. 4.8, 13. Here we
find the Apostle, the father and true elder, as to his growth up into Christ,
strong in the faith; and the Corinthians, they are the children, babes in
Christ, weak and low in faith, but high, full and puffed up in their fleshly
minds. Let us therefore consider the differing characters he gives of the one
and of the other, though both believers, such as in their living and in their
dying are or may be the Lords. Ye now are full, says Paul, or this is your
time of being rich and reigning as kings, without us: but I would to God you
did indeed reign, that we also might reign together with you; But it is
otherwise with us, even a dying time; We are troubled on every side, perplexed,
persecuted, cast down, always bearing about in our body the dying of the Lord
Jesus, God having set forth us that are the Apostles (most strong and eminent
in faith) as it were appointed unto death, and to be made a spectacle to the
world, to angels and to men. We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in
Christ: we are weak, but ye are strong: Ye are honorable, but we are despised.
So then death works in us, but life in you: And we having the same spirit of
faith, according as it is written, I have believed and therefore have I spoken,
we also believe and therefore speak; knowing that he which raised up the Lord
Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus, and shall present us with you.

That then which is wrought in men by Christ, through the ministry of the
outward word, by the spirit and life of his first appearance, is either
restoration-work single, or restoration-work joined and accompanied with true
regeneration and eternal salvation. Restoration-work single is that which is
called the spirit of bondage, making but those servants that abide not in the
house for ever, as having never tasted nor partaken of that freedom, wherewith
the Son makes those free indeed, that he knits into an indissoluble union with
himself. But restoration-work, as it is accompanied with salvation, (or the
birth of the immortal and incorruptible seed of life and righteousness) is that
which is called the spirit of adoption, of power, of love, and of a sound or
steadfast mind; that principle of life, begotten and springing up in us, whereby
we put off that which is mutable and corruptible, and put on that which is
immutable and incorruptible, as well in the inward man of the heart, as in the
outward man of the flesh.

We have already showed that their obedience is accepted with God, who are
faithful to their light, under the first dispensation of Gods word speaking in
them, to the inward senses of their mind, as was the case of the centurion.
Such persons in every nation are owned by God, as those that fear him and work
righteousness. And this fear is in a sense faith; for they cannot thus come to
God and obey him, but they must believe that he is, and that he is the rewarder
of them that diligently seek him and hearken to his voice. Nevertheless, this
is not the faith that is in the regenerate, flowing from the spirit and life of
the new creature, and working by love; but it is the faith which all restored,
enlightened men may have, in conformity to what Adam had before his fall, that
knew and obeyed the eternal WORD, as creator and maker of both worlds, though
not as the redeemer and Savior of men, by the blood of the cross, from sin
and the wrath attending it. This sort of faith is that which flows from man's
exercise of his right knowledge and free will, wherein he was created after Gods
likeness, and did receave the truth in his knowledge, but in no fixed, permanent
love thereof, because he was left free to change his mind as seemed good unto
himself, being (in case of his failer therein) personally responsible to the
penalties and curse of the law. For to be created with such a righteous mutable
principle of activity and free moving power in the mind, was simply in itself
good, and might be lawfully used, to answer the end for which it was given,
which was by way of voluntary resignation to chang and turn out of that
wavering, unstable active power, though at present righteous, into that love
that should bind up the moving power of man's Spirit, into a steadfast and
unmovable delight and rest in righteousness, and into a fixed and unshaken
enmity and aversnes of mind to sin and all evil. By this new creation and
forming of the spirit of man within him, his first freedom is taken from him
and done away, or it is swallowed up into a freedom much better and more
excellent, wherein man is made more in Gods image and after his similitude,
then at the first. For though all things were in a good estate with man at
first, when God made him upright, (that is to say, in a due conformity unto the
divine will, for the performance of a pure and holy worship and service to God,
justice and true judgment to his neighbor, and for the walking in a due
sobriety, temperance and continence, as to himself) yet God would have him
know, he might be better made through a new creation, which should more then
comprehend all the good of his first make, and add also to it an immutability.
God did therefore forbid man to trust to the uncertain riches and fading glory
of his first estate, and timely to look and make out for a better. But in stead
of this, man (notwithstanding Gods prohibition) runs himself aground into a
very bad and evil condition. Out of this forlorn state, the first thing that
God propounds to him, in and by the knowledge of the redeemer, is his
restoration, which God is willing to draw him to by the ministry of Moses, and
turn him to by the ministry of Eliah, even the disobedient to the wisdom of
the just, to make a ready people, prepared for the Lord, to meet and receave
him as he is given by the father in a better Covenant, ordered in all things
and sure, of which there can never be any breach either on Gods or man's part,
as there was and will be again of the first Covenant, how often soever it be
repeated and renewed, unless it end in man's being received and taken into the
second.

There is then a ministry of the first Covenant in the hand of the Redeemer,
Sprinkled with the blood of his cross, which is able to rectify the
depravation of things caused by sin, and man's first breach with God, consisting
in a restitution toward man's primitive purity, and the remission of sins past,
and this by a repentance from dead works, and a returning by faith unto the
living God.

Moses began this ministry; John Baptist continued or rather renewed it, as the
immediate forerunner unto Christ's coming in the flesh; and Elias in spirit
and power, (or the spirit and power of Elias that is yet to come as the latter
rain of Christ's first appearance) shall carry on this work of restoration to
its perfection and immutability, in the hearts of Christ's slain witnesses, and
be as the forerunner and bright morning star that is to usher in the sunshine
of Christ's second coming. Then will Christ come forth in his own person, to
celebrate publicly before the eyes of the whole creation, the marriage of the
lamb with his bride.

This latter Elias is he that must destroy that painted Jezebel, which puts
Naboth to death by the authority of Ahab, Revel: 2:20, 22; the earthly lying
spirit of the false righteousness, in the mouth of the false Prophets, which by
the secular power in all ages, puts to death Naboth, the spirit of true
Prophesy in the mouths of Christ's faithful Servants, by false witnesses, to
the treading down and keeping under the true Prophets of God, during the time,
times and half a time, foretold by Daniel and the Apostle John.

And as this Elias must rectify the worship of God, so must he set in order the
man toward his neighbor. He must turn the heart of the fathers to the
children, and of the children to the fathers, putting an end to all differences
between the spiritual fathers and their children, and the spirits of the
later Prophets shall be subject to the former Prophets. For when this Elias
comes, he will untie all knots, answer all objections, and resolve all doubts.
In a word, he will bring back again the whole man unto his God. He will restore
the natural man to his right. He will also prepare and point out the way unto
the heavenly man, for the obteining of his right. He will recover all Edom to
the house of Israel, and the kingdom shall be the Lords; Obadiah. v. 21.

And why should we doubt or despair, but such a time there will be, when things
(which now are, have long bin, and will yet be more turned upside down, all
out of order, all confounded) shall be restored and brought to right again? Have
not all the Beasts had their reign, and shall not Christ have his? Shall not
his kingdom come, and will be done in earth as it is in heaven, unless we pray
so without faith and hope? Have we not a promise that there shall be times of
refreshing from this heavenly presence and appearance of the Lord? shall not a
general restitution of all things be the effect of such his appearance, in the
very dawnings thereof? Were this to be man's work, no doubt would be made of it.
O we of little faith! shall we then doubt of it, when God himself undertakes
it, the mighty God, the Lord the Redeemer, that is yet to come out of Zion, to
turn away iniquity from Jacob, in a spirit and power that all must bow under
and fall before? Let us then upon whom the ends of the world are come, lift up
our heads in the sight of the neernesse of this redemption, which is hastening
apace upon us, in despite of all the opposition that is, can, or shall be made
against it.

This then is that which we are to understand by the restoration-work, which
God begets, carries on and perfects by the ministry of the outward and written
word, as the handmaid and servant to the sons appearance himself in spirit. It
is that whereby man is first brought back again to God and to himself, in the
exercise of his right judgment and freewill. Then is he also ledd out of that
into the love which he that has, dwells in God, takes up his rest in the
divine nature, becoming the habitable part of the earth, wherein the divine
nature inthrones itself and dwells, as in his temple and resting place. This is
the land of Emmanuel, the true Israell's land, the land of promise in the
spirit, the city that has foundations, whose builder and maker is God, Christ
himself being the chief cornerstone thereof. It is therefore the kingdom that
cannot be shaken; at the coming on thereof, all that is moveable must be taken
out of the way, and give place. He that is least in this kingdom, is greater
then John Baptist, though he were greater then all the other prophets that went
before him; the meaning is, in reference to this restoration-work, which is the
proper effect of John Baptists ministry, through which Gods Covenant is
repeated and renewed with man in the blood of the redeemer, after which a
breach between God and man is still in possibility and danger to happen, and
the spirit of man may be broken off from him, with whom it had bin made one, as
a member of the same body. For by the power of this restoring, healing ministry
of the first Covenant, taking force by the death of Christ, the Lord does
create or make man again of one mind, one will and heart with him, according
to the law of the first creation, which is throughout conditional, and may be
made void through man's default, as appears by what Paul and Barnabas speak to
the contradicting and blaspheming jews; Actor. 13.46. It was necessary that the
word of God should first have bin spoken to you: but seeing ye thrust it from
you, and judge yourselvs unworthy, or show yourselvs not desirous of eternal
life; lo, we turn to the gentiles. Oh, how liable is the heart of man under
this conditional Covenant, (though never so far advanced) to be suddenly broken
off again from God, by its hope and trust in the creature, or in the uncertain
riches, that are either within us or without? This the Apostle Paul well knew,
and therefore charged them that are rich in this world, not to trust in the
uncertainty of riches, (no, not in the very inward riches of the heart, as
enriched with the restored mutable principles of righteousness) but in the
living God, the WORD that is in our heart and in our mouth, in the person of
Christ, the enduring substance that never fails nor fades away. Christ says,
woe be to the rich, to wit, that trust and put confidence in any the
abovementioned fading riches, within man or without. Again he says, Blessed
are the poor in spirit, who do resign the activity, life, and way of working
righteousness and worshipping God in the fading, restored mutable principles of
the first creation, growing weak, feeble and low in all such ways even of
doing well, wherein man has whereof to boast, in order to a growing rich and
strong in the Lord, or in the new creature life, activity and way of
worshipping God, and working righteousness in spirit and truth, in the steady
and unchangable principles of everlasting righteousness. We cannot serve two
masters, God and Mammon. We cannot take that delight and pleasure in any
creature or seeming present good whatsoever, which is due from us to God in
Christ only, but it breaks off our spirits from the God of life. To delight in
and prefer the way of worshipping God and working righteousness, in the mutable,
fading, humane, creaturely principles of our first creation, when restored,
before the performing all in the unchangable, divine, and never fading
principles of the new creation, where God comes to work all our works in us and
for us, this is a very high provocation of God, the highest and most deeply
delusive and unperceaved idolatry, in preferring the creature before the
creator, who is God blessed for ever.

Man's disobedience and failing then with God, as to the performance of the
condition of the first Covenant, renewed and brought into force again by the
blood of the redeemer, is that which since the fall does cause a new breach
between God and man, when it is wilful, working that wrath which the
Sacrifice of Christ cannot appease. And man is not free nor safe from the
danger of such wilful, unexpiable sinning, and so, of that judgment and fiery
indignation which shall devour the adversaries, whilst he is under the dominion
and jurisdiction of the law. And under it he is, so long as he is alive to God
but upon the condition required in the first Covenant, which makes him a
debtour to the whole law, qualifying him with that natural ability and
exercise of free will, unto which when he trusts, (as he is too apt to do)
takes up his rest, and engages in the single strength thereof, to perform what
the law requires, then he falls and provokes God to wrath. This will he never
be able finally to prevent or avoid, whilst he cleaves to and takes up his rest
in the life and activity of his own free will, for the enabling him to keep
Covenant with God, how rich in stock soever he may at present seem to be
therein. His only way therefore is, to pass, or rather suffer himself to be
translated out of these his mutable principles, into that love and stedfastnes
of heart in Covenant with God, which is the end of the commandment, and
proceeds from a pure heart, good conscience, and faith unfeigned.

Now of those that are alive unto God in the awakened principles and renewed
life of the first Covenant, (by repentance from dead works and faith in God the
Redeemer and savior of all men, and this by the voice of Christ, through the
hearing of the outward and written word) there are several sorts, the chief of
which only we shall mention.

1. Those who are diligent hearers, willing and zealous obeyers of what they
learn, receave and drink in from the holy Scriptures, which they are convinced
is the mind and will of God, written for their direction and instruction in
righteousness, either by their own private reading or by the outward ministry
thereof. Upon this, they make their boast of God, and of the chang wrought in
their hearts through repentance and faith; of their walking with God in the
purity of his worship, and toward their neighbor righteously, according to
the commandment delivered unto them. Hereby they do indeed come to be quickly
and deservedly distinguished from the profane world, having the form of
knowledge and of the truth in the law and written word, into the mould whereof
the whole man is by them endeavored to be cast. But all this is but of little
avail to them that stay here, and rest in the letter of the Scriptures which
are not he, but testify of him that is come himself in his own personal
appearance, God manifested in flesh. And he afterward died and rose again,
according to the Scriptures, and revealed himself in spirit, the better
comforter and anointing, which teaches all things. All this the voice of the
Scriptures points at and sends those unto, that desire to be made partakers of
the life that is eternal. But those that hear or obey not this voice, do
provoke, So that though a promise be left unto them of entering into the true
rest, they fall short of it through unbeleif and pleasing themselves with a
false rest and satisfaction in this first degree of restoration-work and lively
change which is and may be wrought by the ministry of the outward word, to the
bringing of men into a mutable state of righteousness, which they are upon all
occasions in danger of losing and falling from, how sure soever they esteem
themselves to be.

2. A second sort of hearers there are, obeyers of the holy commandment
delivered unto them, not only by the testimony and preaching of the written
word, but by the knowledge of the Son himself, Christ in spirit, (which is a
degree farther then the first go) who manifests himself to them in a likeness
and glory that is bread, and suitable food to give life to the world, or to man
in his first nature. Such practical knowledge and sight of Christ is able to
heal and restore man from the leprosy of sin, causing him to escape the
pollutions of the world and to be washed from his old sins. Concerning such is
it said, that it is impossible for them, having bin thus enlightn'd, having
tasted the heavenly gift, bin made partakers of the holy Ghost, or Christ in
spirit, and tasted the good word of God, and Powers of the world to come (so
far as the natural man can be heightened and raised to the capacity of, on this
side true Regeneration) if or when they fall away, to renew them again unto
repentance. The reason is, because they do eminently crucify the Son of God
afresh in themselves, and put him to open shame; yea, they trample him under
foot, accounting the blood of the Covenant whereby they were sanctified, an
unholy thing, and do despite to the Spirit of grace. These, before their
personal fall or apostasy, are not properly under the spirit of bondage, as
mere servants, but are rather children of that kingdom out of which they may be
cast, who strivingly may seek to enter in at the straight gate after an undue
manner, and so shall not be able to enter. When once the master of the house is
risen up, and has shut to the door, and they standing without, knock at the
door, desiring admission, and alleging for themselves, that they have eaten,
and drunk in Christ's presence, and that he has taught in their streets, his
answer to them will be, I know you not whence you are: depart from me all ye
workers of iniquity, to the place where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
You shall se Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and all my true prophets, in the kingdom of
God, and yourselvs (that have in one sense bin the children of the kingdom)
thrust out; Luke 13:24, 28. Mat. 7:21, 23. and Math. 8:12.

These are branches in Christ the true vine and good olive tree, partaking of
his sap and fatnes for a season. But by reason of their mutable principles and
slippery standing under the first and conditional Covenant, they come at last
to wither and to be cut off from the root and cast into the fire that never
shall be quenched. Jo. 15:1, 6. Rom: 11.

In this last sort, the restoration-work is carried up very high, so as to
place them that have it, amongst the number of those mentioned, (1 Cor. 13:1,
3.) that may speak with the tongue of men and angels, have the gift of
prophecy, understand all mysteries, and all knowledge. Yea, though they should
have all faith, so as to remove mountains: though they should bestow all their
goods to feed the poor, and give their bodies to be burned, and yet not have
love, or that faith which works by love, they will come at last to nothing.
They will prove and show themselves to be in the issue, but as sounding brass,
and a tinckling cymball. This is that, the highest restoration-work will
discover itself to be, where it springs up but from the single seed of that
righteousness, which is unaccompanied with true regeneration, or that faith
which works by love, changing the natural mind of man from its mutable into an
immutable principle of life, righteousness and glory.

3. Thirdly therefore, this work of restoration may and does proceed in some so
far, as not only to set all right and straight within and without man, in a
great measure and in an eminent prevailing activity, according to what it was
at first, when he was made in Gods image, but it has a second and farther
operation upon the soul, which prepares and makes ready the will to deny
itself, take up the cross, and become absolutely resigned up to the will of
another, even of the Lord, as the sure guardian and keeper of the will in its
truest and best freedom, which such service of the Lord is, that is in such a
manner performed, that we can do nothing against the truth, but all for it.
Through this second operation, the Lord himself, who is the immortal seed,
does most powerfully beget us, and that of his own will as he is the Son of
Man, begotten into the love of the father, and made unmovable in subjection
and obedience to his fathers will. He does cleave unto us, lay hold on us, and
put under his everlasting arms to make our arms strong and to guide us in
that way of coworking with him in a joyntnes of will and operation, that
nothing can dissolve. Such fools for Christ sake, with Paul (1 Cor. 4.10.)
through the entire resignation of themselves to the ruling power of Christ in
their hearts, will not, cannot err or miscarry in the holy way of Gods
ransomed ones. This is that which the Apostle means by love, 1 Cor. 13. and
chap. 8.1. where he says, knowledge puffs up: but love edifieth; that is,
makes firm and steadfast work of it. It erects that building founded on the
rock, (Math. 7.) that is unmovable, and cannot be shaken.

This love of God by which he makes us his choice ones, lies close and
concealed a great while in the heart, during which time the work of faith is
weak and low, very wavering and apt to fail. But afterward, by falling into
diverse temptations, wherein our faith is put to its proof, it does of weak
become strong. When faith thus begins to come forth with power, that love by
which it works is spread abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given
to us, whereby we come to experience our selves to be firmly rooted and grounded
in the love of God, to the making us able to comprehend with all Saints, what
is the length, breadth, depth and height of it, whilst the communication of it
is enjoyed by any measures. Some do ascend yet farther, even to know the love
of Christ in its highest and most extensive diffusing of itself, passing
knowledge, exceeding all measure, and filling them with all the fulness of God.
The former communication of God who is love, is the single portion or gift of
Christ in spirit, which all true Saints have their share in. The second is the
double portion, which they only do inherit, who are made Gods first born Sons,
higher then the kings of the earth, whose names are written in heaven.

Concerning this love in both these sorts of true believers and Saints, we
shall come in its proper place to a more particular search and consideration.
First, we shall enquire into it, as it is in its concealed state, making us
babes in Christ, in a low and weak exercise of saving faith; 2dly as it has a
time wherein it comes to be spread abroad in the heart, to the warming and
quickening of it, and to the fulfilling of the work of faith with power, in an
activity that fails not, but is immutable, increasing more and more to the
perfect day of Christ's second appearance. In general, we may say, that this is
that love which (2 Cor. 3.) is called the spirit, which where it is, there is
liberty, even a liberty with open face to behold the glory or image of the
invisible God, and by beholding it to be transformed into the same image, from
glory to glory; a state directly opposite to that of the spirit of bondage. The
love we speak of, does truly regenerate and bind up the will in a unity of
operation with the will of the Son of God. It works that hearing ear and
obeying heart to Christ in spirit, in the life and exercise whereof true and
saving faith does consist; yea, it is the activity itself, which quickens that
faith, and by the which faith works.

This love has its beginning in us, in and with Christ's first appearance; but
it is perfected and comsummated by working out the redemption of the body, at
the day of the manifestation of the Son of God in the brightness of his second
coming. At that time, the creature itself, the very animalish and sensual
soul in us, with the filthy garments of the mortal body wherewith it is
clothed, shall be freed from the bondage of corruption, and brought into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God, putting on the chang of raiment which in
that day will be provided for it.

With this love the father loved our head, the second Adam. And the WORD that
was from the beginning, laid hold on the seed of David so as that both he that
sanctifies and he that is sanctified, became one, one engraffed WORD that is
the fathers love, the spirit wherein he is always well pleased, which can do
nothing but what he sees the father do; and those things he does and fulfills
after him, with a heart after the fathers heart. He is so entirely in the
fathers love and well-liking, that he shows him all that himself does, or has
a purpose and intention to do. For this end Christ has sanctified himself,
that is, our nature in his own person, that he which sanctifies and we that
are sanctified may be all of one, of one immortal seed, and he not ashamed to
call us and own us for his brethren. As he is, so are they that are borne of
one and the same immortal seed, each one resembling the children of the great
King. They become one with him (through this birth) as he is one with the
father. They are fixed and rendered unmovable in his love, as he is in his
fathers love. This they arrive at, by his declaring to them the fathers name,
or giving the manifestation of the fathers love, as he and the father are one,
that the love wherewith the father has loved these his children, may be in
them, and that the Spirit of the Son that lives in the fathers love, may also
be in them, even the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, father. From
thence-forward are they evidently no more servants, but true heaven-born Sons
and heirs of God through Christ, being taught to know God after the same manner
as they are known of him, and to apprehend that for which also they are
apprehended of Christ Jesus.

It is Christ in the spirit of this love, that apprehends the soul, lays hold
on the heart, and cleaves to it, as he is the sealed one of the father, till he
change it into the same love and image, from glory to glory, working us into
such a conjunction in spirit with him, and likeness in operation to him, that
not we, in the exercise of our former and natural free will, but Christ in
this his love and glorious liberty of the Son of God, lives in us and we in
him, as in a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. This love does not only cast out
fear, but frees from all danger of any more breach of Covenant with God, whence
his final departure from us should follow, or our separation from him. This
way of giving himself to us, is love indeed, in a much more excellent way then
appeared in such gift as he made of himself to us in our first creation, or in
his restoration-work upon us since, singly considered as that whereby he makes
a new proof and trial of us.

In both those two former sorts of restoration-work above mentioned, God is
indeed pleased to make us his people, manifesting himself and his will to us,
and making known to us good and evil experimentally, so that we have tasted
of the evil and of the good, when the Lord has restored our first fredom, and
put it in our power again, to cleave to him and love him, or else to leave and
forsake him. In this state he set Adam, under the counsel, rebukes and
threatenings declared in his law, with a liberty to stand or fall. Whoever then
stands upon these terms with God, is always in the same danger, can never be
out of the fear of a breach that may happen between God and him, through his
own default. The coming of that love and the spirit of it (abovementioned)
into the soul, does perfectly secure from and cast out all such fear, And
this it does perform by its attracting, prevailing power in and over the will,
whereby man is brought to give up the absolute Rule and power of keeping
himself, into the will of him that is this love, and is made fully content to
be in his hands and under his wormanship, as a little child, created a new unto
the good works before ordained, that we should walk in them. The soul is
hereby fitted and prepared with a meeknes and lowlines of mind, to draw
together in one yoke with the spirit of this love, whose command is easy and
burden light, requiring no more nor other thing to be done, then what by faith
we se our head the second Adam in our very nature, to have done before us. And
as many as are taught and enabled by Christ, to walk with him according to this
rule, that is as a race set before them in his cross, they are the true Israel
of God, and mercy and peace shall for ever rest upon them.

Conformity to this rule of the cross, is the high way, the way of holiness,
which all the ransomed of the Lord are appointed to pass, and wherein the
waifairing men, the true pilgrims on earth, though become as fools and little
children, cannot err, but will infallibly come to Zion with songs and
everlasting joy upon their heads. But this way of holiness appears to flesh and
blood so strait a gate to enter in at, so fiery a baptism to pass through, so
bitter a cup to drink up, that none whoever, that are left to the freedom of
their own wills or natural liberty restored, will ever be inclined to drink
it off or conform to Christ's example and command therein. They look upon ir
as a rock of offense, a stone of stumbling, which they know not how to get
over, nor have any mind to it. This bitter cup and hard saying, is provided by
God, as the bitter waters were of old, to try the adultresse or false hearted
wife to her husband. It has the like operation both ways, as the antitype and
mystery of the bitter water in the Mosaical ministration. It hurts not those
that are chaste, in whose spirit there is no guile, but makes them more
fruitful in good works, such good works as proceed from a lively, operative,
saving faith, which those that truly and savingly believe in Christ, will be
careful to maintein. But it corrupts and rotts others, ripening them faster on
to their own destruction. It is to this sacrifice of the first freedom of our
wills, or free will offering, that the Apostle exhorts us, Romans 12.1, 2. I
beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies, or
living souls, a living sacrifice; holy and acceptable to God, your reasonable
service, or the service which your reason owes unto God, in seeing and
accounting yourselvs fools under his teachings, and weak and insufficient,
under his ruling power in you.

Obj: But it will be objected; If I suffer the freedom of my own will to be
taken from me, I either become a perfect slave, or am reduced into that
necessity of action, with which all creatures work by a Kind of instinct; so
shall I come to be unmanned, and made a very beast.

Answer. In such suggestions and groundless surmises, we err, not knowing the
Scriptures nor the power of God. If we did, both these consequences of man's
being reduced to slavery or bestiality, (through such resignation of his
freedom and rational powers (that make up his reasonable sacrifice) into the
hands of God, who will return all back again with usury) would appear
exceeding far from truth, as is possible. For so far is that from a bestiall
state of life and will, that succeeds in the room of our rightly resigned
freedom to the will of God, by the cross of Christ, and fellowship with him in
his death, that it highly advances man into a more glorious liberty, eve^ the
liberty of the sons of God, a freedom to good only, a liberty to do all things
for the Truth, atte^ded with a kind of powerful impotency or impossibility of
doing any thing against the Truth. What other liberty the^ this is left to the
holy and elect a^gels, that are by a second work of Christ's hands made
immutably good, all possibility (...) in them to evil, being removed, and
utterly and for ever taken away from them? This likewise is all the freedom
left to Jesus the Son of Man, whereby when the evil one comes, he finds
nothing in him, because he and the father are one in their willing power, in
exact likeness and agreement. God himself also, the most free agent of all,
never had the least possibility or fredom to evil. He has not the least
ability that way. To work evil, is utterly impossible to him.

True fredom then is a power to will immutably that which is good; to do it,
not only without any resistance or hindrance from within him that wills or does
it, but against all the tempting or attempting power of any other person or
thing without him, that might induce any chang of mind, if it were possible.
Thus God is most free, who tempts none, nor can himself be tempted to or by
evil. And thus is he free, who is fully born of God, into a likeness and
conformity with his divine fredom of will; nor can he sin, because he is born
of God, and so far as the immortal seed in him is his keeper, the evil one
cannot touch him, or be able to get within him, but at last is totally and
finally overcome by him.

This is the love that with a holy and delightful efficacy, attractivenes and
perswasivenes, carries the regenerate soul captive to the obedience of faith,
constraining it with the greatest readiness and delight, to run the race of Gods
commandment. Christ is responsible for us also to his father, that none of us
shall be lost, but he will raise us up at the last day, perfected in this love,
against which there is no law, or penalties by the law, that are in force,
because it is the very end for which the law was at first delivered unto man.
Through the power of this love, the inward man of the heart is bound up as in a
bundle of life, in and with the active and quickening power of the holy and
blessed will of Christ's manhood. And the will of the sensual and inferior part
of our soul, which is as the door and mouth to the inward man, is so
conformed, subjected and bound up in unity of operation and agreement with it,
as that where the heart so believes in Christ and loves him, by the mouth
belonging to that heart he is answerably confessed and glorified, and comes at
length by both, in exact harmony, to be immutably served and possessed world
without end.

In this third sort of believers, hearers and doers of the law and will of God,
under the teaching and outward ministry of the Scriptures, this love is and
dwells. These are the truly regenerate, heirs according to promise, that are
rooted, grounded and made steadfast with God in his Covenant. These are they
that through the transforming and prevailing power of Christ's love, dwelling
and working in them, are drawn to that sight and knowledge of the father, and
of the Son, and of the unity and agreement of will that is between the^, which
flesh and blood cannot reveal. They are taught also to employ and make use of
their natural ability and strength in the restored fredom of their will, so as
to answer the end for which that liberty was first given, which was, not that
they should therein be their own keepers, but suffer themselves to be kept and
subjected under the Rule that God would send and give unto them for that
purpose, to lead them in the right way, evidently trod by himself, that is, the
way of the cross and true selfdeniall, which does infallibly guide and
unmoveably keep the wayfairing man that walks in it, from all possibility of
erring or falling short of entering into the promised land and true Rest, in
which eternal blessedness consists. And in this they are instructed by the
sacraments of baptism and the Lords supper. So much by way of answer to the
third particular enquiry, in order to the clearing up what is sought after in
the 3d general querie, in this discourse.

4. The 4th particular enquiry under the same 3d general head, demands, how
man comes in a judicial manner to be hardened by God, made a vessel of wrath,
fitted for destruction, with an impossibility to chang his mind from evil to
good, any more then those that are truly saved, can change from good to evil?
These are in a state that can never be repented of, nor is there need. The
other are in a sad estate, even such as admits of no repentance neither, no,
though with Esau they do seek it carefully and with tears.

The answer then to this query may be plain and short, from what has bin
already shown at large. The steps and degrees by which men come into this
deplorable condition, take as follows. By the good will and patience which is
showed to them by the redeemer, and by them abused, do men come to this
judicial hardening and fixednes in evil. Christ is content freely to begin
anew with all mankind, as he is that word of the beginning unto them, which
works their restoration more or less, toward their primitive state, as man
was created, in Covenant with God, before any breach happened. And he does commit
their soul (so restored again) to their own keeping, and under the same law
and condition as before, save only that now if they be found wilfully to break
off and depart from God a second time, crucifying the Son of God a fresh and
thereby putting him to open shame, there remains no more sacrifice for their
sin, no restoration out of it, no chang of mind from it or aversnes to it, but
a perpetual condemnation of them (as they justly deserve) to be made
bondslaves to sin and Satan for ever, whose counsel and will they have so
inexcusably followed and preferred before Gods. And the higher they have bin
raised up in light and in the participatio^ of heavenly gifts, by them abused
through the undue exercise of that free will to which they are left, the deeper
will they sink in everlasting torments and sorrow, to all eternity, through the
sense they shall have of their slighting, resisting and rejecting, against
their own souls, the operations of the spirit of love, the yiedling whereunto
had bin the only way to have made them inheritours of it, as well as others.
They fondly preferred their conceited way of being saved in the single exercise
of their own freewill and choice, before that way which the love and
faithfulness of God had chosen for them and chalked out to them by the rule of
the cross, in the knowledge of Christ, and him crucified, evidently set before
the eyes of their very natural man, in the Sacramental signs of his death,
on which he appoints them to feed, as so manifesting him unto them, till he
himself come in his own personal appearance in spirit, to show them the same
mystery in the substance it self, or original pattern.

Of the abovementioned sorts of believers, partaking of the light and life of
Christ's first appearance, from the voice and testimony of the scriptures,
together with the sacramental signs of his death, instituted by commandment
from God in his written word, does the visible Christian church consist, that
hold themselves to the rule of the Scriptures for their guide, and are
faithfully obedient in putting into practice what is therein revealed. Amongst
these there always is (as we have showed) a select number of hidden and
beloved ones, kept through the power of faith unto salvation, without whom the
rest would be as Sodom, and Gomorrah. And for the sake of this small remnant,
(that truly and properly are Gods heritage out of all the rest, as the new wine
in the cluster) it is, that the Lord says, destroy it not, for there is a
blessing in it.

These are they that being in and under the law of the Scriptures, the teaching
of Gods outward and written word, shall be judged by this law, as to the things
they are found failing in, and as to their coming short of the end set before
them in this ministry. Now the end of it is, to bring them by faith to the
sight and fellowship of Christ himself, speaking in spirit, as he is the word
of the beginning, and gives forth the light of the glory of God in his, own
face, with which he shines in the hearts of his people. This comes to pass
when once it pleases the father to reveal his Son in us, setting him as a
living pattern before the eyes of our faith, that in unity and similitude of
spirit with that wherein the works are done by him in himself, we may fulfill
the law of God after him, and be brought to live and dwell together in the same
love, which has its season of dawning in the heart, as the true day star, to
prepare the soul to meet with Christ in the glory of his second appeara^ce.

Concerning these is it said, Rom: 8:1. There is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. When
they have begun in the spirit, they do end there also, and draw not back to be
perfected in the flesh. As they live in the spirit, so their care and practice
is, to walk in the spirit, rejoicing in Christ Jesus, and having no confidence
in the flesh. Their praise is of God, not of men. They lose the praise and
honor of men, because they seek both of them from God only. They are strangers
and pilgrims with him on the earth, as all their fathers were. They sojourne in
tents, in the outward land of Canaan, the streets of the visible church, and
various self-chosen ways of visible worship, which Christians of different
judgments walk in. These invisible saints have their eye set upon the heavenly
country and building, that has foundations, which is the workmanship wrought
in God, the engraffed WORD, and by him is held forth to the eye of that faith
that is the evidence of things unseen, and is able to espy for us this land of
promise in the spirit, whilst it is yet at a great distance and very far off.
There is evidently set before this eye of our faith, the crucified spirit of
Christ, as he offered up himself in sacrifice to the will of the father,
learning obedience by the things that he suffered, in denying his own will,
that we may tread in the same steps, dying with him that we may live with him,
and suffering with him that we may reign with him. Through such fellowship with
him in his sufferings, and conformity with him in his death, we shall be found
still advancing and pressing forwards, if by any means we may attein the
resurrection of the dead, or that redemption of the body, which is atteinable
in this life, by those that diligently press after the mark, for the prize of
their high calling which is in Christ Jesus. This resurrection and redemption
of the body will be experimented upon the rising of the witnesses, and then
better understood.

In the mean time, the eagle-eyed believer lives upon the dead carcass of
Christ crucified, seen so in spirit. And he is content as a member of his dead
body, to be made the scorn and offscouring of the world, a member of the
forsaken Zion, that dwells in the field, in a wildernes-state, solitary and
alone, that no man regards, because his dwelling is in the dust, in expectation
of rising together with Christ's dead body. Until that season, this sort of
believers, in stead of being found within the pale of the visible church, do
follow Gods invitation of them into the secret chambers of his presence, and do
dwell in his house, (a building not made with hands, in the person and spirit
of Christ) where they behold his beauty, shutting the doors about them, as to
any visible intercourse with the worldly Church. Thus they hide themselves, as
it were, for the little moment, that his indignation is to last and be
exercised on the^ by the power, and during the reign of the Beast. Blessed are
those that thus die in the Lord, (though by the world called and accounted
phanatick) waiting for the brightness of his second coming. He that has ears
to hear, let him hear.

To shut up the^ and close the ministry of the day of Christ's first appearance,
as after this manner the Redeemer has bin lifted up in it, and the work of
common and temporary as well as of peculiar and eternal Redemption has bin
wrought by him and made manifest to all sorts of men and of believers in the
world, we shall now come, in the next place, to a distinct consideration of the
fourth and last general head of enquiry, above mentioned in this discourse,
which is, concerning the very being, life and constitution of the new creature,
or that immutable state in righteousness and glory, that begins in the day of
Christ's first appearance, and is perfected by his second.

4. The fourth general enquiry then is about the immutable state of life and
righteousness in the new creatures constitution, or that change which is brought
upon man by the new creation. The new creatures life is founded (as has bin
showed) in the birth of the fathers love in the soul. Of this love are they
born, who are by Christ the immortal seed, laid hold on, cleaved unto, and
apprehended in that intimate and inseparable marriage-union in spirit, which is
never to be dissolved; in the Covenant, ordered in all things and sure, that is
contracted in his person, between the father and the Son, through the holy
Ghost.

Where ever this union is, there is Gods love; there is Christ inseperably
united to that soul for good. And although this kind of life and union, do lie
hid and concealed (as it may) for a long time, asleep in the vessel of the
mind, as Christ was in the ship when it was in danger to sink with the waves,
yet by it is the soul Kept and separated to the Lord, as Paul was from the
womb, notwithstanding which he walked as a Pharise, nay, as a persecutour of
the true church, till this seed of Gods love revealed itself in him. This is
the first degree of the new creatures hidden and concealed state, and this
foundation of God is sure; for he knows who are sealed with this his living
seal from the womb, though neither as yet themselves know it, or any other, but
only the Father and the Son.

The second degree of new creature life, arising from the immortal seed of
Gods love, sealed as yet and concealed in the heart of the believer, is, as it
yet lies undermost and at botome, suffering Esau the elder brother to come out
first into view. It gives way to the restoration-work which puffs up the flesh,
in making the spirit of the natural man full and rich in his first abilities
of pure nature, and exercise of his freewill. Such a saint girds himself as
peter had done, when he went whithersoever he would. He will be a very active,
courageous follower of Christ, whilst he works miracles and all the world runs
after him; yea, he will promise fair also to go even to prison and death with
him; but in the hour and power of darkness the faith he acts upon this bottom,
and all his other graces fail and abide not the trial, unless the seed which
lies undermost, appear and show forth its preserving, overcomming, and never
failing power.

In this 3d state or degree of new creature life, we are with the Corinthiaus,
such as are carnal and babes in Christ, but cannot properly be addressed unto
as spiritual Christians. We are ready in this state, with good Samuel, to say
of Eliab the elder brother, surely the Lords anointed is before us, in the
restoration-work, wrought by the spirit of Christ in our souls. We are little
aware that the true David, the man after goes own heart, the inward man, which
feeds upon that which is not corruptible, lies hid and is not yet seen as he
is, but under a veyle only and as through the lattesse. In these, true saving
faith is but weak and low, not known rightly to themselves, but upon grounds
that may and will fail them.

A third state or degree of this new birth and new creature life, is, when upon
being found triall-proof, the love of God comes to spread itself abroad in the
heart by the holy Ghost; when the seed which is at the bottom and lies
undermost, works and removes out of the way, him that lets, every impediment
and weight that presses down. It comes now to circumcise the foreskin of the
flesh, which is the cover and veil under which it has layn so long hid,
bringing under and laying low the fleshly man in us, teaching him subjection
and showing him that law, by which the elder is to serve the younger and come
behind, but no longer to lead the way or be preferred before him. For the
natural man to come under this discipline, is the great cross which is so
fiery and dreadful to flesh and blood; the cup, which, if it were possible,
every one would avoid. But, it is by this means, that the natural man is made
subject, and becomes a meet vessel for the use of his Lord. And now, when we
are thus in weakness according to the flesh, most low, broken, and crucified,
then are we strongest after the spirit; and the work of faith springing up with
vigor, is fulfilled in us with power; so comes it to be clearly seen to
ourselvs, though yet very much hid, as to others. When it has once rooted and
grounded the inward man in this love, it will diffuse the good ointment to the
very shirts of the garment, and cloth the believer with change of raiment,
that as the soul is made all glorious within, the outward man may be glorified
also, and Christ not only admired in the heart, but glorified in and by the
mouth of the same believer, which is the fourth degree of new creature life.

This fourth and last degree of the perfecting of the love of God in us; is
reserved to the day of Christ's second appearance, called also the day of the
manifestation of the sons of God, which we shall now in the next place enquire
into and apply ourselvs to search after, according to such discovery thereof as
God has bin pleased to make known. By way of preparation to this enquiry, let
us take notice of what we find described and foretold of it, by the Prophet
Hosea, chap. 6. v. 2, 3. After two days he will revive us, that is, in the end
of the second day. In the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in
his sight. Life from the dead, and immortality shall be brought to light in us.
The day of Christ's Kingdom in the spirit, (considered, as the going forth of it
is prepared as the morning, which increases more and more to a perfect day)
distinguishes itself into two distinct seasons. It comes upon us and to us as
the rain, as the former and the latter rain upon the earth. In the former, it
is a Kingdom of patience; in the latter, a kingdom of power. The Kingdom of
Christ in spirit, is that stone, which whosoever falls upon, shall be broken to
pieces, or they shall split and break themselves in pieces that fall upon it,
whilst it is yet but the Kingdom of his patience, in himself or his suffering
servants, who amidst all their sufferings in the flesh, do remain in spirit
true members of the Kingdom of the stone, lively stones of Christ's spiritual
building, abiding firm and unmovable under all trialls of persecution and
opposition. But on whomsoever this stone or Kingdom of Christ shall fall in the
day of its power, when it becoms a mountain filling the whole earth, it shall
grind them to powder. It will make them as the chafe of the summer threshing
floor, which the wind of Gods just anger will so carry away, that no place
will be found for them.

The beginning of the third day (mentioned Hos. 6.) seems clearly to be about
the time of Christ's ascension, and day of Pentecost, when the former rain of
the spirit came down; or some few years after, at the final ruin of Jerusalem
and the jewish Kingdom. To know the certain period of the second day and
beginning of the third, will much conduce to the better forming of our
judgments, as to the seasons of this Kingdom, that are yet to come. We may
hereby also gain some sight into the two days that are past, and the
distinguished parts of time that the holy Ghost does intend and signify to us
by those two former days.

By the second of them, it seems very evident that the day of Abraham's
natural seed, continuing a nation and visible church, owned by God as a
peculiar people above all others, is certainly intended. Yea, in some respect
we may carry up this day of Abraham's natural seed, as high as shem, the
blessed Son of Noah, in whose loins and under whose blessing Abraham's seed are
comprehended; Genesis 9:26.27. Blessed be the Lord God of Shem. and Canaan shall be
his servant. The true and right jew is here distinguished from all the wicked,
hardened world. 2dly. It Is said, God shall en large or persuade Japhet to dwell
in the tents of Shem, or in the same spirit of faith, and thereby become a
fellow citizen with the Saints, and of the household of God. But if this be not
admitted, the date of the beginning of this day cannot be denied, according to
Stevens computation, (Act. 7.8.) to have bin, at least, when God gave to
Abraham the Covenant of circumcision. And so Abraham begat Isaac and
circumcised him the eight day. And Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat the
twelve Patriarchs, that were the original heads of the twelve tribes, the
Israelits, to whom perteined the adoption, the glory, the Covenants, the
service of God and the promises, whose are the fathers, even from the beginning
of the new world after the flood; and of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ
came, who is over all. God blessed for ever, Amen. By his coming, he gave a
revivall to Gods work in the midst of its days, (Hab. 3.) or in the end of the
second day; and by his death, ended also that whole dispensation of the
circumcision, relating to the natural seed of Abraham and the Mosaicall
ministry.

The second day being thus found in its beginning as well as ending, it will
not at all be difficult, from the beginning of that, (especially if considered
as from the time of Noah's bestowing the blessing upon Sem) to fill up the space
of time, of which the first day consists. And therein shall we find the
continuance of another line, wherein God declared himself for the propagating
and carrying on of the holy seed of the church. For after the death of Abel,
that was murdered by his brother Cain, Adam knew his wife again, and she bare
a son and called his name Seth; for God appointed him as another seed, in stead
of Abel whom Cain slew, Genesis 4:25.

This holy seed from Seth downwards, in way of distinction from the rest of the
world, passed under the name of the Sons of God, calling themselves by the name
of the Lord, and continuing so to do, as we find, (Genesis 6.) till the flood came
and drowned the old, corrupted, apostate world. This reduced the holy seed to a
new root and spring, in the person of Noah, an heir of the righteousness which
is by faith. Hereof he gave the proof, in preparing an ark, at Gods command, to
the saving of his house, thereby condemning the world, that slighted and
rejected that way of being saved.

These are the two days, in the end of the second whereof, we have bin revived
by the coming of Christ in the flesh, dying for our sins, and rising again,
according to the Scriptures.

It remains now therefore to search out, if we can, what is the tract of time,
meant by the third day, which is the day of the continuation of Abraham's seed,
as they are Christ's. And he that sanctifies and they that are sanctified are
all of one; He that begets and they that are begotten are the one seed that are
the Sons of Gods absolute and, unchangable choice and love. They are born, not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, (no not of the
Son of man himself, as standing in his own will, or exercising his own humane
freedom, single) but of God, or of the Son of man, as he and the father are
one, having as it were but one will between them. Of this holy and good will
they are begotten, being taken out of their own wills, and made to stand and
live in the will of the Son of God, as his resigned humane will lives entirely
in the will of his father. So come they to be one with him as he is one with
the father.

This seed are those that are of Abraham's faith, being of the same spirit and
walking in the steps of that typical father, and of Christ himself, their
father in spirit and Truth. These are the true heirs according to the promise,
and are called to inherit the blessing of Abraham, in the actual receiving of
the promise of the spirit through faith, the adoption of Sons, which makes them
like David, a people after Christ's own heart. For the forming and bringing of
them to this, God sends forth the spirit of his Son, or his Son in spirit, into
their hearts, by which thy cry Abba, father. Thus Christ comes to dwell in them
and with them, purifying them in spirit as he is pure, to a like-mindednes in
all things, with himself.

This spiritual seed who are Christ's, (as the children of his Kingdom, the day
whereof in spirit begins with his ascension) are said (Col. 3.) to be risen
with Christ in the affection and desire of their minds, which is set upon
things above. This renders them dead to things below, the seen things which are
temporary and perishing, causing them by the eye of faith to espy out for
themselves a life, and to find an ability to work the righteousness, that is
immutable. However hidden, weak and low this life and ability may be in the
motion and activity thereof, for a season, it is that that will never fail, as
to the effecting in them a conformity to Christ's death, and arming them to
suffer in the flesh and to continue with Christ the season appointed for his
temptations and sufferings, in the whole body of his true members and
followers, as well as in himself. It prepares them to be his true witnesses in
a sackcloth testimony, a state of patience and persecution from the world, as
well as afterward to be the witnesses of his power and great glory, when he
shall come to be glorified in his Saints and admired in all those that do
believe. During the suffering season, they are patiently to undergo all,
approving themselves first to be faithful witnesses under this baptism of the
cross, as they desire to be found afterward in the number of the two sorts of
his obedient children, that are to reign with him; first, such as are chosen
out of the world into the common rank of sons; secondly, such as are chosen out
of that choice, to be friends and special favorites. They are both of them
appointed and prepared by the father, to sit on thrones with Christ, the one at
his right hand and the other at his left, when he shall come forth in his power
and great glory, as may seem in some sort to have bin perceaved by the mother
of Zebedees children, in her untimely and over-forward request on their behalf,
Mat: 20:20, 22. She seemed desirous to have them in the throne before they had
drunk of the cup, and bin made partakers of the great tribulations wherein they
were to abide with Christ, and all other believers, in them represented. This
suffering season is to hold, till the time of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled, for
the treading down and trampling under foot by the space of 42. months the holy
city and tabernacle of David that has bin reared up amongst them by the
Apostles ministry, after it was fallen amongst the jews; Act: 15. v. 16, 17.
When it was fallen amongst the jews, it came to be set up in the midst of the
Gentiles, a nation that for a season did very affectionately bring forth the
fruits of the gospel. Thus the residue of men, (those that were not regarded
till the jewish nation was rejected and broken off from the good olive tree)
were brought to seek after the Lord, even all the gentiles upon whom my name is
called, says the Lord who does all these things.

This is the first act and effect of Christ's resurrection, or of that day in
the spirit, upon the hearts and minds of the children of this his Kingdom,
which is preparing them by the trialls allotted to them in the keeping the word
of his patience, to sit with him on his throne, and shine forth in the day of
his power, not only as bright morning stars, but as the sun itself in its
strength, in the Kingdom of their father.

The beginning of the whole day of Christ's Kingdom, wherein he will have the
word of his patience kept in faith and faithful witness-bearing, was without
all question, from the time of his Ascension, according as it is written, Act.
1.8. Ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem and in Samaria, and unto
the uttermost part of the earth. To like effect spoke Ananias to Paul, upon his
conversion, (Act: 22:14, 15.) The God of our fathers has chosen thee, that
thou should know his will and se that just one, and should hear the voice
of his mouth, that thou may be a witness unto all men, of what thou have
seen and heard. And although there be something in this conversion of Paul,
which is extraordinary, as to his unction and mission into the ministry and
office of Apostleship, yet this description of the Apostles conversion has
that in it, as to the essential parts of it, which is common to all the
spiritual seed of Abraham. For first, they are all chosen to know the will of
God; secondly, to know it by the sight of the just one, Christ in spirit,
through faith; thirdly, to hear the voice and understand the language of the
spirit of Christ's mouth, by the ear that is given them to hear what Christ in
spirit says to the churches, or to particular members of his body; fourthly,
to be witnesses according to their measure and degree of light, in their
stations and callings, of what they have seen and heard.

In this sense, the whole spiritual seed of Abraham are Christ's witnesses,
specially since his ascension, from which time he began to be seen by them in
spirit, and to speak to them from heaven, by his indwelling presence in their
hearts through faith. True believers (as has bin opened) are of two sorts or
degrees. Both of them are freeborn sons and citizens of the same heavenly
Jerusalem and holy city. Christ calls them his two witnesses, and declares the
sackcloth testimony of his name which they are to bear, during the treading
down of them the holy city underfoot, even by the gentiles of the outward
court, for the space of 42 months. But although that these two witnesses were
in being, and also engaged in the work of witnessing what they had seen and
heard, according to Christ's commission, immediately after the coming down of
the holy Ghost upon them, at the day of Pentecost, not only in Jerusalem and
Samaria, but also to the ends of the earth, yet the time of the treading them
underfoot by the gentiles of the outward court, did not begin till some
hundreds of years after, nor by the same reason could their sackcloth testimony
begin, which had relation to that treading down, and must needs therefore be
contemporary with it. When once this began, it was to continue but 42 months,
or 1260. years, from the very same time as that power that was to tread them
down, came to have its beginning as authorized or permitted to make war with
them, and bring them under. To the Beast which all the world wondered after,
and feared to make war with, was power given to continue 42 months, that he
might make war with the saints, and overcome them; Rev. 13.7.

Who or what this beast is, was long ago made known to Daniel, and by him
foretold and described, ch: 7:23, 24. It is said to be the fourth beast,
signifying the fourth Kingdom or universal oppressing power, that should be on
the earth, over the saints of God, and that should come in process of time, to
stand up in a diversity from all the other three Kingdoms, or universal
monarchies that had gone before it. This considerable variation did come to
pass and show itself in a horn of remarque and note by itself, that upheld the
same oppressing power and principles against the saints of the most high, (for
the treading down of the holy city) that the other three had don before, but
under a new form or name of Christian, which they had never owned.

On the account of this name or outward profession of Christianity, which the
fourth beast came to make in the course of the little horn, he plucks up by
the roots the worship and many profane customs that had bin cleaved to, owned
and practiced, during the reign of mere downright heathenisme, all the time
of the three former Kingdoms, Babylonish, Persian, Grecian, as also a great
part of the Roman, till this fourth Kingdom or universal monarchy came to be
headed with the little horn, under the style of universal Bishop or chief
priest, when the Roman empire that had bin heathenish, came to divide and
sink down into ten horns or Kingdoms, all agreeing yet in this, to give up
their power to the little horn, in acknowledging the papacy and universal Rule
over them in spiritualls, by the Bishop of Rome.

These ten Kings, with their civil power, thus uniting under one head, as to
spiritualls, do together with their head constitute that course and state of
the fourth monarchy, under which it is called the little horn. Now when the
time of this combination began, is somewhat difficult to say, exactly, and to a
year. But if the beginning of this little horn be once rightly found out and
stated, it will not be difficult to say when it shall end, or when the
witnesses prophesying in sackcloth shall end, which must be at the same time.
For the 42 months of this little horns continuance in its persecuting power
and war on the saints (who prophesy all the same time in sackcloth, as a
despised, rejected remnant of outcasts) are according to the true meaning of
the holy Ghost, to take their date and beginning from that conspiracy or
combination of the ten horns, uniting in one preistly head, as to spiritualls.

Concerning the Rise then of this little horn, we may safely assert,

1. That there was a time certain, when the papal power did begin, and that
time was after the dissolution of the Roman empire, as it was merely
heathenish. And this power was as the corner stone, to cement and build up the
ruins of the Roman empire into ten Kingdoms, bearing the name of Christian, and
acknowledging the supremacy of the pope.

Secondly. That so soon as this power was first in being, the power which has
made war with the saints ever since, did begin. For these ten Kingdoms, with
their Ghostly father the Pope, have ever since bin treading down and keeping
under the holy city, or true citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, necessitating
the two witnesses, if they will prophesy at all, to do it in sackcloth, that
is, under great persecution and tribulation.

Thirdly, It is evident, that from the time of such beginning of the power of
Daniels little horn, or last branch of the fourth Kingdom upon the earth, the
sackcloth Testimony of the witnesses did also begin. And after the continuance
of the one and the other for the space of 42 months or 1260 years, the day of
the Kingdom of Christ's patience is to expire, and the time of the witnesses
prophesying in sackcloth is to be no longer. But in stead hereof, the time of
the lambs wrath is to come and be revealed from heaven against all this
bestiall domination over his saints, and he will openly take to himself his
great power, and reign. He will set up his Kingdom over the heads, or on the
top of all the other Kingdoms, and Rule with his saints or the earth, one
thousand yeaves; Rev. 20. In order and by way of preparation to this, Christ
comes in the latter rain of his spirit upon the earth, to gather the harvest of
the world, and keep the last and great feast of Tabernacles, to which the true
spiritual Israelits amongst jews and Gentiles are invited, Zech: 14:16, 21.

These then are the two distinct commings of Christ, wherein he comes to his
people, as the former and the latter rain, in this third day, that is the day
of his Kingdom in spirit; the day, wherein first he shows his royal patience
and forbearance toward his worst enemies, and the day wherein secondly he
shows forth his royal power and universal, irresistible command in earth as
well as in heaven. The one as well as the other of these days, (or parts of
the third day above mentioned) do belong to this great Kings making himself
known, even as he is the Son of man, ordained by God to judge the world in
righteousness.

But it may be demanded, since both these make but the one day of Christ's
Kingdom in spirit, called in Hosea, the third day, wherein he has promised to
raise up the children of this his Kingdom, and cause them to live in his sight;
how comes it to pass, that during the long time of Christ's first appearance,
in the Kingdom of his patience, the true saints are in an outwardly suppressed
and afflicted condition, as inhabitants of the dust, trampled under foot by the
powers of the world?

The answer is easy, by this short and clear distinction. The raising up or
resurrection of them to live in his sight, which Christ promises, is twofold.

1. Such a raising up, as is wrought inwardly in their minds, directing them to
the sight of things above, and fastening their affections and desires
accordingly, binding them up in the life which is hid with Christ in God. This
first kind of resurrection is known and experienced in themselves, by the
renewings of their inward man day by day, under the perishings and decays of
their outward, when they are looked upon as in the grave, in a very sad and low
condition, by the eye of the world;

2. But secondly there is a raising them up to live in Christ's sight,
discernably to the very eye of the world. At that season, glory and honor
shall be put upon their very outward man, and they shall be called to sit down at
Christ's right and left hand, in the Kingdom of his power, to the visible
treading all their enemies under their feet, like mire in the streets. They
shall also administer healing and refreshing to the whole creation of God. For
in this seed, all nations of the earth shall be blessed, and the very creature
freed from the bondage of corruption.

The promise then of raising up the true children of the Kingdom, shall be made
good both these ways, and that successively, the one after the other, as will
appear in its proper place, when the day of Christ's second appearance in
spirit, shall be particularly spoken to. But in this, the scripture is very
positive, and express, that until we be children of the resurrection in the
first of these respects, during the season of suffering with Christ, we shall
never be children of it in the second. If we die not or suffer with him now, we
shall not live and reign with him the^. It therefore highly concerns us, even
as much as to make our calling and election sure, to have the certain and clear
discovery, yea and practical experience of what it is that makes the children
of the resurrection in the first sense. For over those only that are such, the
second death will have no power. And they also are of two sorts, being found in
a first or second degree of life from the dead, which is wrought out in Christ,
as he is the Son of man. In the first of these, they are made sharers with the
holy angels, in their atteinment and fruition of God, and go no higher. But in
the second, they are sharers with Christ in that higher atteinment and fruition
of God which he has as he is the engraffed WORD, and is admitted access to
the very similitude and shape of God in his own proper form.

Man by his own voluntary sinful act, has concluded himself, and God by his
judicial act has concluded all men under the death of sin and unbeleif. In
these chains might man justly have bin left by God for ever, bound up in an
alienation of mind from all good. But by the tender mercies of God in the
redeemer, he is visited by the power of that voice of the son of God, which
raises him out of the grave, awakens him out of this deadly sleep into which he
is not at first so deeply plunged, as to be irrecoverable and without remedy.
This death is properly of the mind, as become the servant of sin; and it is not
only that, by which the spirit of the mind is gone out from its subjection to
the law of God, and has given up itself to the rule of the declared enemy of
God, the spirit of darkness that rules in the children of disobedience; but it
is also that, by which the outward man of the heart, (called, Coll. 3. the
members of the mind, that are upon the earth) withdraws itself from its due
subjection and conformity to the dictates of right reason (that are suggested
to it from time to time, by the enlightened spirit of the mind) and gives up
itself to vile, sensual lusts and affections, that carry the whole man captive
to sin and death, to commit all iniquity with greedines, and run into all
manner of unrighteousnes.

The mind which in both these respects is dead, is a downright servant of sin,
and is free from righteousness, or has freed itself entirely from under its
command and Rule, as it is written; know ye not, that to whom ye yield
yourselvs Servants to obey, his Servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of sin
unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?

The freedom wherein man was at first created, was such as whereby he might
freely and voluntarily fix himself, or rather be fixed in the service of
righteousness through believing, or in the service of sin by unbeleif. By the
one he might have bin for ever free from all danger or possibility of serving
sin, or turning from the service of righteousness. By the other he might in such
manner free and discharg himself from the service of righteousness, as never to
be received into it again, but be for ever condemned to the unchangeable
servitude of sin, as his punishment.

The first use man made of this primitive freedom, was to free and turn himself
out of the service of righteousness, and yield up himself in subjection to sin.
And the work of Christ the redeemer is to turn him back again from the service
of sin and power of Satan unto God, setting him in as good a condition as at
first: yea farther, to free him for ever from any possibility of becoming a
servant to sin any more, if the fault be not in himself. This restoring,
renewing and regenerating of man, by the power and workmanship of the redeemer,
in whom we are anew created unto good works, is frequently termed in
scripture, a resurrection, or quickening from the dead. But now, this renewing
work, flowing from the spirit of Christ into fallen man, admits of several
measures and degrees, which are accompanied with answerable operations and
effects upon the mind;

1. It turns man back again from sin to righteousness, conferring upon him the
use and exercise of his free will in Gods service, upon the like terms of
mutability, as he had it at the first creation thereof. And to be thus anew
created in and by Christ Jesus, unto good works, is (in a degree and measure)
to be quickened with Christ, and raised by him from the death of sin, as sin is
the transgression of the law. They that are under this work and chang, wrought
by Christ upon their hearts, are yet but under the law, or under the rule and
command given by God in the first Covenant. This ministry of the spirit of
Christ, does in Scripture pass under the name of Moses, John Baptist and
Eliah, as the voice of the messenger going before, but not the voice of the Son
of God himself, in his own person.

2dly, Therefore, there is a farther and an additionall work to this, (which
supposes this chang first to be wrought) the operation whereof, is to make this
a repentance never to be repented of, this chang unchangable, by bringing the
mind into that better state of fredom, which is for ever exclusive of sin, or
of any possibility to chang and return to the service of sin again. This
second work enlarges the first, making it more entire within itself then ever
it was, in yiedling subjection to righteousness, as transformed into the whole
will of God, with an impossibility to chang, or turn in affection from it. This
is properly the workmanship of the Son himself, called Regeneration, which
carries in it the fredom with which the Son makes all those free indeed, whom
he causes to receave him in this gift of himself to them, likening them unto
himself in that lowly, meek, and subjected frame of spirit, wherein as the Son
of man he is prepared to se God, and to do always that which is welpleasing in
his sight.

Those that are under this second work, are properly believers, having faith of
the right kind, saving faith. And they are therein created by Christ Jesus unto
good works, with another manner of will and spirit then those are of, that are
but restored only unto the service of righteousness, and choose there to be left,
to work out their own salvation in the single principles of their rectified
nature and free will. For in them, that freewil offering (Romans 12.1.) is made,
the life of that flesh is offered up in sacrifice, which the law of faith
commands, as the only way to exclude boasting or a being puffed up in the
service of righteousness; and indeed, to exclude all possibility of final
relapse from God, or return to the service of sin.

This flesh that would live in us, is the power we have to lust and desire,
move and act of ourselvs, in the use and exercise of our primitive free will,
either to good or evil, as likes us best. This freedom may either be taken
away from us by force, or we may be brought through a principle of love
begotten in us, of our own choice to resign it up, into the hands of another,
ordained of God thereunto, to keep and manage for us. This is that, Christ
tells us; (John 6:37, 40.) All that the father gives me, shall come to me; and
it is his will, that of all that he has given me, I should lose none, but
raise them up again at the last day. For I came down from heaven, not to do
my own will, but the will of him that sent me. And this is his will, that he
that sees the Son (as he lives, not in his own will, but in the will of the
father) and believes on him, (living in the will of the Son, and not in his
own will) should have everlasting life, and be raised up at the last day.

To be taken off then by this gift and drawing of the father, from all desire
to live in our own will, or be at our own arbitrary, single choice and
dispose; and to be made willing and contented to live in the will of Christ, to
be built up in a conjunction of spirit, a unity and simplicity in the motion of
our will with his, will enable us truly to say with the Apostle, that now, not
we live, but Christ lives in us; and the life that we now live in the flesh,
or as yet in the mortal body, we live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved
us and gave himself up to death for us, that he might bring us thus to live in
and with him. The life that we thus live, is through his enlivening and
inspiring motion, who for this very e^d gives himself to us in such an
intimate and uncha^gable unio^, as makes him our very life, or the activity and
strength through which we act and live. Christ's thus being given to us and
received by us, amounts unto true regeneration, and our being made willing to
give up ourselvs thus unto him is the presenting our bodies, or lusting fleshly
mind, a living sacrifice, that is holy and acceptable to God. This is to make
our living soul an offering or reasonable service to God, even the freewill
offering of those reasonable first created powers of discerning and desiring,
(which however refined, do remain yet corruptible, till the transforming work
of true regeneration has passed upon them) and this with Abel's, is reputed by
God (and therefore certainly in itself is) a much more excellent sacrifice then
that which Cain offered, or indeed can be offered by any that retain the life
of their own will, as the principle of all their motion and activity in Gods
service, be it otherwise never so conform to the letter of the commandment.

They that are under this second work and chang, have the Son of God in them,
so as to be himself the keeper of their souls, by oath never to part with or
give up his interest in and Rule over them, unto any but the father. After this
manner to receave, have and possess the Son, is to believe and have life
eternal, by the new and everlasting Covenant. And not thus to receave the son,
is the unbeleif, which when once it takes root, springs up with that bitterness
and enmity against the principle, operation and Testimony of saving faith in
true believers, (and so against Christ himself, who rules in their hearts by
faith) as amounts in conclusion to the very second death. For it carries them
on, in to that irrecoverable impenitency and hardness of heart, for which God
swears, they shall never enter into his Rest.

To be quickened and risen with Christ in this second work and chang, wrought in
the soul by him, is that resurrection into life which never is to se
corruption or change more. And he that is thus borne of God, does not commit
sin, that is, the sin of unbeleif above mentioned, because his seed remains
in him, which keeps him from so sinning, and the evil one touches him not.
This heavenly, immortal seed and birth of the life that is incorruptible,
keeps the believer in all trialls and temptations, fixed like a rock, and as
mount Sion that cannot be moved from holding fast the confidence of a lively
hope, to the end. Yet where this resurrection and immortal life is in the
seed, it does not suddenly appear or show itself in its own likeness, according
to the mightines of the power that works in us. But however, it is the power of
faith, through which we are kept unto salvation. It is that, which (after we
have passed over the day of temptation, the suffering season) will be sure to
come forth in its powerful operation, and make us perfect, stablish,
strengthen and settle us. Hence is it that Christ says, if we have faith,
(that is, of the right kind) but as a grain of mustard seed, we shall find it
to be of such a growing, increasing nature, that though it be not presently
discerned, yet by it shall we be at last enabled to remove mountains, and
nothing shall be impossible unto it. This is Christ's meaning also, when he says,
that he will raise up such believers at the last day, that is, in the day
appointed for the manifestation of these Sons of God, in which they shall
appear as indeed they are, to every eye. And the eye that sees them shall
acknowledge them: the ear that hears them, shall bear witness unto them, that
they are the seed that God has blessed, not only by strengthening them with
might in the inner man, and rooting them in love, but visibly raising them up
in his power, to the rendering of them mighty in word and deed. With this kind
of resurrection, that shall be visible in the eyes of enemies and all beholders,
it is, that Christ will raise up the sons of God (before described) and cause
them to live in his sight, in this third day, at the breaking forth of the
brightness of his second personal appearance, as the Kingdom of his power, with
which (as with the latter rain) he will visit and refresh the habitable part of
his earth, and at same time, burn like an oven, in flames of fire, to the
consuming and destroying of all his adversaries.

The way that God will take to make his sons manifest in this day, is by a
powerful work of redemption that shall be wrought and pass upon the outward as
well as inward man of the heart; upon the speaking, acting powers, as well as
upon the understanding and intuitive faculties of the mind, to the freeing of
them both from the bondage of corruption, and stating the whole person of the
believer in the glorious freedom of righteousness and true holiness.

7. This shall be effected, first, by the ministry of the holy Angels, as the
Elias that is to come, who like the four winds of heaven, shall breath with
their influencing gales of prophesy upon the spirits of all men, but especially
upon believers, to the gathering them up into a life of spirit, and causing
them to be (as it were) absent from the body, in order to be present with the
Lord, whilst yet in the body;

2. Secondly, This work shall be carried on by the revelation of the son himself
from heaven, for the changing of our vile bodies into the likeness of his most
glorious body.

We find (Mark. 1.1, etc.) that John Baptists ministry, though but the
messenger sent before Christ's face, to prepare his way in preaching the
baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, is called the beginning of
the gospel of Jesus Christ the son of God. And the Evangelist luke (chap.
1.15.) describing that which qualified John for his ministry, tells us in the
words which the angel spoke to his father Zachary, that he was filled with the
holy Ghost from the womb, for the rendering him a fit messenger to usher in the
coming of Christ in the flesh, by going before him in the spirit, and power of
Eliah, whose work is to restore all things, making them right and straight; but
he is to leave the work of regeneration, and ministry of the new creature being
and life, to the son himself.

The subject which both these ministries chiefly respected, in the day of the
dispe^sation of Christ's first appearance, was the inward man of the heart, for
the rooting and grounding it in love, and strengthening it under the many and
various trialls of the cross, and temptations that were to be undergone. For
believers are to bear about in their bodies, the marks of the dying of the
Lord Jesus, whilst he is in his far country. He has appointed them a warfare
to manage with the ruling powers of this world, in a way of Testimony or
witness-bearing, and therein not to love their lives unto death, but in faith
and patience to possess their souls. Nevertheless, least they might imagine
thereupon (as they are too apt to do) that their faith, if it were of the right
kind and unfamed, would presently come forth into its powerful operation, he
warily cautions them therein, and corrects that mistake, by intimating that
this was a thing they were not to expect, till they had shared with him in his
sufferings, continued with him in his temptations, and given proof of their
service and obedience to him, in and under the cross. For (says he) which of
you having a servant, plowing or feeding cattle, will say to him by and by,
when he is come from the field, go, sit down to meat? will he not rather say
to him, make ready wherewith I may sup, gird thyself and serve me, till I have
eaten and drunken? Wait but till such time as that which is yet behind of my
afflictions in my members, by them to be borne, shall be filled up, and
afterward ye shall eat and drink. The season for your eating and drinking with
me at my table, in my fathers Kingdom, will then come when the work of faith in
you shall be fulfilled with power, and I shall be admired in all that do believe.

This is that which is properly to be wrought and effected by Christ at his
second coming, upon the sounding of the seventh trumpet, and at the preaching
of the everlasting gospel, which is not another but the same gospel of Jesus
Christ the son of God, that the ministry of John Baptist was said to be the
beginning of. But it is called everlasting, from the differing kind of effect
and operation it will have, (especially upon the outward man and sensual part
of the mind) from what the dispensation of it under Christ's first appearance
had. For that which was then sown in weakness, and left the possessors of it
exposed to various sufferings from the powers of this world, shall now be
raised in power at this last day; to the clothing and furnishing their very
outward man, with an ability to handle the powers of this world, and all
adversaries whatsoever, as they shall se good.

That which for the most part is atteined unto, under the dispensation of the
gospel, in the day of Christ's first appearance in spirit, is but a restitution
to that which yet is mutable, a repentance and a reformation that in time of
trial fails, being repented of and turned from, upon which such persons sink
down into a dreadful apostasy from God, and from the holy commandment
delivered to them. But at the day of Christ's second appearance, the works of
righteousness shall come forth with power and prevalency, triumphing over sin in
all for a season, as well as in true believers, but in these it shall be
permanent and abiding. The life of the immortal seed shall make them perfect
in love, and shall by the ministry of glory in Christ's second coming, be made
manifest and visible to every eye. The sun of it shall never set more. This is
that which we are commanded to wait for, because it will surely come and not
tarry. He that believes will not make have, but is taught with the hasband man to
wait for this precious fruit of the earth, and to have long patience, till the
latter rain be received as well as the former.

Now the receaving of the latter rain is not to be looked for (in the course of
good husbandry) till the seed be in the earth, and has had its season there to
corrupt, chang its form, die, and spring up with a new ear against the
harvest. Happy shall they be who endure to the end, taking the prophets and
other holy men that have gone before them, for an example of long-suffering and
patience, having heard also of the exemplary patience of Job, and seen the end
of our Lord himself, who passed this way to the crown, and warns all his true
followers to expect the like.

The work of Eliah, (as has bin showed) is to turn men from sin by
repentance, and to cause them to return by faith to the living God, enabling
the^ to perform their whole duty to him, as by his law we are commanded. Our
blessed savior (Mat. 17.11, 12.) mentions two distinct commings of Eliah, or
two Eliahs. One Eliah, (says he) meaning John Baptist, is already come: the
other, (meaning that foreruning dispensation, that is the beginning of the
everlasting Gospel) is that which comes or shall come; and it is to be waited
for at the sounding of the seventh Trumpet. The latter Elias is first mentioned
by our savior, (v. 11.) that is to come and restore all things, or be the
preparatory messenger to that appearance and coming of our Lord, that shall
complete the restitution of all things, (Act. 3.21.) as he has spoken by the
mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began. Enoch before the flood
Prophesied of this latter coming and appearance of Christ, saying, behold, the
Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, Jude v. 14.

So then, these two commings of Eliah answer to the two commings of Christ, the
two days of the Son of man, the early and later rain of his first and second
appearance, both of which make up that one third day abovementioned, that
Hosea speaks of. John Baptist, in his ministry, which was the first coming of
Eliah, was coursely enterteind by Herod, who did to him what he would. But
there is another Elias to come, though very much opposed by many, who endeavor
to confound Christ's words in the forementioned Scripture, as if they were all
to be understood of John Baptists Ministry only, and did not assert or declare
Eliahs second coming. But the context makes it plain; Eliah comes or shall
come and restore all things. This our Lord said, after they had done what they
would to the first Eliah, which he acknowledged was come already. And both jews
and Christians do understand (Mal. 4:5, 6.) of Eliahs second coming, in the
end of the world, immediately before the great and dreadful day of the Lords
second coming, For then the like universal corruption, apostasy and violence,
yea greater and of a deeper die and malignity (because contracted in times of
greater light) then that of the old world in Noah's days, will certainly
appear, and stand in need of such a refining fire as the ministry of Eliahs
second coming will be found to be, in order to restore all things out of that
desperate, evil, and forlorn estate. And then shall those that fear the Lord,
tread down the wicked as ashes under the soles of their feet; Mal. 4.2, 3.

This is to be the work of Eliahs second coming; but how, and by what ministry
shall it be wrought? It will assuredly be found to be the beginning of the
preaching of the everlasting Gospel of Jesus Christ, that is to say, of the
Gospel preached by that trumpet that gives the certain second, and makes
manifest the Sons of God in an immutable everlasting state of righteousness and
glory, here upon earth; in a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, which is to succeed
all other Kingdoms, showing itself to be the stone cut out of the mountains,
that will fill the whole earth.

This everlasting Gospel, we are told, (Revel. 14.6, 7.) is to be preached by
an angel, flying in the midst of heaven, that must with a loud voice, say unto
them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, kindred, tongue and people;
fear God and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come This is
the hour or the day of that great judgment, wherein God will judge the world by
that man which he has ordained, Jesus Christ. This hour and day is to have
continuance in the course of its execution on the earth, for the space of a
thousand years. During this time, the Kingdoms of this world shall become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, as holding of him their universal
head, and exercising all their authority under him; Revel. 11.15. So then, in
effect, Christ alone shall reign and be exalted in that day, one Lord and his
name one, over all the earth.

This day is to begin (as has bin said) with the second coming of Eliah, and
is described in the Scriptures of truth, as to the several particulars thereof.

The seventh angel sounds, by reason whereof it comes to pass, that there are
great voices to be heard in heaven, appointed by Christ, (as he is the bright
morning star, and head of all Principalities and powers, the true Michael and
Archangel) to seize upon all scepters and governments of this world; to take
the Rule and visible power out of the hands of all the Potentates of the earth,
and reassume it in such a wonderful manner into the hands of the holy and
elect angels, (who under Christ are appointed the highest and chief Rulers of
the visible world) that by the astonishing dispensations of Gods providence in
that season, it will appear and be acknowledged, that Christ has begun and
entered upon the taking to himself his great power, in order to exercise his
visible Rule, as the great, only and universal King over all the earth. This
he will do, to the intent that the living may know, that the most high rules
in the Kingdom of men, giving it to whomsoever he will. Yea, it shall be
acknowledged and seen that under the most high, the heavens do rule, Dan. 4.26.
All matters shall at that time be carried on in the earth, visibly, by the
decree of the watchers, (v. 17.) the supreme counsel and senate of judicature
wherein the holy angels shall sit and exercise jurisdiction under Christ, for
the good of his church on earth. They are ministering spirits in this very
respect, sent forth and authorized for this employment, even to minister for
them who shall be heirs of salvation; as it is written; all things are yours, and
ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. In that day (says Christ) for brass I
will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, for wood brass, and for
stones iron; (so glorious will then the restoration of al things be) and I will
also make thine officers peace, and thine exactours righteousness. Violence
shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting not destruction within thy borders,
but thou shall call thy walls of defense, salvation; and thy gates of justice,
praise. Then the haughtines of man shall be laid low, and his lofty looks
brought down; and the worshippers of idols shall go into the holes of the
rocks and caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and of the glory of his
majesty, when he shall thus arise most terribly to shake the earth; Esaias, 2.
The same thing is promised, Haggai 2:6, 7. Yet once, it is a little while, and
I will shake the heavens and the earth, the sea, and the dry land. And I will
shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come; that is to say,
after the terrible, forerunning dispensation, ministered by Eliah, (that went up
to heaven in a fiery chariot to take his seat amongst this heavenly college of
angels, and be in that glory with other the spirits of just men made perfect,)
shall the desire of all nations (Christ himself) come, to perfect and
consummate what is left wanting in the operation of the former ministry, and
fill his own house with glory in the sight of the whole world, during the
space of a thousand years.

2. But 2dly, although at the sounding of the seventh trumpet, it do come to
pass that there be great voices in heaven, what is that to the inhabitants
that are on earth, those that are at home in the body, absent from the Lord,
whose spirits are fast asleep in the earth, to wit, in the organicall life and
exercise of bodily senses? Will not they be out of the hearing of the sound of
these heavenly voices? At least, will they be able to understand their meaning,
unless what is uttered by the angelical tongues, be in words easy to be
understood by the spirit of their minds who live and dwell in mortal clay, and
that an easy understanding thereof also be communicable to the sensual part of
the soul, which is as the door to take in and give out again, what shall be
heard by the sound of such a heavenly Trumpet? By what is recorded for our
instruction, we may be assured, this is not impossible nor unpracticable. It
happened thus to the Apostle John, before his change by death, even whilst he was
a prisoner and a banished man in the I Will of Patmos, for the Word of God and
testimony of Jesus Christ. He looked, and behold a door was opened in heaven.
By the opening of that door, he came to be made able to hear the voices in
heaven, the first and second voice of the angel (Revel: 4.1. 10:8.) as it were
of a trumpet, talking with him, which said, come up hither, and I will show
thee things which must be hereafter. By the power of that voice calling him, he
was immediately in the spirit, that is, as Paul, absent from the body. He had
such an awakening of his inward senses wrought in him, such an opening and
making of them meet to hear and receave what by the tongue of the angel was to
be delivered, that he was in the spirit, or in the exercise of the same kind of
life and manner of conversing with spirits, that they are in one with another,
or that the spirits of just men made perfect do use with the holy angels, when
in the state of souls separate from the body, made equal to angels, and
children of the resurrection, in the first degree or step of it, which is
called (Revel. 20) the first Resurrection. The Apostle does there speak of the
time, when this way of heavenly converse between the saints that are on earth
and the holy angels, shall be frequent and usual, and no such wonder or strange
thing, as yet by most it is accounted.

This will be brought to pass by the opening of the door in heaven,
interpreted by Christ himself, (Jo. 1.51.) in his answer to Nathaniel. Because
I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, beleevest thou? Thou shall se
greater things then these. What greater things? A door open in heaven, as a
means of easy and familiar intercourse between the inhabitants of heaven and
dwellers on earth. The angels are to be employed as messengers of intelligence
between Christ and his Saints, before the time of his own personal converse
with them on earth. For (says Christ) verily, verily, I say unto you;
Hereafter you shall se heaven open, (or the gate and door that is made into it
and kept open by me) for the ascent and descent of my holy angels, between me
and my Saints on earth. At that day Christ will be glorified in his Saints, and
honor them in the sight of them that hate them: God will answer them before
they pray; whilst they are yet speaking, he will hear, and speedily avenge
them of their adversaries. He will grant them the desire of their hearts.

But when will this day be, that these great and wonderful things shall be seen?
The text is plain and express, Revel. 11. It Is evidently to begin at the rising
of the witnesses, who shall immediately upon their rising, be thus in the
spirit, as John was on the Lords day, in the I Will of Patmos. This will be the
proper and usual dispensation in that day of the Lord, that is to begin at the
sounding of the seventh trumpet. The spirit of life from God shall then enter
into the witnesses, set them upon their feet, and immediately qualify them to be
in the spirit, or have their inward senses awakened and fitted to hear and
receave messages from heaven, and the knowledge of the mind of their Lord, by
the immediate impression and inspiration of angels, employed by him for that
purpose.

We know this was frequently the case with Daniel and most of the other dear
servants and prophets of the Lord. Unto Jacob this great mystery and truth was
most particularly and distinctly foretold in the ladder which he saw, the feet
whereof touched the earth and the top of it reached to heaven, and behold, the
angels ascending and descending upon it, and the Lord himself standing above,
and speaking by that means unto Jacob, acquainting him thereby with his mind,
and giving to him most rich and precious promises. The interpretation of this
ladder was not only made by our savior to Nathaniel, as we have opened, but it
was at the same time given to Jacob with the vision itself, as appears by the
Result that came into his mind thereupon, when he said, How dreadful is this
place? It is the very house of God, where his throne is. It is the very gate of
heaven, through which by the ministry of angels (in the hand of Christ, as he
is the son of man, and has the use and exercise of all kinds of humane sense,
in perfection, in his glorified manhood) the inward and outward man of the
saints shall be so affected, changed, and transformed, as to give them a kind of
entrance into, and a being in heaven, even whilst they are yet here in the body.

This Christ wrought and obtained the power of, when he ascended up above all
heavens, and as man, did come to have a more excellent name then the angels.
Now that he ascended, what is it, but that he (who was in the form of God, and
counted it not robbery to be equal with God) did first descend lower then the
angels, into the fashion of an earthly man, the lowermost part of his habitable
earth, (Prove: 8:31.) even the animalish and sensual nature of man, using and
exercising as well the bodily as spiritual senses, appertaining to the very
natural man. When he had done this, by laying hold on the seed of Abraham, and
receaving it into personal union with himself, he set up that ladder in his
own person; the feet whereof stand on the earth, whilst the top of it enters
into the highest heaven. For he that descended, is the same also that ascended
far above all heavens, that he might fill and fulfill all things. That
therefore which Jacob pronounced in the spiritual interpretation of his
vision, is most undeniable. This is none other (says he) then the house of
God, the building not made with hands, whose builder and maker is God; the
fathers house, wherein are many mansions, built by the eternal WORD and wisdom
of the father, in the person of the mediator, considered as he is the first
borne of every creature, and the beginning or first begotten from the dead,
(Col. 1.) in whom is that life that is the light of men, who was before all
things, and by whom all things consist.

The way for God (that is the high and lofty one, inhabiting eternity) to
descend and come to dwell in the humble, broken and contrite spirit, as the
place of his rest; and the way for the humble, poor, and broken spirit to
ascend into the persence and sight of God; all this was wrought out in our
nature, by the WORD that made himself flesh, and in that body, died, rose again
and ascended where he was before, as in the volume of Gods book it is written
of him. This he told his own disciples (Jo. 14.) In my fathers house are many
mansions. If it were not so, I would have told you. Behold, I go to prepare a
place for you; to set the ladder, by which the ascent and descent is contrived
into my fathers house, for such as you are. And if I go and prepare a place
for you, you may be sure I will come again, and gather you unto my self, that
where J am, ye may be also. At his coming again, the same Apostle John finds
the thing to be true, that his Lord had promised. For (Revel. 11.12, 19.) it
appears that upon the rising of the witnesses and sounding of the seventh
trumpet, the temple of God will be opened in heaven (which is the same opening of
the heavens beforementioned, (Jo. 1.51.) and there will be seen in his temple
the arc of his Testament, the law of the two tables, written in the heart of
Christ the Son of Man, from whose presence the fiery law is to be dispensed by
the ministry of angels, at which there will be lightnings, voices, thunderings,
an earth quake and great hail.

The door into heaven being thus set open, the risen witnesses are spoken to,
(v. 12.) saying, come up hither, or be with me in the spirit, in a mind fitted
to enterteine converse with me, by the ministry of the holy angels. And for
such a blessing and benefit, be not unwilling (as often as there shall be
occasion) to be absent from the body, that you may be present with the Lord.
For if herein you should appear vile in the eyes of wordly men, as men beside
yourselvs, as David did in dancing naked before the arc; yet is it to God. And
when you change again from that inwardnes of life with God, to be more in
outward converse with men, and more sober in their thoughts, it is for their
sakes, and for their great benefit rather then yours, that thereby you may be
able to turn many of the^ to righteousness.

In this sense, (not excluding the literal) it will be found true, that the
saints shall be called to be and live in the spirit with Christ, and to walk
with God on earth, before their translation, as Enoch did. Answerable to this,
it is said, Dan. 12.2. compared with 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. And many of the^ that
sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some
to shame and everlasting contempt. The spirit of our mind which sleeps in the
dust of the earth, will be wrought off from that love and delight it is apt to
take in making the body its home, and exerting itself in such kind of
operations as are in and by the use of our bodily organs, and will be gathered
and carried up by the ministry of the holy angels, (forming a meetnes in the
senses of the inward man of the heart) into a converse with them, and with
Christ himself in spirit, as a better home and city of habitation then that of
the dust of the earth, wherein it has bin so long an inhabitant. In order to
this, the soul will be endued or clothed upon with a hearing ear and a
speaking tongue, like to that of the angels, in their immutable state. And for
this self same thing we are wrought by God, who has given us the earnest of
his spirit already insome degree, but will give it in the highest degree and
measure it is atteinable before the change that comes upon us by death, when
this body is to be laid down and brought into a state of actual separation
from the soul. This change by death, unto those that have partaken first of
this awakening, shall be very easy, like unto the translation of Enoch, who saw
not death, or had no sense of it in a way of pain or horror. His passage was
sudden and in a moment, very easy and desirable. The Apostle Paul therefore,
speaking of this kind of change, that should happen at the sounding of the
seventh trumpet, even in the beginning of it, (as we have opened) does say;
behold I show you a mystery, that which as yet is a great secret, but hereafter
shall be very commonly experienced; we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump. For the
trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible. Those whose
spirits were before, as 'twere, asleep in the dust of the earth, and dead in
respect of the spirituality and heavenlines they are now awakened into, will be
acknowledged as in that kind and degree of resurrection, which will be made
known at the rising of the witnesses. They shall not die, that is, leave the
body with any painful sense of death, but in a moment shall be changed and
translated into glory. This awakned, risen state, is not that which shall be
peculiar only to the saints; but wicked men, the children of perdition, in way
of everlasting contempt, shall also partake of it, with a like way of operation
upon the spirit of their minds, by wicked angels, transforming themselves into
angels of light, and hoping by this means to gain credit to their ministers as
ministers of righteousness also, which in a way of counterfeit resemblance, the
father of deceit will be preparing, during this ministry of Eliah, till he be
bound up by Christ from any more deceaving of the nations in this kind, or any
other.

This the Apostle Paul does very clearly intimate, (1 Cor: 13.7.) where he
admits, there may be those that may speak not only with tongues of men, but
also of angels, who yet not having or living in the spirit of love, there
described, will be found to be but as sounding brass and tinckling cymballs,
vessels of great contempt, compared with those that make the right and true
music, (Revel. 14.) those harpers that are taught how to sing the song of
Moses and of the lamb in sweet harmony and consortship together, and thereby
turn many to righteousness, who shall shine like bright morning stars.

3. The third particular then, that shall be an eminent effect of Eliahs second
coming, is the raising up in the world a more excellent way of preaching,
hearing and obeying the gospel, then ever yet has bin known upon the face of
the earth; even that which (Romans 11.15.) is deservedly called life from the
dead, and is to be the means of bringing in the fullnes both of jew and
gentile. This is darkly pointed out by Dives in the parable (Luke 16.30.) when
in his answer to Abraham, he says, that if one went to his brethren from the
dead, they would repent, hereby glancing (as 't were) at such a kind of
excellent and powerful ministry, as was intended by God to be set up in the
world, whereby to bring men to repentence, or as Luke 14.23. to compel them to
come in, that Gods house may be filled with the fullnes both of jew and gentile.

This kind of ministry is that, wherein both for cleernes and certainty of the
matter preached, and the power of that spirit in which it is ministered, shall be
beyond all that has yet bin seen or experienced in the church. For in this day
the heavens shall be commanded to drop down from above, and the skies to pour
down righteousness, and the earth to open and bring forth salvation, that
righteousness from heaven and in the earth may spring up together, and this by
the Lords own most powerful forming and creation, Esaias. 45.8. So Psalm. 50.1,
6. The Lord, the mighty God has spoken, and called the earth from the rising
of the Son to the going down thereof. Out of Sion, the perfection of beauty,
God has shined. Our God shall come and shall keep no longer silence. A fire
shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestous round about him. He
shall call to the heavens from above, or make use of the angelical ministry in
the judging of his peoples cause for them, as those that he will first employ
to go before him and declare his righteousness, and then afterward will he come
in his own personal appearance, and show that he is judge himself.

Christ will give the angels a call, nay, a command and commission, to prepare
the hearts and mouths of the saints, as trumpets, through which they may give
a certain sound, to the making manifest the knowledge and vision of God and of
his law in both his Covenants, so plain, that those who run, may read it. And
unto this selfsame thing, the heart and mouth of those that God will think fit
to use in this ministry, shall be wrought by Christ spirit, as the most glorious
earnest they can receave here on earth of the life in glory, which they shall
for ever enjoy with Christ in heaven. For it shall come to pass, that those
who are thus called into this ministry, shall be found speaking with the tongues,
not of men only, but of angels, and to have also the love requisite to
distinguish them from all counterfeits. Yea, they shall have this love of
Christ and the spirit of it perfected in them, to the casting out of all
torment and fear, making them bold as a lion, fearing the face neither of
devils nor of men, in the discharge of this their ministry, which shall be so
powerful as to turn many, even innumerable multitudes to righteousness, to the
admiration of all beholders. The Gentiles shall come to this light, and Kings to
the brightness of the very rising thereof Then shall thou se and flow together;
and thine heart shall fear and be enlarged, because the noise or abundance of
the sea shall be turned toward thee, (or multitudes and profane persons who
before were to be seen foaming out their own filth, shall now be converted to
thee) the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee, Esaias: 60:5. And not the
Gentiles only, but the Jews also, (or the mystical earthly Jerusalem,
consisting both of Jews and Gentiles) that earth shall be made to bring forth in
one day, that nation shall be borne at once. That Zion, so soon as she travels,
shall bring forth her children, whose wall the sons of strangers shall build
up, and their Kings shall minister unto her. For in my wrath says the Lord, I
have smote thee, but in my favor I have had mercy on thee. Therefore thy gates
shall be open continually, they shall not be shut day nor night, that may bring
unto thee the forces of the Gentiles and their Kings with them. For the nation
and Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish. Yea those nations shall be
utterly wasted. In these believers shall Christ be admired, and to the exercise
of their faith all things shall be possible. The power of the keys shall be so
committed to them as is promised, that whatsoever they bind or loose on earth,
shall be bound and loosed in the heaven. These will be found to be the angels
that come forth out of the temple, with the seven vials of Gods wrath,
commissionated to pour them out upon the beast, the whore, the false Prophet,
and the whole Kingdom of Antichrist. They shall not need to take care, as to
what they are to speak and answer for themselves, when they are brought before
Magistrates for Christ's name sake, for in that hour a mouth and wisdom shall be
given unto them, which their enemies shall not be able to resist.

3. The third particular that shall accompany the second coming of Eliah, is
the neccessary consequent and product, that shall and must attend the excellent
and powerful ministry, above made known; For it is by the breath of this
mouth of the Lord in his servants, (the loud, plain and certain sound of this
seventh Trumpet, even when it begins to sound) that Jacob must arise, as low
and as small as he and the dispersed seed of God will at that time be judged to
be, in the eye of the world, or in their own sight, Ezekiel. 37.11. These bones,
however they seem to be dried up, must live; and by this breath of prophesy
from the Lord, that is to enter into them, they shall once again stand upon
their feet, with that firmnes and stability, as never to fall more.

When the command is once given for the spirit of prophecy to come forth in
that excellent and powerful way of ministry beforementioned; it will first
make a great noise amongst the inhabitants of the world. It will be a voice of
noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of the Lord, rendering
recompense to his enemies. And after the noise, which shall be occasioned by this
voice of the Lords second appearance, (to the great joy of his saints, and
utter shame of his and their enemies) there shall immediately follow a great
shaking or earth quake, where in a tenth part of the city shall fall, to make
way for the more easy and ready coming together of the dry bones, which will
thus gradually become an exceeding great multitude, in excellent order. For
first, the sinews and flesh will come upon them, and the skin will cover them
above, but no breath in them yet. This is a typical description of the state
of the witnesses, who do for a season lie as it were breathless and dead in
the street of the great city, spiritually called Sodom and Egypt. But upon the
command given to the breath of prophesy, that was called from the four winds,
to breath upon these slain, and cause them to live, the breath comes into them,
and they live and stand upon their feet, an exceeding great army, even these
dry bones of the whole house of Israel, who looked upon themselves a little
before, as those whose bones were dried, whose hope was lost, and who were cut
off for their parts. For at this time, God will open as it were the very graves
of his people, and cause them to come out from thence into their own land, the
land of the promised spirit, Emmanuells land, by putting (after this admirable
and extraordinary manner) his spirit within them, that shall be in them and to
them, as life from the dead, causing them to know that the Lord has opened
their graves fro them, and brought them into their own land, by virtue of the
everlasting Covenant that he has made with them, and has set his sanctuary in
the midst of them for evermore.

The Lord in this day will perform the word spoken by the Prophet Micah,
(chap. 2:12, 13.) I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of thee. I will surely
gather the remnant of Israel. I will put them together as the sheep of the
flock, in the midst of their fold. They shall make a great noise by reason of
the multitude of men. The breaker up is come up before them: they have broken
up and have passed through the gate, and are gone out by it, and their king
shall pass before them, and the Lord on the head of them. For the children of
Israel shall abide many days without a King, Prince, or sacrifice, image,
Ephod, or Teraphim. And afterward, shall they return, and seek the Lord their
God; and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the
latter days, when the Mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established
upon the top of the Mountains, and the las shall go out of Zion, and the word
of the Lord from Jerusalem, Esai. 2. And I will assemble her that halts, and
will gather her that I have driven out, and her that I have afflicted, and will
make of the one a remnant, and of the other a strong nation, and the Lord shall
reign over them in mount Zion, from thenceforth even for ever. And nation
shall not life up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any
more. For all people will walk in the name of their God, and we will walk in
the name of the Lord our God, for ever and ever. For a small moment I have
forsaken thee and hid my face from thee, but with great mercies and everlasting
kindnesses will I gather thee. For thy maker is thy husband, the Lord of hoasts
is his name; and thy Redeemer, the holy one of Israel, the God of the whole
earth shall he be called. Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by
me. Whosoever shall gather together against thee, shall fall for thy sake. For
all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of them.
In righteousness shall they be established. They shall be far from oppression,
fear or terror. No weapon that is formed against thee, shall prosper, and
every tongue that shall rise up in judgment against thee, thou shall condemn.
This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of
me, says the Lord. This is Israel my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, and
the seed of Abraham, my friend.

These and many more like precious promises we meet with in the Scripturs,
concerning a most prosperous and glorious state, that shall visibly come upon
Gods people even in this world, according to the assurance thereof given unto
Abraham, that he in his seed should be heir of the world. All these promises
are reducible only to the state of those times that shall certainly be brought
upon the stage of this world, when the Kingdom and second appearance of the
great God and our savior Jesus Christ, shall shine forth in its brightness upon
earth.

This is that which is not only promised so very often, and testified by all
the Prophets, but was much spoken of and believed amongst the Jews before
Christ's coming in the flesh. It was universally received also in the first age
after Christ, and all were accounted heretics and deniers of the resurrection
that did not acknowledge it. And in that great Council of Nice, called by
Constantine the great, it was asserted in an article of their Ecclesiastical
doctrine, to this effect; That by foreknowledg God did not make the world in
that height of perfection at first, which he intended to bring it unto in the
end, because he foresaw, man would sin. Therefore (say they) we expect new
heavens and a new earth, according to the scriptures. And then (as Daniel
says) the saints of the most high shall take the Kingdom, and there shall be a
pure and holy world, a Land of the living and not of the dead. This David by
the eye of faith foresaw, when he said, I shall se the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living, the land of the humble and meek. Blessed are the
meek, for they shall inherit the earth, and be clothed, beautified and adorned
with salvation. So Esaias. 26. The foot shall tread down the lofty city, even
the feet of the poor and the steps of the needy.

This great truth, was thus witnessed unto, then, and afterward also, till the
adversaries knew no other way to avoid it, but by denying the book of the
Revelation to be scripture.

In the beginning also of the reformation in England, in a catechism set forth
in Edward the sixths time, and by him authorized the last year of his reign,
that part of the Lords prayer, Thy Kingdom come, is thus commented upon.
Hitherto we se not all things put under the feet of Christ; we do not yet se
that stone cut out of the mountain without any work or endeavors of man, that
is to break and dissipate into nothing the great image described by Daniel,
that the little stone which is Christ, may possess and obtein the empire of
the whole world, according to the grant of the father. Antichrist is not yet
destroyed, whence it is, that we are to desire and pray, that in Gods due time
it may be done, and that Christ alone way reign with his Saints, according to
his divine promises; that he may live and reign on the earth, according to the
laws of the holy Scriptures, and not according to the traditions and laws of
men, and the tyrannical will of this world. So have we it, in that Catechism.

Another passage there is, relating to this subject in the same book, upon the
article of the last judgment, distinguishing between the end of the world, and
the last general judgment, saying, that the holy Scriptures call the end of
the world, the time of consummation, the full filling of the Kingdom and
mysteries of Christ, in the restitutio^ of all things. It seems bu agreeable to
reason, that the days should come, wherein the corruption, chang, and sin, to
which the whole world has bin heitherto subjected, should cease. This shall be
done by fire, as gold is refined, by which it shall be brought to its last and
highest perfection. And this, man, the lesser world, shall much more
experience, in being freed from the bondage of corruption, and brought into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God. For man's sake therefore the visible frame
of heaven and earth shall be renewed with a much more pleasant and beautiful
face or for me, then it had before. But secondly, as to the last and general
judgment, the answer is; Christ shall come, at whose voice the dead shall
arise, and be made perfect in soul and body. And he shall sit on the throne of
his majesty, seen by the whole world, and pronounce the final sentence, upon
the testimony of every ones conscience, out of his own mouth. Then the Sons of
God shall completely possess that Kingdom of immortality and eternal life,
which was prepared for them before the foundation of the world, and shall
reign with Christ unto all eternity. But the wicked, which do not believe,
shall be cast into eternal fire, appointed for the devil and his angels.

This distinction between the days of the end of the world, and the work
proper to them (called the last days, and the great day of eternity, or the
last judgment) is well explained and cleared by Mr. Mede, who gives the account
before mentioned, in these things. In a word, he declares his judgment to be;
that the seventh trumpet, or thousand years reign of Christ on earth,
contained therein, is that great day of the Lord, the day of his Judgment, so
much celebrated among the Jews in their writings, and from them taken up by our
Savior and his Apostles, not a day of a few hours, (as some suppose) but a
continued interval of many years, (wherein Christ shall first destroy all his
enemies, even death itself) and shall end with the universal resurrection and
and passing of the final sentence, winding up all in the resigning up of his
Kingdom to the father, that God may be all in all. Thus the thousand years is
no distinct time from the day of Judgment, neither before it nor after; but the
same with it, the whole time, during which this great day of judgment does
continue, in the very beginning whereof, Antichrist shall finally be destroyed,
and not before. These therefore, in Scripture, are called the times of Christ's
Kingdom, wherein he will show himself the blessed and only Potentate, the King
of Kings and Lord of Lords, and this for the space of a thousand years, in the
last period of which, comes the last and final sentence (before mentioned) to
be pronounced and executed.

The reason therefore why the excellent promises (above recited) are not yet
performed, is twofold.

1. The times for their performance are not yet fully come, though very near.
But most certain it is (as we have heard) that they shall and will come.

2dly. Because the seed also to which they are made, is not yet come to be made
manifest as they shall be, in distinction from all counterfeits and false
pretenders, which say they are Jews and are not, but do lie. This
discrimination, and certain, clear discovery of the true seed of God from the
false, will be begun to be made by the ministry of Eliah, or the ministry that
shall rise up in the spirit and powers already discribed.

This excellent ministry must and will be attended with a church of saints
answerable, which shall consist of the risen witnesses, the dry bones that this
spirit of prophesy brings out of their graves, from the four winds of heaven,
causing them to stand again upon their feet, an exceeding great army. All of
them are to be quickened by the means of this powerful and glorious ministry,
with a spirit of life from God, that enters into them, and shows itself to be
that life from the dead in them, which is never more subject to corruption. It
is unto these also, that God says by a great voice from heaven, (which they
are fitted with ears to hear) come up hither, and they do accordingly ascend
up to heaven in a cloud, their enemies beholding them; or rather, heaven is
brought down into their knowledge and possession here on earth, whilst as yet
they are clouded with their mortal body, which (nevertheles) shall at last be
changed in a moment, and they not se death. In the mean time, they shall
experience their very mortal body freed from the bondage of corruption, and
restored to the primitive purity, glory, use and serviceablenes unto the mind,
which it had in paradise in the persons of our first parents, before the fall.
And to these shall it be given to se the opening of the heavens, long since
promised by Christ, and the temple of God that is there, opened also, and in
the temple the arc of the Testament, both which (Revel. 15.5.) are put
together, and called the temple of the tabernacle of the Testimony in heaven,
which in that day shall be opened; the true tabernacle or sanctuary, which God
pitched and not man; Heb. 8.2. In this temple dwells the fulness of the God
head bodily, the vision whereof is to be made plain to the eye of our sensual
part, or to our inward bodily senses, that by seeing the mind of God in such
legible characters in the spirit and person of Christ, the like mind may be
found and seen in all that are his, who are then to appear in the same
likeness, by seeing him as he is.

That which Christ is, and in spirit shall be seen to be, as the mind of the
father is wrought out in him, the Apostle Paul points out, Philip. 2.5, etc.

1. He is in the form of God, the WORD of life, who was in the beginning, was
with God, and was God. And thus considered, he accounts it not robbery to be
Gods equal.

2dly, In the dispensation of the fulness of time, the same that is in the form
of God, is also found in fashion as a man, and is made flesh, with the use of a
living soul, in the very earthly and outward senses of it, bearing the form
and likeness of the first Adam in his primitive purity.

3. He that thus descended into flesh, and the lowermost parts of his habitable
earth, (in which earthly make and nature, he became inferior to angels, for
the suffering of death) is the same that out of this does ascend, and is
exalted far above all heavens, by being made in his humane spirit, soul and
body, the temple wherein all the fulness of the God head dwells bodily, and a
meet vessel to receave, possess, and be the minister of it unto others. He is
the WORD of life, the brightness of the fathers glory, the express character of
his substance, by which this manhood is sealed and made heavenly, partaking
with the living WORD, as he is the Angel of Gods presence, in whom is Gods
name. He is the chief and highest Angel, and as such, is head of all
principalities and power. And over and above all this, in his archangelicall
estate, he is the true Michael, Gods equal, the man that is made Gods fellow,
or second in the same divine throne of glory.

In these three chief particulars, Christ, the temple of God in heaven, shall be
seen and made manifest, as that which he is and will witness himself to be, in
the hearts of all true believers, the sons of his love, that are to be are his
likeness, and to be seen with his name and superscription upon them. In this
respect it is, that he has given that commandment, 1 John. 4:20, 21. that he
who loves God in Christ, love his brother also, which those that do not, will
thereby prove themselves liars, if they say they love God. For how can he love
God or Christ, whom he has not seen, that loves not his brother whom he has
seen? There is a day coming, when that which Christ will be seen to be in
himself, he will be seen to be also in his members, that shall be received and
gathered unto him, as joint heirs and possessours of his fathers love and
glory. When Christ, who is their life, shall so appear, they shall also appear
with him in glory. They shall no longer remain in their hidden and concealed
state, wherein they are judged according to men in the flesh, whilst they live
according to God in the spirit. Nor shall they any longer be like Princes
walking on foot, whilst Servants ride on horse back.

Behold then, upon the opening of the temple of God in heaven, the powerful
and glorious effects that the ministry of the spirit, flowing from thence,
shall produce and be accompanied with, for the making manifest the true Israel
of God.

The Lord himself will descend, first, with the voice of the Archangel, that
last and most glorious trump of God, Christ's humanity, as head of the elect
Angels, all principalities and powers being subjected unto him, who as he is
the Son of man, is made the chief of the a^gels, and the prime minister of the
WORD of life, for food unto them. This beginning of the sounding of the seventh
Trumpet, is that which (as has bin said) is the ministry of Eliah, and goes
before the ministry that shall be immediately exercised by the Son himself in his
own person. By Christ's revealing himself from heaven, the head of angels, he
employes them as his reapers in the end of the world or in the last times, to
sever the wicked from among the just, and gather out of his Kingdom all things
that offend. He will send a quickening Spirit of life from his presence, that
will breath the breath of prophecy into the holy angels, those voices that are
to be heard in heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ. These voices will be heard, as it were
the voice of a Trumpet, talking with the Saints on earth, and calling them up
into the same heavenly converse with themselves, causing them immediately
thereupon, to be in the spirit, beholding the throne that is in heaven, and him
that sits thereon, as the head of those holy and blessed spirits, who are all
desirous to do him homage and worship, refusing to take that to themselves which
is due only to their head, and which the saints themselves on earth, would be
but too forward to give them, as was the case of John, Revel. 22.8, 9.

Under this ministry and dispensation, the church and every particular member
thereof, do become the children that are all taught of God, inwardly, by this
heavenly breath or angelical inspiration. For this qualifies and enables them
by the sight of the just one, to know the mind and will of God, and to do and
fulfill it after Christ, as they se he has done it before them, with a heart
and spirit like unto his, as he is the son of man. And as so considered, he is
head of the holy angels, by them speaking to and inspiring the church on earth.
He is also the head of that church in God the father, that is above the angels,
so as unto principalities and powers, the very elect angels, by the church in
this sense, (even the general assembly of the first borne, whose names are
written in heaven) the manifold wisdom of God shall be made known. By these
divine men, who are the bride the lambs wife, he will show himself speaking and
inspiring the good angels in heaven, to all eternity, and judging the evil and
wicked ones into the flames of eternal fire.

The first of these seize, is that wherein the lower and common rank of
believers (called in scripture, the fulness of the gentiles, compared with the
true Jews, Gods first borne sons) are gathered into society with the holy
angels, into a copartnership with them, in an immutability of righteousness and
glory, and so into Christ their head, as into their proper element and sphere,
in which they are raised up to live in his sight, and to eat and drink with him
at his table, in his fathers Kingdom, to all eternity. Over these the second
death never has power. And this is called the first resurrection, which the
other sort of believers, those that are the fulness of the Jews, do enjoy in
common with them, during the thousand years reign of Christ on earth. And
after that, they have a farther ascent into the life and glory of the second
resurrection, which is not to be revealed in the power of it, until Christ
have resigned up the Kingdom unto his father, that God may be all in all.

But during the thousand years reign of Christ on earth, both these houses of
Israel shall be gathered as sheep under one head and shepherd, into one
sheepfold, and shine forth only in the life and glory of the first
resurrection, witnessing to the headship of Christ, which he exercises over
the angels, and by them, over the very church itself, whilst the Kingdom of the
son is unresigned by him into the hands of the father.

The life and glory of both these resurrections (whether as they respect the
mind or body of the true saints and children of God, or both) is that
immortality which is brought to light by Jesus Christ, the life from the dead,
which will show itself in the times appointed thereunto, and translate us at
length into eternity, where time shall be no more. And we are begotten (even
while here in our mortal bodies) through fellowship with Christ in his
resurrection, unto a lively hope of this inheritance incorruptible and
undefiled, which fades not away, ready to be revealed in these last times.
Until then, it is in faith only, and the seed of it does beget and produce the
two sorts of believers, so frequently mentioned, who now by this ministry of
Eliah are beginning to be made manifest, and shall be distinguished as the true
Israel of God, from all strangers and deceitful workers whatsoever, that
either love or make a lie.

The first of these, are in their principles said to be of the common faith,
and to have ^^teined the common salvation. Thus Paul writes to Titus, as his
son after the common faith Tit. 1:4. And Jude (v. 3.) says, I gave all
diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, to the fulfilling of the
scripture, (Romans 4:17. Genesis 17.5.) speaking of Abraham; I have made thee the
father of many nations, as well as of one nation peculiar, above and besides all
the rest. For so Abraham's seed was to be a seed made up of many nations, and a
seed of one more peculiarly beloved nation also, that were to be separated to
him, to dwell by themselves and not be reckoned amongst the nations that are the
fulness of the Gentiles. Abraham is but the typical father, Christ is the
father in spirit and truth to this twofold seed. In Genesis 13. and 15. chapters,
God promised Abraham, to make of him a great people, numberless as the dust of
the earth or the stars of heaven, which he makes good in the fulness of the true
Jews. But (chap. 17.5.) he gives an additional seed also, which he there
promises him, besides what he promised before, saying, behold, my Covenant is
with thee, and thou shall be a high father of a multitude of nations. Neither
shall thy name any more be called Abram, that is high father, but Abraham, high
father of multitudes. Hence is it, that in Gods everlasting Covenant, there
comes to be found salvation for a multitude of nations, common (as it were) to
all mankind, if the fault be not in themselves, and not salvation only for one
great nation, the Israel that is Gods first borne.

God has therefore an everlasting love and salvation, which comparatively
spoken of, is that which is common and extensive to a numberless multitude,
that he saves out of all people and nations, kindreds and tongues, that are
upon the face of the earth, who yet are not brought so near to him, as that
peculiar nation of his, which he makes a Kingdom of Priests. But they have a
portion that is full and sufficient, coming from the hand of their everlasting
father, who like to Jacob in the type, has his specially beloved Joseph's and
Benjamins by Rachel, the choice delight of his eyes, and has his ten sons
besides, that are also children of his blessing, sons and not bastards or
cast-awayes, but such as he ownes for legitimate, and makes heirs of his
Kingdom. They are provided with inheritances in the land of promise.

And as there is such an everlasting love and salvation spoken of in the
scripture, which is called common in the respect above mentioned, so is there
also a common faith and salvation, that is but temporary, begets but such a
repentance unto life (as the effect of it upon the mind) from whence there is
a turning away again and a drawing back unto perdition. This kind of
believers, in stead of holding fast faith and a good conscience, do put away
their good conscience, and concerning faith do make shipwreck, being not able
to ride it out in the stormy weather of temptations. They do therefore declare
by the event, that they never had faith of the right kind, but that the chang
of mind brought upon them by the preaching of the gospel, and knowledge of the
Lord Jesus Christ, amounted but to such a repentance as might again be
repented of or turned from, and but to such a faith as might fail, though both
were the fruits of the gospel, or good tidings of the work of redemption and
reconciliation, wrought in the person of the mediator, as ministered but by the
first and conditional Covenant, which obliges the children of it in a debt to
the whole law, upon the terms of renewing to them their primitive natural
activity and use of their freewill, for the performance thereof.

Thus Christ gives himself to be the life and reconciliation of the whole
world, commanding all men every where to repent, excluding none from this
benefit of his death, the atonement of sins past, and after this manner to have
faith and repentance wrought in them, if the fault lie not in themselves.

The same gospel then and blessed knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus
Christ, is in the ministry and preaching of it, the everlasting gospel, (as
accompanied with fruits that end in salvation, and are permanent and abiding)
and is also the gospel whose candle may be put out, and candlestick removed out
of its place, as Christ not only threatened to the seven churches of Asia, but
actually executed, upon their apostasy and unworthy walking under the light
thereof.

And if the scope and intent of the Epistle of Jude be well weighed, together
with his expressions, wherein he makes mention of the common salvation and
faith once delivered unto the saints, we shall find that he does very evidently
set forth the division and contention which did arise in his time, between
these two ministries of the gospel, and those that had these differing effects
and operations produced thereby upon their hearts. For the same common
salvation and change, wrought by the preaching of it, upon the minds of the
hearers, which begot in them repentance from dead works, and faith toward God,
if it were accompanied with the faith of the right kind, once delivered to the
saints, through the power of which we are kept unto salvation, he shows
plainly, (v. 20, 21.) that being built up in this our most holy faith, and
praying in the holy Ghost, we shall be kept from falling, and shall keep ourselvs
in the love of God, waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto
eternal life.

But if this faith be wanting, whatever other effects, enlightnings or
quicknings, the knowledge of Christ and preaching of the gospel may have upon
us, in the judgment of the Apostle Jude, such are to be looked upon as having
no more certainty of salvation, nor probability of a good end, then those of
the children of Israel, that the Lord saved out of Egypt and the house of
bondage, but destroyed before they entered into Canaan; or then those angels
that fell, and kept not their first habitation, or then Sodom and Gomorrah;
Yea, or then the rejected nation of the jews, by whose wicked hands our savior
was crucified. They stumbled at the stumbling stone, and though they sought
after righteousness, yet was it, as it were, by the works of the law; children
they were, in whom (as it is written, Deuteronomy. 32.20.) there was no faith. Upon
this very ground, the church of the gentiles that were taken into the place of
the jews, and had Gods name called upon them, do run the same hazard with the
Jewish church, that is, of being cut off from the good olive tree, when they
shall be found to be but such as have not their standing by the faith that is
trial proof. They therefore shall in like manner be swallowed up into a
universal and most signal apostasy from the truth and power of the gospel, a
little before Christ's second coming.

It is no marvel then that the Apostle Jude is so earnest in exhorting to
contend earnestly for the faith, as it is of the right kind and primitive
purity, wherein it was once delivered to the saints, bringing forth those
fruits in them that accompanied salvation, and were not to be fallen from. This
contention, warfare or battle was in heaven, in the very church itself, between
those that had a stronger and firmer birth of grace, and those of a weaker,
that was wavering, uncertain, and capable to prove abortive, as not coming of
Sarah, the free woman, that is the mother of us all. Nevertheles, in this
contest and warfare, the woman that brings forth the manchild, is necessitated
to fly for it into the wilderness, though a conqueror, whilst the battle was
fought out by spiritual weapons only, in a church way. For when once the
secular powers came to exercise a ruling stroke and decisive jurisdiction in
the Christian religion, then she betook herself to the wilderness, became
solitary and neglected by men. In that wilderness state, the remnant of the
woman's seed, that keep the commandments of God and have the faith of Jesus,
continue (for a season) trod under foot, and oppressed by their opposite
brethren that are countenanced and upheld against them, by the power and
strength of the Kingdom of the beast. For having got possession of the outward
court of the temple, which is left out, as no longer regarded by God, they
become a fit seat for Antichrists throne, a great bulwark and strong hold for
the man of sin and Son of perdition, whereby to maintein his war against those
worshippers that are so in spirit and truth, and not in word or form only, and
whose place it is to officiate either in the temple itself, or in the most in
ward and most holy part of it, called the Holy of Holies.

Having thus distinguished between that which in Scripture is called the common
faith, or common salvation, in these its two differing effects and fruits,
producing in some a birth of life and grace which is immutable and cannot fail
or be fallen from; and in others, a birth of repentance and faith that is
changable, may be repented of, shipwrack'd and miscarry; it remains for us to
proceed in describing and declaring the second and higher degree that is
atteinable in that faith which was once delivered to the Saints, called by
Jude, our most holy faith. He seems thereby to intimate, that by the knowledge
of Jesus Christ and ministry of the Gospel, faith may be wrought and begotten
in the heart, according to a threefold degree, wherein righteousness and true
holiness is revealed from faith to faith; from faith of the lowest rank, which
is that that fails, to that of the second rank, which fails not, but makes
us conquerours, and from thence to that of the highest rank, which gives us
power with God to prevail in all things we desire, beyond all we can ask or
think, making us more then conquerours, and with Abraham to be called the
friends of God. The first is holy, the second is more holy, the third is our
most holy faith.

The most holy faith is that which (Ephesians. 3.16.) is said to be granted or
given of the riches of Gods glory, wherein he has an inheritance in his
saints, (chap. 1.18.) and through which he does put forth the exceeding
greatness of his power, toward us that believe, according to what he wrought in
Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in
the heavenly, far above all principality, power, might, and every name that is
named, not only in this world, but in that which is to come. So then, according
to the power of this exceeding mighty operation of God in that gift of Christ's
Spirit, wherein he grants to some Saints to bear a more peculiar likeness to
him, the believer becomes so exceedingly strengthened with might in the inner
man, so rooted and grounded in love, that he is not only made able to
comprehend with all Saints, that are sons after the common faith, what is the
length, breadth, depth and height of the knowledge and love of God that shines
forth in Christ, as he is the Son of man, made head of all Principalities and
Powers, which is the highest image of God, short of the fathers naked
similitude, in his own proper shape and form; but he is (over and above all
this) enabled to know the love of Christ that passes knowledge, and to behold
God in that glory of his, that shines forth in the face of the blessed Trinity,
wherein he has bin delighting himself in and with the eternal WORD, from
before the foundation of the world.

Into this glory, Christ in his manhood, as our forerunner, is entered, even
within the most inward veyle.

This was the form of God, wherein Christ was found, before he assumed his
manhood, and he reteins his manhood both in an inferiority to it and in an
equality with it, by reason whereof, Christ as man, without robbery is
accounted equal with God. In this state of glory, he is the bridegroom to
this most excellent sort of believers, who therefore dwell alone, and shall not
be reckoned among the nations, but are a peculiar nation of Gods jewels and
choice treasure, a Kingdom of priests, his heritage and immediate possession,
that as the Tribe of Levi, are made to approach near unto him, in stead of all
the first born sons of Israel. These are the 144000, described (Revel. 14.) to
be such as have their fathers name written in their foreheads, and that are not
defiled with women, but are virgins which follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes, and are redeemed from among men, as the first fruits to God and to the
lamb; the pure, undefiled bride and spouse of the lamb, that is the only one of
her mother.

These are farther described (Revel. 7.) as those that are the chosen out of
every Tribe of the chosen seed of God, by a small certain number of 144000, a
royal preisthood, selected and taken out of all the Tribes. These being thus
first selected out, how are the remaining parts in and of every Tribe
considered? Are they looked upon by God, as the world? as a people left to
themselves? No, by no means, but also as Gods chosen people, in relation to the
rest of the world. They are his sons according to the common faith, making up
the gentile fulness, as the other do the Jews. And accordingly, in their
gentile fulness, or rather as surrogated Jews, (Romans 11.) have the suitable
characters given to them. For (says the Apostle John) after this, I beheld,
and so, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, people,
kindreds and tongues, stood before the throne and before the lamb, clothed with
white robes and palms in their hands, representing their victorious faith, in
and under the great tribulations they had and were to pass through, in
participation with Christ in his sufferings, for the testimony of Jesus, during
the reign of the Beast.

Amongst these, he that sits on the throne shall dwell for ever. And they will
neither hunger nor thirst any more, nor shall the sun light on them, nor any
heat, for the lamb will feed them and lead them into living fountains of
waters, in the state of the first Resurrection, where all tears shall be wiped
away from their eyes.

Those then whose hearts are purified by this faith, in either of these two
degrees of it, as it is our precious or our most precious faith, (that which
brings us into the common state of salvation with the gentiles, that is durable
and everlasting, or that which brings us yet farther, into the peculiar
privilege of the Jews and first born Sons or God) are the people that properly
are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise. And their day of
manifestatio^ hastens apace. They have bin hitherto, even from the beginning of
the world to this day, a seed of hidden, invisible ones, that in all changes of
times remain the pure invisible church. And they have all along bin kept
undefiled, having that birth of God in them which preservs them, that sin does
not adulterate their hearts, or alienate them from God, neither can the evil
one touch them. Thus was it with the seven thousand concealed pure and
spiritual worshippers that God had reserved in a time of universal apostasy
and corruption in his visible worship, (in Eliah's time) which never did nor
would bow their knee to Baal.

In reference to this seed, in all ages, is verified that which is spoken by
the Prophet Esaias, (chap. 1.9.) Except the Lord of Sabbath had left unto us
(that are the visible church, and have the visible signs of Gods presence and
the purity of his Ordinances amongst us) a very small remnant, (a seed of
hidden ones) we had bin as Sodom in the height of sinning, and bin made like
unto Gomorrha, in the extraordinarines of our punishment.

These are they that God accounts his jewels, the people that are of price and
value with him, whatever reproach and disesteeme they are in from the world, in
all times. These have that faith in the seed of it, by which they are possessed
with an ability to do all things for the truth, and nothing against it; and
this, through Christ the power of God, inwardly strengthening and bringing them
forth into a likeness of ability with himself, to do all things by his quickening
of them, as he himself has done by the fathers quickening of him: that they may
live by him, as he himself, according to his manhood, lives by the father, who
does in him all the works.

God has now for near these six thousand years, kept these his jewels by him
as a reserved hidden treasure, that he resolvs in a fit season to bring to
light, and make a show of openly, in the sight of the whole world. In the mean
time, he calls them into the secret chambers of his love, and is increasing
their faith and patience, under the great and various trialls wherein they are
with God, strangers and soiourners in and to the world, and to the delights and
comforts of it, as all their fathers were.

This time of hardship and suffering from the world, must not always be their
lot. There is a day approaching, wherein the time of their ill usage from the
world shall be no longer. God will have his season to show kindness and love to
them and to do them honor in the sight of the whole creation; a day, in which
his purpose, and determined resolution is, to make up his jewels, and bring
them all together, from all parts where he has kept them hid and concealed. In
this day, he will spare them and show favor to them, as the father spares his
own son that serves him, and in serving pleases him.

And so visible a distinction in this day will God put in the way of the
dispensations of his providence, even to the eye of the world, between them
that serve him and them that serve him not, between the righteous and the
wicked, that every eye shall take notice of it. And it shall have such a
powerful effect upon the beholders, that there shall come people, the
inhabitants of many cities, yea, the inhabitants of one city shall go to
another, saying, let us go speedily and continually to pray before the Lord of
hosts; I will go also. Yea, many people and strong nations shall come to seek
the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord. Ten man shall take
hold out of all languages of the nations, on the skirt of him that is a jew,
saying, we will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you. The jews
that they will thus take hold of, will be such as are so indeed, having the faith
that fails not, but makes them the receavers of that anointing which teaches
all things, and is truth and no lie.

By this heavenly anointing they are in their very principles distinguished,

I. From those, whose faith is so far from being of the same precious kind with
theirs, that it is sure to fail in the most needful time, in the day of
temptation and trial, when the winds blow and the rain deseends, and the
floods come, and beat upon them. Such faith is of little or no price.

Secondly. The true Jew, by his faith and anointing, will be likewise
distinguished from those that have no faith, but are unreasonable persecutours
of those that have, being void of all right discerning in matters of faith,

These true Jews and Israelits indeed, are (as we have showed) the two families
in Jacobs house, children of the same Jacob, but not by the same Rachel, of
whom were only Joseph and Benjamin. This distinction in Jacobs family seems to
be taken notice of by the holy Ghost, (Ezekiel. 37.16.) where the twelve Tribes
are compared to two sticks, or stems, springing out of the same root, as two
houses, nations or families of the same Israel. Upon the one stick, the Prophet
was commanded to write, for Judah and for the children of Israel his
companions, to whom (as we know) the Kingdom and scepter was assigned, and out
of whom Christ according to the flesh, came. Upon the other stick there was to
be written, for Joseph the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel,
his companions. For the separated one from his brethren, the exalted one above
his brethren, the dreamer, to whose sheafe all the other sheaves, yea, the sun,
moon and stars were to do obeisance. To him in a word, was assigned the first
birthright, in the double portion of it, the upper and the nether springs, the
blessings of heaven above, of the deep that lies under, of the breasts and of
the womb, the blessings of the father that have prevailed above the blessings
of his progenitors, in an extent to the utmost bounds of the everlasting
hills, that are appointed to be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the
head of him that was separate from his brethren.

These are the blessings written for Joseph, and for all the house of Israel
his companio^s, or of his faith, spirit, and principles. Both these sticks (the
two houses or churches of believers and Israelits in deed) are to be made up
into one new Jerusalem, in Christ's hand. Both flocks are to be gathered into
one sheepfold and visible universal church state of the revealed sons of God,
distinguished from all people on the face of the earth, besides. And they
shall be gathered into one universal Kingdom and civil state, that shall bear
rule over the whole world. For thus says the Lord, behold, I will take the
children of Israel, (the scattered sheep belonging to this fold) from among the
heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and will
bring them into their own land, even into the promised new Jerusalem state,
the new heavens and new earth, wherein dwells righteousness, figured out by the
land of Canaan. And I will make them one nation or seed of my blessing in the
land, upon the mountains of Israel, and one King shall be King to them all. And
though Judah shall be there with his companions, and Joseph with his, under
distinct writings and enrollings, assigning unto each their lot, yet both shall
make but one church and Kingdom, one spiritual seed or nation of Abraham. They
shall no more be two, so as to be divided into two Kingdoms, either in church
or state. They shall neither envy nor vex one another, any more. They shall be
fully agreed, and live in peace, as inhabitants of the same city, the new
Jerusalem, uppet and lower, as the hebrew word imports, (Ps. 51.) or heavenly
and earthly, consisting of sons of a higher and lower dignity, of this man and
of that man that is borne there, whether of noble or common degree, all free
heaven-born citizens and subjects of one and the same great and universal
King. They shall dwell in perfect unity together, and be of one accord as
brethren, singing the song of Moses and of the lamb, in sweet harmony and
consort, and the stranger and the unclean shall no more pass through this
glorious city. For there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that does
defile, nor that works abomination or makes a lie, but they only which are
written (with the writing that is upon both those sticks beforementioned) in
the lambs both of life.

This is the church and civil state, which the ministry of Eliah is to prepare
the way unto, as the end to which all the work of restitution which thereby
shall be wrought, does and must tend. This will be effected by the powerful
preaching of the everlasting gospel, by a ministry that shall have the tongues
not of men only but of angels, filled with the inspiration of the holy Ghost,
as also yiedling vengeance and flames of fire, as a day of great judgment and
distinction that is to be brought and executed upon ungodly men and wilful
opposers of that work, by the pouring out upon them the seven vialls of Gods
wrath, like as Moses his ministry did upon Pharaoh King of Egypt, so long as he
hardened himself and refused to let Israel his son and his first born go free,
and serve him according to his duty.

By Eliahs second coming then, (according to the particulars before declared,
together with the end itself, in order to which, this ministry of restoring all
things is appointed) we are to understand no other then the spirit and power
wherein the slain witnesses of Christ shall be quickened, made to stand upon
their feet, and have withal an ascent given to them into heaven, as visible
associates and copartners with the holy angels, in their power and great glory,
like bright morning stars, and signs of the coming of the son of man, even
whilst they are yet remaining in the body, on this side death.

This second coming of Eliah therefore is not to be confounded with Christ's
own personal coming, which succeeds, and comes to give us actually and
completely a part in that which (Rev. 20.) is called the first resurrection.
The change effected by Eliah's coming, will rather be a transfiguration, then
what properly can be called the first resurrection, by which our bodies will be
made like unto that glorious body of Christ, in which he lived on earth, forty
days before his ascension, and in which power and glory he is to shine forth,
like the sun in his strength, as the brightness of the day of his second coming
increases and rises up to its height. For the ushering in hereof, this sign in
heaven of the son of man's coming, is to go before, which (as has bin said) is
no other then the spirit and power which the slain witnesses, (or the dried,
dispersed bones and members of Christ's dead body, his hidden, invisible seed of
believers, his church at that time on the earth) shall be quickened and raised up
into, as a heaven upon earth, in the sight of the whole world. The wise or
teachers that then shall be among them, shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for evermore.

By the power of that faith which brings life and immortality to light, in the
minds of those that are true Israelits indeed, inhabitants of the new and
heavenly Jerusalem that is above, we have declared, that Abraham in type and
Christ in spirit and truth, is the father unto two sorts of Sons, that are both
heirs and witnesses of what they se and hear from Christ. They are both
written among the living in Jerusalem, with a writing that is never to be
defaced or blotted out. Some of them are made conquerours, and others of them
more then conquerours, through Christ that has loved them, and caused them to
abide and continue with him in his temptations, and to bear a conformity in
their minds to his death, (armed with the same mind as he was, for suffering in
the flesh) as well as carrying about in their bodies, the marks of the dying of
the Lord Jesus. They have heard and received that language of faith in them and
to them, with which Paul acquaints us (Tim. 2.2. 11, 12.) If we be dead with
him, we shall live with him: if we suffer, we shall also reign with him. Unto
this carcass or dead body, the eagles, the fowls of heaven, by a ministry of
the spirit of life from God, will be gathered together. And as a breath from the
four winds of heaven, a wind of prophesy and divine inspiration, in the spirit
and power of Eliah, shall come forth and show itself in these slain witnesses,
where ever they shall be found, throughout the whole world, and bring them
together into one sheepfold of visible government both in church and state. In
this posture, it will be found most true, that by fire from heaven, and as the
Lords own sword, they shall plead with all flesh, and the slain of the Lord
shall be many, that shall fall under them, in attempting to rise up against them.
For in and by this ministry of Eliah, the Lord will come with fire and with his
chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebukes with
flames of fire.

When you shall be awakened to se, by the coming of this glorious ministry of
God, what in this day shall be wrought, not by might, nor by power, but by the
spirit of the Lord, the seven eyes which run to and fro through the whole
earth, (rejoicing to se his work go on, and taking care that there be suitable
dispensations of divine providence to further and advance it, whereof the
decision to be made in the valley of Iehosaphat will not be the least) then
your heart shall rejoice and your bones flourish like an herb, and the hand of
the Lord shall be known toward his Servants, and his indignation toward his
enemies. Then shall the thoughts and words of the enemies of Gods people, in
designing against them, (however hidden and secret, even in their very
bedchambers) be known and discovered by this ministry of Eliah, and the
Mountains full of horses and chariots of fire shall be like walls round about the
city of God, to defend them. And not only the eyes of the Prophet, the eyes of
the inward man of the Saints, or of the spirit of their mind, but the eyes of
the Prophets servant also, the beast on which he rides, the sensual and outward
man of the soul, in the exercise of the very bodily senses, shall be opened to
se that there are more with the people of God then can be against them. So
shall all fear be removed far from them.

To the word of this Eliahs ministry in the hearts of believers, the whole
creation shall be obedient. The heavens at their prayers will shut or open. They
shall do greater things on earth, then ever yet have bin done, by the power
that Christ has with the father, which in this day he will begin visibly to
set on work, and exercise for the good of his people.

But the great question is, when shall these things be?

Answer. The sign of Christ's coming is already spoken to, in this ministry of
Eliah, which does immediately go before it. And when this ministry comes and
reveals itself in power, (as it must in the hearts of all the true Israel of
God) it will untie all the knots and difficulties that do yet remain to be
resolved, concerning Christ's second appearance, and things to come.

But when may this second coming of Eliah be expected?

1. After that Christ in spirit has as signally bin rejected by the generation
of Jews under the gospel, (which were surrogated and engraffed in the room of
Abraham's natural seed) as he was by that Jewish nation which crucified him at
Jerusalem. And when (accordingly) they shall have openly declared it, by the
like severe proceedings against the true spirit of prophecy, manifesting itself
in Christ's witnesses, who by humane laws and bodily punishments will be
suppressed, kept under and put to death, as much as lies in man to do.

2dly; When this persecution and rejection of Christ in his members, has had
its progress and course with the preaching of the gospel itself, during the
six trumpets, from the one end of the earth to the other, which has shined as
lightning from the east to the west; and when the gospel and obeyers of it,
shall meet with the sharpest brunt of opposition, so as that the dead bodies of
the witnesses shall not be suffered to be put in their graves, during the last
three years and half of this hour and power of darkness that is to come upon
the church of Gods hidden ones, the remnant of the woman's seed, that keep the
commandments of God and faith of Jesus. But they are nevertheles helped and
much saved from the flood of their enemies malice, by the like mistake as was
that of Herod, who slew all the children from two years old and upwards, hoping
amongst them to find the promised seed, but failed. The earth helps the woman.
The earthly Jerusalem with her inhabitants shall prove a skreene to the
heavenly Mount Zion.

3dly. When the wise virgins as well as the foolish, shall be found in a deep
sleep of security, and think the worst past, looking for nothing more but the
coming of the bridegroom, before it be yet midnight.

The witnesses of Christ will be ready to make account that their 1260 years of
suffering under the reign of the beast, is either expired or upon the very
point of expiring, and therefore begin to put off their sackcloth, or lay it
quite aside, as taking for granted that the time is come, that sorrow and
sighing are flowne away, never to return more. But they will afterward find
themselves deceaved, and that they are but falling into the times of the three
last years and half, it being Gods usual and accustomed method from the
beginning, to usher in any great exaltation of his saints, with some desperate
extremity and calamity, immediately foregoing. And therefore, till after the
wise virgins sun be turned into darkness, and the foolish virgins moon be turned
into blood, the BRIGHT MORNING STAR of Eliahs ministry comes not. But then, it
does immediately follow.

4thly and lastly; when Antichrist and all enemies of the witnesses of Christ
shall be in the grearest peace, unity and joy imaginable, amongst themselves, at
the beholding the dead bodies of the two prophets that tormented them that
dwell upon the earth, and shall cry peace, peace, as esteeming their mountain
to be made so strong, that it can never be moved. In one word; When the
sunshine of their prosperity, peace and power is at the height, and to their
thinking, impossible ever to set again.

Let this suffice, without proceeding farther to speak concerning the two other
parts of this great day of Christ's second coming, which will be dignified with
his own personal reign on earth, the THOUSAND YEARS of the FIRST
RESURRECTION. Then will he put an end to this very day of his own Kingdom, by
his free and voluntary resigning it up into the hands of the father, that God
may be all in all: Let me only add this word, that the visible reign of these
saints of the first RESURRECTION here on earth, for a thousand years, will be in
the new Jerusalem state, that is to come down from God out of heaven; in a
state of beatitude and glory, partaking of the divine presence and vision of
Christ their King, in an immutable righteous state both of body and Soul,
distinguished from the state of the nations that shall walk in her light, all
the world over, and be happy and glorious also, but changeable.

THE END.
Mistakes in the printing.
Page 9. lin. 36. for teams, read terms. p. 21. l. 30. this, r. his. p. 41. l.
32. themselv, r. themselves. and l. 33. trues, r. true. p. 43. l. 26. to as, r.
as to, p. 70. l. 21. 3d, r. 2d. p. 83. l. 31. hasband, r. husband. p. 84. l.
29. contracted r. contracted, p. 91. l. 3. tempestous, r. tempestuous. and l.
14. eujoy, r, enjoy, p. 95. l. 40. powers, r. power.


