Dryden's VIRGIL Printed for Jacob Tonson


THE WORKS OF VIRGIL: Containing His PASTORALS, GEORGICS, AND AENEIS.

Translated into English Verse; By Mr. DRYDEN.

Adorned with a Hundred Sculptures.

Sequiturque Patrem non passibus Aequis.
Virg. Aen. 2. LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judges-Head in
Fleetstreet, near the Inner-Temple-Gate, MDCXCVII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Hugh Lord Clifford, BARON of Chudleigh.
My Lord,
I HAVE found it not more difficult to Translate Virgil, than to find such
Patrons as I desire for my Translation. For though England is not wanting in a
Learned Nobility, yet such are my unhappy Circumstances, that they have
confined me to a narrow choice. To the greater part, I have not the Honor to
be known; and to some of them I cannot show at present, by any public Act,
that grateful Respect which I shall ever bear them in my heart. Yet I have no
reason to complain of Fortune, since in the midst of that abundance I could not
possibly have chosen better, than the Worthy Son of so Illustrious a Father. He
was the Patron of my Manhood, when I Flourished in the opinion of the World;
though with small advantage to my Fortune, 'till he awakened the remembrance of
my Royal Master. He was that Pollio, or that Varus, who introduced me to
Augustus: And though he soon dismissed himself from State Affairs, yet in the
short time of his Administration he shone so powerfully upon me, that like the
heat of a Russian -Summer, he ripened the Fruits of Poetry in a cold Clymate;
and gave me wherewithal to subsist at least, in the long Winter which
succeeded. What I now offer to your Lordship, is the wretched remainder of a
sickly Age, worn out with Study, and oppressed by Fortune: without other
support than the Constancy and Patience of a Christian. You, my Lord, are yet
in the flower of your Youth, and may live to enjoy the benefits of the Peace
which is promised Europe: I can only hear of that Blessing: for Years, and,
above all things, want of health, have shut me out from sharing in the
happiness. The Poets, who condemn their Tantalus to Hell, had added to his
Torments, if they had placed him in Elysium, which is the proper Emblem of my
Condition. The Fruit and the Water may reach my Lips, but cannot enter: And if
they could, yet I want a Palate as well as a Digestion. But it is some kind of
pleasure to me, to please those whom I respect. And I am not altogether out of
hope, that these Pastorals of Virgil may give your Lordship some delight,
though made English by one, who scarce remembers that Passion which inspired my
Author when he wrote them. These were his first Essay in Poetry, (if the Ceiris
was not his:) And it was more excusable in him to describe Love when he was
young, than for me to Translate him when I am Old. He died at the Age of fifty
two, and I began this Work in my great Clymacterique. But having perhaps a
better constitution than my Author, I have wronged him less, considering my
Circumstances, than those who have attempted him before, either in our own, or
any Modern Language. And though this Version is not void of Errors, yet it
comforts me that the faults of others are not worth finding. Mine are neither
gross nor frequent, in those Eclogues, wherein my Master has raised himself
above that humble Style in which Pastoral delights, and which I must confefs is
proper to the Education and Converse of Shepherds: for he found the strength of
his Genius b^times, and was even in his youth preluding to his Georgics, and
his Aeneis. He could not forbear to try his Wings, though his Pinions were not
hardened to maintain a long laborious flight. Yet sometimes they bore him to a
pitch as lofty, as ever he was able to reach afterward. But when he was
admonished by his subject to descend, he came down gently circling in the air,
and singing to the ground. Like a Lark, melodious in her mounting, and
continuing her Song 'till she alights: still preparing for a higher flight at
her next sally, and tuning her voice to better music. The Fourth, the Sixth,
and the Eighth Pastorals, are clear Evidences of this truth. In the three first
he contains himself within his bounds; but Addressing to Pollio, his great
Patron, and himself no vulgar Poet, he no longer could restrain the freedom of
his Spirit, but began to assert his Native Character, which is sublimity.
Putting himself under the conduct of the same Cumaean Sybil, whom afterward he
gave for a Guide to his Aeneas. It Is true he was sensible of his own boldness;
and we know it by the Paulo Majora, which begins his Fourth Eclogue. He
remembered, like young Manlius, that he was forbidden to Engage; but what
avails an express Command to a youthful Courage, which presages Victory in the
attempt? Encouraged with Success, he proceeds farther in the Sixth, and invades
the Province of Philosophy. And notwithstanding that Phoebus had forewarned him
of Singing Wars, as he there confesses, yet he presumed that the search of
Nature was as free to him as to Lucretius, who at his Age explained it
according to the Principles of Epicurus. In his Eighth Eclogue, he has
innovated nothing; the former part of it being the Complaint and Despair of a
forsaken Lover: the latter, a Charm of an Enchantress, to renew a lost
Affection. But the Complaint perhaps contains some Topics which are above the
Condition of his Persons; and our Author seems to have made his Herdsmen
somewhat too Learned for their Profession: The Charms are also of the same
nature, but both were Copied from Theocritus, and had received the applause of
former Ages in their Original. There is a kind of Rusticity in all those
pompous Verses; somewhat of a Holiday Shepherd strutting in his Country
Buskins. The like may be observed, both in the Pollio, and the Silenus; where
the Similitudes are drawn from the Woods and Meadows. They seem to me to
represent our Poet betwixt a Farmer, and a Courtier, when he left Mantua for
Rome, and dressed himself in his best Habit to appear before his Patron: Somewhat
too fine for the place from whence he came, and yet retaining part of its
simplicity. In the Ninth Pastoral he Collects some Beautiful passages which
were scattered in Theocritus, which he could not insert into any of his former
Eclogues, and yet was unwilling they should be lost. In all the rest he is
equal to his Sicilian Master, and observes like him a just decorum, both of the
Subject, and the Persons. As particularly in the Third Pastoral; where one of
his Shepherds describes a Bowl, or Mazer, curiously Carved. In Medio duo signa:
Conon, and quis fuit alter,
Descripsit radio, totum qui Gentibus orbem.
He remembers only the name of Conon, and forgets the other on set purpose:
(whether he means Anaximander or Eudoxus I dispute not,) but he was certainly
forgotten, to show his Country Swain was no great Scholar.

After all, I must confess that the Boorish Dialect of Theocritus has a secret
charm in it, which the Roman Language cannot imitate, though Virgil has drawn
it down as low as possibly he could; as in the Cujum pecus, and some other
words, for which he was so unjustly blamed by the bad Critics of his Age, who
could not see the Beauties of that merum Rus, which the Poet described in those
expressions. But Theocritus may justly be preferred as the Original, without
injury to Virgil, who modestly contents himself with the second place, and
glories only in being the first who transplanted Pastoral into his own Country;
and brought it there to bear as happily as the Cherry-trees which Lucullus
brought from Pontus.

Our own Nation has produced a third Poet in this kind, not inferior to the
two former. For the Shepherd's Calendar of Spencer, is not to be matched in any
Modern Language. Not even by Tasso's Amynta, which infinitely transcends
Guarinis 's Pastor-Fido, as having more of Nature in it, and being almost
wholly clear from the wretched affectation of Learning. I will say nothing of
the Pifcatory Eclogues, because no modern Latin can bear Criticism. It Is no
wonder that rolling down through so many barbarous Ages, from the Spring of
Virgil, it bears along with it the filth and ordures of the Goths and Vandals.
Neither will I mention Monsieur Fontinelle, the living Glory of the French.
It Is enough for him to have excelled his Master Lucian, without attempting to
compare our miserable Age with that of Virgil, or Theocritus. Let me only add,
for his reputation, -- Si Pergama dextra
Defendi possint, etiam hac defensa fuissent.


But Spencer being Master of our Northern Dialect; and skilled in Chaucer 's
English, has so exactly imitated the Doric of Theocritus, that his Love is a
perfect Image of that Passion which God infused into both Sexes, before it was
corrupted with the Knowledge of Arts, and the Ceremonies of what we call good
Manners.

My Lord, I know to whom I dedicate: And could not have been induced by any
motive to put this part of Virgil, or any other, into unlearned Hands. You have
read him with pleasure, and I dare say, with admiration in the Latin, of which
you are a Master. You have added to your Natural Endowments, which without
flattery are Eminent, the superstructures of Study, and the knowledge of good
Authors. Courage, Probity, and Humanity are inherent in you. These Virtues have
ever been habitual to the Ancient House of Cumberland, from whence you are
descended, and of which our Chronicles make so honorable mention in the long
Wars betwixt the Rival Families of York and Lancaster. Your Forefathers have
asserted the Party which they chose 'till death, and died for its defense in
the Fields of Battle. You have besides the fresh remembrance of your Noble
Father; from whom you never can degenerate. -- Nec imbellem, feroces
Progenerant Aquilam Columbae.
It being almost morally impossible for you to be other than you are by kind; I
need neither praise nor incite your Virtue. You are acquainted with the Roman
History, and know without my information that Patronage and Clientship always
descended from the Fathers to the Sons; and that the same Plebeian Houses, had
recourse to the same Patrician Line, which had formerly protected them: and
followed their Principles and Fortunes to the last. So that I am your
Lordship's by descent, and part of your Inheritance. And the natural
inclination, which I have to serve you, adds to your paternal right, for I was
wholly yours from the first moment, when I had the happiness and honor of
being known to you. Be pleased therefore to accept the Rudiments of Virgil 's
Poetry: Coursely Translated I confess, but which yet retains some Beauties of
the Author, which neither the barbarity of our Language, nor my unskilfulness
could so much sully, but that they appear sometimes in the dim mirror which I
hold before you. The Subject is not unsuitable to your Youth, which allows you
yet to Love, and is proper to your present Scene of Life. Rural Recreations
abroad, and Books at home, are the innocent Pleasures of a Man who is early
Wise; and gives Fortune no more hold of him, than of necessity he must. It Is
good, on some occasions to think beforehand as little as we can; to enjoy as
much of the present as will not endanger our futurity; and to provide our
selves of the Vertuoso 's Saddle, which will be sure to amble, when the World
is upon the hardest trott. What I humbly offer to your Lordship, is of this
nature. I wish it pleasant, and am sure it is innocent. May you ever continue
your esteem for Virgil; and not lessen it, for the faults of his Translatour;
who is with all manner of Respect, and sense of Gratitude,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, JOHN DRYDEN.

THE LIFE OF Pub. Virgilius Maro.
VIRGIL was born at Mantua, which City was built no less than Three Hundred
Years before Rome; and was the Capital of the New Hetruria, as himself, no less
Antiquary, than Poet, assures us. His Birth is said to have happened in the
first Consulship of Pompey the Great, and Lic. Crassus; but since the Relater
of this presently after contradicts himself; and Virgil's manner of Addressing
to Octavius, implies a greater difference of Age than that of Seven Years, as
appears by his First Pastoral, and other places; it is reasonable to set the
Date of it something backward: And the Writer of his Life having no certain
Memorials to work upon, seems to have pitched upon the two most Illustrious
Consuls he could find about that time, to signalize the Birth of so Eminent a
Man. But it is beyond all Question, that he was Born on, or near the Fifteenth
of October. Which Day was kept Festival in honor of his Memory, by the Latin,
as the Birthday of Homer was by the Greek Poets. And so near a resemblance
there is, betwixt the Lives of these two famous Epic Writers, that Virgil seems
to have followed the Fortune of the other, as well as the Subject and manner of
his Writing. For Homer is said to have been of very mean Parents, such as got
their Bread by Day-labour; so is Virgil. Homer is said to be Base Born; so is
Virgil. The former to have been born in the open Air, in a Ditch, or by the
Bank of a River; so is the latter. There was a Poplar Planted near the place of
Virgil's Birth, which suddenly grew up to an unusual height and bulk, and to
which the Superstitious Neighborhood attributed mavelous Virtue. Homer had
his Poplar too, as Herodotus relates, which was visited with great Veneration.
Homer is described by one of the Ancients, to have been of a slovenly and
neglected Mien and Habit, so was Virgil. Both were of a very delicate and
sickly Constitution: Both addicted to Travel, and the study of Astrology: Both
had their Compositions usurped by others: Both Envied and traduced during their
Lives. We know not so much as the true Names of either of them with any
exactness: For the Critics are not yet agreed how the word [Virgil] should be
Written; and of Homer's Name there is no certainty at all. Whosoever shall
consider this Parallel in so many particulars; (and more might be added) would
be inclined to think, that either the same Stars Ruled strongly at the
Nativities of them both, or what is a great deal more probable; that the Latin
Grammarians wanting Materials for the former part of Virgil's Life, after the
Legendary Fashion, supplied it out of Herodotus; and like ill Face-Painters,
not being able to hit the true Features, endeavored to make amends by a great
deal of impertinent Landscape and Drapery.

Without troubling the Reader with needless Quotations, now, or afterward; the
most probable Opinion is, that Virgil was the Son of a Servant, or Assistant to
a wandering Astrologer; who practiced Physic. For Medicus, Magus, as Juvenal
observes, usually went together; and this course of Life was followed by a
great many Greeks and Syrians; of one of which Nations it seems not improbable,
that Virgil's Father was. Nor could a Man of that Profession have chosen a
fitter place to settle in, than that most Superstitious Tract of Italy; which
by her ridiculous Rites and Ceremonies as much enslaved the Romans, as the
Romans did the Hetrurians by their Arms. This Man therefore having got together
some Money, which Stock he improved by his Skill in Planting and Husbandry, had
the good Fortune, at last, to Marry his Masters Daughter, by whom he had
Virgil; and this Woman seems, by her Mothers side, to have been of good
Extraction; for she was nearly related to Quintilius Varus, whom Paterculus
assures us to have been an Illustrious, though not Patrician Family; and there is
honorable mention made of it in the History of the second Carthaginian War. It
is certain, that they gave him very good Education, to which they were
inclined; not so much by the Dreams of his Mother, and those presages which
Donatus relates, as by the early indications which he gave of a sweet
Disposition, and Excellent Wit. He passed the first Seven Years of his Life at
Mantua, not Seventeen, as Scaliger miscorrects his Author; for the initia
aetatis can hardly be supposed to extend so far. From thence he removed to
Cremona, a Noble Roman Colony, and afterward to Milan. In all which places he
prosecuted his Studies with great application; he read over, all the best
Latin, and Greek Authors, for which he had convenience by the no remote
distance of Marseils, that famous Greek Colony, which maintained its
Politeness, and Purity of Language, in the midst of all those Barbarous Nations
amongst which it was seated: And some Tincture of the latter seems to have
descended from them down to the Modern French. He frequented the most Eminent
Professors of the Epicurean Philosophy, which was then much in vogue, and will
be always in declining and sickly States. But finding no satisfactory Account
from his Master Syron, he passed over to the Academick School, to which he
adhered the rest of his Life, and deserved, from a great Emperor, the Title of
the Plato of Poets. He composed at leisure hours a great number of Verses, on
various Subjects; and desirous rather of a great, than early Fame, he permitted
his Kinsman, and Fellow-student Varus, to derive the Honor of one of his
Tragedies to himself. Glory neglected in proper time and place, returns often
with large Increase, and so he found it: For Varus afterward proved a great
Instrument of his Rise: In short, it was here that he formed the Plan, and
collected the Materials of all those excellent Pieces which he afterward
finished, or was forced to leave less perfect by his Death. But whether it were
the Unwholsomness of his Native Air, of which he somewhere complains, or his
too great abstinence, and Night-watchings at his Study, to which he was always
addicted, as Augustus observes; or possibly the hopes of improving himself by
Travel, he resolved to Remove to the more Southern Tract of Italy; and it was
hardly possible for him not to take Rome in his Way; as is evident to any one
who shall cast an Eye on the Map of Italy: And therefore the late French Editor
of his Works is mistaken, when he asserts that he never saw Rome, 'till he came
to Petition for his Estate: He gained the Acquaintance of the Master of the
Horse to Octavius, and Cured a great many Diseases of Horses, by methods they
had never heard of: It fell out, at the same time, that a very fine Colt, which
promised great Strength and Speed, was presented to Octavius: Virgil assured
them, that he came of a faulty Mare, and would prove a Jade, upon trial it was
found as he had said; his Judgment proved right in several other instances,
which was the more surprising, bebecause the Romans knew least of Natural
Causes of any civilized Nation in the World: And those Meteors, and Prodigies
which cost them incredible Sums to expiate, might easily have been accounted
for, by no very profound Naturalist. It is no wonder, therefore, that Virgil
was in so great Reputation, as to be at last Introduced to Octavius himself.
That Prince was then at variance with Marc. Antony, who vexed him with a great
many Libelling Letters, in which he reproaches him with the baseness of his
Parentage, that he came of a Scrivener, a Ropemaker, and a Baker, as Suetonius
tells us: Octavius finding that Virgil had passed so exact a judgment upon the
Breed of Dogs, and Horses, thought that he possibly might be able to give him
some Light concerning his own. He took him into his Closet, where they
continued in private a considerable time. Virgil was a great Mathematician,
which, in the Sense of those times, took in Astrology: And if there be any
thing in that Art, which I can hardly believe; if that be true which the
Ingenious De le Chamber asserts confidently; that from the Marks on the Body,
the Configuration of the Planets at a Nativity may be gathered, and the Marks
might be told by knowing the Nativity, never had one of those Artists a fairer
Opportunity to show his skill, than Virgil now had; for Octavius had Moles upon
his Body, exactly resembling the Constellation called Vrsa Major. But Virgil
had other helps: The Predictions of Cicero, and Catulus, and that Vote of the
Senate had gone abroad, that no Child Born at Rome, in the Year of his
Nativity, should be bred up; because the Seers assured them that an Emperor
was Born that Year. Besides this, Virgil had heard of the Assyrian, and
Egyptian Prophecies, (which in truth, were no other but the Jewish,) that about
that time a great King was to come into the World. Himself takes notice of
them, Aen. 6. where he uses a very significant Word, (now in all Liturgies)
hujus in adventu, so in another place, adventante Dea.

At his foreseen approach already quake,
Assyrian Kingdoms, and Moeotis Lake.
Nile hears him knocking at his sevenfold Gates --
Every one knows whence this was taken: It was rather a mistake, than impiety
in Virgil, to apply these Prophesies to the Person of Octavius, it being a
usual piece of flattery for near a Hundred Years together, to attribute them to
their Emperors, and other great Men. Upon the whole matter, it is very
probable, that Virgil Predicted to him the Empire at this time. And it will
appear yet the more, if we consider that he assures him of his being received
into the Number of the Gods, in his First Pastoral, long before the thing came
to pass; which Prediction seems grounded upon his former Mistake. This was a
secret, not to be divulged at that time, and therefore it is no wonder that the
slight Story in Donatus was given abroad to palliate the matter. But certain it
is, that Octavius dismissed him with great Marks of esteem, and earnestly
recommended the Protection of Virgil's Affairs to Pollio, then Lieutenant of
the Cis-Alpine Gaul, where Virgil's Patrimony lay. This Pollio from a mean
Original, became one of the most Considerable Persons of his time: A good
General, Orator, Statesman, Historian, Poet, and Favourer of Learned Men;
above all, he was a Man of Honor in those critical times: He had joined with
Octavius, and Antony, in revenging the Barbarous Assassination of Julius
Caesar: When they two were at variance, he would neither follow Antony, whose
courses he detested, nor join with Octavius against him, out of a grateful
Sense of some former Obligations. Augustus, who thought it his interest to
oblige Men of Principles, notwithstanding this, received him afterward into
Favor, and promoted him to the highest Honors. And thus much I thought fit to
say of Pollio, because he was one of Virgil's greatest Friends. Being therefore
eased of Domestic cares, he pursues his Journey to Naples: The Charming
situation of that Place, and view of the beautiful Villa's of the Roman
Nobility, equalling the Magnificence of the greatest Kings; the Neighborhood
of the Baiae, whither the Sick resorted for recovery, and the Statesman when
he was Politickly Sick; whither the wanton went for Pleasure, and witty Men for
good Company; the wholesomness of the Air, and improving Conversation, the best
Air of all, contributed not only to the re-establishing his Health; but to the
forming of his Style, and rendering him Master of that happy turn of Verse, in
which he much surpasses all the Latins, and in a less advantageous Language,
equals even Homer himself. He proposed to use his Talent in Poetry, only for
Scaffolding to Build a convenient Fortune, that he might Prosecute with less
interruption, those Nobler Studies to which his elevated Genius led him, and
which he describes in these admirable Lines.

Me vero primum dulces ante omnia Musae
Quarum sacra fero ingenti perculsus amore,
Accipiant, caelique vias, and sidera monstrent,
Defectus Solis varios, Lunaeque labores:
Vnde tremor terris, etc.
But the current of that Martial Age, by some strange Antiperistasis drove so
violently toward Poetry, that he was at lest carried down with the stream. For
not only the Young Nobility, but Octavius, and Pollio, Cicero in his Old Age,
Julius Caesar, and the Stoical Brutus, a little before, would needs be
tampering with the Muses; the two latter had taken great care to have their
Poems curiously bound, and lodged in the most famous Libraries; but neither the
Sacredness of those places, nor the greatness of their Names, could preserve
ill Poetry. Quitting therefore the Study of the Law, after having pleaded but
one Cause with indifferent Success, he resolved to push his Fortune this way,
which he seems to have discontinu'd for some time, and that may be the reason
why the Culex, his first Pastoral, now extant, has little besides the novelty
of the Subject, and the Moral of the Fable, which contains an exhortation to
gratitude, to recomend it; had it been as correct as his other pieces, nothing
more proper and pertinent could have at that time bin addressed to the Young
Octavius, for the Year in which he Presented it, probably at the Baiae, seems
to be the very same, in which that Prince consented (though with seeming
reluctance) to the Death of Cicero, under whose Consulship he was Born, the
preserver of his Life, and chief instrument of his advancement. There is no
reason to question its being genuine, as the late French Editor does; its
meaness, in comparison of Virgil's other Works, (which is that Writers only
Objection) confutes himself: For Martial, who certainly saw the true Copy,
speaks of it with contempt; and yet that Pastoral equals, at least, the address
to the Dauphin which is prefixed to the late Edition. Octavius, to unbend his
mind from application to public business, took frequent turns to Baiae, and
Sicily; where he composed his Poem called Sicelides, which Virgil seems to
allude to, in the Pastoral beginning Sicelides Musae; this gave him opportunity
of refreshing that Princes Memory of him, and about that time he wrote his
Aetna. Soon after he seems to have made a Voyage to Athens, and at his return
presented his Ceiris, a more elaborate Piece, to the Noble and Eloquent
Messala. The forementioned Author groundlesly taxes this as supposititious: For
besides other Critical marks, there are no less than Fifty, or Sixty Verses,
altered indeed and polished, which he inserted in the Pastorals, according to
his fashion: and from thence they were called Eclogues, or Select Bucolics: We
thought fit to use a Title more intelligible, the reason of the other being
ceased; and we are supported by Virgil's own authority, who expressly calls them
Carmina Pastorum. The French Editor is again mistaken, in asserting, that the
Ceiris is borrowed from the Ninth of Ovid's Metamorphosis; he might have more
reasonably conjectured it, to be taken from Parthenius, the Greek Poet, from
whom Ovid borrowed a great part of his Work. But it is indeed taken from
neither, but from that Learned, unfortunate Poet Apollonius Rhodius, to whom
Virgil is more indebted, than to any other Greek Writer, excepting Homer. The
Reader will be satisfied of this, if he consult that Author in his own
Language, for the Translation is a great deal more obscure than the Original.

Whilst Virgil thus enjoyed the sweets of a Learned Privacy, the Troubles of
Italy cut off his little Subsistence; but by a strange turn of Human Affairs,
which ought to keep good Men from ever despairing; the loss of his Estate
proved the effectual way of making his Fortune. The occasion of it was this;
Octavius, as himself relates, when he was but Nineteen Years of Age, by a
Masterly stroke of Policy, had gained the Veteran Legions into his Service,
(and by that step, outwitted all the Republican Senate:) They grew now very
clamorous for their Pay: The Treasury being Exhausted, he was forced to make
Assignments upon Land, and none but in Italy it self would content them. He
pitched upon Cremona as the most distant from Rome; but that not suffising, he
afterward threw in part of the State of Mantua. Cremona was a Rich and noble
Colony, settled a little before the Invasion of Hannibal. During that Tedious
and Bloody War, they had done several important Services to the Commonwealth.
And when Eighteen other Colonies, pleading Poverty and Depopulation, refused to
contribute Money, or to raise Recruits; they of Cremona voluntarily paid a
double Quota of both: But past Services are a fruitless Plea; Civil Wars are
one continued Act of Ingratitude: In vain did the Miserable Mothers, with their
famishing Infants in their Arms, fill the Streets with their Numbers, and the
Air with Lamentations; the Craving Legions were to be satisfied at any rate.
Virgil, involved in the common Calamity, had recourse to his old Patron Pollio,
but he was, at this time, under a Cloud; however, compassionating so worthy a
Man, not of a make to struggle through the World, he did what he could, and
recommended him to Mecaenas, with whom he still kept a private Correspondence.
The Name of this great Man being much better known than one part of his
Character, the Reader, I presume, will not be displeased if I supply it in this
place.

Though he was of as deep Reach, and easy dispatch of Business as any in his
time, yet he designedly lived beneath his true Character. Men had oftentimes
meddled in Public Affairs, that they might have more ability to furnish for
their Pleasures: Mecaenas, by the honestest Hypocrisy that ever was, pretended
to a Life of Pleasure, that he might render more effectual Service to his
Master. He seemed wholly to amuse himself with the Diversions of the Town, but
under that Mask he was the greatest Minister of his Age. He would be carried in
a careless, effeminate posture through the Streets in his Chair, even to the
degree of a Proverb, and yet there was not a Cabal of ill disposed Persons
which he had not early notice of; and that too in a City as large as London and
Paris, and perhaps two or three more of the most populous put together. No Man
better understood that Art so necessary to the Great; the Art of declining
Envy: Being but of a Gentleman's Family, not Patrician, he would not provoke
the Nobility by accepting invidious Honors; but wisely satisfied himself that
he had the Ear of Augustus, and the Secret of the Empire. He seems to have
committed but one great Fault, which was the trusting a Secret of high
Consequence to his Wife; but his Master, enough Uxorious himself, made his own
Frailty more excusable, by generously forgiving that of his Favorite. He kept
in all his Greatness exact measures with his Friends; and choosing them wisely,
found, by Experience, that good Sense and Gratitude are almost inseparable.
This appears in Virgil and Horace; the former, besides the Honor he did him to
all Posterity, returned his Liberalities at his Death: The other, whom Mecaenas
recommended with his last Breath, was too generous to stay behind, and enjoy
the Favor of Augustus: He only desired a place in his Tomb, and to mingle his
Ashes with those of his deceased Benefactor. But this was Seventeen Hundred
Years ago. Virgil, thus powerfully supported, thought it mean to Petition for
himself alone, but resolutely solicits the Cause of his whole Country, and
seems, at first, to have met with some Encouragement: But the matter cooling,
he was forced to sit down contented with the Grant of his own Estate. He goes
therefore to Mantua, produces his Warrant to a Captain of Foot, whom he found
in his House; Arrius who had eleven Points of the Law, and fierce of the
Services he had rendered to Octavius, was so far from yielding Possession, that
words growing betwixt them, he wounded him dangerously, forced him to fly, and
at last to swim the River Mincius to save his Life. Virgil, who used to say,
that no Virtue was so necessary as Patience, was forced to drag a fick Body
half the length of Italy, back again to Rome, and by the way, probably,
composed his Ninth Pastoral, which may seem to have been made up in haste out
of the Fragments of some other pieces; and naturally enough represents the
disorder of the Poets Mind, by its disjointed Fashion, though there be another
Reason to be given elsewhere of its want of Connection. He handsomely states his
Case in that Poem, and with the pardonable Resentments of Injured Innocence,
not only claims Octavius's Promise, but hints to him the uncertainty of Human
Greatness and Glory: All was taken in good part by that Wise Prince: At last
effectual Orders were given: About this time, he Composed that admirable Poem,
which is set first, out of respect to Caesar; for he does not seem either to
have had leisure, or to have been in the Humor of making so solemn an
Acknowledgment, 'till he was possessed of the Benefit. And now he was in so
great Reputation and Interest, that he resolved to give up his Land to his
Parents, and himself to the Court. His Pastorals were in such Esteem, that
Pollio, now again in high Favor with Caesar, desired him to reduce them into a
Volume. Some Modern Writer, that has a constant flux of Verse, would stand
amazed how Virgil could employ three whole Years in revising five or six
hundred Verses, most of which, probably, were made some time before; but there
is more reason to wonder how he could do it so soon in such Perfection. A
course Stone is presently fashioned; but a Diamond, of not many Karats, is many
Weeks in Cutting, and in Polishing many more. He who put Virgil upon this, had
a Politic good end in it.

The continued Civil Wars had laid Italy almost waste; the Ground was
Uncultivated and Unstock'd; upon which ensued such a Famine, and Insurrection,
that Caesar hardly escaped being Stoned at Rome; his Ambition being looked upon
by all Parties as the principal occasion of it. He set himself therefore with
great Industry to promote Country-Improvements; and Virgil was serviceable to
his Design, as the good keeper of the Bees, Georg. 4.

Tinnitusque cie, and matris quate cymbala circum,
Ipsae consident --
That Emperor afterward thought it matter worthy a public Inscription Rediit
cultus Agris. Which seems to be the motive that Induced Macaenas, to put him
upon Writing his Georgics, or Books of Husbandry: A design as new in Latin
Verse, as Pastorals, before Virgil were in Italy; which Work took up Seven of
the most vigorous Years of his Life; for he was now at least Thirty four Years
of Age; and here Virgil shines in his Meridian. A great part of this Work seems
to have been rough-drawn before he left Mantua, for an Ancient Writer has
observed that the Rules of Husbandry laid down in it, are better Calculated for
the Soil of Mantua, than for the more Sunny Climate of Naples; near which
place, and in Sicily, he finished it. But lest his Genius should be depressed
by apprehensions of want, he had a good Estate settled upon him, and a House in
the Pleasantest part of Rome; the Principal Furniture of which was a
well-chosen Library, which stood open to all comers of Learning and Merit; and
what recommended the situation of it most, was the Neighborhood of his
Mecaenas; and thus he could either visit Rome, or return to his Privacy at
Naples, through a Pleasant Rode adorned on each side with pieces of Antiquity, of
which he was so great a Lover, and in the intervals of them, seemed almost one
continued Street of three days Journey.

Caesar having now Vanquished Sextus Pompeius, a Springtide of Prosperities
breaking in upon him, before he was ready to receive them as he ought, fell
sick of the Imperial Evil, the desire of being thought something more than Man.
Ambition is an infinite Folly: When it has attained to the utmost pitch of
Humane Greatness, it soon falls to making pretensions upon Heaven. The crafty
Livia would needs be drawn in the Habit of a Priestesse by the Shrine of the
new God: And this became a Fashion not to be dispensed with amongst the Ladies:
The Devotion was wondrous great amongst the Romans, for it was their Interest,
and, which sometimes avails more, it was the Mode. Virgil, though he despised the
Heathen Superstitions, and is so bold as to call Saturn and Janus, by no better
a Name than that of Old Men, and might deserve the Title of Subverter of
Superstitions, as well as Varro, thought fit to follow the Maxim of Plato his
Master; that every one should serve the Gods after the Usage of his own
Country, and therefore was not the last to present his Incense, which was of
too Rich a Composition for such an Altar: And by his Address to Caesar on this
occasion, made an unhappy Precedent to Lucan and other Poets which came after
him, Geor. 1. and 3. And this Poem being now in great forwardness, Caesar, who
in imitation of his Predecessor Julius, never intermitted his Studies in the
Camp, and much less in other places, refreshing himself by a short stay in a
pleasant Village of Campania, would needs be entertained with the rehearsal of
some part of it. Virgil recited with a mavelous Grace, and sweet Accent of
Voice, but his Lungs failing him, Mecaenas himself supplied his place for what
remained. Such a piece of condecension would now be very surprising, but it was
no more than customary amongst Friends, when Learning passed for Quality.
Lelius, the second Man of Rome in his time, had done as much for that Poet, out
of whose Dross he would sometimes pick Gold; as himself said, when one found
him reading Ennius: (the like he did by some Verses of Varro, and Pacuvius,
Lucretius, and Cicero, which he inserted into his Works.) But Learned Men then
lived easy and familiarly with the great: Augustus himself would sometimes sit
down betwixt Virgil and Horace, and say jeastingly, that he sat betwixt
Sighing and Tears, alluding to the Asthma of one, and Rheumatick Eyes of the
other; he would frequently Correspond with them, and never leave a Letter of
theirs unanswered: Nor were they under the constraint of formal Superscriptions
in the beginning, nor of violent Superlatives at the close of their Letter: The
invention of these is a Modern Refinement. In which this may be remarked, in
passing, that (humble Servant) is respect, but (Friend) an affront, which
notwithstanding implies the former, and a great deal more. Nor does true
Greatness lose by such Familiarity; and those who have it not, as Mecaenas and
Pollio had, are not to be accounted Proud, but rather very Discreet, in their
Reserves. Some Playhouse Beauties do wisely to be seen at a distance, and to
have the Lamps twinckle betwixt them and the Spectators.

But now Caesar, who though he were none of the greatest Soldiers, was certainly
the greatest Traveller, of a Prince, that had ever been, (for which Virgil so
dexterously Complements him, Aeneid. 6.) takes a Voyage to Egypt, and having
happily finished that War, reduces that mighty Kingdom into the Form of a
Province; over which he appointed Gallus his Lieutenant. This is the same
Person to whom Virgil addresses his Tenth Pastoral; changing, in compliance to
his Request, his purpose of limiting them to the number of the Muses. The
Praises of this Gallus took up a considerable part of the Fourth Book of the
Georgics, according to the general consent of Antiquity: But Caesar would have
it put out, and yet the Seam in the Poem is still to be discerned; and the
matter of Aristaeus's recovering his Bees, might have been dispatched in less
compass, without fetching the Causes so far, or interessing so many Gods and
Goddesses in that Affair. Perhaps some Readers may be inclined to think this,
though very much labored, not the most entertaining part of that Work; so hard
it is for the greatest Masters to Paint against their Inclination. But Caesar
was content he should be mentioned in the last Pastoral, because it might be
taken for a Satirical sort of Commendation; and the Character he there stands
under, might help to excuse his Cruelty, in putting an Old Servant to death for
no very great Crime.

And now having ended, as he begins his Georgics, with solemn mention of
Caesar, an Argument of his Devotion to him: He begins his Aeneis, according to
the common account, being now turned of Forty. But that Work had been, in
truth, the Subject of much earlier Meditation. Whilst he was working upon the
first Book of it, this p^ssage, so very remarkable in History, fell out, in
which Virgil had a great share.

Caesar, about this time, either cloyed with Glory, or terrified by the Example
of his Predecessor; or to gain the Credit of Moderation with the People, or
possibly to feel the Pulse of his Friends, deliberated whether he should retain
the Sovereign Power, or restore the Commonwealth. Agrippa, who was a very
honest Man, but whose View was of no great extent, advised him to the latter;
but Mecaenas, who had thoroughly studied his Master's Temper, in an Eloquent
Oration, gave contrary Advice. That Emperor was too Politic to commit the
oversight of Cromwell, in a deliberation something resembling this. Cromwell
had never been more desirous of the Power, than he was afterward of the Title
of King: And there was nothing, in which the Heads of the Parties, who were all
his Creatures, would not comply with him: But by too vehement Allegation of
Arguments against it, he, who had outwitted every body besides, at last
outwitted himself, by too deep dissimulation: For his Council, thinking to
make their Court by assenting to his judgment, voted unanimously for him
against his Inclination; which surpised and troubled him to such a degree,
that as soon as he had got into his Coach, he fell into a Swoon. But Caesar
knew his People better, and his Council being thus divided, he asked Virgil's
Advice: Thus a Poet had the Honor of determining the greatest Point that ever
was in Debate, betwixt the Son-in-Law, and Favorite of Caesar. Virgil
delivered his Opinion in Words to this effect. The change of a Popular into an
Absolute Government, has generally been of very ill Consequence: For betwixt
the Hatred of the People, and Injustice of the Prince, it of necessity comes to
pass that they live in distrust, and mutual Apprehensions. But if the Commons
knew a just Person, whom they entirely consided in, it would be for the
advantage of all Parties, that such a one should be their Sovereign: Wherefore
if you shall continue to administer Justice impartially, as hitherto you have
done, your Power will prove safe to your self, and beneficial to Mankind. This
excellent Sentence, which seems taken out of Plato, (with whose Writings the
Grammarians were not much acquainted, and therefore cannot reasonably be
suspected of Forgery in this matter,) contains the true state of Affairs at
that time: For the Commonwealth Maxims were now no longer practicable; the
Romans had only the haughtiness of the Old Commonwealth left, without one of
its Vi^tues. And this Sentence we find, almost in the same words, in the first
Book of the Aeneis, which at this time he was writing; and one might wonder
that none of his Commentators have taken notice of it. he Compares a Tempest to
a Popular Insurrection, as Cicero had compared a Sedition to a Storm, a little
before.

Ac veluti magno in populo, cum saepe coorta est
Seditio, saevitque animis ignobile vulgus
Jamque faces, ac saxa volant, furor armae ministrat.
Tum pietate gravem, and meritis si forte virum quem
Conspexere silent, arrectisq^e auribus adstant.
Ille regit dictis animos, and pectora mulcet.
Piety and Merit were the two great Virtues which Virgil every where attributes
to Augustus, and in which that Prince, at least Politickly, if not so truly,
fixed his Character, as appears by the Marmor Anc(...). and several of his
Medals. Franshemius, the Learned Supplementor of Livy, has inserted this
Relation into his History; nor is there any good Reason, why Ruaeus should
account it fabulous. The Title of a Poet in those days did not abate, but
heighten the Character of the gravest Senator. Virgil was one of the best and
wisest Men of his time, and in so popular esteem, that one hundred Thousand
Romans rose when he came into the Theater, and paid him the same Respect they
used to Caesar himself, as Tacitus assures us. And if Augustus invited Horace
to assist him in Writing his Letters, and every body knows that the rescripta
Imperatorum were the Laws of the Empire; Virgil might well deserve a place in
the Cabinet-Council.

And now Virgil prosecutes his Aeneis, which had Anciently the Title of the
Imperial Poem, or Roman History, and deservedly; for though he were too Artful
a Writer to set down Events in exact Historical order, for which Lucan is
justly blamed; yet are all the most considerable Affairs and Persons of Rome
comprised in this Poem. He deduces the History of Italy from before Saturn to
the Reign of King Latinus; and reckons up the Successors of Aeneas, who Reigned
at Alba, for the space of three hundred Years, down to the Birth of Romulus;
describes the Persons and principal Exploits of all the Kings, to their
Expulsion, and the settling of the Commonwealth. After this, he touches
promiscuously the most remarkable Occurrences at home and abroad, but insists
more particularly upon the Exploits of Augustus; insomuch, that though this
Assertion may appear, at first, a little surprising; he has in his Works
deduced the History of a considerable part of the World from its Original,
through the Fabulous and Heroic Ages, through the Monarchy and Commonwealth of
Rome, for the space of four Thousand Years, down to within less than Forty of
our Savior's time, of whom he has preserved a most Illustrious Prophecy.
Besides this, he points at many remarkable Passages of History under seign'd
Names: the destruction of Alba, and Veii, under that of Troy: The Star Venus,
which, Varro says, guided Aeneas in his Voyage to Italy, in that Verse, Matre
dea monstrante viam.


Romulus his Lance taking Root, and Budding, is described in that Passage
concerning Polydorus, lib. 3.

-- Confixum ferrea texit
Telorum seges, and jaculis increvit acutis.
The Stratagem of the Trojans boring Holes in their Ships, and sinking them,
left the Latins should Burn them, under that Fable of their being transformed
into Sea-Nymphs: And therefore the Ancients had no such Reason to condemn that
Fable as groundless and absurd. Cocles swimming the River Tyber, after the
Bridge was broken down behind him, is exactly painted in the Four last Verses
of the Ninth Book, under the Character of Turnus. Marius hiding himself in the
Morass of Minturnae, under the Person of Sinon: Limosoque lacu per Noctem
obscurus in ulva
Delitus --


Those Verses in the Second Book concerning Priam; Jacet ingens littore
truncus, etc.
seem originally made upon Pompey the Great. He seems to touch the Imperious,
and Intriguing Humor of the Empress Livia, under the Character of Juno. The
irresolute and weak Lepidus is well represented under the Person of King
Latinus; Augustus with the Character of Pont. Max. under that of Aeneas; and
the rash Courage (always Unfortunate in Virgil) of Marc Anthony in Turnus; the
railing Eloquence of Cicero in his Phillipics is well imitated in the Oration
of Drances; the dull faithful Agrippa, under the person of Achates; accordingly
this Character is flat: Achates kills but one Man, and himself receives one
slight Wound, but neither says nor does any thing very considerable in the
whole Poem. Curio, who sold his Country for about Two hundred Thousand Pound,
is touched in that Verse. Vendidit hic auro patriam, dominumque potentem.
Imposuit. --
Livy relates that presently after the death of the two Scipio's in Spain, when
Martius took upon him the Command, a Blazing Meteor shone around his Head, to
the astonishment of his Soldiers: Virgil transfers this to Aeneas. Laetasque
vomunt duo tempora flammas.
It is strange that the Commentators have not taken notice of this. Thus the
ill Omen which happened a little before the Battle of Thrasimen, when some of
the Centurions Lances took Fire miraculously, is hinted in the like accident
which befell Acestes, before the Burning of the Trojan Fleet in Sicily. The
Reader will easily find many more such Instances. In other Writers there is
often well covered Ignorance; in Virgil, concealed Learning.

His silence of some Illustrious Persons is no less worth observation. He says
nothing of Scaevola, because he attempted to Assassinate a King, though a
declared Enemy. Nor of the Younger Brutus; for he effected what the other
endeavored. Nor of the Younger Cato, because he was an implacable Enemy of
Julius Caesar; nor could the mention of him be pleasing to Augustus; and that
Passage His Dantem jura Catonem,
may relate to his Office, as he was a very severe Censor. Nor would he name
Cicero, when the occasion of mentioning him came full in his way; when he
speaks of Catiline; because he afterward approved the Murder of Caesar, though
the Plotters were too wary to trust the Orator with their Design. Some other
Poets knew the Art of Speaking well; but Virgil, beyond this, knew the
admirable Secret of being eloquently silent. Whatsoever was most curious in
Fabius Pictor, Cato the Elder, Varro, in the Egyptian Antiquities, in the Form
of Sacrifice, in the Solemnities of making Peace and War, is preserved in this
Poem. Rome is still above ground, and flourishing in Virgil. And all this he
does with admirable brevity. The Aeneis was once near twenty times bigger than
he left it; so that he spent as much time in blotting out, as some Moderns have
done in Writing whole Volumes. But not one Book has his finishing Strokes: The
sixth seems one of the most perfect, the which, after long entreaty, and
sometimes threats of Augustus, he was at last prevailed upon to recite: This
fell out about four Years before his own Death: That of Marcellus, whom Caesar
designed for his Successor, happened a little before this Recital: Virgil
therefore with his usual dexterity, inserted his Funeral Panegyric in those
admirable Lines, beginning, O nate, ingentem luctum ne quaere tuorum, etc.
His Mother, the Excellent Octavia, the best Wife of the worst Husband that
ever was, to divert her Grief, would be of the Auditory. The Poet artificially
deferred the naming Marcellus, 'till their Passions were raised to the highest;
but the mention of it put both Her and Augustus into such a Passion of weeping,
that they commanded him to proceed no further; Virgil answered, that he had
already ended that Passage. Some relate, that Octavia fainted away; but
afterward she presented the Poet with two Thousand one Hundred Pounds, odd
Money; a round Sum for Twenty Seven Verses. Another Writer says, that with a
Royal Magnificence, she ordered him Massy Plate, unweigh'd, to a great value.

And now he took up a Resolution of Traveling into Greece, there to set the
last Hand to this Work; purposing to devote the rest of his Life to Philosophy,
which had been always his principal Passion. He justly thought it a foolish
Figure for a grave Man to be over-taken by Death, whilst he was weighing the
Cadence of Words, and measuring Verses; unless Necessity should constrain it,
from which he was well secured by the liberality of that I earned Age. But he
was not aware, that whilst he allotted three Years for the Revising of his
Poem, he drew Bills upon a failing Bank: For unhappily meeting Augustus at
Athens, he thought himself obliged to wait upon him into Italy, but being
desirous to see all he could of the Greek Antiquities, he fell into a
languishing Distemper at Megara; this, neglected at first, proved Mortal. The
agitation of the Vessel, for it was now Autumn, near the time of his Birth,
brought him so low, that he could hardly reach Brindisi. In his Sickness he
frequently, and with great importunity, called for his Scrutore, that he might
Burn his Aeneis, but Augustus interposing by his Royal Authority, he made his
last Will, of which something shall be said afterward. And considering
probably how much Homer had been disfigured by the Arbitrary Compilers of his
Works, obliged Tucca and Varius to add nothing, nor so much as fill up the
Breaks he left in his Poem. He ordered that his Bones should be carried to
Naples, in which place he had passed the most agreeable part of his Life.
Augustus, not only as Executor, and Friend, but according to the Duty of the
Pont. Max. when a Funeral happened in his Family, took care himself to see the
Will punctually executed. He went out of the World with all that calmness of
Mind with which the Ancient Writer of his Life says he came into it. Making the
Inscription of his Monument himself; for he began and ended his Poetical
Compositions with an Epitaph. And this he made exactly according to the Law of
his Master Plato on such occasions, without the least oftentation.

I sung Flocks, Tillage, Heroes; Mantua gave
Me Life, Brandusium Death, Naples a Grave.
A short Account of his Person, Manners and Fortune.
HE was of a very swarthy Complexion, which might proceed from the Southern
Extraction of his Father, tall and wide-shoulder'd, so that he may be thought
to have described himself under the Character of Musaeus, whom he calls the
best of Poets.

-- Medium nam plurima turba
Hunc habet, atque humeris ex tantem suspicit altis.
His Sickliness, Studies, and the Troubles he met with, made his Hair gray
before the usual time; he had an hesitation in his Speech, as many other great
Men: It being rarely found that a very fluent Elocution, and depth of judgment
meet in the same Person. His Aspect and Behavior rustic, and ungraceful: And
this defect was not likely to be rectified in the place where he first lived,
nor afterward, because the weakness of his Stomach would not permit him to use
his Exercises; he was frequently troubled with the Headache, and spitting of
Blood; spare of Diet, and hardly drank any Wine. Bashful to a fault; and when
People crowded to see him, he would slip into the next Shop, or by-passage, to
avoid them. As this Character could not recommend him to the fair Sex; he seems
to have as little consideration for them as Euripides himself. There is hardly
the Character of one good Woman to be found in his Poems: He uses the Word
[Mulier] but once in the whole Aeneis, then too by way of Contempt, rendering
literally a piece of a Verse out of Homer. In his Pastorals he is full of
invectives against Love: In the Georgics he appropriates all the rage of it to
the Females. He makes Dido, who never deserved that Character, Lustful and
Revengeful to the utmost degree; so as to dye devoting her Lover to
destruction; so changeable, that the Destinies themselves could not fix the
time of her Death. But Iris, the Emblem of Inconstancy, must determine it. Her
Sister is something worse. He is so far from passing such a Complement upon
Helen, as the grave Old Counselor in Homer does, after nine Years War, when
upon the sight of her he breaks out into this Rapture in the presence of King
Priam,

None can the cause of these long Wars despise;
The Cost bears no proportion to the Prize:
Majestic Charms in every Feature shine;
Her Air, her Port, her accent is Divine.
However let the fatal Beauty go, etc.
Virgil is so far from this complaisant Humor, that his Hero falls into an
unmanly and ill-timed deliberation, whether he should not kill her in a Church;
which directly contradicts what Deiphobus says of her, Aeneid 6. in that place
where every body tells the truth. He transfers the dogged Silence of Ajax his
Ghost, to that of Dido; though that be no very natural Character to an injured
Lover, or a Woman. He brings in the Trojan Matrons setting their own Fleet on
Fire; and running afterward, like Witches on their Sabbat, into the Woods. He
bestows indeed some Ornaments upon the Character of Camilla; but soon abates
his Favor, by calling her aspera and horrenda Virgo: He places her in the
Front of the line for an ill Omen of the Battle, as one of the Ancients has
observed; (we may observe, on this occasion, it is an Art peculiar to Virgil,
to intimate the Event by some preceding Accident.) He hardly ever describes the
rising of the Sun, but with some circumstance which foresignifies the Fortune
of the Day. For instance, when Aeneas leaves Africa and Queen Dido, he thus
describes the fatal Morning: Tithoni croceum linguens Aurora cubile.
[And for the Remark, we stand indebted to the curious Pencil of Pollio.] The
Mourning Fields (Aeneid. 6.) are crowded with Ladies of a lost Reputation:
Hardly one Man gets admittance, and that is Caeneus, for a very good Reason.
Latinus his Queen is turbulent, and ungovernable, and at last hangs her self:
And the fair Lavinia is disobedient to the Oracle, and to the King, and looks a
little flickering after Turnus. I wonder at this the more, because Livy
represents her as an excellent Person, and who behaved her self with great
Wisdom in her Regency during the minority of her Son: So that the Poet has done
her Wrong, and it reflects on her Posterity. His Goddesses make as ill a
Figure; Juno is always in a rage, and the Fury of Heaven: Venus grows so
unreasonably confident, as to ask her Husband to forge Arms for her Bastard
Son; which were enough to provoke one of a more Phlegmatic Temper than Vulcan
was. Notwithstanding all this raillery of Virgil's, he was certainly of a very
Amorous disposition, and has described all that is most delicate in the Passion
of Love; but he Conquered his natural Inclinations by the help of Philosophy;
and refined it into Friendship, to which he was extremely sensible. The Reader
will admit of or reject the following Conjecture, with the free leave of the
Writer, who will be equally pleased either way. Virgil had too great an Opinion
of the Influence of the Heavenly Bodies: An Ancient Writer says, that he was
born under the Sign of Virgo, with which Nativity perhaps he pleased himself,
and would exemplify her Virtues in his Life. Perhaps it was thence that he
took his Name of Virgil and Parthenias, which does not necessarily signify
Base-born. Donatus, and Servius, very good Grammarians, give a quite contrary
sense of it. He seems to make allusion to this Original of his Name in that
Passage, Illo Virgilium me tempore dulcis alebat,
Parthenope.


And this may serve to illustrate his Complement to Caesar, in which he invites
him into his own Constellation, Where, in the void of Heaven, a place is free,
Betwixt the Scorpion, and the Maid for thee.
Thus placing him betwixt Justice and Power, and in a Neighbor Mansion to his
own; for Virgil supposed Souls to ascend again to their proper Stars. Being
therefore of this Humor, it is no wonder that he refused the Embraces of the
Beautiful Plotia, when his indiscreet Friend almost threw her into his Arms.

But however he stood affected to the Ladies, there is a dreadful Accusation
brought against him for the most unnatural of all Vices, which by the Malignity
of Humane nature has found more Credit in latter times than it did near his
own. This took not its rise so much from the Alexis, in which Pastoral there is
not one immodest Word; as from a sort of ill nature, that will not let any one
be without the imputation of some Vice; and principally because he was so
strict a follower of Socrates and Plato. In order therefore to his Vindication,
I shall take the matter a little higher.

The Cretans were Anciently much addicted to Navigation, insomuch that it
became A Greek Proverb, (though omitted, I think, by the Industrious Erasmus,) A
Cretan that does not know the Sea. Their Neighborhood gave them occasion of
frequent Commerce with the Phaenicians, that accursed People, who infected the
Western World with endless Superstitions, and gross immoralities. From them it
is probable, that the Cretans learned this infamous Passion, to which they were
so much addicted, that Cicero remarks, in his Book de Rep. that it was a
disgrace for a young Gentleman to be without Lovers. Socrates, who was a great
Admirer of the Cretan Constitutions, set his excellent Wit to find out some
good Cause, and Use of this Evil Inclination, and therefore gives an Account,
wherefore Beauty is to be loved, in the following Passage; for I will not
trouble the Reader, weary perhaps already with a long Greek Quotation. There is
but one Eternal, Immutable, Uniform Beauty; in contemplation of which, our
Sovereign Happiness does consist: And therefore a true Lover considers Beauty
and Proportion as so many Steps and Degrees, by which he may ascend from the
particular to the general, from all that is lovely of Feature, or regular in
Proportion, or charming in Sound, to the general Fountain of all Beauty and
Perfection. And if you are so much transported with the sight of Beautiful
Persons, as to wish neither to Eat or drink, but pass your whole Life in
looking on them; to what ecstasy would it raise you to behold the Original
Beauty, not filled up with Flesh and Blood, or varnished with a fading mixture
of Colors, and the rest of Mortal Trifles and Fooleries, but separate,
unmixed, uniform, and divine, etc. Thus far Socrates, in a strain, much beyond
the Socrate Cre^tien of Mr. Balsac: And thus that admirable Man loved his
Phoedon, his Charmides, and Theatetus; and thus Virgil loved his Alexander, and
Cebes, under the feigned Name of Alexis: He received them illiterate, but
returned them to their Masters, the one a good Poet, and the other an excellent
Grammarian: And to prevent all possible Misinterpretations, he warily inserted
into the liveliest Episode in the whole Aeneis, these words, Nisus amore pio
pueri.
And in the Sixth, Quique pii vates. He feems fond of the Words, castus, pius,
Virgo, and the Compounds of it; and sometimes stretches the Use of that word
further than one would think he reasonably should have done, as when he
attributes it to Pasiphae her self.

Another Vice he is Taxed with, is Avarice; because he died Rich, and so indeed
he did in comparison of modern Wealth; his Estate amounts to near Seventy Five
Thousand Pounds of our Money: But Donatus does not take notice of this as a
thing extraordinary; nor was it esteemed so great a Matter, when the Cash of a
great part of the World lay at Rome; Antony himself bestowed at once Two
Thousand Acres of Land in one of the best Provinces of Italy, upon a ridiculous
Poet, who is named by Cicero and Virgil. A late Cardinal used to purchase ill
flattery at the Expense of 100000 Crowns a Year. But besides Virgil's other
Benefactors, he was much in favor with Augustus, whose Bounty to him had no
limits, but such as the Modesty of Virgil prescribed to it. Before he had made
his own Fortune, he settled his Estate upon his Parents and Brothers; sent them
Yearly large Sums, so that they lived in great Plenty and Respect; and at his
Death, divided his Estate betwixt Duty and Gratitude, leaving one half to his
Relations, and the other to Mecenas, to Tucca and Varius, and a considerable
Legacy to Augustus, who had introduced a politic Fashion of being in every
bodies Will; which alone was a fair Revenue for a Prince. Virgil shows his
detestation of this Vice, by placing in the front of the Damned those who did
not relieve their Relations and Friends; for the Romans hardly ever extended
their Liberality further; and therefore I do not remember to have met in all
the Latin Poets, one Character so noble as that short one in Homer.

-- (...),
(...) --
On the other hand, he gives a very advanced place in Elysium to good Patriots,
etc. Observing in all his Poem, that Rule so Sacred amongst the Romans, That
there should be no Art allowed, which did not tend to the improvement of the
People in Virtue. And this was the Principle too of our Excellent Mr. Waller,
who used to say that he would raze any Line out of his Poems, which did not
imply some Motive to Virtue; but he was unhappy in the choice of the Subject of
his admirable vein in Poetry. The Countess of C. was the Helen of her Country.
There is nothing in Pagan Philosophy more true, more just, and regular than
Virgil's Ethics; and it is hardly possible to sit down to the serious perusual
of his Works, but a Man shall rise more disposed to virtue and goodness, as
well as most agreeably entertained. The contrary to which disposition, may
happen sometimes upon the reading of Ovid, of Martial, and several other second
rate Poets. But of the Craft and Tricking part of Life, with which Homer
abounds, there is nothing to be found in Virgil; and therefore Plato, who gives
the former so many good words, perfumes, Crowns, but at last Complementally
Banishes him his Commonwealth, would have entreated Virgil to stay with him,
(if they had lived in the same Age,) and entrusted him with some important
Charge in his Government. Thus was his Life as chaste as his Style, and those
who can Critic his Poetry, can never find a blemish in his Manners; and one
would rather wish to have that purity of Mind, which the Satyrist himself
attributes to him; that friendly disposition, and evenness of temper, and
patience, which he was Master of in so eminent a degree, than to have the
honor of being Author of the Aeneis, or even of the Georgics themselves.

Having therefore so little relish for the usual amusements of the world, he
prosecuted his Studies without any considerable interruption, during the whole
course of his Life, which one may reasonably conjecture to have been something
longer than 52 years; and therefore it is no wonder that he became the most
general Scholar that Rome ever bred, unless some one should except Varro.
Besides the exact knowledge of Rural Affairs, he understood Medicine, to which
Profession he was designed by his Parents. A Curious Florist, on which Subject
one would wish he had writ, as he once intended: So profound a Naturalist, that
he has solved more Phenomenon of Nature upon sound Principles, than Aristotle
in his Physics. He studied Geometry, the most opposite of all Sciences to a
Poetic Genius, and Beauties of a lively imagination; but this promoted the
order of his Narrations, his propriety of Language, and clearness of
Expression, for which he was justly called the Pillar of the Latin Tongue. This
Geometrical Spirit was the cause, that to fill up a Verse he would not insert
one superfluous word; and therefore deserves that Character which a Noble and
Judicious Critic has given him, Essay of Poetry.
That he never says too little nor too much. Nor could any one ever fill up the
Verses he left imperfect. There is one supplied near the beginning of the First
Book; Virgil left the Verse thus. -- Hic illius arma,
Hic currus fuit --
the rest is none of Virgil's.

He was so good a Geographer, that he has not only left us the finest
description of Italy that ever was; but besides, was one of the few Ancients
who knew the true System of the Earth, its being Inhabited round about under
the Torrid Zone, and near the Poles. Metrodorus, in his five Books of the
Zones, justifies him from some Exceptions made against him by Astronomers. His
Rhetoric was in such general esteem, that Lectures were read upon it in the
Reign of Tiberius, and the Subject of Declamations taken out of him. Pollio
himself, and many other Ancients Commented him. His Esteem degenerated into a
kind of Superstition. The known Story of Mr. Cowley is an instance of it. But
the sorts Virgilianae were condemned by St. Augustine, and other Casuists.
Abienus, by an odd Design, put all Virgil and Livy into Iambick Verse; and the
Pictures of those two were hung in the most Honorable place of Public
Libraries, and the Design of taking them down, and destroying Virgil's Works,
was looked upon as one of the most Extravagant amongst the many Brutish
Frenzies of Caligula.

PREFACE TO THE PASTORALS, With a short DEFENSE of VIRGIL, Against some of the
Reflections of Monsieur Fontanelle.
AS the Writings of greatest Antiquity are in Verse, so of all sorts of Poetry,
Pastorals seem the most Ancient; being formed upon the Model of the First
Innocence, and Simplicity, which the Moderns, better to dispense themselves
from imitating, have wisely thought fit to treat as Fabulous, and
impracticable; and yet they, by obeying the unsophisticated Dictates of Nature,
enjoyed the most valuable Blessings of Life; a vigorous Health of Body, with a
constant serenity, and freedom of Mind, whilst we, with all our fanciful
Refinements, can scarcely pass an Autumn without some access of a Fever, or a
whole Day, not ruffled by some unquiet Passion. He was not then looked upon as
a very Old Man; who reached to a greater Number of Years, than in these times
an ancient Family can reasonably pretend to; and we know the Names of several,
who saw, and practiced the World for a longer space of time, than we can read
the Account of in any one entire Body of History. In short, they invented the
most useful Arts, Pastorage, Tillage, Geometry, Writing, Music, Astronomy,
etc. Whilst the Moderns, like Extravagant Heirs, made rich by their Industry,
ingratefully deride the good Old Gentlemen, who left them the Estate. It is not
therefore to be wondered at, that Pastorals are fallen into Disesteem, together
with that Fashion of Life, upon which they were grounded. And methinks, I see
the Reader already uneasy at this Part of Virgil, counting the Pages, and
posting to the Aeneis; so delightful an entertainment is the very Relation of
public Mischief, and slaughter, now become to Mankind: and yet Virgil passed a
much different judgment on his own Works: He valued most this part, and his
Georgics, and depended upon them for his Reputation with Posterity: But
Censures himself in one of his Letters to Augustus, for meddling with Heroics,
the Invention of a degenerating Age. This is the Reason that the Rules of
Pastoral, are so little known or studied. Aristotle, Horace, and the Essay of
Poetry, take no notice of it. And Mr. Boileau, one of the most accurate of the
Moderns, because he never loses the Ancients out of his Sight, bestows scarce
half a Page on it. It is the Design therefore of the few following pages, to
clear this sort of Writing from vulgar Prejudices; to vindicate our Author from
some unjust Imputations; to look into some of the Rules of this sort of Poetry,
and Enquire what sort of Versification is most proper for it, in which point we
are so much inferior to the Ancients; that this Consideration alone, were
enough to make some Writers think as they ought, that is, Meanly, of their own
Performances.

As all sorts of Poetry consist in imitation; Pastoral is the imitation of a
Shepherd considered under that Character: It is requisite therefore to be a
little informed of the Condition, and Qualification of these Shepherds.

One of the Ancients has observed truly, but Satyrically enough, that Mankind
is the Measure of every thing: And thus by a gradual improvement of this
mistake, we come to make our own Age and Country the Rule and Standard of
others, and our selves at last the measure of them all. We figure the Ancient
Contrymen like our own, leading a painful Life in Poverty and Contempt,
without Wit, or Courage, or Education: But Men had quite different Notions of
these things, for the first four Thousand Years of the World; Health and
Strength were then in more esteem than the refinements of Pleasure; and it was
accounted a great deal more Honorable to Till the Ground, or keep a Flock of
Sheep, than to dissolve in Wantonness, and effeminating Sloth. Hunting has now
an Idea of Quality joined to it, and is become the most important Business in
the Life of a Gentleman; Anciently it was quite otherways. Mr. Fleury has
severely remarked, that this Extravagant Passion for Hunting is a strong Proof
of our Gothic Extraction, and shows an affinity of Humor with the Savage
Americans. The Barbarous Franks and other Germans, (having neither Corn, nor
Wine of their own growth,) when they passed the Rhine, and possessed themselves
of Countries better Cultivated, left the Tillage of the Land to the Old
Proprietors; and afterward did hazard their Lives as freely for their
Diversion, as they had done before for their necessary subsistence. The English
gave this Usage the Sacred stamp of Fashion, and from hence it is that most of
our Terms of Hunting are French. The Reader will, I hope, give me his Pardon
for my freedom on this Subject, since an ill Accident, occasioned by Hunting,
has kept England in pain, these several Months together, for one of the best,
and greatest Peers which she has bred for some Ages; no less Illustrious for
Civil Virtues, and Learning, than his Ancestors were for all their Victories in
France.

But there are some Prints still left of the Ancient Esteem for Husbandry and
their plain Fashion of Life in many of our Sir-Names, and in the Escutcheons of
the most Ancient Families, even those of the greatest Kings, the Roses, the
Lillies, the Thistle, etc. It is generally known, that one of the principal
Causes of the Deposing of Mahomet the 4th, was, that he would not allot part of
the Day to some manual Labor, according to the Law of Mahomet, and Ancient
Practice of his Predecessors. He that reflects on this will be the less
surpised to find that Charlemaign Eight Hundred Years ago, ordered his
Children to be instructed in some Profession. And Eight Hundred Years yet
higher, that Augustus wore no Clothes but such as were made by the Hands of the
Empress, and her Daughters; and Olympias did the same for Alexander the Great.
Nor will he wonder that the Romans, in great exigency, sent for their Dictator
from the Plow, whose whole Estate was but of Four Acres; too little a spot now
for the Orchard, or Kitchin-Garden of a Private Gentleman. It is commonly
known, that the Founders of three the most renowned Monarchies in the World,
were Shepherds: And the Subject of Husbandry has been adorned by the Writings
and Labor of more than twenty Kings. It ought not therefore to be matter of
surprise to a Modern Writer, that Kings, the Shepherds of the People in Homer,
laid down their first Rudiments in tending their mute Subjects; nor that the
Wealth of Ulysses consisted in Flocks and Herds, the Intendants over which,
were then in equal esteem with Officers of State in latter times. And therefore
Eumaeus is called (...) in Homer; not so much because Homer was a lover of a
Country Life, to which he rather seems averse, but by reason of the Dignity
and Greatness of his Trust, and because he was the Son of a King, stolen away,
and Sold by the Phaenician Pirates, which the Ingenious Mr. Cowley seems not to
have taken notice of. Nor will it seem strange, that the Master of the Horse to
King Latinus, in the Ninth Aeneid, was found in the homely Employment of
cleaving Blocks, when news of the first Skirmish betwixt the Trojans and Latins
was brought to him.

Being therefore of such Quality, they cannot be supposed so very ignorant and
unpolished; the Learning and good breeding of the World was then in the hands
of such People. He who was chosen by the consent of all Parties to arbitrate so
delicate an affair, as which was the fairest of the three Celebrated Beauties
of Heaven; he who had the address to debauch away Helen from her Husband, her
Native Country, and from a Crown, understood what the French call by the too
soft name of Gallantry; he had Accomplishments enough, how ill use soever he
made of them. It seems therefore that Mr. F. had not duly considered the
matter, when he reflected so severely upon Virgil, as if he had not observed
the Laws of decency in his Pastorals, in making Shepherds speak to things
beside their Character, and above their Capacity. He stands amazed that
Shepherds should thunder out, as he expresses himself, the formation of the
World, and that too according to the System of Epicurus. In truth, says he,
page 176. I cannot tell what to make of this whole piece; (the Sixth Past.) I
can neither comprehend the Design of the Author, nor the Connection of the
parts; first come the Ideas of Philosophy, and presently after those incoherent
Fables, etc. To expose him yet more, he subjoyns, it is Silenus himself who
makes all this absurd Discourse. Virgil says indeed that he had drank too much
the day before; perhaps the Debauch hung in his head when he composed this
Poem, etc. Thus far Mr. F. who, to the disgrace of Reason, as himself
ingenuously owns, first built his House, and then studied Architecture; I mean
first Composed his Eclogues, and then studied the Rules. In answer to this, we
may observe, first, that this very Pastoral which he singles out to triumph
over, was recited by a Famous Player on the Roman Theater, with mavelous
applause; insomuch that Cicero who had heard part of it only, ordered the whole
to be rehearsed, and struck with admiration of it, conferred then upon Virgil
the Glorious Title of Magnae spes alterae Romae. Nor is it Old Donatus only who
relates this, we have the same account from another very Credible and Ancient
Author; so that here we have the judgment of Cicero, and the People of Rome, to
confront the single Opinion of this adventrous Critic. A Man ought to be well
assured of his own Abilities, before he attack an Author of established
Reputation. If Mr. F. had perused the fragments of the Phaenician Antiquity,
traced the progress of Learning through the Ancient Greek Writers, or so much as
Consulted his Learned Countryman Huetius, he would have found, (which falls
out unluckily for him) that a Chaldaean Shepherd discovered to the Egyptians
and Greeks the Creation of the World. And what Subject more fit for such a
Pastoral, than that Great Affair which was first notified to the World by one
of that Profession? Nor does it appear, (what he takes for granted) that Virgil
describes the Original of the World according to the Hypothesis of Epicurus; he
was too well seen in Antiquity to commit such a gross Mistake; there is not the
least mention of Chance in that whole passage, nor of the Clinamen
Principiorum, so peculiar to Epicurus's Hypothesis. Virgil had not only more
Piety, but was of too nice a Judgment to introduce a God denying the Power and
Providence of the Deity, and singing a Hymn to the Atoms, and Blind Chance. On
the contrary, his Description agrees very well with that of Moses; and the
Learned Commentator D'Acier, who is so confident that Horace had perused the
Sacred History, might with greater Reason have affirmed the same thing of
Virgil. For, besides that Famous Passage in the Sixth Aeneid, (by which this
may be illustrated,) where the word Principio is used in the front of both by
Moses and Virgil, and the Seas are first mentioned, and the Spiritus intus
alit, which might not improbably, as Mr. D'Acier would suggest, allude to the
Spirit moving upon the face of the Waters; But omitting this parallel place,
the successive formation of the World is evidently described in these words,
Rerum paulatim sumere formas;
And it is hardly possible to render more literally that verse of Moses,

Let the Waters be gathered into one place, and let the dry Land appear, than
in this of Virgil, Jam durare solum, and discludere Nerea Ponto.


After this the formation of the Sun is described (exactly in the Mosaical
order,) and next the production of the first Living Creatures, and that too in
a small number, (still in the same method.)

Rara per ignotos errent animalia montes.
And here the foresaid Author would probably remark, that Virgil keeps more
exactly to the Mosaic System, than an Ingenious Writer, who will by no means
allow Mountains to be coaeval with the World. Thus much will make it probable
at least, that Virgil had Moses in his thoughts rather than Epicurus, when he
composed this Poem. But it is further remarkable, that this passage was taken
from a Song attributed to Apollo, who himself too unluckily had been a
Shepherd, and he took it from another yet more ancient, composed by the first
Inventer of Music, and at that time a Shepherd too; and this is one of the
Noblest Fragments of Greek Antiquity; and because I cannot suppose the
Ingenious Mr. F. one of their number, who pretend to censure the Greeks,
without being able to distinguish Greek from Ephesian Characters, I shall here
set down the Lines from which Virgil took this passage, though none of the
Commentators have observed it.

-- (...),
(...),
(...).
So that our Poet here with great Judgment, as always, follows the ancient
Custom of beginning their more Solemn Songs with the Creation, and does it too
most properly under the person of a Shepherd; and thus the first and best
Employment of Poetry was to compose Hymns in Honor of the Great Creator of the
Universe.

Few words will suffice to answer his other Objections. He demands why those
several Transformations are mentioned in that Poem? And is not Fable then the
Life and Subject of Poetry? Can himself assign a more proper Subject of
Pastoral, than the Saturnia Regna, the Age and Scene of this kind of Poetry?
What Theme more fit for the Song of a God, or to imprint Religious awe, than
the Omnipotent Power of transforming the Species of Creatures at their
pleasure? Their Families lived in Groves, near clear Springs; and what better
warning could be given to the hopeful young Shepherds, than that they should
not gaze too much into the Liquid dangerous Looking-glass, for fear of being
stolen by the Water-Nymphs, that is, falling and being drowned, as Hylas was?
Pasiphea's monstrous passion for a Bull, is certainly a Subject enough fitted
for Bucolic's? Can Mr. F. Tax Silenus for fetching too far the Transformation
of the Sisters of Phaeton into Trees, when perhaps they sat at that very time
under the hospitable shade of those Alders or Poplars? Or the Metamorphoses of
Philomela into that ravishing Bird, which makes the sweetest music of the
Groves? If he had looked into the Ancient Greek Writers, or so much as
Consulted honest Servius, he would have discovered that under the Allegory of
this drunkenness of Silenus, the refinement and exaltation of Men's Minds by
Philosophy was intended. But if the Author of these Reflections can take such
flights in his Wine, it is almost pity that drunkenness should be a Sin, or
that he should ever want good store of Burgundy, and Champaign. But indeed he
seems not to have ever drank out of Silenus his Tankard, when he made either
his Critique, or Pastorals.

His Censure on the Fourth seems worse grounded than the other; it is Entitled
in some ancient Manuscripts, The History of the Renovation of the World; he
complains that he cannot understand what is meant by those many Figurative
Expressions: But if he had consulted the younger Vossius his Dissertation on
this Pastoral, or read the Excellent Oration of the Emperor Constantine, made
French by a good Pen of their own, he would have found there the plain
inerpretation of all those Figurative Expressions; and withal, very strong
proofs of the truth of the Christian Religion; such as Converted Heathens, as
Valerianus, and others: And upon account of this Piece, the most Learned of the
Latin Fathers calls Virgil a Christian, even before Christianity. Cicero takes
notice of it in his Books of Divination, and Virgil probably had put it in
Verse a considerable time before the Edition of his Pastorals. Nor does he
appropriate it to Pollio, or his Son, but Complementally dates it from his
Consulship. And therefore some one who had not so kind thoughts of Mr. F. as I,
would be inclined to think him as bad a Catholic as Critic in this place.

I pass by, in respect therefore to some Books he has wrote since, a great part
of this, and shall only touch briefly some of the Rules of this sort of Poem.

The First is, that an air of Piety upon all occasions should be maintained in
the whole Poem: This appears in all the Ancient Greek Writers; as Homer, etc.
And Virgil is so exact in the observation of it, not only in this Work, but in
his Aeneis too, that a Celebrated French Writer taxes him for permitting Aeneas
to do nothing without the assistance of some God. But by this it appears, at
least, that Mr. St. Eur. is no Jansenist.

Mr. F. seems a little defective in this point; he brings in a pair of
Shepherdesses disputing very warmly, whether Victoria, (none of the fittest
Names for a Shepherdess) be a Goddess, or a Woman. Her great condescension and
compassion, her affability and goodness, none of the meanest Attributes of the
Divinity, pass for convincing Arguments that she could not possibly be a
Goddess. Les Deesses toujours fieres and meprisantes
Ne rassureroient point les Bergeres tremblantes
Par d'obligeans discourse, des souris gracieux;
Mais tu l'as veu; cette Auguste Person
Qui vient de paroistre en ces lieux
Prend soin de rassurer au moment qu'elle etonne.
Sa bonte descendant sans peine jusqu'a nous.
In short, she has too many Divine Perfections to be a Deity, and therefore she
is a Mortal [which was the thing to be proved.] It is directly contrary to the
practice of all ancient Poets, as well as to the Rules of decency and Religion,
to make such odious Comparisons. I am much surpised therefore that he should
use such an argument as this. Cloris, as-tu veu des Deesses
Avoir un air si facile and si doux?
Was not Aurora, and Venus, and Luna, and I know not how many more of the
Heathen Deities too easy of access to Tithonus, to Anchises, and to Endimion?
Is there any thing more Sparkish and better humored than Venus her accosting
her Son in the Deserts of Lybia? or than the behavior of Pallas to Diomedes,
one of the most perfect and admirable Pieces of all the Iliads; where she
condescends to rally him so agreeably; and notwithstanding her severe Virtue,
and all the Ensigns of Majesty, with which she so terribly adorns her self,
condescends to ride with him in his Chariot? But the Odysses are full of
greater instances of condescension than this.

This brings to mind that Famous passage of Lucan, in which he prefers Cato to
all the Gods at once, Victrix causa deis placuit sed victa Catoni. Which
Brelaeuf has rendered so flatly, and which may be thus Paraphrased.

Heaven meanly with the Conqueror did comply,
But Cato rather than submit would die.
It is an unpardonable presumption in any sort of Religion to complement their
Princes at the expense of their Deities.

But letting that pass, this whole Eclogue is but a long Paraphrase of a trite
Verse in Virgil, and Homer, Nec vox Hominem sonat, O Dea certe.

So true is that Remark of the Admirable E. of Roscomon, if applied to the
Romans, rather I fear than to the English, since his own Death.

-- one sterling Line,
Drawn to French Wire, would through whole pages shine.
Another Rule is, that the Characters should represent that Ancient Innocence,
and unpracticed Plainness, which was then in the World. P. Rapine has gathered
many Instances of this out of Theocritus, and Virgil; and the Reader can do it
as well himself. But Mr. F. transgressed this Rule, when he hid himself in the
Thicket, to listen to the private Discourse of the two Shepherdesses. This is
not only ill Breeding at Versailles; the Arcadian Shepherdesses themselves
would have set their Dogs upon one for such an unpardonable piece of Rudeness.

A Third Rule is, That there should be some Ordonnance, some Design, or little
Plot, which may deserve the Title of a Pastoral Scene. This is every where
observed by Virgil, and particularly remarkable in the first Eclogue; the
standard of all Pastorals; a Beautiful Landscape presents it self to your view,
a Shepherd with his Flock around him, resting securely under a spreading Beech,
which furnished the first Food to our Ancestors. Another in quite different
Situation of Mind and Circumstances, the Sun setting, the Hospitality of the
more fortunate Shepherd, etc. And here Mr. F. seems not a little wanting.

A Fourth Rule, and of great importance in this delicate sort of Writing, is,
that there be choice diversity of Subjects; that the Eclogues, like a Beautiful
Prospect, should Charm by its Variety. Virgil is admirable in this Point, and
far surpasses Theocritus, as he does every where, when Judgment and Contrivance
have the principal part. The Subject of the first Pastoral is hinted above.

The Second contains the Love of Coridon for Alexis, and the seasonable
reproach he gives himself, that he left his Vines half pruned, (which according
to the Roman Rituals, derived a Curse upon the Fruit that grew upon it) whilst
he pursued an Object undeserving his Passion.

The Third, a sharp Contention of two Shepherds for the Prize of Poetry.

The Fourth contains the Discourse of a Shepherd Comforting himself in a
declining Age, that a better was ensuing.

The Fifth a Lamentation for a Dead Friend, the first draught of which is
probably more Ancient than any of the Pastorals now extant; his Brother being
at first intended; but he afterward makes his Court to Augustrus, by turning
it into an Apothesis of Julius Caesar.

The Sixth is the Silenus.

The Seventh, another Poetical Dispute, first Composed at Mantua.

The Eighth is the Description of a despairing Lover, and a Magical Charm.

He sets the Ninth after all these, very modestly, because it was particular to
himself; and here he would have ended that Work, if Gallus had not prevailed
upon him to add one more in his Favor.

Thus Curious was Virgil in diversifying his Subjects. But Mr. F. is a great
deal too Uniform; begin where you please, the Subject is still the same. We
find it true what he says of himself,

Toujours, toujours de l'Amour. He seems to take Pastorals and Love-Verses for
the same thing. Has Humaen Nature no other Passion? Does not Fear, Ambition,
Avarice, Pride, a Capricio of Honor, and Laziness it self often Triumph over
Love? But this Passion does all, not only in Pastorals, but on Modern Tragedies
too. A Hero can no more Fight, or be Sick, or Dye, than he can be Born without
a Woman. But Dramatic's have been composed in compliance to the Humor of the
Age, and the prevailing Inclination of the great, whose Example has a very
powerful Influence, not only in the little Court behind the Scenes, but on the
great Theater of the World. This inundation of Love-Verses it is not so much an
effect of their Amorousness, as of immoderate Self-love. This being the only
sort of Poetry, in which the Writer can, not only without Censure, but even
with Commendation, talk of himself. There is generally more of the Passion of
Narcissus, than concern for Chloris and Corinna in this whole Affair. Be
pleased to look into almost any of those Writers, and you shall meet every
where that eternal Moy, which the admirable Paschal so judiciously condemns.
Homer can never be enough admired for this one so particular Quality, that he
never speaks of himself, either in the Iliad, or the Odysses; and if Horace had
never told us his Genealogy, but left it to the Writer of his Life, perhaps he
had not been a loser by it. This Consideration might induce those great
Critics, Varius and Tucca, to raze out the four first Verses of the Aeneis, in
great measure, for the sake of that unlucky Ille ego. But extraordinary
Genius's have a sort of Prerogative, which may dispense them from Laws, binding
to Subject-Wits. However, the Ladies have the less Reason to be pleased with
those Addresses, of which the Poet takes the greater share to himself. Thus the
Beau presses into their Dressing Room, but it is not so much to adore their
fair Eyes, as to adjust his own Steenzkirk and Peruke, and set his Countenance
in their Glass.

A fifth Rule, (which one may hope will not be contested) is that the Writer
should show in his Compositions, some competent skill of the Subject matter,
that which makes the Character of the Persons introduced. In this, as in all
other Points of Learning, Decency, and Economy of a Poem, Virgil much excells
his Master Theocritus. The Poet is better skilled in Husbandry than those that
get their Bread by it. He describes the Nature, the Diseases, the Remedies, the
proper places, and Seasons, of Feeding, of Watering their Flocks; the
Furniture, Diet; the Lodging and pastimes of his Shepherds. But the Persons
brought in by Mr. F. are Shepherds in Masquerade, and handle their Sheep-Hook
as awkardly, as they do their Oaten-Reed. They Saunter about with their chers
Moutons, but they relate as little to the Business in hand, as the Painter's
Dog, or a Dutch Ship, does to the History designed. One would suspect some of
them, that instead of leading out their Sheep into the Plains of Mont-Brison,
and Marcilli, to the flowery Banks of Lignon, or the Charanthe; that they are
driving directly, a la boucherie, to make Money of them. I hope hereafter Mr.
F. will choose his Servants better.

A sixth Rule is, That as the Style ought to be natural, clear, and elegant, it
should have some peculiar relish of the Ancient Fashion of Writing. Parables in
those times were frequently used, as they are still by the Eastern Nations;
Philosophical Questions, Aenigma's, etc. and of this we find Instances in the
Sacred Writings, in Homer, Contemporary with King David, in Herodotus, in the
Greek Tragedians; this piece of Antiquity is imitated by Virgil with great
judgment and discretion: He has proposed one Riddle which has never yet been
solved by any of his Commentators. Though he knew the Rules of Rhetoric, as well
as Cicero himself; he conceals that skill in his Pastorals, and keeps close to
the Character of Antiquity: Nor ought the Connexions and Transitions to be very
strict, and regular; this would give the Pastorals an Air of Novelty, and of
this neglect of exact Connexions, we have instances in the Writings of the
Ancient Chinese, of the Jews and Greeks, in Pindar, and other Writers of
Dithyrambics, in the Chorus 's of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. If Mr.
F. and Ruaeus, had considered this, the one would have spared his Critic of the
Sixth, and the other, his Reflections upon the Ninth Pastoral. The
over-scrupulous care of Connexions, makes the Modern Compositions oftentimes
tedious and flat: And by the omission of them it comes to pass, that the
Pensees of the incomparable Mr. Pascal, and perhaps of Mr. Bruyere, are two of
the most Entertaining Books which the Modern French can boast of. Virgil, in
this point, was not only faithful to the Character of Antiquity, but Copies
after Nature her self. Thus a Meadow, where the Beauties of the Spring are
profusely blended together, makes a more delightful Prospect, than a curious
Knot of sorted Flowers in our Gardens; and we are much more transported with
the Beauty of the Heavens, and admiration of their Creator, in a clear Night,
when we behold Stars of all Magnitudes, promiscuously moving together, than if
those glorious Lights were ranked in their several Orders, or reduced into the
finest Geometrical Figures.

Another Rule omitted by P. Rapine, as some of his are by me, (for I do not
design an entire Treatise in this Preface,) is, that not only the Sentences
should be short, and smart, upon which account, he justly blames the Italian,
and French, as too Talkative, but that the whole piece should be so too. Virgil
transgressed this Rule in his first Pastorals, I mean those which he composed
at Mantua, but rectified the Fault in his Riper Years. This appears by the
Culex, which is as long as five of his Pastorals put together. The greater part
of those he finished, have less than a Hundred Verses, and but two of them
exceed that Number. But the Silenus, which he seems to have designed for his
Masterpiece, in which he introduces a God singing, and he too full of
Inspiration, (which is intended by that ebriety, which Mr. F. so unreasonably
ridicules,) though it go through so vast a Field of Matter, and comprizes the
Mythology of near Two Thousand Years, consists but of Fifty Lines; so that its
brevity is no less admirable, than the subject Matter; the noble Fashion of
handling it, and the Deity speaking. Virgil keeps up his Characters in this
respect too, with the strictest decency: For Poetry and Pastime was not the
Business of Men's Lives in those days, but only their seasonable Recreation
after necessary Labors. And therefore the length of some of the Modern
Italian, and English Compositions, is against the Rules of this kind of Poesy.

I shall add something very briefly touching the Versification of Pastorals,
though it be a mortifying Consideration to the Moderns. Heroic Verse, as it is
commonly called, was used by the Latins in this sort of Poem, as very Ancient
and Natural. Lyrics, Iambics, etc. being Invented afterward: but there is so
great a difference in the Numbers, of which it may be compounded, that it may
pass rather for a Genus, than Species, of Verse. Whosoever shall compare the
numbers of the three following Verses, will quickly be sensible of the truth of
this Observation.

Tityre, tu patulae recubans sub tegmine fagi. The first of the Georgics, Quid
faciat laetas segetes, quo sydere terram. and of the Aeneis.

Arma, virumque cano, Trojae qui Primus ab oris. The Sound of the Verses, is
almost as different as the Subjects. But the Greek Writers of Pastoral, usually
limited themselves to the Example of the first; which Virgil found so
exceedingly difficult, that he quitted it, and left the Honor of that part to
Theocritus. It is indeed probable, that what we improperly call rhyme, is the
most Ancient sort of Poetry; and Learned Men have given good Arguments for it;
and therefore a French Historian commits a gross mistake, when he attributes
that Invention to a King of Gaul, as an English Gentleman does, when he makes a
Roman Emperor the Inventor of it. But the Greeks who understood fully the
force and power of Numbers, soon grew weary of this Childish sort of Verse, as
the Younger Vossius justly calls it, and therefore those rhyming Hexameters,
which Plutarch observes in Homer himself, seem to be the Remains of a barbarous
Age. Virgil had them in such abhorrence, that he would rather make a false
Syntax, than what we call a Rhyme, such a Verse as this Vir precor Vxori,
frater succurre Sorori. Was passable in Ovid, but the nice Ears in Augustus his
Court could not pardon Virgil, for* At Regina Pyra. So that the principal
Ornament of Modern Poetry, was accounted deformity by the Latins, and Greeks;
it was they who invented the different terminations of words, those happy
compositions, those short monosyllables, those transpositions for the elegance
of the sound and sense, which are wanting so much in modern Languages. The
French sometimes crowd together ten, or twelve Monosyllables, into one
disjoynted Verse; they may understand the nature of, but cannot imitate, those
wonderful Spondees of Pythagoras, by which he could suddenly pacify a Man that
was in a violent transport of anger; nor those swift numbers of the Priests of
Cybele, which had the force to enrage the most sedate and Phlegmatic Tempers.
Nor can any Modern put into his own Language the Energy of that single Poem of
Catullus, Super alta vectus, Atys* etc. Latin is but a corrupt dialect of
Greek; and the French, Spanish, and Italian, a corruption of Latin; and
therefore a Man might as well go about to persuade me that Vinegar is a Nobler
Liquor than Wine, as that the modern Compositions can be as graceful and
harmonious as the Latin it self. The Greek Tongue very naturally falls into
Iambicks, and therefore the diligent Reader may find six or seven and twenty of
them in those accurate Orations of Isocrates. The Latin as naturally falls into
Heroic; and therefore the beginning of Livy's History is half an Hexameter, and
that of Tacitus an entire one. The Roman Historian describing the glorious
effort of a Colonel to break through a Brigade of the Enemies, just after the
defeat at Cannae, falls, unknowingly, into a Verse not unworthy Virgil himself.

Haec ubi dicta dedit, stringit gladium, cuneoque
Facto per medios, etc.
Ours and the French can at best but fall into Blank Verse, which is a fault in
Prose. The misfortune indeed is common to us both, but we deserve more
compassion, because we are not vain of our Barbarities. As Age brings Men back
into the state and infirmities of Childhood, upon the fall of their Empire, the
Romans doted into Rhyme, as appears sufficiently by the Hymns of the Latin
Church; and yet a great deal of the French Poetry does hardly deserve that poor
title. I shall give an instance out of a Poem which had the good luck to gain
the Prize in 1685, for the Subject deserved a Nobler Pen.

Tous les jours ce grand Roy des autres Roys l'exemple,
S'ouvre un nouveau chemin au faiste de ton temple, etc.
The Judicious Malherbe exploded this sort of Verse near Eighty Years ago. Nor
can I forbear wondering at that passage of a Famous Academician, in which he,
most compassionately, excuses the Ancients for their not being so exact in
their Compositions, as the Modern French, because they wanted a Dictionary, of
which the French are at last happily provided. If Cicero and Demosthenes had
been so lucky as to have had a Dictionary, and such a Patron as Cardinal
Richelieu, perhaps they might have aspired to the honor of Balzac's Legacy of
Ten Pounds, Le prix de l'Eloquence.

On the contrary, I dare assert that there are hardly ten Lines in either of
those great Orators, or even in the Catalogue of Homer's Ships, which is not
more harmonious, more truly Rythmical, than most of the French, or English
Sonnets; and therefore they lose, at least, one half of their native Beauty by
Translation.

I cannot but add one Remark on this occasion, that the French Verse is
oftentimes not so much as Rhyme, in the lowest Sense; for the Childish
repetition of the same Note cannot be called Music; such Instances are
infinite, as in the forecited Poem. 'Epris Mepris
Trophee Orphee
cache; cherche.


Mr. Boileau himself has a great deal of this (...), not by his own neglect,
but purely by the faultiness and poverty of the French Tongue. Mr. F. at last
goes into the excessive Paradoxes of Mr. Perrault, and boasts of the vast
number of their Excellent Songs, preferring them to the Greek and Latin. But an
ancient Writer of as good Credit, has assured us, that Seven Lives would hardly
suffice to read over the Greek Odes; but a few Weeks would be sufficient, if a
Man were so very idle as to read over all the French. In the mean-time I should
be very glad to see a Catalogue of but fifty of theirs with Essay of Poetry.
Exact propriety of word and thought. Notwithstanding all the high Encomiums,
and mutual Gratulations which they give one another; (for I am far-from
censuring the whole of that Illustrious Society, to which the Learned World is
much obliged) after all those Golden Dreams at the L'Ouvre, that Modern Pieces
will be as much valued ten, or twelve Ages hence, as the ancient Greek, or
Roman, I can no more get it into my head that they will last so long, than I
could believe the Learned Dr. H -- K. [of the Royal Society,] if he should
pretend to show me a Butterflye that had lived a thousand Winters.

When Mr. F. wrote his Eclogues, he was so far from equalling Virgil, or
Theocritus, that he had some pains to take before he could understand in what
the principal Beauty, and Graces of their Writings do consist.

Cum mortuis non nisi larvae luctantur.
To Mr. Dryden, on his Excellent Translation of VIRGIL.
WHen e're Great VIRGIL's lofty Verse I see,
The Pompous Scene Charms my admiring Eye:
There different Beauties in perfection meet;
The Thoughts as proper, as the Numbers sweet:
And When wild Fancy mounts a daring height,
Judgment steps in, and moderates her flight.
Wisely he manages his Wealthy Store,
Still says enough, and yet implies still more:
For tho'the weighty Sense be closely wrought,
The Reader's left t'improve the pleasing thought.
Hence we despaired to see an English dress
Should e're his Nervous Energy express;
For who could that in fettered Rhyme enclose,
Which without loss can scarce be told in Prose?
But you, Great Sir, his Manly Genius raise;
And make your Copy share an equal praise.
O how I see thee in soft Scenes of Love,
Renew those Passions he alone could move!
Here Cupid's Charms are with new Art expressed,
And pale Eliza leaves her peaceful rest:
Leaves her Elisium, as if glad to live,
To Love, and Wish, to Sigh, Despair and Grieve,
And Die again for him that would again deceive.
Nor does the Mighty Trojan less appear
Than Mars himself amidst the storms of War.
Now his fierce Eyes with double fury glow,
And a new dread attends the impending blow:
The Daunian Chiefs their eager rage abate,
And though unwounded, seem to feel their Fate.
Long the rude fury of an ignorant Age,
With barbarous spite profaned his Sacred Page.
The heavy Dutchmen with laborious toil,
Wrested his Sense, and cramped his vigorous Style:
No time, no pains the drudging Pedants spare;
But still his Shoulders must the burden bear.
While through the Mazes of their Comments led,
We learn not what he writes, but what they read.
Yet through these Shades of undistinguished Night
Appeared some glimmering intervals of Light;
'Till mangled by a vile Translating Sect,
Like Babes by Witches in Effigy rackt:
'Till Ogleby, mature in dullness rose,
And Holbourn Dogrel, and low chiming Prose,
His Strength and Beauty did at once depose.
But now the Magic Spell is at an end,
Since even the Dead in you have found a Friend.
You free the Bard from rude Oppressor's Power,
And grace his Verse with Charms unknown before:
He, doubly thus obliged, must doubting stand,
Which chiefly should his Gratitude command;
Whether should claim the Tribute of his Heart,
The Patron's Bounty, or the Poet's Art.
Alike with wonder and delight we viewed
The Roman Genius in thy Verse renewed:
We saw thee raise soft Ovid's Amorous Fire,
And fit the tuneful Horace to thy Lyre:
We saw new gall imbitter Juvenal's Pen,
And crabbed Persius made politely plain:
Virgil alone was thought too great a task;
What you could scarce perform, or we durst ask:
A Task! which Waller's Muse could never engage;
A Task! too hard for Denham's stronger rage:
Sure of Success they some slight Sallies tried,
But the fenced Coast their bold attempts defied:
With fear their o're-match'd Forces back they drew,
Quitted the Province Fate reserved for you.
In vain thus Philip did the Persians storm;
A Work his Son was destined to perform.
O had Roscommon Essay of Translated Verse. page 26.
lived to hail the day,
And Sing loud Poeans through the crowded way;
When you in Roman Majesty appear,
Which none know better, and none come so near:
The happy Author would with wonder see,
His Rules were only Prophecies of thee:
And were he now to give Translators light,
He Would bid them only read thy Work, and write.
For this great Task our loud applause is due;
We own old Favors, but must press for new.
The expecting World demands one Labor more;
And thy loved Homer does thy aid implore,
To right his injured Works, and set them free
From the lewd Rhymes of grovelling Ogleby.
Then shall his Verse in graceful Pomp appear,
Nor will his Birth renew the ancient jar;
On those Greek Cities we shall look with scorn,
And in our Britain think the Poet Born.
To Mr. Dryden on his Translation of VIRGIL.
WE read, how Dreams and Visions heretofore,
The Prophet, and the Poet could inspire;
And make 'em in unusual Rapture soar,
With Rage Divine, and with Poetic Fire.
2.
O could I find it now! -- Would Virgil's Shade
But for a while vouchsafe to bear the Light;
To grace my Numbers, and that Muse to aid,
Who sings the Poet, that has done him right.
3.
It long has been this Sacred Author's Fate,
To lie at every dull Translator's Will;
Long, long his Muse has groaned beneath the weight
Of mangling Ogleby's presumptuous Quill.
4.
Dryden, at last, in his Defense arose;
The Father now is righted by the Son:
And while his Muse endeavors to disclose
That Poet's Beauties, she declares her own.
5.
In your smooth, pompous Numbers dressed, each Line,
Each Thought, betrays such a Majestic Touch;
He could not, had he finished his Design,
Have wished it better, or have done so much.
6.
You like his Hero, though your self were free;
And disentangl'd from the War of Wit;
You, who secure might others danger see,
And safe from all malicious Censure sit:
7.
Yet because Sacred Virgil's Noble Muse,
O'relay'd by Fools, was ready to expire:
To risque your Fame again, you boldly choose,
Or to redeem, or perish with your Sire.
8.
Even first and last, we owe him half to you,
For that his Aeneids missed their threatened Fate,
Was -- that his Friends by some Prediction knew,
Hereafter who correcting should translate.
9.
But hold my Muse, thy needless Flight restrain,
Unless like him thou could a Verse indite:
To think his Fancy to describe, is vain,
Since nothing can discover Light, but Light.
10.
It Is want of Genius that does more deny;
It Is Fear my Praise should make your Glory less.
And therefore, like the modest Painter, I
Must draw the Vail, where I cannot express.
Henry Grahme.

To Mr. DRYDEN.
NO undisputed Monarch Governed yet
With Universal Sway the Realms of Wit:
Nature could never such Expense afford,
Each several Province owned a several Lord.
A Poet then had his Poetic Wife,
One Muse embraced, and Married for his Life.
By the stale thing his appetite was cloyed,
His Fancy lessned, and his Fire destroyed.
But Nature grown extravagantly kind,
With all her Treasures did adorn your Mind.
The different Powers were then united found,
And you Wit's Universal Monarch Crowned.
Your Mighty Sway your great Desert secures,
And every Muse and every Grace is yours.
To none confined, by turns you all enjoy,
Sated with this, you to another fly.
So Sultan-like in your Seraglio stand,
While wishing Muses wait for your Command.
Thus no decay, no want of vigor find,
Sublime your Fancy, boundless is your Mind.
Not all the blasts of time can do you wrong,
Young spite of Age, in spite of Weakness strong.
Time like Alcides, strikes you to the ground,
You like Antaeus from each fall rebound.
H. St. John.

To Mr. Dryden on his VIRGIL.
IT IS said that Phidias gave such living Grace,
To the carved Image of a beauteous Face,
That the cold Marble might even seem to be
The Life, and the true Life, the Imag'ry.
You pass that Artist, Sir, and all his Powers,
Making the best of Roman Poets ours;
With such Effect, we know not which to call
The Imitation, which the Original.
What Virgil lent, you pay in equal Weight,
The charming Beauty of the Coin no less;
And such the Majesty of your Impress,
You seem the very Author you translate.
It Is certain, were he now alive with us,
And did revolving Destiny constrain,
To dress his Thoughts in English over again,
Himself could write no otherwise than thus.
His old Encomium never did appear
So true as now; Romans and Greeks submit,
Something of late is in our Language writ,
More nobly great than the famed Iliads were.
Ja. Wright.

To Mr. Dryden on his Translations.
AS Flowers transplanted from a Southern Sky,
But hardly bear, or in the raising dye,
Missing their Native Sun, at best retain
But a faint Odor, and but live with Pain:
So Roman Poetry by Moderns taught,
Wanting the Warmth with which its Author wrote,
Is a dead Image, and a worthless Draught.
While we transfuse, the nimble Spirit flies,
Escapes unseen, evaporates, and dies.
Who then attempt to show the Ancients Wit,
Must copy with the Genius that they writ.
Whence we conclude from thy translated Song,
So just, so warm, so smooth, and yet so strong,
Thou Heavenly Charmer! Soul of Harmony!
That all their Geniusses revived in thee.
Thy Trumpet sounds, the dead are raised to Light,
Newborn they rise, and take to Heaven their Flight;
Decked in thy Verse, as clad with Rays, they shine
All Glorified, Immortal and Divine.
As Britain, in rich Soil abounding wide,
Furnished for Use, for Luxury, and Pride,
Yet spreads her wanton Sails on every Shore,
For Foreign Wealth, insatiate still of more;
To her own Wool, the Silks of Asia joins,
And to her plenteous Harvests, Indian Mines:
So Dryden, not contented with the Fame
Of his own Works, though an immortal Name,
To Lands remote he sends his learned Muse,
The Noblest Seeds of Foreign Wit to choose.
Feasting our Sense so many various Ways,
Say, Is It thy Bounty, or thy Thirst of Praise?
That by comparing others, all might see,
Who most excelled, are yet excelled by thee.
George Granville.

ERRATA.
In the Dedicatory Preface to the Marquess of Normanby.
Page 7. line 32. read, of Republican Principles in his Heart. p. 9. where Atis
is mentioned as having a claim by Succession before Aeneas, my Memory betrayed
me; for had I consulted Virgil, he calls not the Son of Polites by the name of
Atis, but of Priamus. It Is true he mentions Atis immediately afterward, on the
account of the Atian Family, from which Julius Caesar was descended by his
Grandmother, as I have there mentioned. p. 26. toward the bottom of this Page
here is a gross Error, which is easily corrected, by reading Ten Months
instead of Three: the Sense will direct you to the place. p. 28. In the
quotation of a verse of Virgil's; for contise r. confise. p. 30 f. Juturna took
his opportunity, r. this opportunity. There are other Errata both in false
pointing, and omissions of words, both in the Preface and the Poem, which the
Reader will correct without my trouble. I omit them, because they only lame my
English, not destroy my meaning.

Some of the most considerable Errata.
PAstoral 2. l. 43. r. nor scorn the Pipe. Past. 4. l. 36. for Cold r. Gold.
Past. 6. l. 72. f. this r. thy. In the same Past. l. 1. f. Scicilian r.
Sicilian. Past. 8. l. 19. read the whole line thus; Scarce from the World the
Shades of Night withdrew. Georgic 1. l. 96. after the word Arbute place the
Comma; not after the next word Hazle, as it is printed, which destroys the
Sense. The whole Verse is to be thus read, The thin-leav'd Arbute, hazle Graffs
receives. l. 139. the note of Interrogation is false at the end of the Line, it
ought to be a Period. l. 393. f. skins r. skims. Geor. 2. l. 203. and 204. the
Rhymes of both are false printed: instead of Wars and prepares, r. War and
prepare in the singular. l. 296. f. tracts r. tracks. Geor. 4. l. 354. And
Worms that shun the Light, r. and Lizards shunning Light. Aeneid 1. l. 79. f.
Elus r. Eolus. l. 97. r. Eolus again. l. 640. f. Fate r. Fame. l. 1054. f.
Dimede r. Diomede. Aen. 2. l. 2. f. the lofty Couch r. his lofty Couch. Aen. 3.
l. 40. f. Horror r. Terror. l. 142. blot out the Period at the end of the
Verse, and place a Comma. Aen. 4. l. 824. f. pious pious r. pious Prince. Aen
5. l. 188. f. ptwo r. Prow. Aen. 6. l. 488. f. but but r. but once only. l.
747. f. van r. vain. l. 1133. f. three r. two. Aen. 7. l. 43. dele the Period
at the end of the Verse. l. 266. f. On, (the first word of the Verse,) r. In.
l. 446. f. native Land, r. another Land. l. 549. f. crowns her Lance, r.
wreaths her Lance. l. 68. f. fill. r. feed. l. 732. f. reinfor'd r. reinforced.
l. 946. f. rosy Fields r. dewy Fields. l. 1087. f. yied r. yield. Aen. 8. l.
674. f. lifeless Limbs, r. listless Limbs. Aen. 10 l. 497. blot out the Period
at the end of the Verse, and place a Comma. l. 735. f. shall. r. will. l. 864.
f. loving Lord r. Sovereign Lord. l. 924. f. Planks were r. Plank was. l. 1286.
f. Sholuder r. Shoulder. l. 1311. f. to his Throat the Sword applied, r. to the
Sword his Throat applied. Aen. 11. l. 120. f. Heads and Hands r. their loaded
Hands. l. 528. f. Heroes r. Heroes.

Directions to the Binders, how to place the several Parts of this Book in
Binding. 1. Title and Dedication to the Lord Clifford. 2. The Life of Virgil,
and Preface to the Pastorals. 3. Poems on Mr. Dryden's Translation of Virgil.
4. The Names of the Subscribers to the Cuts of Virgil. 5. The Names of the
second Subscribers. 6. The Pastorals. 7. The Dedication to the Earl of
Chesterfield, with an Essay on the Georgics. 8. The Georgics. 9. The Dedication
to the Marquess of Normanby. 10. The Aeneis.


THE NAMES OF THE SUBSCRIBERS TO THE Cuts of Virgil, Each Subscription being
Five Guineas.
PASTORALS.
Page 1 LOrd Chancellor. -- 1 2 Lord Privy Seal. -- 6 3 Earl of Dorset. -- 10 4
Lord Buckhurst. -- 17 5 Earl of Abingdon. -- 20 6 Lord Visc. Cholmondely. -- 26
7 Ld. Herbert of Chirbury. -- 31 8 Lord Clifford. -- 35 9 Marq. of Hartington.
-- 41 10 The Hon. Mr. Chapter Mountague. -- 45
Georgic 1st.
11 Sir Tho Trevor. -- 49 12 Sir John Hawles. -- 56 13 Joseph Jeakyl, Esquire -- 61
14 Tho. Vernon, Esquire -- 63 15 Will. Dobyns, Esquire -- 68
Geor. 2d.
16 Sir Will. Bowyer. -- 71 17 Gilbert Dolbin, Esquire -- 75 18 Geo. London, Esquire --
80 19 John Loving, Esquire -- 87 20 Will. Walsh, Esquire -- 94
Geor. 3d.
21 Duke of Richmond. -- 96 22 Sir J. Isham, Bar. -- 106 23 Sir Tho. Mompesson.
-- 110 24 John Dormer, Esquire -- 113 25 Frederick Tylney, Esquire -- 117
Geor. 4th.
26 Richard Norton, Esquire -- 122 27 Sir Will. Trumbull. -- 125 28 Sir Barth.
Shower, -- 138 29 Simon Harcourt, Esquire -- 141 30 John Granvill, Esquire -- 146
Aeneid 1st.
31 Prince George of Denmark. 201 32 Princess Ann of Denmark. 210 33 Duchess
of Ormond. -- 211 34 Countess of Exeter. -- 214 35 Countess Dowager of
Winchelsea. -- 227 36 Marchioness of Normanby. 230
Aeneid 2d.
37 Duke of Somerset. -- 234 38 Earl of Salisbury. -- 243 39 Earl of
Inchiqueen. -- 247 40 Earl of Orrery. -- 257 41 Ld. Visc. Dunbar. -- 261 42
Coun. Dow. of Northampton. 263
Aeneid 3d.
Page 43 Earl of Darby. -- 267 44 Bp. of Durham. -- 270 45 Bp. of Ossery. --
276 46 Dr. John Mountague. -- 279 47 Dr. Brown. -- 286 48 Dr. Guibbons. -- 293
Aeneid 4th.
49 Earl of Exeter. -- 296 50 Lady Giffard. -- 298 51 Lord Clifford. -- 303 52
John Walkaden, Esquire -- 307 53 Henry Tasburgh, Esquire -- 318 54 Mrs. Ann Brownlow.
-- 326
Aeneid 5th.
55 Duke of St. Albans. -- 327 56 Earl of Torrington. -- 332 57 Anth. Hamond,
Esquire -- 340 58 Henry St. John's, Esquire -- 345 59 Steph. Waller, Dr. of Laws. 347 60
Duke of Gloucester. -- 349 61 Edmond Waller, Esquire -- 359
Aeneid 6th.
62 Earl of Denbigh. -- 362 63 Sir Tho. Dyke, Bar. -- 370 64 Mrs. Ann Bayner.
-- 371 65 John Lewknor, Esquire -- 374 66 Sir Fleetwood Shepherd. -- 378 67 John
Poultney, Esquire -- 380 68 John Knight, Esquire -- 382 69 Robert Harley, Esquire -- 394
Aeneid 7th.
70 Earl of Rumney. -- 400 71 Anthony Henley, Esquire -- 404 72 George Stepney, Esquire
-- 407 Page 73 Coll. Tho. Farringdon. -- 416 74 Lady Mary Sackvill. -- 420 75
Charles Fox, Esquire -- 432
Aeneid 8th.
76 Earl of Ailesbury. -- 434 77 The Hon. Mr. Robert Bruce. -- 447 78
Christopher Rich, Esquire -- 450 79 Sir Godfry Kneller. -- 458
Aeneid 9th.
80 Earl of Sunderland. -- 464 81 Thomas Foley, Esquire -- 468 82 Col. Geo.
Cholmondley. -- 476 83 Sir John Percivall, Bar. -- 481 84 Col. Christoph.
Codrington. -- 486 85 Mr. John Closterman. -- 494
Aeneid 10th.
86 Ld. Visc. Fitzharding. -- 498 87 Sir Robert Howard. -- 511 88 Sir John
Leuson Gore, Bar. 517 89 Sir Charles Orby. -- 531 90 Tho. Hopkins, Esquire -- 536
Aeneid 11th.
91 Duke of Shrewsbury. -- 538 92 Sir Walter Kirkham Blount, Bar. -- 541 93
John Noell, Esquire -- 546 94 Marquess of Normanby. -- 549 95 Lord Berkley. -- 569
96 Arthur Manwareing, Esquire 573
Aeneid 12th.
97 Earl of Chesterfield. -- 578 98 Brigradier Fitzpatrick. -- 585 99 Dr. Tho.
Hobbs. -- 595 100 Lord Guilford -- 611 101 Duke of Ormond. -- 618


The Names of the second SUBSCRIBERS.
A.
LOrd Ashley. Sir James Ash, Bar. Sir James Ash, Bar. Sir Francis Andrew, Bar.
Charles Adderley, Esquire Mrs. Ann Ash. Edw. Ash Esquire Mr. Francis Atterbury. Sam.
Atkins, Esquire Tho. Austen Esquire To. Austen, Esquire
B.
Earl of Bullingbrook. Sir Ed. Bettenson, Bar. Sir Tho. Pope Blount, Bar. Sir
John Bolles. Sir Will. Bows. Will. Blathwayt, Esquire Secretary of War. Will.
Barlow, Esquire Peregrine Bertye, Esquire Will. Bridgman, Esquire Orlando Bridgman, Esquire
Will. Bridges, Esquire Char. Bloodworth, Esquire The Hon. Henry Boil, Esquire Rich. Boil,
Esquire Chidley Brook, Esquire Will. Bromley, Esquire of Warwicksbire. Mich. Bruneau, Esquire
Tho. Bulkley, Esquire Theoph. Butler, Esquire Capt. John Berkeley. Mr. Jo. Bows,
Prebend of Durham. Mr. Jeremiah Ball. Mr. John Ball. Mr. Richard Banks. Mrs.
Elizabeth Barry. Mr. Beckford. Mr. Tho. Betterton. Mrs. Catharine Blount. Mr.
Bond. Mr. Bond. Mrs. Ann Bracegirdle. Mr. Samuel Brockenbo-rough. Mrs.
Elizabeth Brown. Mr. Moses Bruche. Mr. Lancelton Burton.
C.
Earl of Clarendon. Lord Hen. Cavendish. Lord Clifford. Lord Coningsby. Lord
Cutts. Lady Chudleigh of the West. The Hon. Char. Cornwallis, Son to the Lord
Cornwallis. Sir Walt. Clarges, Bar. Sir To. Cotton. Sir Will. Cooper. The Ho.
Will. Cheyney. James Calthorp, Esquire Charles Chamberlayn, Esquire Edmond Clifford,
Esquire Charles Cocks, Esquire Tho. Coel, Esquire Tho. Coke, Esquire Hugh Colville, Esquire Jo.
Crawley, Esquire Courtney Crocker, Esquire Henry Curwyn, Esquire Capt. James Conoway. Mr.
Will. Claret. Mr. John Clancy. Mr. Will. Congreve. Mr. Henry Cook. Mr. Will.
Cooper. Mrs. Elizabeth Creed.
D.
Duchess of Devonshire. Paul Docmenique, Esquire Mountague Drake, Esquire Will.
Draper, Esquire Mr. Mich. Dahl. Mr. Davenport. Mr. Will. Delawn. Mrs. Dorothy
Draycot. Mr. Edward Dryden.
E.
Earl of Essex. Sir Edw. Ernle. Will. Elson, Esquire Tho. Elyot, Esquire Thomas Earl,
Major General.
F.
Sir Edm. Fettiplace, Bar. Sir Will. Forester. Sir James Forbys. Lady Mary
Fenwick. The Ho. Colon. Finch. The Ho. Doctor Finch. The Ho. Will. Fielding.
Rich. Francklin, Postmaster, Esquire Charles Fergesen, Esquire Com. of the Navy. Doctor
Fuller, D. of Lincoln. Henry Farmer, Esquire Tho. Finch, Esquire Tho. Frewin, Esquire Mr.
George Finch.
G.
Sir Bevill Granville, Bar. Oliver St. George, Esquire Tho. Gifford, Esquire Rich.
Goulston, Esquire Richard Graham, Esquire Fergus Grahme, Esquire Will. Grove, Esquire Dr. Gath,
M. D. Mr. George Goulding. Mr. Grinlin Guibbons.
H.
Lord Archibald Hamilton. Lord Hide. Sir Richard Haddock. Sir Christop. Hales,
Bar. Sir Tho. Hussy. Rob. Harley, Esquire Rob. Henley, Esquire Memb. of Parl. Will.
Hewer, Esquire Roger Hewett, Esquire He. Heveningham, Esquire John Holdworthy, Esquire Matt.
Holdworthy, Esquire Nath. Hornby, Esquire The Ho. Bern. Howard. Craven Howard Esquire
Mansel How, Esquire Sam. Hunter, Esquire Mr. Edward Hastwell. Mr. Nich. Hawksmore. Mr.
Whitfeild Hayter. Mr. Peter Henriques. Mr. To. Huckwell.
J.
John James, Esquire William Jenkins, Esquire Sam. Jones, Esquire Mr. Edw. Jefferyes.
K.
Jos. Keally, Esquire Coll. James Kendall. Dr. Knipe. Mr. Mich. Kinkead.
L.
Sir Berkeley Lucy, Ba. Lady Jane Leveson-Gower. Tho. Langley, Esquire Patrick
Lamb, Esquire Will. Latton, Esquire James Long of Draycot, Esquire Will. Lownds, Esquire Dennis
Lydal, Esquire Mr. Char. Longueville.
M.
Char. Mannours, Esquire Tho. Mansell, Esquire Bussy Mansel, Esquire Will. Martyn, Esquire
Henry Maxwell, Esquire Charles Mein, Esquire Rich. Minshul, Esquire To. Molesworth, Esquire The
Ho. Henry Mordaunt, Esquire George Moult, Esquire Christoph. Mountague. Esquire Walter
Moyl, Esquire Mr. Charles Marbury. Mr. Christoph. Metcalf. Mrs. Monneux.
N.
Lord Norris. Henry Nevile, Esquire William Norris, Esquire Mr. William Nicoll.
O.
To. Orme, Esquire Dr. Oliver, M. D. Mr. Mich. Owen.
P.
The Right Hon. Charles Earl of Peterborough. Sir Henry Peachy, Bar. Sir John
Phillips, Bar. Sir John Pykering Bar. Sir John Parsons, To. Palmer, Esquire Guy
Palms, Esquire Ben. Parry, Esquire Sam. Pepys, Esquire James Petre, Esquire Will. Peysley, Esquire
Craven Peyton, Esquire John Pitts, Esquire Will. Plowden of Plowden, Esquire Mr. Theoph.
Pykering, Prebend. of Durham. Coll. Will. Parsons. Captain Phillips. Captain
Pitts. Mr. Daniel Peck.
R.
Duchess of Richmond. Earl of Radnor. Lord Ranelagh. Tho. Rawlins, Esquire Will.
Rider, Esquire Francis Roberts, Esquire Mr. Rose.
S.
Lord Spencer. Sir Tho. Skipwith, Bar. Sir John Seymour. Sir Char. Skrimpshire.
J. Scroop of Danby, Esquire Ralph. Sheldon, Com. Warw. Esquire Edw. Sheldon, Esquire John
Smith, Esquire James Sothern, Esquire The Ho. James Stanley, Esquire To. Stopford, Esquire The
Hon. Major Genesis Edw. Sackville. Col. J. Stanhope. Col. Strangways. Mr. James
Seamer. Mr. William Seeks. Mr. Joseph Sherwood. Mr. Laurence Smith. Mr. Tho.
Southern. Mr. Paris Slaughter. Mr. Lancelot Stepney.
T.
Sir John Trevillion, Bar. Sir Edm. Turner. Henry Temple, Esquire Ashburnam Toll,
Esquire Sam. Travers, Esquire John Tucker, Esquire Maj. Genesis Charles Trelawney. Maj. Genesis
Trelawney. Col. John Tidcomb. Col. Trelawney. Mr. George Townsend. Mr. Tho.
Tyldesley. Mr. Tyndall.
V.
John Verney, Esquire Henry Vernon, Esquire James Vernon, Esquire
W.
Ld. Marquess of Winchester. Earl of Weymouth. Lady Windham. Sir John Walter,
Bar. Sir John Woodhouse, B. Sir Francis Windham. James Ward, Esquire William
Wardour, Jun. Esquire Will. Welby, Esquire Will. Weld, Esquire Th. Brom Whorwood, Esquire
Salw. Winnington, Esquire Col. Cornelius Wood. Mrs. Mary Walter. Mr. Leonard
Wessel.
Ec. 1. l. 1
To the Right Honble John Lord Summers Baron of Eresham Ld High Chancellr: of
England etc.


Virgil's Pastorals.
The First Pastoral. OR Tityrus and Meliboeus.
The Argument.
The Occasion of the First Pastoral was this. When Augustus had settled himself
in the Roman Empire, that he might reward his Veteran Troops for their past
Service, he distributed among 'em all the Lands that lay about Cremona and
Mantua: turning out the right Owners for having sided with his Enemies. Virgil
was a Sufferer among the rest; who afterward recovered his Estate by Mecaenas
's Intercession, and as an Instance of his Gratitude composed the following
Pastoral; where he sets out his own Good Fortune in the Person of Tityrus, and
the Calamities of his Mantuan Neighbors in the Character of Meliboeus.

MELIBOEUS. BEneath the Shade which Beechen Boughs diffuse,
You Tity'rus entertain your Silvan Muse:
Round the wide World in Banishment we rome,
Forced from our pleasing Fields and Native Home:
While stretched at Ease you sing your happy loves:
And Amarillis fills the shady Groves.

TITYRUS. These blessings, Friend, a Deity bestowed:
For never can I deem him less than God.
The tender Firstlings of my Woolly breed
Shall on his holy Altar often bleed.
He gave my Kine to graze the Flowery Plain:
And to my Pipe renewed the Rural Strain.

MELIBOEUS. I envy not your Fortune, but admire,
That while the raging Sword and wastful Fire
Destroy the wretched Neighborhood around,
No Hostile Arms approach your happy ground.
Far different is my Fate: my feeble Goats
With pains I drive from their forsaken Cotes.
And this you see I scarcely drag along,
Who yeaning on the Rocks has left her Young;
(The Hope and Promise of my failing Fold:)
My loss by dire Portents the Gods foretold:
For had I not been blind I might have seen
You riven Oak, the fairest of the Green,
And the hoarse Raven, on the blasted Bough,
With frequent Crokes presaged the coming Blow.
But tell me, Tityrus, what Heavenly Power
Preserved your Fortunes in that fatal Hour?

TITYRUS. Fool that I was, I thought Imperial Rome
Like Mantua, where on Market-days we come,
And thither drive our tender Lambs from home.
So Kids and Whelps their Syres and Dams express:
And so the Great I measured by the Less.
But Country Towns, compared with her, appear
Like Shrubs, when lofty Cypresses are near.

MELIBOEUS. What great Occasion called you hence to Rome?

TITYRUS. Freedom, which came at length, though slow to come:
Nor did my Search of Liberty begin,
Till my black Hairs were changed upon my Chin.
Nor Amarillis would vouchsafe a look,
Till Galeatea's meaner bonds I broke.
Till then a helpless, hopeless, homely Swain,
I sought not freedom, nor aspired to Gain:
Though many a Victim from my Folds was bought,
And many a Cheese to Country Markets brought,
Yet all the little that I got, I spent,
And still returned as empty as I went.

MELIBOEUS. We stood amazed to see your Mistress mourn;
Unknowing that she pined for your return:
We wondered why she kept her Fruit, so long,
For whom so late the ungather'd Apples hung.
But now the Wonder ceases, since I see
She kept them only, Tityrus, for thee.
For thee the bubling Springs appeared to mourn,
And whispering Pines made vows for thy return.

TITYRUS. What should I do! while here I was enchain'd,
No glimpse of Godlike Liberty remained?
Nor could I hope in any place, but there,
To find a God so present to my Prayer.
There first the Youth of Heavenly Birth I viewed;
For whom our Monthly Victims are renewed.
He heard my Vows, and graciously decreed
My Grounds to be restored, my former Flocks to feed.

MELIBOEUS. O Fortunate Old Man! whose Farm remains
For you sufficient, and requites your pains,
Though Rushes overspread the Neighboring Plains.
Though here the Marshy Grounds approach your Fields,
And there the Soil a stony Harvest yields.
Your teeming Ewes shall no strange Meadows try,
Nor fear a Rott from tainted Company.
Behold yon bord'ring Fence of Sallow Trees
Is fraught with Flowers, the Flowers are fraught with Bees:
The buisie Bees with a soft murmuring Strain
Invite to gentle sleep the laboring Swain.
While from the Neighboring Rock, with Rural Songs,
The Pruner's Voice the pleasing Dream prolongs;
Stock-Doves and Turtles tell their Amorous pain,
And from the lofty Elms of Love complain.

TITYRUS. The Inhabitants of Seas and Skies shall change,
And Fish on shore and Stags in Air shall range,
The banished Parthian dwell on Arar's brink,
And the blue German shall the Tigris drink:
E're I, forsaking Gratitude and Truth,
Forget the Figure of that Godlike Youth.

MELIBOEUS. But we must beg our Bread in Climes unknown,
Beneath the scorching or the freezing Zone.
And some to far Oaxis shall be sold;
Or try the Lybian Heat, or Scythian Cold.
The rest among the Britans be confined;
A Race of Men from all the World dis-join'd.
O must the wretched Exiles ever mourn,
Nor after length of rowl'ing Years return?
Are we condemned by Fates unjust Decree,
No more our Houses and our Homes to see?
Or shall we mount again the Rural Throne,
And rule the Country Kingdoms, once our own!
Did we for these Barbarians plant and sow,
On these, on these, our happy Fields bestow?
Good Heaven, what dire Effects from Civil Discord flow!
Now let me graff my Pears, and prune the Vine;
The Fruit is theirs, the Labor only mine.
Farewell my Pastures, my Paternal Stock,
My fruitful Fields, and my more fruitful Flock!
No more, my Goats, shall I behold you climb
The steepy Cliffs, or crop the flowery Thyme!
No more, extended in the Grot below,
Shall see you browzing on the Mountain's brow
The prickly Shrubs; and after on the bare,
Lean down the Deep Abyss, and hang in Air.
No more my Sheep shall sip the Morning Dew;
No more my Song shall please the Rural Crew:,
Adieu, my tuneful Pipe! and all the World adieu!

TITYRUS. This Night, at least, with me forget your Care;
Chestnuts and Curds and Cream shall be your fare:
The Carpet-ground shall be with Leaves o'respread;
And Boughs shall weave a Covering for your Head.
For see yon sunny Hill the Shade extends;
And curling Smoke from Cottages ascends.

The Second Pastoral. OR, ALEXIS.
The Argument.
The Commentators can by no means agree on the Person of Alexis, but are all of
opinion that some Beautiful Youth is meant by him, to whom Virgil here makes
Love; in Corydon 's Language and Simplicity. His way of Courtship is wholly
Pastoral: He complains of the Boys Coyness, recommends himself for his Beauty
and Skill in Piping; invites the Youth into the Country, where he promises him
the Diversions of the Place; with a suitable Present of Nuts and Apples: But
when he finds nothing will prevail, he resolves to quit his troublesome Amor,
and betake himself again to his former Business.

Young Corydon, the unhappy Shepherd Swain,
The fair Alexis loved, but loved in vain:
And underneath the Beechen Shade, alone,
Thus to the Woods and Mountains made his moan.
Is this, unkind Alexis, my reward,
And must I die unpitied, and unheard?
Now the green Lizard in the Grove is laid,
The Sheep enjoy the coolness of the Shade;
And Thestilis wild Thime and Garlike beats
For Harvest Hinds, o'respent with Toil and Heats:
While in the scorching Sun I trace in vain
Thy flying footsteps over the burning Plain.
The creaking Locusts with my Voice conspire,
They fried with Heat, and I with fierce Desire.
How much more easy was it to sustain
Proud Amarillis, and her haughty Reign,
The Scorns of Young Menalcas, once my care,
Though he was black, and thou art Heavenly fair.
To the Right Honble: Thomas Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Lord Privy Seal
and (...)

Past: 2.


Trust not too much to that enchanting Face;
Beauty's a Charm, but soon the Charm will pass:
White Lillies lie neglected on the Plain,
While dusky Hyacinths for use remain.
My Passion is thy Scorn; nor will thou know
What Wealth I have, what Gifts I can bestow:
What Stores my Dairies and my Folds contain;
A thousand Lambs that wander on the Plain:
New Milk that all the Winter never fails,
And all the Summer overflows the Pails:
Amphion sung not sweeter to his Herd,
When summoned Stones the Theban Turrets reared.
Nor am I so deformed; for late I stood
Upon the Margin of the briny Flood:
The Winds were still, and if the Glass be true,
With Daphnis I may vie, though judged by you.
O leave the noisie Town, O come and see
Our Country Cotts, and live content with me!
To wound the Flying Deer, and from their Cotes
With me to drive a-Field, the browzing Goats:
To pipe and sing, and in our Country Strain
To Copy, or perhaps contend with Pan.
Pan taught to join with Wax unequal Reeds,
Pan loves the Shepherds, and their Flocks he feeds:
Nor scorns the Pipe; Amyntas, to be taught,
With all his Kisses would my Skill have bought.
Of seven smooth joints a mellow Pipe I have,
Which with his dying Breath Damaetas gave:
And said, This, Corydon, I leave to thee;
For only thou deserve it after me.
His Eyes Amyntas durst not upward lift,
For much he grudged the Praise, but more the Gift.
Besides two Kids that in the Valley strayed,
I found by chance, and to my fold conveyed:
They drein to bagging Udders every day;
And these shall be Companions of thy Play.
Both fleck'd with white, the true Arcadian Strain,
Which Thestilis had often begged in vain:
And she shall have them, if again she sues,
Since you the Giver and the Gift refuse.
Come to my longing Arms, my lovely care,
And take the Presents which the Nymphs prepare.
White Lillies in full Canisters they bring,
With all the Glories of the Purple Spring,
The Daughters of the Flood have searched the Mead
For Violets pale, and cropped the Poppy's Head:
The Short Narcissus and fair Daffodil,
Pancies to please the Sight, and Cassia sweet to smell:
And set soft Hyacinths with Iron blue,
To shade marsh Marigolds of shining Hue.
Some bound in Order, others loosely strow'd,
To dress thy Bower, and trim thy new Abode.
My self will search our planted Grounds at home,
For downy Peaches and the glossie Plum:
And thrash the Chestnuts in the Neighboring Grove,
Such as my Amarillis used to love.
The Laurel and the Myrtle sweets agree;
And both in Nosegays shall be bound for thee.
Ah, Corydon, ah poor unhappy Swain,
Alexis will thy homely Gifts disdain:
Nor, should thou offer all thy little Store,
Will rich Iolas yield, but offer more.
What have I done, to name that wealthy Swain,
So powerful are his Presents, mine so mean!
The Boar amidst my Crystal Streams I bring;
And Southern Winds to blast my flowery Spring.
Ah, cruel Creature, whom do thou despise?
The Gods to live in Woods have left the Skies.
And Godlike Paris in the Idean Grove,
To Priam's Wealth preferred Oenone's Love.
In Cities which she built, let Pallas Reign;
Towers are for Gods, but Forests for the Swain.
The greedy Lyoness the Wolf pursues,
The Wolf the Kid, the wanton Kid the Browze:
Alexis thou art chased by Corydon;
All follow several Games, and each his own.
See from afar the Fields no longer smoke,
The sweating Steers unharnass'd from the Yoke,
Bring, as in Triumph, back the crooked Plough;
The Shadows lengthen as the Sun goes Low.
Cool Breezes now the raging Heats remove;
Ah, cruel Heaven! that made no Cure for Love!
I wish for balmy Sleep, but wish in vain:
Love has no bounds in Pleasure, or in Pain.
What frenzy, Shepherd, has thy Soul possessed,
Thy Vinyard lies half pruned, and half undressed.
Quench, Corydon, thy long unanswered fire:
Mind what the common wants of Life require.
On willow Twigs employ thy weaving care:
And find an easier Love, though not so fair.
The Third Pastoral. OR, PALAEMON.
Menalcas, Damaetas, Palaemon.
The Argument.
Damaetas and Menalcas, after some smart strokes of Country Railery, resolve to
try who has the most Skill at a Song; and accordingly make their Neighbor
Palaemon Judge of their Performances: Who, after a full hearing of both
Parties, declares himself unfit for the Decision of so weighty a Controversy,
and leaves the Victory undetermined.

MENALCAS. HO, Groom, what Shepherd owns those ragged Sheep?

DAMAETAS. Aegon's they are, he gave 'em me to keep.

MENALCAS. Unhappy Sheep of an Unhappy Swain,
While he Neaera courts, but courts in vain,
And fears that I the Damsel shall obtain;
Thou, Varlet, do thy Master's gains devour:
Thou milk'st his Ewes, and often twice an hour;
Of Grass and Fodder thou defraud'st the Dams:
And of their Mothers Duggs the starving Lambs.

DAMAETAS. Good words, young Catamite, at least to Men:
We know who did your Business, how, and when.
And in what Chapel too you played your prize;
And what the Goats observed with leering Eyes:
The Nymphs werekind, and laughed, and there your safety lies.

To the Right Honble: Charles Sackvill Earl of Dorsett and Midleseoc Lord
Chamberlain of his Majts. househould etc.

Past 3.


MENALCAS. Yes, when I crept the Hedges of the Leys;
Cut Micon's tender Vines, and stole the Stays.

DAMAETAS. Or rather, when beneath yon ancient Oak,
The Bow of Daphnis and the Shafts you broke:
When the fair Boy received the Gift of right;
And but for Mischief, you had died for spite.

MENALCAS. What Nonsense would the Fool thy Master prate,
When thou, his Knave, can talk at such a rate!
Did I not see you, Rascal, did I not!
When you lay snug to snap young Damon's Goat?
His Mungril barked, I ran to his relief,
And cried, There, there he goes; stop, stop the Thief.
Discovered and defeated of your Prey,
You sculk'd behind the Fence, and sneaked away.

DAMAETAS. An honest Man may freely take his own;
The Goat was mine, by singing fairly won.
A solemn match was made; He lost the Prize,
Ask Damon, ask if he the Debt denies;
I think he dares not, if he does, he lies.

MENALCAS. Thou sing with him, thou Booby; never Pipe
Was so profaned to touch that blubbered Lip:
Dunce at the best; in Streets but scarce allowed
To tickle, on thy Straw, the stupid Crowd.

DAMAETAS. To bring it to the Trial, will you dare
Our Pipes, our Skill, our Voices to compare?
My Brinded Heifar to the Stake I lay;
Two Thriving Calves she suckles twice a day:
And twice besides her Beestings never fail
To store the Dairy, with a brimming Pail.
Now back your singing with an equal Stake.

MENALCAS. That should be seen, if I had one to make.
You know too well I feed my Father's Flock:
What can I wager from the common Stock?
A Stepdame too I have, a cursed she,
Who rules my Hen-peck'd Sire, and orders me.
Both number twice a day the Milky Dams;
And once she takes the tale of all the Lambs.
But since you will be mad, and since you may
Suspect my Courage, if I should not lay;
The Pawn I proffer shall be full as good:
Two Bowls I have, well turned of Beechen Wood;
Both by divine Alcimedon were made;
To neither of them yet the Lip is laid.
The Lids are Ivy, Grapes in clusters lurk,
Beneath the Carving of the curious Work.
Two Figures on the sides embossed appear;
Conon, and what is his Name who made the Sphere,
And showed the Seasons of the sliding Year,
Instructed in his Trade the Laboring Swain,
And when to reap, and when to sow the Grain?

DAMAETAS. And I have two, to match your pair, at home;
The Wood the same, from the same Hand they come:
The kimbo Handles seem with Bears-foot carved;
And never yet to Table have been served:
Where Orpheus on his Lyre laments his Love,
With Beasts encompassed, and a dancing Grove:
But these, nor all the Proffers you can make,
Are worth the Heifar which I set to stake.

MENALCAS. No more delays, vain Boaster, but begin:
I prophecy beforehand I shall win.
Palaemon shall be Judge how ill you rhyme,
I Will teach you how to brag another time.

DAMAETAS. Rhymer come on, and do the worst you can:
I fear not you, nor yet a better Man.
With Silence, Neighbor, and Attention wait:
For it is a business of a high Debate.

PALAEMON. Sing then; the Shade affords a proper place;
The Trees are clothed with Leaves, the Fields with Grass;
The Blossoms blow; the Birds on bushes sing;
And Nature has accomplished all the Spring.
The Challenge to Damaetas shall belong,
Menalcas shall sustain his under Song:
Each in his turn your tuneful numbers bring;
In turns the tuneful Muses love to sing.

DAMAETAS. From the great Father of the Gods above
My Muse begins; for all is full of Jove;
To Jove the care of Heaven and Earth belongs;
My Flocks he blesses, and he loves my Songs.

MENALCAS. Me Phoebus loves; for He my Muse inspires;
And in her Songs, the warmth he gave, requires.
For him, the God of Shepherds and their Sheep,
My blushing Hyacinths, and my Bays I keep.

DAMAETAS. With pelted Fruit, me Galatea plyes;
Then tripping to the Woods the Wanton hies:
And wishes to be seen, before she flies.
But from my frowning Fair, more Ills I find,
Than from the Wolves, and Storms, and Winter-wind.

MENALCAS. The Kids with pleasure browze the bushy Plain,
The Showers are grateful to the swelling Grain:
To teeming Ewes the Sallow's tender tree;
But more than all the World my Love to me.

DAMAETAS. Pollio my Rural Verse vouchsafes to read:
A Heyfar, Muses, for your Patron breed.

MENALCAS. My Pollio writes himself, a Bull be bred,
With spurning Heels, and with a butting Head.

DAMAETAS. Who Pollio loves, and who his Muse admires,
Let Pollio's fortune crown his full desires.
Let Myrrh instead of Thorn his Fences fill:
And Showers of Honey from his Oaks distill.

MENALCAS. Who hates not living Bavius, let him be
(Dead Maevius) damned to love thy Works and thee:
The same ill taste of Sense would serve to join
Dog Foxes in the Yoke, and sheer the Swine.

DAMAETAS. Ye Boys, who pluck the Flowers, and spoil the Spring,
Beware the secret Snake, that shoots a sting.

MENALCAS. Graze not too near the Banks, my jolly Sheep,
The Ground is false, the running Streams are deep:
See, they have caught the Father of the Flock;
Who drys his Fleece upon the neighboring Rock.

DAMAETAS. From Rivers drive the Kids, and sling your Hook;
Anon I Will wash 'em in the shallow Brook.

MENALCAS. But fair Amyntas comes unasked to me;
And offers Love; and sits upon my knee:
Not Delia to my Dogs is known so well as he.

DAMAETAS. To the dear Mistress of my Lovesick Mind,
Her Swain a pretty Present has designed:
I saw two Stock-doves billing, and e're long
Will take the Nest, and Hers shall be the Young.

MENALCAS. Ten ruddy Wildings in the Wood I found,
And stood on tip-toes, reaching from the ground;
I sent Amyntas all my present Store;
And will, to Morrow, send as many more.

DAMAETAS. The lovely Maid lay panting in my arms;
And all she said and did was full of Charms.
Winds on your Wings to Heaven her Accents bear;
Such words as Heaven alone is fit to hear.

MENALCAS. Ah! what avails it me, my Love's delight,
To call you mine, when absent from my sight!
I hold the Nets, while you pursue the Prey;
And must not share the Dangers of the Day.

DAMAETAS. I keep my Birthday: send my Phillis home;
At Sheering-time, Iolas, you may come.

MENALCAS. With Phillis I am more in grace than you:
Her Sorrow did my parting-steps pursue:
Adieu my Dear, she said, a long Adieu.

DAMAETAS. The Nightly Wolf is baneful to the Fold,
Storms to the Wheat, to Budds the bitter Cold;

MENALCAS. To fold, my Flock; when Milk is dried with heat,
In vain the Milk-maid tugs an empty Teat.

DAMAETAS. How lank my Bulls from plenteous pasture come!
But Love that drains the Herd, destroys the Groom.

MENALCAS. My Flocks are free from Love; yet look so thin,
Their bones are barely covered with their Skin.
What magic has bewitched the woolly Dams,
And what ill Eyes beheld the tender Lambs?

DAMAETAS. Say, where the round of Heaven, which all contains,
To three short Else on Earth our sight restrains:
Tell that, and rise a Phoebus for thy pains.

MENALCAS. Nay tell me first, in what new Region springs
A Flower, that bears inscribed the names of Kings:
And thou shall gain a Present as Divine
As Phoebus self; for Phillis shall be thine.

PALAEMON. So nice a difference in your Singing lies,
That both have won, or both deserved the Prize.
Rest equal happy both; and all who prove
The bitter Sweets, and pleasing Pains of Love.
Now dam the Ditches, and the Floods restrain:
Their moisture has already drenched the Plain.

The Fourth Pastoral. OR, POLLIO.
The Argument.
The Poet celebrates the Birthday of Saloninus, the Son of Pollio, born in the
Consulship of his Father, after the taking of Salonae, a City in Dalmatia. Many
of the Verses are translated from one of the Sybils, who prophecy of our
Savior's Birth.

To the Right Honble. Lionel Cranfeild Sackvill Lord Buck hurst, eldest son of
Charles Earl of Dorsett and Midlesex.

Past: 4.


SIcilian Muse begin a loftier strain!
Though lowly Shrubs and Trees that shade the Plain,
Delight not all; Sicilian Muse, pepare
To make the vocal Woods deserve a Consul's care.
The last great Age, foretold by sacred Rhymes,
Renews its finished Course, Saturnian times
Roll round again, and mighty years, begun
From their first Orb, in radiant Circles run.
The base degenerate Iron-off-spring ends;
A golden Progeny from Heaven descends;
O chaste Lucina speed the Mother's pains,
And haste the glorious Birth; thy own Apollo reigns!
The lovely Boy, with his auspicious Face,
Shall Pollio's Consulship and Triumph grace;
Majestic Months set out with him to their appointed Race.
The Father banished Virtue shall restore,
And Crimes shall threat the guilty world no more.
The Son shall lead the life of Gods, and be
By Gods and Heroes seen, and Gods and Heroes see.
The jarring Nations he in peace shall bind,
And with paternal Virtues rule Mankind.
Unbidden Earth shall wreathing Ivy bring,
And fragrant Herbs (the promises of Spring)
As her first Offerings to her Infant King.
The Goats with strutting Dugs shall homeward speed,
And lowing Herds, secure from Lions feed.
His Cradle shall with rising Flowers be crowned;
The Serpents Brood shall die: the sacred ground
Shall Weeds and poisonous Plants refuse to bear,
Each common Bush shall Syrian Roses wear.
But when Heroic Verse his Youth shall raise,
And form it to Hereditary Praise;
Unlabored Harvests shall the Fields adorn,
And clustered Grapes shall blush on every Thorn.
The knotted Oaks shall showers of Honey weep,
And through the Matted Grass the liquid Cold shall creep.
Yet, of old Fraud some footsteps shall remain,
The Merchant still shall plough the deep for gain:
Great Cities shall with Walls be compassed round;
And sharpened Shares shall vex the fruitful ground.
Another Typhis shall new Seas explore,
Another Argos land the Chiefs, upon the Iberian Shore.
Another Helen other Wars create,
And great Achilles urge the Trojan Fate:
But when to ripened Manhood he shall grow,
The greedy Sailer shall the Seas forego;
No Keel shall cut the Waves for foreign Ware;
For every Soil shall every Product bear.
The laboring Hind his Oxen shall disjoyn,
No Plow shall hurt the Glebe, no Pruning-hook the Vine:
Nor Wool shall in dissembled Colors shine.
But the luxurious Father of the Fold,
With native Purple, or unborrow'd Gold,
Beneath his pompous Fleece shall proudly sweat:
And under Tyrian Robes the Lamb shall bleat.
The Fates, when they this happy Web have spun,
shall bless the sacred Clue, and bid it smoothly run.
Mature in years, to ready Honors move,
O of Celestial Seed! O foster Son of Jove!
See, laboring Nature calls thee to sustain
The nodding Frame of Heaven, and Earth, and Main;
See to their Base restored, Earth, Seas, and Air,
And joyful Ages from behind, in crowding Ranks appear.
To sing thy Praise, would Heaven my breath prolong,
Insusing Spirits worthy such a Song;
Not Thracian Orpheus should transcend my Lays,
Nor Linus crowned with never-fading Bays:
Though each his Heavenly Parent should inspire;
The Muse instruct the Voice, and Phoebus tune the Lyre.
Should Pan contend in Verse, and thou my Theme,
Arcadian Judges should their God condemn.
Begin, auspicious Boy, to cast about
Thy Infant Eyes, and with a smile, thy Mother single out;
Thy Mother well deserves that short delight,
The nauseous Qualms of ten long Months and Travel to requite.
Then smile; the frowning Infant's Doom is read,
No God shall crown the Board, nor Goodess bless the Bed.
The Fifth Pastoral. OR, DAPHNIS.
The Argument.
Mopsus and Menalcas, two very expert Shepherds at a Song, begin one by consent
to the Memory of Daphnis; who is supposed by the best Critics to represent
Julius Caesar. Mopsus laments his Death, Menalcas proclaims his Divinity. The
whole Eclogue consisting of an Elegy and an Apotheosis.

MENALCAS. SInce on the Downs our Flocks together feed,
And since my Voice can match your tuneful Reed,
Why sit we not beneath the grateful Shade,
Which Hazles, intermixed with Elms, have made?

MOPSUS. Whether you please that Silvan Scene to take,
Where whistling Winds uncertain Shadows make:
Or will you to the cooler Cave succeed,
Whose Mouth the curling Vines have overspread?

MENALCAS. Your Merit and your Years command the Choice:
Amyntas only rivals you in Voice.

MOPSUS. What will not that presuming Shepherd dare,
Who thinks his Voice with Phoebus may compare?

MENALCAS. Begin you first; if either Alcon's Praise,
Or dying Phillis have inspired your Lays:
To the Right Honble. James Bertie, Earl of Abingdon, and Baron Norreys of
Rycott Chief Justice, and Justice in Air of all his Majts. -- Parcks Forests,
and Chaces* on the South side of Trent: and Ld Lieutenant and Custos Rotulorum
of the County of Oxon.

Past: 5: 1.


If her you mourn, or Codrus you commend,
Begin, and Tityrus your Flock shall tend.

MOPSUS. Or shall I rather the sad Verse repeat,
Which on the Beeches bark I lately writ:
I writ, and sung betwixt; now bring the Swain
Whose Voice you boast, and let him try the Strain.

MENALCAS. Such as the Shrub to the tall Olive shows,
Or the pale Sallow to the blushing Rose;
Such is his Voice, if I can judge aright,
Compared to thine, in sweetness and in height.

MOPSUS. No more, but sit and hear the promised Lay,
The gloomy Grotto makes a doubtful day.
The Nymphs about the breathless Body wait
Of Daphnis, and lament his cruel Fate.
The Trees and Floods were witness to their Tears:
At length the rumor reached his Mother's Ears.
The wretched Parent, with a pious haste,
Came running, and his lifeless Limbs embraced.
She sighed, she sob'd, and, furious with despair,
She rent her Garments, and she tore her Hair:
Accufing all the Gods and every Star.
The Swains forgot their Sheep, nor near the brink
Of running Waters brought their Herds to drink.
The thirsty Cattle, of themselves, abstained
From Water, and their grassy Fare disdained.
The death of Daphnis Woods and Hills deplore,
They cast the sound to Lybia's desert Shore;
The Lybian Lions hear, and hearing roar.
Fierce Tigers Daphnis taught the Yoke to bear;
And first with curling Ivy dressed the Spear:
Daphnis did Rites to Bacchus first ordain;
And holy Revels for his reeling Train.
As Vines the Trees, as Grapes the Vines adorn,
As Bulls the Herds, and Fields the Yellow Corn;
So bright a Splendour, so divine a Grace,
The glorious Daphnis cast on his illustrious Race.
When envious Fate the Godlike Daphnis took,
Our guardian Gods the Fields and Plains forsook:
Pales no longer swelled the teeming Grain,
Nor Phoebus fed his Oxen on the Plain:
No fruitful Crop the sickly Fields return;
But Oats and Darnel choke the rising Corn.
And where the Vales with Violets once were crowned,
Now knotty Burrs and Thorns disgrace the Ground.
Come, Shepherds, come, and strew with Leaves the Plain;
Such Funeral Rites your Daphnis did ordain.
With Cypress Boughs the Crystal Fountains hide,
And softly let the running Waters glide;
A lasting Monument to Daphnis raise;
With this Inscription to record his Praise,
Daphnis, the Fields Delight, the Shepherd's Love,
Renowned on Earth, and deify'd above.
Whose Flock excelled the fairest on the Plains,
But less than he himself surpassed the Swains.

MENALCAS. Oh Heavenly Poet! such thy Verse appears,
So sweet, so charming to my ravished Ears,
As to the weary Swain, with cares oppressed,
Beneath the Silvan Shade, refreshing Rest:
As to the feavorish Travellor, when first
He finds a Crystal Stream to quench his thirst.
In singing, as in piping, you excel;
And scarce your Master could perform so well.
O fortunate young Man, at least your Lays
Are next to his, and claim the second Praise.
Such as they are my rural Songs I join,
To raise our Daphnis to the Powers Divine;
For Daphnis was so good, to love what-e're was mine.

MOPSUS. How is my Soul with such a Promise raised!
For both the Boy was worthy to be praised,
And Stimichon has often made me long,
To hear, like him, so soft so sweet a Song.

MENALCAS. Daphnis, the Guest of Heaven, with wondering Eyes,
Views in the Milky Way, the starry Skies:
And far beneath him, from the shining Sphere,
Beholds the moving Clouds, and rolling Year.
For this, with cheerful Cries the Woods resound;
The Purple Spring arrays the various ground:
The Nymphs and Shepherds dance; and Pan himself is Crowned.
The Wolf no longer prowls for nightly Spoils,
Nor Birds the Sprindges fear, nor Stags the Toils:
For Daphnis reigns above; and deals from thence
His Mothers milder Beams, and peaceful Influence.
The Mountain tops unshorn, the Rocks rejoice;
The lowly Shrubs partake of Humane Voice.
Assenting Nature, with a gracious nod,
Proclaims him, and salutes the new-admitted God.
Be still propitious, ever good to thine:
Behold four hallowed Altars we design;
And two to thee, and two to Phoebus rise;
On each is offered Annual Sacrifice.
The holy Priests, at each returning year,
Two Bowls of Milk, and two of Oil shall bear;
And I my self the Guests with friendly Bowls will cheer.
Two Goblets will I crown with sparkling Wine,
The generous Vintage of the Chian Vine;
These will I pour to thee, and make the Nectar thine.
In Winter shall the Genial Feast be made
Before the fire; by Summer in the shade.
Damaetas shall perform the Rites Divine;
And Lictian Aegon in the Song shall join.
Alphesibaeus, tripping, shall advance;
And mimick Satyrs in his antic Dance.
When to the Nymphs our annual Rites we pay,
And when our Fields with Victims we survey:
While savage Boars delight in shady Woods,
And finny Fish inhabit in the Floods;
While Bees on Thime, and Locusts feed on Dew,
Thy grateful Swains these Honors shall renew.
Such Honors as we pay to Powers Divine,
To Bacchus and to Ceres, shall be thine.
Such annual Honors shall be given, and thou
Shall hear, and shall condemn thy Suppliants to their Vow.

MOPSUS. What Present worth thy Verse can Mopsus find!
Not the soft Whispers of the Southern Wind,
That play through trembling Trees, delight me more;
Nor murmuring Billows on the sounding Shore;
Nor winding Streams that through the Valley glide;
And the scarce covered Pebbles gently chide.

MENALCAS. Receive you first this tuneful Pipe; the same
That played my Coridon's unhappy Flame.
The same that sung Neaera's conquering Eyes;
And, had the Judge been just, had won the Prize.

MOPSUS. Accept from me this Sheephook in exchange,
The Handle Brass; the Knobs in equal range.
Antigenes, with Kisses, often tried
To beg this Present, in his Beauty's Pride;
When Youth and Love are hard to be denied.
But what I could refuse, to his Request,
Is yours unasked, for you deserve it best.

The Sixth Pastoral. OR, SILENUS.
The Argument.
Two young Shepherds Chromis and Mnasylus, having been often promised a Song by
Silenus, chance to catch him asleep in this Pastoral; where they bind him hand
and foot, and then claim his Promise. Silenus finding they would be put off no
longer, begins his Song; in which he describes the Formation of the Universe,
and the Original of Animals, according to the Epicurean Philosophy; and then
runs through the most surprising Transformations which have happened in Nature
since her Birth. This Pastoral was designed as a Complement to Syro the
Epicurean, who instructed Virgil and Varus in the Principles of that
Philosophy. Silenus acts as Tutor, Chromis and Mnasylus as the two Pupils.

I First transferred to Rome Scicilian Strains:
Nor blushed the Dorick Muse to dwell on Mantuan Plains.
But when I tried her tender Voice, too young;
And fighting Kings, and bloody Battles sung,
Apollo checked my Pride; and bade me feed
My fatning Flocks, nor dare beyond the Reed.
Admonished thus, while every Pen prepares
To write thy Praises, Varus, and thy Wars,
My Past'ral Muse her humble Tribute brings;
And yet not wholly uninspir'd she sings.
For all who read, and reading, not disdain
These rural Poems, and their lowly Strain,
The name of Varus often inscribed shall see,
In every Grove, and every vocal Tree;
And all the Silvan reign shall sing of thee:
To the Right Honble. Hugh Lord Viscount Cholmondely of Kelles in the Kingdom
of Ireland and Baron of Wichmalbank in the Kingdom of England.

Past:6.


Thy name, to Phoebus and the Muses known,
Shall in the front of every Page be shown;
For he who sings thy Praise, secures his own.
Proceed, my Muse: Two Satyrs, on the ground,
Stretched at his Ease, their Sire Sylenus found.
Dos'd with his fumes, and heavy with his Load,
They found him snoring in his dark abode;
And seized with Youthful Arms the drunken God.
His rosy Wreath was dropped not long before,
Born by the tide of Wine, and floating on the floor.
His empty Can, with Ears half worn away,
Was hung on high, to boast the triumph of the day.
Invaded thus, for want of better bands,
His Garland they unstring, and bind his hands:
For by the fraudful God deluded long,
They now resolve to have their promised Song.
Aegle came in, to make their Party good;
The fairest Nais of the neighboring Flood,
And, while he stares around, with stupid Eyes,
His Brows with Berries, and his Temples dies.
He finds the Fraud, and, with a Smile, demands
On what design the Boys had bound his hands.
Loose me, he cried; 'twas Impudence to find
A sleeping God, it is Sacrilege to bind.
To you the promised Poem I will pay;
The Nymph shall be rewarded in her way.
He raised his voice; and soon a numerous throng
Of tripping Satyrs crowded to the Song.
And Sylvan Fauns, and Savage Beasts advanced,
And nodding Forests to the Numbers danced.
Not by Haemonian Hills the Thracian Bard,
Nor awful Phoebus was on Pindus heard,
With deeper silence, or with more regard.
He sung the secret Seeds of Nature's Frame;
How Seas, and Earth, and Air, and active Flame,
Fell through the mighty Void; and in their fall
Were blindly gathered in this goodly Ball.
The tender Soil then stiffning by degrees,
Shut from the bounded Earth, the bounding Seas.
Then Earth and Ocean various Forms disclose;
And a new Sun to the new World arose.
And Mists condensed to Clouds obscure the Sky;
And Clouds dissolved, the thirsty Ground supply.
The rising Trees the lofty Mountains grace:
The lofty Mountains feed the Savage Race.
From thence the birth of Man the Song pursued,
And how the World was lost, and how renewed.
The Reign of Saturn, and the Golden Age;
Prometheus Theft, and Jove's avenging Rage.
The Cries of Argonauts for Hylas drowned;
With whose repeated Name the Shoars resound.
Then mourns the madness of the Cretan Queen;
Happy for her if Herds had never been.
What fury, wretched Woman, seized thy Breast!
The Maids of Argos (tho with rage possessed,
Their imitated lowings filled the Grove)
Yet shunned the guilt of this prepost'rous Love.
Nor sought the Youthful Husband of the Herd;
Tho tender and untried the Yoke he feared.
Tho soft and white as flakes of falling Snow;
And scarce his budding Horns had armed his brow.
Ah, wretched Queen! you range the pathless Wood;
While on a flowery Bank he chaws the Cud:
Or sleeps in Shades, or through the Forest roves;
And roars with anguish for his absent Loves.
Ye Nymphs, with toils, his Forest-walk surround;
And trace his wandering Footsteps on the ground.
But, ah! perhaps my Passion he disdains;
And courts the milky Mothers of the Plains.
We search the ungrateful Fugitive abroad;
While they at home sustain his happy load.
He sung the Lover's fraud; the longing Maid,
With golden Fruit, like all the Sex, betrayed.
The Sisters mourning for their Brother's loss;
Their Bodies hid in Barks, and furred with Moss.
How each a rising Alder now appears;
And over the Po distills her Gummy Tears.
Then sung, how Gallus by a Muses hand,
Was led and welcomed to the sacred Strand.
The Senate rising to salute their Guest;
And Linus thus their gratitude expressed.
Receive this Present, by the Muses made;
The Pipe on which the Ascraean Pastor played:
With which of old he charmed the Savage Train:
And called the Mountain Ashes to the Plain.
Sing thou on this, thy Phoebus; and the Wood
Where once his Fane of Parian Marble stood.
On this his ancient Oracles rehearse;
And with new Numbers grace the God of Verse.
Why should I sing the double Scylla's Fate,
The first by Love transformed, the last by Hate.
A beauteous Maid above, but Magic Arts,
With barking Dogs deformed her nether parts.
What Vengeance on the passing Fleet she poured,
The Master frighted, and the Mates devoured.
Then ravished Philomel the Song expressed;
The Crime revealed; the Sisters cruel Feast;
And how in Fields the Lapwing Tereus reigns;
The warbling Nightingale in Woods complains.
While Progne makes on Chymney tops her moan;
And hovers over the Palace once her own.
Whatever Songs besides, the Delphian God
Had taught the Laurels, and the Spartan Flood,
Silenus sung: the Vales his Voice rebound;
And carry to the Skies the sacred Sound.
And now the setting Sun had warned the Swain
To call his counted Cattle from the Plain:
Yet still the unwearied Sire pursues the tuneful Strain.
Till unperceived the Heavens with Stars were hung:
And sudden Night surpised the yet unfinished Song.
The Seventh Pastoral. OR, MELIBOEUS.
The Argument.
Meliboeus here gives us the Relation of a sharp Poetical Contest between
Thyrsis and Corydon; at which he himself and Daphnis were present; who both
declared for Corydon.

To the Right Honble: Henry Lord Herbert Baron of Chirbury. andc.

Past: 7.


BEneath a Holm, repaired two jolly Swains;
Their Sheep and Goats together grazed the Plains.
Both young Arcadians, both alike inspired
To sing, and answer as the Song required.
Daphnis, as Umpire, took the middle Seat;
And Fortune thither led my weary Feet.
For while I fenced my Myrtles from the Cold,
The Father of my Flock had wandered from the Fold.
Of Daphnis I inquired; he, smiling, said,
Dismiss your Fear, and pointed where he fed.
And, if no greater Cares disturb your Mind,
Sit here with us, in covert of the Wind.
Your lowing Heyfars, of their own accord,
At wat'ring time will seek the neighboring Ford.
Here wanton Mincius winds along the Meads,
And shades his happy Banks with bending Reeds:
And see from yon old Oak, that mates the Skies,
How black the Clouds of swarming Bees arise.
What should I do! nor was Alcippe nigh,
Nor absent Phillis could my care supply,
To house, and feed by hand my weaning Lambs,
And drain the strutting Udders of their Dams?
Great was the strife betwixt the Singing Swains:
And I preferred my Pleasure to my Gains.
Alternate Rhyme the ready Champions chose:
These Corydon rehearsed, and Thyrsis those.
CORYDON. Ye Muses, ever fair, and ever young,
Assist my Numbers, and inspire my Song.
With all my Codrus O inspire my Breast,
For Codrus after Phoebus sings the best.
Or if my Wishes have presumed too high,
And stretched their bounds beyond Mortality,
The praise of artful Numbers I resign:
And hang my Pipe upon the Sacred Pine.

THYRSIS. Arcadian Swains, your Youthful Poet crown
With Ivy Wreaths; tho surly Codrus, frown.
Or if he blast my Muse with envious Praise,
Then fence my Brows with Amuletts of Bays.
Lest his ill Arts or his malicious Tongue
Should poison, or bewitch my growing Song.

CORYDON. These Branches of a Stag, this tusky Boar
(The first essay of Arms untried before)
Young Mycon offers, Delia, to thy Shrine;
But speed his hunting with thy Power divine,
Thy Statue then of Parian Stone shall stand;
Thy Legs in Buskins with a Purple Band.

THYRSIS. This Bowl of Milk, these Cakes, (our Country Fare,)
For thee, Priapus, yearly we prepare.
Because a little Garden is thy care.
But if the falling Lambs increase my Fold,
Thy Marble Statue shall be turned to Gold.

CORYDON. Fair Galathea, with thy silver Feet,
O, whiter than the Swan, and more than Hybla sweet;
Tall as a Poplar, taper as the Bole,
Come charm thy Shepherd, and restore my Soul.
Come when my lated Sheep, at night return;
And crown the silent Hours, and stop the rosy Morn.

THYRSIS. May I become as abject in thy sight,
As Sea-weed on the Shore, and black as Night:
Rough as a Bur, deformed like him who chaws
Sardinian Herbage to contract his Jaws;
Such and so monstrous let thy Swain appear,
If one day's Absence looks not like a Year.
Hence from the Field, for Shame: the Flock deserves
No better Feeding, while the Shepherd starves.

CORYDON. Ye mossy Springs, inviting easy Sleep,
Ye Trees, whose leafy Shades those mossy Fountains keep,
Defend my Flock, the Summer heats are near,
And Blossoms on the swelling Vines appear.

THYRSIS. With heapy Fires our cheerful Hearth is crowned;
And Firs for Torches in the Woods abound:
We fear not more the Winds, and wintry Cold,
Than Streams the Banks, or Wolves the bleating Fold.

CORYDON. Our Woods, with Juniper and Chestnuts crowned,
With falling Fruits and Berries paint the Ground;
And lavish Nature laughs, and strows her Stores around.
But if Alexis from our Mountains fly,
Even running Rivers leave their Channels dry.

THYRSIS. Parched are the Plains, and frying is the Field,
Nor withering Vines their juicy Vintage yield.
But if returning Phillis bless the Plain,
The Grass revives; the Woods are green again;
And Jove descends in Showers of kindly Rain.

CORYDON. The Poplar is by great Alcides worn:
The Brows of Phoebus his own Bays adorn.
The branching Vine the jolly Bacchus loves;
The Cyprian Queen delights in Myrtle Groves.
With Hazle, Phillis crowns her flowing Hair,
And while she loves that common Wreath to wear;
Nor Bays, nor Myrtle Bows, with Hazle shall compare.

THYRSIS. The towering Ash is fairest in the Woods;
In Gardens Pines, and Poplars by the Floods:
But if my Lycidas will ease my Pains,
And often visit our forsaken Plains;
To him the towering Ash shall yield in Woods;
In Gardens Pines, and Poplars by the Floods.

MELIBOEUS. I Have heard: and, Thyrsis, you contend in vain:
For Corydon, young Corydon shall reign,
The Prince of Poets, on the Mantuan Plain.

The Eighth Pastoral. OR, PHARMACEUTRIA.
The Argument.
This Pastoral contains the Songs of Damon and Alphesiboeus. The first of 'em
bewails the loss of his Mistress, and repines at the Success of his Rival
Mopsus. The other repeats the Charms of some Enchantress, who endeavored by
her Spells and Magic to make Daphnis in Love with her.

To the Rigt Honble: Charles Ld Clifford Baron of Lounsbrough in the County of
York

past. 8


THE mournful Muse of two despairing Swains,
The Love rejected, and the Lovers' pains;
To which the salvage Linxes listening stood,
The Rivers stood on heaps, and stopped the running Flood,
The hungry Herd their needful Food refuse;
Of two despairing Swains, I sing the mournful Muse.
Great Pollio, thou for whom thy Rome prepares
The ready Triumph of thy finished Wars,
Whither Timavus or the Illirian Coast,
Whatever Land or Sea thy presence boast;
Is there an hour in Fate reserved for me,
To Sing thy Deeds in Numbers worthy thee?
In numbers like to thine, could I rehearse
Thy lofty Tragic Scenes, thy labored Verse;
The World another Sophocles in thee,
Another Homer should behold in me:
Amidst thy Laurels let this Ivy twine,
Thine was my earlyest Muse; my latest shall be thine.
Scarce from our upper World the Shades withdrew;
Scarce were the Flocks refreshed with Morning Dew,
When Damon stretched beneath an Olive Shade,
And wildly staring upwards, thus inveighed
Against the conscious Gods, and cursed the cruel Maid.
Star of the Morning, why do thou delay?
Come, Lucifer, drive on the lagging Day.
While I my Nisa's perjured Faith deplore;
Witness ye Powers, by whom she falsely swore!
The Gods, alas, are Witnesses in vain;
Yet shall my dying Breath to Heaven complain.
Begin with me, my Flute, the sweet Maenalian Strain.
The Pines of Maenalus, the vocal Grove,
Are ever full of Verse, and full of Love:
They hear the Hinds, they hear their God complain;
Who suffered not the Reeds to rise in vain:
Begin with me, my Flute, the sweet Maenalian Strain.
Mopsus triumphs; he weds the willing Fair:
When such is Nisa's choice, what Lover can despair!
Now Griffons join with Mares; another Age
Shall see the Hound and Hind their Thirst assuage,
Promiscuous at the Spring: Prepare the Lights,
O Mopsus! and perform the bridal Rites.
Scatter thy Nuts among the scrambling Boys:
Thine is the Night; and thine the Nuptial Joys.
For thee the Sun declines: O happy Swain!
Begin with me, my Flute, the sweet Maenalian Strain.
O, Nisa! Justly to thy Choice condemned,
Whom have thou taken, whom have thou contemned!
For him, thou have refused my browzing Herd,
Scorned my thick Eyebrows, and my shaggy Beard.
Unhappy Damon sighs, and sings in vain:
While Nisa thinks no God regards a Lover's pain.
Begin with me, my Flute, the sweet Maenalian Strain.
I viewed thee first; how fatal was the View!
And led thee where the ruddy Wildings grew,
High on the planted hedge, and wet with Morning Dew.
Then scarce the bending Branches I could win;
The callow Down began to cloth my Chin;
I saw, I perished; yet indulged my Pain:
Begin with me, my Flute, the sweet Maenalian Strain.
I know thee, Love; in Deserts thou were bred;
And at the Dugs of Salvage Tigers fed:
Alien of Birth, Usurper of the Plains:
Begin with me, my Flute, the sweet Maenalian Strains.
Relentless Love the cruel Mother led,
The Blood of her unhappy Babes to shed:
Love lent the Sword; the Mother struck the blow;
Inhuman she; but more inhuman thou.
Alien of Birth, Usurper of the Plains:
Begin with me, my Flute, the sweet Maenalian Strains.
Old doting Nature change thy Course anew:
And let the trembling Lamb the Wolf pursue:
Let Oaks now glitter with Hesperian Fruit,
And purple Daffodils from Alder shoot.
Fat Amber let the Tamarisk distill:
And hooting Owls contend with Swans in Skill.
Hoarse Tity'rus strive with Orpheus in the Woods:
And challenge famed Arion on the Floods.
Or, oh! let Nature cease; and Chaos reign:
Begin with me, my Flute, the sweet Maenalian Strain.
Let Earth be Sea; and let the whelming Tide,
The lifeless Limbs of luckless Damon hide:
Farewell, ye secret Woods, and shady Groves,
Haunts of my Youth, and conscious of my Loves!
From yon high Cliff I plunge into the Main;
Take the last Present of thy dying Swain:
And cease, my silent Flute, the sweet Maenalian Strain.
Now take your Turns, ye Muses, to rehearse
His Friend's Complaint; and mighty Magic Verse.
Bring running Water; bind those Altars round
With Fillets; and with Vervain strew the Ground:
Make fat with Frankincense the sacred Fires;
To re-inflame my Daphnis with Desires.
It Is done, we want but Verse. Restore, my Charms,
My lingering Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Pale Phoebe, drawn by Verse from Heaven descends:
And Circe changed with Charms Ulysses Friends.
Verse breaks the Ground, and penetrates the Brake;
And in the winding Cavern splits the Snake.
Verse fires the frozen Veins: Restore, my Charms,
My lingering Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Around his waxen Image, first I wind
Three woollen Fillets, of three Colors joined:
Thrice bind about his thrice devoted head,
Which round the sacred Altar thrice is led.
Unequal Numbers please the Gods: my Charms,
Restore my Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Knit with three knots, the Fillets, knit 'em straight;
And say, These Knots to Love I consecrate.
Haste, Amaryllis, haste; restore, my Charms,
My lovely Daphnis to my longing Arms.
As Fire this Figure hardens, made of Clay;
And this of Wax with Fire consumes away;
Such let the Soul of cruel Daphnis be;
Hard to the rest of Women; soft to me.
Crumble the sacred Mole of Salt and Corn,
Next in the Fire the Bays with Brimstone burn.
And while it crackles in the Sulphur, say,
This, I for Daphnis burn; thus Daphnis burn away.
This Laurel is his Fate: Restore, my Charms,
My lovely Daphnis to my longing Arms.
As when the raging Heyfar, through the Grove,
Stung with Desire, pursues her wandering Love;
Faint at the last, she seeks the weedy Pools,
To quench her thirst, and on the Rushes rowls:
Careless of Night, unmindful to return,
Such fruitless Fires perfidious Daphnis burn.
While I so scorn his Love; Restore, my Charms,
My lingering Daphnis to my longing Arms.
These Garments once were his; and left to me;
The Pledges of his promised Loyalty:
Which underneath my Threshold I bestow;
These Pawns, O sacred Earth! to me my Daphnis owe.
As these were his, so mine is he; my Charms,
Restore their lingering Lord to my deluded Arms.
These poisonous Plants, for Magic use designed,
(The noblest and the best of all the baneful Kind,)
Old Moeris brought me from the Pontick Strand:
And culled the Mischief of a bounteous Land.
Smeared with these powerful Juices, on the Plain,
He howls a Wolf among the hungry Train:
And often the mighty Negromancer boasts,
With these, to call from Tombs the stalking Ghosts:
And from the roots to tear the standing Corn;
Which, whirld aloft, to distant Fields is born.
Such is the strength of Spells; restore, my Charms,
My lingering Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Bear out these Ashes; cast 'em in the Brook;
Cast backwards over your head, nor turn your look:
Since neither Gods, nor Godlike Verse can move,
Break out ye smothered Fires, and kindle smothered Love.
Exert your utmost power, my lingering Charms,
And force my Daphnis to my longing Arms.
See, while my last endeavors I delay,
The waking Ashes rise, and round our Altars play!
Run to the Threshold, Amaryllis, hark,
Our Hylas opens, and begins to bark.
Good Heaven! may Lovers what they wish believe;
Or dream their wishes, and those dreams deceive!
No more, my Daphnis comes; no more, my Charms;
He comes, he runs, he leaps to my desiring Arms.
The Ninth Pastoral. OR, LYCIDAS, and MOERIS.
The Argument.
When Virgil, by the Favor of Augustus, had recovered his Patrimony near
Mantua, and went in hope to take Possession, he was in danger to be slain by
Arius the Centurion, to whom those Lands were assigned by the Emperor, in
reward of his Service against Brutus and Cassius. This Pastoral therefore is
filled with complaints of his hard Usage; and the Persons introduced, are the
Bailiff of Virgil, Moeris, and his Friend Lycidas.

To the Right Honble. Marquess of Hartington the Duke of William Lord Eldest
Son to His Grace the Duke of Devonshire.

Past: (...)


LYCIDAS. HO Moeris! whether on thy way so fast?
This leads to Town.

MOERIS. O Lycidas, at last
The Time is come I never thought to see,
(Strange Revolution for my Farm and me)
When the grim Captain in a surly Tone
Cries out, pack up ye Rascals, and be gone.
Kicked out, we set the best Face on it we could,
And these two Kids, to appease his angry Mood,
I bear, of which the Furies give him good.

LYCIDAS. Your Country Friends were told another Tale;
That from the sloaping Mountain to the Vale,
And dodder'd Oak, and all the Banks along,
Menalcas saved his Fortune with a Song.

MOERIS. Such was the News, indeed, but Songs and Rhymes
Prevail as much in these hard Iron Times,
As would a plump of trembling Fowl, that rise
Against an Eagle sousing from the Skies.
And had not Phoebus warned me by the croak
Of an old Raven, from a hollow Oak,
To shun debate, Menalcas had been slain,
And Moeris not survived him, to complain.

LYCIDAS. Now Heaven defend! could barbarous Rage induce
The Brutal Son of Mars, to insult the sacred Muse!
Who then should sing the Nymphs, or who rehearse
The Waters gliding in a smoother Verse!
Or Amaryllis praise, that Heavenly Lay,
That shortened as we went, our tedious Way.
O Tity'rus, tend my Herd, and see them fed;
To Morning Pastures, Evening Waters led:
And 'ware the Lybian Ridgils butting Head.

MOERIS. Or what unfinished He to Varus read;
Thy Name, O Varus (if the kinder Powers
Preserve our Plains, and shield the Mantuan Towers,
Obnoxious by Cremona's neighboring Crime,)
The Wings of Swans, and stronger pinioned Rhyme,
Shall raise aloft, and soaring bear above
The immortal Gift of Gratitude to Jove.

LYCIDAS. Sing on, sing on, for I can never be cloyed,
So may thy Swarms the baleful Eugh avoid:
So may thy Cows their burdened Bags distend,
And Trees to Goats their willing Branches bend.
Mean as I am, yet have the Muses made
Me free, a Member of the tuneful trade:
At least the Shepherds seem to like my Lays,
But I discern their Flattery from their Praise:
I nor to Cinna's Ears, nor Varus dare aspire;
But gabble like a Goose, amidst the Swan-like Quire.

MOERIS. It Is what I have been conning in my Mind:
Nor are they Verses of a Vulgar Kind.
Come, Galatea, come, the Seas forsake;
What Pleasures can the Tides with their hoarse Murmurs make?
See, on the Shore inhabits purple Spring;
Where Nightingales their Lovesick Ditty fing;
See, Meads with purling Streams, with Flowers the Ground,
The Grottoes cool, with shady Poplars crowned,
And creeping Vines on Arbours weaved around.
Come then, and leave the Waves tumultuous roar,
Let the wild Surges vainly beat the Shore.

LYCIDAS. Or that sweet Song I heard with such delight;
The same you sung alone one starry Night;
The Tune I still retain, but not the Words.

MOERIS. Why, Daphnis, do thou search in old Records,
To know the Seasons when the Stars arise?
See Caesar's Lamp is lighted in the Skies:
The Star, whose Rays the blushing Grapes adorn,
And swell the kindly ripening Ears of Corn.
Under this influence, graft the tender Shoot;
Thy Childrens Children shall enjoy the Fruit.
The rest I have forgot, for Cares and Time
Change all things, and untune my Soul to Rhyme:
I could have once sung down a Summer's Sun,
But now the Chime of Poetry is done.
My Voice grows hoarse; I feel the Notes decay,
As if the Wolves had seen me first to Day.
But these, and more than I to mind can bring,
Menalcas has not yet forgott to sing.

LYCIDAS. Thy faint Excuses but inflame me more;
And now the Waves roll silent to the Shore.
Hushed Winds the topmost Branches scarcely bend,
As if thy tuneful Song they did attend:
Already we have half our way overcome;
Far off I can discern Bianor's Tomb;
Here, where the Labourer's hands have formed a Bower
Of wreathing Trees, in Singing waste an Hour.
Rest here thy weary Limbs, thy Kids lay down,
We Have Day before us yet, to reach the Town:
Or if e're Night the gathering Clouds we fear,
A Song will help the beating Storm to bear.
And that thou may not be too late abroad,
Sing, and I Will ease thy Shoulders of thy Load.

MOERIS. Cease to request me, let us mind our way;
Another Song requires another Day.
When good Menalcas comes, if he rejoice,
And find a Friend at Court, I Will find a Voice.

The Tenth Pastoral. OR, GALLUS.
The Argument.
Gallus a great Patron of Virgil, and an excellent Poet, was very deeply in
Love with one Citheris, whom he calls Lycoris; and who had forsaken him for the
Company of a Soldier. The Poet therefore supposes his Friend Gallus retired in
his height of Melancholy into the Solitudes of Arcadia (the celebrated Scene
of Pastorals;) where he represents him in a very languishing Condition with all
the Rural Deities about him, pitying his hard Usage, and condoling his
Misfortune.

To the Right Hon^^e. Charles Montague Esqr: one of the Lords Commrs. of his
Majts. Treasury, Chancellor, and under Treasurer of his Majts. Excheqr. and one
of his Majts. Most Honble. Privy Council.

Past: 10.


THY sacred Succor, Arethusa, bring,
To crown my Labor: it is the last I sing.
Which proud Lycoris may with Pity view;
The Muse is mournful, though the Numbers few.
Refuse me not a Verse, to Grief and Gallus due.
So may thy Silver Streams beneath the Tide,
Unmixed with briny Seas, securely glide.
Sing then, my Gallus, and his hopeless Vows;
Sing, while my Cattle crop the tender Browze.
The vocal Grove shall answer to the Sound,
And Echo, from the Vales, the tuneful Voice rebound.
What Lawns or Woods withheld you from his Aid,
Ye Nymphs, when Gallus was to Love betrayed;
To Love, unpitied by the cruel Maid?
Not steepy Pindus could retard your Course,
Nor cleft Parnassus, nor the Aonian Source:
Nothing that owns the Muses could suspend
Your Aid to Gallus, Gallus is their Friend.
For him the lofty Laurel stands in Tears;
And hung with humid Pearls the lowly Shrub appears.
Maenalian Pines the Godlike Swain bemoan;
When spread beneath a Rock he sighed alone;
And cold Lycaeus wept from every dropping Stone.
The Sheep surround their Shepherd, as he lies:
Blush not, sweet Poet, nor the name despise:
Along the Streams his Flock Adonis fed;
And yet the Queen of Beauty blessed his Bed.
The Swains and tardy Neat-herds came, and last
Menalcas, wet with beating Winter Mast.
Wondering, they asked from whence arose thy Flame;
Yet, more amazed, thy own Apollo came.
Flushed were his Cheeks, and glowing were his Eyes:
Is she thy Care, is she thy Care, he cries?
Thy false Lycoris flies thy Love and thee;
And for thy Rival tempts the raging Sea,
The Forms of horrid War, and Heavens Inclemency.
Sylvanus came: his Brows a Country Crown
Of Fennel, and of nodding Lillies, drown.
Great Pan arrived; and we beheld him too,
His Cheeks and Temples of Vermilion Hue.
Why, Gallus, this immod'rate Grief, he cried:
Think thou that Love with Tears is satisfied?
The Meads are sooner drunk with Morning Dews;
The Bees with flowery Shrubs, the Goats with Brouze.
Unmoved, and with dejected Eyes, he mourned:
He paused, and then these broken Words returned.
It Is past; and Pity gives me no Relief:
But you, Arcadian Swains, shall sing my Grief:
And on your Hills, my last Complaints renew;
So sad a Song is only worthy you.
How light would lie the Turf upon my Breast,
If you my Sufferings in your Songs expressed?
Ah! that your Birth and Business had been mine;
To penn the Sheep, and press the swelling Vine!
Had Phyllis or Amyntas caused my Pain,
Or any Nymph, or Shepherd on the Plain,
Tho Phyllis brown, tho black Amyntas were,
Are Violets not sweet, because not fair?
Beneath the Sallows, and the shady Vine,
My Loves had mixed their pliant Limbs with mine;
Phyllis with Myrtle Wreaths had crowned my Hair,
And soft Amyntas sung away my Care.
Come, see what Pleasures in our Plains abound;
The Woods, the Fountains, and the flowery ground.
As you are beauteous, were you half so true,
Here could I live, and love, and dye with only you.
Now I to fighting Fields am sent afar,
And strive in Winter Camps with toils of War;
While you, (alas, that I should find it so!)
To shun my sight, your Native Soil forgo,
And climb the frozen Alps, and tread the eternal Snow.
Ye Frosts and Snows her tender Body spare,
Those are not Limbs for Ysicles to tear.
For me, the Wilds and Deserts are my Choice;
The Muses, once my Care; my once harmonious Voice.
There will I sing, forsaken and alone,
The Rocks and hollow Caves shall echo to my Moan.
The Rind of every Plant her Name shall know;
And as the Rind extends, the Love shall grow.
Then on Arcadian Mountains will I chase
(Mixed with the Woodland Nymphs) the Salvage Race.
Nor Cold shall hinder me, with Horns and Hounds,
To third the Thickets, or to leap the Mounds.
And now methinks over steepy Rocks I go;
And rush through sounding Woods, and bend the Parthian Bow:
As if with Sports my Sufferings I could ease,
Or by my Pains the God of Love appease.
My Frenzy changes, I delight no more
On Mountain tops, to chase the tusky Boar;
No Game but hopeless Love my thoughts pursue:
Once more ye Nymphs, and Songs, and sounding Woods adieu.
Love alters not for us, his hard Decrees,
Not tho beneath the Thracian Clime we freeze;
Or Italy's indulgent Heaven forgo;
And in mid-Winter tread Scythonian Snow.
Or when the Barks of Elms are scorched, we keep
On Meroes burning Plains the Lybian Sheep.
In Hell, and Earth, and Seas, and Heaven above,
Love conquers all; and we must yield to Love.
My Muses, here your sacred Raptures end:
The Verse was what I owed my suffering Friend.
This while I sung, my Sorrows I deceived,
And bending Osiers into Baskets weaved.
The Song, because inspired by you, shall shine:
And Gallus will approve, because it is mine.
Gallus, for whom my holy Flames renew,
Each hour, and every moment rise in view:
As Alders, in the Spring, their Boles extend;
And heave so fiercely, that the Bark they rend.
Now let us rise, for hoarseness often invades
The Singer's Voice, who sings beneath the Shades.
From Juniper, unwholsom Dews distill,
That blast the sooty Corn; the withering Herbage kill;
Away, my Goats, away: for you have browz'd your fill.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP Earl of Chesterfield, etc.
My Lord,
I Cannot begin my Address to your Lordship, better than in the words of
Virgil, -- Quod optanti, Divum promittere Nemo
Auderet, volvenda Dies, en, attulit ultro.
Seven Years together I have concealed the longing which I had to appear before
you: A time as tedious as Aeneas passed in his wandering Voyage, before he
reached the promised Italy. But I considered, that nothing which my meanness
could produce, was worthy of your Patronage. At last this happy Occasion
offered, of Presenting to you the best Poem of the best Poet. If I balk'd this
opportunity, I was in despair of finding such another; and if I took it, I was
still uncertain whether you would vouchsafe to accept it from my hands. 'Twas a
bold venture which I made, in desiring your permission to lay my unworthy
Labors at your feet. But my rashness has succeeded beyond my hopes: And you
have been pleased not to suffer an Old Man to go discontented out of the World,
for want of that protection, of which he had been so long Ambitious. I have
known a Gentleman in disgrace, and not daring to appear before King Charles the
Second, though he much desired it: At length he took the confidence to attend a
fair Lady to the Court; and told His Majesty, that under her protection he had
presumed to wait on him. With the same humble confidence I present my self
before your Lordship, and attending on Virgil hope a gracious reception. The
Gentleman succeeded, because the powerful Lady was his Friend; but I have too
much injured my great Author, to expect he should intercede for me. I would
have Translated him, but according to the litteral French and Italian Phrases,
I fear I have traduced him. It Is the fault of many a well-meaning Man, to be
officious in a wrong place, and do a prejudice, where he had endeavored to do
a service. Virgil wrote his Georgics in the full strength and vigor of his
Age, when his Judgment was at the height, and before his Fancy was declining.
He had, (according to our homely Saying) his full swing at this Poem, beginning
it about the Age of Thirty Five; and scarce concluding it before he arrived at
Forty. It Is observed both of him, and Horace, and I believe it will hold in all
great Poets; that though they wrote before with a certain heat of Genius which
inspired them, yet that heat was not perfectly digested. There is required a
continuance of warmth to ripen the best and Noblest Fruits. Thus Horace in his
First and Second Book of Odes, was still rising, but came not to his Meridian
'till the Third. After which his Judgment was an overpoize to his Imagination:
He grew too cautious to be bold enough, for he descended in his Fourth by slow
degrees, and in his Satires and Epistles, was more a Philosopher and a Critic
than a Poet. In the beginning of Summer the days are almost at a stand, with
little variation of length or shortness, because at that time the Diurnal
Motion of the Sun partakes more of a Right Line, than of a Spiral. The same is
the method of Nature in the frame of Man. He seems at Forty to be fully in his
Summer Tropic; somewhat before, and somewhat after, he finds in his Soul but
small increases or decays. From Fifty to Threescore the Balance generally
holds even, in our colder Clymates: For he loses not much in Fancy; and
Judgment, which is the effect of Observation, still increases: His succeeding
years afford him little more than the stubble of his own Harvest: Yet if his
Constitution be healthful, his Mind may still retain a decent vigor; and the
Gleanings of that Ephraim, in Comparison with others, will surpass the Vintage
of Abiezer. I have called this somewhere by a bold Metaphor, a green Old Age;
but Virgil has given me his Authority for the Figure.

Jam Senior; sed Cruda Deo, viridisque Senectus. Amongst those few who enjoy
the advantage of a latter Spring, your Lordship is a rare Example: Who being
now arrived at your great Clymacterique, yet give no proof of the least decay
in your Excellent Judgment, and comprehension of all things, which are within
the compass of Humane Understanding. Your Conversation is as easy as it is
instructive, and I could never observe the least vanity or the least assuming
in any thing you said: but a natural unaffected Modesty, full of good sense,
and well digested. A clearness of Notion, expressed in ready and unstudied
words. No Man has complained, or ever can, that you have discoursed too long on
any Subject: for you leave us in an eagerness of Learning more; pleased with
what we hear, but not satisfied, because you will not speak so much as we could
wish. I dare not excuse your Lordship from this fault; for though it is none in
you, it is one to all who have the happiness of being known to you. I must
confess the Critics make it one of Virgil's Beauties, that having said what he
thought convenient, he always left somewhat for the imagination of his Readers
to supply: That they might gratify their fancies, by finding more, in what he
had written, than at first they could; and think they had added to his thought,
when it was all there beforehand, and he only saved himself the expense of
words. However it was, I never went from your Lordship, but with a longing to
return, or without a hearty Curse to him who invented Ceremonies in the World,
and put me on the nec^ssity of withdrawing, when it was my interest as well as
my desire, to have given you a much longer trouble. I cannot imagine (if your
Lordship will give me leave to speak my thoughts) but you have had a more than
ordinary vigor in your Youth. For too much of heat is required at first, that
there may not too little be left at last. A Prodigal Fire is only capable of
large remains: And yours, my Lord, still burns the clearer in declining. The
Blaze is not so fierce as at the first, but the Smoke is wholly vanished; and
your Friends who stand about you, are not only sensible of a cheerful warmth,
but are kept at an awful distance by its force. In my small Observations of
Mankind, I have ever sound, that such as are not rather too full of Spirit when
they are young, degenerate to dullness in their Age. Sobriety in our riper
years is the effect of a well-concocted warmth; but where the Principles are
only Phlegm, what can be expected from the waterish Matter, but an insipid
Manhood, and a stupid old Infancy; Discretion in Leading-strings, and a
confirmed ignorance on Crutches? Virgil in his Third Georgic, when he describes
a Colt, who promises a Courser for the Race, or for the Field of Battle, shows
him the first to pass the Bridge, which trembles under him, and to stem the
torrent of the flood. His beginnings must be in rashness; a Noble Fault: But
Time and Experience will correct that Error, and tame it into a deliberate and
well-weigh'd Courage; which knows both to be cautious and to dare, as occasion
offers. Your Lordship is a Man of Honor, not only so unstained, but so
unquestioned, that you are the living Standard of that Heroic Virtue; so truly
such, that if I would flatter you, I could not. It takes not from you, that you
were born with Principles of Generosity and Probity: But it adds to you, that
you have cultivated Nature, and made those Principles, the Rule and Measure of
all your Actions. The World knows this, without my telling: Yet Poets have a
right of Recording it to all Posterity. Dignum Laud Virum, Musa vetat Mori.
Epaminondas, Lucullus, and the two first Caesar's, were not esteemed the worse
Commanders, for having made Philosophy, and the Liberal Arts their Study.
Cicero might have been their Equal, but that he wanted Courage. To have both
these Virtues, and to have improved them both, with a softness of Manners, and
a sweetness of Conversation, few of our Nobility can fill that Character: One
there is, and so conspicuous by his own light, that he needs not

Digito monstrari, and dicier Hic est. To be Nobly Born, and of an Ancient
Family, is in the extremes of Fortune, either good or bad; for Virtue and
Descent are no Inheritance. A long Series of Ancestors shows the Native with
great advantage at the first; but if he any way degenerate from his Line, the
least Spot is visible on Ermine. But to preserve this whiteness in its Original
Purity, you, my Lord, have, like that Ermine, forsaken the common Track of
Business, which is not always clean: You have chosen for your self a private
Greatness, and will not be polluted with Ambition. It has been observed in
former times, that none have been so greedy of Employments, and of managing the
Public, as they who have least deserved their Stations. But such only merit to
be called Patriots, under whom we see their Country Flourish. I have laughed
sometimes (for who would always be a Heraclitus?) when I have reflected on
those Men, who from time to time have shot themselves into the World. I have
seen many Successions of them; some bolting out upon the Stage with vast
applause, and others hissed off, and quitting it with disgrace. But while they
were in action, I have constantly observed, that they seemed desirous to
retreat from Business: Greatness they said was nauseous, and a Crowd was
troublesome; a quiet privacy was their Ambition. Some few of them I believe
said this in earnest, and were making a provision against future want, that
they might enjoy their Age with ease: They saw the happiness of a private Life,
and promised to themselves a Blessing, which every day it was in their power to
possess. But they deferred it, and lingered still at Court, because they
thought they had not yet enough to make them happy: They would have more, and
laid in to make their Solitude Luxurious. A wretched Philosophy, which Epicurus
never taught them in his Garden: They loved the prospect of this quiet in
reversion, but were not willing to have it in possession; they would first be
Old, and made as sure of Health and Life, as if both of them were at their
dispose. But put them to the necessity of a present choice, and they preferred
continuance in Power: Like the Wretch who called Death to his assistance, but
refused it when he came. The Great Scipio was not of their Opinion, who indeed
sought Honors in his Youth, and endured the Fatigues with which he purchased
them. He served his Country when it was in need of his Courage and his Conduct,
'till he thought it was time to serve himself: But dismounted from the Saddle,
when he found the Beast which bore him, began to grow restiff and ungovernable.
But your Lordship has given us a better Example of Moderation. You saw betimes
that Ingratitude is not confined to Commonwealths; and therefore though you
were formed alike, for the greatest of Civil Employments, and Military
Commands, yet you pushed not your Fortune to rise in either; but contented your
self with being capable, as much as any whosoever, of defending your Country
with your Sword, or assisting it with your Counsel, when you were called. For
the rest, the respect and love which was paid you, not only in the Province
where you live, but generally by all who had the happiness to know you, was a
wise Exchange for the Honors of the Court: A place of forgetfulness, at the
best, for well deservers. It Is necessary for the polishing of Manners, to have
breathed that Air, but it is infectious even to the best Morals to live always
in it. It Is a dangerous Commerce, where an honest Man is sure at the first of
being Cheated; and he recovers not his Losses, but by learning to Cheat others.
The undermining Smile becomes at length habitual; and the drift of his
plausible Conversation, is only to flatter one, that he may betray another. Yet
it is good to have been a looker on, without venturing to play; that a Man may
know false Dice another time, though he never means to use them. I commend not
him who never knew a Court, but him who forsakes it because he knows it. A
young Man deserves no praise, who out of melancholy Zeal leaves the World
before he has well tried it, and runs headlong into Religion. He who carries a
Maidenhead into a Cloister, is sometimes apt to lose it there, and to repent of
his Repentance. He only is like to endure Austerities, who has already found
the inconvenience of Pleasures. For almost every Man will be making Experiments
in one part or another of his Life: And the danger is the less when we are
young: For having tried it early, we shall not be apt to repeat it afterward.
Your Lordship therefore may properly be said to have chosen a Retreat; and not
to have chosen it 'till you had maturely weighed the advantages of rising
higher with the hazards of the fall. Res non parta labor, sed relicta, was
thought by a Poet, to be one of the requisites to a happy Life. Why should a
reasonable Man put it into the power of Fortune to make him miserable, when his
Ancestors have taken care to release him from her? Let him venture, says
Horace, Qui Zonam perdidit. He who has nothing, plays securely, for he may win,
and cannot be poorer if he loses. But he who is born to a plentiful Estate, and
is Ambitious of Offices at Court, sets a stake to Fortune, which she can seldom
answer: If he gains nothing, he loses all, or part of what was once his own;
and if he gets, he cannot be certain but he may refund.

In short, however he succeeds, it is Covetousness that induced him first to
play, and Covetousness is the undoubted sign of ill sense at bottom. The Odds
are against him that he loses, and one loss may be of more consequence to him,
than all his former winnings. It Is like the present War of the Christians
against the Turk; every year they gain a Victory, and by that a Town; but if
they are once defeated, they lose a Province at a blow, and endanger the safety
of the whole Empire. You, my Lord, enjoy your quiet in a Garden, where you have
not only the leisure of thinking, but the pleasure to think of nothing which
can discompose your Mind. A good Conscience is a Port which is Land-lock'd on
every side, and where no Winds can possibly invade, no Tempests can arise.
There a Man may stand upon the Shore, and not only see his own Image, but that
of his Maker, clearly reflected from the undisturbed and silent waters. Reason
was intended for a Blessing, and such it is to Men of Honor and Integrity; who
desire no more, than what they are able to give themselves; like the happy Old
Coricyan, whom my Author describes in his Fourth Georgic; whose Fruits and
Salads on which he lived contented, were all of his own growth, and his own
Plantation. Virgil seems to think that the Blessings of a Country Life are not
complete, without an improvement of Knowledge by Contemplation and Reading.

O Fortunatos nimium, bona si sua norint
Agricolas!
It Is but half possession not to understand that happiness which we possess: A
foundation of good Sense, and a cultivation of Learning, are required to give a
seasoning to Retirement, and make us taste the blessing. God has bestowed on
your Lordship the first of these, and you have bestowed on your self the
second. Eden was not made for Beasts, though they were suffered to live in it,
but for their Master, who studied God in the Works of his Creation. Neither
could the Devil have been happy there with all his Knowledge, for he wanted
Innocence to make him so. He brought Envy, Malice, and Ambition into Paradise,
which sour'd to him the sweetness of the Place. Wherever inordinate Affections
are, it is Hell. Such only can enjoy the Country, who are capable of thinking
when they are there, and have left their Passions behind them in the Town. Then
they are prepared for Solitude; and in that Solitude is prepared for them Et
secura quies, and nescia fallere vita.

As I began this Dedication with a Verse of Virgil, so I conclude it with
another. The continuance of your Health, to enjoy that Happiness which you so
well deserve, and which you have provided for your self, is the sincere and
earnest Wish of

Your Lordship's most Devoted, and most Obedient Servant, JOHN DRYDEN.

AN ESSAY ON THE GEORGICS.
VIRGIL may be reckoned the first who introduced three new kinds of Poetry
among the Romans, which he Copied after three the Greatest Masters of Greece.
Theocritus and Homer have still disputed for the advantage over him in Pastoral
and Heroicks, but I think all are Unanimous in giving him the precedence to
Hesiod in his Georgies. The truth of it is, the Sweetness and Rusticity of a
Pastoral cannot be so well expressed in any other Tongue as in the Greek, when
rightly mixed and qualified with the Doric Dialect; nor can the Majesty of an
Heroic Poem any where appear so well as in this Language, which has a Natural
greatness in it, and can be often rendered more deep and sonorous by the
Pronunciation of the Ionians. But in the middle Style, where the Writers in
both Tongues are on a Level: we see how far Virgil has excelled all who have
written in the same way with him.

There has been abundance of Criticism spent on Virgil's Pastorals and Aeneids,
but the Georgics are a Subject which none of the Critics have sufficiently
taken into their Consideration; most of 'em passing it over in silence, or
casting it under the same head with Pastoral; a division by no means proper,
unless we suppose the Style of a Husbandman ought to be imitated in a Georgic
as that of a Shepherd is in Pastoral. But though the Scene of both these Poems
lies in the same place; the Speakers in them are of a quite different
Character, since the Precepts of Husbandry are not to be delivered with the
simplicity of a Plowman, but with the Address of a Poet. No Rules therefore
that relate to Pastoral, can any way affect the Georgics, which fall under that
Class of Poetry which consists in giving plain and direct Instructions to the
Reader; whether they be Moral Duties, as those of Theognis and Pythagoras; or
Philosophical Speculations, as those of Aratus and Lucretius; or Rules of
Practice, as those of Hesiod and Virgil. Among these different kinds of
Subjects, that which the Georgics goes upon, is I think the meanest and the
least improving, but the most pleasing and delightful. Precepts of Morality,
besides the Natural Corruption of our Tempers, which makes us averse to them,
are so abstracted from Ideas of Sense, that they seldom give an opportunity for
those Beautiful Descriptions and Images which are the Spirit and Life of
Poetry. Natural Philosophy has indeed sensible Objects to work upon, but then
it often puzzles the Reader with the Intricacy of its Notions, and perplexes
him with the multitude of its Disputes. But this kind of Poetry I am now
speaking of, addresses it self wholly to the Imagination: It is altogether
Conversant among the Fields and Woods, and has the most delightful part of
Nature for its Province. It raises in our Minds a pleasing variety of Scenes
and Landskips, whilst it teaches us: and makes the dryest of its Precepts look
like a Description. A Georgic therefore is some part of the Science of
Husbandry put into a pleasing Dress, and set off with all the Beauties and
Embellishments of Poetry. Now since this Science of Husbandry is of a very
large extent, the Poet shows his Skill in singling out such Precepts to preceed
on, as are useful, and at the same time most capable of Ornament. Virgil was so
well acquainted with this Secret, that to set off his first Georgic, he has run
into a set of Precepts, which are almost foreign to his Subject, in that
Beautiful account he gives us of the Signs in Nature, which precede the Changes
of the Weather.

And if there be so much Art in the choice of fit Precepts, there is much more
required in the Treating of 'em; that they may fall in after each other by a
Natural unforced Method, and show themselves in the best and most advantageous
Light. They should all be so finely wrought together into the same Piece, that
no course Seam may discover where they join; as in a Curious Bread of
Needle Work, one Color falls away by such just degrees, and another rises so
insensibly, that we see the variety, without being able to distinguish the
total vanishing of the one from the first appearance of the other. Nor is it
sufficient to range and dispose this Body of Precepts into a clear and easy
Method, unless they are delivered to us in the most pleasing and agreeable
manner: For there are several ways of conveying the same Truth to the Mind of
Man, and to choose the pleasantest of these ways, is that which chiefly
distinguishes Poetry from Prose, and makes Virgil's Rules of Husbandry
pleasanter to read than Varro's. Where the Prose-writer tells us plainly what
ought to be done, the Poet often conceals the Precept in a description, and
represents his Countryman performing the Action in which he would instruct his
Reader. Where the one sets out as fully and distinctly as he can, all the parts
of the Truth, which he would communicate to us; the other singles out the most
pleasing Circumstance of this Truth, and so conveys the whole in a more
diverting manner to the Understanding. I shall give one Instance out of a
multitude of this nature, that might be found in the Georgics, where the Reader
may see the different ways Virgil has taken to express the same thing, and how
much pleasanter every manner of Expression is, than the plain and direct
mention of it would have been. It is in the Second Georgic where he tells us
what Trees will bear Grafting on each other.

Et saepe alterius ramos impune videmus,
Vertere in alterius, mutatamque; insita mala
Far pyrum, and prunis lapidosa rubescere corna.
-- Steriles Platani malos gessere valentes,
Castaneae fagos, ornusque; incanuit albo
Flore pyri: Glandemque; sues fregere sub ulmis.
-- Nec longum tempus: and ingens
Exijt ad Coelum ramis felicibus arbos;
Miraturque novas frondes, and non sua poma.
Here we see the Poet considered all the Effects of this Union between Trees of
different kinds, and took notice of that Effect which had the most surprise,
and by consequence the most delight in it, to express the capacity that was in
them of being thus united. This way of Writing is every where much in use among
the Poets, and is particularly practiced by Virgil, who loves to suggest a
Truth indirectly, and without giving us a full and open view of it: To let us
see just so much as will naturally lead the Imagination into all the parts that
lie concealed. This is wonderfully diverting to the Understanding, thus to
receive a Precept, that enters as it were through a By-way, and to apprehend an
Idea that draws a whole train after it: For here the Mind, which is always
delighted with its own Discoveries, only takes the hint from the Poet, and
seems to work out the rest by the strength of her own faculties.

But since the inculcating Precept upon Precept, will at length prove tiresom
to the Reader, if he meets with no other Entertainment, the Poet must take care
not to encumber his Poem with too much Business; but sometimes to relieve the
Subject with a Moral Reflection, or let it rest a while for the sake of a
pleasant and pertinent digression. Nor is it sufficient to run out into
beautiful and diverting digressions (as it is generally thought) unless they
are brought in aptly, and are something of a piece with the main design of the
Georgic: for they ought to have a remote alliance at least to the Subject, that
so the whole Poem may be more uniform and agreeable in all its parts. We should
never quite lose sight of the Country, though we are sometimes entertained with a
distant prospect of it. Of this nature are Virgil's Descriptions of the
Original of Agriculture, of the Fruitfulness of Italy, of a Country Life, and
the like, which are not brought in by force, but naturally rise out of the
principal Argument and Design of the Poem. I know no one digression in the
Georgics that may seem to contradict this Observation, besides that in the
latter end of the First Book, where the Poet launches out into a discourse of
the Battle of Pharsalia, and the Actions of Augustus: But it is worth while to
consider how admirably he has turned the course of his narration into its
proper Channel, and made his Husbandman concerned even in what relates to the
Battle, in those inimitable Lines, Scilicet and tempus veniet, cum finibus illis
Agricola in curvo terram molitus aratro,
Exesa inveniet scabra rubigine pila:
Aut gravibus rastris galeas pulsabit inanes,
Grandiaque effossis mirabitur ossa sepulchris.
And afterward speaking of Augustus's Actions, he still remembers that
Agriculture ought to be some way hinted at throughout the whole Poem.

-- Non ullus Aratro
Dignus honos: squalent abductis arva colonis:
Et curvae rigidum falces conflantur in Ensem.
We now come to the Style which is proper to a Georgic; and indeed this is the
part on which the Poet must lay out all his strength, that his words may be
warm and glowing, and that every thing he describes may immediately present it
self, and rise up to the Reader's view. He ought in particular to be careful of
not letting his Subject debase his Style, and betray him into a meanness of
Expression, but every where to keep up his Verse in all the Pomp of Numbers,
and Dignity of words.

I think nothing which is a Phrase or Sayingin common talk, should be admitted
into a serious Poem: because it takes off from the Solemnity of the expression,
and gives it too great a turn of Familiarity: much less ought the low Phrases
and Terms of Art, that are adapted to Husbandry, have any place in such a Work
as the Georgic, which is not to appear in the natural simplicity and nakedness
of its Subject, but in the pleasantest Dress that Poetry can bestow on it. Thus
Virgil, to deviate from the common form of words, would not make use of Tempore
but Sidere in his first Verse, and every where else abounds with Metaphors,
Grecisms, and Circumlocutions, to give his Verse the greater Pomp, and preserve
it from sinking into a Plebeian Style. And herein consists Virgil's
Masterpiece, who has not only excelled all other Poets, but even himself in
the Language of his Georgics; where we receive more strong and lively Ideas of
things from his words, than we could have done from the Objects themselves: and
find our Imaginations more affected by his Descriptions, than they would have
been by the very sight of what he describes.

I shall now, after this short Scheme of Rules, consider the different success
that Hesiod and Virgil have met with in this kind of Poetry, which may give us
some further Notion of the Excellence of the Georgics. To begin with Hesiod; If
we may guess at his Character from his Writings, he had much more of the
Husbandman than the Poet in his Temper: He was wonderfully Grave, Discreet, and
Frugal, he lived altogether in the Country, and was probably for his great
Prudence the Oracle of the whole Neighborhood. These Principles of good
Husbandry ran through his Works, and directed him to the choice of Tillage, and
Merchandise, for the Subject of that which is the most Celebrated of them. He
is every where bent on Instruction, avoids all manner of Digressions, and does
not stir out of the Field once in the whole Georgic. His Method in describing
Month after Month with its proper Seasons and Employments, is too grave and
fimple; it takes off from the surprise and variety of the Poem, and makes the
whole look but like a modern Almanac in Verse. The Reader is carried through a
course of Weather, and may beforehand guess whether he is to meet with Snow or
Rain, Clouds or Sunshine in the next Description. His Descriptions indeed have
abundance of Nature in them, but then it is Nature in her simplicity and
undress. Thus when he speaks of January; the Wild-Beasts, says he, run
shivering through the Woods with their Heads stooping to the ground, and their
Tails clapped between their Legs; the Goats and Oxen are almost flead with Cold;
but it is not so bad with the Sheep, because they have a thick Coat of Wool
about 'em. The Old Men too are bitterly pincht with the Weather, but the young
Girls feel nothing of it, who sit at home with their Mothers by a warm
Fireside. Thus does the Old Gentleman give himself up to a loose kind of
Tattle, rather than endeavor after a just Poetical Description. Nor has he
shown more of Art or Judgment in the Precepts he has given us, which are sown
so very thick, that they clog the Poem too much, and are often so minute and
full of Circumstances, that they weaken and un-nerve his Verse. But after all,
we are beholding to him for the first rough sketch of a Georgic: where we may
still discover something venerable in the Antickness of the Work; but if we
would see the Design enlarged, the Figures reformed, the Coloring laid on, and
the whole Piece finished, we must expect it from a greater Master's hand.

Virgil has drawn out the Rules for Tillage and Planting into Two Books, which
Hesiod has dispatched in half a one; but has so raised the natural rudeness and
simplicity of his Subject with such a significancy of Expression, such a Pomp
of Verse, such variety of Transitions, and such a solemn Air in his
Reflections, that if we look on both Poets together, we see in one the
plainness of a downright Countryman, and in the other, something of a Rustic
Majesty, like that of a Roman Dictator at the Plow-Tail. He delivers the
meanest of his Precepts with a kind of Grandeur, he breaks the Clods and tosses
the Dung about with an air of gracefulness. His Prognostications of the Weather
are taken out of Aratus, where we may see how judiciously he has picked out
those that are most proper for his Husbandman's Observation; how he has
enforced the Expression, and heightened the Images which he found in the
Original.

The Second Book has more wit in it, and a greater boldness in its Metaphors
than any of the rest. The Poet with a great Beauty applies Oblivion, Ignorance,
Wonder, Desire and the like to his Trees. The last Georgic has indeed as many
Metaphors, but not so daring as this; for Humane Thoughts and Passions may be
more naturally ascribed to a Be, than to an Inanimate Plant. He who reads over
the Pleasures of a Country Life, as they are described by Virgil in the latter
end of this Book, can scarce be of Virgil's Mind, in preferring even the Life
of a Philosopher to it.

We may I think read the Poet's Clime in his Description, for he seems to have
been in a sweat at the Writing of it. -- O Quis me gelidis sub Montibus Haemi
Sistat, and ingenti ramorum protegat umbr a!
And is every where mentioning among his chief Pleasures, the coolness of his
Shades and Rivers, Vales and Grottos, which a more Northern Poet would have
omitted for the description of a Sunny Hill, and Fireside.

The Third Georgic seems to be the most labored of 'em all; there is a
wonderful Vigor and Spirit in the description of the Horse and Chariot-Race.
The force of Love is represented in Noble Instances, and very Sublime
Expressions. The Scythian Winter-piece appears so very cold and bleak to the
Eye, that a Man can scarce look on it without shivering. The Murrain at the end
has all the expressiveness that words can give. It was here that the Poet
strained hard to outdo Lucretius in the description of his Plague; and if the
Reader would see what success he had, he may find it at large in Scaliger.

But Virgil seems no where so well pleased, as when he is got among his Bees in
the Fourth Georgic: And Ennobles the Actions of so trivial a Creature, with
Metaphors drawn from the most important Concerns of Mankind. His Verses are not
in a greater noise and hurry in the Battles of Aeneas and Turnus, than in the
Engagement of two Swarms. And as in his Aeneis he compares the Labors of his
Trojans to those of Bees and Pismires, here he compares the Labors of the Bees
to those of the Cyclops. In short, the last Georgic was a good Prelude to the
Aeneis; and very well showed what the Poet could do in the description of what
was really great, by his describing the Mock-grandeur of an Insect with so good
a grace. There is more pleasantness in the little Platform of a Garden, which
he gives us about the middle of this Book, than in all the spacious Walks and
Waterworks of Rapin's. The Speech of Proteus at the end can never be enough
admired, and was indeed very fit to conclude so Divine a Work.

After this particular account of the Beauties in the Georgics, I should in the
next place endeavor to point out its imperfections, if it has any. But though I
think there are some few parts in it that are not so Beautiful as the rest, I
shall not presume to name them, as rather suspecting my own Judgment, than I
can believe a fault to be in that Poem, which lay so long under Virgil's
Correction, and had his last hand put to it. The first Georgic was probably
Burlesqu'd in the Author's Lifetime; for we still find in the Scholiasts a
Verse that ridicules part of a Line Translated from Hesiod. Nudus Ara, sere
Nudus -- And we may easily guess at the Judgment of this extraordinary Critic,
whoever he was, from his Censuring this particular Precept. We may be sure
Virgil would not have Translated it from Hesiod, had he not discovered some
Beauty in it; and indeed the Beauty of it is what I have before observed to be
frequently met with in Virgil, the delivering the Precept so indirectly, and
singling out the particular circumstance of Sowing and Plowing naked, to
suggest to us that these Employments are proper only in the hot Season of the
Year.

I shall not here compare the Style of the Georgics with that of Lucretius,
which the Reader may see already done in the Preface to the Second Volume of
Miscellany Poems; but shall conclude this Poem to be the most Complete,
Elaborate, and finished Piece of all Antiquity. The Aeneis indeed is of a Nobler
kind, but the Georgic is more perfect in its kind. The Aeneid has a greater
variety of Beauties in it, but those of the Georgic are more exquisite. In
short, the Georgic has all the perfection that can be expected in a Poem
written by the greatest Poet in the Flower of his Age, when his Invention was
ready, his Imagination warm, his Judgment settled, and all his Faculties in
their full Vigor and Maturity.

Virgil's Georgics.
The First Book of the Georgics.
The Argument.
The Poet, in the beginning of this Book, propounds the general Design of each
Georgic: And after a solemn Invocation of all the Gods who are any way related
to his Subject, he addresses himself in particular to Augustus, whom he
complements with Divinity; and after strikes into his Business. He shows the
different kinds of Tillage proper to different Soils, traces out the Original
of Agriculture, gives a Catalogue of the Husbandman's Tools, specifies the
Employments pecultar to each Season, describes the changes of the Weather, with
the Signs in Heaven and Earth that fore-bode them. Instances many of the
Prodigies that happened near the time of Julius Caesar 's Death. And shuts up
all with a Supplication to the Gods for the Safety of Augustus, and the
Prefervation of Rome.

To Sr Thomas Trevor of the Inner Temple Knight His Majestys Attorney General.

Geor: 1 L. 1*


WHat makes a plenteous Harvest, when to turn
The fruitful Soil, and when to sow the Corn;
The Care of Sheep, of Oxen, and of Kine;
And how to raise on Elms the teeming Vine:
The Birth and Genius of the frugal Be,
I sing, Mecaenas, and I sing to thee.
Ye Deities! who Fields and Plains protect,
Who rule the Seasons, and the Year direct;
Bacchus and fost'ring Ceres, Powers Divine,
Who gave us Corn for Mast, for Water Wine.
Ye Fawns, propitious to the Rural Swains,
Ye Nymphs that haunt the Mountains and the Plains,
Join in my Work, and to my Numbers bring
Your needful Succor, for your Gifts I sing.
And thou, whose Trident struck the teeming Earth,
And made a Passage for the Coursers Birth.
And thou, for whom the Caean Shore sustains
Thy Milky Herds, that graze the Flowery Plains.
And thou, the Shepherds tutelary God,
Leave, for a while, O Pan! thy loved Abode:
And, if Arcadian Fleeces be thy Care,
From Fields and Mountains to my Song repair.
Inventor, Pallas, of the fat'ning Oil,
Thou Founder of the Plough and Plough-man's Toil;
And thou, whose Hands the Shrowd-like Cypress rear;
Come all ye Gods and Goddesses, that wear
The rural Honors, and increase the Year.
You, who supply the Ground with Seeds of Grain;
And you, who swell those Seeds with kindly Rain:
And chiefly thou, whose undetermined State
Is yet the Business of the Gods Debate:
Whether in after Times to be declared
The Patron of the World, and Rome's peculiar Guard,
Or over the Fruits and Seasons to preside,
And the round Circuit of the Year to guide.
Powerful of Blessings, which thou strew'st around,
And with thy Goddess Mother's Myrtle crowned.
Or will thou, Caesar, choose the watery Reign,
To smooth the Surges, and correct the Main?
Then Mariners, in Storms, to thee shall pray,
Even utmost Thule shall thy Power obey;
And Neptune shall resign the Fasces of the Sea.
The watery Virgins for thy Bed shall strive,
And Tethys all her Waves in Dowry give.
Or will thou bless our Summers with thy Rays,
And seated near the Balance, poise the Days:
Where in the Void of Heaven a Space is free,
Betwixt the Scorpion and the Maid for thee.
The Scorpion ready to receive thy Laws,
Yields half his Region, and contracts his Claws.
Whatever part of Heaven thou shall obtain,
For let not Hell presume of such a Reign;
Nor let so dire a Thirst of Empire move
Thy Mind, to leave thy Kindred Gods above.
Though Greece admires Elysium's blessed Retreat,
Though Proserpine affects her silent Seat,
And importuned by Ceres to remove,
Prefers the Fields below to those above.
But thou, propitious Caesar, guide my Course,
And to my bold Endeavors add thy Force.
Pity the Poet's and the Ploughman's Cares,
Interest thy Greatness in our mean Affairs,
And use thy self betimes to hear our Prayers.
While yet the Spring is young, while Earth unbinds
Her frozen Bosom to the Western Winds;
While Mountain Snows dissolve against the Sun,
And Streams, yet new, from Precipices run.
Even in this early Dawning of the Year,
Produce the Plough, and yoke the sturdy Steer,
And goad him till he groans beneath his Toil,
'Till the bright Share is buried in the Soil.
That Crop rewards the greedy Peasant's Pains,
Which twice the Sun, and twice the Cold sustains,
And bursts the crowded Barns, with more than promised Gains.
But e're we stir the yet unbroken Ground,
The various Course of Seasons must be found;
The Weather, and the setting of the Winds,
The Culture suiting to the several Kinds
Of Seeds and Plants; and what will thrive and rise,
And what the Genius of the Soil denies.
This Ground with Bacchus, that with Ceres suits:
That other loads the Trees with happy Fruits.
A fourth with Grass, unbidden, decks the Ground:
Thus Tmolus is with yellow Saffron crowned:
India, black Ebon and white Ivory bears:
And soft Idume weeps her odorous Tears.
Thus Pontus sends her Beaver Stones from far;
And naked Spaniards temper Steel for War.
Epirus for the Elean Chariot breeds,
(In hopes of Palms,) a Race of running Steeds.
This is the Orig'nal Contract; these the Laws
Imposed by Nature, and by Nature's Cause,
On sundry Places, when Deucalion hurled
his Mother's Entrails on the desert World:
Whence Men, a hard laborious Kind, were born.
Then borrow part of Winter for thy Corn;
And early with thy Team the Gleeb in Furrows turn.
That while the Turf lies open, and unbound,
Succeeding Suns may bake the Mellow Ground.
But if the Soil be barren, only scar
The Surface, and but lightly print the Share,
When cold Arcturus rises with the Sun:
Lest wicked Weeds the Corn should overrun
In watery Soils; or lest the barren Sand
Should suck the Moisture from the thirsty Land.
Both these unhappy Soils the Swain forbears,
And keeps a Sabbath of alternate Years:
That the spent Earth may gather heart again;
And, bettered by Cessation, bear the Grain.
At least where Vetches, Pulse, and Tares have stood,
And Stalks of Lupines grew (a stubborn Wood:)
The ensuing Season, in return, may bear
The bearded product of the Golden Year.
For Flax and Oats will burn the tender Field,
And sleepy Poppies harmful Harvests yield.
But sweet Vicissitudes of Rest and Toil
Make easy Labor, and renew the Soil.
Yet sprinkle sordid Ashes all around,
And load with fat'ning Dung thy fallow Ground.
Thus change of Seeds for meagre Soils is best;
And Earth manured, not idle, though at rest.
Long Practice has a sure Improvement found,
With kindled Fires to burn the barren Ground;
When the light Stubble, to the Flames resigned,
Is driven along, and crackles in the Wind.
Whether from hence the hollow Womb of Earth
Is warmed with secret Strength for better Birth,
Or when the latent Vice is cured by Fire,
Redundant Humors through the Pores expire;
Or that the Warmth distends the Chinks, and makes
New Breathings, whence new Nourishment she takes;
Or that the Heat the gaping Ground constrains,
New Knits the Surface, and new Strings the Veins;
Lest soaking Showers should pierce her secret Seat,
Or freezing Boreas chill her genial Heat;
Or scorching Suns too violently beat.
Nor is the Profit small, the Peasant makes;
Who smooths with Harrows, or who pounds with Rakes
The crumbling Clods: Nor Ceres from on high
Regards his Labors with a grudging Eye;
Nor his, who plows across the furrowed Grounds,
And on the Back of Earth inflicts new Wounds:
For he with frequent Exercise Commands
The unwilling Soil, and tames the stubborn Lands.
Ye Swains, invoke the Powers who rule the Sky,
For a moist Summer, and a Winter dry:
For Winter drout rewards the Peasant's Pain,
And broods indulgent on the buried Grain.
Hence Mysia boasts her Harvests, and the tops
Of Gargarus admire their happy Crops.
When first the Soil receives the fruitful Seed,
Make no delay, but cover it with speed:
So fenced from Cold; the plyant Furrows break,
Before the surly Clod resists the Rake.
And call the Floods from high, to rush amain
With pregnant Streams, to swell the teeming Grain.
Then when the fiery Suns too fiercely play,
And shrivelled Herbs on withering Stems decay,
The wary Ploughman, on the Mountain's Brow,
Undams his watery Stores, huge Torrents flow;
And, rattling down the Rocks, large moisture yield,
Temp'ring the thirsty Fever of the Field.
And lest the Stem, too feeble for the freight,
Should scarce sustain the head's unweildy weight,
Sends in his feeding Flocks betimes t'invade
The rising bulk of the luxuriant Blade;
E're yet the aspiring Offspring of the Grain
O'retops the ridges of the furrowed Plain:
And drains the standing Waters, when they yield
Too large a Bev'rage to the drunken Field.
But most in Autumn, and the show'ry Spring,
When dubious Months uncertain weather bring;
When Fountains open, when impetuous Rain
Swells hasty Brooks, and pours upon the Plain;
When Earth with Slime and Mud is covered over,
Or hollow places spue their watery Store.
Nor yet the Ploughman, nor the laboring Steer,
Sustain alone the hazards of the Year:
But glutton Geese, and the Strymonian Crane,
With foreign Troops, invade the tender Grain:
And towering Weeds malignant Shadows yield;
And spreading Succ'ry choaks the rising Field.
The Sire of Gods and Men, with hard Decrees,
Forbids our Plenty to be bought with Ease:
And wills that Mortal Men, inured to toil,
Should exercise, with pains, the grudging Soil.
Himself invented first the shining Share,
And whetted Humane Industry by Care:
Himself did Handy-Crafts and Arts ordain;
Nor suffered Sloth to rust his active Reign.
E're this, no Peasant vexed the peaceful Ground;
Which only Turfs and Greens for Altars found:
No Fences parted Fields, nor Marks nor Bounds
Distinguished Acres of litigious Grounds:
But all was common, and the fruitful Earth
Was free to give her unexacted Birth.
Jove added Venom to the Viper's Brood,
And swelled, with raging Storms, the peaceful Flood:
Commissioned hungry Wolves to infest the Fold,
And shook from Oaken Leaves the liquid Gold.
Removed from Humane reach the cheerful Fire,
And from the Rivers bade the Wine retire:
That studious Need might useful Arts explore;
From furrowed Fields to reap the foodful Store:
And force the Veins of clashing Flints to expire
The lurking Seeds of their Celestial Fire.
Then first on Seas the hollowed Alder swam;
Then Sailers quartered Heaven, and found a Name
For every fixed and every wandering Star:
The Pleiads, Hyads, and the Northern Car.
Then Toils for Beasts, and Lime for Birds were found,
And deep-mouth Dogs did Forest Walks surround:
And casting Nets were spread in shallow Brooks,
Drags in the Deep, and Baits were hung on Hooks.
Then Saws were toothed, and sounding Axes made;
(For Wedges first did yielding Wood invade.)
And various Arts in order did succeed,
(What cannot endless Labor urged by need?)
First Ceres taught, the Ground with Grain to sow,
And armed with Iron Shares the crooked Plough;
When now Dodonian Oaks no more supplied
Their Mast, and Trees their Forrest-fruit denied.
Soon was his Labor doubled to the Swain,
And blasting Mildews blackned all his Grain.
Tough Thistles choked the Fields, and killed the Corn,
And an unthrifty Crop of Weeds was born.
Then Burrs and Brambles, an unbidden Crew
Of graceless Guests, the unhappy Field subdue:
And Oats unblest, and Darnel domineers,
And shoots its head above the shining Ears.
So that unless the Land with daily Care
Is exercised, and with an Iron War,
Of Rakes and Harrows, the proud Foes expelled,
And Birds with clamours frighted from the Field;
Unless the Boughs are lopped that shade the Plain,
And Heaven invoked with Vows for fruitful Rain,
On other Crops you may with envy look,
And shake for Food the long abandoned Oak.
Nor must we pass untold what Arms they wield,
Who labor Tillage and the furrowed Field:
Without whose aid the Ground her Corn denis,
And nothing can be sown, and nothing rise.
The crooked Plough, the Share, the towr'ing height
Of Wagons, and the Cart's unweildy weight;
The Sled, the Tumbril, Hurdles and the Flail,
The Fan of Bacchus, with the flying Sail.
These all must be prepared, if Plowmen hope
The promised Blessing of a Bounteous Crop.
Young Elms with early force in Copses bow,
Fit for the Figure of the crooked Plough.
To Sr John Hawles* of Lincolns Inn in the County of Midlesex Knt: His
Majestyes Solicitor Genll:

Geor. 1. L. 240.


Of eight Foot long a fastened Beam prepare,
On either side the Head produce an Ear,
And sink a Socket for the shining Share.
Of Beech the Plough-tail, and the bending Yoke;
Or softer Linden hardened in the Smoke.
I could be long in Precepts, but I fear
So mean a Subject might offend your Ear.
Delve of convenient Depth your thrashing Floor;
With tempered Clay, then fill and face it over:
And let the weighty Rowler run the round,
To smooth the Surface of the unequal Ground;
Lest cracked with Summer Heats the flooring flies,
Or sinks, and through the Crannies Weeds arise.
For sundry Foes the Rural Realm surround:
The Field Mouse builds her Garner under ground,
For gathered Grain the blind laborious Mole,
In winding Mazes works her hidden Hole.
In hollow Caverns Vermin make abode,
The hissing Serpent, and the swelling Toad:
The Corn devouring Weezel here abides,
And the wise Ant her wintry Store provides.
Mark well the flowring Almonds in the Wood;
If odorous Blooms the bearing Branches load,
The Glebe will answer to the Sylvan Reign,
Great Heats will follow, and large Crops of Grain.
But if a Wood of Leaves o're-shade the Tree,
Such and so barren will thy Harvest be:
In vain the Hind shall vex the thrashing Floor,
For empty Chaff and Straw will be thy Store.
Some steep their Seed, and some in Cauldrons boil
With vigorous Nitre, and with Lees of Oil,
Over gentle Fires; the exuberant Juice to drain,
And swell the flattering Husks with fruitful Grain.
Yet is not the Success for Years assured,
Tho chosen is the Seed, and fully cured;
Unless the Peasant, with his Annual Pain,
Renews his Choice, and culls the largest Grain.
Thus all below, whether by Nature's Curse,
Or Fates Decree, degenerate still to worse.
So the Boats brawny Crew the Current stem,
And, slow advancing, struggle with the Stream:
But if they slack their hands, or cease to strive,
Then down the Flood with headlong haste they drive.
Nor must the Ploughman less observe the Skies,
When the Kidds, Dragon, and Arcturus rise,
Than Saylors homeward bent, who cut their Way
Through Helle's stormy Streights, and Oyster-breeding Sea.
But when Astrea's Balance, hung on high,
Betwixt the Nights and Days divides the Sky,
Then Yoke your Oxen, sow your Winter Grain;
'Till cold December comes with driving Rain.
Lineseed and fruitful Poppy bury warm,
In a dry Season, and prevent the Storm.
Sow Beans and Clover in a rotten Soil,
And Millet rising from your Annual Toil;
When with his Golden Horns, in full Cariere,
The Bull beats down the Barriers of the Year;
And Arg^s and the Dog forsake the Northern Sphere.
But if your Care to Wheat alone extend,
Let Maja with her Sisters first descend,
And the bright Gnosian Diadem downward bend:
Before you trust in Earth your future Hope;
Or else expect a listless lazy Crop.
Some Swains have sown before, but most have found
A husky Harvest, from the grudging Ground.
Vile Vetches would you sow, or Lentils lean,
The Growth of Egypt, or the Kidney-bean?
Begin when the slow Waggoner descends,
Nor cease your sowing till Mid-winter ends:
For this, through twelve bright Signs Apollo guides
The Year, and Earth in several Climes divides.
Five Girdles bind the Skies, the torrid Zone
Glows with the passing and repassing Sun.
Far on the right and left, the extremes of Heaven,
To Frosts and Snows, and bitter Blasts are given.
Betwixt the midst and these, the Gods assigned
Two habitable Seats for Humane Kind:
And cross their limits cut a sloping way,
Which the twelve Signs in beauteous order sway.
Two Poles turn round the Globe; one seen to rise
Over Scythian Hills, and one in Lybian Skies.
The first sublime in Heaven, the last is whirled
Below the Regions of the nether World.
Around our Pole the spiry Dragon glides,
And like a winding Stream the Bears divides;
The less and greater, who by Fates Decree
Abhor to dive beneath the Southern Sea:
There, as they say, perpetual Night is found
In silence brooding on the unhappy ground:
Or when Aurora leaves our Northern Sphere,
She lights the downward Heaven, and rises there.
And when on us she breaths the living Light,
Red Vesper kindles there the Tapers of the Night.
From hence uncertain Seasons we may know;
And when to reap the Grain, and when to sow:
Or when to fell the Furzes, when it is meet
To spread the flying Canvass for the Fleet.
Observe what Stars arise or disappear;
And the four Quarters of the rolling Year.
But when cold Weather and continued Rain,
The laboring Husband in his House restrain:
Let him forecast his Work with timely care,
Which else is huddl'd, when the Skies are fair:
Then let him mark the Sheep, or whet the shining Share.
Or hollow Trees for Boats, or number over
His Sacks, or measure his increasing Store:
Or sharpen Stakes, or head the Forks, or twine
The Sallow Twigs to tie the straggling Vine:
Or wicker Baskets weave, or air the Corn,
Or grinded Grain betwixt two Marbles turn.
No Laws, Divine or Human, can restrain
From necessary Works, the laboring Swain.
Even Holy Days and Feasts permission yield,
The Meads to water, and to fence the Field,
To Fire the Brambles, snare the Birds, and steep
In wholesome Water-falls the woolly Sheep.
And often the drudging Ass is driven, with Toil,
To neighboring Towns with Apples and with Oil:
Returning late, and laden home with Gain
Of bartered Pitch, and Hand-mills for the Grain.
The lucky Days, in each revolving Moon,
For Labor choose: The Fifth be sure to shun;
That gave the Furies and pale Pluto Birth,
And armed, against the Skies, the Sons of Earth.
With Mountains pil'd on Mountains, thrice they strove
To scale the steepy Battlements of Jove:
And thrice his Lightning and red Thunder played,
And their demolished Works in Ruin laid.
The Sev'nth is, next the Tenth, the best to join
Young Oxen to the Yoke, and plant the Vine.
Then Weavers stretch your Stays upon the Weft:
The Ninth is good for Travel, bad for Theft.
Some Works in dead of Night are better done;
Or when the Morning Dew prevents the Sun.
To Joseph Jekyll of the middle Temple Esquire

Geo: 1. l. 390


Parched Meads and Stubble mow, by Phoebe's Light;
Which both require the Coolness of the Night:
For Moisture then abounds, and Pearly Rains
Descend in Silence to refresh the Plains.
The Wife and Husband equally conspire,
To work by Night, and rake the Winter Fire:
He sharpens Torches in the glim'ring Room,
She shoots the flying Shuttle through the Loom:
Or boils in Kettles Must of Wine, and Skins
With Leaves, the Dregs that overflow the Brims.
And till the watchful Cock awakes the Day,
She sings to drive the tedious hours away.
But in warm Weather, when the Skies are clear,
By Daylight reap the Product of the Year:
And in the Sun your golden Grain display,
And thrash it out, and winnow it by Day.
Plough naked, Swain, and naked sow the Land,
For lazy Winter numbs the laboring Hand.
In Genial Winter, Swains enjoy their Store,
Forget their Hardships, and recruit for more.
The Farmer to full Bowls invites his Friends,
And what he got with Pains, with Pleasure spends.
So Saylors, when escaped from stormy Seas,
First crown their Vessels, then indulge their Ease.
Yet that is the proper Time to thrash the Wood
For Mast of Oak, your Father's homely Food.
To gather Laurel-berries, and the Spoil
Of bloody Myrtles, and to press your Oil.
For stalking Cranes to set the guileful Snare,
TO enclose the Stags in Toyls, and hunt the Hare.
With Balearick Slings, or Gnossian Bow,
To persecute from far the flying Do.
Then, when the Fleecy Skies new cloth the Wood,
And cakes of rustling Ice come rolling down the Flood.
Now sing we stormy Stars, when Autumn weighs
The Year, and adds to Nights, and shortens Days;
And Suns declining shine with feeble Rays:
What Cares must then attend the toiling Swain;
Or when the lowering Spring, with lavish Rain,
Beats down the slender Stem and bearded Grain:
While yet the Head is green, or lightly swelled
With Milky-moisture, over-looks the Field.
Even when the Farmer, now secure of Fear,
Sends in the Swains to spoil the finished Year:
Even while the Reaper fills his greedy hands,
And binds the golden Sheafs in brittle bands:
Often have I seen a sudden Storm arise,
From all the warring Winds that sweep the Skies:
The heavy Harvest from the Root is torn,
And whirled aloft the lighter Stubble born;
With such a force the flying rack is driven;
And such a Winter wears the face of Heaven:
And often whole sheets descend of slucy Rain,
Sucked by the spongy Clouds from off the Main:
The lofty Skies at once come pouring down,
The promised Crop and golden Labors drown.
The Dykes are filled, and with a roaring sound
The rising Rivers float the nether ground;
And Rocks the bellowing Voice of boiling Seas rebound.
The Father of the Gods his Glory shrowds,
Involved in Tempests, and a Night of Clouds.
And from the middle Darkness flashing out,
By fits he deals his fiery Bolts about.
Earth feels the Motions of her angry God,
Her Entrails tremble, and her Mountains nod;
And flying Beasts in Forests seek abode:
Deep horror seizes every Humane Breast,
Their Pride is humbled, and their Fear confessed:
To Thomas Vernon of Hanbury in Worcester - Shire Esquire

Geo: 1 L 475


While he from high his rolling Thunder throws,
And fires the Mountains with repeated blows:
The Rocks are from their old Foundations rent;
The Winds redouble, and the Rains augment:
The Waves on heaps are dashed against the Shore,
And now the Woods, and now the Billows roar.
In fear of this, observe the starry Signs,
Where Saturn houses, and where Hermes joins.
But first to Heaven thy due Devotions pay,
And Annual Gifts on Ceres Altars lay.
When Winter's rage abates, when cheerful Hours
Awake the Spring, and Spring awakes the Flowers,
On the green Turf thy careless Limbs display,
And celebrate the mighty Mother's day.
For then the Hills with pleasing Shades are crowned,
And Sleeps are sweeter on the silken Ground:
With milder Beams the Sun securely shines;
Fat are the Lambs, and luscious are the Wines.
Let every Swain adore her Power Divine,
And Milk and Honey mix with sparkling Wine:
Let all the Quire of Clowns attend the Show,
In long Procession, shouting as they go;
Invoking her to bless their yearly Stores,
Inviting Plenty to their crowded Floors.
Thus in the Spring, and thus in Summer's Heat,
Before the Sickles touch the ripening Wheat,
On Ceres call; and let the laboring Hind
With Oaken Wreaths his hollow Temples bind:
On Ceres let him call, and Ceres praise,
With uncouth Dances, and with Country Lays.
And that by certain signs we may presage
Of Heats and Rains, and Wind's impetuous rage,
The Sovereign of the Heavens has set on high
The Moon, to mark the Changes of the Sky:
When Southern blasts should cease, and when the Swain
Should near their Folds his feeding Flocks restrain.
For e're the rising Winds begin to roar,
The working Seas advance to wash the Shore:
Soft whispers run along the leavy Woods,
And Mountains whistle to the murmuring Floods:
Even then the doubtful Billows scarce abstain
From the tossed Vessel on the troubled Main:
When crying Cormorants forsake the Sea,
And stretching to the Covert wing their way:
When sportful Coots run skimming over the Strand;
When watchful Herons leave their watery Stand,
And mounting upward, with erected flight,
Gain on the Skies, and soar above the sight.
And often before tempest'our Winds arise,
The seeming Stars fall headlong from the Skies;
And, shooting through the darkness, guild the Night
With sweeping Glories, and long trails of Light:
And Chaff with eddy Winds is whirled around,
And dancing Leaves are lifted from the Ground;
And floating Feathers on the Waters play.
But when the winged Thunder takes his way
From the cold North, and East and West engage,
And at their Frontiers meet with equal rage,
The Clouds are crushed, a glut of gathered Rain
The hollow Ditches fills, and floats the Plain,
And Sailors furl their dropping Sheets amain.
Wet weather seldom hurts the most unwise,
So plain the Signs, such Prophets are the Skies:
The wary Crane foresees it first, and sails
Above the Storm, and leaves the lowly Vales:
The Cow looks up, and from afar can find
The change of Heaven, and snuffs it in the Wind.
The Swallow skims the River's watery Face,
The Frogs renew the Croaks of their loquacious Race.
The careful Ant her secret Cell forsakes,
And drags her Eggs along the narrow Tracks.
At either Horn the Rainbow drinks the Flood,
Huge Flocks of rising Rooks sorsake their Food,
And, crying, seek the Shelter of the Wood.
Besides, the several sorts of watery Fowls,
That swim the Seas, or haunt the standing Pools:
The Swans that sail along the Silver Flood,
And dive with stretching Necks to search their Food.
Then lave their Backs with sprinkling Dews in vain,
And stem tke Stream to meet the promised Rain.
The Crow with clamorous Cries the Shower demands,
And single stalks along the Desert Sands.
The nightly Virgin, while her Wheel she plies,
Foresees the Storm impending in the Skies,
When sparkling Lamps their sputt'ring Light advance,
And in the Sockets Oily Bubbles dance.
Then after Showers, it is easy to descry
Returning Suns, and a serener Sky:
The Stars shine smarter, and the Moon adorns,
As with unborrow'd Beams, her sharpened Horns.
The filmy Gossamer now flitts no more,
Nor Halcyons bask on the short Sunny Shore:
Their Litter is not tossed by Sows unclean,
But a blue droughty Mist descends upon the Plain.
And Owls, that mark the setting Sun, declare
A Starlight Evening, and a Morning fair.
Towering aloft, avenging Nisus flies,
While dared below the guilty Scylla lies.
Wherever frighted Scylla flies away,
Swift Nisus follows, and pursues his Prey.
Where injured Nisus takes his Airy Course,
Thence trembling Scylla flies and shuns his Force.
This punishment pursues the unhappy Maid,
And thus the purple Hair is dearly paid.
Then, thrice the Ravens rend the liquid Air,
And croaking Notes proclaim the settled fair.
Then, round their Airy Palaces they fly,
To greet the Sun; and seized with secret Joy,
When Storms are over-blown, with Food repair
To their forsaken Nests, and callow Care.
Not that I think their Breasts with Heavenly Souls
Inspired, as Man, who Destiny controls.
But with the changeful Temper of the Skies,
As Rams condense, and Sunshine rarifies;
So turn the Species in their altered Minds,
Composed by Calms, and disoompos'd by Winds.
From hence proceeds the Birds harmonious Voice:
From hence the Cows exult, and frisking Lambs rejoice.
Observe the daily Circle of the Sun,
And the short Year of each revolving Moon:
By them thou shall foresee the following day;
Nor shall a starry Night thy Hopes betray.
When first the Moon appears, if then she shrouds
Her silver Crescent, tip'd with sable Clouds;
Conclude she bodes a Tempest on the Main,
And brews for Fields impetuous Floods of Rain.
Or if her Face with fiery Flushing glow,
Expect the rattling Winds aloft to blow.
But four Nights old, (for that is the surest Sign,)
With sharpened Horns if glorious then she shine:
Next Day, nor only that, but all the Moon,
Till her revolving Race be wholly run;
Are void of Tempests, both by Land and Sea,
And Saylors in the Port their promised Vow shall pay.
Above the rest, the Sun, who never lies;
Foretells the change of Weather in the Skies:
For if he rise, unwilling to his Race,
Clouds on his Brows, and Spots upon his Face;
Or if through Mists he shoots his sullen Beams,
Frugal of Light, in loose and straggling Streams:
Suspect a drisling Day, with Southern Rain,
Fatal to Fruits, and Flocks, and promised Grain.
Or if Aurora, with half opened Eyes,
And a pale sickly Cheek, salute the Skies;
How shall the Vine, with tender Leaves, defend
Her teeming Clusters, when the Storms descend?
When ridgy Roofs and Tiles can scarce avail,
To bar the Ruin of the rattling Hail.
But more than all, the setting Sun survey,
When down the Steep of Heaven he drives the Day.
For often we find him finishing his Race,
With various Colors erring on his Face;
If fiery red his glowing Globe descends,
High Winds and furious Tempests he portends.
But if his Cheeks are swollen with livid blue,
He bodes wet Weather by his watery Hue.
If dusky Spots are varied on his Brow,
And, streaked with red, a troubled Color show;
That sullen Mixture shall at once declare
Winds, Rain, and Storms, and Elemental War:
What desperate Madman then would venture over
The Frith, or haul his Cables from the Shore?
But if with Purple Rays he brings the Light,
And a pure Heaven resigns to quiet Night:
No rising Winds, or falling Storms, are nigh:
But Northern Breezes through the Forest fly:
And drive the rack, and purge the ruffl'd Sky.
The unerring Sun by certain Signs declares,
What the late Even, or early Morn prepares:
And when the South projects a stormy Day,
And when the clearing North will puff the Clouds away.
The Sun reveals the Secrets of the Sky;
And who dares give the Source of Light the Lie?
The change of Empires often he declares,
Fierce Tumults, hidden Treasons, open Wars.
He first the Fate of Caesar did foretell,
And pitied Rome, when Rome in Caesar fell.
In Iron Clouds concealed the Public Light:
And Impious Mortals feared Eternal Night.
Nor was the Fact foretold by him alone:
Nature her self stood forth, and seconded the Sun.
Earth, Air, and Seas, with Prodigies were signed,
And Birds obscene, and howling Dogs divined.
What Rocks did Aetna's bellowing Mouth expire
From her torn Entrails! and what Floods of Fire!
What Clanks were heard, in German Skies afar,
Of Arms and Armies, rushing to the War!
Dire Earthquakes rent the solid Alps below,
And from their Summets shook the Eternal Snow.
Pale Specters in the close of Night were seen;
And Voices heard of more than Mortal Men.
In silent Groves, dumb Sheep and Oxen spoke;
And Streams ran backward, and their Beds forsook:
The yawning Earth disclosed the Abyss of Hell:
The weeping Statues did the Wars foretell;
And Holy Sweat from Brazen Idols fell.
Then rising in his Might, the King of Floods,
Rusht through the Forests, tore the lofty Woods;
And rolling onward, with a sweepy Sway,
Bore Houses, Herds, and laboring Hinds away.
To William Dobyns of Lincolns Inn Esquire.

Geo 1: 625.


Blood sprang from Wells, Wolfs howled in Towns by Night,
And boding Victims did the Priests affright.
Such Peals of Thunder never poured from high;
Nor Lightning flashed from so serene a Sky.
Red Meteors ran along the Etherial Space;
Stars disappeared, and Comets took their place.
For this, the Emathian Plains once more were strow'd
With Roman Bodies, and just Heaven thought good
To fatten twice those Fields with Roman Blood.
Then, after length of Time, the laboring Swains,
Who turn the Turfs of those unhappy Plains,
Shall rusty Piles from the plough'd Furrows take,
And over empty Helmets pass the Rake.
Amazed at Antic Titles on the Stones,
And mighty Relics of Gygantick Bones.
Ye home-born Deities, of Mortal Birth!
Thou Father Romulus, and Mother Earth,
Goddess unmoved! whose Guardian Arms extend
Over Thuscan Tiber's Course, and Roman Towers defend;
With youthful Caesar your joint Powers engage,
Nor hinder him to save the sinking Age.
O! let the Blood, already spilt, atone
For the past Crimes of cursed Laomedon!
Heaven wants thee there, and long the Gods, we know,
Have grudged thee, Caesar, to the World below.
Where Fraud and Rapine, Right and Wrong confound;
Where impious Arms from every part resound,
And monstrous Crimes in every Shape are crowned.
The peaceful Peasant to the Wars is pressed;
The Fields lie fallow in inglorious Rest.
The Plain no Pasture to the Flock affords,
The crooked Scythes are straightened into Swords:
And there Euphrates her soft Offspring Arms,
And here the Rhine rebellows with Alarms:
The neighboring Cities range on several sides,
Perfidious Mars long plighted Leagues divides,
And over the wasted World in Triumph rides.
So four fierce Coursers starting to the Race,
Scow'r through the Plain, and lengthen every Pace:
Nor Reigns, nor Curbs, nor threatening Cries they fear,
But force along the trembling Charioteer.
The Second Book of the Georgics.
The Argument.
The Subject of the following Book is Planting. In handling of which Argument,
the Poet shows all the different Methods of raising Trees: Describes their
Variety; and gives Rules for the management of each in particular. He then
points out the Soils in which the several Plants thrive best: And thence takes
occasion to run out into the Praises of Italy. After which he gives some
Directions for discovering the Nature of every Soil; prescribes Rules for the
Dressing of Vines, Olives, etc. And concludes the Georgic with a Panegyric on a
Country Life.

To Sr: William Bowyer Baronet of Denham Court in the County of Bucks.

Geor: 2. L. 1.


THus far of Tillage, and of Heavenly Signs;
Now sing my Muse the growth of generous Vines:
The shady Groves, the Woodland Progeny,
And the slow Product of Minerva's Tree.
Great Father Bacchus! to my Song repair;
For clustring Grapes are thy peculiar Care:
For thee large Bunches load the bending Vine,
And the last Blessings of the Year are thine.
To thee his Joys the jolly Autumn owes,
When the fermenting Juice the Vat o'reflows.
Come strip with me, my God, come drench all over
Thy Limbs in Must of Wine, and drink at every Pore.
Some Trees their birth to bounteous Nature owe:
For some without the pains of Planting grow.
With Osiers thus the Banks of Brooks abound,
Sprung from the watery Genius of the Ground:
From the same Principles gray Willows come;
Herculean Poplar, and the tender Broom.
But some from Seeds enclosed in Earth arise:
For thus the mastful Chestnut mates the Skies.
Hence rise the branching Beech and vocal Oak,
Where Jove of old Oraculously spoke.
Some from the Root a rising Wood disclose;
Thus Elms, and thus the salvage Cherry grows.
Thus the green Bays, that binds the Poet's Brows,
Shoots and is sheltered by the Mother's Boughs.
These ways of Planting, Nature did ordain,
For Trees and Shrubs, and all the Sylvan Reign.
Others there are, by late Experience found:
Some cut the Shoots, and plant in furrowed ground:
Some cover rooted Stalks in deeper Mold:
Some cloven Stakes, and (wondrous to behold,)
Their sharpened ends in Earth their footing place,
And the dry Poles produce a living Race.
Some bow their Vines, which buried in the Plain,
Their tops in distant Arches rise again.
Others no Root require, the Lab'rer cuts
Young Slips, and in the Soil securely puts.
Even Stumps of Olives, barred of Leaves, and dead,
Revive, and often redeem their withered head.
It Is usual now, an Inmate Graff to see,
With Insolence invade a Foreign Tree:
Thus Pears and Quinces from the Crabtree come;
And thus the ruddy Cornel bears the Plum.
Then let the Learned Gardener mark with care
The Kinds of Stocks, and what those Kinds will bear:
Explore the Nature of each several Tree;
And known, improve with artful Industry:
And let no spot of idle Earth be found,
But cultivate the Genius of the Ground.
For open Ismarus will Bacchus please;
Taburnus loves the shade of Olive Trees.
The Virtues of the several Soils I sing,
Mecaenas, now thy needful Succor bring!
O thou! the better part of my Renown,
Inspire thy Poet, and thy Poem crown:
Embarque with me, while I new Tracts explore,
With flying sails and breezes from the shore:
Not that my song, in such a scanty space,
So large a Subject fully can embrace:
Not tho I were supplied with Iron Lungs,
A hundred Mouths, filled with as many Tongues:
But steer my Vessel with a steady hand,
And coast along the Shore in sight of Land.
Nor will I tire thy Patience with a train
Of Preface, or what ancient Poets feign.
The Trees, which of themselves advance in Air,
Are barren kinds, but strongly built and fair:
Because the vigor of the Native Earth
Maintains the Plant, and makes a Manly Birth.
Yet these, receiving Graffs of other Kind,
Or thence transplanted, change their salvage Mind:
Their Wildness lose, and quitting Nature's part,
Obey the Rules and Discipline of Art.
The same do Trees, that, sprung from barren Roots
In open fields, transplanted bear their Fruits.
For where they grow the Native Energy
Turns all into the Substance of the Tree,
Starves and destroys the Fruit, is only made
For brawny bulk, and for a barren shade.
The Plant that shoots from Seed, a sullen Tree
At leisure grows, for late Posterity;
The generous flavor lost, the Fruits decay,
And salvage Grapes are made the Birds ignoble prey.
Much labor is required in Trees, to tame
Their wild disorder, and in ranks reclaim.
Well must the ground be dig'd, and better dressed,
New Soil to make, and meliorate the rest.
Old Stakes of Olive Trees in Plants revive;
By the same Methods Paphian Myrtles live:
But nobler Vines by Propagation thrive.
From Roots hard Hazles, and from Cyens rise
Tall Ash, and taller Oak that mates the Skies:
Palm, Poplar, Firr, descending from the Steep
Of Hills, to try the dangers of the Deep.
The thin-leav'd Arbute Hazle, graffs receives,
And Planes huge Apples bear, that bore but Leaves.
Thus Mastful Beech the bristly Chestnut bears,
And the wild Ash is white with blooming Pears.
And greedy Swine from grafted Elms are fed,
With falling Acorns, that on Oaks are bred.
But various are the ways to change the state
Of Plants, to Bud, to Graff, to Inoculate.
For where the tender Rinds of Trees disclose
Their shooting Gems, a swelling Knot there grows;
Just in that space a narrow Slit we make,
Then other Buds from bearing Trees we take:
Inserted thus, the wounded Rind we close,
In whose moist Womb the admitted Infant grows.
But when the smoother Bole from Knots is free,
We make a deep Incision in the Tree;
And in the solid Wood the Slip enclose,
The bat'ning Bastard shoots again and grows:
And in short space the laden Boughs arise,
With happy Fruit advancing to the Skies.
The Mother Plant admires the Leaves unknown,
Of Alien Trees, and Apples not her own.
Of vegetable Woods are various Kinds,
And the same Species are of several Minds.
Lotes, Willows, Elms, have different Forms allowed,
So funeral Cypress rising like a Shroud.
To Gilbert Dolbin of Thindon in Northamptonshire Esquire

Geo: 2 L* 145.


Fat Olive Trees of sundry Sorts appear:
Of sundry Shapes their unctuous Berries bear.
Radij long Olives, Orchit's round produce,
And bitter Pausia, pounded for the Juice.
Alcinous Orchard various Apples bears:
Unlike are Bergamotes and pounder Pears.
Nor our Italian Vines produce the Shape,
Or Taste, or Flavor of the Lesbian Grape.
The Thasian Vines in richer Soils abound,
The Mareotique grow in barren Ground.
The Psythian Grape we dry: Lagaean Juice,
Will stamm'ring Tongues, and stagg'ring Feet produce.
Rathe ripe are some, and some of later kind,
Of Golden some, and some of Purple Rind.
How shall I praise the Raethean Grape divine,
Which yet contends not with Falernian Wine!
The Aminean many a Consulship survives,
And longer than the Lydian Vintage lives?
Or high Phanaeus King of Chian growth:
But for large quantities, and lasting both,
The less Argitis bears the Prize away.
The Rhodian, sacred to the Solemn Day,
In second Services is poured to Jove;
And best accepted by the Gods above.
Nor must Bumastus his old Honors lose,
In length and largeness like the Dugs of Cows.
I pass the rest, whose every Race and Name,
And Kinds, are less material to my Theme.
Which who would learn, as soon may tell the Sands,
Driven by the Western Wind on Lybian Lands.
Or number, when the blustering Eurus roars,
The Billows beating on Ionian Shoars.
Nor every Plant on every Soil will grow;
The Sallow loves the watery Ground, and low.
The Marshes, Alders; Nature seems t'ordain
The rocky Cliff for the wild Ashe's reign:
The baleful Yeugh to Northern Blasts assigns;
To Shores the Myrtles, and to Mounts the Vines.
Regard the extremest cultivated Coast,
From hot Arabia to the Scythian Frost:
All sort of Trees their several Countries know;
Black Ebon only will in India grow:
And odorous Frankincense on the Sabaean Bough.
Balm slowly trickles through the bleeding Veins
Of happy Shrubs, in Idumaean Plains.
The green Egyptian Thorn, for Medicine good;
With Ethiops hoary Trees and woolly Wood,
Let others tell: and how the Seres spin
Their fleecy Forests in a slender Twine.
With mighty Trunks of Trees on Indian shoars,
Whose height above the feathered Arrow soars,
Shot from the toughest Bow; and by the Brawn
Of expert Archers, with vast Vigor drawn.
Sharp tasted Citrons Median Climes produce:
Bitter the Rind, but generous is the Juice:
A cordial Fruit, a present Antidote
Against the direful Stepdam's deadly Draught:
Who mixing wicked Weeds with Words impure,
The Fate of envied Orphans would procure.
Large is the Plant, and like a Laurel grows,
And did it not a different Scent disclose,
A Laurel were: the fragrant Flowers contemn
The stormy Winds, tenacious of their Stem.
With this the Medes, to laboring Age, bequeath
New Lungs, and cure the sourness of the Breath.
But neither Median Woods, (a plenteous Land,)
Fair Ganges, Hermus rolling Golden Sand,
Nor Bactria, nor the richer Indian Fields,
Nor all the Gummy Stores Arabia yields;
Nor any foreign Earth of greater Name,
Can with sweet Italy contend in Fame.
No Bulls, whose Nostrils breath a living Flame,
Have turned our Turf, no Teeth of Serpents here
Were sown, an armed Host, and Iron Crop to bear.
But fruitful Vines, and the fat Olives freight,
And Harvests heavy with their fruitful weight,
Adorn our Fields; and on the cheerful Green,
The grazing Flocks and lowing Herds are seen.
The Warrior Horse, here bred, is taught to train,
There flows Clitumnus through the flowery Plain;
Whose Waves, for Triumphs after prosperous Wars,
The Victim Ox, and snowy Sheep prepares.
Perpetual Spring our happy Climate sees,
Twice breed the Cattle, and twice bear the Trees;
And Summer Suns recede by slow degrees.
Our Land is from the Rage of Tigers freed,
Nor nourishes the Lyon's angry Seed;
Nor poisonous Aconite is here produced,
Or grows unknown, or is, when known, refused.
Nor in so vast a length our Serpents glide,
Or raised on such a spiry Volume ride.
Next add our Cities of Illustrious Name,
Their costly Labor and stupend'ous Frame:
Our Forts on steepy Hills, that far below
See wanton Streams, in winding Valleys flow.
Our twofold Seas, that washing either side,
A rich Recruit of Foreign Stores provide.
Our spacious Lakes; thee, Larius, first; and next
Benacus, with tempest'ous Billows vexed.
Or shall I praise thy Ports, or mention make
Of the vast Mound, that binds the Lucrine Lake.
Or the disdainful Sea, that, shut from thence,
Roars round the Structure, and invades the Fence.
There, where secure the Julian Waters glide,
Or where Avernus Jaws admit the Tyrrhene Tide.
Our Quarries deep in Earth, were famed of old,
For Veins of Silver, and for Ore of Gold.
The Inhabitants themselves, their Country grace;
Hence rose the Marsian and Sabellian Race:
Strong limbed and stout, and to the Wars inclined,
And hard Ligurians, a laborious Kind.
And Volscians armed with Iron-headed Darts.
Besides an Offspring of undaunted Hearts,
The Decij, Marij, great Camillus came
From hence, and greater Scipio's double Name:
And mighty Caesar, whose victorious Arms,
To farthest Asia, carry fierce Alarms:
Avert unwarlike Indians from his Rome;
Triumph abroad, secure our Peace at home.
Hail, sweet Saturnian Soil! of fruitful Grain
Great Parent, greater of Illustrious Men.
For thee my tuneful Accents will I raise,
And treat of Arts disclosed in Ancient Days:
Once more unlock for thee the sacred Spring,
And old Ascraean Verse in Roman Cities sing.
The Nature of their several Soils now see,
Their Strength, their Color, their Fertility:
And first for Heath, and barren hilly Ground,
Where meagre Clay and flinty Stones abound;
Where the poor Soil all Succor seems to want,
Yet this suffices the Palladian Plant.
Undoubted Signs of such a Soil are found,
For here wild Olive-shoots o'respread the ground,
And heaps of Berries strew the Fields around.
But where the Soil, with fat'ning Moisture filled,
Is clothed with Grass, and fruitful to be tilled:
Such as in cheerful Vales we view from high;
Which dripping Rocks with rolling Streams supply,
And feed with Ooze; where rising Hillocks run
In length, and open to the Southern Sun;
Where Fern succeeds, ungrateful to the Plough,
That gentle ground to generous Grapes allow.
Strong Stocks of Vines it will in time produce,
And overflow the Vats with friendly Juice.
Such as our Priests in golden Goblets pour
To Gods, the Givers of the cheerful hour.
Then when the bloated Thuscan blows his Horn,
And reeking Entrails are in Chargers born.
If Herds or fleecy Flocks be more thy Care,
Or Goats that graze the Field, and burn it bare:
Then seek Tarentum's Lawns, and farthest Coast,
Or such a Field as hapless Mantua lost:
Where Silver Swans sail down the watery Rode,
And graze the floating Herbage of the Flood.
There Crystal Streams perpetual tenor keep,
Nor Food nor Springs are wanting to thy Sheep.
For what the Day devours, the nightly Dew
Shall to the Morn in Perly Drops renew.
Fat crumbling Earth is fitter for the Plough,
Putrid and loose above, and black below:
For Ploughing is an imitative Toil,
Resembling Nature in an easy Soil.
No Land for Seed like this, no Fields afford
So large an Income to the Village Lord:
No toiling Teams from Harvest-labour come
So late at Night, so heavy laden home.
The like of Forest Land is understood,
From whence the spleenful Ploughman grubs the Wood,
Which had for length of Ages idle stood.
Then Birds forsake the Ruins of their Seat,
And flying from their Nests their Callow Young forget.
The course lean Gravel, on the Mountain sides,
Scarce dewy Bev'rage for the Bees provides:
Nor Chalk nor crumbling Stones, the food of Snakes,
That work in hollow Earth their winding Tracts.
The Soil exhaling Clouds of subtle Dews,
Imbibing moisture which with ease she spews;
Which rusts not Iron, and whose Mold is clean,
Well clothed with cheerful Grass, and ever green,
Is good for Olives and aspiring Vines;
Embracing Husband Elms in amorous twines,
Is fit for feeding Cattle, fit to sow,
And equal to the Pasture and the Plough.
Such is the Soil of fat Campanian Fields,
Such large increase Vesuvian Nola yields:
And such a Country could Acerra boast,
Till Clanius overflowed the unhappy Coast.
I teach thee next the differing Soils to know;
The light for Vines, the heavyer for the Plough.
Choose first a place for such a purpose fit,
There dig the solid Earth, and sink a Pit:
Next fill the hole with its own Earth again,
And trample with thy Feet, and tread it in:
Then if it rise not to the former height
Of superfice, conclude that Soil is light;
A proper Ground for Pasturage and Vines.
But if the sullen Earth, so pressed, repines
Within its native Mansion to retire,
And stays without, a heap of heavy Mire;
To George London of his maties: Royal Garden in St James^'s Park Gent.

Geo* 2 L (...)


It Is good for Arable, a Glebe that asks
Tough Teams of Oxen, and laborious Tasks.
Salt Earth and bitter are not fit to sow,
Nor will be tamed or mended with the Plough.
Sweet Grapes degenerate there, and Fruits declined
From their first flav'rous Taste, renounce their Kind.
This Truth by sure Experiment is tried;
For first an Ofier Colendar provide
Of Twigs thick wrought, (such toiling Peasants twine,
When through straight Passages they strein their Wine;)
In this close Vessel place that Earth accursed,
But filled brimful with wholesome Water first;
Then run it through, the Drops will rope around,
And by the bitter Taste disclose the Ground.
The fatter Earth by handling we may find,
With Ease distinguished from the meagre Kind:
Poor Soil will crumble into Dust, the Rich
will to the Fingers cleave like clammy Pitch:
Moist Earth produces Corn and Grass, but both
Too rank and too luxuriant in their Growth.
Let not my Land so large a Promise boast,
Lest the lank Ears in length of Stem be lost.
The heavier Earth is by her Weight betrayed,
The lighter in the poising Hand is weighed:
It Is easy to distinguish by the Sight
The Color of the Soil, and black from white.
But the cold Ground is difficult to know,
Yet this the Plants that prosper there, will show;
Black Ivy, Pitch Trees, and the baleful Yeugh.
These Rules considered well, with early Care,
The Vineyard destined for thy Vines prepare:
But, long before the Planting, dig the Ground,
With Furrows deep that cast a rising Mound:
The Clods, exposed to Winter Winds, will bake:
For putrid Earth will best in Vineyards take,
And hoary Frosts, after the painful Toil
Of delving Hinds, will rot the Mellow Soil.
Some Peasants, not to omit the nicest Care,
Of the same Soil their Nursery prepare,
With that of their Plantation; lest the Tree
Translated, should not with the Soil agree.
Beside, to plant it as it was, they mark
The Heavens four Quarters on the tender Bark;
And to the North or South restore the Side,
Which at their Birth did Heat or Cold abide.
So strong is Custom; such Effects can Use
In tender Souls of pliant Plants produce.
Choose next a Province, for thy Vineyards Reign,
On Hills above, or in the lowly Plain:
If fertile Fields or Valleys be thy Choice,
Plant thick, for bounteous Bacchus will rejoice
In close Plantations there: But if the Vine
On rising Ground be placed, or Hills supine,
Extend thy loose Battalions largely wide,
Opening thy Ranks and Files on either Side:
But marshalled all in order as they Stand,
And let no Soldier straggle from his Band.
As Legions in the Field their Front display,
To try the Fortune of some doubtful Day,
And move to meet their Foes with sober Pace,
Strict to their Figure, though in wider Space;
Before the Battle joins, while from afar
The Field yet glitters with the Pomp of War,
And equal Mars, like an impartial Lord,
Leaves all to Fortune, and the dint of Sword;
So let thy Vines in Intervals be set,
But not their Rural Discipline forget:
Indulge their Width, and add a roomy Space,
That their extremest Lines may scarce embrace:
Nor this alone t'indulge a vain Delight,
And make a pleasing Prospect for the Sight:
But, for the Ground it self this only Way,
Can equal Vigor to the Plants convey;
Which crowded, want the room, their Branches to display.
How deep they must be planted, would thou know?
In shallow Furrows Vines securely grow.
Not so the rest of Plants; for Joves own Tree,
That holds the Woods in awful Sov'raignty,
Requires a depth of Lodging in the Ground;
And, next the lower Skies, a Bed profound:
High as his topmost Boughs to Heaven ascend,
So low his Roots to Hell's Dominion tend.
Therefore, nor Winds, nor Winters Rage o'rethrows
His bulky Body, but unmoved he grows.
For length of Ages lasts his happy Reign,
And Lives of Mortal Man contend in vain.
Full in the midst of his own Strength he stands,
Stretching his brawny Arms, and leafy Hands;
His Shade protects the Plains, his Head the Hills commands
The hurtful Hazle in thy Vineyard shun;
Nor plant it to receive the setting Sun:
Nor break the topmost Branches from the Tree;
Nor prune, with blunted Knife, the Progeny.
Root up wild Olives from thy labored Lands:
For sparkling Fire, from Hinds unwary Hands,
Is often scattered over their unctuous rinds,
And after spread abroad by raging Winds.
For first the smouldring Flame the Trunk receives,
Ascending thence, it crackles in the Leaves:
At length victorious to the Top aspires,
Involving all the Wood with smoky Fires,
But most, when driven by Winds, the flaming Storm,
Of the long Files destroys the beauteous Form.
In Ashes then the unhappy Vineyard lies,
Nor will the blasted Plants from Ruin rise:
Nor will the withered Stock be green again,
But the wild Olive shoots, and shades the ungrateful Plain.
Be not seduced with Wisdom's empty Shows,
To stir the peaceful Ground when Boreas blows.
When Winter Frosts constrain the Field with Cold,
The fainty Root can take no steady hold.
But when the Golden Spring reveals the Year,
And the white Bird returns, whom Serpents fear:
That Season deem the best to plant thy Vines.
Next that, is when Autumnal Warmth declines:
E're Heat is quite decayed, or Cold begun,
Or Capricorn admits the Winter Sun.
The Spring adorns the Woods, renews the Leaves;
The Womb of Earth the genial Seed receives.
For then Almighty Jove descends, and pours
Into his buxom Bride his fruitful Showers.
And mixing his large Limbs with hers, he feeds
Her Births with kindly Juice, and fosters teeming Seeds.
Then joyous Birds frequent the lonely Grove,
And Beasts, by Nature stung, renew their Love.
Then Fields the Blades of buried Corn disclose,
And while the balmy Western Spirit blows,
Earth to the Breath her Bosom dares expose.
With kindly Moisture then the Plants abound,
The Grass securely springs above the Ground;
The tender Twig shoots upward to the Skies,
And on the Faith of the new Sun relies.
The swerving Vines on the tall Elms prevail,
Unhurt by Southern Showers or Northern Hail.
They spread their Gems the genial Warmth to share:
And boldly trust their Buds in open Air.
In this soft Season (so sweet Poets sing)
The World was hatched by Heavens Imperial King:
In prime of all the Year, and Holydays of Spring.
Earth knew no Season then, but Spring alone:
On the moist Ground the Sun serenely shone:
Then Winter Winds their blustering Rage forbear,
And in a silent Pomp proceeds the mighty Year.
Sheep soon were sent to people flowery Fields,
And salvage Beasts were banished into Wilds.
Then Heaven was lighted up with Stars; and Man,
A hard relentless Race, from Stones began.
Nor could the tender, new Creation, bear
The excessive Heats or Coldness of the Year:
But chilled by Winter, or by Summer fired,
The middle Temper of the Spring required.
When Infant Nature was with Quiet crowned,
And Heavens Indulgence brooded on the Ground.
For what remains, in depth of Earth secure
Thy covered Plants, and dung with hot Manure;
And Shells and Gravel in the Ground enclose;
For through their hollow Chinks the Water flows:
Which, thus imbibed, returns in misty Dews,
And steeming up, the rising Plant renews.
Some Husbandmen, of late, have found the Way,
A hilly Heap of Stones above to lay,
And press the Plants with Sherds of Potters Clay.
This Fence against immod'rate Rain they found:
Or when the Dog Star cleaves the thirsty Ground.
Be mindful when thou have entombed the Shoot,
With Store of Earth around to feed the Root;
With Iron Teeth of Rakes and Prongs, to move
The crusted Earth, and loosen it above.
Then exercise thy struggling Steers to plough
Betwixt thy Vines, and teach thy feeble Row
To mount on Reeds, and Wands, and, upward led,
On Ashen Poles to raise their forky Head.
On these new Crutches let them learn to walk,
Till swerving upwards, with a stronger Stalk,
They brave the Winds, and, clinging to their Gu
On tops of Elms at length triumphant ride.
But in their tender Nonage, while they spread
Their Springing Leafs, and lift their Infant Head,
And upward while they shoot in open Air,
Indulge their Childhood, and the Nurseling spare.
Nor exercise thy Rage on newborn Life,
But let thy Hand supply the Pruning-knife;
And crop luxuriant Straglers, nor be loath
To strip the Branches of their leafy Growth:
But when the rooted Vines, with steady Hold,
Can clasp their Elms, then Husbandman be bold
To lop the disobedient Boughs, that strayed
Beyond their Ranks: let crooked Steel invade
The lawless Troops, which Discipline disclaim,
And their superfluous Growth with Rigor tame.
Next, fenced with Hedges and deep Ditches round,
Exclude the incroaching Cattle from thy Ground,
While yet the tender Gems but just appear,
Unable to sustain the uncertain Year;
Whose Leaves are not alone foul Winter's Prey,
But often by Summer Suns are scorched away;
And worse than both, become the unworthy Browze
Of Buffal'os, salt Goats, and hungry Cows.
For not December's Frost that burns the Boughs,
Nor Dog Days parching Heat that splits the Rocks,
Are half so harmful as the greedy Flocks:
Their venomed Bite, and Scars indented on the Stocks.
To John Loving Esquire of Little Ealing in the County of Middlesex.

Geor. 2. l. 530.


For this the Malefactor Goat was laid
On Bacchus's Altar, and his forfeit paid.
At Athens thus old Comedy began,
When round the Streets the reeling Actors ran;
In Country Villages, and crossing ways,
Contending for the Prizes of their Plays:
And glad, with Bacchus, on the grassie soil,
Leapt over the Skins of Goats besmeared with Oil.
Thus Roman Youth derived from ruined Troy,
In rude Saturnian Rhymes express their Joy:
With Taunts, and Laughter loud, their Audience please,
Deformed with Vizards, cut from Barks of Trees:
In jolly Hymns they praise the God of Wine,
Whose Earthen Images adorn the Pine;
And there are hung on high, in honor of the Vine:
A madness so devout the Vineyards fills.
In hollow Valleys and on rising Hills;
On what e're side he turns his honest face,
And dances in the Wind, those Fields are in his grace.
To Bacchus therefore let us tune our Lays,
And in our Mother Tongue resound his Praise.
Thin Cakes in Chargers, and a Guilty Goat,
Dragged by the Horns, be to his Altars brought;
Whose offered Entrails shall his Crime reproach,
And drip their Fatness from the Hazle Broach.
To dress thy Vines new labor is required,
Nor must the painful Husbandman be tired:
For thrice, at least, in Compass of the Year,
Thy Vineyard must employ the sturdy Steer,
To turn the Glebe; besides thy daily pain
To break the Clods, and make the Surface plain:
T'unload the Branches or the Leaves to thin,
That suck the Vital Moisture of the Vine.
Thus in a Circle runs the Peasant's Pain,
And the Year rowls within it self again.
Even in the lowest Months, when Storms have shed
From Vines the hairy Honors of their Head;
Not then the drudging Hind his Labor ends;
But to the coming Year his Care extends:
Even then the naked Vine he persecutes;
His Pruning Knife at once Reforms and Cuts.
Be first to dig the Ground, be first to burn
The Branches lopt, and first the Props return
Into thy House, that bore the burdened Vines;
But last to reap the Vintage of thy Wines.
Twice in the Year luxuriant Leaves o'reshade
The encumbered Vine; rough Brambles twice invade:
Hard Labor both! commend the large excess
Of spacious Vineyards; cultivate the less.
Besides, in Woods the Shrubs of prickly Thorn,
Sallows and Reeds, on Banks of Rivers born,
Remain to cut; for Vineyards useful found,
To stay thy Vines, and fence thy fruitful Ground.
Nor when thy tender Trees at length are bound;
When peaceful Vines from Pruning Hooks are free,
When Husbands have surveyed the last degree,
And utmost Files of Plants, and ordered every Tree;
Even when they sing at ease in full Content,
Insulting over the Toils they underwent;
Yet still they find a future Task remain;
To turn the Soil, and break the Clods again:
And after all, their Joys are unsincere,
While falling Rains on ripening Grapes they fear.
Quite opposite to these are Olives found,
No dressing they require, and dread no wound;
Nor Rakes nor Harrows need, but fixed below,
Rejoice in open Air, and unconcerndly grow.
The Soil it self due Nourishment supplies:
Plough but the Furrows, and the Fruits arise:
Content with small Endeavors, 'till they spring.
Soft Peace they figure, and sweet Plenty bring:
Then Olives plant, and Hymns to Pallas sing.
Thus Apple Trees, whose Trunks are strong to bear
Their spreading Boughs, exert themselves in Air:
Want no supply, but stand secure alone,
Not trusting foreign Forces, but their own:
'Till with the ruddy freight the bending Branches groan.
Thus Trees of Nature, and each common Bush,
Uncultivated thrive, and with red Berries blush.
Vile Shrubs are shorn for Browze: the towering hight
Of unctuous Trees, are Torches for the Night.
And shall we doubt, (indulging easy Sloth,)
To sow, to set, and to reform their growth?
To leave the lofty Plants; the lowly kind,
Are for the Shepherd, or the Sheep designed.
Even humble Broom and Osiers have their use,
And Shade for Sleep, and Food for Flocks produce;
Hedges for Corn, and Honey for the Bees:
Besides the pleasing Prospect of the Trees.
How goodly looks Cytorus, ever green
With Boxen Groves, with what delight are seen
Narycian Woods of Pitch, whose gloomy shade,
Seems for retreat of thoughtful Muses made!
But much more pleasing are those Fields to see,
That need not Ploughs, nor Human Industry.
Even cold Caucasean Rocks with Trees are spread,
And wear green Forests on their hilly Head.
Though bending from the blast of Eastern Storms,
Though shent their Leaves, and shattered are their Arms;
Yet Heaven their various Plants for use designs:
For Houses Cedars, and for Shipping Pines.
Cypress provides for Spokes, and Wheels of Wains:
And all for Keels of Ships, that scour the watery Plains.
Willows in Twigs are fruitful, Elms in Leaves,
The War, from stubborn Myrtle Shafts receives:
From Cornels Jav'lins, and the tougher Yeugh
Receives the bending Figure of a Bow.
Nor Box, nor Limes, without their use are made,
Smooth-grain'd, and proper for the Turner's Trade:
Which curious Hands may kerve, and Steel with Ease invade.
Light Alder stems the Po's impetuous Tide,
And Bees in hollow Oaks their Honey hide.
Now balance, with these Gifts, the fumy Joys
Of Wine, attended with eternal Noise.
Wine urged to lawless Lust the Centaurs Train,
Through Wine they quarreled, and through Wine were slain.
Oh happy, if he knew his happy State!
The Swain, who, free from Business and Debate;
Receives his easy Food from Nature's Hand,
And just Returns of cultivated Land!
No Palace, with a lofty Gate, he wants,
TO admit the Tides of early Visitants.
With eager Eyes devouring, as they pass,
The breathing Figures of Corinthian Brass.
No Statues threaten, from high Pedestals;
No Persian Arras hides his homely Walls,
With Antic Vests; which through their shady fold,
Betray the Streaks of ill dissembled Gold.
He boasts no Wool, whose native white is died
With Purple Poison of Assyrian Pride.
No costly Drugs of Araby defile,
With foreign Scents, the Sweetness of his Oil.
But easy Quiet, a secure Retreat,
A harmless Life that knows not how to cheat,
With homebred Plenty the rich Owner bless,
And rural Pleasures crown his Happiness.
Unvex'd with Quarrels, undisturbed with Noise,
The Country King his peaceful Realm enjoys:
Cool Grots, and living Lakes, the Flowery Pride
Of Meads, and Streams that through the Valley glide;
And shady Groves that easy Sleep invite,
And after toilsome Days, a sweet repose at Night.
Wild Beasts of Nature in his Woods abound;
And Youth, of Labor patient, plow the Ground,
Inured to Hardship, and to homely Fare.
Nor venerable Age is wanting there,
In great Examples to the Youthful Train:
Nor are the Gods adored with Rites profane.
From hence Astrea took her Flight, and here
the Prints of her departing Steps appear.
Ye sacred Muses, with whose Beauty fired,
My Soul is ravished, and my Brain inspired:
Whose Priest I am, whose holy Fillets wear;
Would you your Virgil's first Petition hear,
Give me the Ways of wandering Stars to know:
The Depths of Heaven above, and Earth below.
Teach me the various Labors of the Moon,
And whence proceed the Eclipses of the Sun.
Why flowing Tides prevail upon the Main,
And in what dark Recess they shrink again.
What shakes the solid Earth, what Cause delays
The Summer Nights, and shortens Winter Days.
But if my heavy Blood restrain the Flight
Of my free Soul, aspiring to the Height
Of Nature, and unclouded Fields of Light:
My next Desire is, void of Care and Strife,
To lead a soft, secure, inglorious Life.
A Country Cottage near a Crystal Flood,
A winding Valley, and a lofty Wood.
Some God conduct me to the sacred Shades,
Where Bacchanals are sung by Spartan Maids.
Or lift me high to Hemus hilly Crown;
Or in the Plains of Tempe lay me down:
Or lead me to some solitary Place,
And cover my Retreat from Human Race.
Happy the Man, who, studying Nature's Laws,
Through known Effects can trace the secret Cause.
His Mind possessing, in a quiet state,
Fearless of Fortune, and resigned to Fate.
And happy too is he, who decks the Bowers
Of Sylvans, and adores the Rural Powers:
Whose Mind, unmoved, the Bribes of Courts can see;
Their glittering Baits, and Purple Slavery.
Nor hopes the People's Praise, nor fears their Frown,
Nor, when contending Kindred tear the Crown,
Will set up one, or pull another down.
Without Concern he hears, but hears from far,
Of Tumults and Descents, and distant War:
Nor with a Superstitious Fear is awed,
For what befalls at home, or what abroad.
Nor envies he the Rich their heapy Store,
Nor with a helpless Hand condoles the Poor.
He feeds on Fruits, which, of their own accord,
The willing Ground, and laden Trees afford.
From his loved Home no Lucre him can draw;
The Senates mad Decrees he never saw;
Nor heard, at bawling Bars, corrupted Law.
Some to the Seas, and some to Camps resort,
And some with Impudence invade the Court.
In foreign Countries others seek Renown,
With Wars and Taxes others waste their own.
And Houses burn, and household Gods deface,
To drink in Bowls which glittering Gems enchase:
To loll on Couches, rich with Cytron Steds,
And lay their guilty Limbs in Tyrian Beds.
This Wretch in Earth intombs his Golden Ore,
Hovering and brooding on his buried Store.
Some Patriot Fools to pop'lar Praise aspire,
By Public Speeches, which worse Fools admire.
While from both Benches, with redoubled Sounds,
The Applause of Lords and Commoners abounds.
Some through Ambition, or through Thirst of Gold;
Have slain their Brothers, or their Country sold:
And leaving their sweet Homes, in Exile run
To Lands that lie beneath another Sun.
The Peasant, innocent of all these Ills,
With crooked Ploughs the fertile Fallows tills;
And the round Year with daily Labor fills.
From hence the Country Markets are supplied:
Enough remains for household Charge beside;
His Wife, and tender Children to sustain,
And gratefully to feed his dumb deserving Train.
Nor cease his Labors, till the Yellow Field
A full return of bearded Harvest yield:
A Crop so plenteous, as the Land to load,
Overcome the crowded Barns, and lodge on Ricks abroad.
Thus every several Season is employed:
Some spent in Toil, and some in Ease enjoyed.
The yeaning Ewes prevent the springing Year;
The laded Boughs their Fruits in Autumn bear.
It Is then the Vine her liquid Harvest yields,
Baked in the Sunshine of ascending Fields.
The Winter comes, and then the falling Mast,
For greedy Swine, provides a full repast.
Then Olives, ground in Mills, their fatness boast,
And Winter Fruits are mellow'd by the Frost.
His Cares are eased with Intervals of bliss,
His little Children climbing for a Kiss,
Welcome their Father's late return at Night;
His faithful Bed is crowned with chaste delight.
His Kine with swelling Udders ready stand,
And, lowing for the Pail, invite the Milker's hand.
His wanton Kids, with budding Horns prepared,
Fight harmless Battles in his homely Yard:
Himself in Rustic Pomp, on Holy Days,
To Rural Powers a just Oblation pays;
And on the Green his careless Limbs displays.
The Hearth is in the midst; the Herdsmen round
The cheerful Fire, provoke his health in Goblets crowned.
He calls on Bacchus, and propounds the Prize;
The Groom his Fellow Groom at Buts defies;
And bends his Bow, and levels with his Eyes.
Or stripped for Wrestling, smears his Limbs with Oil,
And watches with a trip his Foe to foil.
Such was the life the frugal Sabines led;
So Remus and his Brother God were bred:
From whom the austere Etrurian Virtue rose,
And this rude life our homely Fathers chose.
Old Rome from such a Race derived her birth,
(The Seat of Empire, and the conquered Earth:)
Which now on sev'n high Hills triumphant reigns,
And in that compass all the World contains.
E're Saturn's Rebel Son usurped the Skies,
When Beasts were only slain for Sacrifice:
While peaceful Crete enjoyed her ancient Lord,
E're sounding Hammers forged the inhumane Sword:
To William Walsh of Abberley in Worcestershire Esquire

Geo: 2. l. 760.


E're hollow Drums were beat, before the Breath
Of brazen Trumpets rung the Peals of Death;
The good old God his Hunger did assuage
With Roots and Herbs, and gave the Golden Age.
But over labored with so long a Course,
It Is time to set at ease the smoking Horse.
The Third Book of the Georgics.
The Argument.
This Book begins with an Invocation of some Rural Deities, and a Compliment to
Augustus: After which Virgil directs himself to Mecaenas, and enters on his
Subject. He lays down Rules for the Breeding and Management of Horses, Oxen,
Sheep, Goats, and Dogs: And interweaves several pleasant Descriptions of a
Chariot-Race, of the Battle of the Bulls, of the Force of Love, and of the
Scythian Winter. In the latter part of the Book he relates the Diseases
incident to Cattle; and ends with the Description of a fatal Murrain that
formerly raged among the Alps.

THY Fields, propitious Pales, I rehearse;
And sing thy Pastures in no vulgar Verse,
Amphrysian Shepherd; the Lycaean Woods;
Arcadia's flowery Plains, and pleasing Floods.
5 All other Themes, that careless Minds invite,
Are worn with use; unworthy me to write.
Busiri's Altars, and the dire Decrees
Of hard Euristheus, every Reader sees:
Hylas the Boy, Latona's erring Isle,
And Pelop's Ivory Shoulder, and his Toil
For fair Hippodame, with all the rest
Of Grecian Tales, by Poets are expressed:
New ways I must attempt, my grovelling Name
To raise aloft, and wing my flight to Fame.
I, first of Romans shall in Triumph come
From conquered Greece, and bring her Trophies home:
With Foreign Spoils adorn my native place;
And with Idume's Palms, my Mantua grace.
Of Parian Stone a Temple will I raise,
Where the slow Mincius through the Valley strays:
To the most Noble and Illustrious Prince Charles Duke of Richmond and Lenox
Earl of Marsh and Darnley Baron of Siterington Knight of the most noble Order
of the Garter.

Geo* 3 l 1


Where cooling Streams invite the Flocks to drink:
And Reeds defend the winding Waters Brink.
Full in the midst shall mighty Caesar stand:
Hold the chief Honors; and the Dome command.
Then I, conspicuous in my Tyrian Gown,
(Submitting to his Godhead my Renown)
A hundred Coursers from the Goal will drive;
The rival Chariots in the Race shall strive.
All Greece shall flock from far, my Games to see;
The Whorlbat, and the rapid Race, shall be
Reserved for Caesar, and ordained by me.
My self, with Olive crowned, the Gifts will bear:
Even now methinks the public shouts I hear:
The passing Pageants, and the Pomps appear.
I, to the Temple will conduct the Crew:
The Sacrifice and Sacrificers view;
From thence return, attended with my Train,
Where the proud Theaters disclose the Scene:
Which interwoven Britains seem to raise,
And show the Triumph which their Shame displays.
High over the Gate, in Elephant and Gold,
The Crowd shall Caesar's Indian War behold;
The Nile shall flow beneath; and on the side,
His shattered Ships on Brazen Pillars ride.
Next him Niphates with inverted Urn,
And dropping Sedge, shall his Armenia mourn;
And Asian Cities in our Triumph born.
With backward Bows the Parthians shall be there;
And, spurring from the Fight confess their Fear.
A double Wreath shall crown our Caesar's Brows;
Two differing Trophies, from two different Foes.
Europe with Africa in his Fame shall join;
But neither Shore his Conquest shall confine.
The Parian Marble, there, shall feem to move,
In breathing Statues, not unworthy Jove.
Resembling Heroes, whose Etherial Root,
Is Jove himself, and Caesar is the Fruit.
Tros and his Race the Sculptor shall employ;
And he the God, who built the Walls of Troy.
Envy her self at last, grown pale and dumb;
(By Caesar combated and overcome)
Shall give her Hands; and fear the curling Snakes
Of lashing Furies, and the burning Lakes:
The Pains of famisht Tantalus shall feel;
And Sisyphus that labors up the Hill
The rolling Rock in vain; and cursed Ixion's Wheel.
Mean time we must pursue the Sylvan Lands;
(The abode of Nymphs,) untouched by former Hands:
For such, Maecenas, are thy hard Commands.
Without thee nothing lofty can I sing;
Come then, and with thy self thy Genius bring:
With which inspired, I brook no dull delay.
Cytheron loudly calls me to my way;
Thy Hounds, Taygetus, open and pursue their Prey.
High Epidaurus urges on my speed,
Famed for his Hills, and for his Horses breed:
From Hills and Dales the cheerful Cries rebound:
For Echo hunts along; and propagates the sound.
A time will come, when my maturer Muse,
In Caesar's Wars, a Nobler Theme shall choose.
And through more Ages bear my Sovereign's Praise;
Than have from Tithon past to Caesar's Days.
The Generous Youth, who studious of the Prize,
The Race of running Coursers multiplies;
Or to the Plough the sturdy Bullock breeds,
May know that from the Dam the worth of each proceeds:
The Mother Cow must wear a lowering look,
Sour headed, strongly neck'd, to bear the Yoke.
Her double Dew-lap from her Chin descends:
And at her Thighs the pondrous burden ends.
Long are her sides and large, her Limbs are great;
Rough are her Ears, and broad her horny Feet.
Her Color shining Black, but fleck'd with white;
She tosses from the Yoke; provokes the Fight:
She rises in her Gate, is free from Fears;
And in her Face a Bull's Resemblance bears:
Her ample Forehead with a Star is crowned;
And with her length of Tail she sweeps the Ground.
The Bull's Insult at Four she may sustain;
But, after Ten, from Nuptial Rites refrain.
Six Seasons use; but then release the Cow,
Unfit for Love, and for the laboring Plough.
Now while their Youth is filled with kindly Fire,
Submit thy Females to the lusty Sire:
Watch the quick motions of the frisking Tail,
Then serve their fury with the rushing Male,
Indulging Pleasure lest the Breed should fail.
In Youth alone, unhappy Mortals live;
But, ah! the mighty Bliss is fugitive;
Discolored Sickness, anxious Labors come,
And Age, and Death's inexorable Doom.
Yearly thy Herds in vigor will impair;
Recruit and mend 'em with thy Yearly care:
Still propagate, for still they fall away,
It Is Prudence to prevent the entire decay.
Like Diligence requires the Courser's Race;
In early Choice; and for a longer space.
The Colt, that for a Stallion is designed,
By sure Presages shows his generous Kind,
Of able Body, sound of Limb and Wind.
Upright he walks, on Pasterns firm and straight;
His Motions easy; prancing in his Gate.
The first to lead the Way, to tempt the Flood;
To pass the Bridge unknown, nor fear the trembling Wood.
Dauntless at empty Noises; lofty neck'd;
Sharp headed, Barrel bellied, broadly backed.
Brawny his Chest, and deep, his Color gray;
For Beauty dappled, or the brightest Bay:
Faint white and Dun will scarce the Rearing pay.
The fiery Courser, when he hears from far,
The sprightly Trumpet, and the shouts of War,
Pricks up his Ears; and trembling with Delight,
Shifts place, and paws; and hopes the promised Fight.
On his right Shoulder his thick Mane reclined,
Ruffles at speed; and dances in the Wind.
His horny Hoofs are jetty black, and round;
His Chine is double; starting, with a bound
He turns the Turf, and shakes the solid Ground.
Fire from his Eyes, Clouds from his Nostrils flow:
He bears his Rider headlong on the Foe.
Such was the Steed in Grecian Poets famed,
Proud Cyllarus, by Spartan Castor tamed:
Such Coursers bore to Fight the God of Thrace;
And such, Achilles, was thy warlike Race.
In such a Shape, old Saturn did restrain
His Heavenly Limbs, and flowed with such a Mane.
When, half surpised, and fearing to be seen,
The Leacher galloped from his Jealous Queen:
Ran up the ridges of the Rocks amain;
And with shrill Neighings filled the Neigb'ring Plain.
But worn with Years, when dire Diseases come,
Then hide his not Ignoble Age, at Home:
In Peace to enjoy his former Palms and Pains;
And gratefully be kind to his Remains.
For when his Blood no Youthful Spirits move,
He languishes and labors in his Love.
And when the sprightly Seed should swiftly come,
Dribling he drudges, and defrauds the Womb.
In vain he burns, like fainty Stubble Fires;
And in himself his former self requires.
His Age and Courage weigh: Nor those alone,
But note his Father's Virtues with his own;
Observe if he disdains to yield the Prize;
Of Loss impatient, proud of Victories.
Have thou beheld, when from the Goal they start,
The Youthful Charioteers with beating Heart,
Rush to the Race; and panting, scarcely bear
The extremes of feverish hope, and chilling Fear;
Stoop to the Reins, and lash with all their force;
The flying Chariot kindles in the Course:
And now aloft; and now allow they fly,
Now seem to sink in Earth, and now to touch the Sky;
No stop, no stay, but Clouds of Sand arise;
Spurned, and cast backward on the Follower's Eyes.
The hindmost blows the foam upon the first:
Such is the love of Praise, an Honorable Thirst.
Bold Ericthonius was the first, who joined
Four Horses for the rapid Race designed;
And over the dusty Wheels presiding sat;
The Lapythae to Chariots, added State
Of Bits and Bridles; taught the Steed to bound;
To run the Ring, and trace the mazy round.
To stop, to fly, the Rules of War to know:
TO obey the Rider; and to dare the Foe.
To choose a Youthful Steed, with Courage fired;
To breed him, break him, back him, are required
Experienced Masters; and in sundry Ways:
Their Labors equal, and alike their Praise.
But once again the battered Horse beware,
The weak old Stallion will deceive thy care.
Though Famous in his Youth for force and speed,
Or was of Argos or Epirian breed,
Or did from Neptune's Race, or from himself proceed.
These things premised, when now the Nuptial time
Approaches for the stately Steed to climb;
With Food enable him, to make his Court;
Distend his Chine, and pamper him for sport.
Feed him with Herbs, whatever thou can find,
Of generous warmth; and of salacious kind.
Then Water him, and (drinking what he can)
Encourage him to thirst again, with Bran.
Instructed thus, produce him to the Fair;
And join in Wedlock to the longing Mare.
For if the Sire be faint, or out of case,
He will be copied in his famished Race:
And sink beneath the pleasing Task assigned;
(For all is too little for the craving Kind.)
As for the Females, with industrious care
Take down their Mettle, keep 'em lean and bare;
When conscious of their past delight, and keen
To take the leap, and prove the sport again;
With scanty measure then supply their food;
And, when athirst, restrain 'em from the flood:
Their Bodies harrass, sink 'em when they run;
And fry their melting Marrow in the Sun.
Starve 'em, when Barns beneath their burden groan,
And winnow'd Chaff, by western winds is blown.
For Fear the rankness of the swelling Womb
Should scant the passage, and confine the room.
Lest the Fat Furrows should the sense destroy
Of Genial Lust; and dull the Seat of Joy.
But let 'em suck the Seed with greedy force;
And there enclose the Vigor of the Horse.
No more of Coursers yet: We now proceed
To teeming Kine; and their laborious breed.
First let 'em run at large; and never know
The taming Yoke, or draw the crooked Plough.
Let 'em not leap the Ditch, or swim the Flood;
Or lumber over the Meads; or cross the Wood.
But range the Forest, by the silver side
Of some cool Stream, where Nature shall provide
Green Grass and fat'ning Clover for their fare!
And Mossy Caverns for their Evening lare:
With Rocks above, to shield the sharp Nocturnal air.
About the Alburnian Groves, with Holly green,
Of winged Insects mighty swarms are seen:
This flying Plague (to mark its quality;)
Oestros the Grecians call: Asylus, we:
A fierce loud buzzing Breez; their stings draw blood;
And drive the Cattle gadding through the Wood.
Seized with unusual pains, they loudly cry,
Tanagrus hastens thence; and leaves his Channel dry.
This Curse the jealous Juno did invent;
And first employed for Io's Punishment.
To shun this Ill, the cunning Leach ordains
In Summer's Sultry Heats (for then it reigns)
To feed the Females, e're the Sun arise,
Or late at Night, when Stars adorn the Skies.
When she has calv'd, then set the Dam aside;
And for the tender Progeny provide.
Distinguish all betimes, with branding Fire;
To note the Tribe, the Lineage, and The Sire.
Whom to reserve for Husband of the Herd;
Or who shall be to Sacrifice preferred;
Or whom thou shall to turn thy Glebe allow;
To harrow Furrows, and sustain the Plough:
The rest, for whom no Lot is yet decreed,
May run in Pastures, and at pleasure feed.
The Calf, by Nature and by Genius made
To turn the Glebe, breed to the Rural Trade.
Set him betimes to School; and let him be
Instructed there in Rules of Husbandry:
While yet his youth is flexible and green;
Nor bad Examples of the World has seen.
Early begin the stubborn Child to break;
For his soft Neck, a supple Collar make
Of bending Osiers; and (with time and care
Enured that easy Servitude to bear)
Thy flattering Method on the Youth pursue:
Joined with his School-Fellows, by two and two,
Persuade 'em first to lead an empty Wheel,
That scarce the dust can raise; or they can feel:
In length of Time produce the laboring Yoke
And shining Shares, that make the Furrow smoke.
E're the licentious Youth be thus restrained,
Or Moral Precepts on their Minds have gained;
Their wanton appetites not only feed
With delicates of Leaves, and marshy Weed,
But with thy Sickle reap the rankest land:
And minister the blade, with bounteous hand.
Nor be with harmful parsimony won
To follow what our homely Sires have done;
Who filled the Pail with Beestings of the Cow:
But all her Udder to the Calf allow.
If to the Warlike Steed thy Studies bend,
Or for the Prize in Chariots to contend;
Near Pisa's Flood the rapid Wheels to guide,
Or in Olympian Groves aloft to ride,
The generous Labors of the Courser, first
Must be with sight of Arms and sounds of Trumpets nursed:
Inured the groaning Axle-tree to bear;
And let him clashing Whips in Stables hear.
Sooth him with Praise, and make him understand
The loud Applauses of his Master's Hand:
This from his Weaning, let him well be taught;
And then betimes in a soft Snaffle wrought:
Before his tender Joints with Nerves are knit;
Guiltless of Arms, and trembling at the Bit.
But when to four full Springs his years advance,
Teach him to run the round, with Pride to prance;
And (rightly managed) equal time to beat;
To turn, to bound in measure; and Curvet.
Let him, to this, with easy pains be brought:
And seem to labor, when he labors not.
Thus, formed for speed, he challenges the Wind;
And leaves the Scythian Arrow far behind:
He scours along the Field, with loosened Reins;
And treads so light, he scarcely prints the Plains.
Like Boreas in his Race, when rushing forth,
He sweeps the Skies, and clears the cloudy North:
The waving Harvest bends beneath his blast;
The Forest shakes, the Groves their Honors cast;
He flies aloft, and with impetuous roar
Pursues the foaming Surges to the Shore.
Thus over the Elean Plains, thy well-breathed Horse
Sustains the goring Spurs, and wins the Course.
Or, bred to Belgian Wagons, leads the Way;
Untir'd at night, and cheerful all the Day.
When once he is broken, feed him full and high:
Indulge his Growth, and his gaunt sides supply.
Before his Training, keep him poor and low;
For his stout Stomach with his Food will grow;
The pampered Colt will Discipline disdain,
Impatient of the Lash, and restiff to the Rein.
Would thou their Courage and their Strength improve,
Too soon they must not feel the stings of Love.
Whether the Bull or Courser be thy Care,
Let him not leap the Cow, nor mount the Mare.
The youthful Bull must wander in the Wood;
Behind the Mountain, or beyond the Flood:
Or, in the Stall at home his Fodder find;
Far from the Charms of that alluring Kind.
With two fair Eyes his Mistress burns his Breast;
He looks, and languishes, and leaves his Rest;
Forsakes his Food, and pining for the Lass,
Is joyless of the Grove, and spurns the growing grass.
The soft Seducer, with enticing Looks,
The bellowing Rivals to the Fight provokes.
A beauteous Heifer in the Woods is bred;
The stooping Warriors, aiming Head to Head,
Engage their clashing Horns; with dreadful Sound
The Forest rattles, and the Rocks rebound.
They fence, they push, and pushing loudly roar;
Their Dewlaps and their Sides are bathed in Gore.
Nor when the War is over, is it Peace;
Nor will the vanquished Bull his Claim release:
But feeding in his Breast his ancient Fires,
And cursing Fate, from his proud Foe retires.
Driven from his Native Land, to foreign Grounds,
He with a generous Rage resents his Wounds;
His ignominious Flight, the Victor's boast,
And more than both, the Loves, which unrevenged he lost.
Often he turns his Eyes, and, with a Groan,
Surveys the pleasing Kingdoms, once his own.
To Sr Justinian Isham of Lamport in Northampton Shire Barronet

Geo 3. L 340.


And therefore to repair his Strength he tries:
Hardening his Limbs with painful Exercise,
And rough upon the flinty Rock he lies.
On prickly Leaves, and on sharp Herbs he feeds,
Then to the Prelude of a War proceeds.
His Horns, yet sore, he tries against a Tree:
And meditates his absent Enemy.
He snuffs the Wind, his heels the Sand excite;
But, when he stands collected in his might,
He roars, and promises a more successful Fight.
Then, to redeem his Honor at a blow,
He moves his Camp, to meet his careless Foe.
Not with more Madness, rolling from afar,
The spumy Waves proclaim the watery War.
And mounting upwards, with a mighty Roar,
March onwards, and insult the rocky shore.
They mate the middle Region with their height;
And fall no less, than with a Mountain's weight;
The Waters boil, and belching from below
Black Sands, as from a forceful Engine throw.
Thus every Creature, and of every Kind,
The secret Joys of sweet Coition find:
Not only Man's Imperial Race; but they
That wing the liquid Air; or swim the Sea,
Or haunt the Desert, rush into the flame:
For Love is Lord of all; and is in all the same.
It Is with this rage, the Mother Lion stung,
Scours over the Plain; regardless of her young:
Demanding Rites of Love; she sternly stalks;
And hunts her Lover in his lonely Walks.
It Is then the shapeless Bear his Den forsakes;
In Woods and Fields a wild destruction makes.
Boars whet their Tusks; to battle Tigers move;
Enraged with Hunger, more enraged with Love.
Then woe to him, that in the desert Land
Of Lybia travels, over the burning Sand.
The Stallion snuffs the well-known Scent afar;
And snorts and trembles for the distant Mare:
Nor Bits nor Bridles can his Rage restrain;
And rugged Rocks are interposed in vain:
He makes his way over Mountains, and contemns
Unruly Torrents, and unfoorded Streams.
The bristled Boar, who feels the pleasing Wound,
New grinds his arming Tusks, and digs the Ground.
The sleepy Leacher shuts his little Eyes;
About his churning Chaps the frothy bubbles rise:
He rubs his sides against a Tree; prepares
And hardens both his Shoulders for the Wars.
What did the Youth, when Love's unerring Dart
Transfixt his Liver; and inflamed his heart?
Alone, by night, his watery way he took;
About him, and above, the Billows broke:
The Sluices of the Sky were open spread;
And rolling Thunder rattl'd over his Head.
The raging Tempest called him back in vain;
And every boding Omen of the Main.
Nor could his Kindred; nor the kindly Force
Of weeping Parents, change his fatal Course.
No, not the dying Maid who must deplore
His floating Carcass on the Sestian shore.
I pass the Wars that spotted Linx's make
With their fierce Rivals, for the Females sake:
The howling Wolves, the Mastiffs amorous rage;
When even the fearsul Stag dares for his Hind engage.
But far above the rest, the furious Mare,
Barred from the Male, is frantic with despair.
For when her pouting Vent declares her pain,
She tears the Harness, and she rends the Reyn;
For this; (when Venus gave them rage and power)
Their Masters mangled Members they devour;
Of Love defrauded in their longing Hour.
For Love they force through Thickets of the Wood,
They climb the steepy Hills, and stem the Flood.
When at the Spring's approach their Marrow burns,
(For with the Spring their genial Warmth returns)
The Mares to Cliffs of rugged Rocks repair,
And with wide Nostrils snuff the Western Air:
When (wondrous to relate) the Parent Wind,
Without the Stallion, propagates the Kind.
Then fired with amorous rage, they take their Flight
Through Plains, and mount the Hills unequal height;
Nor to the North, nor to the Rising Sun,
Nor Southward to the Rainy Regions run,
But boring to the West, and hovering there,
With gaping Mouths, they draw prolifick air:
With which impregnate, from their Groins they shed
A slimy Juice, by false Conception bred.
The Shepherd knows it well; and calls by Name
Hippomanes, to note the Mother's Flame.
This, gathered in the Planetary Hour,
With noxious Weeds, and spelled with Words of power*
Dire Stepdames in the Magic Bowl infuse;
And mix, for deadly Draughts, the poisonous Juice.
But time is lost, which never will renew,
While we too far the pleasing Path pursue;
Surveying Nature, with too nice a view.
Let this suffice for Herds: our following Care
Shall woolly Flocks, and shaggy Goats declare.
Nor can I doubt what Oil I must bestow,
To raise my Subject from a Ground so low:
And the mean Matter which my Theme affords,
T'embellish with Magnificence of Words.
But the commanding Muse my Chariot guides;
Which over the dubious Cliff securely rides:
And pleased I am, no beaten Road to take:
But first the way to new Discov'ries make.
Now, sacred Pales, in a lofty strain,
I sing the Rural Honors of thy Reign.
First with assiduous care, from Winter keep
Well fodder'd in the Stalls, thy tender, Sheep.
Then spread with Straw, the bedding of thy Fold;
With Fern beneath, to fend the bitter Gold.
That free from Gouts thou may preserve thy Care:
And clear from Scabs, produced by freezing Air.
Next let thy Goats officiously be nursed;
And led to living Streams; to quench their Thirst.
Feed 'em with Winter-brouze, and for their lare
A Cot that opens to the South prepare:
Where basking in the Sunshine they may lie,
And the short Remnants of his Heat enjoy.
This during Winter's drisly Reign be done:
'Till the new Ram receives the exalted Sun:
For hairy Goats of equal profit are
With woolly Sheep, and ask an equal Care.
It Is true, the Fleece, when drunk with Tyrian Juice,
Is dearly sold; but not for needful use:
For the sallacious Goat increases more;
And twice as largely yields her milky Store.
The still distended Udders never fail;
But when they seem exhausted swell the Pail.
Mean time the Pastor shears their hoary Beards;
And eases of their Hair, the laden Herds.
Their Camelots, warm in Tents, the Soldier hold;
And shield the wretched Mariner from Cold.
On Shrubs they brouze, and on the bleaky Top
Of rugged Hills, the thorny Bramble crop.
To the Right Worshipful Sr. Thomas Mompesson of Bathampton in the County of
Wilts, Knight.

Geor: 3. l. 465


Attended with their Family they come
At Night unasked, and mindful of their home;
And scarce their swelling Bags the threshold overcome.
So much the more thy diligence bestow
In depth of Winter, to defend the Snow:
By how much less the tender helpless Kind,
For their own ills, can fit Provision find.
Then minister the browze, with bounteous hand;
And open let thy Stacks all Winter stand.
But when the Western Winds with vital power
Call forth the tender Grass, and budding Flower;
Then, at the last, produce in open Air
Both Flocks; and send 'em to their Summer fare.
Before the Sun, while Hesperus appears;
First let 'em sip from Herbs the pearly tears
Of Morning Dews: And after break their Fast
On Green-sword Ground; (a cool and grateful taste:)
But when the day's fourth hour has drawn the Dews,
And the Sun's sultry heat their thirst renews;
When creaking Grasshoppers on Shrubs complain,
Then lead 'em to their wat'ring Troughs again.
In Summer's heat, some bending Valley find,
Closed from the Sun, but open to the Wind:
Or seek some ancient Oak, whose Arms extend
In ample breadth, thy Cattle to defend:
Or solitary Grove, or gloomy Glade:
To shield 'em with its venerable Shade.
Once more to wat'ring lead; and feed again
When the low Sun is sinking to the Main.
When rising Cynthia sheds her silver Dews;
And the cool Evening-breeze the Meads renews:
When Linnets fill the Woods with tunesul sound,
And hollow shoars the Halcyons Voice rebound.
Why should my Muse enlarge on Lybian Swains;
Their scattered Cottages, and ample Plains?
Where often the Flocks, without a Leader stray;
Or through continued Deserts take their way;
And, feeding, add the length of Night to day.
Whole Months they wander, grazing as they go;
Nor Folds, nor hospitable Harbor know.
Such an extent of Plains, so vast a space
Of Wilds unknown, and of untasted Grass
Allures their Eyes: The Shepherd last appears,
And with him all his Patrimony bears:
His House and household Gods! his trade of War,
His Bow and Quiver; and his trusty Cur.
Thus, under heavy Arms, the Youth of Rome
Their long laborious Marches overcome;
Chearly their tedious Travels undergo:
And pitch their sudden Camp before the Foe.
Not so the Scythian Shepherd tends his Fold;
Nor he who bears in Thrace the bitter cold:
Nor he, who treads the bleak Meotian Strand;
Or where proud Ister rouls his yellow Sand.
Early they stall their Flocks and Herds; for there
No Grass the Fields, no Leaves the Forests wear.
The frozen Earth lies buried there, below
A hilly heap, sev'n Cubits deep in Snow:
And all the West Allies of stormy Boreas blow.
The Sun from far, peeps with a sickly face;
Too weak the Clouds, and mighty Fogs to chase;
When up the Skies, he shoots his rosy Head;
Or in the ruddy Ocean seeks his Bed.
Swift Rivers, are with sudden Ice constrained;
And studded Wheels are on its back sustained.
An Hostry now sor Wagons; which before
Tall Ships of burden, on its Bosom bore.
To John Dormer of Rowshan in the County of Oxford Esquire

Geo: 3: L 570.


The brazen Cauldrons, with the Frost are flaw'd;
The Garment, stiff with Ice, at Hearths is thawed.
With Axes first they cleave the Wine, and thence
By weight, the solid portions they dispense.
From Locks uncomb'd, and from the frozen Beard,
Long Isicles depend, and crackling Sounds are heard.
Mean time perpetual Sleet, and driving Snow,
Obscure the Skies, and hang on Herds below.
The starving Cattle perish in their Stalls,
Huge Oxen stand enclosed in wint'ry Walls
Of Snow congealed; whole Herds are buried there
Of mighty Stags, and scarce their Horns appear.
The dext'rous Huntsman wounds not these afar,
With Shafts, or Darts, or makes a distant War
With Dogs; or pitches Toyls to stop their Flight:
But close engages in unequal Fight.
And while they strive in vain to make their way
Through hills of Snow, and pitifully bray;
Assaults with dint of Sword, or pointed Spears,
And homeward, on his Back, the joyful burden bears.
The Men to subterranean Caves retire;
Secure from Cold; and crowd the cheerful Fire:
With Trunks of Elms and Oaks, the Hearth they load,
Nor tempt the inclemency of Heaven abroad.
Their jovial Nights, in frollicks and in play
They pass, to drive the tedious Hours away.
And their cold Stomachs with crowned Goblets cheer,
Of windy Cider, and of barmy Beer.
Such are the cold Ryphean Race; and such
The savage Scythian, and unwarlike Dutch.
Where Skins of Beasts, the rude Barbarians wear;
The spoils of Foxes, and the furry Bear.
Is Wool thy care? Let not thy Cattle go
Where Bushes are, where Burs and Thistles grow;
Nor in too rank a Pasture let 'em feed:
Then of the purest white select thy Breed.
Even though a snowy Ram thou shall behold,
Prefer him not in haste, for Husband to thy Fold.
But search his Mouth; and if a swarthy Tongue
Is underneath his humid Pallat hung;
Reject him, lest he darken all the Flock;
And substitute another from thy Stock.
It Was thus with Fleeces milky white (if we
May trust report,) Pan God of Arcady
Did bribe thee Cynthia; nor did thou disdain
When called in woody shades, to cure a Lover's pain.
If Milk be thy design; with plenteous hand
Bring Clover-grass; and from the marshy Land
Salt Herbage for the fodd'ring Rack provide;
To fill their Bags, and swell the milky Tide:
These raise their Thirst, and to the Taste restore
The savor of the Salt, on which they fed before.
Some, when the Kids their Dams too deeply drain,
With gags and muzzles their soft Mouths restrain.
Their morning Milk, the Peasants press at Night:
Their Evening Meal, before the rising Light
To Market bear: or sparingly they steep
With seas'ning Salt, and stored, for Winter keep.
Nor last, forget thy faithful Dogs: but feed
With fat'ning Whey the Mastiffs generous breed;
And Spartan Race: who for the Folds relief
Will prosecute with Cries the Nightly Thief:
Repulse the prouling Wolf, and hold at Bay,
The Mountain Robbers, rushing to the Prey.
With cries of Hounds, thou may pursue the fear
Of flying Hares, and chase the fallow Deer;
Rouse from their desert Dens, the brisl'd Rage
Of Boars, and beamy Stags in Toyls engage.
With smoke of burning Cedar scent thy Walls:
And fume with stinking Galbanum thy Stalls:
With that rank Odor from thy dwelling Place
To drive the Viper's brood, and all the venomed Race.
For often under Stalls unmoved, they lie,
Obscure in shades, and shunning Heavens broad Eye.
And Snakes, familiar, to the Hearth succeed,
Disclose their Eggs, and near the Chimny breed.
Whether, to roofy Houses they repair,
Or Sun themselves abroad in open Air,
In all abodes of pestilential Kind,
To Sheep and Oxen, and the painful Hind.
Take, Shepherd take, a plant of stubborn Oak;
And labor him with many a sturdy stroke:
Or with hard Stones, demolish from a-far
His haughty Crest, the seat of all the War.
Invade his hissing Throat, and winding spires;
'Till stretched in length, the unfolded Foe retires.
He drags his Tail; and for his Head provides:
And in some secret cranny slowly glides;
But leaves exposed to blows, his Back and battered sides.
In fair Calabria's Woods, a Snake is bred,
With curling Crest, and with advancing Head:
Waving he rolls, and makes a winding Track;
His Belly spotted, burnisht is his Back:
While Springs are broken, while the Southern Air
And dropping Heavens, the moistened Earth repair,
He lives on standing Lakes, and trembling Bogs,
And fills his Maw with Fish, or with loquacious Frogs.
But when, in muddy Pools, the water sinks;
And the chapt Earth is furrowed over with Chinks;
He leaves the Fens, and leaps upon the Ground;
And hissing, rowls his glaring Eyes around.
With Thirst inflamed, impatient of the heats,
He rages in the Fields, and wide Destruction threats.
Oh let not Sleep, my closing Eyes invade,
In open Plains, or in the secret Shade,
When he, renewed in all the speckl'd Pride
Of pompous Youth, has cast his slough aside:
And in his Summer Liv'ry rowls along:
Erect, and brandishing his forky Tongue,
Leaving his Nest, and his imperfect Young;
And thoughtless of his Eggs, forgets to rear
The hopes of Poison, for the foll'wing Year.
The Causes and the Signs shall next be told,
Of every Sickness that infects the Fold.
A scabby Tetter on their pelts will stick,
When the raw Rain has pierced 'em to the quick:
Or searching Frosts, have eaten through the Skin,
Or burning Isicles are lodged within:
Or when the Fleece is shorn, if sweat remains
Unwash'd, and soaks into their empty Veins:
When their defenseless Limbs, the Brambles tear;
Short of their Wool, and naked from the Sheer.
Good Shepherds after sheering, drench their Sheep,
And their Flocks Father (forced from high to leap)
Swims down the Stream, and plunges in the deep.
They oint their naked Limbs with mother'd Oil;
Or from the Founts where living Sulphurs boil,
They mix a Medicine to foment their Limbs;
With Scum that on the molten Silver swims.
Fat Pitch, and black Bitumen, add to these,
Besides, the waxen labor of the Bees:
And Hellebore, and Squills deep rooted in the Seas,
Receipts abound; but searching all thy Store,
The best is still at hand, to launch the Sore:
To Fredrick Filney of Filney Hall in Hant-Shire Esquire

Geo 3: L 721


And cut the Head; for till the Core be found,
The secret Vice is fed, and gathers Ground:
While making fruitless Moan, the Shepherd stands,
And, when the launching Knife requires his hands,
Vain help, with idle Prayers from Heaven demands.
Deep in their Bones when Fevers fix their seat,
And rack their Limbs; and lick the vital heat;
The ready Cure to cool the raging Pain,
Is underneath the Foot to breath a Vein.
This remedy the Scythian Shepherds found:
The Inhabitants of Thracia's hilly Ground,
And Gelons use it; when for Drink and Food
They mix their cruddl'd Milk with Horses Blood.
But where thou see a single Sheep remain
In shades aloof, or couched upon the Plain;
Or listlesly to crop the tender Grass;
Or late to lag behind, with truant pace;
Revenge the Crime; and take the Traytor's head,
E're in the faultless Flock the dire Contagion spread.
On Winter Seas we fewer Storms behold,
Than foul Diseases that infect the Fold.
Nor do those ills, on single Bodies prey;
But oft'ner bring the Nation to decay;
And sweep the present Stock, and future Hope away.
A dire Example of this Truth appears:
When, after such a length of rolling Years,
We see the naked Alps, and thin Remains
Of scattered Cotts, and yet unpeopl'd Plains:
Once filled with grazing Flocks, the Shepherds happy Reigns.
Here from the vicious Air, and sickly Skies,
A Plague did on the dumb Creation rise:
During the Autumnal Heats the Infection grew,
Tame Cattle, and the Beasts of Nature slew.
Poys'ning the Standing Lakes; and Pools Impure:
Nor was the foodful Grass in Fields secure.
Strange Death! For when the thirsty fire had drunk
Their vital Blood, and the dry Nerves were shrunk;
When the contracted Limbs were cramped, even then
A wat'rish Humor swelled and ooz'd again:
Converting into Bane the kindly Juice,
Ordained by Nature for a better use.
The Victim Ox, that was for Altars pressed,
Trimmed with white Ribbons, and with Garlands dressed,
Sunk of himself, without the Gods Command:
Preventing the slow Sacrificer's Hand.
Or, by the holy Butcher, if he fell,
The inspected Entrails, could no Fates foretell.
Nor, laid on Altars, did pure Flames arise;
But Clouds of smouldring Smoke, forbad the Sacrifice.
Scarcely the Knife was redden'd with his Gore,
Or the black Poison stained the sandy Floor.
The thriven Calves in Meads their Food forsake,
And render their sweet Souls before the plenteous Rack.
The fawning Dog runs mad; the wheasing Swine
With Coughs is choked; and labors from the Chine:
The Victor Horse, forgetful of his Food,
The Palm renounces, and abhors the Flood.
He paws the Ground, and on his hanging Ears
A doubtful Sweat in clammy drops appears:
Parched is his Hide, and rugged are his Hairs.
Such are the Symptoms of the young Disease;
But in time's process, when his pains increase,
He rouls his mournful Eyes, he deeply groans
With patient sobbing, and with manly Moans.
He heaves for Breath: which, from his Lungs supplied,
And fetched from far, distends his laboring side.
To his rough Palate, his dry Tongue succeeds;
And roapy Gore, he from his Nostrils bleeds.
A Drench of Wine has with success been used;
And through a Horn, the generous Juice infused:
Which timely taken opened his closing Jaws;
But, if too late, the Patient's death did cause.
For the too vigorous Dose, too fiercely wrought;
And added Fury to the Srength it brought.
Recruited into Rage, he grinds his Teeth
In his own Flesh, and feeds approaching Death.
Ye Gods, to better Fate, good Men dispose;
And turn that Impious Error on our Foes!
The Steer, who to the Yoke was bred to bow,
(Studious of Tillage; and the crooked Plough)
Falls down and dies; and dying spews a Flood
Of foamy Madness, mixed with clotted Blood.
The Clown, who cursing Providence repines,
His Mournful Fellow from the Team disjoyns:
With many a groan, forsakes his fruitless care;
And in the unfinished Furrow, leaves the Share.
The pineing Steer, no Shades of lofty Woods,
Nor flowery Meads can ease; nor Crystal floods
Roul'd from the Rock: His flabby Flanks decrease;
His Eyes are settled in a stupid peace.
His bulk too weighty for his Thighs is grown;
And his unweildy Neck, hangs drooping down.
Now what avails his well-deserving Toil
To turn the Glebe; or smooth the rugged Soil!
And yet he never supt in solemn State,
Nor undigested Feasts did urge his Fate;
Nor day, to Night, luxuriously did join;
Nor surfeited on rich Campanian Wine.
Simple his Bev'rage; homely was his Food;
The wholesome Herbage, and the running Flood:
No dreadful Dreams awaked him with affright;
His Pains by Day, secured his Rest by Night.
'Twas then that Buffalo's, ill paired, were seen
To draw the Carr of Jove's Imperial Queen
For want of Oxen: and the laboring Swain
Scratched with a Rake, a Furrow for his Grain:
And covered, with his hand, the shallow Seed again.
He Yokes himself, and up the Hilly height,
With his own Shoulders, draws the Waggon's weight.
The nightly Wolf, that round the Enclosure proul'd
To leap the Fence; now plots not on the Fold.
Tamed with a sharper Pain. The fearful Do
And flying Stag, amidst the Greyhounds go:
And round the Dwellings roam of Man, their fiercer Foe.
The scaly Nations of the Sea profound,
Like Shipwrecked Carcasses are driven aground:
And mighty Phocae, never seen before
In shallow Streams, are stranded on the shore.
The Viper dead, within her Hole is found:
Defenseless was the shelter of the ground.
The water-Snake, whom Fish and Paddocks fed,
With staring Scales lies poisoned in his Bed:
To Birds their Native Heavens contagious prove,
From Clouds they fall, and leave their Souls above.
Besides, to change their Pasture it is in vain:
Or trust to Physic; Physic is their Bane.
The Learned Leaches in despair depart:
And shake their Heads, desponding of their Art.
Tisiphone, let loose from under ground,
Majestically pale, now treads the round:
Before her drives Diseases, and affright;
And every moment rises to the sight:
Aspiring to the Skies; encroaching on the light.
The Rivers and their Banks, and Hills around,
With lowings, and with dying Bleats resound.
At length, she strikes an Universal Blow;
To Death at once whole Herds of Cattle go:
Sheep, Oxen, Horses fall; and, heaped on high,
The differing Species in Confusion lie.
'Till warned by frequent ills, the way they found,
To lodge their loathsome Carrion underground.
For, useless to the Currier were their Hides:
Nor could their tainted Flesh with Ocean Tides
Be freed from Filth; nor could Vulcanian Flame
The Stench abolish; or the Savor tame.
Nor safely could they shear their fleecy Store;
(Made drunk with poisonous Juice, and stiff with Gore:)
Or touch the Web: But if the Vest they wear,
Red Blisters rising on their Paps appear,
And flaming Carbuncles; and noisome Sweat,
And clammy Dews, that loathsome Lice beget:
'Till the slow creeping Evil eats his way,
Consumes the parching Limbs; and makes the Life his prey.
The Fourth Book of the Georgics.
The Argument.
Virgil has taken care to raise the Subject of each Georgic: In the First he
has only dead Matter on which to work. In the second he just steps on the World
of Life, and describes that degree of it which is to be found in Vegetables. In
the third he advances to Animals. And in the last, singles out the Be, which
may be reckoned the most sagacious of 'em, for his Subject.

In this Georgic he shows us what Station is most proper for the Bees, and when
they begin to gather Honey: how to call 'em home when they swarm; and how to
part 'em when they are engaged in Battle. From hence he takes occasion to
discover their different Kinds; and, after an Excursion relates their prudent
and politic Administration of Affairs and the several Diseases that often rage
in their Hives, with the proper Symptoms and Remedies of each Disease. In the
last place he lays down a method of repairing their Kind, supposing their whole
Breed lost; and gives at large the History of its Invention.

THE Gifts of Heaven my foll'wing Song pursues,
Aerial Honey, and Ambrosial Dews.
Maecenas, read this other part, that sings
Fmbattel'd Sqadrons and adventurous Kings:
A mighty Pomp, though made of little Things.
Their Arms, their Arts, their Manners I disclose,
And how they War, and whence the People rose:
Slight is the Subject, but the Praise not small,
If Heaven assist, and Phoebus hear my Call.
First, for thy Bees a quiet Station find,
And lodge 'em under Covert of the Wind:
For Winds, when homeward they return, will drive
The loaded Carriers from their Evening Hive.
Far from the Cows and Goats insulting Crew,
That trample down the Flowers, and brush the Dew:
The painted Lizard, and the Birds of Prey,
Foes of the frugal Kind, be far away.
To Richard Norton of Southwick in Hant-shire Esquire.

Geo 4: L 1


The Titmouse, and the Peckers hungry Brood,
And Progne, with her Bosom stained in Blood:
These rob the trading Citizens, and bear
The trembling Captives through the liquid Air;
And for their callow young a cruel Feast prepare.
But near a living Stream their Mansion place,
Edged round with Moss, and tufts of matted Grass:
And plant (the Winds impetuous rage to stop,)
Wild Olive Trees, or Palms, before the buisy Shop:
That when the youthful Prince, with loud allarm,
Calls out the venurous Colony to swarm;
When first their way through yielding Air they wing,
New to the Pleasures of their native Spring;
The Banks of Brooks may make a cool retreat
For the raw Soldiers from the scalding Heat:
And neighboring Trees, with friendly Shade invite
The Troops unused to long laborious Flight.
Then over the running Stream, or standing Lake,
A Passage for thy weary People make;
With Osier Floats the standing Water strew;
Of massy Stones make Bridges, if it flow:
That basking in the Sun thy Bees may lie,
And resting there, their flaggy Pinions dry:
When late returning home, the laden Host,
By raging Winds is wrecked upon the Coast.
Wild Thyme and Sav'ry set around their Cell,
Sweet to the Taste, and fragrant to the Smell:
Set rows of Rosemary with flow'ring Stem,
And let the purple Vi'lets drink the Stream.
Whether thou build the Palace of thy Bees
With twisted Osiers, or with Barks of Trees;
Make but a narrow Mouth: for as the Cold
Congeals into a Lump the liquid Gold;
So it is again dissolved by Summer's heat,
And the sweet Labors both Extremes defeat.
And therefore, not in vain, the industrious Kind
With dawby Wax and Flowers the Chinks have lined.
And, with their Stores of gathered Glue, contrive
To stop the Vents, and Crannies of their Hive.
Not Birdlime, or Idean Pitch produce
A more tenacious Mass of clammy Juice.
Nor Bees are lodged in Hives alone, but found
In Chambers of their own, beneath the Ground:
Their vaulted Roofs are hung in Pumices,
And in the rotten Trunks of hollow Trees.
But plaster thou the chinky Hives with Clay,
And leafy Branches over their Lodgings lay.
Nor place them where too deep a Water flows,
Or where the Yeugh their poisonous Neighbor grows:
Nor roast red Crabs to offend the niceness of their Nose.
Nor near the steaming Stench of muddy Ground;
Nor hollow Rocks that render back the Sound,
And doubled Images of Voice rebound.
For what remains, when Golden Suns appear,
And under Earth have driven the Winter Year:
The winged Nation wanders through the Skies,
And over the Plains, and shady Forest flies:
Then stooping on the Meads and leafy Bowers;
They skim the Floods, and sip the purple Flowers.
Exalted hence, and drunk with secret Joy,
Their young Succession all their Cares employ:
They breed, they brood, instruct and educate,
And make Provision for the future State:
They work their waxen Lodgings in their Hives,
And labor Honey to sustain their Lives.
But when thou see a swarming Cloud arise,
That sweeps aloft, and darkens all the Skies:
To the Right Honble: Sr. William Trumbull Knight. Principal Secretary of State
and one of his Maities: Most Honble: Priry Council.

Geo: 4. l. 85.


The Motions of their hasty Flight attend;
And know to Floods, or Woods, their airy march they bend.
Then Melfoil beat, and Honey-suckles pound,
With these alluring Savours strew the Ground;
And mix with tinkling Brass, the Cymbals droning Sound.
Straight to their ancient Cells, recalled from Air,
The reconciled Deserters will repair.
But if intestine Broils allarm the Hive,
(For two Pretenders often for Empire strive)
The Vulgar in divided Factions jar;
And murmuring Sounds proclaim the Civil War.
Inflamed with Ire, and trembling with Disdain,
Scarce can their Limbs, their mighty Souls contain.
With Shouts, the Cowards Courage they excite,
And martial Clangors call 'em out to fight:
With hoarse Allarms the hollow Camp rebounds,
That imitates the Trumpets angry Sounds:
Then to their common Standard they repair;
The nimble Horsemen scour the Fields of Air.
In form of Battle drawn, they issue forth,
And every Knight is proud to prove his Worth.
Pressed for their Country's Honor, and their King's,
On their sharp Beaks they whet their pointed Stings;
And exercise their Arms, and tremble with their Wings.
Full in the midst, the haughty Monarchs ride,
The trusty Guards come up, and close the Side;
With Shouts the daring Foe to Battle is defied.
Thus in the Season of unclouded Spring,
To War they follow their undaunted King:
Crowd thro'their Gates, and in the Fields of Light,
The shocking Squadrons meet in mortal Fight:
Headlong they fall from high, and wounded wound,
And heaps of slaughtered Soldiers bite the Ground.
Hard Hailstones lie not thicker on the Plain;
Nor shaken Oaks such Showers of Acorns rain.
With gorgeous Wings the Marks of Sovereign sway,
The two contending Princes make their way;
Intrepid through the midst of danger go;
Their friends encourage, and amaze the Foe.
With mighty Souls in narrow Bodies pressed,
They challenge, and encounter Breast to Breast;
So fixed on Fame, unknowing how to fly,
And obstinately bent to win or dye;
That long the doubtful Combat they maintain,
Till one prevails (for one can only Reign.)
Yet all those dreadful deeds, this deadly fray,
A cast of scattered Dust will soon alay,
And undecided leave the Fortune of the day.
When both the Chiefs are sund'red from the Fight,
Then to the lawful King restore his Right.
And let the wastful Prodigal be slain,
That he, who best deserves, alone may reign.
With ease distinguished is the Regal Race,
One Monarch wears an honest open Face;
Large are his Limbs, and Godlike to behold,
His Royal Body shines with specks of Gold,
And ruddy Skales; for Empire he designed,
Is better born, and of a Nobler Kind.
That other looks like Nature in disgrace,
Gaunt are his sides, and sullen is his face:
And like their grizly Prince appears his gloomy Race:
Grim, ghastly, rugged, like a thirsty train
That long have traveled through a desert plain,
And spet from their dry Chaps the gathered dust again.
The better Brood, unlike the Bastard Crew,
Are marked with Royal streaks of shining hue;
Glittering and ardent, though in Body less:
From these at pointed Seasons hope to press
Huge heavy Honey-Combs, of Golden Juice,
Not only sweet, but pure, and fit for use:
T'allay the Strength and Hardness of the Wine,
And with old Bacchus, new Metheglin join.
But when the Swarms are eager of their play,
And loath their empty Hives, and idly stray,
Restrain the wanton Fugitives, and take
A timely Care to bring the Truants back.
The Task is easy: but to clip the Wings
Of their high-flying Arbitrary Kings:
At their Command, the People swarm away;
Confine the Tyrant, and the Slaves will stay.
Sweet Gardens, full of Saffron Flowers, invite
The wandering Gluttons, and retard their Flight.
Besides, the God obscene, who frights away,
With his Lath Sword, the Thiefs and Birds of Prey.
With his own hand, the Guardian of the Bees,
For Slips of Pines, may search the Mountain Trees:
And with wild Thyme and Sav'ry, plant the Plain,
'Till his hard horny Fingers ache with Pain:
And deck with fruitful Trees the Fields around,
And with refreshing Waters drench the Ground.
Now, did I not so near my Labors end,
Strike Sail, and hastening to the Harbor tend;
My Song to Flowery Gardens might extend.
To teach the vegetable Arts, to sing
The Paestan Roses, and their double Spring:
How Succ'ry drinks the running Streams, and how
Green Beds of Parsley near the River grow;
How Cucumers along the Surface creep,
With crooked Bodies, and with Bellies deep.
The late Narcissus, and the winding Trail
Of Bears-foot, Myrtles green, and Ivy pale.
For where with stately Towers Tarentum stands,
And deep Galesus soaks the yellow Sands,
I chanced an Old Corycian Swain to know,
Lord of few Acres, and those barren too;
Unfit for Sheep or Vines, and more unfit to sow:
Yet laboring well his little Spot of Ground,
Some scattering Potherbs here and there he found:
Which cultivated with his daily Care,
And bruised with Vervain, were his frugal Fare.
Sometimes white Lyllies did their Leaves afford,
With wholesome Poppy-flow'rs, to mend his homely Board:
For late returning home he supped at ease,
And wisely deemed the Wealth of Monarchs less:
The little of his own, because his own, did please.
To quit his Care, he gathered first of all
In Spring the Roses, Apples in the Fall:
And when cold Winter split the Rocks in twain,
And Ice the running Rivers did restrain,
He stripped the Bears-foot of its leafy growth;
And, calling Western Winds, accused the Spring of sloth.
He therefore first among the Swains was found,
To reap the Product of his labored Ground,
And squeese the Combs with Golden Liquor Crowned.
His Limes were first in Flowers, his lofty Pines,
With friendly Shade, secured his tender Vines.
For every Bloom his Trees in Spring afford,
An Autumn Apple was by tale restored.
He knew to rank his Elms in even rows;
For Fruit the grafted Peartree to dispose:
And tame to Plums, the sourness of the Sloes.
With spreading Planes he made a cool retreat,
To shade good Fellows from the Summer's heat.
But streighten'd in my space, I must forsake
This Task; for others afterward to take.
Describe we next the Nature of the Bees,
bestowed by Jove for secret Services:
When by the tinkling Sound of Timbrels led,
The King of Heaven in Cretan Caves they fed.
Of all the Race of Animals, alone
The Bees have common Cities of their own:
And common Sons, beneath one Law they live,
And with one common Stock their Traffic drive.
Each has a certain home, a several Stall:
All is the States, the State provides for all.
Mindful of coming Cold, they share the Pain:
And hoard, for Winter's use, the Summer's gain.
Some over the Public Magazines preside,
And some are sent new Forage to provide:
These drudge in Fields abroad, and those at home
Lay deep Foundations for the labored Comb,
With dew, Narcissus Leaves, and clammy Gum.
To pitch the waxen Flooring some contrive:
Some nurse the future Nation of the Hive:
Sweet Honey some condense, some purge the Grout;
The rest, in Cells apart, the liquid Nectar shut.
All, with united Force, combine to drive
The lazy Drones from the laborious Hive.
With Envy stung, they view each others Deeds:
With Diligence the fragrant Work proceeds.
As when the Cyclops, at the Almighty Nod,
New Thunder hasten for their angry God:
Subdued in Fire the Stubborn Metal lies,
One brawny Smith the puffing Bellows plyes;
And draws, and blows reciprocating Air:
Others to quench the hissing Mass prepare:
With lifted Arms they order every Blow,
And chime their sounding Hammers in a Row;
With strokes of Anvils Aetna groans below.
Strongly they strike, huge Flakes of Flames expire,
With Tongs they turn the Steel, and vex it in the Fire.
If little things with great we may compare,
Such are the Bees, and such their native Care:
Studious of Honey, each in his Degree,
The youthful Swain, the grave experienced Be:
That in the Field; this in Affairs of State,
Employed at home, abides within the Gate:
To fortify the Combs, to build the Wall,
To prop the Ruins lest the Fabric fall:
But late at Night, with weary Pinions come
The labr'ring Youth, and heavy laden home.
Plains, Meads, and Orchards all the day he plies,
The gleans of yellow Thime distend his Thighs:
He spoils the Saffron Flowers, he sips the blues
Of Vi'lets, wilding Blooms, and Willow Dews.
Their Toil is common, common is their Sleep;
They shake their Wings when Morn begins to peep;
Rush through the City Gates without delay,
Nor ends their Work, but with declining Day:
Then having spent the last remains of Light,
They give their Bodies due repose at Night:
When hollow Murmurs of their Evening Bells,
Dismiss the sleepy Swains, and toll 'em to their Cells.
When once in Beds their weary Limbs they steep,
No buzzing Sounds disturb their Golden Sleep.
It Is sacred Silence all. Nor dare they stray,
When Rain is promised, or a stormy Day:
But near the City Walls their Watring take,
Nor Forage far, but short Excursions make.
And as when empty Barks on Billows float,
With sandy Ballast Sailors trim the Boat;
So Bees bear Gravel Stones, whose poising Weight
Steers through the whistling Winds their steady Flight.
But what is more strange, their modest Appetites,
Averse from Venus, fly the nuptial Rites.
No lust enervates their Heroic Mind,
Nor wastes their Strength on wanton Womankind.
But in their Mouths reside their Genial Powers,
They gather Children from the Leaves and Flowers.
Thus make they Kings to fill the Regal Seat;
And thus their little Citizens create:
And waxen Cities build, and Palaces of State.
And often on Rocks their tender Wings they tear,
And sink beneath the Burdens which they bear.
Such Rage of Honey in their Bosom beats:
And such a Zeal they have for flowery Sweets.
Thus though the race of Life they quickly run;
Which in the space of seven short Years is done,
The immortal Line in fure Succession reigns,
The Fortune of the Family remains:
And Grandsires Grandsons the long List contains.
Besides, not Egypt, India, Media more
With servile Awe, their Idol King adore:
While he survives, in Concord and Content
The Commons live, by no Divisions rent;
But the great Monarch's Death dissolves the Government.
All goes to Ruin, they themselves contrive
To rob the Honey, and subvert the Hive.
The King presides, his Subjects Toil surveys;
The servile Rout their careful Caesar praise:
Him they extol, they worship him alone,
They crowd his Levees, and support his Throne:
They raise him on their shoulders with a Shout:
And when their Sov'raigns Quarrel calls 'em out,
His Foes to mortal Combat they defy,
And think it honor at his feet to die.
Induced by such Examples, some have taught
That Bees have Portions of Etherial Thought:
Endu'd with Particles of Heavenly Fires:
For God the whole created Mass inspires;
Through Heaven, and Earth, and Oceans depth he throws
His Influence round, and kindles as he goes.
Hence Flocks, and Herds, and Men, and Beasts, and Fowls
With Breath are quickened; and attract their Souls.
Hence take the Forms his Prescience did ordain,
And into him at length resolve again.
No room is left for Death, they mount the Sky,
And to their own congenial Planets fly.
Now when thou have decreed to seize their Stores,
And by Prerogative to break their Doors:
With sprinkled Water first the City choke,
And then pursue the Citizens with Smoke.
Two Honey Harvests fall in every Year:
First, when the pleasing Pleiades appear,
And springing upward spurn the briny Seas:
Again, when their affrighted Quire surveys
The watery Scorpion mend his Pace behind,
With a black Train of Storms, and winter Wind;
They plunge into the Deep, and safe Protection find.
Prone to Revenge, the Bees, a wrathful Race,
When once provoked assault the Agressor's Face:
And through the purple Veins a passage find;
There fix their Stings, and leave their Souls behind.
But if a pinching Winter thou foresee,
And would preserve thy famished Family;
With fragant Thyme the City fumigate,
And break the waxen Walls to save the State.
For lurking Lizards often lodge, by Stealth,
Within the Suburbs, and purloyn their Wealth.
And Worms that shun the Light, a dark Retreat
Have found in Combs, and undermined the Seat.
Or lazy Drones, without their Share of Pain;
In Winter Quarters free, devour the Gain:
Or Wasps infest the Camp with loud Alarms,
And mix in Battle with unequal Arms:
Or secret Moaths are there in Silence fed;
Or Spiders in the Vault, their snary Webs have spread.
The more oppressed by Foes, or Famine pined;
The more increase thy Care to save the sinking Kind.
With Greens and Flowers recruit their empty Hives,
And seek fresh Forage to sustain their Lives.
But since they share with us one common Fate,
In Health and Sickness, and in Turns of State;
Observe the Symptoms when they fall away,
And languish with insensible Decay.
They change their Hue, with hagger'd Eyes they stare,
Lean are their Looks, and shagged is their Hair:
And Crowds of dead, that never must return
To their loved Hives, in decent Pomp are born:
Their Friends attend the Hearse, the next Relations Mourn.
The sick, for Air before the Portal gasp,
Their feeble Legs within each other clasp.
Or idle in their empty Hives remain,
Benumbed with Cold, and listless of their Gain.
Soft Whispers then, and broken Sounds are heard,
As when the Woods by gentle Winds are stirred.
Such stifled noise as the close Furnace hides,
Or dying Murmurs of departing Tides.
This when thou see, Galbanean Odours use,
And Honey in the sickly Hive infuse.
Through reeden Pipes convey the Golden Flood,
TO invite the People to their wonted Food.
Mix it with thickened Juice of sodden Wines,
And Raisins from the Grapes of Psythian Vines:
To these add pounded Galls, and Roses dry,
And with Cecropian Thyme, strong scented Centaury.
A Flower there is that grows in Meadow Ground,
Amellus called, and easy to be found;
For from one Root the rising Stem bestows
A Wood of Leaves, and vi'let-purple Boughs:
The Flower it self is glorious to behold,
And shines on Altars like refulgent Gold:
Sharp to the Taste, by Shepherds near the Stream
Of Mella found, and thence they gave the Name.
Boil this restoring Root in generous Wine,
And set beside the Door, the sickly Stock to dine.
But if the laboring Kind be wholly lost,
And not to be retrieved with Care or Cost;
It Is time to touch the Precepts of an Art,
The Arcadian Master did of old impart:
And how he stocked his empty Hives again;
Renewed with putrid Gore of Oxen slain.
An ancient Legend I prepare to sing,
And upward follow Fame's immortal Spring.
For where with sev'n-fold Horns mysterious Nile
Surrounds the Skirts of Egypt's fruitful Isle,
And where in Pomp the Sunburned People ride
On painted Barges, over the teeming Tide,
Which pouring down from Ethiopian Lands,
Makes green the Soil with Slime, and black prolific Sands;
That length of Region, and large Tract of Ground,
In this one Art a sure relief have found.
First, in a place, by Nature closs, they build
A narrow Flooring, gutter'd, walled, and til'd.
In this, four Windows are contrived, that strike
To the four Winds opposed, their Beams oblique.
A Steer of two Years old they take, whose Head
Now first with burnished Horns begins to spread:
They stop his Nostrils, while he strives in vain
To breath free Air, and struggles with his Pain.
Knocked down, he dies: his Bowels bruised within,
Betray no Wound on his unbroken Skin.
Extended thus, in this obscene Abode,
They leave the Beast; but first sweet Flowers are strow'd
Beneath his Body, broken Boughs and Thyme,
And pleasing Cassia just renewed in prime.
This must be done, e're Spring makes equal Day,
When Western Winds on curling Waters play:
E're painted Meads produce their Flowery Crops,
Or Swallows twitter on the Chimney Tops.
The tainted Blood, in this close Prison pent,
Begins to boil and through the Bones ferment.
Then, wondrous to behold, new Creatures rise,
A moving Mass at first, and short of Thighs;
'Till shooting out with Legs, and imp'd with Wings,
The Grubs proceed to Bees with pointed Stings:
And more and more affecting Air, they try
Their tender Pinions, and begin to fly:
At length, like Summer Storms from spreading Clouds,
That burst at once, and pour impetuous Floods;
Or Flights of Arrows from the Parthian Bows,
When from afar they gaul embattel'd Foes;
With such a Tempest through the Skies they Steer;
And such a form the winged Squadrons bear.
What God, O Muse! this useful Science taught?
Or by what Man's Experience was it brought?
Sad Aristaeus from fair Tempe fled,
His Bees with Famine, or Diseases dead:
On Peneus's Banks he stood, and near his holy Head.
And while his falling Tears the Stream supplied,
Thus mourning, to his Mother Goddess cried.
Mother Cyrene, Mother, whose abode
Is in the depth of this immortal Flood:
What boots it, that from Phoebus's Loins I spring,
The third by him and thee, from Heavens high King?
O! Where is all thy boasted Pity gone,
And Promise of the Skies to thy deluded Son?
Why did thou me, unhappy me, create?
Odious to Gods, and born to bitter Fate.
Whom* scarce my Sheep, and scarce my painful Plough,
The needsul Aids of Human Life allow;
So wretched is thy Son, so hard a Mother thou.
Proceed, inhuman Parent in thy Scorn;
Root up my Trees, with Blites destroy my Corn;
My Vineyards Ruin, and my Sheepfolds burn.
Let loose thy Rage, let all thy Spite be shown,
Since thus thou hat'st the Praises of thy Son.
But from her Mossy Bower below the Ground,
His careful Mother heard the Plaintive sound;
Encompassed with her Seagreen Sisters round.
One common Work they plied: their Distaffs full
With carded Locks of blue Milesian Wool.
Spio with Drymo brown, and Xanthe fair,
And sweet Phyllodoce with long disheveled Hair:
Cydippe with Licorias, one a Maid,
And one that once had called Lucina's Aid.
Clio and Beroe, from one Father both,
Both girt with Gold, and clad in part colored Cloth.
Opis the meek, and Deiopeia proud;
Nisaea softly, with Ligaea loud;
Thalia joyous, Ephyre the sad,
And Arethusa once Diana's Maid,
But now, her Quiver left, to Love betrayed.
To these, Climene the sweet Theft declares,
Of Mars and Vulcans unavailing Cares:
And all the Rapes of Gods, and every Love,
From ancient Chaos down to youthful Jove.
Thus while she sings, the Sisters turn the Wheel,
Empty the wooly Rock, and fill the Reel.
A mournful Sound, again the Mother hears;
Again the mournful Sound invades the Sister's Ears:
Starting at once from their green Seats, they rise;
Fear in their Heart, Amazement in their Eyes.
But Arethusa leaping from her Bed,
First lifts above the Waves her beauteous Head;
And, crying from afar, thus to Cyrene said.
O Sister! not with causeless Fear possessed,
No Stranger Voice disturbs thy tender Breast.
It Is Aristeus, it is thy darling Son,
Who to his careless Mother makes his Moan.
Near his Paternal Stream he sadly stands,
With down-cast Eyes, wet Cheeks, and folded Hands:
Upbraiding Heaven from whence his Lineage came,
And cruel calls the Gods, and cruel thee, by Name.
Cyrene moved with Love, and seized with Fear,
Cries out, conduct my Son, conduct him here:
It Is lawful for the Youth, derived from Gods,
To view the Secrets of our deep Abodes.
At once she waved her Hand on either side,
At once the Ranks of swelling Streams divide.
Two rising Heaps of liquid Crystal stand,
And leave a Space betwixt, of empty Sand.
Thus safe received, the downward track he treads,
Which to his Mother's watery Palace leads.
With wondering Eyes he views the secret Store
Of Lakes, that pent in hollow Caverns, roar.
He hears the crackling Sound of Coral Woods,
And sees the secret Source of subterranean Floods.
And where, distinguished in their several Cells,
The Fount of Phasis; and of Lycus dwells;
Where swift Enipeus in his Bed appears,
And Tiber his Majestic Forehead rears.
Whence Anio flows, and Hypanis, profound,
Breaks through the opposing Rocks with raging Sound.
Where Po first issues from his dark abodes,
And, awful in his Cradle, rules the Floods.
Two Golden Horns on his large Front he wears,
And his grim Face a Bull's Resemblance bears.
With rapid Course he seeks the sacred Main,
And fattens, as he runs, the fruitful Plain.
Now to the Court arrived, the admiring Son
Beholds the vaulted Roofs of Pory Stone;
Now to his Mother Goddess tells his Grief,
Which she with Pity hears, and promises Relief.
The officious Nymphs, attending in a Ring,
With Waters drawn from their perpetual Spring,
From earthly dregs his Body purify,
And rub his Temples, with fine Towels, dry:
Then load the Tables with a liberal Feast,
And honor with full Bowls their friendly Guest.
The sacred Altars are involved in Smoke,
And the bright Quire their kindred Gods invoke.
To Sr Bartholomen Shower of the Middle Temple. Knt.

Go: 4. l. 535.


Two Bowls the Mother fills with Lydian Wine;
Then thus, Let these be poured, with Rites divine,
To the great Authors of our watery Line.
To Father Ocean, this; and this, she said,
Be to the Nymphs his sacred Sisters paid,
Who rule the watery Plains, and hold the woodland Shade.
She sprinkled thrice, with Wine, the Vestal Fire,
Thrice to the vaulted Roof the Flames aspire.
Raised with so blessed an Omen, she begun,
With Words like these, to cheer her drooping Son.
In the Carpathian Bottom makes abode
The Shepherd of the Seas, a Prophet and a God;
High over the Main in watery Pomp he rides,
His azure Carr and finny Coursers guides:
Proteus his Name: to his Pallenian Port,
I see from far the weary God resort.
Him, not alone, we River Gods adore,
But aged Nereus hearkens to his Lore.
With sure foresight, and with unerring Doom,
He sees what is, and was, and is to come.
This Neptune gave him, when he gave to keep
His scaly Flocks, that graze the watery deep.
Implore his Aid, for Proteus only knows
The secret Cause, and Cure of all thy Woes.
But first the wily Wizard must be caught,
For unconstrained he nothing tells for naught;
Nor is with Prayers, or Bribes, or Flattery bought.
Surprise him first, and with hard Fetters bind;
Then all his Frauds will vanish into Wind.
I will my self conduct thee on thy Way,
When next the Southing Sun inflames the Day:
When the dry Herbage thirsts for Dews in vain,
And Sheep, in Shades, avoid the parching Plain.
Then will I lead thee to his secret Seat;
When weary with his Toil, and scorched with Heat,
The wayward Sire frequents his cool Retreat.
His Eyes with heavy Slumber overcast;
With Force invade his Limbs, and bind him fast:
Thus surely bound, yet be not over bold,
The slippery God will try to loose his hold:
And various Forms assume, to cheat thy sight;
And with vain Images of Beasts affright.
With foamy Tusks he seems a bristly Boar,
Or imitates the Lion's angry Roar;
Breaks out in crackling Flames to shun thy Snares,
A Dragon hisses, or a Tiger stares:
Or with a Wile, thy Caution to betray,
In fleeting Streams attempts to slide away.
But thou, the more he varies Forms, beware
To strain his Fetters with a stricter Care:
'Till tiring all his Arts, he turns again
To his true Shape, in which he first was seen.
This said, with Nectar she her Son anoints;
Infusing Vigor through his mortal Joints:
Down from his Head the liquid Odours ran;
He breathed of Heaven, and looked above a Man.
Within a Mountain's hollow Womb, there lies
A large Recess, concealed from Human Eyes;
Where heaps of Billows, driven by Wind and Tide,
In Form of War, their watery Ranks divide;
And there, like Centries set, without the Mouth abide:
A Station safe for Ships, when Tempests roar,
A silent Harbor, and a covered Shore.
Secure within resides the various God,
And draws a Rock upon his dark Abode.
To Simon Harcourt of Stanton Harcourt in the County of Oxon Esquire..

Geo 4: L: 635.


Hither with silent Steps, secure from Sight,
The Goddess guides her Son, and turns him from the Light:
Her self, involved in Clouds, precipitates her Flight.
'Twas Noon; the sultry Dog Star from the Sky
Scorched Indian Swains, the rivell'd Grass was dry;
The Sun with flaming Arrows pierced the Flood,
And, darting to the bottom, baked the Mud:
When weary Proteus, from the briny Waves,
Retired for Shelter to his wonted Caves:
His finny Flocks about their Shepherd play,
And rolling round him, spirt the bitter Sea.
Unweildily they wallow first in Ooze,
Then in the shady Covert seek Repose.
Himself their Herdsman, on the middle Mount,
Takes of his mustered Flocks a just Account.
So, seated on a Rock, a Shepherd's Groom
Surveys his Evening Flocks returning Home:
When lowing Calves, and bleating Lambs, from far,
Provoke the prouling Wolf to nightly War.
The Occasion offers, and the Youth complies:
For scarce the weary God had closed his Eyes;
When rushing on, with shouts, he binds in Chains
The drowzy Prophet, and his Limbs constrains.
He, not unmindful of his usual Art,
First in dissembled Fire attempts to part:
Then roaring Beasts, and running Streams he tryes,
And wearies all his Miracles of Lies:
But having shifted every Form to escape,
Convinced of Conquest, he resumed his shape:
And thus, at length, in human Accent spoke*
Audacious Youth, what madness could provoke
A Mortal Man to invade a sleeping God?
What Buis'ness brought thee to my dark abode?
To this, the audacious Youth; Thou know full well
My Name, and Buis'ness, God, nor need I tell:
No Man can Proteus cheat; but Proteus leave
Thy fraudful Arts, and do not thou deceive.
Foll'wing the Gods Command, I come t'implore
Thy Help, my perished People to restore.
The Seer, who could not yet his Wrath assuage,
Rolled his green Eyes, that sparkl'd with his Rage;
And gnash'd his Teeth, and cried, No vulgar God
Pursues thy Crimes, nor with a Common Rod.
Thy great Misdeeds have met a due Reward,
And Orpheus's dying Prayers at length are heard.
For Crimes, not his, the Lover lost his Life,
And at thy Hands requires his murdered Wife:
Nor (if the Fates assist not) can thou escape
The just Revenge of that intended Rape.
To shun thy lawless Lust, the dying Bride,
Unwary, took along the River's side:
Nor, at her Heels perceived the deadly Snake,
That kept the Bank, in Covert of the Brake.
But all her fellow Nymphs the Mountains tear
With loud Laments, and break the yielding Air:
The Realms of Mars remurmur'd all around,
And Echoes to the Athenian Shoars rebound.
The unhappy Husband, Husband now no more,
Did on his tuneful Harp his Loss deplore,
And sought, his mournful Mind with Music to restore.
On thee, dear Wife, in Deserts all alone,
He called, sighed, sung, his Griefs with Day begun,
Nor were they finished with the setting Sun.
Even to the dark Dominions of the Night,
He took his way, through Forests void of Light:
And dared amidst the trembling Ghosts to sing,
And stood before the inexorable King.
The Infernal Troops like passing Shadows glide,
And, listening, crowd the sweet Musician's side.
Not flocks of Birds when driven by Storms, or Night,
Stretch to the Forest with so thick a flight.
Men, Matrons, Children, and the unmarry'd Maid,
This whole Line is taken from the Marquess of Normanby 's Translation.
The mighty Heroes more Majestic shade;
And Youths on Funeral Piles before their Parents laid.
All these Cocytus bounds with squalid Reeds,
With Muddy Ditches, and with deadly Weeds:
And baleful Styx encompasses around,
With Nine slow circling Streams, the unhappy ground.
Even from the depths of Hell the Damned advance,
The Infernal Mansions nodding seem to dance;
The gaping three-mouth'd Dog forgets to snarl,
The Furies harken, and their Snakes uncurl:
Ixion seems no more his Pains to feel,
But leans attentive on his standing Wheel.
All Dangers past, at length the lovely Bride,
In safety goes, with her Melodious Guide;
Longing the common Light again to share,
And draw the vital breath of upper Air:
He first, and close behind him followed she,
For such was Proserpine's severe Decree.
When strong Desires the impatient Youth invade;
By little Caution and much love betrayed:
A fault which easy Pardon might receive,
Were Lovers Judges, or could Hell forgive.
For near the Confines of Etherial Light,
And longing for the glimmering of a sight,
The unwary Lover cast his Eyes behind,
Forgetful of the Law, nor Master of his Mind.
Straight all his Hopes exhaled in empty Smoke;
And his long Toils were forfeit for a Look.
Three flashes of blue Lightning gave the sign
Of Cov'nants broke, three peals of Thunder join.
Then thus the Bride; What fury seized on thee,
Unhappy Man! to lose thy self and Me?
Dragged back again by cruel Destinies,
An Iron Slumber shuts my swimming Eyes.
And now farewell, involved in Shades of Night,
For ever I am ravished from thy sight.
In vain I reach my feeble hands, to join
In sweet Embraces; ah! no longer thine!
She said, and from his Eyes the fleeting Fair
Retired like subtle Smoke dissolved in Air;
And left her hopeless Lover in despair.
In vain, with folding Arms, the Youth assayed
To stop her flight, and strain the flying Shade:
He prays, he raves, all Means in vain he tries,
With rage inflamed, astonished with surprise;
But she returned no more, to bless his longing Eyes.
Nor would the Infernal Ferry-Man once more
Be bribed, to waft him to the farther shore.
What should He do, who twice had lost his Love?
What Notes invent, what new Petitions move?
Her Soul already was consigned to Fate,
And shivering in the leaky Sculler sat.
For seven continued Months, if Fame say true,
The wretched Swain his Sorrows did renew;
By Strymon's freezing Streams he sat alone,
The Rocks were moved to pity with his moan:
Trees bent their heads to hear him sing his Wrongs,
Fierce Tigers couched around, and loll'd their fawning Tongues.
So, close in Poplar Shades, her Children gone,
The Mother Nightingale laments alone:
Whose Nest some prying Churl had found, and thence,
By Stealth, conveyed the unfeather'd Innocence.
But she supplies the Night with mournful Strains,
With one continued Tenor still complains;
Which fills the Forest, and the neighboring Plains.
Sad Orpheus thus his tedious Hours employs,
Averse from Venus, and from nuptial Joys.
Alone he tempts the frozen Floods, alone
The unhappy Climes, where Spring was never known:
He mourned his wretched Wife, in vain restored,
And Pluto's unavailing Boon deplored.
The Thracian Matrons, who the Youth accused,
Of Love disdained, and Marriage Rites refused:
With Furies, and Nocturnal Orgies fired,
At length, against his sacred Life conspired.
Whom even the salvage Beasts had spared, they killed,
And strewn his mangled Limbs about the Field.
Then, when his Head, from his fair Shoulders torn,
Washed by the Waters, was on Hebrus born;
Even then his trembling Tongue invoked his Bride;
With his last Voice, Eurydice, he cried,
Eurydice, the Rocks and River-banks replied.
This answer Proteus gave, nor more he said,
But in the Billows plunged his hoary Head;
And where he leaped, the Waves in Circles widely spread.
The Nymph returned, her drooping Son to cheer,
And bade him banish his superfluous fear:
For now, said she, the Cause is known, from whence
Thy Woe succeeded, and for what Offense:
The Nymphs, Companions of the unhappy Maid,
This punishment upon thy Crimes have laid;
And sent a Plague among thy thriving Bees.
With Vows and suppliant Prayers their Powers appease:
The soft Napaean Race will soon repent
Their Anger, and remit the Punishment.
The secret in an easy Method lies;
Select four Brawny Bulls for Sacrifice,
Which on Lycaeus graze, without a Guide;
Add four fair Heifars yet in Yoke untried:
For these, four Altars in their Temple rear,
And then adore the Woodland Powers with Prayer.
From the slain Victims pour the streaming Blood,
And leave their Bodies in the shady Wood:
Nine Mornings thence, Lethean Poppy bring,
TO appease the Manes of the Poets King:
And to propitiate his offended Bride,
A fatted Calf, and a black Ewe provide:
This finished, to the former Woods repair.
His Mother's Precepts he performs with care;
The Temple visits, and adores with Prayer.
Four Altars raises, from his Herd he culls,
For Slaughter, four the fairest of his Bulls;
Four Heifars from his Female Store he took,
All fair, and all unknowing of the Yoke.
Nine Mornings thence, with Sacrifice and Prayers,
The Powers atoned, he to the Grove repairs.
Behold a Prodigy! for from within
The broken Bowels, and the bloated Skin,
A buzzing noise of Bees their Ears alarms,
Straight issue through the Sides assembling Swarms:
Dark as a Cloud they make a wheeling Flight,
Then on a neighboring Tree, descending, light:
Like a large Cluster of black Grapes they show,
And make a large dependence from the Bough.
To the Honble: John Granville second Son to John EARL of BATH one of the
Com^s: appointed by Act of Parliamt: for Examining Taking and Stating the
Public Accounts of the Kingdom.

Geor: 4: l. 795.


Thus have I sung of Fields, and Flocks, and Trees,
And of the waxen Work of laboring Bees;
While mighty Caesar, thundering from afar,
Seeks on Euphrates Banks the Spoils of War:
With conquering Arms asserts his Country's Cause,
With Arts of Peace the willing People draws:
On the glad Earth the Golden Age renews,
And his great Father's Path to Heaven pursues.
While I at Naples pass my peaceful Days,
Affecting Studies of less noisy Praise;
And bold, through Youth, beneath the Beechen Shade,
The Lays of Shepherds, and their Loves have played.
TO THE MOST HONORABLE John, Lord Marquess of Normanby, EARL of MULGRAVE, etc.
AND Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter.
A HEROIC Poem, truly such, is undoubtedly the greatest Work which the Soul of
Man is capable to perform. The Design of it, is to form the Mind to Heroic
Virtue by Example; it is conveyed in Verse, that it may delight, while it
instructs: The Action of it is always one, entire, and great. The least and
most trivial Episodes, or under-Actions, which are interwoven in it, are parts
either necessary, or convenient to carry on the main Design. Either so
necessary, that without them the Poem must be Imperfect, or so convenient, that
no others can be imagined more suitable to the place in which they are. There
is nothing to be left void in a firm Building; even the Cavities ought not to
be filled with Rubbish, which is of a perishable kind, destructive to the
strength: But with Brick or Stone, though of less pieces, yet of the same
Nature, and fitted to the Cranies. Even the least portions of them must be of
the Epick kind; all things must be Grave, Majestical, and Sublime: Nothing of a
Foreign Nature, like the trifling Novels, which Aristotle and others have
inserted in their Poems. By which the Reader is miss-led into another sort of
Pleasure, opposite to that which is designed in an Epick Poem. One raises the
Soul and hardens it to Virtue, the other softens it again and unbends it into
Vice. One conduces to the Poet's aim, the completing of his Work; which he is
driving on, laboring and hastening in every Line: the other slackens his pace,
diverts him from his Way, and locks him up like a Knight Errant in an Enchanted
Castle, when he should be pursuing his first Adventure. Statius, as Bossu has
well observed, was ambitious of trying his strength with his Master Virgil, as
Virgil had before tried his with Homer. The Grecian gave the two Romans an
Example, in the Games which were Celebrated at the Funerals of Patroclus.
Virgil imitated the Invention of Homer, but changed the Sports. But both the
Greek and Latin Poet, took their occasions from the Subject; though to confess
the Truth, they were both Ornamental, or at best, convenient parts of it,
rather than of necessity arising from it. Statius, who through his whole Poem,
is noted for want of Conduct and Judgment; instead of staying, as he might have
done, for the Death of Capaneus, Hippomedon, Tideus, or some other of his Seven
Champions, (who are Heroes all alike) or more properly for the Tragical end of
the two Brothers, whose Exequies the next Successor had leisure to perform,
when the Siege was raised, and in the Interval betwixt the Poets first Action,
and his second; went out of his way, as it were on propense Malice to commit a
Fault. For he took his opportunity to kill a Royal Infant, by the means of a
Serpent, (that Author of all Evil) to make way for those Funeral Honors, which
he intended for him. Now if this Innocent had been of any Relation to his
Thebais; if he had either farther'd or hindered the taking of the Town, the
Poet might have found some sorry Excuse at least, for detaining the Reader from
the promised Siege. I can think of nothing to plead for him, but what I verily
believe he thought himself; which was, that as the Funerals of Anchises were
solemnized in Sicily, so those of Archemorus should be celebrated in Candy. For
the last was an Island; and a better than the first, because Jove was Born
there. On these terms, this Capaneus of a Poet engaged his two Immortal
Predecessors, and his Success was answerable to his Enterprise.

If this Economy must be observed in the minutest Parts of an Epick Poem,
which, to a common Reader, seem to be detached from the Body, and almost
independent of it; what Soul, though sent into the World with great advantages of
Nature, cultivated with the liberal Arts and Sciences; conversant with
Histories of the Dead, and enriched with Observations on the Living, can be
sufficient to inform the whole Body of so great a Work? I touch here but
transiently, without any strict Method, on some few of those many Rules of
imitating Nature, which Aristotle drew from Homer's Iliads and Odysses, and
which he fitted to the Drama; furnishing himself also with Observations from
the Practice of the Theater, when it flourished under Aeschilus, Eurypides, and
Sophocles. For the Original of the Stage was from the Epick Poem. Narration,
doubtless, preceded Acting, and gave Laws to it: What at first was told
Artfully, was, in process of time, represented gracefully to the sight, and
hearing. Those Episodes of Homer, which were proper for the Stage, the Poets
amplify'd each into an Action: Out of his Limbs they formed their Bodies: What
he had Contracted they Enlarged: Out of one Hercules were made infinite of
Pigmies; yet all endued with humane Souls: For from him, their great Creator,
they have each of them the Divinae particulam Aurae. They flowed from him at
first, and are at last resolved into him. Nor were they only animated by him,
but their Measure and Symetry was owing to him. His one, entire, and great
Action was Copied by them according to the proportions of the Drama: If he
finished his Orb within the Year, it sufficed to teach them, that their Action
being less, and being also less diversified with Incidents, their Orb, of
consequence, must be circumscribed in a less compass, which they reduced,
within the limits either of a Natural or an Artificial Day. So that as he
taught them to amplify what he had shortened, by the same Rule applied the
contrary way, he taught them to shorten what he had amplifi'd. Tragedy is the
minature of Humane Life; an Epick Poem is the draught at length. Here, my Lord,
I must contract also, for, before I was aware, I was almost running into a long
digression, to prove that there is no such absolute necessity that the time of
a Stage-Action should so strictly be confined to Twenty Four Hours, as never to
exceed them, for which Aristotle contends, and the Grecian Stage has practiced.
Some longer space, on some occasions, I think may be allowed, especially for
the English Theater, which requires more variety of Incidents than the French.
Corneille himself, after long Practice, was inclined to think, that the time
allotted by the Ancients was too short to raise and finish a great Action: And
better a Mechanic Rule were stretched or broken, than a great Beauty were
omitted. To raise, and afterward to calm the Passions, to purge the Soul from
Pride, by the Examples of Humane Miseries, which befall the greatest; in few
words, to expel Arrogance, and introduce Compassion, are the great effects of
Tragedy. Great, I must confess, if they were altogether as true as they are
pompous. But are Habits to be introduced at three Hours warning? Are radical
Diseases so suddenly removed? A Mountebank may promise such a Cure, but a
skilful Physician will not undertake it. An Epick Poem is not in so much haste;
it works leisurely; the Changes which it makes are slow; but the Cure is likely
to be more perfect. The effects of Tragedy, as I said, are too violent to be
lasting. If it be answered that for this Reason Tragedies are often to be seen,
and the Dose to be repeated; this is tacitly to confess, that there is more
Virtue in one Heroic Poem than in many Tragedies. A Man is humbled one Day,
and his Pride returns the next. Chemical Medicines are observed to Relieve
oft'ner than to Cure: For it is the nature of Spirits to make swift impressions,
but not deep. Galenical Decoctions, to which I may properly compare an Epick
Poem, have more of Body in them; they work by their substance and their weight.
It is one Reason of Aristotle's to prove, that Tragedy is the more Noble,
because it turns in a shorter Compass; the whole Action being circumscribed
within the space of Four-and-Twenty Hours. He might prove as well that a
Mushroom is to be preferred before a Peach, because it shoots up in the compass
of a Night. A Chariot may be driven round the Pillar in less space than a large
Machine, because the Bulk is not so great: Is the Moon a more Noble Planet than
Saturn, because she makes her Revolution in less than Thirty Days, and He in
little less than Thirty Years? Both their Orbs are in proportion to their
several Magnitudes; and, consequently, the quickness or slowness of their
Motion, and the time of their circumvolutions, is no Argument of the greater or
less Perfection. And besides, what Virtue is there in a Tragedy, which is not
contained in an Epick Poem? Where Pride is humbled, Virtue rewarded, and Vice
punished; and those more amply treated, than the narrowness of the Drama can
admit? The shining Qualitiy of an Epick Hero, his Magnanimity, his Constancy,
his Patience, his Piety, or whatever Characteristical Virtue his Poet gives
him, raises first our Admiration: We are naturally prone to imitate what we
admire: And frequent Acts produce a habit. If the Hero's chief quality be
vicious, as for Example, the Choler and obstinate desire of Vengeance in
Achilles, yet the Moral is Instructive: And besides, we are informed in the
very proposition of the Iliads, that this anger was pernicious: That it brought
a thousand ills on the Grecian Camp. The Courage of Achilles is proposed to
imitation, not his Pride and Disobedience to his General, nor his brutal
Cruelty to his dead Enemy, nor the selling his Body to his Father. We abhor
these Actions while we read them, and what we abhor we never imitate: The Poet
only shows them like Rocks or Quicksands, to be shunned.

By this Example the Critics have concluded that it is not necessary the
Manners of the Hero should be virtuous. They are Poetically good if they are
of a Piece. Though where a Character of perfect Virtue is set before us, it is
more lovely: for there the whole Hero is to be imitated. This is the Aeneas of
our Author: this is that Idea of perfection in an Epick Poem, which Painters
and Statuaries have only in their minds; and which no hands are able to
express. These are the Beauties of a God in a Humane Body. When the Picture of
Achilles is drawn in Tragedy, he is taken with those Warts, and Moles, and hard
Features, by those who represent him on the Stage, or he is no more Achilles:
for his Creator Homer has so described him. Yet even thus he appears a perfect
Hero, though an imperfect Character of Virtue. Horace Paints him after Homer,
and delivers him to be Copied on the Stage with all those imperfections.
Therefore they are either not faults in a Heroic Poem, or faults common to the
Drama. After all, on the whole merits of the Cause, it must be acknowledged
that the Epick Poem is more for the Manners, and Tragedy for the Passions. The
Passions, as I have said, are violent: and acute Distempers require Medicines
of a strong and speedy operation. Ill habits of the Mind are like Chronical
Diseases, to be corrected by degrees, and Cured by Alteratives: wherein though
Purges are sometimes necessary, yet Diet, good Air, and moderate Exercise, have
the greatest part. The Matter being thus stated, it will appear that both sorts
of Poetry are of use for their proper ends. The Stage is more active, the Epick
Poem works at greater leisure, yet is active too, when need requires. For
Dialogue is imitated by the Drama, from the more active parts of it. One puts
off a Fit like the Quinquina, and relieves us only for a time; the other roots
out the Distemper, and gives a healthful habit. The Sun enlightens and chears
us, dispels Fogs, and warms the ground with his daily Beams; but the Corn is
sowed, increases, is ripened, and is reaped for use in process of time, and in
its proper Season. I proceed from the greatness of the Action, to the Dignity
of the Actours, I mean to the Persons employed in both Poems. There likewise
Tragedy will be seen to borrow from the Epopee; and that which borrows is
always of less Dignity, because it has not of its own. A Subject, it is true,
may lend to his Sovereign, but the act of borrowing makes the King inferior,
because he wants, and the Subject supplies. And suppose the Persons of the
Drama wholly Fabulous, or of the Poet's Invention, yet Heroic Poetry gave him
the Examples of that Invention, because it was first, and Homer the common
Father of the Stage. I know not of any one advantage, which Tragedy can boast
above Heroic Poetry, but that it is represented to the view, as well as read:
and instructs in the Closet, as well as on the Theater. This is an uncontended
Excellence, and a chief Branch of its Prerogative; yet I may be allowed to say
without partiality, that herein the Actors share the Poet's praise. Your
Lordship knows some Modern Tragedies which are beautiful on the Stage, and yet
I am confident you would not read them. Tryphon the Stationer complains they
are seldom asked for in his Shop. The Poet who Flourished in the Scene, is
damned in the Ruelle; nay more, he is not esteemed a good Poet by those who see
and hear his Extravagancies with delight. They are a sort of stately Fustian,
and lofty Childishness. Nothing but Nature can give a sincere pleasure; where
that is not imitated, it is Grotesque Painting, the fine Woman ends in a Fishes
Tail.

I might also add, that many things, which not only please, but are real
Beauties in the reading, would appear absurd upon the Stage: and those not only
the Speciosa Miracula, as Horace calls them; of Transformations, of Scylla,
Antiphates, and the Lestrigons, which cannot be represented even in Opera's;
but the prowess of Achilles or Aeneas would appear ridiculous in our
Dwarf-Heroes of the Theater. We can believe they routed Armies in Homer or in
Virgil, but ne Hercules contraduos in the Drama. I forbear to instance in many
things which the Stage cannot or ought not to represent. For I have said
already more than I intended on this Subject, and should fear it might be
turned against me; that I plead for the pre-eminence of Epick Poetry, because I
have taken some pains in translating Virgil; if this were the first time that I
had delivered my Opinion in this Dispute. But I have more than once already
maintained the Rights of my two Masters against their Rivals of the Scene, even
while I wrote Tragedies my self, and had no thoughts of this present
Undertaking. I submit my Opinion to your Judgment, who are better qualified
than any Man I know to decide this Controversy. You come, my Lord, instructed
in the Cause, and needed not that I should open it. Your Essay of Poetry, which
was published without a Name, and of which I was not honored with the
Confidence, I read over and over with much delight, and as much instruction:
and, without flattering you, or making my self more Moral than I am, not
without some Envy. I was loath to be informed how an Epick Poem should be
written, or how a Tragedy should be contrived and managed in better Verse and
with more judgment than I could teach others. A Native of Parnassus, and bred
up in the Studies of its Fundamental Laws, may receive new Lights from his
Contemporaries, but it is a grudging kind of praise which he gives his
Benefactors. He is more obliged than he is willing to acknowledge: there is a
tincture of Malice in his Commendations. For where I own I am taught, I confess
my want of Knowledge. A Judge upon the Bench, may, out of good Nature, or at
least interest, encourage the Pleadings of a puny Councellor, but he does not
willingly commend his Brother Sergeant at the Bar, especially when he controuls
his Law, and exposes that ignorance which is made Sacred by his Place. I gave
the unknown Author his due Commendation, I must consess, but who can answer for
me, and for the rest of the Poets, who heard me read the Poem, whether we
should not have been better pleased to have seen our own Names at the bottom of
the Title Page? perhaps we commended it the more, that we might seem to be
above the Censure. We are naturally displeased with an unknown Critic, as the
Ladies are with a Lampooner, because we are bitten in the dark, and know not
where to fasten our Revenge. But great Excellencies will work their way through
all sorts of opposition. I applauded rather out of decency than Affection; and
was Ambitious, as some yet can witness, to be acquainted with a Man, with whom
I had the honor to Converse, and that almost daily, for so many years
together. Heaven knows if I have heartily forgiven you this deceit. You
extorted a Praise which I should willingly have given had I known you. Nothing
had been more easy than to commend a Patron of a long standing. The World
would join with me, if the Encomiums were just; and if unjust, would excuse a
grateful Flatterer. But to come Anonymous upon me, and force me to commend you
against my interest, was not altogether so fair, give me leave to say, as it
was Politic. For by concealing your Quality, you might clearly understand how
your Work succeeded; and that the general approbation was given to your Merit
not your Titles. Thus like Apelles you stood unseen behind your own Venus, and
received the praises of the passing Multitude: the Work was commended, not the
Author: And I doubt not this was one of the most pleasing Adventures of your
Life.

I have detained your Lordship longer than I intended in this Dispute of
preference betwixt the Epick Poem, and the Dramae: and yet have not formally
answered any of the Arguments which are brought by Aristotle on the other side,
and set in the fairest light by Dacier. But I suppose, without looking on the
Book, I may have touched on some of the Objections. For in this Address to your
Lordship, I design not a Treatise of Heroic Poetry, but write in a loose
Epistolary way, somewhat tending to that Subject, after the Example of Horace,
in his First Epistle of the Second Book to Augustus Caesar, and of that to the
Piso's, which we call his Art of Poetry. In both of which he observes no Method
that I can trace, whatever Scaliger the Father, or Heinsius may have seen, or
rather think they had seen. I have taken up, laid down, and resumed as often as
I pleased the same Subject: and this loose proceeding I shall use through all
this Prefatory Dedication. Yet all this while I have been Sailing with some
side-wind or other toward the Point I proposed in the beginning; the Greatness
and Excellency of an Heroic Poem, with some of the difficulties which attend
that work. The Comparison therefore which I made betwixt the Epopee and the
Tragedy was not altogether a digression; for it is concluded on all hands, that
they are both the Masterpieces of Humane Wit.

In the mean time I may be bold to draw this Corollary from what has been
already said, That the File of Heroic Poets is very short: all are not such
who have assumed that lofty Title in Ancient or Modern Ages, or have been so
esteemed by their partial and ignorant Admirers.

There have been but one great Ilias and one Aeneis in so many Ages. The next,
but the next with a long interval betwixt, was the Jerusalem: I mean not so
much in distance of time, as in Excellency. After these three are entered, some
Lord Chamberlain should be appointed, some Critic of Authority should be set
before the door, to keep out a Crowd of little Poets, who press for Admission,
and are not of Quality. Maevius would be deafning your Lordship's Ears with his
Fortunam Priami, Cantabo, and Nobile Bellum. mere Fustian, as Horace would tell
you from behind, without pressing forward, and more smoke than fire. Pulci,
Boyardo, and Ariosto, would cry out, make room for the Italian Poets, the
descendants of Virgil in a right Line. Father Le Moin with his Saint Louis; and
Scudery with his Alaric, for a godly King, and a Gothic Conqueror; and
Chapelain would take it ill that his Maid should be refused a place with Helen
and Lavinia. Spencer has a better plea for his Fairy-Queen, had his action been
finished, or had been one. And Milton, if the Devil had not been his Hero
instead of Adam, if the Giant had not foiled the Knight, and driven him out of
his strong hold, to wander through the World with his Lady Errant: and if there
had not been more Machining Persons than Humane, in his Poem. After these, the
rest of our English Poets shall not be mentioned. I have that Honor for them
which I ought to have: but if they are Worthies, they are not to be ranked
amongst the three whom I have named, and who are established in their
Reputation.

Before I quitted the Comparison betwixt Epick Poetry and Tragedy, I should
have acquainted my Judge with one advantage of the former over the latter,
which I now casually remember out of the Preface of Segrais before his
Translation of the Aeneis, or out of Bossu, no matter which. The style of the
Heroic Poem is and ought to be more lofty than that of the Drama. The Critic
is certainly in the right, for the Reason already urged: The work of Tragedy is
on the Passions, and in Dialogue, both of them abhor strong Metaphors, in which
the Epopee delights. A Poet cannot speak too plainly on the Stage: for Volat
irrevocabile verbum; the sense is lost if it be not taken flying: but what we
read alone we have leisure to digest. There an Author may beautify his Sense
by the boldness of his Expression, which if we understand not fully at the
first, we may dwell upon it, 'till we find the secret force and excellence.
That which cures the Manners by alterative Physic, as I said before, must
proceed by insensible degrees; but that which purges the Passions, must do its
business all at once, or wholly fail of its effect, at least in the present
Operation, and without repeated Doses. We must beat the Iron while it is hot,
but we may polish it at leisure. Thus, my Lord, you pay the Fine of my
forgetfulness, and yet the merits of both Causes are where they were, and
undecided, 'till you declare whether it be more for the benefit of Mankind to
have their Manners in general corrected, or their Pride and hard-heartedness
removed.

I must now come closer to my present business: and not think of making more
invasive Wars abroad, when like Hannibal, I am called back to the defense of my
own Country. Virgil is attacked by many Enemies: He has a whole Confederacy
against him, and I must endeavor to defend him as well as I am able. But their
principal Objections being against his Moral, the duration or length of time
taken up in the action of the Poem, and what they have to urge against the
Manners of his Hero, I shall omit the rest as mere Cavils of Grammarians: at
the worst but casual slips of a Great Man's Pen, or inconsiderable faults of an
admirable Poem, which the Author had not leisure to review before his Death.
Macrobius has answered what the Ancients could urge against him: and some
things I have lately read in Tanneguy le Fevre, Valois, and another whom I name
not, which are scarce worth answering. They begin with the Moral of his Poem,
which I have elsewhere confessed, and still must own not to be so Noble as that
of Homer. But let both be fairly stated, and without contradicting my first
Opinion, I can show that Virgil's was as useful to the Romans of his Age, as
Homer's was to the Grecians of his; in what time soever he may be supposed to
have lived and flourished. Homer's Moral was to urge the necessity of Union,
and of a good understanding betwixt Confederate States and Princes engaged in a
War with a Mighty Monarch: as also of Discipline in an Army, and obedience in
the several Chiefs, to the Supreme Commander of the joint Forces. To inculcate
this, he sets forth the ruinous Effects of Discord in the Camp of those Allies,
occasioned by the quarrel betwixt the General, and one of the next in Office
under him. Agamemnon gives the provocation, and Achilles resents the injury.
Both Parties are faulty in the Quarrel, and accordingly they are both punished:
the Agressor is forced to sue for peace to his Inferior, on dishonorable
Conditions; the Deserter resuses the satisfaction offered, and his Obstinacy
costs him his best Friend. This works the Natural Effect of Choler, and turns
his Rage against him, by whom he was last Affronted, and most sensibly. The
greater Anger expels the less; but his Caracter is still preserved. In the mean
time the Grecian Army receives Loss on Loss, and is half destroyed by a
Pestilence into the Bargain.

Quicquid delirant Reges plectuntur Achivi. As the Poet, in the first part of
the Example, had shown the bad effects of Discord, so after the Reconcilement,
he gives the good effects of Unity. For Hector is slain, and then Troy must
fall. By this, it is probable, that Homer lived when the Persian Monarchy was
grown formidable to the Grecians: and that the joint Endeavors of his
Countrymen, were little enough to preserve their common Freedom, from an
encroaching Enemy. Such was his Moral, which all Critics have allowed to be
more Noble than that of Virgil: though not adapted to the times in which the
Roman Poet lived. Had Virgil flourished in the Age of Ennius, and addressed to
Scipio, he had probably taken the same Moral, or some other not unlike it. For
then the Romans were in as much danger from the Carthaginian Commonwealth, as
the Grecians were from the Persian Monarchy. But we are to consider him as
writing his Poem in a time when the Old Form of Government was subverted, and a
new one just Established by Octavius Caesar: In effect by force of Arms, but
seemingly by the Consent of the Roman People. The Commonwealth had received a
deadly Wound in the former Civil Wars betwixt Marius and Sylla. The Commons,
while the first prevailed, had almost shaken off the Yoke of the Nobility; and
Marius and Cinna, like the Captains of the Mobb, under the specious Pretense of
the Public Good, and of doing Justice on the Oppressors of their Liberty,
revenged themselves, without Form of Law, on their private Enemies. Sylla, in
his turn, proscribed the Heads of the adverse Party: He too had nothing but
Liberty and Reformation in his Mouth; (for the Cause of Religion is but a
Modern Motive to Rebellion, invented by the Christian Priesthood, refining on
the Heathen:) Sylla, to be sure, meant no more good to the Roman People than
Marius before him, whatever he declared; but Sacrificed the Lives, and took the
Estates of all his Enemies, to gratify those who brought him into Power: Such
was the Reformation of the Government by both Parties. The Senate and the
Commons were the two Bases on which it stood; and the two Champions of either
Faction, each destroyed the Foundations of the other side: So the Fabrique of
consequence must fall betwxt them: And Tyranny must be built upon their Ruins.
This comes of altering Fundamental Laws and Constitutions. Like him, who being
in good Health, lodged himself in a Physician's House, and was over-perswaded
by his Landlord to take Physic, of which he dyed, for the benefit of his
Doctor. Stavo ben (was written on his Monument) ma, perstar meglio, sto qui.

After the Death of those two Usurpers, the Commonwealth seemed to recover, and
held up its Head for a little time: But it was all the while in a deep
Consumption, which is a flattering Disease. Pompey, Crassus, and Caesar, had
found the Sweets of Arbitrary Power; and each being a check to the others
growth, struck up a false Friendship amongst themselves; and divided the
Government betwixt them, which none of them was able to assume alone. These
were the public Spirited Men of their Age, that is, Patriots for their own
Interest. The Commonwealth looked with a florid Countenance in their
Management, spread in Bulk, and all the while was wasting in the Vitals. Not to
trouble your Lordship with the Repetition of what you know: After the death of
Crassus, Pompey found himself outwitted by Caesar; broke with him,
overpowered him in the Senate, and caused many unjust Decrees to pass against
him: Caesar thus injured, and unable to resist the Faction of the Nobles, which
was now uppermost (for he was a Marian) had recourse to Arms; and his Cause was
just against Pompey, but not against his Country, whose Constitution ought to
have been sacred to him; and never to have been Violated on the account of any
private Wrong. But he prevailed, and Heaven declaring for him, he became a
Providential Monarch, under the Title of Perpetual Dictator. He being Murdered
by his own Son, whom I neither dare commend, nor can justly blame (though Dante
in his Inferno, has put him and Cassius, and Judas Iscariot betwixt them, into
the great Devil's Mouth) the Commonwealth popp'd up its Head for the third
time, under Brutus and Cassius, and then sunk for ever.

Thus the Roman People were grossly gulled: twice or thrice over: and as often
enslaved in one Century, and under the same pretense of Reformation. At last
the two Battles of Philippi, gave the decisive stroke against Liberty; and not
long after, the Commonwealth was turned into a Monarchy, by the Conduct and
good Fortune of Augustus. It Is true, that the despotick Power could not have
fallen into better Hands, than those of the first and second Caesar. Your
Lordship well knows what Obligations Virgil had to the latter of them: He saw,
beside, that the Commonwealth was lost without ressource: The Heads of it
destroyed; the Senate new molded, grown degenerate; and either bought off, or
thrusting their own Necks into the Yoke, out of fear of being forced. Yet I may
safely affirm for our great Author (as Men of good Sense are generally Honest)
that he was still of Republic principles in Heart.

Secretisque Piis, his dantem jura Catonem. I think, I need use no other
Argument to justify my Opinion, than that of this one Line, taken from the
Eighth Book of the Eneis. If he had not well studied his Patron's Temper, it
might have Ruined him with another Prince. But Augustus was not discontented,
at least that we can find, that Cato was placed, by his own Poet, in Elisium;
and there giving Laws to the Holy Souls, who deserved to be separated from the
Vulgar sort of good Spirits. For his Conscience could not but whisper to the
Arbitrary Monarch, that the Kings of Rome were at first Elective, and Governed
not without a Senate: That Romulus was no Hereditary Prince, and though, after
his Death, he received Divine Honors, for the good he did on Earth, yet he was
but a God of their own making: that the last Tarquin was Expelled justly, for
Overt-Acts of Tyranny, and Maladministration; for such are the Conditions of
an Elective Kingdom: And I meddle not with others: being, for my own Opinion,
of Montaigns Principles, that an Honest Man ought to be contented with that
Form of Government, and with those Fundamental Constitutions of it, which he
received from his Ancestors, and under which himself was Born: Though at the
same time he confessed freely, that if he could have chosen his Place of Birth,
it should have been at Venice: Which for many Reasons I dislike, and am better
pleased to have been born an English Man.

But to return from my long rambling: I say that Virgil having maturely weighed
the Condition of the Times in which he lived: that an entire Liberty was not to
be retrieved: that the present Settlement had the prospect of a long
continuance in the same Family, or those adopted into it: that he held his
Paternal Estate from the Bounty of the Conqueror, by whom he was likewise
enriched, esteemed and cherished: that this Conqueror, though of a bad kind,
was the very best of it: that the Arts of Peace flourished under him: that all
Men might be happy if they would be quiet: that now he was in possession of the
whole, yet he shared a great part of his Authority with the Senate: That he
would be chosen into the Ancient Offices of the Commonwealth, and Ruled by the
Power which he derived from them; and Prorogued his Government from time to
time: Still, as it were, threatening to dismiss himself from Public Cares,
which he exercised more for the common Good, than for any delight he took in
greatness: These things, I say, being considered by the Poet, he concluded it
to be the Interest of his Country to be so Governed: To infuse an awful Respect
into the People, toward such a Prince: By that respect to confirm their
Obedience to him; and by that Obedience to make them Happy. This was the Moral
of his Divine Poem: Honest in the Poet: Honorable to the Emperor, whom he
derives from a Divine Extraction; and reflecting part of that Honor on the
Roman People, whom he derives also from the Trojans; and not only profitable,
but necessary to the present Age; and likely to be such to their Posterity.
That it was the received Opinion, that the Romans were descended from the
Trojans, and Julius Caesar from Julus the Son of Aeneas, was enough for Virgil;
though perhaps he thought not so himself: Or that Aeneas ever was in Italy, which
Bochartus manifestly proves. And Homer, where he says that Jupiter hated the
House of Priam, and was resolved to transfer the Kingdom to the Family of
Aeneas, yet mentions nothing of his leading a Colony into a Foreign Country,
and settling there: But that the Romans valued themselves on their Trojan
Ancestry, is so undoubted a Truth, that I need not prove it. Even the Seals
which we have remaining of Julius Caesar, which we know to be Antique, have the
Star of Venus over them, though they were all graven after his Death, as a Note
that he was Deifi'd. I doubt not but it was one Reason, why Augustus should be
so passionately concerned for the preservation of the Aeneis, which its Author
had Condemned to be Burnt, as an Imperfect Poem, by his last Will and
Testament; was, because it did him a real Service as well as an Honor; that a
Work should not be lost where his Divine Original was Celebrated in Verse,
which had the Character of Immortality stamped upon it.

Neither were the great Roman Families which flourished in his time, less
obliged by him than the Emperor. Your Lordship knows with what Address he
makes mention of them, as Captains of Ships, or Leaders in the War; and even
some of Italian Extraction are not forgotten. These are the single Stars which
are sprinkled through the Aeneis: But there are whole Constellations of them in
the Fifth Book. And I could not but take notice, when I Translated it, of some
Favorite Families to which he gives the Victory, and awards the Prizes, in the
Person of his Hero, at the Funeral Games which were Celebrated in Honor of
Anchises. I, Insist not on their Names: But am pleased to find the Memmii
amongst them, derived from Mnestheus, because Lucretius Dedicates to one of
that Family, a Branch of which destroyed Corinth. I likewise either found or
formed an Image to my self of the contrary kind; that those who lost the
Prizes, were such as had disobliged the Poet, or were in disgrace with
Augustus, or Enemies to Mecenas: And this was the Poetical Revenge he took. For
genus irritabile Vatum, as Horace says. When a Poet is thoroughly provoked, he
will do himself Justice, however dear it cost him, Animamque, in Vulnere ponit.
I think these are not bare Imaginations of my own, though I find no trace of
them in the Commentatours: But one Poet may judge of another by himself. The
Vengeance we defer, is not forgotten. I hinted before, that the whole Roman
People were obliged by Virgil, in deriving them from Troy; an Ancestry which
they affected. We, and the French are of the same Humor: They would be thought
to descend from a Son, I think, of Hector: And we would have our Britain, both
Named and Planted by a descendant of Aeneas. Spencer favors this Opinion what
he can. His Prince Arthur, or whoever he intends by him, is a Trojan. Thus the
Hero of Homer was a Grecian, of Virgil a Roman, of Tasso an Italian.

I have transgressed my Bounds, and gone farther than the Moral led me. But if
your Lordship is not tired, I am safe enough.

Thus far, I think, my Author is defended. But as Augustus is still shadowed in
the Person of Aeneas, of which I shall say more, when I come to the Manners
which the Poet gives his Hero: I must prepare that Subject by showing how
dext'rously he managed both the Prince and People, so as to displease neither,
and to do good to both, which is the part of a Wise and an Honest Man: And
proves that it is possible for a Courtier not to be a Knave: I shall continue
still to speak my Thoughts like a freeborn Subject as I am; though such
things, perhaps, as no Dutch Commentator could, and I am sure no Frenchman
durst. I have already told your Lordship my Opinion of Virgil; that he was no
Arbitrary Man. Obliged he was to his Master for his Bounty, and he repays him
with good Counsel, how to behave himself in his new Monarchy, so as to gain the
Affections of his Subjects, and deserve to be called the Father of his Country.
From this Consideration it is, that he chose for the groundwork of his Poem,
one Empire destroyed, and another raised from the Ruins of it. This was just
the Parallel. Aeneas could not pretend to be Priam's Heir in a Lineal
Succession: For Anchises the Hero's Father, was only of the second Branch of
the Royal Family: And Helenus, a Son of Priam, was yet surviving, and might
lawfully claim before him. It may be Virgil mentions him on that Account.
Neither has he forgotten Atis, in the Fifth of his Aeneis, the Son of Polites,
youngest Son to Priam; who was slain by Pyrrhus, in the Second Book. Atis,
then, the Favorite Companion of Ascanius, had a better Right than he; though I
know he was introduced by Virgil, to do Honor to the Family, from which Julius
Caesar was descended by the Mothers side. Aeneas had only Married Creusa,
Priam's Daughter, and by her could have no Title, while any of the Male Issue
were remaining. In this case, the Poet gave him the next Title, which is, that
of an Elective King. The remaining Trojans chose him to lead them forth, and
settle them in some Foreign Country. Ilioneus in his Speech to Dido, calls him
expressly by the Name of King. Our Poet, who all this while had Augustus in his
Eye, had no desire he should seem to succeed by any right of Inheritance,
derived from Julius Caesar; such a Title being but one degree removed from
Conquest. For what was introduced by force, by force may be removed. 'Twas
better for the People that they should give, than he should take. Since that
Gift was indeed no more at bottom than a Trust. Virgil gives us an Example of
this, in the Person of Mezentius. He Governed Arbitrarily, he was expelled: And
came to the deserved End of all Tyrants. Our Author shows us another sort of
Kingship in the Person of Latinus. He was descended from Saturn, and as I
remember, in the Third Degree. He is described a just and a gracious Prince;
solicitous for the Welfare of his People; always Consulting with his Senate to
promote the common Good. We find him at the head of them, when he enters into
the Council-Hall. Speaking first, but still demanding their Advice, and
steering by it as far as the Iniquity of the Times would suffer him. And this
is the proper Character of a King by Inheritance, who is born a Father of his
Country. Aeneas, though he Married the Heiress of the Crown, yet claimed no Title
to it during the Life of his Father-in-Law. Pater arma Latinus habeto, etc. are
Virgil's Words. As for himself, he was contented to take care of his Country
Gods, who were not those of Latium. Wherein our Divine Author seems to relate
to the after practice of the Romans, which was to adopt the Gods of those they
Conquered, or received as Members of their Commonwealth. Yet withal, he plainly
touches at the Office of the High Priesthood, with which Augustus was invested:
And which made his Person more Sacred and inviolable, than even the Tribunitial
Power. It was not therefore for nothing, that the most Judicious of all Poets,
made that Office vacant, by the Death of Panthus, in the Second Book of the
Aeneis, for his Hero to succeed in it; and consequently for Augustus to enjoy.
I know not that any of the Commentatours have taken notice of that passage. If
they have not, I am sure they ought: And if they have, I am not indebted to
them for the Observation: The words of Virgil are very plain.

Sacra, suosque tibi, commendat Troja Penates. As for Augustus, or his Uncle
Julius, claiming by descent from Aeneas; that Title is already out of doors.
Aeneas succeeded not, but was Elected. Troy was fore-doom'd to fall for ever.

Postquam res Asiae, Priamique evertere Regnum,
Immeritum, visum superis. Aeneis the 3d, line the 1st.
Augustus it is true, had once resolved to re-build that City, and there to make
the Seat of Empire: But Horace writes an Ode on purpose to deter him from that
Thought; declaring the place to be accursed, and that the Gods would as often
destroy it as it should be raised. Hereupon the Emperor laid aside a Project
so ungrateful to the Roman People: But by this, my Lord, we may conclude that
he had still his Pedigree in his Head; and had an Itch of being thought a
Divine King, if his Poets had not given him better Counsel.

I will pass by many less material Objections, for want of room to Answer them:
What follows next is of great Importance, if the Critics can make out their
Charge; for it is levelled at the Manners which our Poet gives his Hero; and
which are the same which were eminently seen in his Augustus. Those Manners
were Piety to the Gods, and a dutiful Affection to his Father; Love to his
Relations; Care of his People; Courage and Conduct in the Wars; Gratitude to
those who had obliged him; and Justice in general to Mankind.

Piety, as your Lordship sees, takes place of all, as the chief part of his
Character: And the word in Latin is more full than it can possibly be expressed
in any Modern Language; for there it comprehends not only Devotion to the Gods,
but Filial Love and tender Affection to Relations of all sorts. As instances of
this, the Deities of Troy and his own Penates are made the Companions of his
Flight: They appear to him in his Voyage, and advise him; and at last he
re-places them in Italy, their Native Country. For his Father he takes him on
his Back: He leads his little Son, his Wife follows him; but losing his
Footsteps through Fear or Ignorance, he goes back into the midst of his Enemies
to find her; and leaves not his pursuit 'till her Ghost appears, to forbid his
farther search. I will say nothing of his Duty to his Father while he lived;
his Sorrow for his Death; of the Games instituted in Honor of his Memory; or
seeking him, by his Command, even after Death, in the Elysian Fields. I will
not mention his Tenderness for his Son, which every where is visible; Of his
raising a Tomb for Polydorus, the Obsequies for Misenus, his pious remembrance
of Deiphobus: The Funerals of his Nurse: His Grief for Pallas, and his Revenge
taken on his Murderer; whom, otherwise by his Natural Compassion, he had
forgiven: And then the Poem had been left imperfect: For we could have had no
certain prospect of his Happiness, while the last Obstacle to it was unremov'd.
Of the other parts which compose his Character, as a King, or as a General, I
need say nothing: The whole Aeneis is one continued Instance, of some one or
other of them: And where I find any thing of them taxed, it shall suffice me,
as briefly as I can, to vindicate my Divine Master to your Lordship, and by you
to the Reader. But herein, Segrais, in his admirable Preface to his Translation
of the Aeneis, as the Author of the Dauphin's Virgil justly calls it; has
prevented me. Him I follow; and what I borrow from him, am ready to acknowledge
to him. For, impartially speaking, the French are as much better Critics than
the English, as they are worse Poets. Thus we generally allow that they better
understand the management of a War, than our Islanders; but we know we are
superior to them, in the day of Battle. They value themselves on their
Generals; we on our Soldiers. But this is not the proper place to decide that
Question, if they make it one. I shall sayperhaps as much of other Nations, and
their Poets, excepting only Tasso: and hope to make my Assertion good, which is
but doing Justice to my Country. Part of which Honor will reflect on your
Lordship, whose Thoughts are always just; your Numbers harmonious; your Words
chosen; your Expressions strong and manly; your Verse flowing, and your turns
as happy as they are easy. If you would set us more Copies, your Example would
make all Precepts needless. In the mean time, that little you have Written is
owned, and that particularly by the Poets, (who are a Nation not over-lavish of
praise to their Contemporaries,) as a principal Ornament of our Language: But
the sweetest Essences are always confined in the smallest Glasses.

When I speak of your Lordship, it is never a digression, and therefore I need
beg no pardon for it; but take up Segrais where I left him: And shall use him
less often than I have occasion for him. For his Preface is a perfect piece of
Criticism, full and clear, and digested into an exact Method; mine is loose,
and, as I intended it, Epistolary. Yet I dwell on many things which he durst
not touch: For it is dangerous to offend an Arbitrary Master: And every Patron
who has the Power of Augustus, has not his Clemency. In short, my Lord, I would
not Translate him, because I would bring you somewhat of my own. His Notes and
Observations on every Book, are of the same Excellency; and for the same Reason
I omit the greater part.

He takes notice that Virgil is Arraigned for placing Piety before Valor; and
making that Piety the chief Character of his Hero. I have said already from
Bossu, that a Poet is not obliged to make his Hero a Virtuous Man: Therefore
neither Homer nor Tasso are to be blamed, for giving what predominant quality
they pleased to their first Character. But Virgil, who designed to form a
perfect Prince, and would insinuate, that Augustus, whom he calls Aeneas in his
Poem, was truly such, found himself obliged to make him without blemish;
thoroughly Virtuous; and a thorough Virtue both begins and ends in Piety.
Tasso, without question, observed this before me; and therefore split his Hero
in two. He gave Godfrey Piety, and Rinaldo Fortitude; for their chief Qualities
or Manners. Homer, who had chosen another Moral, makes both Agamemnon and
Achilles vicious: For his design was to instruct in Virtue, by showing the
deformity of Vice. I avoid repetitione of that I have said above. What follows
is Translated literally from Segrais.

Virgil had considered that the greatest Virtues of Augustus consisted in the
perfect Art of Governing his People; which caused him to Reign for more than
Forty Years in great Felicity. He considered that his Emperor was Valiant,
Civil, Popular, Eloquent, Politic, and Religious. He has given all these
Qualities to Aeneas. But knowing that Piety alone comprehends the whole Duty of
Man toward the Gods; toward his County, and toward his Relations, he judged,
that this ought to be his first Character, whom he would set for a Pattern of
Perfection. In reality, they who believe that the Praises which arise from
Valor, are superior to those, which proceed from any other Virtues, have not
considered (as they ought), that Valor, destitute of other Virtues, cannot
render a Man worthy of any true esteem. That Quality which signifies no more
than an intrepid Courage, may be separated from many others which are good, and
accompanied with many which are ill. A Man may be very Valiant, and yet Impious
and Vicious. But the same cannot be said of Piety; which excludes all ill
Qualities, and comprehends even Valor it self, with all other Qualities which
are good. Can we, for Example, give the praise of Valor to a Man who should
see his Gods profaned, and should want the Courage to defend them? To a Man
who should abandon his Father, or desert his King in his last Necessity?

Thus far Segrais, in giving the preference to Piety before Valor. I will now
follow him, where he considers this Valor, or intrepid Courage, singly in it
self; and this also Virgil gives to his Aeneas, and that in a Heroical Degree.

Having first concluded, that our Poet did for the best in taking the first
Character of his Hero, from that Essential Virtue on which the rest depend, he
proceeds to tell us, that in the Ten Years war of Troy, he was considered as
the second Champion of his Country; allowing Hector the first place; and this,
even by the Confession of Homer, who took all occasions of setting up his own
Countrymen the Grecians, and of undervaluing the Trojan Chiefs. But Virgil,
(whom Segrais forgot to cite,) makes Diomede give him a higher Character for
Strength and Courage. His Testimony is this in the Eleventh Book.

-- stetimus tela aspera contra,
Contulimusque manus: Experto, credit, quantus
In clypeum afsurgat, quo turbine torqueat hastam.
Si duo preterea tales Idaea tulisset
Terra viros; ultro Inachias venisset ad Vrbes
Dardanus, and versis lugeret Graecia fatis.
Quicquid apud durae cessatum est moenia Trojae,
Hectoris, Aeeneaeque manu victoria Grajum
Haesit; and in decumum vestigia rettulit annum.
Ambo animis, ambo insignes praestantibus armis:
Hic pietate prior.
I give not here my Translation of these Verses; though I think I have not ill
succeeded in them; because your Lordship is so great a Master of the Original,
that I have no reason to desire you should see Virgil and me so near together:
But you may please, my Lord, to take notice, that the Latin Author refines upon
the Greek; and insinuates, That Homer had done his Hero Wrong, in giving the
advantage of the Duel to his own Countryman: Though Diomedes was manifestly
the second Champion of the Grecians: And Ulysses preferred him before Ajax,
when he chose him for the Companion of his Nightly Expedition: For he had a
Headpiece of his own; and wanted only the fortitude of another, to bring him
off with safety; and that he might compass his Design with Honor.

The French Translator thus proceeds: They who accuse Aeneas for want of
Courage, either understand not Virgil, or have read him slightly; otherwise
they would not raise an Objection so easy to be Answered: Hereupon he gives so
many instances of the Hero's Valor, that to repeat them after him would tire
your Lordship, and put me to the unnecessary trouble of Transcribing the
greatest part of the three last Aeneids. In short, more could not be expected
from an Amadis, a Sir Lancelot, or the whole round Table, than he performs.
Proxima quaeque metit gladio, is the perfect Account of a Knight Errant. If it
be replied, continues Segrais, that it was not difficult for him to undertake
and atchieve such hardy Enterprises, because he wore Enchanted Arms. That
Accusation, in the first place, must fall on Homer e're it can reach Virgil.
Achilles was as well provided with them as Aeneas, though he was invulnerable
without them: And, Ariosto, the two Tasso's, Bernardo and Torquato, even our
own Spencer; in a word, all Modern Poets have Copied Homer as well as Virgil:
He is neither the first nor last; but in the midst of them; and therefore is
safe if they are so. Who knows, says Segrais, but that his fated Armor was
only an Allegorical Defense, and signified no more than that he was under the
peculiar protection of the Gods; born, as the Astrologers will tell us out of
Virgil (who was well versed in the Chaldaean Mysteries) under the favorable
influence of Jupiter, Venus, and the Sun: But I insist not on this, because I
know you believe not there is such an Art: though not only Horace and Persius,
but Augustus himself, thought otherwise. But in defense of Virgil, I dare
positively say, that he has been more cautious in this particular than either
his Predecessor, or his Descendants. For Aeneas was actually wounded, in the
Twelfth of the Aeneis; though he had the same God-Smith to Forge his Arms, as
had Achilles. It seems he was no War-luck, as the Scots commonly call such Men,
who they say, are Iron-free, or Lead-free. Yet after this Experiment, that his
Arms were not impenetrable, when he was Cured indeed by his Mother's help,
because he was that day to conclude the War by the death of Turnus, the Poet
durst not carry the Miracle too far, and restore him wholly to his former
Vigor: He was still too weak to overtake his Enemy; yet we see with what
Courage he attacks Turnus, when he faces and renews the Combat. I need say no
more, for Virgil defends himself, without needing my assistance; and proves his
Hero truly to deserve that Name. He was not then a Second-rate Champion, as
they would have him, who think Fortitude the first Virtue in a Hero. But being
beaten from this hold, they will not yet allow him to be Valiant; because he
wept more often, as they think, than well becomes a Man of Courage.

In the first place, if Tears are Arguments of Cowardice, What shall I say of
Homer's Hero? shall Achilles pass for timorous because he wept? and wept on
less occasions than Aeneas? Herein Virgil must be granted to have excelled his
Master. For once both Heroes are described lamenting their lost Loves: Briseis
was taken away by force from the Grecian: Cerusa was lost for ever to her
Husband. But Achilles went roaring along the salt Seashore, and like a Booby,
was complaining to his Mother, when he should have revenged his Injury by Arms.
Aeneas took a Nobler Course; for having secured his Father and his Son, he
repeated all his former Dangers to have found his Wife, if she had been above
ground. And here your Lordship may observe the Address of Virgil; it was not
for nothing, that this Passage was related with all these tender Circumstances.
Aeneas told it; Dido heard it: That he had been so affectionate a Husband, was
no ill Argument to the coming Dowager, that he might prove as kind to her.
Virgil has a thousand secret Beauties, though I have not leisure to remark them.

Segrais on this Subject of a Hero's shedding Tears, observes that Historians
commend Alexander for weeping, when he read the mighty Actions of Achilles. And
Julius Caesar is likewise praised, when out of the same Noble Envy, he wept at
the Victories of Alexander. But if we observe more closely, we shall find, that
the tears of Aeneas were always on a laudable Occasion. Thus he weeps out of
Compassion, and tenderness of Nature, when in the Temple of Carthage he beholds
the Pictures of his Friends, who Sacrificed their Lives in Defense of their
Country. He deplores the lamentable End of his Pilot Palinurus; the untimely
death of young Pallas his Confederate; and the rest, which I omit. Yet even for
these Tears his wretched Critics dare condemn him. They make Aeneas little
better than a kind of a St. Swithen Hero, always raining. One of these Censors
is bold enough to argue him of Cowardice; when in the beginning of the First
Book, he not only weeps, but trembles at an approaching Storm.

Extemplo Aeneae solvuntur frigore Membra:
Ingemit and duplices tendens ad syderas palmas, etc.
But to this I have answered formerly; that his fear was not for himself, but
for his People. And who can give a Sovereign a better Commendation, or
recommend a Hero more to the affection of the Reader? They were threatened with
a Tempest, and he wept; he was promised Italy, and therefore he prayed for the
accomplishment of that Promise. All this in the beginning of a Storm, therefore
he showed the more early Piety, and the quicker sense of Compassion. Thus much
I have urged elsewhere in the defense of Virgil; and since I have been
informed, by Mr. Moyl, a young Gentleman, whom I can never sufficiently
commend, that the Ancients accounted drowning an accursed Death. So that if we
grant him to have been afraid, he had just occasion for that fear, both in
relation to himself, and to his Subjects. I think our Adversaries can carry
this Argument no farther, unless they tell us that he ought to have had more
confidence in the promise of the Gods: But how was he assured that he had
understood their Oracles aright? Helenus might be mistaken, Phoebus might speak
doubtfully, even his Mother might flatter him, that he might prosecute his
Voyage, which if it succeeded happily, he should be the Founder of an Empire.
For that she her self was doubtful of his Fortune, is apparent by the Address
she made to Jupiter on his behalf. To which the God makes answer in these
words: Parce metu, Citherea, manent immota tuorum,
Fata tibi, etc.


Notwithstanding which, the Goddess, though comforted, was not assured: For
even after this, through the course of the whole Aeneis, she still apprehends
the interest which Juno might make with Jupiter against her Son. For it was a
moot Point in Heaven, whether he could alter Fate or not. And indeed, some
passages in Virgil would make us suspect, that he was of Opinion, Jupiter might
deferr Fate, though he could not alter it. For in the latter end of the Tenth
Book, he introduces Juno begging for the Life of Turnus, and flattering her
Husband with the power of changing Destiny. Tua qui potes, orsa reflectas. To
which he graciously answers: Si mora praesentis lethi tempusque caduco
Oratur Juveni, meque hoc ita ponere sentis,
Toll fuga Turnum, atque instantibus Eripe fatis.
Hactenus indulsisse vacat. Sin altior istis
Sub precibus venia ulla latet, totumque moveri,
Mutarive putas bellum, spes pascis inaneis.


But that he could not alter those Decrees, the King of Gods himself confesses,
in the Book above cited: when he comforts Hercules, for the death of Pallas,
who had invoked his aid, before he threw his Lance at Turnus.

-- Trojae sub moenibus altis,
Tot Nati Cecidere Deum; quin occidit una
Sarpedon mea progenies: etiam sua Turnum
Fata manent: metasque dati pervenit ad aevi.
Where he plainly acknowledges, that he could not save his own Son, or prevent
the death which he foresaw. Of his power to deferr the blow, I once
occasionally discoursed with that Excellent Person Sir Robert Howard: who is
better conversant than any Man I know, in the Doctrine of the Stoics, and he
set me right; from the concurrent testimony of Philosophers and Poets, that
Jupiter could not retard the effects of Fate, even for a moment. For when I
cited Virgil as favoring the contrary opinion in that Verse, Toll fuga
Turnum, atque instantibus eripe fatis.

He replied, and I think with an exact Judgment, that when Jupiter gave Juno
leave to withdraw Turnus from the present danger, it was because he certainly
fore-knew that his Fatal hour was not come: that it was in Destiny for Juno at
that time to save him; and that he himself obeyed Destiny, in giving her that
leave.

I need say no more in justification of our Hero's Courage, and am much
deceived, if he ever be attacked on this side of his Character again. But he is
Arraigned with more show of Reason by the Ladies; who will make a numerous
Party against him, for being false to Love, in forsaking Dido. And I cannot
much blame them; for to say the truth, it is an ill Precedent for their Gallants
to follow. Yet if I can bring him off, with Flying Colors, they may learn
experience at her cost; and for her sake, avoid a Cave, as the worst shelter
they can choose from a shower of Rain, especially when they have a Lover in
their Company.

In the first place, Segrais observes with much accuteness, that they who blame
Aeneas for his insensibility of Love, when he left Carthage, contradict their
former accusation of him, for being always Crying, Compassionate, and
Effeminately sensible of those Misfortunes which befell others. They give him
two contrary Characters, but Virgil makes him of a piece, always grateful,
always tenderhearted. But they are impudent enough to discharge themselves of
this blunder, by laying the Contradiction at Virgil's door. He, they say, has
shown his Hero with these inconsistent Characters: Acknowledging, and
Ungrateful, Compassionate, and Hard-harted; but at the bottom, Fickle, and
Self-interested. For Dido had not only received his weather-beaten Troops
before she saw him, and given them her protection, but had also offered them an
equal share in her Dominion.

Vultis and his mecum pariter considere Regnis?
Vrbem quam statuo, vestra est.
This was an obligement never to be forgotten: and the more to be considered,
because antecedent to her Love. That passion, it is true, produced the usual
effects of Generosity, Gallantry, and care to please, and thither we referr
them. But when she had made all these advances, it was still in his power to
have refused them: After the Intrigue of the Cave, call it Marriage, or
Enjoment only, he was no longer free to take or leave; he had accepted the
favor, and was obliged to be Constant, if he would be grateful.

My Lord, I have set this Argument in the best light I can, that the Ladies may
not think I write booty: and perhaps it may happen to me, as it did to Doctor
Cudworth, who has raised such strong Objections against the being of a God, and
Providence, that many think he has not answered them. You may please at least
to hear the adverse Party. Segrais pleads for Virgil, that no less than an
Absolute Command from Jupiter, could excuse this insensibility of the Hero,
and this abrupt departure, which looks so like extreme ingratitude. But at the
same time, he does wisely to remember you, that Virgil had made Piety the first
Character of Aeneas: And this being allowed, as I am afraid it must, he was
obliged, antecedent to all other Considerations, to search an Asylum for his
Gods in Italy. For those very Gods, I say, who had promised to his Race the
Universal Empire. Could a Pious Man dispense with the Commands of Jupiter to
satisfy his passion; or take it in the strongest sense, to comply with the
obligations of his gratitude? Religion, it is true, must have Moral Honesty for
its groundwork, or we shall be apt to suspect its truth; but an immediate
Revelation dispenses with all Duties of Morality. All Casuists agree, that
Theft is a breach of the Moral Law: yet if I might presume to mingle Things
Sacred with Profane, the Israelites only spoiled the Egyptians, not robbed
them, because the propriety was transferred; by a Revelation to their
Lawgiver. I confess Dido was a very Infidel in this Point: for she would not
believe, as Virgil makes her say, that ever Jupiter would send Mercury on such
an Immoral Errand. But this needs no Answer; at least no more than Virgil gives
it: Fata obstant, placidasque viri Deus obstruit aures.

This notwithstanding, as Segrais confesses, he might have shown a little more
sensibility when he left her; for that had been according to his Character.

But let Virgil answer for himself; he still loved her; and struggled with his
inclinations, to obey the Gods.

Curam sub Cord premebat,
Multa gemens; magnoque animum labefactus Amore.
Upon the whole Matter, and humanely speaking, I doubt there was a fault
somewhere; and Jupiter is better able to bear the blame, than either Virgil or
Aeneas. The Poet it seems had found it out, and therefore brings the deserting
Hero and the forsaken Lady to meet together in the lower Regions; where he
excuses himself when it is too late, and accordingly she will take no
satisfaction, nor so much as hear him. Now Segrais is forced to abandon his
defense, and excuses his Author, by saying that the Aeneis is an imperfect
Work, and that Death prevented the Divine Poet from reviewing it; and for that
Reason he had condemned it to the fire; though at the same time, his two
Translators must acknowledge, that the Sixth Book is the most Correct of the
whole Aeneis. Oh, how convenient is a Machine sometimes in a Heroic Poem! This
of Mercury is plainly one, and Virgil was constrained to use it here, or the
honesty of his Hero would be ill-defended. And the Fair Sex however, if they
had the Desertour in their power, would certainly have shown him no more mercy,
than the Bacchanals did Orpheus. For if too much Constancy may be a fault
sometimes, then want of Constancy, and Ingratitude after the last Favor, is a
Crime that never will be forgiven. But of Machines, more in their proper place:
where I shall show, with how much judgment they have been used by Virgil; and
in the mean time pass to another Article of his defense on the present Subject:
where if I cannot clear the Hero, I hope at least to bring off the Poet; for
here I must divide their Causes. Let Aeneas trust to his Machine, which will
only help to break his Fall, but the Address is incomparable. Plato, who
borrowed so much from Homer, and yet concluded for the Banishment of all Poets,
would at least have Rewarded Virgil, before he sent him into Exile. But I go
farther, and say, that he ought to be acquitted, and deserved beside, the
Bounty of Augustus, and the gratitude of the Roman People. If after this, the
Ladies will stand out, let them remember, that the Jury is not all agreed; for
Octavia was of his Party, and was also of the first Quality in Rome; she was
present at the reading of the Sixth Aeneid, and we know not that she condemned
Aeneas; but we are sure she presented the Poet, for his admirable Elegy on her
Son Marcellus.

But let us consider the secret Reasons which Virgil had, for thus framing this
Noble Episode, wherein the whole passion of Love is more exactly described than
in any other Poet. Love was the Theme of his Fourth Book; and though it is the
shortest of the whole Aeneis, yet there he has given its beginning, its
progress, its traverses, and its conclusion. And had exhausted so entirely this
Subject, that he could resume it but very slightly in the Eight ensuing Books.

She was warmed with the graceful appearance of the Hero, she smothered those
Sparkles out of decency, but Conversation blew them up into a Flame. Then she
was forced to make a Confident of her whom she best might trust, her own
Sister, who approves the passion, and thereby augments it, then succeeds her
public owning it; and after that, the consummation. Of Venus and Juno, Jupiter
and Mercury I say nothing, for they were all Machining work; but possession
having cooled his Love, as it increased hers, she soon perceived the change, or
at least grew suspicious of a change; this suspicion soon turned to Jealousy,
and Jealousy to Rage; then she disdains and threatens, and again is humble,
and entreats; and nothing availing, despairs, curses, and at last becomes her
own Executioner. See here the whole process of that passion, to which nothing
can be added. I dare go no farther, lest I should lose the connection of my
Discourse.

To love our Native Country, and to study its Benefit and its Glory, to be
interessed in its Concerns, is Natural to all Men, and is indeed our common
Duty. A Poet makes a farther step; for endeavoring to do honor to it, it is
allowable in him even to be partial in its Cause; for he is not tied to truth,
or fettered by the Laws of History. Homer and Tasso are justly praised for
choosing their Heroes out of Greece and Italy; Virgil indeed made his a Trojan,
but it was to derive the Romans, and his own Augustus from him; but all the
three Poets are manifestly partial to their Heroes, in favor of their Country.
For Dares Phrygius reports of Hector, that he was slain Cowardly; Aeneas
according to the best account, slew not Mezentius, but was slain by him: and
the Chronicles of Italy tell us little of that Rinaldo d'Este who Conquers
Jerusalem in Tasso. He might be a Champion of the Church; but we know not that
he was so much as present at the Siege. To apply this to Virgil, he thought
himself engaged in Honor to espouse the Cause and Quarrel of his Country
against Carthage. He knew he could not please the Romans better, or oblige them
more to Patronize his Poem, than by disgracing the Foundress of that City. He
shows her ungrateful to the Memory of her first Husband, doting on a Stranger;
enjoyed, and afterward forsaken by him. This was the Original, says he, of the
immortal hatred betwixt the two Rival Nations. It Is true, he colors the
falsehood of Aeneas by an express Command from Jupiter, to forsake the Queen,
who had obliged him: but he knew the Romans were to be his Readers, and them he
bribed, perhaps at the expense of his Hero's honesty, but he gained his Cause
however; as Pleading before Corrupt Judges. They were content to see their
Founder false to Love, for still he had the advantage of the Amor: It was
their Enemy whom he forsook, and she might have forsaken him, if he had not got
the start of her: she had already forgotten her Vows to her Sichaeus; and
varium and mutabile semper femina, is the sharpest Satire in the fewest words
that was ever made on Womankind; for both the Adjectives are Neuter, and Animal
must be understood, to make them Grammar. Virgil does well to put those words
into the mouth of Mercury. If a God had not spoken them, neither durst he have
written them, nor I translated them. Yet the Deity was forced to come twice on
the same Errand: and the second time, as much a Hero as Aeneas was, he
frighted him. It seems he feared not Jupiter so much as Dido. For your Lordship
may observe, that as much intent as he was upon his Voyage, yet he still
delayed it, 'till the Messenger was obliged to tell him plainly, that if he
weighed not Anchor in the Night, the Queen would be with him in the Morning.
Notumque furens quid femina possit; she was Injured, she was Revengeful, she
was Powerful. The Poet had likewise before hinted, that her People were
naturally perfidious: For he gives their Character in their Queen, and makes a
Proverb of Punica fides, many Ages before it was invented.

Thus I hope, my Lord, that I have made good my Promise, and justified the
Poet, whatever becomes of the false Knight. And sure a Poet is as much
priviledg'd to lie, as an Ambassador, for the Honor and Interest of his
Country; at least as Sir Henry Wootton has defined.

This naturally leads me to the defense of the Famous Anachronism, in making
Aeneas and Dido Contemporaries. For it is certain that the Hero lived almost
two hundred years before the Building of Carthage. One who imitates Bocaline,
says that Virgil was accused before Apollo for this Error. The God soon found
that he was not able to defend his Favorite by Reason, for the Case was clear:
he therefore gave this middle Sentence; That any thing might be allowed to his
Son Virgil on the account of his other Merits; That being a Monarch he had a
dispensing Power, and pardoned him. But that this special Act of Grace might
never be drawn into Example, or pleaded by his puny Successors, in
justification of their ignorance; he decreed for the future, No Poet should
presume to make a Lady die for Love two hundred years before her Birth. To
Moralize this Story, Virgil is the Apollo, who has this Dispensing Power. His
great Judgment made the Laws of Poetry, but he never made himself a Slave to
them: Chronology at best is but a Cobweb-Law, and he broke through it with his
weight. They who will imitate him wisely, must choose as he did, an obscure and
a remote Era, where they may invent at pleasure, and not be easily
contradicted. Neither he, nor the Romans had ever read the Bible, by which only
his false computation of times can be made out against him: this Segrais says
in his defense, and proves it from his Learned Friend Bochartus, whose Letter
on this Subject, he has Printed at the end of the Fourth Aeneid, to which I
referr your Lordship, and the Reader. Yet the Credit of Virgil was so great,
that he made this Fable of his own Invention pass for an Authentic History, or
at least as credible as any thing in Homer. Ovid takes it up after him, even in
the same Age, and makes an ancient Heroine of Virgil's new-created Dido;
Dictates a Letter for her just before her death, to the ungrateful Fugitive;
and very unluckily for himself, is for measuring a Sword with a Man so much
superior in force to him on the same subject. I think I may be Judge of this,
because I have Translated both. The Famous Author of the Art of Love has
nothing of his own, he borrows all from a greater Master in his own profession;
and which is worse, improves nothing which he finds. Nature fails him, and
being forced to his old shift, he has recourse to Witticism. This passes indeed
with his Soft Admirers, and gives him the preference to Virgil in their esteem.
But let them like for themselves, and not prescribe to others, for our Author
needs not their Admiration.

The Motives that induced Virgil to Coin this Fable, I have showed already; and
have also begun to show that he might make this Anacronism, by superseding the
mechanic Rules of Poetry, for the same Reason, that a Monarch may dispense
with, or suspend his own Laws, when he finds it necessary so to do; especially
if those Laws are not altogether fundamental. Nothing is to be called a fault
in Poetry, says Aristotle, but what is against the Art; therefore a Man may be
an admirable Poet, without being an exact Chronologer. Shall we dare, continues
Segrais, to condemn Virgil, for having made a Fiction against the order of
time, when we commend Ovid and other Poets who have made many of their Fictions
against the Order of Nature? For what are else the splendid Miracles of the
Metamorphoses? Yet these are Beautiful as they are related; and have also deep
Learning and instructive Mythologies couched under them: But to give, as Virgil
does in this Episode, the Original Cause of the long Wars betwixt Rome and
Carthage, to draw Truth out of Fiction, after so probable a manner, with so
much Beauty, and so much for the Honor of his Country, was proper only to the
Divine Wit of Maro; and Tasso in one of his Discourses, admires him for this
particularly. It Is not lawful indeed, to contradict a Point of History, which
is known to all the World; as for Example, to make Hannibal and Scipio
Contemporaries with Alexander; but in the dark Recesses of Antiquity, a great
Poet may and ought to feign such things as he finds not there, if they can be
brought to embelish that Subject which he treats. On the other side, the pains
and diligence of ill Poets is but thrown away, when they want the Genius to
invent and feign agreeably. But if the Fictions be delightful, which they
always are, if they be natural, if they be of a piece; if the beginning, the
middle, and the end be in their due places, and artfully united to each other,
such Works can never fail of their deserved Success. And such is Virgil's
Episode of Dido and Aeneas; where the sourest Critic must acknowledge' that if
he had deprived his Aeneis of so great an Ornament, because he found no traces
of it in Antiquity, he had avoided their unjust Censure, but had wanted one of
the greatest Beauties of his Poem. I shall say more of this, in the next
Article of their Charge against him, which is want of Invention. In the mean
time I may affirm in honor of this Episode, that it is not only now esteemed
the most pleasing entertainment of the Aeneis, but was so accounted in his own
Age; and before it was mellow'd into that reputation, which time has given it;
for which I need produce no other testimony, than that of Ovid, his
Contemporary.

Nec pars ulla magis legitur de Corpore toto
Quam non legitimo faedere, junctus Amor.
Where by the way, you may observe, my Lord, that Ovid in those words, Non
legitimo faedere junctus Amor, will by no means allow it to be a lawful
Marriage betwixt Dido and Aeneas. He was in Banishment when he wrote those
Verses, which I cite from his Letter to Augustus. You, Sir, says he, have sent
me into Exile for writing my Art of Love, and my wanton Elegies; yet your own
Poet was happy in your good graces, though he brought Dido and Aeneas into a
Cave, and left them there not over-honestly together. May I be so bold to ask
your Majesty, is it a greater fault to teach the Art of unlawful Love, than to
show it in the Action? But was Ovid the Court-Poet so bad a Courtier, as to
find no other Plea to excuse himself, than by a plain accusation of his Master?
Virgil confessed it was a Lawful Marriage betwixt the Lovers; that Juno the
Goddess of Matrimony had ratified it by her presence, for it was her business
to bring Matters to that issue. That the Ceremonies were short we may believe,
for Dido was not only amorous, but a Widow. Mercury himself, though employed on
a quite contrary Errand, yet owns it a Marriage by an innuendo: Palchramque
Vxorius Vrbem Extruis -- He calls Aeneas not only a Husband, but upbraids him
with being a fond Husband, as the word Vxorius implies. Now mark a little, if
your Lordship pleases, why Virgil is so much concerned to make this Marriage
(for he seems to be the Father of the Bride himself, and to give her to the
Bridegroom) it was to make way for the Divorce which he intended afterward;
for he was a finer Flatterer than Ovid: and I more than conjecture that he had
in his eye the Divorce which not long before had passed betwixt the Emperor
and Scribonia. He drew this dimple in the Cheek of Aeneas, to prove Augustus of
the same Family, by so remarkable a Feature in the same place. Thus, as we say
in our homespun English Proverb, He killed two Birds with one stone; pleased
the Emperor by giving him the resemblance of his Ancestor; and gave him such a
resemblance as was not scandalous in that Age. For to leave one Wife and take
another, was but a matter of Gallantry at that time of day among the Romans.
Neque haec in faedera veni, is the very Excuse which Aeneas makes, when he
leaves his Lady. I made no such Bargain with you at our Marriage, to live
always drudging on at Carthage; my business was Italy, and I never made a
secret of it. If I took my pleasure, had not you your share of it? I leave you
free at my departure, to comfort your self with the next Stranger who happens
to be Shipwrecked on your Coast. Be as kind an Hostess as you have been to me,
and you can never fail of another Husband. In the mean time, I call the Gods to
witness, that I leave your Shore unwillingly; for though Juno made the
Marriage, yet Jupiter Commands me to forsake you. This is the effect of what he
says, when it is dishonored out of Latin Verse, into English Prose. If the
Poet argued not aright, we must pardon him for a poor blind Heathen, who knew
no better Morals.

I have detained your Lordship longer than I intended on this Objection: Which
would indeed weigh something in a Spiritual Court; but I am not to defend our
Poet there. The next I think is but a Cavil, though the Cry is great against
him, and has continued from the time of Macrobius to this present Age. I hinted
it before. They lay no less than want of Invention to his Charge. A capital
Crime I must acknowledge. For a Poet is a Maker, as the word signifies: And who
cannot make, that is, invent, has his Name for nothing. That which makes this
Accusation look so strange at the first sight, is, That he has borrowed so many
things from Homer, Appollonius Rhodius, and others who preceded him. But in the
first place, if Invention is to be taken in so strict a sense, that the Matter
of a Poem must be wholly new, and that in all its Parts; then Scaliger has made
out, says Segrais, that the History of Troy was no more the Invention of Homer,
than of Virgil. There was not an Old Woman, or almost a Child, but had it in
their Mouths, before the Greek Poet or his Friends digested it into this
admirable order in which we read it. At this rate, as Solomon has told us,
there is nothing new beneath the Sun: Who then can pass for an Inventor, if
Homer, as well as Virgil must be deprived of that Glory? Is Versailles the less
a New Building, because the Architect of that Palace has imitated others which
were built before it? Walls, Doors and Windows, Apartments, Offices, Rooms of
convenience and Magnificence, are in all great Houses. So Descriptions Figures,
Fables, and the rest, must be in all Heroic Poems. They are the Common
Materials of Poetry, furnished from the Magazine of Nature: Every Poet has as
much right to them, as every Man has to Air or Water. Quid prohibetis Aquas?
Vsus communis aquarum est. But the Argument of the Work, that is to say, its
principal Action, the Economy and Disposition of it; these are the things
which distinguish Copies from Originals. The Poet, who borrows nothing from
others, is yet to be Born. He and the Jews Messiah will come together. There
are parts of the Aeneis, which resemble some parts both of the Ilias and of the
Odysses; as for Example, Aeneas descended into Hell, and Ulysses had been there
before him: Aeneas loved Dido, and Ulysses loved Calypso: In few words, Virgil
has imitated Homer's Odysses in his first six Books, and in his six last the
Ilias. But from hence can we infer, that the two Poets write the same History?
Is there no invention in some other parts of Virgil's Aeneis? The disposition
of so many various matters, is not that his own? From what Book of Homer had
Virgil his Episode of Nysus and Euryalus, of Mezentius and Lausus? From whence
did he borrow his Design of bringing Aeneas into Italy, of Establishing the
Roman Empire on the Foundations of a Trojan Colony; to say nothing of the
honor he did his Patron, not only in his descent from Venus, but in making him
so like him in his best Features, that the Goddess might have mistaken Augustus
for her Son. He had indeed the Story from common Fame, as Homer had his from
the Egyptian Priestess. Aeneadum Genetrix was no more unknown to Lucretius than
to him. But Lucretius taught him not to form his Hero; to give him Piety or
Valor for his Manners; and both in so eminent a degree, that having done what
was possible for Man, to save his King and Country; his Mother was forced to
appear to him and restrain his Fury, which hurried him to death in their
Revenge. But the Poet made his Piety more successful; he brought off his Father
and his Son; and his Gods witnessed to his Devotion, by putting themselves
under his Protection; to be re-plac'd by him in their promised Italy. Neither
the Invention, nor the Conduct of this great Action, were owing to Homer or any
other Poet. It Is one thing to Copy, and another thing to imitate from Nature.
The Copyer is that servile Imitator, to whom Horace gives no better a Name than
that of Animal: He will not so much as allow him to be a Man. Raphael imitated
Nature: They who Copy one of Raphael's Pieces, imitate but him, for his Work is
their Original. They Translate him as I do Virgil; and fall as short of him as
I of Virgil. There is a kind of Invention in the imitation of Raphael; for
though the thing was in Nature, yet the Idea of it was his own. Ulysses
Traveled, so did Aeneas; but neither of them were the first Travelers; for
Cain went into the Land of Nod, before they were born: And neither of the Poets
ever heard of such a Man. If Ulysses had been killed at Troy, yet Aeneas must
have gone to Sea, or he could never have arrived in Italy. But the designs of
the two Poets were as different as the Courses of their Heroes; one went Home,
and the other sought a Home. To return to my first similitude: Suppose Apelles
and Raphael had each of them Painted a burning Troy; might not the Modern
Painter have succeeded as well as the Ancient, though neither of them had seen
the Town on Fire? For the draughts of both were taken from the Idea's which
they had of Nature. Cities had been burnt before either of them were in Being.
But to Close the Simile as I begun it; they would not have designed after the
same manner. Apelles would have distinguished Pyrrhus from the rest of all the
Grecians, and showed him forcing his entrance into Priam's Palace; there he had
set him in the fairest Light, and given him the chief place of all his Figures,
because he was a Grecian, and he would do Honor to his Country. Raphael, who
was an Italian, and descended from the Trojans, would have made Aeneas the
Hero of his piece: And perhaps not with his Father on his Back; his Son in one
hand, his Bundle of Gods in the other, and his Wife following; (for an Act of
Piety, is not half so graceful in a Picture as an Act of Courage:) He would
rather have drawn him killing Androgeos, or some other, Hand to Hand; and the
blaze of the Fires should have darted full upon his Face, to make him
conspicuous amongst his Trojans. This I think is a just Comparison betwixt the
two Poets in the Conduct of their several designs. Virgil cannot be said to
copy Homer: The Grecian had only the advantage of writing first. If it be urged
that I have granted a resemblance in some parts; yet therein Virgil has
excelled him: For what are the Tears of Calypso for being left, to the Fury and
Death of Dido? Where is there the whole process of her Passion, and all its
violent Effects to be found, in the languishing Episode of the Odysses? If this
be to Copy, let the Critics show us the same Disposition, Features, or
Coloring in their Original. The like may be said of the Descent to Hell; which
was not of Homer's Invention neither: He had it from the Story of Orpheus and
Eurydice. But to what end did Ulysses make that Journey? Aeneas undertook it by
the express Commandment of his Father's Ghost: There he was to show him all the
succeeding Heroes of his Race; and next to Romulus, (mark, if you please, the
Address of Virgil) his own Patron Augustus Caesar. Anchises was likewise to
instruct him, how to manage the Italian War; and how to conclude it with his
Honor. That is, in other words, to lay the Foundations of that Empire which
Augustus was to Govern. This is the Noble Invention of our Author: But it has
been Copyed by so many Sign-post Daubers; that now it is grown fulsom, rather by
their want of Skill, than by the Commonness.

In the last place I may safely grant, that by reading Homer, Virgil was taught
to imitate his Invention: That is, to imitate like him; which is no more, than
if a Painter studied Raphael, that he might learn to design after his manner.
And thus I might imitate Virgil, if I were capable of writing an Heroic Poem,
and yet the Invention be my own: But I should endeavor to avoid a servile
Copying. I would not give the same Story under other Names: With the same
Characters, in the same Order, and with the same Sequel: For every common
Reader to find me out at the first sight for a Plagiary: And cry, this I read
before in Virgil, in a better Language, and in better Verse: This is like merry
Andrew on the low Rope, copying lubberly the same Tricks, which his Master is
dexterously performing on the high.

I will trouble your Lordship but with one Objection more; which I know not
whether I found in Le Fevre or Valois, but I am sure I have read it in another
French Critic, whom I will not name, because I think it is not much for his
Reputation. Virgil, in the heat of Action, suppose for Example, in describing
the fury of his Hero in a Battle, when he is endeavoring to raise our
concernments to the highest pitch, turns short on the sudden into some
similitude, which diverts, say they, your attention from the main Subject, and
mispends it on some trivial Image. He pours cold Water into the Caldron when
his business is to make it boil.

This Accusation is general against all who would be thought Heroic Poets; but
I think it touches Virgil less than any. He is too great a Master of his Art,
to make a Blott which may so easily be hit. Similitudes, as I have said, are
not for Tragedy, which is all violent, and where the Passions are in a
perpetual ferment; for there they deaden where they should animate; they are
not of the nature of Dialogue, unless in Comedy: A Metaphor is almost all the
Stage can suffer, which is a kind of Similitude comprehended in a word. But
this Figure has a contrary effect in Heroic Poetry: There it is employed to
raise the Admiration, which is its proper business. And Admiration is not of so
violent a nature as Fear or Hope, Compassion or Horror, or any Concernment we
can have for such or such a Person on the Stage. Not but I confess, that
Similitudes and Descriptions, when drawn into an unreasonable length, must
needs nauseate the Reader. Once I remember, and but once; Virgil makes a
Similitude of fourteen Lines; and his description of Fame is about the same
number. He is blamed for both; and I doubt not but he would have contracted
them, had he lived to have reviewed his Work: But Faults are no Precedents.
This I have observed of his Similitudes in general, that they are not placed,
as our unobserving Critics tell us, in the heat of any Action: But commonly in
its declining: When he has warmed us in his Description, as much as possibly he
can; then, lest that warmth should languish, he renews it by some apt
Similitude, which illustrates his Subject, and yet palls not his Audience. I
need give your Lordship but one Example of this kind, and leave the rest to
your Observation, when next you review the whole Aeneis in the Original
unblemished by my rude Translation. It Is in the first Book, where the Poet
describes Neptune composing the Ocean, on which Eolus had raised a Tempest,
without his permission. He had already chidden the Rebellious Winds for obeying
the Commands of their Usurping Master: He had warned them from the Seas, He had
beaten down the Billows with his Mace; dispelled the Clouds, restored the
Sunshine, while Triton and Cymothoe were heaving the Ships from off the
Quicksands; before the Poet would offer at a Similitude for illustration.

Ac, veluti magno in populo cum saepe coorta est
Seditio, saevitque animis ignobile vulgus,
Jamque faces, and saxa volant, furor arma ministrat;
Tum, pietate gravem, ac meritis si forte virum quem
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus adstant:
Ille regit dictis animos, and pectora mulcet:
Sic cunctus pelagi cecidit fragor, aequora postquam
Prospiciens genitor, caeloque invectus aperto
Flectit equos, curruque volans dat lora secundo.
This is the first Similitude which Virgil makes in this Poem: And one of the
longest in the whole; for which Reason I the rather cite it. While the Storm
was in its fury, any Allusion had been improper: For the Poet could have
compared it to nothing more impetuous than it self; consequently he could have
made no Illustration. If he could have illustrated, it had been an ambitious
Ornament out of season, and would have diverted our Concernment: Nunc, non erat
hisce locus; and therefore he deferred it to its proper place.

These are the Criticisms of most moment which have been made against the
Aeneis, by the Ancients or Moderns. As for the particular Exceptions against
this or that passage, Macrobius and Pontanus have answered them already. If I
desired to appear more Learned than I am, it had been as easy for me to have
taken their Objections and Solutions, as it is for a Country Parson to take the
Expositions of the Fathers out of Junius and Tremellius: Or not to have named
the Authors from whence I had them: For so Ruaeus, otherwise a most judicious
Commentator on Virgil's Works, has used Pontanus, his greatest Benefactor, of
whom, he is very silent, and I do not remember that he once cites him.

What follows next, is no Objection; for that implies a Fault: And it had been
none in Virgil, if he had extended the time of his Action beyond a Year. At
least Aristotle has set no precise limits to it. Homer's, we know, was within
two Months: Tasso I am sure exceeds not a Summer: And if I examined him,
perhaps he might be reduced into a much less compass. Bossu leaves it doubtful
whether Virgil's Action were within the Year, or took up some Months beyond it.
Indeed the whole Dispute is of no more concernment to the common Reader, than
it is to a Plough-man, whether February this Year had 28 or 29 Days in it. But
for the satisfaction of the more Curious, of which number, I am sure your
Lordship is one; I will Translate what I think convenient out of Segrais, whom
perhaps you have not read: For he has made it highly probable, that the Action
of the Aeneis began in the Spring, and was not extended beyond the Autumn. And
we have known Campaigns that have begun sooner, and have ended later.

Ronsard and the rest whom Segrais names, who are of Opinion that the Action of
this Poem takes up almost a Year and half; ground their Calculation thus.
Anchises dyed in Sicily at the end of Winter, or beginning of the Spring.
Aeneas, immediately after the Interment of his Father, puts to Sea for Italy:
He is surpised by the Tempest described in the beginning of the first Book;
and there it is that the Scene of the Poem opens; and where the Action must
Commence. He is driven by this Storm on the Coasts of Afric: He stays at
Carthage all that Summer, and almost all the Winter following: Sets Sail again
for Italy just before the beginning of the Spring; meets with contrary Winds,
and makes Sicily the second time: This part of the Action compleats the Year.
Then he celebrates the Aniversary of his Father's Funerals, and shortly after
arrives at Cumes, and from thence his time is taken up in his first Treaty with
Latinus; the Overture of the War; the Siege of his Camp by Turnus; his going
for Succors to relieve it: His return: The raising of the Siege by the first
Battle: The twelve days Truce: The second Battle: The Assault of Laurentum, and
the single Fight with Turnus; all which, they say, cannot take up less than
four or five Months more; by which Account we cannot suppose the entire Action
to be contained in a much less compass than a Year and half.

Segrais reckons another way; and his computation is not condemned by the
learned Ruaeus, who compiled and Published the Commentaries on our Poet, which
we call the Dauphin's Virgil.

He allows the time of Year when Anchises dyed; to be in the latter end of
Winter, or the beginning of the Spring; he acknowledges that when Aeneas is
first seen at Sea afterward, and is driven by the Tempest on the Coast of
Afric, is the time when the Action is naturally to begin: He confesses
farther, that Aeneas left Carthage in the latter end of Winter; for Dido tells
him in express terms, as an Argument for his longer stay, Quinetiam Hyberno
moliris sydere Classem.

But whereas Ronsard's Followers suppose that when Aeneas had buried his
Father, he set Sail immediately for Italy, (though the Tempest drove him on the
Coast of Carthage.) Segrais will by no means allow that Supposition; but thinks
it much more probable that he remained in Sicily 'till the midst of July or the
beginning of August; at which time he places the first appearance of his Hero
on the Sea; and there opens the Action of the Poem. From which beginning, to
the Death of Turnus, which concludes the Action, there need not be supposed
above ten Months of intermediate time: For arriving at Carthage in the latter
end of Summer, staying there the Winter following; departing thence in the very
beginning of the Spring; making a short abode in Sicily the second time,
landing in Italy, and making the War, may be reasonably judged the business but
of three Months. To this the Ronsardians reply, that having been for Seven
Years before in quest of Italy, and having no more to do in Sicily, than to
interr his Father; after that Office was performed, what remained for him, but,
without delay, to pursue his first Adventure? To which Segrais answers, that
the Obsequies of his Father, according to the Rites of the Greeks and Romans,
would detain him for many days: That a longer time must be taken up in the
refitting of his Ships, after so tedious a Voyage; and in refreshing his
Weather-beaten Soldiers on a friendly Coast. These indeed are but Suppositions
on both sides, yet those of Segrais seem better grounded. For the Feast of
Dido, when she entertained Aeneas first, has the appearance of a Summer's
Night, which seems already almost ended, when he begins his Story: Therefore
the Love was made in Autumn; the Hunting followed properly when the Heats of
that scorching Country were declining: The Winter was passed in jollity, as the
Season and their Love required; and he left her in the latter end of Winter, as
is already proved. This Opinion is fortified by the Arrival of Aeneas at the
Mouth of Tyber; which marks the Season of the Spring, that Season being
perfectly described by the singing of the Birds, saluting the dawn; and by the
Beauty of the place, which the Poet seems to have painted expressly in the
Seventh Aeneid.

Aurora in roseis fulgebat lutea bigis:
Cum venti posuere; variae circumque, supraque
Assuetae ripis volucres, and fluminis alveo,
Aethera mulcebant cantu.
The remainder of the Action required but three Months more; for when Aeneas
went for Succor to the Tuscans, he found their Army in a readiness to march;
and wanting only a Commander: So that according to this Calculation, the Aeneis
takes not up above a Year complete, and may be comprehended in less compass.

This, amongst other Circumstances, treated more at large by Segrais, agrees
with the rising of Orion, which caused the Tempest, described in the beginning
of the first Book. By some passages in the Pastorals, but more particularly in
the Georgicks, our Poet is found to be an exact Astronomer, according to the
Knowledge of that Age. Now Ilioneus (whom Virgil twice employs in Embassies, as
the best Speaker of the Trojans) attributes that Tempest to Orion in his Speech
to Dido.

Cum subito, assurgens fluctu nimbosus Orion. He must mean either the Heliacal
or Achronical rising of that Sign. The Heliacal rising of a Constellation, is
when it comes from under the Rays of the Sun, and begins to appear before
Daylight. The Achronical rising, on the contrary, is when it appears at the
close of Day, and in opposition of the Sun's diurnal Course.

The Heliacal rising of Orion, is at present computed to be about the sixth of
July; and about that time it is, that he either causes, or presages Tempests on
the Seas.

Segrais has observed farther, that when Anna Counsels Dido to stay Aeneas
during the Winter; she speaks also of Orion; Dum pelago desaevit hyems, and
aquosus Orion.

If therefore Ilioneus, according to our Supposition, understand the Heliacal
rising of Orion: Anna must mean the Achronical, which the different Epithetes
given to that Constellation, seem to manifest. Ilioneus calls him nimbosus,
Anna aquosus. He is tempestuous in the Summer when he rises Heliacally, and
Rainy in the Winter when he rises Achronically. Your Lordship will pardon me
for the frequent repetition of these cant words; which I could not avoid in
this abbreviation of Segrais; who I think deserves no little commendation in
this new Criticism. I have yet a word or two to say of Virgil's Machines, from
my own observation of them. He has imitated those of Homer, but not Copied
them. It was established long before this time, in the Roman Religion as well
as in the Greek; that there were Gods; and both Nations, for the most part,
worshipped the same Deities; as did also the Trojans: From whom the Romans, I
suppose, would rather be thought to derive the Rites of their Religion, than
from the Grecians; because they thought themselves descended from them. Each of
those Gods had his proper Office, and the chief of them their particular
Attendants. Thus Jupiter had in propriety, Ganimede and Mercury; and Juno had
Iris. It was not then for Virgil to create new Ministers; he must take what he
found in his Religion. It cannot therefore be said that he borrowed them from
Homer, any more than Apollo, Diana, and the rest, whom he uses as he finds
occasion for them, as the Grecian Poet did: But he invents the occasions for
which he uses them. Venus, after the destruction of Troy, had gained Neptune
entirely to her Party; therefore we find him busy in the beginning of the
Aeneis, to calm the Tempest raised by Aeolus, and afterward conducting the
Trojan Fleet to Cumes in safety, with the loss only of their Pilot; for whom he
Bargains. I name those two Examples amongst a hundred which I omit; to prove
that Virgil, generally speaking, employed his Machines in performing those
things, which might possibly have been done without them. What more frequent
then a Storm at Sea, upon the rising of Orion? What wonder, if amongst so many
Ships there should one be overset, which was commanded by Orontes; though half
the Winds had not been there, which Aeolus employed? Might not Palinurus,
without a Miracle, fall asleep, and drop into the Sea, having been over-wearied
with watching, and secure of a quiet passage, by his observation of the Skies?
At least Aeneas, who knew nothing of the Machine of Somnus, takes it plainly in
this Sense.

O nimium Coelo and Pelago confise sereno,
Nudus in ignota Palinure jacebis arena.
But Machines sometimes are specious things to amuse the Reader, and give a
color of probability to things otherwise incredible. And besides, it soothed
the vanity of the Romans, to find the Gods so visibly concerned in all the
Actions of their Predecessors. We who are better taught by our Religion, yet
own every wonderful Accident which befalls us for the best, to be brought to
pass by some special Providence of Almighty God; and by the care of guardian
Angels: And from hence I might infer, that no Heroic Poem can be writ on the
Epicuraean Principles. Which I could easily demonstrate, if there were need to
prove it, or I had leisure.

When Venus opens the Eyes of her Son Aeneas, to behold the Gods who Combated
against Troy, in that fatal Night when it was surpised; we share the pleasure
of that glorious Vision, (which Tasso has not ill Copied in the sacking of
Jerusalem.) But the Greeks had done their business; though neither Neptune,
Juno, or Pallas, had given them their Divine assistance. The most crude Machine
which Virgil uses, is in the Episode of Camilla, where Opis by the command of
her Mistress, kills Aruns. The next is in the Twelfth Aeneid, where Venus cures
her Son Aeneas. But in the last of these, the Poet was driven to a necessity;
for Turnus was to be slain that very day: And Aeneas, wounded as he was, could
not have Engaged him in single Combat, unless his Hurt had been miraculously
healed. And the Poet had considered that the Dittany which she brought from
Crete, could not have wrought so speedy an effect, without the Juice of
Ambrosia, which she mingled with it. After all, that his Machine might not seem
too violent, we see the Hero limping after Turnus. The Wound was skinned; but
the strength of his Thigh was not restored. But what Reason had our Author to
wound Aeneas at so critical a time? And how came the Cuisses to be worse
tempered than the rest of his Armor, which was all wrought by Vulcan and his
Journey-men? These difficulties are not easily to be solved, without confessing
that Virgil had not life enough to correct his Work: Though he had reviewed it,
and found those Errors which he resolved to mend: But being prevented by
Death, and not willing to leave an imperfect work behind him, he ordained, by
his last Testament, that his Aeneis should be burned. As for the death of
Aruns, who was shot by a Goddess, the Machine was not altogether so outrageous,
as the wounding Mars and Venus by the Sword of Diomede. Two Divinities, one
would have thought, might have pleaded their Prerogative of Impassibility, or,
at least not to have been wounded by any mortal Hand. Beside that the (...)
which they shed, was so very like our common Blood, that it was not to be
distinguished from it, but only by the Name and Color. As for what Horate says
in his Art of Poetry; that no Machines are to be used, unless on some
extraordinary occasion, Nec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus. That Rule
is to be applied to the Theater, of which he is then speaking, and means no
more than this, that when the Knot of the Play is to be untied, and no other
way is left, for making the discovery; then and not otherwise, let a God
descend upon a Rope, and clear the Business to the Audience: But this has no
relation to the Machines which are used in an Epick Poem.

In the last place, for the Dira, or Flying-Pest, which flapping on the Shield
of Turnus, and fluttering about his Head, disheartened him in the Duel, and
presaged to him his approaching Death, I might have placed it more properly
amongst the Objections. For the Critics, who lay want of Courage to the Charge
of Virgil's Hero; quote this Passage as a main proof of their Assertion. They
say our Author had not only secured him before the Duel, but also in the
beginning of it, had given him the advantage in impenetrable Arms, and in his
Sword: (for that of Turnus was not his own, which was forged by Vulcan for his
Father) but a Weapon which he had snatched in haste, and by mistake, belonging
to his Charioteer Metiscus. That after all this, Jupiter, who was partial to
the Trojan, and distrustful of the Event, though he had hung the Balance, and
given it a jog of his hand to weigh down Turnus, thought convenient to give the
Fates a collatteral Security, by sending the Screech-Owl to discourage him. For
which they quote these words of Virgil.

Non me tua turbida virtus,
Terret ait; Dii me terrent, and Jupiter Hostis.
In answer to which, I say, that this Machine is one of those which the Poet
uses only for Ornament, and not out of Necessity. Nothing can be more
Beautiful, or more Poetical than his description of the three Dirae, or the
setting of the Balance, which our Milton has borrowed from him, but employed to
a different end: For first he makes God Almighty set the Scales for St. Michael
and Satan, when he knew no Combat was to follow; then he makes the good
Angel's Scale descend, and the Devils mount; quite contrary to Virgil, if I
have Translated the three Verses, according to my Author's Sense. Jupiter ipse
duas, aequato Examine lances
Sustinet; and fata imponit diversa duorum:
Quem damnet labor, and quo vergat pondere lethum.


For I have taken these words Quem damnet labor, in the Sense which Virgil
gives them in another place; Damnabis tu quoque votis; to signify a prosperous
Event. Yet I dare not condemn so great a Genius as Milton: For I am much
mistaken if he alludes not to the Text in Daniel, where Belshazzar was put into
the Balance, and found too light: This is digression, and I return to my
Subject. I said above, that these two Machines of the Balance, and the Dira,
were only Ornamental, and that the success of the Duel had been the same
without them. For when Aeneas and Turnus stood fronting each other before the
Altar, Turnus looked dejected, and his Color faded in his Face, as if he
desponded of the Victory before the Fight; and not only he, but all his Party,
when the strength of the two Champions was judged by the proportion of their
Limbs, concluded it was impar pugna, and that their Chief was over-match'd:
Whereupon Juturna (who was of the same Opinion) took his opportunity to break
the Treaty and renew the War. Juno her self had plainly told the Nymph
beforehand, that her Brother was to Fight Imparibus fatis; nec Diis, nec
viribus aequis; So that there was no need of an Apparition to fright Turnus. He
had the presage within himself of his impending Destiny. The Dirae only served
to confirm him in his first Opinion, that it was his Destiny to die in the
ensuing Combat. And in this sense are those words of Virgil to be taken. Non me
tua turbida virtus
Terret ait; Dii me terrent, and Jupiter Hostis.


I doubt not but the Adverb (solum) is to be understood; it is not your Valor
only that gives me this concernment; but I find also, by this portent, that
Jupiter is my Enemy. For Turnus fled before, when his first Sword was broken,
'till his Sister supplied him with a better; which indeed he could not use;
because Aeneas kept him at a distance with his Spear. I wonder Ruaeus saw not
this, where he charges his Author so unjustly, for giving Turnus a second
Sword, to no purpose. How could he fasten a blow, or make a thrust, when he was
not suffered to approach? Besides, the chief Errand of the Dira, was to warn
Juturna from the Field, for she could have brought the Chariot again, when she
saw her Brother worsted in the Duel. I might farther add, that Aeneas was so
eager of the Fight, that he left the City, now almost in his Possession, to
decide his quarrel with Turnus by the Sword: Whereas Turnus had manifestly
declined the Combat, and suffered his Sister to convey him as far from the
reach of his Enemy as she could. I say not only suffered her, but consented to
it; for it is plain, he knew her by these words; O soror, and dudum agnovi, cum
prima per artem,
Faedera turbasti, teque haec in bella dedisti;
Et nunc nequicquam fallis Dea. --


I have dwelt so long on this Subject, that I must contract what I have to say,
in reference to my Translation: Unless I would swell my Preface into a Volume,
and make it formidable to your Lordship, when you see so many Pages yet behind.
And indeed what I have already written either in justification or praise of
Virgil, is against my self; for presuming to Copy, in my course English, the
Thoughts and Beautiful Expressions of this inimitable Poet: Who flourished in
an Age when his Language was brought to its last perfection, for which it was
particularly owing to him and Horace. I will give your Lordship my Opinion,
that those two Friends had consulted each others Judgment, wherein they should
endeavor to excel; and they seem to have pitched on Propriety of Thought,
Elegance of Words, and Harmony of Numbers. According to this Model, Horace writ
his Odes and Epods: For his Satires and Epistles, being intended wholly for
instruction, required another Style: Ornari res ipsa negat, contenta doceri:

And therefore as he himself professes, are Sermoni propiora, nearer Prose than
Verse. But Virgil, who never attempted the Lyrick Verse, is every where
Elegant, sweet and flowing in his Hexameters. His words are not only chosen,
but the places in which he ranks them for the sound; he who removes them from
the Station wherein their Master sets them, spoils the Harmony. What he says of
the Sybill's Prophecies, may be as properly applied to every word of his: They
must be read, in order as they lie; the least breath discomposes them, and
somewhat of their Divinity is lost. I cannot boast that I have been thus exact
in my Verses, but I have endeavored to follow the Example of my Master: And am
the first Englishman, perhaps, who made it his design to copy him in his
Numbers, his choice of Words, and his placing them for the sweetness of the
sound. On this last Consideration, I have shunned the Caesura as much as
possibly I could. For wherever that is used, it gives a roughness to the Verse,
of which we can have little need, in a Language which is over-stock'd with
Consonants. Such is not the Latin, where the Vowels and Consonants are mixed
in proportion to each other: yet Virgil judged the Vowels to have somewhat of
an over-balance, and therefore tempers their sweetness with Caesuras. Such
difference there is in Tongues, that the same Figure which roughens one, gives
Majesty to another: and that was it which Virgil studied in his Verses. Ovid
uses it but rarely; and hence it is that his Versification cannot so properly
be called sweet, as luscious. The Italians are forced upon it, once or twice in
every line, because they have a redundancy of Vowels in their Language. Their
Metal is so soft, that it will not Coin without Alloy to harden it. On the
other side, for the Reason already named, it is all we can do to give sufficient
sweetness to our Language: We must not only choose our words for Elegance, but
for sound. To perform which, a Mastery in the Language is required; the Poet
must have a Magazine of Words, and have the Art to manage his few Vowels to
the best advantage, that they may go the farther. He must also know the nature
of the Vowels, which are more sonorous, and which more soft and sweet; and so
dispose them as his present occasions require: All which, and a thousand
secrets of Versification beside, he may learn from Virgil, if he will take him
for his Guide. If he be above Virgil, and is resolved to follow his own Verve
(as the French call it,) the Proverb will fall heavily upon him; Who teaches
himself, has a Fool for his Master.

Virgil employed Eleven Years upon his Aeneis, yet he left it as he thought
himself imperfect. Which when I seriously consider, I wish, that instead of
three years which I have spent in the Translation of his Works, I had four
years more allowed me to correct my Errors, that I might make my Version
somewhat more tolerable than it is. For a Poet cannot have too great a
reverence for his Readers, if he expects his Labors should survive him. Yet I
will neither plead my Age nor Sickness in excuse of the faults which I have
made: That I wanted time is all I have to say. For some of my Subscribers grew
so clamorous, that I could no longer deferr the Publication. I hope from the
Candor of your Lordship, and your often experienced goodness to me, that if
the faults are not too many, you will make allowances with Horace.

Si plura nitent in Carmine, non ego paucis
Offendar macalis, quas aut incuria fudit,
Aut humana parum cavit Natura.
You may please also to observe, that there is not, to the best of my
remembrance, one Vowel gaping on another for want of a Caesura, in this whole
Poem. But where a Vowel ends a word, the next begins either with a Consonant,
or what is its equivalent; for our W and H aspirate, and our Dipthongues are
plainly such: The greatest latitude I take, is in the Letter Y, when it
concludes a word, and the first Syllable of the next begins with a Vowel.
Neither need I have called this a latitude, which is only an explanation of
this general Rule. That no Vowel can be cut off before another, when we cannot
sink the Pronunciation of it: As He, She, Me, I, etc. Virgil thinks it
sometimes a Beauty, to imitate the License of the Greeks, and leave two Vowels
opening on each other, as in that Verse of the Third Pastoral, Et succus pecori
and lac subducitur Agnis.

But nobis non licet, esse tam disertis. At least if we study to refine our
Numbers. I have long had by me the Materials of an English Prosodia, containing
all the Mechanical Rules of Versification, wherein I have treated with some
exactness of the Feet, the Quantities, and the Pauses. The French and Italians
know nothing of the two first; at least their best Poets have not practiced
them. As for the Pauses, Malherb first brought them into France, within this
last Century: And we see how they adorn their Alexandrins. But as Virgil
propounds a Riddle which he leaves unsolv'd: Dic quibus in terris, inscripti
nomina Regum
Nascantur flores, and Phyllida solus habeto.
So I will give your Lordship another, and leave the Exposition of it to your
acute Judgment. I am sure there are few who make Verses, have observed the
sweetness of these two Lines in Coopers Hill. Though deep, yet clear; though
gentle, yet not dull;
Strong without rage, without o'reflowing, full.
And there are yet fewer who can find the Reason of that sweetness. I have
given it to some of my Friends in Conversation, and they have allowed the
Criticism to be just. But since the evil of false quantities is difficult to be
cured in any Modern Language; since the French and the Italians as well as we,
are yet ignorant what feet are to be used in Heroic Poetry; since I have not
strictly observed those Rules my self, which I can teach others; since I
pretend to no Dictatorship among my Fellow-Poets; since if I should instruct
some of them to make well-running Verses, they want Genius to give them
strength as well as sweetness; and above all, since your Lordship has advised
me not to publish that little which I know, I look on your Counsel as your
Command, which I shall observe inviolably, 'till you shall please to revoke it,
and leave me at liberty to make my thoughts public. In the mean time, that I
may arrogate nothing to my self, I must acknowledge that Virgil in Latin, and
Spencer in English, have been my Masters. Spencer has also given me the
boldness to make use sometimes of his Alexandrin Line, which we call, though
improperly, the Pindarick; because Mr. Cowley has often employed it in his
Odes. It adds a certain Majesty to the Verse, when it is used with Judgment, and
stops the sense from overflowing into another Line. Formerly the French, like
us, and the Italians, had but five Feet, or ten Syllables in their Heroic
Verse: but since Ronsard's time, as I suppose, they found their Tongue too weak
to support their Epick Poetry, without the addition of another Foot. That
indeed has given it somewhat of the run, and measure of a Trimeter; but it runs
with more activity than strength: Their Language is not strung with Sinews like
our English. It has the nimbleness of a Greyhound, but not the bulk and body of
a Mastiff. Our Men and our Verses over-bear them by their weight; and Pondere
non Numero, is the British Motto. The French have set up Purity for the
Standard of their Language; and a Masculine Vigor is that of ours. Like their
Tongue is the Genius of their Poets, light and trifling in comparison of the
English; more proper for Sonnets, Madrigals, and Elegies, than Heroic Poetry.
The turn on Thoughts and Words is their chief Talent, but the Epick Poem is too
stately to receive those little Ornaments. The Painters draw their Nymphs in
thin and airy Habits, but the weight of Gold and of Embroideries is reserved
for Queens and Goddesses. Virgil is never frequent in those Turns, like Ovid,
but much more sparing of them in his Aeneis, than in his Pastorals and
Georgicks.

Ignoscenda quidem, scirent si ignoscere Manes. That turn is Beautiful indeed;
but he employs it in the Story of Orpheus and Eurydice, not in his great Poem.
I have used that License in his Aeneis sometimes: but I own it as my fault.
'Twas given to those who understand no better. It Is like Ovid's Semivirumque
bovem, semibovemque virum. The Poet found it before his Critics, but it was a
darling Sin which he would not be persuaded to reform. The want of Genius, of
which I have accused the French, is laid to their Charge by one of their own
great Authors, though I have forgotten his Name, and where I read it. If
Rewards could make good Poets, their great Master has not been wanting on his
part in his bountiful Encouragements: For he is wise enough to imitate
Augustus, if he had a Maro. The Triumvir and Proscriber had descended to us in
a more hideous form than they now appear, if the Emperor had not taken care to
make Friends of him and Horace. I confess the Banishment of Ovid was a Blot in
his Escutcheon, yet he was only Banished, and who knows but his Crime was
Capital, and then his Exile was a Favor? Ariosto, who with all his faults,
must be acknowledged a great Poet, has put these words into the mouth of an
Evangelist, but whether they will pass for Gospel now, I cannot tell.

Non fu si santo ni benigno Augusto,
Come la tuba di Virgilio suona;
L'haver havuto, in poesia buon gusto
La proscrittione, iniqua gli perdona.
But Heroic Poetry is not of the growth of France, as it might be of England,
if it were Cultivated. Spencer wanted only to have read the Rules of Bossu: for
no Man was ever Born with a greater Genius, or had more Knowledge to support
it. But the performance of the French is not equal to their Skill; and hitherto
we have wanted Skill to perform better. Segrais, whose Preface is so
wonderfully good, yet is wholly destitute of Elevation; though his Version is
much better than that of the two Brothers, or any of the rest who have
attempted Virgil. Hannibal Caro is a great Name amongst the Italians, yet his
Translation of the Aeneis is most scandalously mean, though he has taken the
advantage of writing in Blank Verse, and freed himself from the shackles of
modern Rhyme: (if it be modern, for Le Clerc has told us lately, and I believe
has made it out, that David's Psalms were written in as errant Rhyme as they
are Translated.) Now if a Muse cannot run when she is unfettered, it is a sign
she has but little speed. I will not make a digression here, though I am
strangely tempted to it; but will only say, that he who can write well in
Rhyme, may write better in Blank Verse. Rhyme is certainly a constraint even to
the best Poets, and those who make it with most ease; though perhaps I have as
little reason to complain of that hardship as any Man, excepting Quarles, and
Withers. What it adds to sweetness, it takes away from sense; and he who loses
the least by it, may be called a gainer: it often makes us swerve from an
Author's meaning. As if a Mark be set up for an Archer at a great distance, let
him aim as exactly as he can, the least wind will take his Arrow, and divert it
from the White. I return to our Italian Translatour of the Aeneis: He is a
Foot-Poet, he Lacquies by the side of Virgil at the best, but never mounts
behind him. Doctor Morelli, who is no mean Critic in our Poetry, and therefore
may be presumed to be a better in his own Language, has confirmed me in this
Opinion by his Judgment, and thinks withal, that he has often mistaken his
Master's Sense. I would say so, if I durst, but I am afraid I have committed
the same fault more often, and more grossly: For I have forsaken Ruaeus, (whom
generally I follow) in many places, and made Expositions of my own in some,
quite contrary to him. Of which I will give but two Examples, because they are
so near each other in the Tenth Aeneid. -- Sorti Pater aequus utrique. Pallas
says it to Turnus just before they Fight. Ruaeus thinks that the word Pater is
to be referred to Evander the Father of Pallas. But how could he imagine that
it was the same thing to Evander, if his Son were slain, or if he overcame. The
Poet certainly intended Jupiter the common Father of Mankind; who, as Pallas
hoped, would stand an impartial Spectatour of the Combat, and not be more
favorable to Turnus, than to him. The Second is not long after it, and both
before the Duel is begun. They are the words of Jupiter, who comforts Hercules
for the death of Pallas, which was immediately to ensue, and which Hercules
could not hinder (though the young Hero had addressed his Prayers to him for
his assistance:) Because the Gods cannot control Destiny -- the Verse follows.
Sic ait; atque oculos Rutulorum rejicit arvis. Which the same Ruaeus thus
construes. Jupiter after he had said this; immediately turns his eyes to the
Rutulian Fields, and beholds the Duel. I have given this place another
Exposition, that he turned his Eyes from the Field of Combat, that he might not
behold a sight so unpleasing to him. The word Rejicit I know will admit of both
senses; but Jupiter having confessed that he could not alter Fate, and being
grieved he could not, in consideration of Hercules, it seems to me that he
should avert his Eyes, rather than take pleasure in the Spectacle. But of this
I am not so consident as the other, though I think I have followed Virgil's
sense.

What I have said, though it has the face of arrogance, yet is intended for the
honor of my Country; and therefore I will boldly own, that this English
Translation has more of Virgil's Spirit in it, than either the French, or the
Italian. Some of our Countrymen have translated Episodes, and other parts of
Virgil, with great Success. As particularly your Lordship, whose Version of
Orpheus and Eurydice, is eminently good. Amongst the dead Authors, the Silenus
of my Lord Roscommon cannot be too much commended. I say nothing of Sir John
Denham, Mr. Waller, and Mr. Cowley; it is the utmost of my Ambition to be
thought their Equal, or not to be much inferior to them, and some others of
the Living. But it is one thing to take pains on a Fragment, and Translate it
perfectly; and another thing to have the weight of a whole Author on my
shoulders. They who believe the burden light, let them attempt the Fourth,
Sixth or Eighth Pastoral, the First or Fourth Georgick; and amongst the
Aeneids, the Fourth, the Fifth, the Seventh, the Ninth, the Tenth, the
Eleventh, or the Twelfth; for in these I think I have succeeded best.

Long before I undertook this Work, I was no stranger to the Original. I had
also studied Virgil's Design, his disposition of it, his Manners, his judicious
management of the Figures, the sober retrenchments of his Sense, which always
leaves somewhat to gratify our imagination, on which it may enlarge at
pleasure; but above all, the Elegance of his Expressions, and the harmony of
his Numbers. For, as I have said in a former Dissertation, the words are in
Poetry, what the Colors are in Painting. If the Design be good, and the
Draught be true, the Coloring is the first Beauty that strikes the Eye.
Spencer and Milton are the nearest in English to Virgil and Horace in the
Latin; and have endeavored to form my Style by imitating their Masters. I
will farther own to you, my Lord, that my chief Ambition is to please those
Readers, who have discernment enough to prefer Virgil before any other Poet in
the Latin Tongue. Such Spirits as he desired to please, such would I choose for
my Judges, and would stand or fall by them alone. Segrais has distinguished the
Readers of Poetry, according to their capacity of judging, into three Classes:
(He might have said the same of Writers too if he had pleased.) In the lowest
Form he places those whom he calls Les Petits Esprits: such things as are our
Upper-Gallery Audience in a Playhouse; who like nothing but the Husk and Rhind
of Wit; prefer a Quibble, a Conceit, an Epigram, before solid Sense, and
Elegant Expression: These are Mobb-Readers: If Virgil and Martial stood for
Parliament Men, we know already who would carry it. But though they make the
greatest appearance in the Field, and cry the loudest, the best on it is, they
are but a sort of French Hugonots, or Dutch Boors, brought over in Herds, but
not Naturalized: who have not Land of two Pounds per Annum in Parnassus, and
therefore are not priviledg'd to Poll. Their Authors are of the same level; fit
to represent them on a Mountebank's-Stage, or to be Masters of the Ceremonies
in a Bear-Garden. Yet these are they who have the most Admirers. But it often
happens, to their mortification, that as their Readers improve their Stock of
Sense, (as they may by reading better Books, and by Conversation with Men of
Judgment,) they soon forsake them: And when the Torrent from the Mountains
falls no more, the swelling Writer is reduced into his shallow Bed, like the
Mancanares at Madrid, with scarce water to moisten his own Pebbles. There are a
middle sort of Readers (as we hold there is a middle state of Souls) such as
have a farther insight than the former; yet have not the capacity of judging
right; (for I speak not of those who are bribed by a Party, and know better if
they were not corrupted;) but I mean a Company of warm young Men, who are not
yet arrived so far as to discern the difference betwixt Fustian, or
ostentatious Sentences, and the true sublime. These are above liking Martial,
or Owen's Epigrams, but they would certainly set Virgil below Statius, or
Lucan. I need not say their Poets are of the same Paste with their Admirers.
They affect greatness in all they write, but it is a bladder'd greatness, like
that of the vain Man whom Seneca describes: An ill habit of Body, full of
Humors, and swelled with Dropsy. Even these too desert their Authors, as
their Judgment ripens. The young Gentlemen themselves are commonly miss-led by
their Pedagogue at School, their Tutor at the University, or their Governor in
their Travels. And many of those three sorts are the most positive Blockheads
in the World. How many of those flatulent Writers have I known, who have sunk
in their Reputation, after Seven or Eight Editions of their Works? for indeed
they are Poets only for young Men. They had great success at their first
appearance; but not being of God, as a Wit said formerly, they could not stand.

I have already named two sorts of Judges, but Virgil wrote for neither of
them: and by his Example, I am not ambitious of pleasing the lowest, or the
middle form of Readers.

He chose to please the most Judicious: Souls of the highest Rank, and truest
Understanding. These are few in number; but whoever is so happy as to gain
their approbation, can nover lose it, because they never give it blindly. Then
they have a certain Magnetism in their Judgment, which attracts others to their
Sense. Every day they gain some new Proselyte, and in time become the Church.
For this Reason, a well-weigh'd Judicious Poem, which at its first appearance
gains no more upon the World than to be just received, and rather not blamed,
than much applauded, insinuates it self by insensible degrees into the liking
of the Reader: The more he studies it, the more it grows upon him; every time
he takes it up, he discovers some new Graces in it. And whereas Poems which are
produced by the vigor of Imagination only, have a gloss upon them at the
first, which Time wears off; the Works of Judgment, are like the Diamond, the
more they are polished, the more luster they receive. Such is the difference
betwixt Virgil's Aeneis, and Marini's Adone. And if I may be allowed to change
the Metaphor, I would say, that Virgil is like the Fame which he describes;
Mobilitate viget, viresque acquirit eundo.

Such a sort of Reputation is my aim, though in a far inferior degree,
according to my Motto in the Title Page: Sequiturque Patrem, non passibus
aequis; and therefore I appeal to the Highest Court of Judicature, like that of
the Peers, of which your Lordship is so great an Ornament.

Without this Ambition which I own, of desiring to please the Judices Natos, I
could never have been able to have done any thing at this Age, when the fire of
Poetry is commonly extinguished in other Men. Yet Virgil has given me the
Example of Entellus for my Encouragement: When he was well heated, the younger
Champion could not stand before him. And we find the Elder contended not for
the Gift, but for the Honor; Nec dona moror. For Dampier has informed us, in
his Voyages, that the Air of the Country which produces Gold, is never wholesome.

I had long since considered, that the way to please the best Judges, is not to
Translate a Poet literally; and Virgil least of any other. For his peculiar
Beauty lying in his choice of Words, I am excluded from it by the narrow
compass of our Heroic Verse, unless I would make use of Monosyllables only,
and those clogged with Consonants, which are the dead weight of our
Mother Tongue. It Is possible, I confess, though it rarely happens, that a Verse
of Monosyllables may sound harmoniously; and some Examples of it I have seen.
My first Line of the Aeneis is not harsh: Arms, and the Man I Sing, who forced
by Fate, etc.

But a much better instance may be given from the last Line of Manilius, made
English by our Learned and Judicious Mr. Creech.

Nor could the World have born so fierce a Flame. Where the many Liquid
Consonants are placed so Artfully, that they give a pleasing sound to the
Words, though they are all of one Syllable.

It Is true, I have been sometimes forced upon it in other places of this Work,
but I never did it out of choice: I was either in haste, or Virgil gave me no
occasion for the Ornament of Words; for it seldom happens but a Monosyllable
Line turns Verse to Prose, and even that Prose is rugged, and unharmonious.
Philarchus, I remember, taxes Balzac for placing Twenty Monosyllables in file,
without one dissyllable betwixt them. The way I have taken, is not so straight
as Metaphrase, nor so loose as Paraphrase: Some things too I have omitted, and
sometimes have added of my own. Yet the omissions I hope, are but of
Circumstances, and such as would have no grace in English; and the Additions, I
also hope, are easily deduced from Virgil's Sense. They will seem (at least I
have the Vanity to think so), not stuck into him, but growing out of him. He
studies brevity more than any other Poet, but he had the advantage of a
Language wherein much may be comprehended in a little space. We, and all the
Modern Tongues, have more Articles and Pronouns, besides signs of Tenses and
Cases, and other Barbarities on which our Speech is built by the faults of our
Forefathers. The Romans founded theirs upon the Greek: And the Greeks, we know,
were laboring many hundred years upon their Language, before they brought it
to perfection. They rejected all those Signs, and cut off as many Articles as
they could spare; comprehending in one word, what we are constrained to express
in two; which is one Reason why we cannot write so concisely as they have done.
The word Pater, for Example, signifies not only a Father, but your Father, my
Father, his or her Father, all included in a word.

This inconvenience is common to all Modern Tongues, and this alone constrains
us to employ more words than the Ancients needed. But having before observed,
that Virgil endeavors to be short, and at the same time Elegant, I pursue the
Excellence, and forsake the Brevity. For there he is like Ambergreace, a Rich
Perfume, but of so close and glutinous a Body, that it must be opened with
inferior scents of Musk or Civet, or the sweetness will not be drawn out into
another Language.

On the whole Matter, I thought fit to steer betwixt the two Extremes, of
Paraphrase, and literal Translation: To keep as near my Author as I could,
without losing all his Graces, the most Eminent of which, are in the Beauty of
his words: And those words, I must add, are always Figurative. Such of these as
would retain their Elegance in our Tongue, I have endeavored to graff on it;
but most of them are of necessity to be lost, because they will not shine in
any but their own. Virgil has sometimes two of them in a Line; but the
scantiness of our Heroic Verse, is not capable of receiving more than one: And
that too must expiate for many others which have none. Such is the difference
of the Languages, or such my want of skill in choosing words. Yet I may presume
to say, and I hope with as much reason as the French Translator, that taking
all the Materials of this divine Author, I have endeavored to make Virgil
speak such English, as he would himself have spoken, if he had been born in
England, and in this present Age. I acknowledge, with Segrais, that I have not
succeeded in this attempt, according to my desire: yet I shall not be wholly
without praise, if in some sort I may be allowed to have copied the Clearness,
the Purity, the Easiness and the Magnificence of his Style. But I shall have
occasion to speak farther on this Subject, before I end the Preface.

When I mentioned the Pindarick Line, I should have added, that I take another
License in my Verses: For I frequently make use of Triplet Rhymes, and for the
same Reason: Because they bound the Sense. And therefore I generally join these
two Licenses together: And make the last Verse of the Triplet a Pindarique: For
besides, the Majesty which it gives, it confines the sense within the barriers
of three Lines, which would languish if it were lengthened into four. Spencer
is my Example for both these privileges of English Verses. And Chapman has
followed him in his Translation of Homer. Mr. Cowley has given in to them after
both: And all succeeding Writers after him. I regard them now as the Magna
Charta of Heroic Poetry; and am too much an Englishman to lose what my
Ancestors have gained for me. Let the French and Italians value themselves on
their Regularity: Strength and Elevation are our Standard. I said before, and I
repeat it, that the affected purity of the French, has unsinew'd their Heroic
Verse. The Language of an Epick Poem is almost wholly figurative: Yet they are
so fearful of a Metaphor, that no Example of Virgil can encourage them to be
bold with safety. Sure they might warm themselves by that sprightly Blaze,
without approaching it so close as to singe their Wings; they may come as near
it as their Master. Not that I would discourage that purity of diction, in
which he excels all other Poets. But he knows how far to extend his Franchises:
And advances to the verge, without venturing a Foot beyond it. On the other
side, without being injurious to the Memory of our English Pindar, I will
presume to say, that his Metaphors are sometimes too violent, and his Language
is not always pure. But at the same time, I must excuse him. For through the
Iniquity of the times, he was forced to Travel, at an Age, when, instead of
Learning Foreign Languages, he should have studied the Beauties of his Mother
Tongue: Which like all other Speeches, is to be cultivated early, or we shall
never Write it with any kind of Elegance. Thus by gaining abroad he lost at
home: Like the Painter in the Arcadia, who going to see a Skirmish, had his
Arms lop'd off: and returned, says Sir Philip Sydney, well instructed how to
draw a Battle, but without a Hand to perform his Work.

There is another thing in which I have presumed to deviate from him and
Spencer. They both make Hemysticks (or half Verses) breaking off in the middle
of a Line. I confess there are not many such in the Fairy Queen: And even those
few might be occasioned by his unhappy choice of so long a Stanza. Mr. Cowley
had found out, that no kind of Staff is proper for an Heroic Poem; as being
all too lirical: Yet though he wrote in Couplets, where Rhyme is freer from
constraint, he frequently affects half Verses: of which we find not one in
Homer, and I think not in any of the Grcek Poets, or the Latin, excepting only
Virgil; and there is no question but he thought, he had Virgil's Authority for
that License. But I am confident, our Poet never meant to leave him or any
other such a Precedent. And I ground my Opinion on these two Reasons. First, we
find no Example of a Hemystick in any of his Pastorals or Georgicks. For he had
given the last finishing Strokes to both these Poems: But his Aeneis he left so
uncorrect, at least so short of that perfection at which he aimed, that we know
how hard a Sentence He passed upon it: And in the second place, I reasonably
presume, that he intended to have filled up all those Hemysticks, because in
one of them we find the sense imperfect: Quem tibi jam Troja -- Which some
foolish Gramarian, has ended for him, with a half Line of Nonsense. Peperit
fumante Creusa. For Ascanius must have been born some Years before the burning
of that City; which I need not prove. On the other side we find also, that he
himself filled up one Line in the sixth Aeneid, the Enthusiasm seizing him,
while he was reading to Augustus.

Misenum Aeolidem, quo non praestantior alter
Aere, ciere viros. --
To which he added in that transport. Martemque accendere Cantu. And never was
any Line more nobly finished; for the reasons which I have given in the Book of
Painting. On these Considerations I have shunned Hemysticks: Not being willing
to imitate Virgil to a Fault; like Alexander's Courtiers, who affected to hold
their Necks awry, because he could not help it: I am confident your Lordship is
by this time of my Opinion; and that you will look on those half lines
hereafter, as the imperfect products of a hasty Muse: Like the Frogs and
Serpents in the Nile; part of them kindled into Life; and part a lump of
unformed unanimated Mudd.

I am sensible that many of my whole Verses, are as imperfect as those halves;
for want of time to digest them better: But give me leave to make the Excuse of
Boccace: Who when he was upbraided, that some of his Novels had not the Spirit
of the rest, returned this Answer, that Charlemain who made the Paladins; was
never able to raise an Army of them. The Leaders may be Heroes, but the
multitude must consist of Common Men.

I am also bound to tell your Lordship, in my own defense: That from the
beginning of the first Georgick to the end of the last Aeneid; I found the
difficulty of Translation growing on me in every succeeding Book. For Virgil,
above all Poets, had a stock, which I may call almost inexhaustible of
figurative, Elegant, and sounding Words. I who inherit but a small portion of
his Genius, and write in a Language so much inferior to the Latin, have found
it very painful to vary Phrases, when the same sense returns upon me. Even he
himself, whether out of necessity or choice, has often expressed the same thing
in the same words; and often repeated two or three whole Verses, which he had
used before. Words are not so easily Coined as Money: And yet we see that the
Credit not only of Banks, but of Exchequers cracks, when little comes in, and
much goes out. Virgil called upon me in every line for some new word: And I
paid so long, that I was almost Banckrupt. So that the latter end must needs be
more burdensome than the beginning or the middle. And consequently the Twelfth
Aeneid cost me double the time of the first and second. What had become of me,
if Virgil had taxed me with another Book? I had certainly been reduced to pay
the Public in hammered Money for want of Milled; that is in the same old Words
which I had used before: And the Receivers must have been forced to have taken
any thing, where there was so little to be had.

Besides this difficulty (with which I have strugled, and made a shift to pass
it over) there is one remaining, which is insuperable to all Translators. We
are bound to our Author's Sense, though with the latitudes already mentioned
(for I think it not so sacred, as that one Iota must not be added or diminished
on pain of an Anathema.) But Slaves we are; and labor on another Man's
Plantation; we dress the Vineyard, but the Wine is the Owners: If the Soil be
sometimes Barren, then we are sure of being scourged: If it be fruitful, and
our Care succeeds, we are not thanked; for the proud Reader will only say, the
poor drudge has done his duty. But this is nothing to what follows; for being
obliged to make his Sense intelligible, we are forced to untune our own Verses,
that we may give his meaning to the Reader. He who Invents is Master of his
Thoughts and Words: He can turn and vary them as he pleases, 'till he renders
them harmonious. But the wretched Translator has no such privilege: For being
tied to the Thoughts, he must make what Music he can in the Expression. And
for this reason it cannot always be so sweet as that of the Original. There is
a beauty of Sound, as Segrais has observed, in some Latin Words, which is
wholly lost in any Modern Language. He instances in that Mollis Amaracus, on
which Venus lays Cupid in the First Aeneid. If I should Translate it Sweet
Marjoram, as the word signifies; the Reader would think I had mistaken Virgil:
For those Village-words, as I may call them, gives us a mean Idea of the thing;
but the Sound of the Latin is so much more pleasing, by the just mixture of the
Vowels with the Consonants, that it raises our Fancies, to conceive somewhat
more Noble than a common Herb; and to spread Roses under him, and strew Lillies
over him; a Bed not unworthy the Grandson of the Goddess.

If I cannot Copy his Harmonious Numbers, how shall I imitate his noble
Flights; where his Thoughts and Words are equally sublime?

Quem quisquis studet aemulari,
-- Caeratis open Dedalaea
Nititur pennis, vitreo daturus
Nomina Ponto.
What Modern Language, or what Poet can express the Majestic Beauty of this
one Verse amongst a thousand others! Aude Hospes contemnere opes, and te quoque
dignum
Finge Deo.
For my part I am lost in the admiration of it: I contemn the World, when I
think on it, and my self when I Translate it.

Lay by Virgil, I beseech your Lordship, and all my better sort of Judges, when
you take up my Version, and it will appear a passable Beauty, when the Original
Muse is absent: But like Spencer's false Florimel made of Snow, it melts and
vanishes, when the true one comes in sight. I will not excuse but justify my
self for one pretended Crime, with which I am liable to be charged by false
Critics, not only in this Translation, but in many of my Original Poems; that
I latinize too much. It Is true, that when I find an English word, significant
and sounding, I neither borrow from the Latin or any other Language: But when I
want at home, I must seek abroad.

If sounding Words are not of our growth and Manufacture, who shall hinder me
to Import them from a Foreign Country? I carry not out the Treasure of the
Nation, which is never to return: but what I bring from Italy, I spend in
England: Here it remains, and here it circulates; for if the Coin be good, it
will pass from one hand to another. I Trade both with the Living and the Dead,
for the enrichment of our Native Language. We have enough in England to supply
our necessity; but if we will have things of Magnificence and Splendor, we
must get them by Commerce. Poetry requires Ornament, and that is not to be had
from our Old Teuton Monosyllables; therefore if I find any Elegant Word in a
Classick Author, I propose it to be Naturalized, by using it my self: and if
the Public approves of it, the Bill passes. But every Man cannot distinguish
betwixt Pedantry and Poetry: Every Man therefore is not fit to innovate. Upon
the whole matter, a Poet must first be certain that the Word he would Introduce
is Beautiful in the Latin; and is to consider, in the next place, whether it
will agree with the English Idiom: After this, he ought to take the Opinion of
judicious Friends, such as are Learned in both Languages: And lastly, since no
Man is infallible, let him use this License very sparingly; for if too many
Foreign Words are poured in upon us, it looks as if they were designed not to
assist the Natives, but to Conquer them.

I am now drawing toward a Conclusion, and suspect your Lordship is very glad
of it. But permit me first, to own what Helps I have had in this Undertaking.
The late Earl of Lauderdail, sent me over his new Translation of the Aeneis;
which he had ended before I engaged in the same Design. Neither did I then
intend it: But some Proposals being afterward made me by my Bookseller, I
desired his Lordship's leave, that I might accept them, which he freely
granted; and I have his Letter yet to show, for that permission. He resolved to
have Printed his Work; which he might have done two Years before I could
Publish mine: and had performed it, if Death had not prevented him. But having
his Manuscript in my hands, I consulted it as often as I doubted of my Author's
sense. For no Man understood Virgil better than that Learned Noble Man. His
Friends, I hear, have yet another, and more Correct Copy of that Translation by
them: which had they pleased to have given the Public, the Judges must have
been convinced, that I have not flattered him. Besides this help, which was not
inconsiderable, Mr. Congreve has done me the Favor to review the Aeneis; and
compare my Version with the Original. I shall never be ashamed to own, that
this Excellent Young Man, has showed me many Faults, which I have endeavored
to Correct. It Is true, he might have easily found more, and then my Translation
had been more Perfect.

Two other Worthy Friends of mine, who desire to have their Names concealed,
seeing me straightened in my time, took Pity on me, and gave me the Life of
Virgil, the two Prefaces to the Pastorals, and the Georgics, and all the
Arguments in Proof to the whole Translation. Which perhaps, has occasioned a
Report that the two First Poems are not mine. If it had been true, that I had
taken their Verses for my own, I might have gloried in their Aid; and like
Terence, have farther'd the Opinion, that Scipio and Laelius joined with me.
But the same Style being continued through the whole, and the same Laws of
Versification observed, are proofs sufficient, that this is one Man's Work: And
your Lordship is too well acquainted with my manner, to doubt that any part of
it is another.

That your Lordship may see I was in earnest, when I promised to hasten to an
end, I will not give the Reasons, why I Writ not always in the proper terms of
Navigation, Land-Service, or in the Cant of any Profession. I will only say,
that Virgil has avoided those proprieties, because he Writ not to Mariners,
Soldiers, Astronomers, Gardners, Peasants, etc. but to all in general, and in
particular to Men and Ladies of the first Quality: who have been better Bred
than to be too nicely knowing in the Terms. In such cases, it is enough for a
Poet to write so plainly, that he may be understood by his Readers: To avoid
impropriety, and not affect to be thought Learned in all things.

I have omitted the Four Preliminary Lines of the First Aeneid: Because I think
them inferior to any Four others, in the whole Poem: and consequently, believe
they are not Virgil's. There is too great a gap betwixt the Adjective vicina in
the Second Line, and the Substantive Arva in the latter end of the Third, which
keeps his meaning in obscurity too long: And is contrary to the clearness of
his Style. Vt quamvis avidis Is too ambitious an Ornament to be his, and Gratum
opus Agricolis, Are all words unnecessary, and Independent of what he had said
before. Horrentia Martis Arma, Is worse than any of the rest. Horrentia is such
a flat Epithete, as Tully would have given us in his Verses. It Is a mere
filler; to stop a vacancy in the Hexameter, and connect the Preface to the Work
of Virgil. Our Author seems to sound a Charge, and begins like the clangour of
a Trumpet; Arma, virumque cano; Trojae qui primus ab oris.

Scarce a word without an R. and the Vowels for the greater part sonorous. The
Prefacer began with Ille ego, which He was constrained to patch up in the
Fourth line with At nunc, to make the Sense cohere. And if both those words are
not notorious botches, I am much deceived, though the French Translator thinks
otherwise. For my own part, I am rather of Opinion, that they were added by
Tucca and Varius, than Retrenched.

I know it may be answered by such as think Virgil the Author of the four
Lines; that he asserts his Title to the Aeneis, in the beginning of this Work,
as he did to the two former, in the last lines of the fourth Georgic. I will
not reply otherwise to this, than by desiring them to compare these four Lines
with the four others; which we know are his, because no Poet but he alone could
write them. If they cannot distinguish Creeping from Flying, let them lay down
Virgil, and take up Ovid de Ponto in his stead. My Master needed not the
assistance of that Preliminary Poet to prove his Claim. His own Majestic Mien
discovers him to be the King, amidst a Thousand Courtiers. It was a superfluous
Office, and therefore I would not set those Verses in the Front of Virgil. But
have rejected them to my own Preface.

I, who before, with Shepherds in the Groves,
Sung to my Oaten Pipe, their Rural Loves,
And issuing thence, compelled the Neighboring Field
A plenteous Crop of rising Corn to yield,
Manured the Glebe, and stocked the fruitful Plain,
(A Poem grateful to the greedy Swain.) etc.
If there be not a tolerable Line in all these six, the Prefacer, gave me no
occasion to write better. This is a just Apology in this place. But I have done
great Wrong to Virgil in the whole Translation: Want of Time, the Inferiority
of our Language; the inconvenience of Rhyme, and all the other Excuses I have
made, may alleviate my Fault, but cannot justisie the boldness of my
Undertaking. What avails it me to acknowledge freely, that I have not been able
to do him right in any line? For even my own Confession makes against me; and
it will always be returned upon me, Why then did you attempt it? To which, no
other Answer can be made, than that I have done him less Injury than any of his
former Libellers.

What they called his Picture, had been drawn at length, so many times, by the
Daubers of almost all Nations, and still so unlike him, that I snatched up the
Pencil with disdain: being satisfied before hand, that I could make some small
resemblance of him, though I must be content with a worse likeness. A Sixth
Pastoral, a Pharmaceutria, a single Orpheus, and some other Features, have been
exactly taken: But those Holiday Authors writ for Pleasure; and only showed us
what they could have done, if they would have taken pains, to perform the whole.

Be pleased, My Lord, to accept, with your wonted goodness, this unworthy
Present, which I make you. I have taken off one trouble from you, of defending
it, by acknowledging its Imperfections: And though some part of them are
covered in the Verse; (as Ericthonius rode always in a Chariot, to hide his
lameness.) Such of them as cannot be concealed, you will please to connive at,
though in the strictness of your Judgment, you cannot Pardon. If Homer was
allowed to nod sometimes, in so long a Work, it will be no wonder if I often
fall asleep. You took my Aureng-zeb into your Protection, with all his faults:
And I hope here cannot be so many, because I Translate an Author, who gives me
such Examples of Correctness. What my Jury may be, I know not; but it is good
for a Criminal to plead before a favorable Judge: If I had said Partial, would
your Lordship have forgiven me? Or will you give me leave to acquaint the
World, that I have many times been obliged to your Bounty since the Revolution.
Though I never was reduced to beg a Charity, nor ever had the Impudence to ask
one, either of your Lordship, or your Noble Kinsman the Earl of Dorset, much
less of any other, yet when I least expected it, you have both remembered me.
So inherent it is in your Family not to forget an Old Servant. It looks rather
like Ingratitude on my part, that where I have been so often obliged, I have
appeared so seldom to return my thanks: and where I was also so sure of being
well received. Somewhat of Laziness was in the case; and somewhat too of
Modesty: But nothing of Disrespect, or of Unthankfulness. I will not say that
your Lordship has encouraged me to this Presumption, lest if my Labors meet
with no success in Public, I may expose your Judgment to be Censured. As for
my own Enemies I shall never think them worth an Answer; and if your Lordship
has any, they will not dare to Arraign you for your want of Knowledge in this
Art, till they can produce somewhat betterof their own, than your Essay on
Poetry. 'Twas on this Consideration, that I have drawn out my Preface to so
great a length. Had I not addressed to a Poet, and a Critic of the first
Magnitude, I had my self been taxed for want of Judgment, and shamed my Patron
for want of Understanding. But neither will you, My Lord, so soon be tired as
any other, because the Discourse is on your Art; Neither will the Learned
Reader think it tedious, because it is ad Clerum. At least, when he begins to
be weary, the Church Doors are open. That I may pursue the Allegory with a
short Prayer, after a long Sermon:

May you Live happily and long, for the Service of your Country, the
Encouragement of good Letters and the Ornament of Poetry; which cannot be
wished more earnestly by any Man, than by

Your Lordships, most Humble, Most Obliged, and most Obedient Servant. John
Dryden.

To his Royal Highness PRINCE GEORGE of DENMARK. and



Virgil's Aeneis.
The First Book of the Aeneis.
The Argument.
The Trojans, after a seven Years Voyage, set sail for Italy, but are overtaken
by a dreadful Storm, which Aeolus raises at Juno 's Request. The Tempest sinks
one, and scatters the rest: Neptune drives off the Winds and calms the Sea.
Aeneas with his own Ship, and six more, arrives safe at an Affrican Port. Venus
complains to Jupiter of her Son's Misfortunes. Jupiter comforts her, and sends
Mercury to procure him a kind Reception among the Carthaginians. Aeneas going
out to discover the Country, meets his Mother in the Shape of an Huntress, who
conveys him in a Cloud to Carthage; where he sees his Friends whom he thought
lost, and receives a kind Entertainment from the Queen. Dido by a device of
Venus begins to have a Passion for him, and after some Discourse with him,
desires the History of his Adventures since the Siege of Troy, which is the
Subject of the two following Books.

ARms, and the Man I sing, who, forced by Fate,
And haughty Juno's unrelenting Hate;
Expelled and exiled, left the Trojan Shore:
Long Labors, both by Sea and Land he bore;
And in the doubtful War, before he won
The Latian Realm, and built the destined Town:
His banished Gods restored to Rites Divine,
And settled sure Succession in his Line:
From whence the Race of Alban Fathers come,
And the long Glories of Majestic Rome.
O Muse! the Causes and the Crimes relate,
What Goddess was provoked, and whence her hate:
For what Offense the Queen of Heaven began
To persecute so brave, so just a Man!
Involved his anxious Life in endless Cares,
Exposed to Wants, and hurried into Wars!
Can Heavenly Minds such high resentment show;
Or exercise their Spite in Human Woe?
Against the Tiber's Mouth, but far away,
An ancient Town was seated on the Sea:
A Tyrian Colony; the People made
Stout for the War, and studious of their Trade.
Carthage the Name, beloved by Juno more
Than her own Argos, or the Samian Shore.
Here stood her Chariot, here, if Heaven were kind,
The Seat of awful Empire she designed.
Yet she had heard an ancient Rumor fly,
(Long cited by the People of the Sky;)
That times to come should see the Trojan Race
Her Carthage ruin, and her Towers deface:
Nor thus confined, the Yoke of Sovereign Sway,
Should on the Necks of all the Nations lay.
She pondered this, and feared it was in Fate;
Nor could forget the War she waged of late,
For conquering Greece against the Trojan State.
Besides long Causes working in her Mind,
And secret Seeds of Envy lay behind.
Deep graven in her Heart, the Doom remained
Of partial Paris, and her Form disdained:
The Grace bestowed on ravished Ganimed,
Electra's Glories, and her injured Bed.
Each was a Cause alone, and all combined
To kindle Vengeance in her haughty Mind.
For this, far distant from the Latian Coast,
She drove the Remnants of the Trojan Host:
And sev'n long Years the unhappy wandering Train,
Were tossed by Storms, and scattered through the Main.
Such Time, such Toil required the Roman Name,
Such length of Labor for so vast a Frame.
Now scarce the Trojan Fleet with Sails and Oars,
Had left behind the Fair Sicilian Shoars:
Entering with cheerful Shouts the watery Reign,
And ploughing frothy Furrows in the Main:
When laboring still, with endless discontent,
The Queen of Heaven did thus her Fury vent.
Then am I vanquished, must I yield, said she,
And must the Trojans reign in Italy?
So Fate will have it, and Jove adds his Force;
Nor can my Power divert their happy Course.
Could angry Pallas, with revengeful Spleen,
The Grecian Navy burn, and drown the Men?
She for the Fault of one offending Foe,
The Bolts of Jove himself presumed to throw:
With Whirlwinds from beneath she tossed the Ship,
And bare exposed the Bosom of the deep:
Then, as an Eagle gripes the trembling Game,
The Wretch yet hissing with her Father's Flame,
She strongly seized, and with a burning Wound,
Transfixed and naked, on a Rock she bound.
But I, who walk in awful State above,
The Majesty of Heaven, the Sister-wife of Jove;
For length of Years, my fruitless Force employ
Against the thin remains of ruined Troy.
What Nations now to Juno's Power will pray,
Or Offerings on my slighted Altars lay?
Thus raged the Goddess, and with Fury fraught,
The restless Regions of the Storms she sought.
Where in a spacious Cave of living Stone,
The Tyrant E'lus from his Airy Throne,
With Power Imperial curbs the struggling Winds,
And sounding Tempests in dark Prisons binds.
This Way, and that, the impatient Captives tend,
And pressing for Release, the Mountains rend;
High in his Hall, the undaunted Monarch stands,
And shakes his Scepter, and their Rage commands:
Which did he not, their unresisted Sway
Would sweep the World before them, in their Way:
Earth, Air, and Seas through empty Space would roll,
And Heaven would fly before the driving Soul.
In fear of this, the Father of the Gods
Confined their Fury to those dark Abodes,
And lock'd'em safe within, oppressed with Mountain loads:
Imposed a King, with arbritrary Sway,
To loose their Fetters, or their Force allay.
To whom the suppliant Queen her Prayers addressed,
And thus the tenor of her Suit expressed.
O E'lus! for to thee the King of Heaven
The Power of Tempests, and of Winds has given:
Thy Force alone their Fury can restrain,
And smooth the Waves, or swell the troubled Main.
A race of wandering Slaves, abhorred by me,
With prosperous Passage cut the Thuscan Sea:
To fruitful Italy their Course they steer,
And for their vanquished Gods design new Temples there.
Raise all thy Winds, with Night involve the Skies;
Sink, or disperse my fatal Enemies.
Twice sev'n, the charming Daughters of the Main,
Around my Person wait, and bear my Train:
Succeed my Wish, and second my Design,
The fairest, Deiopeia, shall be thine;
And make thee Father of a happy Line.
To this the God -- It Is yours, O Queen! to will
The Work, which Duty binds me to fulfill.
These airy Kingdoms, and this wide Command,
Are all the Presents of your bounteous Hand:
Yours is my Sov'raign's Grace, and, as your Guest,
I sit with Gods at their Celestial Feast.
Raise Tempests at your Pleasure, or subdue;
Dispose of Empire, which I hold from you.
He said, and hurld against the Mountain side,
His quivering Spear, and all, the God applied.
The raging Winds rush through the hollow Wound,
And dance aloft in Air, and skim along the Ground:
Then settling on the Sea, the Surges sweep;
Raise liquid Mountains, and disclose the deep.
South, East, and West, with mixed Confusion roar,
And roll the foaming Billows to the Shore.
The Cables crack, the Sailors fearful Cries
Ascend; and sable Night involves the Skies;
And Heaven it self is ravished from their Eyes.
Loud Peals of Thunder from the Poles ensue,
Then flashing Fires the transient Light renew:
The Face of things a frightful Image bears,
And present Death in various Forms appears.
Struck with unusual Fright, the Trojan Chief,
With lifted Hands and Eyes, invokes Relief.
And thrice, and four times happy those, he cried,
That under Ilian Walls before their Parents died.
Tydides, bravest of the Grecian Train,
Why could not I by that strong Arm be slain,
And lie by noble Hector on the Plain,
Or great Sarpedon, in those bloody Fields,
Where Simois rouls the Bodies, and the Shields
Of Heroes, whose dismembered Hands yet bear
The Dart aloft, and clench the pointed Spear?
Thus while the Pious Prince his Fate bewails,
Fierce Boreas drove against his flying Sails,
And rent the Sheets: The raging Billows rise,
And mount the tossing Vessel to the Skies:
Nor can the shivering Oars sustain the Blow;
The Galley gives her side, and turns her Prow:
While those astern descending down the Steep,
Through gaping Waves behold the boiling deep.
Three Ships were hurried by the Southern Blast,
And on the secret Shelves with Fury cast.
Those hidden Rocks, the Ausonian Sailors knew,
They called them Altars, when they rose in view,
And showed their spacious Backs above the Flood.
Three more, fierce Eurus in his angry Mood,
Dashed on the Shallows of the moving Sand,
And in mid Ocean left them moored a-land.
Orontes Barque that bore the Lycian Crew,
(A horrid Sight) even in the Hero's view,
From Stem to Stern, by Waves was overborn:
The trembling Pilot, from his Rudder torn,
Was headlong hurled; thrice round, the Ship was tossed,
Then bulg'd at once, and in the deep was lost.
And here and there above the Waves were seen
Arms, Pictures, precious Goods, and floating Men.
The stoutest Vessel to the Storm gave way,
And sucked through loosened Planks the rushing Sea.
Ilioneus was her Chief: Alethes old,
Achates faithful, Abas young and bold
Endured not less: their Ships, with gaping Seams,
Admit the Deluge of the briny Streams.
Mean time Imperial Neptune heard the Sound
Of raging Billows breaking on the Ground:
Displeased, and fearing for his Watery Reign,
He reard his awful Head above the Main:
Serene in Majesty, then rolled his Eyes
Around the Space of Earth, and Seas, and Skies.
He saw the Trojan Fleet dispersed, distressed
By stormy Winds and wintry Heaven oppressed.
Full well the God his Sister's envy knew,
And what her Aims, and what her Arts pursue:
He summoned Eurus and the western Blast,
And first an angry glance on both he cast:
Then thus rebuked; Audacious Winds! from whence
This bold Attempt, this Rebel Insolence?
Is it for you to ravage Seas and Land,
Unauthoriz'd by my supreme Command?
To raise such Mountains on the troubled Main?
Whom I -- But first it is fit, the Billows to restrain,
And then you shall be taught obedience to my Reign.
Hence, to your Lord my Royal Mandate bear,
The Realms of Ocean and the Fields of Air
Are mine, not his; by fatal Lot to me
The liquid Empire fell, and Trident of the Sea.
His Power to hollow Caverns is confined,
There let him reign, the Jailor of the Wind:
With hoarse Commands his breathing Subjects call,
And boast and bluster in his empty Hall.
He spoke: And while he spoke, he smoothed the Sea,
Dispelled the Darkness, and restored the Day:
Cymothoe, Triton, and the Seagreen Train
Of beauteous Nymphs, the Daughters of the Main,
Clear from the Rocks the Vessels with their hands;
The God himself with ready Trident stands,
And opes the Deep, and spreads the moving sands;
Then heaves them off the sholes: where e're he guides
His finny Coursers, and in Triumph rides,
The Waves unruffle and the Sea subsides.
As when in Tumults rise the ignoble Crow'd,
Mad are their Motions, and their Tongues are loud;
And Stones and Brands in rattling Vollies fly,
And all the Rustic Arms that Fury can supply:
If then some grave and Pious Man appear,
They hush their Noise, and lend a listening Ear;
He sooths with sober Words their angry Mood,
And quenches their innate Desire of Blood.
So when the Father of the Flood appears,
And over the Seas his Sovereign Trident rears,
Their Fury falls: He skims the liquid Plains,
High on his Chariot, and with loosened Reins,
Majestic moves along, and awful Peace maintains.
The weary Trojans ply their shattered Oars,
To nearest Land, and make the Lybian Shoars.
Within a long Recess there lies a Bay,
An Island shades it from the rolling Sea,
And forms a Port secure for Ships to ride,
Broke by the jutting Land on either side:
In double Streams the briny Waters glide.
Betwixt two rows of Rocks, a Sylvan Scene
Appears above, and Groves for ever green:
A Grott is formed beneath, with Mossy Seats,
To rest the Nereids, and exclude the Heats.
Down through the Cranies of the living Walls
The Crystal Streams descend in murmuring Falls.
No Haulsers need to bind the Vessels here,
Nor bearded Anchors, for no Storms they fear.
Sev'n Ships within this happy Harbor meet,
The thin Remainders of the scattered Fleet.
The Trojans, worn with Toils, and spent with Woes,
Leap on the welcome Land, and seek their wished Repose.
First, good Achates, with repeated strokes
Of clashing Flints, their hidden Fire provokes;
Short Flame succeeds, a Bed of withered Leaves
The dying Sparkles in their Fall receives:
Caught into Life, in smoking Fumes they rise,
And, fed with stronger Food, invade the Skies.
The Trojans, dropping wet, or stand around
The cheerful blaze, or lie along the Ground:
Some dry their Corn infected with the Brine,
Then grind with Marbles, and prepare to dine.
Aeneas climbs the Mountain's airy Brow,
And takes a Prospect of the Seas below:
If Capys thence, or Antheus he could spy;
Or see the Streamers of Caicus fly.
No Vessels were in view: But, on the Plain,
Three beamy Stags command a Lordly Train
Of branching Heads; the more ignoble Throng
Attend their stately Steps, and slowly graze along.
He stood; and while secure they fed below,
He took the Quiver, and the trusty Bow
Achates used to bear; the Leaders first
He laid along, and then the Vulgar pierced:
Nor ceased his Arrows, 'till the shady Plain
Sev'n mighty Bodies, with their Blood distain.
For the sev'n Ships he made an equal Share,
And to the Port returned, Triumphant from the War.
The Jarrs of generous Wine, (Acestes Gist,
When his Trinacrian Shoars the Navy left)
He set abroach, and for the Feast prepared;
In equal Portions, with the Ven'son shared.
Thus while he dealt it round, the pious Chief,
With cheerful Words, allayed the common Grief.
Endure, and conquer; Jove will soon dispose
To future Good, our past and present Woes.
With me, the Rocks of Scylla you have tried;
The inhuman Cyclops, and his Den defied.
What greater Ills hereafter can you bear?
Resume your Courage, and dismiss your Care.
An Hour will come, with Pleasure to relate
Your Sorrows past, as Benefits of Fate.
Through various Hazards, and Events we move
To Latium, and the Realms foredoom'd by Jove.
Called to the Seat, (the Promise of the Skies,)
Where Trojan Kingdoms once again may rise.
Endure the Hardships of your present State,
Live, and reserve your selves for better Fate.
These Words he spoke; but spoke not from his Heart;
His outward Smiles concealed his inward Smart.
The jolly Crew, unmindful of the past,
The Quarry share, their plenteous Dinner haste:
Some strip the Skin, some portion out the Spoil;
The Limbs yet trembling, in the Cauldrons boil:
Some on the Fire the reeking Entrails broil.
Stretched on the grassy Turf, at ease they dine;
Restore their Strength with Meat, and cheer their Souls with Wine.
Their Hunger thus appeased, their Care attends,
The doubtful Fortune of their absent Friends:
Alternate Hopes and Fears, their Minds possess,
Whether to deem 'em dead, or in Distress.
Above the rest, Aeneas mourns the Fate
Of brave Orontes, and the uncertain State
Of Gyas, Lycus, and of Amycus:
The Day, but not their Sorrows, ended thus.
When, from aloft, Almighty Jove surveys
Earth, Air, and Shoars, and navigable Seas,
At length on Lybian Realms he fixed his Eyes:
Whom, pond'ring thus on Human Miseries,
When Venus saw, she with a lowly Look,
Not free from Tears, her Heavenly Sire bespoke.
O King of Gods and Men, whose awful Hand,
Disperses Thunder on the Seas and Land;
Disposing all with absolute Command:
To her Royal Highness the Princess Anne of Denmark

AE 1. l. 295


To her Grace Mary Duchess of Ormond



How could my Pious Son thy Power incense,
Or what, alas! is vanished Troy's Offense?
Our hope of Italy not only lost,
On various Seas, by various Tempests tossed,
But shut from every Shore, and barred from every Coast.
You promised once, a Progeny Divine,
Of Romans, rising from the Trojan Line,
In aftertimes should hold the World in awe,
And to the Land and Ocean give the Law.
How is your Doom reversed, which eased my Care;
When Troy was ruined in that cruel War?
Then Fates to Fates I could oppose; but now,
When Fortune still pursues her former Blow,
What can I hope? what worse can still succeed?
What end of Labors has your Will decreed?
Antenor, from the midst of Grecian Hosts,
Could pass secure, and pierce the Illyrian Coasts:
Where rolling down the Steep, Timavus raves,
And through nine Channels disembogues his Waves.
At length he founded Padua's happy Seat,
And gave his Trojans a secure Retreat:
There fixed their Arms, and there renewed their Name,
And there in Quiet rules, and crowned with Fame.
But we, descended from your sacred Line,
Entitled to your Heaven, and Rites Divine,
Are banished Earth, and, for the Wrath of one,
Removed from Latium, and the promised Throne.
Are these our Scepters? These our due Rewards?
And is it thus that Jove his plighted Faith regards?
To whom, the Father of the immortal Race,
Smiling with that serene indulgent Face,
With which he drives the Clouds, and clears the Skies:
First gave a holy Kiss, then thus replies.
Daughter, dismiss thy Fears: To thy desire
The Fates of thine are fixed, and stand entire.
Thou shall behold thy wished Lavinian Walls,
And, ripe for Heaven, when Fate Aeneas calls,
Then shall thou bear him up, sublime, to me;
No Councils have reversed my firm Decree.
And lest new Fears disturb thy happy State,
Know, I have searched the Mystic Rolls of Fate:
Thy Son (nor is the appointed Season far)
In Italy shall wage succesful War:
Shall tame fierce Nations in the bloody Field,
And Sovereign Laws impose, and Cities build.
'Till, after every Foe sub du'd, the Sun
Thrice through the Signs his Annual Race shall run:
This is his time prefixed. Ascanius then,
Now called Julus, shall begin his Reign.
He thirty rolling Years the Crown shall wear:
Then from Lavinium shall the Seat transfer:
And, with hard Labor, Alba-longa build;
The Throne with his Succession shall be filled,
Three hundred Circuits more: then shall be seen,
Ilia the fair, a Priestess and a Queen.
Who full of Mars, in time, with kindly Throws,
Shall at a Birth two goodly Boys disclose.
The Royal Babes a tawny Wolf shall drain,
Then Romulus his Grandsire's Throne shall gain.
Of Martial Towers the Founder shall become,
The People Romans call, the City Rome.
To them, no Bounds of Empire I assign;
Nor term of Years to their immortal Line.
Ev'^ haughty Juno, who, with endless Broils,
Earth, Seas, and Heaven, and Jove himself turmoils;
At length atton'd, her friendly Power shall join,
To cherish and advance the Trojan Line.
The subject World shall Rome's Dominion own,
And, prostrate, shall adore the Nation of the Gown.
An Age is ripening in revolving Fate,
When Troy shall overturn the Grecian State:
And sweet Revenge her conquering Sons shall call,
To crush the People that conspired her Fall.
Then Caesar from the Julian Stock shall rise,
Whose Empire Ocean, and whose Fame the Skies
Alone shall bound. Whom, fraught with Eastern Spoils,
Our Heaven, the just Reward of Human Toyls,
Securely shall reward with Rites Divine;
And Incense shall ascend before his sacred Shrine.
Then dire Debate, and impious War shall cease,
And the stern Age be softened into Peace:
Then banished Faith shall once again return,
And Vestal Fires in hallowed Temples burn;
And Remus with Quirinus shall sustain,
The righteous Laws, and Fraud and Force restrain.
Janus himself before his Fane shall wait,
And keep the dreadful issues of his Gate,
With Bolts and Iron Bars: within remains
Imprisoned Fury, bound in brazen Chains:
High on a Trophie raised, of useless Arms,
He sits, and threats the World with vain Alarms.
He said, and sent Cyllenius with Command
To free the Ports, and open the Punique Land
To Trojan Guests; lest ignorant of Fate,
The Queen might force them from her Town and State.
Down from the Steep of Heaven Cyllenius flies,
And cleaves with all his Wings the yielding Skies.
Soon on the Lybian Shore descends the God;
Performs his Message, and displays his Rod:
The surly Murmurs of the People cease,
And, as the Fates required, they give the Peace.
The Queen her self suspends the rigid Laws,
The Trojans pities, and protects their Cause.
Mean time, in Shades of Night Aeneas lies;
Care seized his Soul, and Sleep forsook his Eyes.
But when the Sun restored the cheerful Day,
He rose, the Coast and Country to survey,
Anxious and eager to discover more:
It looked a wild uncultivated Shore:
But whether Human Kind, or Beasts alone
Possessed the newfound Region, was unknown.
Beneath a hollow Rock his Fleet he hides;
Tall Trees surround the Mountains shady sides:
The bending Brow above, a safe Retreat provides.
Armed with two pointed Darts, he leaves his Friends,
And true Achates on his steps attends.
Lo, in the deep Recesses of the Wood,
Before his Eyes his Goddess Mother stood:
A Huntress in her Habit and her Mien;
Her dress a Maid, her Air confessed a Queen.
Bare were her Knees, and knots her Garments bind;
Loose was her Hair, and wantoned in the Wind;
Her Hand sustained a Bow, her Quiver hung behind.
She seemed a Virgin of the Spartan Blood:
With such Array Harpalice bestrode
Her Thracian Courser, and outstrip'd the rapid Flood.
Ho! Strangers! have you lately seen, she said,
One of my Sisters, like my self arrayed;
Who crossed the Lawn, or in the Forest strayed?
A Painted Quiver at her Back she bore;
Varied with Spots, a Linx's Hide she wore:
And at full Cry pursued the tusky Boar?
Thus Venus: Thus her Son replied again;
None of your Sisters have we heard or seen,
To ye Right Honble: Anne Countess of Exeter Wife to ye Right Honble: John
Earl of Exeter Baron Coecill of Burleigh

AE. 1. l. 435


O virgin! or what other Name you bear
A bove that style; O more than mortal fair!
Your Voice and Mien Celestial birth betray!
If, as you seem, the Sister of the Day;
Or one at least of Chaste Diana's Train,
Let not an humble Suppliant sue in vain:
But tell a Stranger, long in Tempests tossed,
What Earth we tread, and who commands the Coast?
Then on your Name shall wretched Mortals call;
And offered Victims at your Altars fall.
I dare not, she replied, assume the Name
Of Goddess, or Celestial Honors claim:
For Tyrian Virgins Bows and Quivers bear,
And Purple Buskins over their Ankles wear.
Know, gentle Youth, in Lybian Lands you are:
A People rude in Peace, and rough in War.
The rising City, which from far you see,
Is Carthage; and a Tyrian Colony.
Phenician Dido rules the growing State,
Who fled from Tire, to shun her Brother's hate:
Great were her wrongs, her Story full of Fate;
Which I will sum in short. Sicheus known
For wealth, and Brother to the Punic Throne,
Possessed fair Dido's Bed: And either heart
At once was wounded with an equal Dart.
Her Father gave her, yet a spotless Maid;
Pigmalion then the Tyrian Scepter swayed:
One who contemned Divine and Humane Laws:
Then Strife ensued, and cursed Gold the Cause.
The Monarch, blinded with desire of Wealth;
With Steel invades his Brother's life by stealth;
Before the sacred Altar made him bleed,
And long from her concealed the cruel deed.
Some Tale, some new Pretense, he daily coined,
To sooth his Sister, and delude her Mind.
At length, in dead of Night, the Ghost appears
Of her unhappy Lord: the Spectre stares,
And with erected Eyes his bloody Bosom bares.
The cruel Altars, and his Fate he tells,
And the dire Secret of his House reveals.
Then warns the Widow, with her household Gods,
To seek a Refuge in remote abodes.
Last, to support her, in so long a way,
He shows her where his hidden Treasure lay.
Admonished thus, and seized with mortal fright,
The Queen provides Companions of her flight:
They meet; and all combine to leave the State,
Who hate the Tyrant, or who fear his hate.
They seize a Fleet, which ready rigged they find:
Nor is Pigmalion's Treasure left behind.
The Vessels, heavy laden, put to Sea
With prosperous winds; a Woman leads the way.
I know not, if by stress of Weather driven,
Or was their fatal Course disposed by Heaven;
At last they landed, where from far your Eyes
May view the Turrets of new Carthage rise:
There bought a space of Ground, which Byrsa called
From the Bulls hide, they first enclosed, and walled.
But whence are you, what Country claims your Birth?
What seek you, Strangers, on our Lybian Earth?
To whom, with sorrow streaming from his Eyes,
And deeply sighing, thus her Son replies:
Could you with Patience hear, or I relate,
O Nymph! the tedious Annals of our Fate!
Through such a train of Woes if I should run,
The day would sooner than the Tale be done!
From ancient Troy, by Force expelled, we came,
If you by chance have heard the Trojan Name:
On various Seas by various Tempests tossed,
At length we landed on your Lybian Coast.
The Good Aeneas am I called, a Name,
While Fortune favored, not unknown to Fame:
My household Gods, Companions of my Woes,
With pious Care I rescued from our Foes.
To fruitful Italy my Course was bent,
And from the King of Heaven is my Descent.
With twice ten Sail I crossed the Phrygian Sea;
Fate, and my Mother Goddess, led my Way.
Scarce sev'n, the thin Remainders of my Fleet,
From Storms preserved, within your Harbor meet:
My self distressed, an Exile, and unknown,
Debarred from Europe, and from Asia thrown,
In Lybian Deserts wander thus alone.
His tender Parent could no longer bear;
But, interposing, sought to sooth his Care.
Who e're you are, not unbelov'd by Heaven,
Since on our friendly Shore your Ships are driven:
Have Courage: To the Gods permit the rest,
And to the Queen expose your just Request.
Now take this earnest of Success, for more*
Your scattered Fleet is joined upon the Shore;
The Winds are changed, your Friends from danger free,
Or I renounce my Skill in Augury.
Twelve Swans behold, in beauteous order move,
And stoop with closing Pinions from above:
Whom late the Bird of Jove had driven along,
And through the Clouds pursued the scattering Throng:
Now all united in a goodly Team,
They skim the Ground, and seek the quiet Stream.
As they, with Joy returning, clap their Wings,
And ride the Circuit of the Skies in Rings:
Not otherwise your Ships, and every Friend,
Already hold the Port, or with swift Sails descend.
No more Advice is needful, but pursue
The Path before you, and the Town in view.
Thus having said, she turned, and made appear
Her Neck refulgent, and disheveled Hair;
Which flowing from her Shoulders, reached the Ground,
And widely spread Ambrosial Scents around:
In length of Train descends her sweeping Gown,
And by her graceful Walk, the Queen of Love is known.
The Prince pursued the parting Deity,
With Words like these: Ah! whither do you fly?
Unkind and cruel, to deceive your Son
In borrowed Shapes, and his Embrace to shun:
Never to bless my Sight, but thus unknown;
And still to speak in Accents not your own.
Against the Goddess these Complaints he made;
But took the Path, and her Commands obeyed.
They march obscure, for Venus kindly shrowds,
With Mists, their Persons, and involves in Clouds:
That, thus unseen, their Passage none might stay,
Or force to tell the Causes of their Way.
This part performed, the Goddess flies sublime,
To visit Paphos; and her native Clime:
Where Garlands ever green, and ever fair,
With Vows are offered, and with solemn Prayer:
A hundred Altars in her Temple Smoke,
A thousand bleeding Hearts her Power invoke.
They climb the next Ascent, and, looking down,
Now at a nearer Distance view the Town:
The Prince, with Wonder, sees the stately Towers,
Which late were Huts, and Shepherd's homely Bowers.
The Gates and Streets; and hears, from every part,
The Noise, and buisy Concourse of the Mart.
The toiling Tyrians on each other call,
To ply their Labor: Some extend the Wall,
Some build the Citadel; the brawny Throng,
Or dig, or push unweildy Stones along.
Some for their Dwellings choose a Spot of Ground,
Which, first designed, with Ditches they surround.
Some Laws ordain, and some attend the Choice
Of holy Senates, and elect by Voice.
Here some design a Mole, while others there
Lay deep Foundations for a Theater:
From Marble Quarries mighty Columns hew,
For Ornaments of Scenes, and future view.
Such is their Toil, and such their buisy Pains,
As exercise the Bees in flowery Plains;
When Winter past, and Summer scarce begun,
Invites them forth to labor in the Sun:
Some lead their Youth abroad, while some condense
Their liquid Store, and some in Cells dispense.
Some at the Gate stand ready to receive
The Golden Burden, and their Friends relieve.
All, with united Force, combine to drive
The lazy Drones from the laborious Hive;
With Envy stung* they view each others Deeds;
The fragrant Work with Diligence proceeds.
Thrice happy you, whose Walls already rise;
Aeneas said; and viewed, with lifted Eyes,
Their lofty Towers; then entering at the Gate,
Concealed in Clouds, (prodigious to relate)
He mixed, unmarked, among the buisy Throng,
Born by the Tide, and passed unseen along.
Full in the Center of the Town there stood,
Thick set with Trees, a venerable Wood:
The Tyrians landing near this holy Ground,
And digging here, a prosperous Omen found:
From under Earth a Courser's Head they drew,
Their Growth and future Fortune to foreshew:
This fatal Sign their Foundress Juno gave,
Of a Soil fruitful, and a People brave.
Sidonian Dido here with solemn State
Did Juno's Temple build, and consecrate:
Enriched with Gifts, and with a Golden Shrine;
But more the Goddess made the Place Divine.
On Brazen Steps the Marble Threshold rose,
And brazen Plates the Cedar Beams enclose:
The Rafters are with brazen Cov'rings crowned,
The lofty Doors on brazen Hinges sound.
What first Aeneas in this place beheld,
Revived his Courage, and his Fear expelled.
For while, expecting there the Queen, he raised
His wondering Eyes, and round the Temple gazed;
Admired the Fortune of the rising Town,
The striving Artists, and their Arts renown:
He saw in order painted on the Wall,
Whatever did unhappy Troy befall:
The Wars that Fate around the World had blown,
All to the Life, and every Leader known.
There Agamemnon, Priam here he spies,
And fierce Achilles who both Kings defies.
He stopped, and weeping said, O Friend! even here
The Monuments of Trojan Woes appear!
Our known Disasters fill even foreign Lands:
See there, where old unhappy Priam stands!
Even the Mute Walls relate the Warrior's Fame,
And Trojan Griefs the Tyrians Pity claim.
He said, his Tears a ready Passage find,
Devouring what he saw so well designed;
And with an empty Picture fed his Mind*
For there he saw the fainting Grecians yield,
And here the trembling Trojans quit the Field,
Pursued by fierce Achilles through the Plain,
On his high Chariot driving over the Slain.
The Tents of Rhesus next, his Grief renew,
By their white Sails betrayed to nightly view.
And wakesul Diomede, whose cruel Sword
The Centries slew; nor spared their slumbering Lord.
Then took the fiery Steeds, e're yet the Food
Of Troy they taste, or drink the Xanthian Flood.
Elsewhere he saw where Troilus defied
Achilles, and unequal Combat tried.
Then, where the Boy disarmed with loosened Reins,
Was by his Horses hurried over the Plains:
Hung by the Neck and Hair, and dragged around,
The hostile Spear yet sticking in his Wound;
With tracks of Blood inscribed the dusty Ground.
Mean time the Trojan Dames oppressed with Woe,
To Pallas Fane in long Precession go,
In hopes to reconcile their Heavenly Foe:
They weep, they beat their Breasts, they rend their Hair,
And rich embroidered Vests for Presents bear:
But the stern Goddess stands unmoved with Prayer.
Thrice round the Trojan Walls Achilles drew
The Corpse of Hector, whom in Fight he slew.
Here Priam sues, and there, for Sums of Gold,
The lifeless Body of his Son is sold.
So sad an Object, and so well expressed,
Drew Sighs and Groans from the grieved Heroes Breast:
To see the Figure of his lifeless Friend,
And his old Sire his helpless Hand extend.
Himself he saw amidst the Grecian Train,
Mixed in the bloody Battle on the Plain.
And swarthy Memnon in his Arms he knew
His pompous Ensigns, and his Indian Crew.
Penthisilea there, with haughty Grace,
Leads to the Wars an Amazonian Race:
In their right Hands a pointed Dart they wield;
The left, for Ward, sustains the Lunar Shield.
Athwart her Breast a Golden Belt she throws,
Amidst the Press alone provokes a thousand Foes:
And dares her Maiden Arms to Manly Force oppose.
Thus, while the Trojan Prince employs his Eyes,
Fixed on the Walls with wonder and surprise;
The Beauteous Dido, with a numerous Train,
And pomp of Guards, ascends the sacred Fane.
Such on Eurota's Banks, or Cynthus's hight,
Diana seems; and so she charms the sight,
When in the Dance the graceful Goddess leads
The Quire of Nymphs, and overtops their Heads.
Known by her Quiver, and her lofty Mien,
She walks Majestic, and she looks their Queen:
Latona sees her shine above the rest,
And feeds with secret Joy her silent Breast.
Such Dido was; with such becoming State,
Amidst the Crowd, she walks serenely great.
Their Labor to her future Sway she speeds,
And passing with a gracious Glance proceeds:
Then mounts the Throne, high placed before the Shrine;
In Crowds around the swarming People join.
She takes Petitions, and dispenses Laws,
Hears, and determines every Private Cause.
Their Tasks in equal Portions she divides,
And where unequal, there by Lots decides.
Another Way by chance Aeneas bends
His Eyes, and unexpected sees his Friends:
Antheus, Sergestus grave, Cloanthus strong,
And at their Backs a mighty Trojan Throng:
Whom late the Tempest on the Billows tossed,
And widely scattered on another Coast.
The Prince, unseen, surpised with Wonder stands,
And longs, with joyful haste to join their Hands:
But doubtful of the wished Event, he stays,
And from the hollow Cloud his Friends surveys:
Impatient 'till they told their present State,
And where they left their Ships, and what their Fate;
And why they came, and what was their Request:
For these were sent commissioned by the rest,
To sue for leave to land their sickly Men,
And gain Admission to the Gracious Queen.
Entering, with Cries they filled the holy Fane;
Then thus, with humble Voice, Ilioneus began.
O Queen! indulged by Favor of the Gods,
To found an Empire in these new Abodes;
To build a Town, with Statutes to restrain
The wild Inhabitants beneath thy Reign:
We wretched Trojans tossed on every Shore,
From Sea to Sea, thy Clemency implore:
Forbid the Fires our Shipping to deface,
Receive the unhappy Fugitives to Grace,
And spare the remnant of a Pious Race.
We come not with design of wastful Prey,
To drive the Country, force the Swains away:
Nor such our Strength, nor such is our Desire,
The vanquished dare not to such Thoughts aspire.
A Land there is, Hesperia named of old,
The Soil is fruitful, and the Men are bold:
The Oenotrians held it once, by common Fame,
Now called Italia, from the Leaders Name.
To that sweet Region was our Voyage bent,
When Winds, and every warring Element,
Disturbed our Course, and far from sight of Land,
Cast our torn Vessels on the moving Sand:
The Sea came on; the South with mighty Roar,
Dispersed and dashed the rest upon the Rocky Shore.
Those few you see escaped the Storm, and fear,
Unless you interpose, a Shipwreck here:
What Men, what Monsters, what inhuman Race,
What Laws, what barbarous Customs of the Place,
Shut up a desert Shore to drowning Men,
And drives us to the cruel Seas again!
If our hard Fortune no Compassion draws,
Nor hospitable Rights, nor human Laws,
The Gods are just, and will revenge our Cause.
Aeneas was our Prince, a juster Lord,
Or nobler Warrior, never drew a Sword:
Observant of the Right, religious of his Word.
If yet he lives, and draws this vital Air:
Nor we his Friends of Safety shall despair;
Nor you, great Queen, these Offices repent,
Which he will equal, and perhaps prevent.
We want not Cities, nor Sicilian Coasts,
Where King Acestes Trojan Lineage boasts.
Permit our Ships a Shelter on your Shoars,
Refitted from your Woods with Planks and Oars;
That if our Prince be safe, we may renew
Our destined Course, and Italy pursue.
But if, O best of Men! the Fates ordain
That thou art swallowed in the Lybian Main:
And if our young Iulus be no more,
Dismiss our Navy from your friendly Shore.
That we to good Acestes may return,
And with our Friends our common Losses mourn.
Thus spoke Ilioneus; the Trojan Crew
With Cries and Clamours his Request renew.
The modest Queen a while, with down-cast Eyes,
Pondered the Speech; then briefly thus replies.
Trojans dismiss your Fears: my cruel Fate,
And doubts attending an unsettled State,
Force me to guard my Coast, from Foreign Foes.
Who has not heard the story of your Woes?
The Name and Fortune of your Native Place,
The Fame and Valor of the Phrygian Race?
We Tyrians are not so devoid of Sense,
Nor so remote from Phoebus influence.
Whether to Latian Shores your Course is bent,
Or driven by Tempest's from your first intent,
You seek the good Acestes Government;
Your Men shall be received, your Fleet repaired,
And sail, with Ships of Convoy for your guard;
Or, would you stay, and join your friendly Powers,
To raise and to defend the Tyrian Towers;
My Wealth, my City, and my Self are yours.
And would to Heaven the Storm, you felt, would bring
On Carthaginian Coasts your wandering King.
My People shall, by my Command, explore
The Ports and Creeks of every winding shore;
And Towns, and Wilds, and shady Woods, in quest
Of so renowned and so desired a Guest.
Raised in his Mind the Trojan Hero stood,
And longed to break from out his Ambient Cloud;
Achates found it; and thus urged his way;
From whence, O Goddess born, this long delay?
What more can you desire, your Welcome sure,
Your Fleet in safety, and your Friends secure?
One only wants; and him we saw in vain
Oppose the Storm, and swallowed in the Main.
Orontes in his Fate our Forfeit paid,
The rest agrees with what your Mother said.
Scarce had he spoken, when the Cloud gave way,
The Mists flew upward, and dissolved in day.
The Trojan Chief appeared in open sight,
August in Visage, and serenely bright.
His Mother Goddess, with her hands Divine,
Had formed his Curling Locks, and made his Temples shine:
And given his rolling Eyes a sparkling grace;
And breathed a youthful vigor on his Face:
Like polished Ivory, beauteous to behold,
Or Parian Marble, when enchas'd in Gold:
Thus radiant from the circling Cloud he broke;
And thus with manly modesty he spoke.
He whom you seek am I: by Tempests tossed,
And saved from Shipwreck on your Lybian Coast:
Presenting, gracious Queen, before your Throne,
A Prince that ows his Life to you alone.
Fair Majesty, the Refuge and Redress
Of those whom Fate pursues, and Wants oppress.
You, who your pious Offices employ
To save the Relics of abandoned Troy;
Receive the Shipwrecked on your friendly Shore,
With hospitable Rites relieve the Poor:
Associate in your Town a wandering Train,
And Strangers in your Palace entertain.
What thanks can wretched Fugitives return,
Who scattered through the World in exile mourn?
The Gods, (if Gods to Goodness are inclined,)
If Acts of mercy touch their Heavenly Mind;
And more than all the Gods, your generous heart,
Conscious of worth, requite its own desert!
In you this Age is happy, and this Earth:
And Parents more than Mortal gave you birth.
To the Right Honble: Elizabeth Countess Dowager of Winchelsea andct.

AE. 1. l: 875.


While rolling Rivers into Seas shall run,
And round the space of Heaven the radiant Sun;
While Trees the Mountain tops with Shades supply,
Your Honor, Name, and Praise shall never dye.
What e're abode my Fortune has assigned,
Your Image shall be present in my Mind.
Thus having said; he turned with pious have,
And joyful his expecting Friends embraced:
With his right hand Ilioneus was graced,
Serestus with his left; then to his breast
Cloanthus and the Noble Gyas pressed;
And so by turns descended to the rest.
The Tyrian Queen stood fixed upon his Face,
Pleased with his motions, ravished with his grace:
Admired his Fortunes, more admired the Man;
Then recollected stood; and thus began.
What Fate, O Goddess born, what angry Powers
Have cast you shipwrack'd on our barren Shores?
Are you the great Aeneas, known to Fame,
Who from Celestial Seed your Lineage claim!
The same Aeneas whom fair Venus bore
To famed Anchises on the Idaean Shore?
It calls into my mind, though then a Child,
When Teucer came from Salamis exiled;
And sought my Father's aid, to be restored:
My Father Belus then with Fire and Sword
Invaded Cyprus, made the Region bare,
And, Conquering, finished the successful War.
From him the Trojan Siege I understood,
The Grecian Chiefs, and your Illustrious Blood.
Your Foe himself the Dardan Valor praised,
And his own Ancestry from Trojans raised.
Enter, my Noble Guest; and you shall find,
If not a costly welcome, yet a kind.
For I my self, like you, have been distressed;
Till Heaven afforded me this place of rest.
Like you an Alien in a Land unknown;
I learn to pity Woes, so like my own.
She said, and to the Palace led her Guest,
Then offered Incense, and proclaimed a Feast.
Nor yet less careful for her absent Friends,
Twice ten fat Oxen to the Ships she sends:
Besides a hundred Boars, a hundred Lambs,
With bleating cries, attend their Milky Dams.
And Jars of generous Wine, and spacious Bowls,
She gives to cheer the Sailors drooping Souls.
Now Purple Hangings cloth the Palace Walls,
And sumptuous Feasts are made in splendid Halls:
On Tyrian Carpets, richly wrought, they dine;
With loads of Massy Plate the Side-boards shine.
And Antique Vafes all of Gold Embossed;
(The Gold it self inferior to the Cost:)
Of curious Work, where on the sides were seen
The Fights and Figures of Illustrious Men;
From their first Founder to the present Queen.
The Good Aeneas, whose Paternal Care
Iulus absence could no longer bear,
Dispatched Achates to the Ships in have,
To give a glad Relation of the past;
And, fraught with precious Gifts, to bring the Boy
Snatched from the Ruins of unhappy Troy:
A Robe of Tissue, stiff with golden Wire;
An upper Vest, once Hellen's rich Attire;
From Argos by the famed Adultress brought,
With Golden flowers and winding foliage wrought;
Her Mother Laeda's Present, when she came
To ruin Troy, and set the World on flame.
The Scepter Priam's eldest Daughter bore,
Her orient Necklace, and the Crown she wore;
Of double texture, glorious to behold;
One order set with Gems, and one with Gold.
Instructed thus, the wise Achates goes:
And in his diligence his duty shows.
But Venus, anxious for her Son's Affairs,
New Councils tryes; and new Designs prepares:
That Cupid should assume the Shape and Face
Of sweet Ascanius, and the sprightly grace:
Should bring the Prefents, in her Nephews stead,
And in Eliza's Veins the gentle Poison shed.
For much she feared the Tyrians, double tongued,
And knew the Town to Juno's care belonged.
These thoughts by Night her Golden Slumbers broke;
And thus alarmed, to winged Love she spoke.
My Son, my strength, whose mighty Power alone
Controuls the Thund'rer, on his awful Throne;
To thee thy much afflicted Mother flies,
And on thy Succor, and thy Faith relies.
Thou know, my Son, how Jove's revengeful Wife,
By force and Fraud, attempts thy Brother's life.
And often have thou mourned with me his Pains:
Him Dido now with Blandishment detains;
But I suspect the Town where Juno reigns.
For this, it is needful to prevent her Art,
And fire with Love the proud Phoenician's heart.
A Love so violent, so fond, so sure,
That neither Age can change, nor Art can cure.
How this may be performed, now take my mind:
Ascanius, by his Father is designed
To come, with Presents, laden from the Port,
To gratify the Queen, and gain the Court.
I mean to plunge the Boy in pleasing Sleep,
And, ravished, in Idalian Bowers to keep;
Or high Cythaera: That the sweet Deceit
May pass unseen, and none prevent the Cheat,
Take thou his Form and Shape. I beg the Grace
But only for a Night's revolving Space;
Thy self a Boy, assume a Boy's dissembled Face.
That when amidst the fervor of the Feast,
The Tyrian hugs, and fonds thee on her Breast,
And with sweet Kisses in her Arms constrains,
Thou may infuse thy Venom in her Veins.
The God of Love obeys, and sets aside
His Bow, and Quiver, and his plumy Pride:
He walks Iulus in his Mother's Sight,
And in the sweet Resemblance takes Delight.
The Goddess then to young Ascanius flies,
And in a pleasing Slumber seals his Eyes;
Lulled in her Lap, amidst a Train of Loves,
She gently bears him to her blissful Groves:
Then with a Wreath of Myrtle crowns his Head,
And softly lays him on a flowery Bed.
Cupid mean time assumed his Form and Face,
Foll'wing Achates with a shorter Pace;
And brought the Gifts. The Queen, already sat
Amidst the Trojan Lords, in shining State,
High on a Golden Bed: Her Princely Guest
Was next her side, in order sat the rest.
Then Canisters with Bread are heaped on high;
The Attendants Water for their Hands supply;
And having washed, with silken Towels dry.
Next fifty Handmaids in long order bore
The Censers, and with Fumes the Gods adore.
Then Youths, and Virgins twice as many, join
To place the Dishes, and to serve the Wine.
To the most Honble. Ursula Marchioness of Normaneby

AE. 1. l 995


The Tyrian Train, admitted to the Feast,
Approach, and on the painted Couches rest.
All on the Trojan Gifts, with Wonder gaze;
But view the beauteous Boy with more amaze.
His Rosy-colour'd Cheeks, his radiant Eyes,
His Motions, Voice, and Shape, and all the God's disguise.
Nor pass unprais'd the Vest and Veil Divine,
Which wandering Foliage and rich Flowers entwine.
But far above the rest, the Royal Dame,
(Already doomed to Love's disastrous Flame;)
With Eyes insatiate, and tumultuous Joy,
Beholds the Presents, and admires the Boy.
The guileful God, about his Father long,
With Children's play, and false Embraces hung;
Then sought the Queen: She took him to her Arms,
With greedy Pleasure, and devoured his Charms.
Unhappy Dido little thought what Guest,
How dire a God she drew so near her Breast.
But he, not mindless of his Mother's Prayer,
Works in the pliant Bosom of the Fair;
And moulds her Heart anew, and blots her former Care.
The dead is to the living Love resigned,
And all Aeneas enters in her Mind.
Now, when the Rage of Hunger was appeased,
The Meat removed, and every Guest was pleased;
The Golden Bowls with sparkling Wine are crowned,
And through the Palace cheerful Cries resound.
From gilded Roofs depending Lamps display
Nocturnal Beams, that emulate the Day.
A Golden Bowl, that shone with Gems Divine,
The Queen commanded to be crowned with Wine;
The Bowl that Belus used, and all the Tyrian Line.
Then, Silence through the Hall proclaimed, she spoke:
O hospitable Jove! we thus invoke,
With solemn Rites, thy sacred Name and Power!
Bless to both Nations this auspicious Hour.
So may the Tojan and the Tyrian Line,
In lasting Concord, from this Day combine.
Thou, Bacchus, God of Joys and friendly Cheer,
And gracious Juno, both be present here:
And you, my Lords of Tire, your Vows address
To Heaven with mine, to ratify the Peace.
The Goblet then she took, with Nectar crowned,
(Sprinkling the first Libations on the Ground,)
And raised it to her Mouth with sober Grace,
Then sipping, offered to the next in place.
'Twas Bitias whom she called, a thirsty Soul,
He took the Challenge, and embraced the Bowl:
With Pleasure swill'd the Gold, nor ceased to draw,
'Till he the bottom of the Brimmer saw.
The Goblet goes around: Iopas brought
His Golden Lyre, and sung what ancient Atlas taught.
The various Labors of the wandering Moon,
And whence proceed the Eclipses of the Sun.
The Original of Men, and Beasts; and whence
The Rains arise, and Fires their Warmth dispense;
And fixed, and erring Stars, dispose their Influence.
What shakes the solid Earth, what Cause delays
The Summer Nights, and shortens Winter Days.
With Peals of Shouts the Tyrians praise the Song;
Those Peals are echoed by the Trojan Throng.
The unhappy Queen with Talk prolonged the Night,
And drank large Draughts of Love with vast Delight.
Of Priam much inquired, of Hector more;
Then asked what Arms the swarthy Memnon wore;
What Troops he landed on the Trojan Shore.
The Steeds of Di'mede varied the Discourse,
And fierce Achilles, with his matchless Force.
At length, as Fate and her ill Stars required,
To hear the Series of the War desired.
Relate at large, my God-like Guest, she said,
The Grecian Stratagems, the Town betrayed;
The fatal Issue of so long a War,
Your Flight, your Wand'rings, and your Woes declare.
For since on every Sea, on every Coast,
Your Men have been distressed, your Navy tossed,
Sev'n times the Sun has either Tropic viewed,
The Winter banished, and the Spring renewed.
The Second Book of the Aeneis.
The Argument.
Aeneas relates how the City of Troy was taken, after a Ten Years Siege, by the
Treachery of Sinon, and the Stratagem of a wooden Horse. He declares the fixed
Resolution he had taken not to survive the Ruins of his Country, and the
various Adventures he met with in the Defense of it: at last having been before
advised by Hector 's Ghost, and now by the Appearance of his Mother Venus, he
is prevailed upon to leave the Town, and settle his Houshold-Gods in another
Country. in order to this, he carries off his Father on his Shoulders, and
leads his little Son by the Hand, his Wife following him behind. When he comes
to the Place appointed for the general Rendevouze, he finds a great Confluence
of People, but misses his Wife, whose Ghost afterward appears to him, and
tells him the Land which was designed for him.

ALL were attentive to the God-like Man;
When from the lofty Couch he thus began.
Great Queen, what you command me to relate,
Renews the sad remembrance of our Fate.
An Empire from its old Foundations rent,
And every Woe the Trojans underwent:
A Peopled City made a Desert Place;
All that I saw, and part of which I was:
Not even the hardest of our Foes could hear,
Nor stern Ulysses tell without a Tear.
And now the latter Watch of wasting Night,
And setting Stars to kindly Rest invite.
But since you take such Interest in our Woe,
And Troy's disast'rous end desire to know:
I will restrain my Tears, and briefly tell
What in our last and fatal Night befell.
By Destiny compelled, and in Despair,
The Greeks grew weary of the tedious War:
To ye most Illustrious Prince Charles Duke of Somerset, Knight of ye most
Noble Order of ye Garter.

AE. 2. l: 1.


And by Minerva's Aid a Fabric reared,
Which like a Steed of monstrous height appeared;
The Sides were planck'd with Pine, they feigned it made
For their Return, and this the Vow they paid.
Thus they pretend, but in the hollow Side,
Selected Numbers of their Soldiers hide:
With inward Arms the dire Machine they load,
With Iron Bowels stuff the dark Abode.
In sight of Troy lies Tenedos, an Isle,
(While Fortune did on Priam's Empire smile)
Renowned for Wealth, but since a faithless Bay,
Where Ships exposed to Wind and Weather lay.
There was their Fleet concealed: We thought for Greece
Their Sails were hoisted, and our Fears release.
The Trojans cooped within their Walls so long,
Unbar their Gates, and issue in a Throng,
Like swarming Bees, and with Delight survey
The Camp deserted, where the Grecians lay:
The Quarters of the several Chiefs they showed,
Here Phoenix, here Achilles made abode,
Here joined the Battles, there the Navy rode.
Part on the Pile their wondering Eyes employ,
(The Pile by Pallas raised to ruin Troy.)
Thymaetes first ('it is doubtful whether hired,
Or so the Trojan Destiny required)
Moved that the Ramparts might be broken down,
To lodge the fatal Engine in the Town.
But Capys, and the rest of sounder Mind,
The fatal Present to the Flames designed;
Or to the watery deep: At least to bore
The hollow sides, and hidden Frauds explore:
The giddy Vulgar, as their Fancies guide,
With Noise say nothing, and in parts divide.
Iaocoon, followed by a numerous Crowd,
Ran from the Fort; and cried, from far, aloud;
O wretched Countrymen! what Fury reigns?
What more than Madness has possessed your Brains?
Think you the Grecians from your Coasts are gone,
And are Ulysses Arts no better known?
This hollow Fabric either must enclose,
Within its blind Recess, our secret Foes;
Or it is an Engine raised above the Town,
TO o'relook the Walls, and then to batter down.
Somewhat is sure designed; by Fraud or Force;
Trust not their Presents, nor admit the Horse.
Thus having said, against the Steed he threw
His forceful Spear, which, hissing as it flew,
Pierced through the yielding Planks of jointed Wood,
And trembling in the hollow Belly stood.
The sides transpierc'd, return a rattling Sound,
And Groans of Greeks enclosed come issuing through the Wound.
And had not Heaven the fall of Troy designed,
Or had not Men been fated to be blind,
Enough was said and done, to inspire a better Mind:
Then had our Lances pierced the treacherous Wood,
And Ilian Towers, and Priam's Empire stood.
Mean time, with Shouts, the Trojan Shepherds bring
A captive Greek in Bands, before the King:
Taken, to take; who made himself their Prey,
TO impose on their Belief, and Troy betray.
Fixed on his Aim, and obstinately bent
To die undaunted, or to circumvent.
About the Captive, tides of Trojans flow;
All press to see, and some insult the Foe.
Now hear how well the Greeks their Wiles disguised,
Behold a Nation in a Man comprised.
Trembling the Miscreant stood, unarmed and bound;
He star'd, and rolled his hagger'd Eyes around:
Then said, Alas! what Earth remains, what Sea
Is open to receive unhappy me!
What Fate a wretched Fugitive attends,
Scorned by my Foes, abandoned by my Friends.
He said, and sighed, and cast a ruful Eye:
Our Pity kindles, and our Passions dye.
We cheer the Youth to make his own Defense,
And freely tell us what he was, and whence:
What News he could impart, we long to know,
And what to credit from a captive Foe.
His fear at length dismissed, he said, what e're
My Fate ordains, my Words shall be sincere:
I neither can, nor dare my Birth disclaim,
Greece is my Country, Sinon is my Name:
Though plunged by Fortune's Power in Misery,
It Is not in Fortune's Power to make me lie.
If any chance has hither brought the Name
Of Palamedes, not unknown to Fame,
Who suffered from the Malice of the times;
Accused and sentenced for pretended Crimes:
Because these fatal Wars he would prevent;
Whose Death the wretched Greeks too late lament;
Me, then a Boy, my Father, poor and bare
Of other Means, committed to his Care:
His Kinsman and Companion in the War.
While Fortune favored, while his Arms support
The Cause, and ruled the Counsels of the Court,
I made some figure there; nor was my Name
Obscure, nor I without my share of Fame.
But when Ulysses, with fallacious Arts,
Had made Impression in the Peoples Hearts;
And forged a Treason in my Patron's Name,
(I speak of things too far divulged by Fame)
My Kinsman fell; then I, without support,
In private mourned his Loss, and left the Court.
Mad as I was, I could not bear his Fate
With silent Grief, but loudly blamed the State:
And cursed the direful Author of my Woes.
'Twas told again, and hence my Ruin rose.
I threatened, if indulgent Heaven once more
Would land me safely on my Native Shore,
His Death with double Vengeance to restore.
This moved the Murderer's Hate, and soon ensued
The Effects of Malice from a Man so proud.
Ambiguous Rumors through the Camp he spread,
And sought, by Treason, my devoted Head:
New Crimes invented, left unturned no Stone,
To make my Guilt appear, and hide his own.
'Till Calchas was by Force and Threatening wrought:
But why -- Why dwell I on that anxious Thought?
If on my Nation just Revenge you seek,
And it is to appear a Foe, to appear a Greek;
Already you my Name and Country know,
Assuage your thirst of Blood, and strike the Blow:
My Death will both the Kingly Brothers please,
And set insatiate Ithacus at ease.
This fair unfinished Tale, these broken starts,
Raised expectations in our longing Hearts;
Unknowing as we were in Grecian Arts.
His former trembling once again renewed,
With acted Fear, the Villain thus pursued.
Long had the Grecians (tired with fruitless Care,
And wearied with an unsuccessful War,)
Resolved to raise the Siege, and leave the Town;
And had the Gods permitted, they had gone.
But often the Wintry Seas, and Southern Winds,
Withstood their passage home, and changed their Minds.
Portents and Prodigies their Souls amazed;
But most, when this stupendous Pile was raised.
Then flaming Meteors, hung in Air, were seen,
And Thunders ratled through a Sky serene:
Dismayed, and fearful of some dire Event,
Eurypylus, t'enquire their Fate, was sent;
He from the Gods this dreadful Answer brought;
O Grecians, when the Trojan Shores you sought,
Your Passage with a Virgin's Blood was bought:
So must your safe Return be bought again;
And Grecian Blood, once more atone the Main.
The spreading Rumor round the People ran;
All feared, and each believed himself the Man.
Ulysses took the advantage of their fright;
Called Calchas, and produced in open sight:
Than bade him name the Wretch, ordained by Fate,
The Public Victim, to redeem the State.
Already some presaged the dire Event,
And saw what Sacrifice Ulysses meant.
For twice five days the good old Seer withstood
The intended Treason, and was dumb to Blood.
Till Tired with endless Clamours, and pursuit
Of Ithacus, he stood no longer Mute:
But, as it was agreed, pronounced, that I
Was destined by the wrathful Gods to die.
All praised the Sentence, pleased the storm should fall
On one alone, whose Fury threatened all.
The dismal day was come, the Priests prepare
Their leavened Cakes; and Fillets for my Hair.
I followed Natur's Laws, and must avow
I broke my Bonds, and fled the fatal blow.
Hid in a weedy Lake all Night I lay,
Secure of Safety when they sailed away.
But now what further Hopes for me remain,
To see my Friends or Native Soil again?
My tender Infants, or my careful Sire;
Whom they returning will to Death require?
Will perpetrate on them their first Design,
And take the forfeit of their heads for mine?
Which, O if Pity mortal Minds can move!
If there be Faith below, or Gods above!
If Innocence and Truth can claim desert,
Ye Trojans from an injured Wretch avert.
False Tears true Pity move: the King Commands
To loose his Fetters, and unbind his hands:
Then adds these friendly words; dismiss thy Fears,
Forget the Greeks, be mine as thou were theirs.
But truly tell, was it for Force or Guile,
Or some Religious End, you raised the Pile?
Thus said the King. He full of fraudful Arts,
This well invented Tale for Truth imparts.
Ye Lamps of Heaven! he said, and lifted high
His hands now free, thou venerable Sky,
Inviolable Powers, adored with dread,
Ye fatal Fillets, that once bound this head,
Ye sacred Altars, from whose flames I fled!
Be all of you adjur'd; and grant I may,
Without a Crime, the ungrateful Greeks betray!
Reveal the Secrets of the guilty State,
And justly punish whom I justly hate!
But you, O King, preseve the Faith you gave,
If I to save my self your Empire save.
The Grecian Hopes, and all the Attempts they made,
Were only founded on Minerva's Aid.
But from the time when impious Diomede,
And false Ulysses, that inventive Head,
Her fatal Image from the Temple drew,
The sleeping Guardians of the Castle slew,
Her Virgin Statue with their bloody Hands
Polluted, and profaned her holy Bands:
From thence the Tide of Fortune left their Shore,
And ebbed much faster than it flowed before:
Their Courage languish'd, as their Hopes decayed,
And Pallas, now averse, refused her Aid.
Nor did the Goddess doubtfully declare
Her altered Mind, and alienated Care:
When first her fatal Image touched the Ground,
She sternly cast her glaring Eyes around;
That sparkl'd as they rolled, and seemed to threat:
Her Heavenly Limbs distilled a briny Sweat.
Thrice from the Ground she leaped, was seen to wield
Her brandished Lance, and shake her horrid Shield.
Then Calchas bad our Host for flight prepare,
And hope no Conquest from the tedious War:
'Till first they sailed for Greece; with Prayers besought
Her injured Power, and better Omens brought.
And now their Navy ploughs the watery Main,
Yet, soon expect it on your Shoars again,
With Pallas pleased; as Calchas did ordain.
But first, to reconcile the blue-ey'd Maid,
For her stolen Statue, and her Tower betrayed;
Warned by the Seer, to her offended Name
We raised, and dedicate this wondrous Frame:
So lofty, lest through your forbidden Gates
It pass, and intercept our better Fates.
For, once admitted there, our hopes are lost;
And Troy may then a new Palladium boast.
For so Religion and the Gods ordain;
That if you violate with Hands profane
Minerva's Gift, your Town in Flames shall burn,
(Which Omen, O ye Gods, on Grecia turn!)
But if it climb, with your assisting Hands,
The Trojan Walls, and in the City stands;
Then Troy shall Argos and Mycenae burn,
And the reverse of Fate on us return.
With such Deceits he gained their easy Hearts,
Too prone to credit his perfidious Arts.
What Diomede, nor Thetis greater Son,
A thousand Ships, nor ten years Siege had done:
False Tears and fawning Words the City won.
A greater Omen, and of worse portent,
Did our unwary Minds with fear torment:
Concurring to produce the dire Event.
Laocoon, Neptune's Priest by Lot that Year,
With solemn pomp then sacrificed a Steer.
When, dreadful to behold, from Sea we spied
Two Serpents ranked abreast, the Seas divide,
And smoothly sweep along the swelling Tide.
Their flaming Crests above the Waves they show,
Their Bellies seem to burn the Seas below:
Their speckled Tails advance to steer their Course,
And on the sounding Shore the flying Billows force.
And now the Strand, and now the Plain they held,
Their ardent Eyes with bloody streaks were filled:
Their nimble Tongues they brandished as they came,
And licked their hissing Jaws, that sputter'd Flame.
We fled amazed; their destined Way they take,
And to Laocoon and his Children make:
To the Right Honble: James Earl of Salisbury and

AE. 2. l. 290.


And first around the tender Boys they wind,
Then with their sharpened Fangs their Limbs and Bodies grind.
The wretched Father, running to their Aid
With pious Haste, but vain, they next invade:
Twice round his waste their winding Volumes rolled,
And twice about his gasping Throat they fold.
The Priest, thus doubly choked, their Crests divide,
And towering over his Head, in Triumph ride.
With both his Hands he labors at the Knots,
His Holy Fillets the blue Venom blots:
His roaring fills the flitting Air around.
Thus, when an Ox receives a glancing Wound,
He breaks his Bands, the fatal Altar flies,
And with loud Bellowings breaks the yielding Skies.
Their Tasks performed, the Serpents quit their prey,
And to the Tower of Pallas make their way:
Couched at her Feet, they lie protected there,
By her large Buckler, and protended Spear.
Amazement seizes all; the general Cry
Proclaims Laocoon justly doomed to die.
Whose hand the Will of Pallas had withstood,
And dared to violate the Sacred Wood.
All vote to admit the Steed, that Vows be paid,
And Incense offered to the offended Maid.
A spacious Breach is made, the Town lies bare,
Some hoisting Leavers, some the Wheels prepare,
And fasten to the Horses Feet: the rest
With Cables haul along the unweildy Beast.
Each on his Fellow for Assistance calls:
At length the fatal Fabric mounts the Walls,
Big with Destruction. Boys with Chaplets crowned,
And Quires of Virgins sing, and dance around.
Thus raised aloft, and then descending down,
It enters over our Heads, and threats the Town.
O sacred City! built by Hands Divine!
O valiant Heroes of the Trojan Line!
Four times he struck; as often the clashing sound
Of Arms was heard, and inward Groans rebound.
Yet mad with Zeal, and blinded with our Fate,
We hawl along the Horse, in solemn state;
Then place the dire Portent within the Tower.
Cassandra cried, and cursed the unhappy Hour;
Foretold our Fate; but by the Gods decree
All heard, and none believed the Prophecy.
With Branches we the Fanes adorn, and wast
In jollity, the Day ordained to be the last.
Mean time the rapid Heavens rolled down the Light,
And on the shaded Ocean rushed the Night:
Our Men secure, nor Guards nor Centries held,
But easy Sleep their weary Limbs compelled.
The Grecians had embarked their Naval Powers
From Tenedos, and sought our well known Shoars:
Safe under Covert of the silent Night,
And guided by the Imperial Galley's light.
When Sinon, favored by the Partial Gods,
Unlocked the Horse, and opened his dark abodes:
Restored to vital Air our hidden Foes,
Who joyful from their long Confinement rose.
Tysander bold, and Sthenelus their Guide,
And dire Ulysses down the Cable slide:
Then Thoas, Athamas, and Pyrrhus have;
Nor was the Podalyrian Hero last:
Nor injured Menelaus, nor the famed
Epeus, who the fatal Engine framed.
A nameless Crowd succeed; their Forces join
TO invade the Town, oppressed with Sleep and Wine.
Those few they find awake, first meet their Fate,
Then to their Fellows they unbar the Gate.
'Twas in the dead of Night, when Sleep repairs
Our Bodies worn with Toils, our Minds with Cares,
When Hector's Ghost before my sight appears:
A bloody Shroud he seemed, and bathed in Tears.
Such as he was, when, by foul Treason slain,
Thessalian Coursers dragged him over the Plain.
Swollen were his Feet, as when the Thongs were thrust
Through the bored holes, his Body black with dust.
Unlike that Hector, who returned from toils
Of War Triumphant, in Aeacian Spoils:
Or him, who made the fainting Greeks retire,
And lanch'd against their Navy Phrygian Fire.
His Hair and Beard stood stiffen'd with his gore;
And all the Wounds he for his Country bore,
Now streamed afresh, and with new Purple ran:
I wept to see the visionary Man:
And while my Trance continued, thus began.
O Light of Trojans, and Support of Troy,
Thy Father's Champion, and thy Country's Joy!
O, long expected by thy Friends! from whence
Art thou so late returned for our Defense?
Do we behold thee, wearied as we are,
With length of Labors, and with Toils of War?
After so many Fun'rals of thy own,
Art thou restored to thy declining Town?
But say, what Wounds are these? What new Disgrace
Deforms the Manly Features of thy Face?
To this the Spectre no Reply did frame;
But answered to the Cause for which he came:
And, groaning from the bottom of his Breast,
This Warning, in these mournful Words expressed.
O Goddess-born! escape, by timely flight,
The Flames, and Horrors of this fatal Night.
The Foes already have possessed the Wall,
Troy nods from high, and totters to her Fall.
Enough is paid to Priam's Royal Name,
More than enough to Duty and to Fame.
If by a Mortal Hand my Father's Throne
Could be defended, 'twas by mine alone:
Now Troy to thee commends her future State,
And gives her Gods Companions of thy Fate:
From their assistance happyer Walls expect,
Which, wandering long, at last thou shall erect.
He said, and brought me, from their blessed abodes,
The venerable Statues of the Gods:
With ancient Vesta from the sacred Quire,
The Wreaths and Relics of the Immortal Fire.
Now peals of Shouts come thundering from afar,
Cries, Threats, and loud Laments, and mingled War:
The Noise approaches, though our Palace stood
Aloof from Streets, encompassed with a Wood.
Louder, and yet more loud, I hear the Allarms
Of Human Cries distinct, and clashing Arms:
Fear broke my Slumbers; I no longer stay,
But mount the Terrass, thence the Town survey,
And hearken what the frightful Sounds convey.
Thus when a flood of Fire by Winds is born,
Crackling it rowls, and mows the standing Corn:
Or Deluges, descending on the Plains,
Sweep over the yellow Year, destroy the pains
Of laboring Oxen, and the Peasant's gains:
Unroot the Forest Oaks, and bear away
Flocks, Folds, and Trees, an undistinguished Prey.
The Shepherd climbs the Cliff, and sees from far,
The wastful Ravage of the watery War.
Then Hector's Faith was manifestly cleared;
The Grecian Frauds in open light appeared.
The Palace of Deiphobus ascends
In smoaky Flames, and catches on his Friends.
Ucalegon burns next; the Seas are bright
With splendour, not their own; and shine with Trojan light.
New Clamours, and new Clangors now arise,
The sound of Trumpets mixed with fighting cries.
With frenzy seized, I run to meet the Alarms,
Resolved on death, resolved to die in Arms.
But first to gather Friends, with them to oppose,
If Fortune favored, and repel the Foes.
Spurred by my courage, by my Country fired;
With sense of Honor, and Revenge inspired.
Pantheus, Apollo's Priest, a sacred Name,
Had escaped the Grecian Swords, and passed the Flame;
With Relics laden, to my Doors he fled,
And by the hand his tender Grandson led.
What hope, O Pantheus! whither can we run?
Where make a stand? and what may yet be done?
Scarce had I said, when Pantheus, with a groan,
Troy is no more, and Ilium was a Town!
The fatal Day, the appointed Hour is come,
When wrathful Jove's irrevocable doom
Transfers the Trojan State to Grecian hands.
The Fire consumes the Town, the Foe commands:
And armed Hosts, an unexpected Force,
Break from the Bowels of the Fatal Horse.
Within the Gates, proud Sinon throws about
The flames, and Foes for entrance press without.
With thousand others, whom I fear to name,
More than from Argos, or Mycenae came.
To several Posts their Parties they divide;
Some block the narrow Streets, some scour the wide.
The bold they kill, the unwary they surprise;
Who fights finds Death, and Death finds him who flies.
The Warders of the Gate but scarce maintain
The unequal Combat, and resist in vain.
I Heard; and Heaven, that well-born Souls inspires,
Prompts me, through lifted Swords, and rising Fires
To run, where clashing Arms and Clamor calls,
And rush undaunted to defend the Walls.
Ripheus and Iph'itus by my side engage,
For Valor one Renowned, and one for Age.
Dymas and Hypanis by Moonlight knew
My motions, and my Mien, and to my Party drew;
With young Choroebus, who by Love was led
To win Renown, and fair Cassandra's Bed;
And lately brought his Troops to Priam's aid:
Forewarned in vain, by the Prophetic Maid.
Whom, when I saw, resolved in Arms to fall,
And that one Spirit animated all;
Brave Souls, said I, but Brave, alas! in vain:
Come, finish what our Cruel Fates ordain.
You see the desperate state of our Affairs;
And Heavens protecting Powers are deaf to Prayers.
The passive Gods behold the Greeks defile
Their Temples, and abandon to the Spoil
Their own Abodes: we, feeble few, conspire
To save a sinking Town, involved in Fire.
Then let us fall, but fall amidst our Foes,
Despair of Life, the Means of Living shows.
So fierce a Speech encouraged their desire
Of Death, and added fuel to their fire.
As hungry Wolves, with raging appetite,
Scour through the fields, nor fear the stormy Night;
Their Whelps at home expect the promised Food,
And long to temper their dry Chaps in Blood:
So rushed we forth at once, resolved to die,
Resolved in Death the last Extremes to try.
We leave the narrow Lanes behind, and dare
The unequal Combat in the public Square:
Night was our Friend, our Leader was Despair.
What Tongue can tell the Slaughter of that Night?
What Eyes can weep the Sorrows and Affright!
An ancient and imperial City falls,
The Streets are filled with frequent Funerals:
Houses and Holy Temples float in Blood,
And hostile Nations make a common Flood.
Not only Trojans fall, but in their turn,
The vanquished Triumph, and the Victors mourn.
Ours take new Courage from Despair and Night;
Confused the Fortune is, confused the Fight.
All parts resound with Tumults, Plaints, and Fears,
And grisly Death in sundry shapes appears.
Androgeos fell among us, with his Band,
Who thought us Grecians newly come to Land:
From whence, said he, my Friends this long delay?
You loiter, while the Spoils are born away:
Our Ships are laden with the Trojan Store,
And you like Truants come too late ashore.
He said, but soon corrected his Mistake,
Found, by the doubtful Answers which we make:
Amazed, he would have shunned the unequal Fight,
But we, more numerous, intercept his flight.
As when some Peasant in a bushy Brake,
Has with unwary Footing pressed a Snake;
He starts aside, astonished, when he spies
His rising Crest, blue Neck, and rolling Eyes;
So from our Arms, surpised Androgeos flies.
In vain; for him and his we compassed round,
Possessed with Fear, unknowing of the Ground;
And of their Lives an easy Conquest found.
Thus Fortune on our first Endeavor smiled:
Choraebus then, with youthful Hopes beguiled,
Swollen with Success, and of a daring Mind,
This new Invention fatally designed.
My Friends, said he, since Fortune shows the way,
It Is fit we should the auspicious Guide obey.
For what has she these Grecian Arms bestowed,
But their Destruction, and the Trojans good?
Then change we Shields, and their Devices bear,
Let Fraud supply the want of Force in War.
They find us Arms; this said, himself he dressed
In dead Androgeos's Spoils, his upper Vest,
His painted Buckler, and his plumy Crest.
Thus Ripheus, Dymas, all the Trojan Train
Lay down their own Attire, and strip the slain.
Mixed with the Greeks, we go with ill Presage,
Flattered with hopes to glut our greedy Rage:
Unknown, assaulting whom we blindly meet,
And strew, with Grecian Carcasses, the Street.
Thus while their straggling Parties we defeat,
Some to the Shore and safer Ships retreat:
And some oppressed with more ignoble Fear,
Remount the hollow Horse, and pant in secret there.
But ah! what use of Valor can be made,
When Heavens propitious Powers refuse their Aid!
Behold the royal Prophetess, the Fair
Cassandra, dragged by her disheveled Hair;
Whom not Minerva's Shrine, nor sacred Bands,
In safety could protect from sacrilegious Hands:
On Heaven she cast her Eyes, she sighed, she cried,
('It Was all she could) her tender Arms were tied.
So sad a Sight Choraebus could not bear,
But fired with Rage, distracted with Despair;
To the Right Honble. William OBryen Earl of Inchiquin in the Kingdom of
Ireland andct

AE. 2. l: 545.


Amid the barbarous Ravishers he flew:
Our Leader's rash Example we pursue.
But storms of Stones, from the proud Temple's height,
Pour down, and on our battered Helms alight.
We from our Friends received this fatal Blow,
Who thought us Grecians, as we seemed in show.
They aim at the mistaken Crests, from high,
And ours beneath the ponderous Ruin lie.
Then, moved with Anger and Disdain, to see
Their Troops dispersed, the Royal Virgin free:
The Grecians rally, and their Powers unite;
With Fury charge us, and renew the Fight.
The Brother-Kings with Ajax join their force,
And the whole Squadron of Thessalian Horse.
Thus, when the Rival Winds their Quarrel try,
Contending for the Kingdom of the Sky;
South, East, and West, on airy Coursers born,
The Whirlwind gathers, and the Woods are torn:
Then Nereus strikes the deep, the Billows rise,
And, mixed with Ooze and Sand, pollute the Skies.
The Troops we squandered first, again appear
From several Quarters, and enclose the Rear.
They first observe, and to the rest betray
Our different Speech; our borrowed Arms survey.
Oppressed with odds, we fall; Choraebus first,
At Pallas's Altar, by Peneleus pierced.
Then Ripheus followed, in the unequal Fight;
Just of his Word, observant of the right;
Heaven thought not so: Dymas their Fate attends,
With Hypanis, mistaken by their Friends.
Nor Pantheus, thee, thy Mitre nor the Bands
Of awful Phoebus, saved from impious Hands.
Ye Trojan Flames your Testimony bear,
What I performed, and what I suffered there:
No Sword avoiding in the fatal Strife,
Exposed to Death, and prodigal of Life.
Witness, ye Heavens! I live not by my Fault,
I strove to have deserved the Death I sought.
But when I could not fight, and would have died,
Born off to distance by the growing Tide,
Old Iphitus and I were hurried thence,
With Pelias wounded, and without Defense.
New Clamors from the invested Palace ring;
We run to die, or disengage the King.
So hot the Assault, so high the Tumult rose,
While ours defend, and while the Greeks oppose;
As all the Dardan and Argolick Race
Had been contracted in that narrow Space:
Or as all Ilium else were void of Fear,
And Tumult, War, and Slaughter only there.
Their Targets in a Tortoise cast, the Foes
Secure advancing, to the Turrets rose:
Some mount the scaling Ladders, some more bold
Swerve upwards, and by Posts and Pillars hold:
Their left hand gripes their Bucklers, in the ascent,
While with the right they seize the Battlement.
From their demolished Towers the Trojans throw
Huge heaps of Stones, that falling, crush the Foe:
And heavy Beams, and Rafters from the sides,
(Such Arms their last necessity provides:)
And gilded Roofs come tumbling from on high,
The marks of State, and ancient Royalty.
The Guards below, fixed in the Pass, attend
The Charge undaunted, and the Gate defend.
Renewed in Courage with recovered Breath,
A second time we ran to tempt our Death:
To clear the Palace from the Foe, succeed
The weary living, and revenge the dead.
A Postern-door, yet unobserved and free,
Joined by the length of a blind Gallery,
To the King's Closet led; a way well known
To Hector's Wife, while Priam held the Throne:
Through which she brought Astyanax, unseen,
To cheer his Grandsire, and his Grandsire's Queen.
Through this we pass, and mount the Tower, from whence
With unavailing Arms the Trojans make defense.
From this the trembling King had often descried
The Grecian Camp, and saw their Navy ride.
Beams from its lofty height with Swords we hew;
Then wrenching with our hands, the Assault renew.
And where the Rafters on the Columns meet,
We push them headlong with our Arms and Feet.
The Lightning flies not swifter than the Fall;
Nor Thunder louder than the ruined Wall:
Down goes the top at once; the Greeks beneath
Are piecemeal torn, or pounded into Death.
Yet more succeed, and more to death are sent;
We cease not from above, nor they below relent.
Before the Gate stood Pyrrhus, threatening loud,
With glittering Arms conspicuous in the Crowd.
So shines, renewed in Youth, the crested Snake,
Who slept the Winter in a thorny Brake:
And casting off his Slough, when Spring returns,
Now looks aloft, and with new Glory burns:
Restored with poisonous Herbs, his ardent sides
Reflect the Sun, and raised on Spires he rides:
High over the Grass, hissing he rowls along,
And brandishes by fits his sorky Tongue.
Proud Periphas, and fierce Automedon,
His Father's Charioteer, together run
To force the Gate: The Scyrian Infantry
Rush on in Crowds, and the barred Passage free.
Entering the Court, with Shouts the Skies they rend,
And flaming Firebrands to the Roofs ascend.
Himself, among the foremost, deals his Blows,
And with his Axe repeated Strokes bestows
On the strong Doors: then all their Shoulders ply,
'Till from the Posts the brazen Hinges fly.
He hews apace, the double Bars at length
Yield to his Ax, and unresisted Strength.
A mighty Breach is made; the Rooms concealed
Appear, and all the Palace is revealed.
The Halls of Audience, and of public State,
And where the lonely Queen in secret sat.
Armed Soldiers now by trembling Maids are seen,
With not a Door, and scarce a Space between.
The House is filled with loud Laments and Cries,
And Shrieks of Women rend the vaulted Skies.
The fearful Matrons run from place to place,
And kiss the Thresholds, and the Posts embrace.
The fatal work inhuman Pyrrhus plies,
And all his Father sparkles in his Eyes.
Nor Bars, nor fighting Guards his force sustain;
The Bars are broken, and the Guards are slain.
In rush the Greeks, and all the Apartments fill;
Those few Defendants whom they find, they kill.
Not with so fierce a Rage, the foaming Flood
Roars, when he finds his rapid Course withstood:
Bears down the Dams with unresisted sway,
And sweeps the Cattle and the Cots away.
These Eyes beheld him, when he marched between
The Brother-Kings: I saw the unhappy Queen,
The hundred Wives, and where old Priam stood,
To stain his hallowed Altar with his Blood.
The fifty Nuptial Beds: (such Hopes had he,
So large a Promise of a Progeny.)
The Posts of plated Gold, and hung with Spoils,
Fell the Reward of the proud Victor's Toils.
Where e're the raging Fire had left a space,
The Grecians enter, and possess the Place.
Perhaps you may of Priam's Fate enquire.
He, when he saw his Regal Town on fire,
His ruined Palace, and his entering Foes,
On every side inevitable woes;
In Arms, disused, invests his Limbs decayed
Like them, with Age; a late and useless aid.
His feeble shoulders scarce the weight sustain:
Loaded, not armed, he creeps along, with pain;
Despairing of Success; ambitious to be slain!
Uncovered but by Heaven, there stood in view
An Altar; near the hearth a Laurel grew;
Dodder'd with Age, whose Boughs encompass round
The Household Gods, and shade the holy Ground.
Here Hecuba, with all her helpless Train
Of Dames, for shelter sought, but sought in vain.
Driven like a Flock of Doves along the sky,
Their Images they hugg, and to their Altars fly.
The Queen, when she beheld her trembling Lord,
And hanging by his side a heavy Sword,
What Rage, she cried, has seized my Husband's mind;
What Arms are these, and to what use designed?
These times want other aids: were Hector here,
Even Hector now in vain, like Priam would appear.
With us, one common shelter thou shall find,
Or in one common Fate with us be joined.
She said, and with a last Salute embraced
The poor old Man, and by the Laurel placed.
Behold Polites, one of Priam's Sons,
Pursued by Pyrrhus, there for safety runs.
Through Swords, and Foes, amazed and hurt, he flies
Through empty Courts, and open Galleries:
Him Pyrrhus, urging with his Lance, pursues;
And often reaches, and his thrusts renews.
The Youth transfixed, with lamentable Cries
Expires, before his wretched Parent's Eyes.
Whom, gasping at his feet, when Priam saw,
The Fear of death gave place to Nature's Law.
And shaking more with Anger, than with Age,
The Gods, said He, requite thy brutal Rage:
As sure they will, Barbarian, sure they must,
If there be Gods in Heaven, and Gods be just:
Who take in Wrongs an insolent delight;
With a Son's death t'infect a Father's sight.
Not He, whom thou and lying Fame conspire
To call thee his; Not He, thy vaunted Sire,
Thus used my wretched Age: The Gods he feared,
The Laws of Nature and of Nations heard.
He cheered my Sorrows, and for Sums of Gold
The bloodless Carcass of my Hector sold.
Pitied the Woes a Parent underwent,
And sent me back in safety from his Tent.
This said, his feeble hand a Javelin threw,
Which fluttering, seemed to loiter as it flew:
Just, and but barely, to the Mark it held,
And faintly tinckl'd on the Brazen Shield.
Then Pyrrhus thus: go thou from me to Fate;
And to my Father my foul deeds relate.
Now dye: with that he dragged the trembling Sire,
Slidd'ring through clotter'd Blood, and holy Mire,
(The mingled Paste his murdered Son had made,)
Haul'd from beneath the violated Shade;
And on the Sacred Pile, the Royal Victim laid.
To ye Right Honble Roger Earl of Orrery Baron of Broghill andct

AE. 2. l: 765.


His right Hand held his bloody Fauchion bare;
His left he twisted in his hoary Hair:
Then, with a speeding Thrust, his Heart he found:
The lukewarm Blood came rushing through the wound,
And sanguine Streams distained the sacred Ground.
Thus Priam fell: and shared one common Fate
With Troy in Ashes, and his ruined State:
He, who the Scepter of all Asia swayed,
Whom Monarchs like domestic Slaves obeyed,
On the bleak Shore now lies the abandoned King,
This whole line is taken from Sir John Derhan.
A headless Carcass, and a nameless thing.
Then, not before, I felt my crudled Blood
Congeal with Fear; my Hair with horror stood:
My Father's Image filled my pious Mind;
Lest equal Years might equal Fortune find.
Again I thought on my forsaken Wife;
And trembled for my Son's abandoned Life.
I looked about; but found my self alone:
Deserted at my need, my Friends were gone.
Some spent with Toil, some with Despair oppressed,
Leaped headlong from the Heights; the Flames consumed the (rest.
Thus, wandering in my way, without a Guide,
The graceless Helen in the Porch I spied
Of Vesta's Temple: there she lurked alone;
Muffled she sat, and what she could, unknown:
But, by the Flames, that cast their Blaze around,
That common Bane of Greece and Troy, I found.
For Ilium burnt, she dreads the Trojan Sword;
More dreads the Vengeance of her injured Lord;
Even by those Gods, who refug'd her, abhorred.
Trembling with Rage, the Strumpet I regard;
Resolved to give her Guilt the due reward.
Shall she triumphant sail before the Wind,
And leave in Flames, unhappy Troy behind?
Shall she, her Kingdom and her Friends review,
In State attended with a Captive Crew;
While unrevenged the good old Priam falls,
And Grecian Fires consume the Trojan Walls?
For this the Phrygian Fields, and Xanthian Flood
Were swelled with Bodies, and were drunk with Blood?
It Is true a Soldier can small Honor gain,
And boast no Conquest from a Woman slain:
Yet shall the Fact not pass without Applause,
Of Vengeance taken in so just a Cause.
The punished Crime shall set my Soul at ease:
And murmuring Manes of my Friends appease.
Thus while I rave, a gleam of pleasing Light
Spread over the Place, and shining Heavenly bright,
My Mother stood revealed before my Sight.
Never so radiant did her Eyes appear;
Not her own Star confessed a Light so clear.
Great in her Charms, as when on Gods above
She looks, and breaths her self into their Love.
She held my hand, the destined Blow to break:
Then from her rosy Lips began to speak.
My Son, from whence this Madness, this neglect
Of my Commands, and those whom I protect?
Why this unmanly Rage? Recall to mind
Whom you forsake, what Pledges leave behind.
Look if your helpless Father yet survive;
Or if Ascanius, or Creusa live.
Around your House the greedy Grecians err;
And these had perished in the nightly War,
But for my Presence and protecting Care.
Not Helen's Face, nor Paris was in fault;
But by the Gods was this Destruction brought.
Now cast your Eyes around; while I dissolve
The Mists and Films that mortal Eyes involve:
Purge from your sight the Dross, and make you see
The Shape of each avenging Deity.
Enlightened thus, my just Commands fulfill;
Nor fear Obedience to your Mother's Will.
Where you disordered heap of Ruin lies,
Stones rent from Stones, where Clouds of dust arise,
Amid that smother, Neptune holds his place:
Below the Wall's foundation drives his Mace:
And heaves the Building from the solid Base.
Look where, in Arms, Imperial Juno stands,
Full in the Scaean Gate, with loud Commands;
Urging on Shore the tardy Grecian Bands.
See Pallas, of her snaky Buckler proud,
Bestrides the Tower, refulgent through the Cloud:
See Jove new Courage to the Foe supplies,
And arms against the Town, the partial Deities.
Haste hence, my Son; this fruitless Labor end:
Haste where your trembling Spouse, and Sire attend:
Haste, and a Mother's Care your Passage shall befriend.
She said: and swiftly vanished from my Sight,
Obscure in Clouds, and gloomy Shades of Night.
I looked, I listened; dreadful Sounds I hear;
And the dire Forms of hostile Gods appear.
Troy sunk in Flames I saw, nor could prevent;
And Ilium from its old Foundations rent.
Rent like a Mountain Ash, which dared the Winds;
And stood the sturdy Strokes of laboring Hinds:
About the Roots the cruel Ax resounds,
The Stumps are pierced, with often repeated Wounds.
The War is felt on high, the nodding Crown
Now threats a Fall, and throws the leafy Honors down.
To their united Force it yields, though late;
And mourns with mortal Groans the approaching Fate:
The Roots no more their upper load sustain;
But down she falls, and spreads a ruin through the Plain.
Descending thence, I escape through Foes, and Fire:
Before the Goddess, Foes and Flames retire.
Arrived at home, he for whose only sake,
Or most for his, such Toils I undertake,
The good Anchises, whom, by timely Flight,
I purposed to secure on Ida's height,
Refused the Journey: Resolute to die,
And add his Fun'rals to the fate of Troy:
Rather than Exile and old Age sustain.
Go you, whose Blood runs warm in every Vein:
Had Heaven decreed that I should Life enjoy,
Heaven had decreed to save unhappy Troy.
It Is sure enough, if not too much for one;
Twice to have seen our Ilium overthrown.
Make haste to save the poor remaining Crew;
And give this useless Corpse a long Adieu.
These weak old Hands suffice to stop my Breath:
At least the pitying Foes will aid my Death,
To take my Spoils: and leave my Body bare:
As for my Sepulcher let Heaven take Care.
It Is long since I, for my Celestial Wife,
Loathed by the Gods, have dragged a lingering Life:
Since every Hour and Moment I expire,
Blasted from Heaven by Jove's avenging Fire.
This often repeated, he stood fixed to die:
My self, my Wife, my Son, my Family,
Entreat, pray, beg, and raise a doleful Cry.
What, will he still persist, on Death resolve,
And in his Ruin all his House involve!
He still persists, his reasons to maintain;
Our Prayers, our Tears, our loud Laments are vain.
Urged by Despair, again I go to try
The fate of Arms, resolved in Fight to die.
To ye Right Honble, Robt: Ld. Constable Visnt. Dunbar in ye Kingdom of Scotland

AE 2. l. 915.


What hope remains, but what my Death must give?
Can I without so dear a Father live?
You term it Prudence, what I Baseness call:
Could such a Word from such a Parent fall?
If Fortune please, and so the Gods ordain,
That nothing should of ruined Troy remain:
And you conspire with Fortune, to be slain;
The way to Death is wide, the Approaches near:
For soon relentless Pyrrhus will appear,
Reeking with Priam's Blood: The wretch who slew
The Son (inhuman) in the Father's view,
And then the Sire himself, to the dire Altar drew.
O Goddess Mother, give me back to fate;
Your Gift was undesir'd, and came too late.
Did you for this, unhappy me convey
Through Foes and Fires to see my House a Prey?
Shall I, my Father, Wife, and Son, behold
Welt'ring in Blood, each others Arms infold?
Haste, gird my Sword, though spent, and overcome:
It Is the last Summons to receive our Doom.
I hear thee, Fate, and I obey thy Call:
Not unrevenged the Foe shall see my Fall.
Restore me to the yet unfinished Fight:
My Death is wanting to conclude the Night.
Armed once again, my glittering Sword I wield,
While the other hand sustains my weighty Shield:
And forth I rush to seek the abandoned Field.
I went; but sad Creusa stopped my way,
And cross the Threshold in my Passage lay;
Embraced my Knees; and when I would have gone
Showed me my feeble Sire, and tender Son.
If Death be your design, at least, said she,
Take us along, to share your Destiny.
If any farther hopes in Arms remain,
This Place, these Pledges of your Love, maintain.
To whom do you expose your Father's Life,
Your Son's, and mine, your now forgotten Wife!
While thus she fills the House with clamorous Cries,
Our Hearing is diverted by our Eyes.
For while I held my Son, in the short space,
Betwixt our Kisses and our last Embrace;
Strange to relate, from young Iulus Head
A lambent Flame arose, which gently spread
Around his Brows, and on his Temples fed.
Amazed, with running Water we prepare
To quench the sacred Fire, and shake his Hair;
But old Anchises, versed in Omens, reared
His hands to Heaven, and this request preferred.
If any Vows, Almighty Jove, can bend
Thy Will, if Piety can Prayers commend,
Confirm the glad Presage which thou art pleased to send.
Scarce had he said, when, on our left, we hear
A peal of rattling Thunder roll in Air:
There shot a streaming Lamp along the Sky,
Which on the winged Lightning seemed to fly;
From over the Roof the blaze began to move;
And trailing vanished in the Idean Grove.
It swept a path in Heaven, and shone a Guide;
Then in a steaming stench of Sulphur died.
The good old Man with suppliant hands implored
The Gods protection, and their Star adored.
Now, now, said he, my Son, no more delay,
I yield, I follow where Heaven shows the way.
Keep (O my Country Gods) our dwelling Place,
And guard this Relick of the Trojan Race:
This tender Child; these Omens are your own;
And you can yet restore the ruined Town.
At least accomplish what your Signs foreshow:
I stand resigned, and am prepared to go.
To ye Right Honble: Mary Countess Dowager of Northampton

AE. 2. l. 985.


He said; the crackling Flames appear on high,
And driving Sparkles dance along the Sky.
With Vulcan's rage the rising Winds conspire;
And near our Palace roll the flood of Fire.
Haste, my dear Father, ('it is no time to wait)
And load my Shoulders with a willing Freight.
What e're befalls, your Life shall be my care,
One Death, or one Deliverance we will share.
My hand shall lead our little Son; and you
My faithful Consort, shall our Steps purfue.
Next, you my Servants, heed my strict Commands:
Without the Walls a ruined Temple stands,
To Ceres hollowed once; a Cypress nigh
Shoots up her venerable Head on high;
By long Religion kept: there bend your Feet;
And in divided Parties let us meet.
Our Country Gods, the Relics, and the Bands,
Hold you, my Father, in your guiltless Hands:
In me it is impious holy things to bear,
Red as I am with Slaughter, new from War:
'Till in some living Stream I cleanse the Guilt
Of dire Debate, and Blood in Battle spilt.
Thus, ord'ring all that Prudence could provide,
I cloth my Shoulders with a Lion's Hide;
And yellow Spoils: Then, on my bending Back,
The welcome load of my dear Father take.
While on my better Hand Ascanius hung,
And with unequal Paces tript along.
Creusa kept behind: by choice we stray
Through every dark and every devious Way.
I, who so bold and dauntless just before,
The Grecian Darts and shock of Lances bore,
At every Shadow now am seized with Fear:
Not for my self, but for the Charge I bear.
Till near the ruined Gate arrived at last,
Secure, and deeming all the Danger past;
A frightful noise of trampling Feet we hear;
My Father looking through the Shades, with fear,
Cried out, haste, haste my Son, the Foes are nigh;
Their Swords, and shining Armor I descry.
Some hostile God, for some unknown Offense,
Had sure bereft my Mind of better Sense:
For while through winding Ways I took my Flight;
And sought the shelter of the gloomy Night;
Alas! I lost Creusa: hard to tell
If by her fatal Destiny she fell,
Or weary sat, or wandered with affright;
But she was lost for ever to my sight.
I knew not, or reflected, 'till I meet
My Friends, at Ceres now deserted Seat:
We met: not one was wanting, only she
Deceived her Friends, her Son, and wretched me.
What mad expessions did my Tongue refuse!
Whom did I not of Gods or Men accuse!
This was the fatal Blow, that pained me more
Than all I felt from ruined Troy before.
Stung with my Loss, and raving with Despair,
Abandoning my now forgotten Care,
Of Counsel, Comfort, and of Hope bereft,
My Sire, my Son, my Country Gods, I left.
In shining Armor once again I sheath
My Limbs, not feeling Wounds, nor fearing Death.
Then headlong to the burning Walls I run,
And seek the Danger I was forced to shun.
I tread my former Tracks: through Night explore
Each Passage, every Street I crossed before.
All things were full of Horror and Affright,
And dreadful even the silence of the Night.
Then, to my Father's House I make repair,
With some small Glimps of hope to find her there:
Instead of her the cruel Greeks I met;
The house was filled with Foes, with Flames beset.
Driven on the wings of Winds, whole sheets of Fire,
Through Air transported, to the Roofs aspire.
From thence to Priam's Palace I resort;
And search the Citadel, and desert Court.
Then, unobserved, I pass by Juno's Church;
A guard of Grecians had possessed the Porch:
There Phaenix and Ulysses watch the Prey:
And thither all the Wealth of Troy convey.
The Spoils which they from ransacked Houses brought;
And golden Bowls from burning Altars caught.
The Tables of the Gods, the Purple Vests;
The People's Treasure, and the Pomp of Priests.
A rank of wretched Youths, with pinioned Hands,
And captive Matrons in long Order stands.
Then, with ungoverned Madness, I proclaim,
Through all the silent Streets, Creusa's Name.
Creusa still I call: At length she hears;
And sudden, through the Shades of Night appears.
Appears, no more Creusa, nor my Wife:
But a pale Spectre, larger than the Life.
Aghast, astonished, and struk dumb with Fear,
I stood; like Bristles rose my stiffen'd Hair.
Then thus the Ghost began to sooth my Grief:
Nor Tears, nor Cries can give the dead Relief;
Desist, my much loved Lord, t'indulge your Pain:
You bear no more than what the Gods ordain.
My Fates permit me not from hence to fly;
Nor he, the great Comptroller of the Sky.
Long wandering Ways for you the Powers decree:
On Land hard Labors, and a length of Sea.
Then, after many painful Years are past,
On Latium's happy Shore you shall be cast:
Where gentle Tiber from his Bed beholds
The flowery Meadows, and the feeding Folds.
There end your Toils: And there your Fates provide
A quiet Kingdom, and a Royal Bride:
There Fortune shall the Trojan Line restore;
And you for lost Creusa weep no more.
Fear not that I shall watch with servile Shame,
The imperious Looks of some proud Grecian Dame:
Or, stooping to the Victor's Lust, disgrace
My Goddess Mother, or my Royal Race.
And now, farewell: the Parent of the Gods
Restrains my fleeting Soul in her Abodes:
I trust our common Issue to your Care.
She said: And gliding passed unseen in Air.
I strove to speak, but Horror tied my Tongue;
And thrice about her Neck my Arms I flung;
And thrice deceived, on vain Embraces hung.
Light as an empty Dream at break of Day,
Or as a blast of Wind, she rushed away.
Thus, having passed the Night in fruitless Pain,
I, to my longing Friends, return again.
Amazed the augmented Number to behold,
Of Men, and Matrons mixed, of young and old:
A wretched Exiled Crew together brought,
With Arms appointed, and With Treasure fraught.
Resolved, and willing under my Command,
To run all hazards both of Sea and Land.
The Morn began, from Ida, to display
Her rosy Cheeks, and Phosphor led the day;
Before the Gates the Grecians took their Post:
And all pretense of late Relief was lost.
I yield to Fate, unwillingly retire;
And loaded, up the Hill convey my Sire.
The Third Book of the Aeneis.
The Argument.
Aeneas proceeds in his Relation: He gives an Account of the Fleet with which
he sailed, and the Success of his first Voyage to Thrace; from thence he
directs his Course to Delos, and asks the Oracle what place the Gods had
appointed for his Habitation? By a mistake of the Oracle's Answer, he settles
in Crete; his household Gods give him the true sense of the Oracle, in a Dream.
He follows their advice, and makes the best of his way for Italy: He is cast on
several Shores, and meets with very surprising Adventures, 'till at length he
lands on Sicily: where his Father Anchises dies. This is the place which he was
sailing from when the Tempest rose and threw him upon the Carthaginian Coast.

To the Right Honble. William Stanley Earl of Derby andct Ld of Man and ye
Isles

AE. e. l. 2.


WHen Heaven had overturned the Trojan State,
And Priam's Throne, by too severe a Fate:
When ruined Troy became the Grecians Prey,
And Ilium's lofty Towers in Ashes lay:
Warned by Celestial Omens, we retreat,
To seek in foreign Lands a happier Seat.
Near old Antandros, and at Ida's foot,
The Timber of the sacred Groves we cut:
And build our Fleet; uncertain yet to find
What place the Gods for our Repose assigned.
Friends daily flock; and scarce the kindly Spring
Began to cloth the Ground, and Birds to sing;
When old Anchises summoned all to Sea:
The Crew, my Father and the Fates obey.
With Sighs and Tears I leave my native Shore,
And empty Fields, where Ilium stood before.
My Sire, my Son, our less, and greater Gods,
All sail at once; and tempt the briny Floods.
Against our Coast appears a spacious Land,
Which once the fierce Lycurgus did command:
Thracia the Name; the People bold in War;
Vast are their Fields, and Tillage is their Care.
A hospitable Realm while Fate was kind;
With Troy in friendship and Religion joined.
I land; with luckless Omens, then adore
Their Gods, and draw a Line along the Shore:
I lay the deep Foundations of a Wall;
And Enos, named from me, the City call.
To Dionaean Venus Vows are paid,
And all the Powers that rising Labors aid;
A Bull on Jove's Imperial Altar laid.
Not far, a rising Hillock stood in view;
Sharp Myrtles, on the sides, and Cornels grew.
There, while I went to crop the Silvan Scenes,
And shade our Altar with their leafy Greens;
I pulled a Plant; with horror I relate
A Prodigy so strange, and full of Fate.
The rooted Fibers rose; and from the Wound,
Black bloody Drops distilled upon the Ground.
Mute, and amazed, my Hair with Horror stood;
Fear shrunk my Sinews, and congealed my Blood.
Manned once again, another Plant I try;
That other gushed with the same sanguine Dye.
Then, fearing Guilt, for some Offense unknown,
With Prayers and Vows the Driads I atone:
With all the Sisters of the Woods, and most
The God of Arms, who rules the Thracian Coast:
That they, or he, these Omens would avert;
Release our Fears, and better signs impart.
Cleared, as I thought, and fully fixed at length
To learn the Cause, I tug'd with all my Strength;
I bent my knees against the Ground; once more
The violated Myrtle ran with purple Gore.
Scarce dare I tell the Sequel: From the Womb
Of wounded Earth, and Caverns of the Tomb,
A Groan, as of a troubled Ghost, renewed
My Fright, and then these dreadful Words ensued.
Why do thou thus my buried Body rend?
O spare the Corpse of thy unhappy Friend!
Spare to pollute thy pious Hands with Blood:
The Tears distill not from the wounded Wood;
But every drop this living Tree contains,
Is kindred Blood, and ran in Trojan Veins:
O fly from this unhospitable Shore,
Warned by my Fate; for I am Polydore!
Here loads of Lances, in my Blood embru'd,
Again shoot upward, by my Blood renewed.
My faultring Tongue, and shivering Limbs declare
My Horror, and in Bristles rose my Hair.
When Troy with Grecian Arms was closely pent,
Old Priam, fearful of the Wars Event,
This hapless Polydore to Thracia sent.
Loaded with Gold, he sent his Darling, far
From Noise and Tumults, and destructive War:
Committed to the faithless Tyrant's Care.
Who, when he saw the Power of Troy decline,
Forsook the weaker, with the strong to join.
Broke every Bond of Nature, and of Truth;
And murdered, for his Wealth, the Royal Youth.
O sacred Hunger of pernicious Gold,
What bands of Faith can impious Lucre hold!
Now, when my Soul had shaken off her Fears,
I call my Father, and the Trojan Peers:
Relate the Prodigies of Heaven; require.
What he commands, and their Advice desire.
All vote to leave that execrable Shore,
Polluted with the Blood of Polydore.
But e're we sail, his Funeral Rites prepare;
Then, to his Ghost, a Tomb and Altars rear,
In mournful Pomp the Matrons walk the round:
With baleful Cypress, and blue Fillets crowned;
With Eyes dejected, and with Hair unbound.
Then Bowls of tepid Milk and Blood we pour,
And thrice invoke the Soul of Polydore.
Now when the raging Storms no longer reign;
But Southern Gales invite us to the Main;
We launch our Vessels, with a prosperous Wind;
And leave the Cities and the Shores behind.
An Island in the Aegean Main appears:
Neptune and watery Doris claim it theirs.
It floated once, till Phoebus fixed the sides
To rooted Earth, and now it braves the Tides.
Here, born by friendly Winds, we come ashore
With needful ease our weary Limbs restore;
And the Sun's Temple, and his Town adore.
Anius the Priest, and King, with Laurel crowned,
His hoary Locks with purple Fillets bound,
Who saw my Sire the Delian Shore ascend,
Came forth with eager haste to meet his Friend.
Invites him to his Palace; and in sign
Of ancient Love, their plighted Hands they join.
Then to the Temple of the God I went;
And thus, before the Shrine, my Vows present.
Give, O Thymbraeus, give a resting place,
To the sad Relics of the Trojan Race:
A Seat secure, a Region of their own,
A lasting Empire, and a happier Town.
Where shall we fix, where shall our Labors end,
Whom shall we follow, and what Fate attend?
Let not my Prayers a doubtful Answer find,
But in clear Auguries unveil thy Mind.
To the Right Honble: Nathanael Lord Bishop of Durham

AE. 3 l: 220


Scarce had I said, He shook the holy Ground:
The Laurels, and the lofty Hills around:
And from the Tripos rushed a bellowing sound.
Prostrate we fell; confessed the present God,
Who gave this Answer from his dark Abode.
Undaunted Youths, go seek that Mother Earth
From which your Ancestors derive their Birth.
The Soil that sent you forth, her Ancient Race,
In her old Bosom, shall again embrace.
Through the wide World the Eneian House shall reign,
And Childrens Children shall the Crown sustain.
Thus Phoebus did our future Fates disclose;
A mighty Tumult, mixed with Joy, arose.
All are concerned to know what place the God
Assigned and where determind our abode.
My Father, long revolving in His Mind,
The Race and Lineage of the Trojan Kind,
Thus answered their demands: Ye Princes, hear
Your pleasing Fortune; and dispel your fear.
The fruitful Isle of Crete well known to Fame,
Sacred of old to Jove's Immortal Name.
In the mid Ocean lies, with large Command;
And on its Plains a hundred Cities stand.
Another Ida rises there; and we
From thence derive our Trojan Ancestry.
From thence, as it is divulged by certain Fame,
To the Rhaetean Shores old Teucrus came.
There fixed, and there the Seat of Empire chose,
E're Ilium and the Trojan Towers arose.
In humble Vales they built their soft abodes:
Till Cybele, the Mother of the Gods,
With tinckling Cymbals charmed the Idean Woods*
She, secret Rites and Ceremonies taught,
And to the Yoke, the salvage Lions brought.
Let us the Land, which Heaven appoints, explore;
Appease the Winds, and seek the Gnossian Shore.
If Jove assists tht passage of our Fleet,
The third propitious dawn discovers Creet.
Thus having said, the Sacrifices laid
On smoking Altars, to the Gods He paid.
A Bull, to Neptune an Oblation due,
Another Bull to bright Apollo slew:
A milk white Ewe the Western Winds to please;
And one cole black to calm the stormy Seas.
E're this, a flying Rumor had been spread,
That fierce Idomeneus from Crete was fled;
Expelled and exiled; that the Coast was free
From Foreign or Domestic Enemy:
We leave the Delian Ports, and put to Sea:
By Naxos, famed for Vintage, make our way:
Then green Donysa pass; and Sail in sight
Of Paros Isle, with Marble Quarries white.
We pass the scattered Isles of Cyclades;
That, scarce distinguished, seem to stud the Seas.
The shouts of Saylors double near the shores;
They stretch their Canvass, and they ply their Oars.
All hands aloft, for Creet for Creet they cry,
And swiftly through the foamy Billows fly.
Full on the promised Land at length we bore,
With Joy desending on the Cretan Shore.
With eager haste a rising Town I frame,
Which from the Trojan Pergamus I name:
The Name it self was grateful; I exhort
To found their Houses, and erect a Fort.
Our Ships are haul'd upon the yellow strand,
The Youth begin to till the labored Land.
And I my self new Marriages promote,
Give Laws: and Dwellings I divide by Lot.
When rising Vapors choke the wholesome Air,
And blasts of noisome Winds corrupt the Year:
The Trees, devouring Caterpillars burn:
Parched was the Grass, and blited was the Corn.
Nor escape the Beasts: for Syrius from on high,
With pestilential Heat infects the Sky:
My Men, some fall, the rest in Fevers fry.
Again my Father bids me seek the Shore
Of sacred Delos; and the God implore:
To learn what end of Woes we might expect,
And to what Clime, our weary Course direct.
'Twas Night, when every Creature, void of Cares,
The common gift of balmy Slumber shares:
The Statues of my Gods, (for such they seemed)
Those Gods whom I from flaming Troy redeemed,
Before me stood; Majestically bright,
Full in the Beams of Phoebe's entering light.
Then thus they spoke; and eased my troubled Mind:
What from the Delian God thou go to find,
He tells thee here; and sends us to relate:
Those Powers are we, Companions of thy Fate,
Who from the burning Town by thee were brought;
Thy Fortune followed, and thy safety wrought.
Through Seas and Lands, as we thy Steps attend,
So shall our Care thy Glorious Race befriend.
An ample Realm for thee thy Fates ordain;
A Town, that over the conquered World shall reign.
Thou, mighty Walls for mighty Nations build;
Nor let thy weary Mind to Labors yield:
But change thy Seat; for not the Delian God,
Nor we, have given thee Crete for our Abode.
A Land there is, Hesperia called of old,
The Soil is fruitful, and the Natives bold.
The Oenotrians held it once; by later Fame,
Now called Italia from the Leader's Name.
Jasius there, and Dardanus were born:
From thence we came, and thither must return.
Rise, and thy Sire with these glad Tidings greet;
Search Italy, for Jove denies thee Creet.
Astonished at their Voices, and their sight,
(Nor were they Dreams, but Visions of the Night;
I saw, I knew their Faces, and descried
In perfect View, their Hair with Fillets tied:)
I started from my Couch, a clammy Sweat
On all my Limbs, and shivering Body sat.
To Heaven I lift my Hands with pious haste,
And sacred Incense in the Flames I cast.
Thus to the Gods their perfect Honors done,
More cheerful to my good old Sire I run:
And tell the pleasing News; in little space
He found his Error, of the double Race.
Not, as before he deemed, derived from Creet;
No more deluded by the doubtful Seat.
Then said, O Son, turmoil'd in Trojan Fate;
Such things as these Cassandra did relate.
This Day revives within my Mind, what she
Foretold of Troy renewed in Italy;
And Latian Lands: but who could then have thought,
That Phrygian Gods to Latium should be brought;
Or who believed what mad Cassandra taught?
Now let us go, where Phoebus leads the way:
He said, and we with glad Consent obey.
Forsake the Seat; and leaving few behind,
We spread our sails before the willing Wind.
Now from the sight of Land, our Galleys move,
With only Seas around, and Skies above.
When over our Heads, descends a burst of Rain;
And Night, with sable Clouds involves the Main:
The ruffling Winds the foamy Billows raise:
The scattered Fleet is forced to several Ways:
The face of Heaven is ravished from our Eyes,
And in redoubled Peals the roaring Thunder flys.
Cast from our Course, we wander in the Dark;
No Stars to guide, no point of Land to mark.
Even Palinurus no distinction found
Betwixt the Night and Day; such Darkness reigned around.
Three starless Nights the doubtful Navy strays
Without Distinction, and three Sunless Days.
The fourth renews the Light, and from our Shrowds
We view a rising Land like distant Clouds:
The Mountain tops confirm the pleasing Sight;
And curling Smoke ascending from their Height.
The Canvas falls; their Oars the Sailors ply;
From the rude strokes the whirling Waters fly.
At length I land upon the Strophades;
Safe from the danger of the stormy Seas:
Those Isles are compassed by the Ionian Main;
The dire Abode where the foul Harpies reign:
Forced by the winged Warriors to repair
To their old Homes, and leave their costly Fare.
Monsters more fierce, offended Heaven never sent
From Hell's Abyss, for Human Punishment.
With Virgin-faces, but with Wombs obscene,
Foul Paunches, and with Ordure still unclean:
With Claws for Hands, and Looks for ever lean.
We landed at the Port; and soon beheld
Fat Herds of Oxen graze the flowery Field:
And wanton Goats without a Keeper strayed:
With Weapons we the welcome Prey invade.
Then call the Gods, for Partners of our Feast:
And Jove himself the chief invited Guest.
We spread the Tables, on the greensword Ground:
We feed with Hunger, and the Bowls go round.
When from the Mountain tops, with hideous Cry,
And clatt'ring Wings, the hungry Harpies fly:
They snatch the Meat; defiling all they find:
And parting leave a loathsome Stench behind.
Close by a hollow Rock, again we sit;
New dress the Dinner, and the Beds refit:
Secure from Sight, beneath a pleasing Shade;
Where tufted Trees a native Arbor made.
Again the Holy Fires on Altars burn:
And once again the ravenous Birds return:
Or from the dark Recesses where they ly*
Or from another Quarter of the Sky.
With filthy Claws their odious Meal repeat,
And mix their loathsome Ordures with their Meat.
I bid my Friends for Vengeance then prepare;
And with the Hellish Nation wage the War.
They, as commanded, for the Fight provide,
And in the Grass their glittering Weapons hide:
Then, when along the crooked Shore we hear
Their clatt'ring Wings, and saw the Foes appear;
Misenus sounds a charge: We take the Alarm;
And our strong hands with Swords and Bucklers arm.
In this new kind of Combat, all employ
Their utmost Force, the Monsters to destroy.
In vain; the fated Skin is proof to Wounds:
And from their Plumes the shining Sword rebounds.
At length rebuff'd, they leave their mangled Prey,
And their stretched Pinions to the Skies display.
Yet one remained, the Messenger of Fate;
High on a craggy Cliff Celaeno sat,
And thus her dismal Errand did relate.
To ye Right Reverend Dr: John Hartstonge Bp: of Ossory in Kilkenny Son of Sr.
Standish Hartstonge Bart

AE. 3. l. 315.


What, not contented with our Oxen slain,
Dare you with Heaven an impious War maintain,
And drive the Harpies from their Native Reign?
Heed therefore what I say; and keep in mind
What Jove decrees, what Phoebus has designed:
And I, the Fury's Queen, from both relate:
You seek the Italian Shores, foredoom'd by Fate:
The Italian Shores are granted you to find:
And a safe Passage to the Port assigned.
But know, that e're your promised Walls you build,
My Curses shall severely be fulfilled.
Fierce Famine is your Lot, for this Misdeed,
Reduced to grind the Plates on which you feed.
She said; and to the neighboring Forest flew:
Our Courage fails us, and our Fears renew.
Hopeless to win by War, to Prayers we fall:
And on the offended Harpies humbly call.
And whether Gods, or Birds obscene they were,
Our Vows for Pardon, and for Peace prefer.
But old Anchises, offering Sacrifice,
And lifting up to Heaven his Hands, and Eyes;
Adored the greater Gods: Avert, said he,
These Omens, render vain this Prophecy:
And from the impending Curse, a Pious People free.
Thus having said, he bids us put to Sea;
We loose from Shore our Haulsers, and obey:
And soon with swelling Sails, pursue the watery Way.
Amidst our course Zacynthian Woods appear;
And next by rocky Neritos we steer:
We fly from Ithaca's detested Shore,
And curse the Land which dire Ulysses bore.
At length Leucates cloudy top appears;
And Phoebus Temple, which the Sailor fears.
Resolved to breath a while from Labor past,
Our crooked Anchors from the Prow we cast;
And joyful to the little City haste.
Here safe beyond our Hopes, our Vows we pay
To Jove, the Guide and Patron of our way.
The Customs of our Country we pursue;
And Trojan Games on Actian Shores renew.
Our Youth, their naked Limbs besmear with Oil;
And exercise the Wrastlers noble Toil.
Pleased to have sailed so long before the Wind;
And left so many Grecian Towns behind.
The Sun had now fulfilled his Annual Course,
And Boreas on the Seas displayed his Force:
I fixed upon the Temples lofty Door,
The brazen Shield which vanquished Abas bore:
The Verse beneath, my Name and Action speaks,
These Arms, Aeneas took from Conquering Greeks.
Then I command to weigh; the Seamen ply
Their sweeping Oars, the smokeing Billows fly.
The sight of high Phaeacia soon we lost:
And skim'd along Epirus rocky Coast.
Then to Chaonia's Port our Course we bend,
And landed, to Buthrotus heights ascend.
Here wondrous things were loudly blazed by Fame;
How Helenus revived the Trojan Name;
And reigned in Greece: That Priam's captive Son
Succeeded Pyrrhus in his Bed and Throne.
And fair Andromache, restored by Fate,
Once more was happy in a Trojan Mate.
I leave my Galleys riding in the Port;
And long to see the new Dardanian Court.
By chance, the mournful Queen, before the Gate,
Then solemnized her former Husbands Fate.
To The Honble. Dr: Ion: Mountague Master of Trinity College in Cambridge

AE. 3. l: 415.


Green Altars raised of Turf, with Gifts she Crowned;
And sacred Priests in order stand around;
And thrice the Name of hapless Hector sound.
The Grove it self resembles Ida's Wood;
And Simois seemed the well dissembled Flood.
But when, at nearer distance, she beheld
My shining Armor, and my Trojan Shield;
Astonished at the sight, the vital Heat
Forsakes her Limbs, her Veins no longer beat:
She faints, she falls, and scarce recov'ring strength,
Thus, with a falt'ring Tongue, she speaks at length.
Are you alive, O Goddess born! she said,
Or if a Ghost, then where is Hector's Shade?
At this, she cast a loud and frightful Cry:
With broken words, I made this brief Reply.
All of me that remains, appears in sight,
I live; if living be to loath the Light.
No Phantome; but I drag a wretched life;
My Fate resembling that of Hector's Wife.
What have you suffered since you lost your Lord,
By what strange blessing are you now restored!
Still are you Hector's, or is Hector fled,
And his Remembrance lost in Pyrrhus Bed?
With Eyes dejected, in a lowly tone,
After a modest pause, she thus begun.
Oh only happy Maid of Priam's Race,
Whom Death delivered from the Foes embrace!
Commanded on Achilles Tomb to die,
Not forced, like us, to hard Captivity:
Or in a haughty Master's Arms to lie.
In Grecian Ships unhappy we were born:
Endured the Victor's Lust, sustained the Scorn:
Thus I submitted to the lawless pride
Of Pyrrhus, more a Handmaid than a Bride.
Cloyed with Possession, He forsook my Bed,
And Helen's lovely Daughter sought to wed.
Then me, to Trojan Helenus resigned:
And his two Slaves in equal Marriage joined.
Till young Orestes, pierced with deep despair,
And longing to redeem the promised Fair,
Before Apollo's Altar slew the Ravisher.
By Pyrrhus death the Kingdom we regained:
At least one half with Helenus remained;
Our part, from Chaon, He Chaonia calls:
And names, from Pergamus, his rising Walls.
But you, what Fates have landed on our Coast,
What Gods have sent you, or what Storms have tossed?
Does young Ascanius life and health enjoy,
Saved from the Ruins of unhappy Troy!
O tell me how his Mothers loss he bears,
What hopes are promised from his blooming years,
How much of Hector in his Face appears?
She spoke: and mixed her Speech with mournful Cries:
And fruitless Tears came trickling from her Eyes.
At length her Lord descends upon the Plain;
In pomp, attended with a numerous Train:
Receives his Friends, and to the City leads;
And Tears of Joy amidst his Welcome sheds.
Proceeding on, another Troy I see;
Or, in less compass, Troy's Epitome.
A Riv'let by the name of Xanthus ran:
And I embrace the Scaean Gate again.
My Friends in Portico's were entertained;
And Feasts and Pleasures through the City reigned.
The Tables filled the spacious Hall around:
And Golden Bowls with sparkling Wine were crowned.
Two days we passed in mirth, till friendly Gales,
Blown from the South, supplied our swelling Sails.
Then to the Royal Seer I thus began:
O thou who know beyond the reach of Man,
The Laws of Heaven, and what the Stars decree,
Whom Phoebus taught unerring Prophecy,
From his own Tripod, and his holy Tree:
Skilled in the winged Inhabitants of Air,
What Auspices their notes, and flights declare:
O say; for all Religious Rites portend
A happy Voyage, and a prosperous End:
And every Power and Omen of the Sky,
Direct my Course for destined Italy:
But only dire Celaeno, from the Gods,
A dismal Famine fatally fore-bodes:
O say what Dangers I am first to shun:
What Toils to vanquish, and what Course to run.
The Prophet first with Sacrifice adores
The greater Gods; their Pardon then implores:
Unbinds the Fillet from his holy Head;
To Phoebus next, my trembling Steps he led:
Full of religious Doubts, and awful dread.
Then with his God possessed, before the Shrine,
These words proceeded from his Mouth Divine.
O Goddess-born, (for Heaven's appointed Will,
With greater Auspices of good than ill,
Fore-shows thy Voyage, and thy Course directs;
Thy Fates conspire, and Jove himself protects:)
Of many things, some few I shall explain,
Teach thee to shun the dangers of the Main,
And how at length the promised Shore to gain.
The rest the Fates from Helenus conceal;
And Juno's angry Power forbids to tell.
First then, that happy Shore, that seems so nigh,
Will far from your deluded Wishes fly:
Long tracts of Seas divide your hopes from Italy.
For you must cruise along Sicilian Shoars;
And stem the Currents with your struggling Oars:
Then round the Italian Coast your Navy steer;
And after this to Circe's Island veer.
And last, before your new Foundations rise,
Must pass the Stygian Lake, and view the nether Skies.
Now mark the Signs of future Ease and Rest;
And bear them safely treasured in thy Breast.
When in the shady Shelter of a Wood,
And near the Margin of a gentle Flood,
Thou shall behold a Sow upon the Ground,
With thirty sucking young encompassed round;
The Dam and Offspring white as falling Snow:
These on thy City shall their Name bestow:
And there shall end thy Labors and thy Woe.
Nor let the threatened Famine fright thy Mind,
For Phoebus will assist; and Fate the way will find.
Let not thy Course to that ill Coast be bent,
Which fronts from far the Epirian Continent;
Those parts are all by Grecian Foes possessed:
The salvage Locrians here the Shores infest:
There fierce Idomeneus his City builds,
And guards with Arms the Salentinian Fields.
And on the Mountains brow Petilia stands,
Which Philoctetes with his Troops commands.
Even when thy Fleet is landed on the Shore,
And Priests with holy Vows the Gods adore;
Then with a Purple Veil involve your Eyes,
Lest hostile Faces blast the Sacrifice.
These Rites and Customs to the Rest commend;
That to your Pious Race they may descend.
When parted hence, the Wind that ready waits
For Sicily, shall bear you to the Streights:
Where proud Pelorus opes a wider way,
Tack to the Larboord, and stand off to Sea:
Veer Star-board Sea and Land. The Italian Shore,
And fair Sicilia's Coast were one, before
An Earthquake caused the Flaw, the roaring Tides
The Passage broke, that Land from Land divides:
And where the Lands retired, the rushing Ocean rides.
Distinguished by the Streights, on either hand,
Now rising Cities in long order stand;
And fruitful Fields: So much can Time invade
The mouldring Work, that beauteous Nature made.
Far on the right, her Dogs foul Scylla hides:
Charibdis roaring on the left presides;
And in her greedy Whirl-pool sucks the Tides:
Then Spouts them from below; with Fury driven,
The Waves mount up, and wash the face of Heaven.
But Scylla from her Den, with open Jaws,
The sinking Vessel in her Eddy draws;
Then dashes on the Rocks: A Human Face,
And Virgin Bosom, hides her Tails disgrace.
Her Parts obscene below the Waves descend,
With Dogs enclosed; and in a Dolphin end.
It Is safer, then, to bear aloof to Sea,
And coast Pachynus, though with more delay;
Than once to view misshapen Scylla near,
And the loud yell of watery Wolves to hear.
Besides, if Faith to Helenus be due,
And if Prophetic Phoebus tell me true;
Do not this Precept of your Friend forget;
Which therefore more than once I must repeat.
Above the rest, great Juno's Name adore:
Pay Vows to Juno; Juno's Aid implore.
Let Gifts be to the mighty Queen designed;
And mollify with Prayers her haughty Mind.
Thus, at the length, your Passage shall be free,
And you shall safe descend on Italy.
Arrived at Cumae, when you view the Flood
Of black Avernus, and the sounding Wood,
The mad prophetic Sybil you shall find,
Dark in a Cave, and on a Rock reclined.
She sings the Fates, and in her frantic Fitts,
The Notes and Names inscribed, to Leafs commits.
What she commits to Leafs, in order laid,
Before the Caverns Entrance are displayed:
Unmoved they lie, but if a Blast of Wind
Without, or Vapors issue from behind,
The Leafs are born aloft in liquid Air,
And she resumes no more her Museful Care:
Nor gathers from the Rocks her scattered Verse;
Nor sets in order what the Winds disperse.
Thus, many not succeeding, most upbraid
The Madness of the visionary Maid;
And with loud Curses leave the mystic Shade.
Think it not loss of time a while to stay;
Though thy Companions chide thy long delay:
Though summoned to the Seas, though pleasing Gales
Invite thy Course, and stretch thy swelling Sails.
But beg the sacred Priestess to relate
With willing Words, and not to write thy Fate.
The fierce Italian People she will show;
And all thy Wars, and all thy Future Woe;
And what thou may avoid, and what must undergo.
She shall direct thy Course, instruct thy Mind;
And teach thee how the happy Shores to find.
This is what Heaven allows me to relate:
Now part in Peace; pursue thy better Fate,
And raise, by strength of Arms, the Trojan State*
This, when the Priest with friendly Voice declared,
He gave me License, and rich Gifts prepared:
Bounteous of Treasure, he supplied my want
With heavy Gold, and polished Elephant.
Then Dodonaean Caldrons put on Board,
And every Ship with Sums of Silver stored.
A trusty Coat of Mail to me he sent,
Thrice chained with Gold, for Use and Ornament:
The Helm of Pyrrhus added to the rest,
That flourished with a Plume and waving Crest.
Nor was my Sire forgotten, nor my Friends:
And large Recruits he to my Navy sends;
Men, Horses, Captains, Arms, and warlick Stores:
Supplies new Pilots, and new sweeping Oars.
Mean time, my Sire commands to hoist our Sails;
Lest we should lose the first auspicious Gales.
The Prophet blessed the parting Crew: and last,
With Words like these, his ancient Friend embraced.
Old happy Man, the Care of Gods above,
Whom Heavenly Venus honored with her Love,
And twice preserved thy Life, when Troy was lost;
Behold from far the wished Ausonian Coast:
There land; but take a larger Compass round;
For that before is all forbidden Ground.
The Shore that Phoebus has designed for you,
At farther distance lies, concealed from view.
Go happy hence, and seek your new Abodes;
Blessed in a Son, and favored by the Gods:
For I with useless words prolong your stay;
When Southern Gales have summoned you away.
Nor less the Queen our parting thence deplored;
Nor was less bounteous than her Trojan Lord.
A noble Present to my Son she brought,
A Robe with Flowers on Golden Tissue wrought;
A Phrygian Vest; and loads, with Gifts beside
Of precious Texture, and of Asian Pride.
Accept, she said, these Monuments of Love;
Which in my Youth with happier Hands I wove:
Regard these Trifles for the Giver's sake;
It Is the last Present Hector's Wife can make.
Thou call'st my lost Astyanax to mind:
In thee his Features, and his Form I find.
His Eyes so sparkled with a lively Flame;
Such were his Motions, such was all his Frame;
And ah! had Heaven so pleased, his Years had been the same.
With Tears I took my last adieu, and said,
Your Fortune, happy pair, already made,
Leaves you no farther Wish: My different state,
Avoiding one, incurs another Fate.
To you a quiet Seat the Gods allow,
You have no Shores to search, no Seas to plow,
Nor Fields of flying Italy to chase:
(Deluding Visions, and a vain Embrace!)
You see another Simois, and enjoy
The labor of your Hands another Troy;
With better Auspice than her ancient Towers:
And less obnoxious to the Grecian Powers.
If e're the Gods, whom I with Vows adore,
Conduct my Steps to Tiber's happy Shore:
If ever I ascend the Latian Throne,
And build a City I may call my own,
As both of us our Birth from Troy derive,
So let our Kindred Lines in Concord live:
And both in Acts of equal Friendship strive.
Our Fortunes, good or bad, shall be the same*
The double Troy shall differ but in Name:
That what we now begin, may never end;
But long, to late Posterity descend.
To Edward Brown Dr. in Physic.

AE. 3. l. 625.


Near the Ceraunean Rocks our Course we bore:
(The shortest passage to the Italian shore:)
Now had the Sun withdrawn his radiant Light,
And Hills were hid in dusky Shades of Night:
We land; and on the bosom of the Ground
A safe Retreat, and a bare Lodging found;
Close by the Shore we lay; the Sailors keep
Their watches, and the rest securely sleep.
The Night proceeding on with silent pace,
Stood in her noon; and viewed with equal Face,
Her steepy rise, and her declining Race.
Then wakeful Palinurus rose, to spy
The face of Heaven, and the Nocturnal Sky;
And listened every breath of Air to try:
Observes the Stars, and notes their sliding Course,
The Pleiads, Hyads, and their watery force;
And both the Bears is careful to behold;
And bright Orion armed with burnished Gold.
Then when he saw no threatening Tempest Nigh,
But a sure promise of a settled Sky;
He gave the Sign to weigh; we break our sleep;
Forsake the pleasing Shore, and plow the deep.
And now the rising Morn, with rosy light
Adorns the Skies, and puts the Stars to flight:
When we from far, like bluish Mists, descry
The Hills, and then the Plains of Italy.
Achates first pronounced the Joyful sound;
Then Italy the cheerful Crew rebound.
My Sire Anchises crowned a Cup with Wine:
And offering, thus implored the Powers Divine.
Ye Gods, presiding over Lands and Seas,
And you who raging Winds and Waves appease,
Breath on our swelling Sails a prosperous Wind:
And smooth our Passage to the Port assigned.
The gentle Gales their flagging force renew;
And now the happy Harbor is in view.
Minerva's Temple then salutes our sight;
Placed, as a Landmark, on the Mountains height:
We furl our Sails, and turn the Prows to shore;
The curling Waters round the Galleys roar:
The Land lies open to the raging East,
Then, bending like a Bow, with Rocks compressed,
Shuts out the Storms; the Winds and Waves complain,
And vent their malice on the Cliffs in vain.
The Port lies hid within; on either side
Two Towering Rocks the narrow mouth divide.
The Temple, which aloft we viewed before,
To distance flies, and seems to shun the Shore.
Scarce landed, the first Omens I beheld
Were four white Steeds that crop'd the flowery Field.
War, War is threatened from this Foreign Ground,
(My Father cried) where warlike Steeds are found.
Yet, since reclaimed to Chariots they submit,
And bend to stubborn Yokes, and champ the Bitt,
Peace may succeed to War. Our way we bend
To Pallas, and the sacred Hill ascend.
There, prostrate to the fierce Virago pray;
Whose Temple was the Landmark of our way.
Each with a Phrygian Mantle veiled his Head;
And all Commands of Helenus obeyed;
And pious Rites to Grecian Juno paid.
These dues performed, we stretch our Sails, and stand
To Sea, forsaking that suspected Land.
From hence Tarentum's Bay appears in view;
For Hercules renowned, if Fame be true.
Just opposite, Lacinian Juno stands;
Caulonian Towers and Scylacaean Strands.
For Shipwrecks feared: Mount Etna thence we spy,
Known by the smoaky Flames which Cloud the Sky.
Far off we hear the Waves, with surly sound
Invade the Rocks, the Rocks their groans rebound.
The Billows break upon the sounding Strand;
And roll the rising Tide, impure with Sand.
Then thus Anchises, in Experience old,
It Is that Charibdis which the Seer foretold:
And those the promised Rocks; bear off to Sea:
With haste the frighted Mariners obey.
First Palinurus to the Larboor'd veer'd;
Then all the Fleet by his Example steered.
To Heaven aloft on ridgy Waves we ride;
Then down to Hell descend, when they divide.
And thrice our Galleys knocked the stony ground,
And thrice the hollow Rocks returned the sound,
And thrice we saw the Stars, that stood with dews around.
The flagging Winds forsook us, with the Sun;
And wearied, on Cyclopean Shores we run.
The Port capacious, and secure from Wind,
Is to the foot of thundering Etna joined.
By turns a pitchy Cloud she rowls on high;
By turns hot Embers from her entrails fly;
And flakes of mounting Flames, that lick the Sky.
Often from her Bowels massy Rocks are thrown,
And shivered by the force come piecemeal down.
Often liquid Lakes of burning Sulphur flow,
Fed from the fiery Springs that boil below.
Enceladus they say, transfixed by Jove,
With blasted Limbs came tumbling from above:
And, where he fell, the Avenging Father drew
This flaming Hill, and on his Body threw:
As often as he turns his weary sides,
He shakes the solid Isle, and smoke the Heavens hides.
In shady Woods we pass the tedious Night,
Where bellowing Sounds and Groans our Souls affright
Of which no Cause is offered to the sight.
For not one Star was kindled in the Sky;
Nor could the Moon her borrowed Light supply:
For misty Clouds invovl'd the Firmament;
The Stars were muffled, and the Moon was pent.
Scarce had the rising Sun the day revealed;
Scarce had his heat the pearly dews dispelled;
When from the Woods there bolts, before our sight,
Somewhat, betwixt a Mortal and a Spright.
So thin, so ghastly meagre, and so wan,
So bare of flesh, he scarce resembled Man.
This thing, all tattered, seemed from far t'implore
Our pious aid, and pointed to the Shore.
We look behind; then view his shaggy Beard;
His Clothes were tagg'd with Thorns, and Filth his Limbs besmeared:
The rest, in Mien, in habit, and in Face,
Appeared a Greek; and such indeed he was.
He cast on us, from far, a frightful view,
Whom soon for Trojans and for Foes he knew:
Stood still, and paused; then all at once began
To stretch his Limbs, and trembled as he ran.
Soon as approached, upon his Knees he falls,
And thus with Tears and Sighs for pity calls.
Now by the Powers above, and what we share
As Nature's common Gift, this vital Air,
O Trojans take me hence: I beg no more,
But bear me far from this unhappy Shore.
It Is true I am a Greek, and farther own,
Among your Foes besieged the Imperial Town;
For such Demerits if my death be due,
No more for this abandoned life I sue:
This only Favor let my Tears obtain,
To throw me headlong in the rapid Main:
Since nothing more than Death my Crime demands,
I dye content, to dye by human Hands.
He said, and on his Knees my Knees embraced,
I bad him boldly tell his Fortune past;
His present State, his Lineage and his Name;
The occasion of his Fears, and whence he came.
The good Anchises raised him with his Hand;
Who, thus encouraged, answered our Demand:
From Ithaca my native Soil I came
To Troy, and Achaemenides my Name.
Me, my poor Father, with Ulysses sent;
(Oh had I stayed, with Poverty content!)
But fearful for themselves, my Countrymen
Left me forsaken in the Cyclop's Den.
The Cave, though large, was dark, the dismal Flore
Was paved with mangled Limbs and putrid Gore.
Our monstrous Host, of more than Human Size,
Erects his Head, and stares within the Skies.
Bellowing his Voice, and horrid is his Hue.
Ye Gods, remove this Plague from Mortal View!
The Joints of slaughtered Wretches are his Food:
And for his Wine he quaffs the streaming Blood.
These Eyes beheld, when with his spacious Hand
He seized two Captives of our Grecian Band;
Stretched on his Back, he dashed against the Stones
Their broken Bodies, and their crackling Bones:
With spouting Blood the Purple Pavement swims,
While the dire Glutton grinds the trembling Limbs.
Not unrevenged, Ulysses bore their Fate,
Nor thoughtless of his own unhappy State:
For, gorged with Flesh, and drunk with Human Wine,
While fast asleep the Giant lay supine;
Snoaring aloud, and belching from his Maw
His indigested Foam, and Morsels raw:
We pray, we cast the Lots, and then surround
The monstrous Body, stretched along the Ground:
Each, as he could approach him, lends a hand
To bore his Eyeball with a flaming Brand.
Beneath his frowning Forehead lay his Eye,
(For only one did the vast Frame supply;)
But that a Globe so large, his Front it filled,
Like the Sun's disk, or like a Grecian Shield.
The Stroke succeeds; and down the Pupil bends;
This Vengeance followed for our slaughtered Friends.
But haste, unhappy Wretches, haste to fly;
Your Cables cut, and on your Oars rely.
Such, and so vast as Polypheme appears,
A hundred more this hated Island bears:
Like him in Caves they shut their woolly Sheep,
Like him, their Herds on tops of Mountains keep;
Like him, with mighty Strides, they stalk from Steep to Steep.
And now three Moons their sharpened Horns renew
Since thus in Woods and Wilds, obscure from view,
I drag my loathsome Days with mortal Fright;
And in deserted Caverns lodge by Night.
Often from the Rocks a dreadful Prospect see,
Of the huge Cyclops, like a walking Tree:
From far I hear his thundering Voice resound;
And trampling Feet that shake the solid Ground.
Cornels, and salvage Berries of the Wood,
And Roots and Herbs have been my meagre Food.
While all around my longing Eyes I cast,
I saw your happy Ships appear at last.
On those I fixed my hopes, to these I run,
It Is all I ask this cruel Race to shun:
To Wm. Gibbons Dr.: in Physic

AE. 3. l. 865.


What other Death you please your selves, bestow.
Scarce had he said, when on the Mountain's brow,
We saw the Gyant-Shepherd stalk before
His following Flock, and leading to the Shore.
A monstrous Bulk, deformed, deprived of Sight,
His Staff a trunk of Pine, to guide his steps aright.
His pondrous Whistle from his Neck descends;
His woolly Care their pensive Lord attends:
This only Solace his hard Fortune sends.
Soon as he reached the Shore, and touched the Waves,
From his bored Eye the gutt'ring Blood he laves:
He gnash'd his Teeth and groaned; through Seas he strides,
And scarce the topmost Billows touched his sides.
Seized with a sudden Fear, we run to Sea,
The Cables cut, and silent haste away:
The well deserving Stranger entertain;
Then, buckling to the Work, our Oars divide the Main.
The Giant harken'd to the dashing Sound:
But when our Vessels out of reach he found,
He strided onward; and in vain essayed
The Ionian Deep, and durst no farther wade.
With that he roared aloud; the dreadful Cry
Shakes Earth, and Air, and Seas; the Billows fly
Before the bellowing Noise, to distant Italy.
The neighboring Aetna trembled all around;
The winding Caverns echo to the sound.
His brother Cyclops hear the yelling Roar;
And, rushing down the Mountains, crowd the Shore:
We saw their stern distorted looks, from far,
And one eyed Glance, that vainly threatened War.
A dreadful Council, with their heads on high;
The misty Clouds about their Foreheads fly:
Not yielding to the towering Tree of Jove;
Or tallest Cypress of Diana's Grove.
New Pangs of mortal Fear our Minds assail,
We tug at every Oar, and hoist up every Sail;
And take the Advantage of the friendly Gale.
Forewarned by Helenus, we strive to shun
Charibdis Gulf, nor dare to Scylla run.
An equal Fate on either side appears;
We, tacking to the left, are free from Fears.
For from Pelorus Point, the North arose,
And drove us back where swift Pantagias flows.
His Rocky Mouth we pass; and make our Way
By Thapsus, and Megara's winding Bay;
This Passage Achaemenides had shown,
Tracing the Course which he before had run.
Right o're-against Plemmyrium's watery Strand,
There lies an Isle once called the Ortygian Land:
Alpheus, as Old Fame reports, has found
From Greece a secret Passage underground:
By Love to beauteous Arethusa led,
And mingling here, they roll in the same Sacred Bed.
As Helenus enjoined, we next adore
Diana's Name, Protectress of the Shore.
With prosperous Gales we pass the quiet Sounds
Of still Elorus and his fruitsul Bounds.
Then doubling Cape Pachynus, we survey
The rocky Shore extended to the Sea.
The Town of Camarine from far we see;
And fenny Lake undrain'd by Fates decree.
In sight of the Geloan Fields we pass,
And the large Walls, where mighty Gela was:
Then Agragas with lofty Summets crowned;
Long for the Race of warlike Steeds renowned:
We passed Selinus, and the Palmy Land,
And widely shun the Lilybaean Strand,
Unsafe, for secret Rocks, and moving Sand.
At length on Shore the weary Fleet arrived;
Which Drepanum's unhappy Port received.
Here, after endless Labors, often tossed
By raging Storms, and driven on every Coast,
My dear, dear Father, spent with Age, I lost.
Ease of my Cares, and Solace of my Pain,
Saved through a thousand Toils, but saved in vain:
The Prophet, who my future Woes revealed,
Yet this, the greatest and the worst, concealed.
And dire Celoeno, whose foreboding Skill
Denounced all else, was silent of this Ill:
This my last Labor was. Some friendly God,
From thence conveyed us to your blessed Abode.
Thus to the listening Queen, the Royal Guest
His wandering Course, and all his Toils expressed;
And here concluding, he retired to rest.
The Fourth Book of the Aeneis.
The Argument.
Dido discovers to her Sister her Passion for Aeneas, and her thoughts of
marrying him. She prepares a Hunting-Match for his Entertainment. Juno by Venus
's consent raises a Storm, which separates the Hunters, and drives Aeneas and
Dido into the same Cave, where their Marriage is supposed to be completed.
Jupiter dispatches Mercury to Aeneas, to warn him from Carthage; Aeneas
secretly prepares for his Voyage: Dido finds out his Design, and to put a stop
to it, makes use of her own, and her Sister's Entreaties, and discovers all the
variety of Passions that are incident to a neglected Lover: When nothing would
prevail upon him, she contrives her own Death, with which this Book concludes.

BUT anxious Cares already seized the Queen:
She fed within her Veins a Flame unseen:
The Hero's Valor, Acts, and Birth inspire
Her Soul with Love, and fann the secret Fire.
His Words, his Looks imprinted in her Heart,
Improve the Passion, and increase the Smart.
Now, when the Purple Morn had chased away
The dewy Shadows, and restored the Day;
Her Sister first, with early Care she sought,
And thus in mournful Accents eased her Thought.
My dearest Anna, what new Dreams affright
My laboring Soul; what Visions of the Night
Disturb my Quiet, and distract my Breast,
With strange Ideas of our Trojan Guest?
His Worth, his Actions, and Majestic Air,
A Man descended from the Gods declare:
Fear never harbors in a Noble Mind,
But Modesty, with just Assurance joined.
To ye Right Honble. John Earl of Exeter Baron Coecill of Burleigh andct

AE. 4. l: 1.


Then, what he suffered, when by Fate betrayed,
What brave Attempts for falling Troy he made!
Such were his Looks, so gracefully he spoke,
That were I not resolved against the Yoke
Of hapless Marriage; never to be cursed
With second Love, so fatal was my first;
To this one Error I might yield again:
For since Sichaeus was untimely slain,
This only Man, is able to subvert
The fixed Foundations of my stubborn Heart.
And to confess my Frailty, to my shame,
Somewhat I find within, if not the same,
Too like the Sparkles of my former Flame.
But first let yawning Earth a Passage rend;
And let me through the dark Abyss descend;
First let avenging Jove, with Flames from high,
Drive down this Body, to the nether Sky,
Condemned with Ghosts in endless Night to lie;
Before I break the plighted Faith I gave;
No; he who had my Vows, shall ever have;
For whom I loved on Earth, I worship in the Grave.
She said; the Tears ran gushing from her Eyes,
And stopped her Speech: her Sister thus replies.
O dearer than the vital Air I breath,
Will you to Grief your blooming Years bequeath?
Condemned to wast in Woes, your lonely Life,
Without the Joys of Mother, or of Wife.
Think you these Tears, this pompous Train of Woe,
Are known, or valued by the Ghosts below?
I grant, that while your Sorrows yet were green,
It well became a Woman, and a Queen,
The Vows of Tyrian Princes to neglect,
To scorn Hyarbas, and his Love reject;
With all the Lybian Lords of mighty Name,
But will you fight against a pleasing Flame!
This little Spot of Land, which Heaven bestows,
On every side is hemmed with warlike Foes:
Getulian Cities here are spread around;
And fierce Numidians there your Frontiers bound;
Here lies a barren Wast of thirsty Land,
And there the Syrtes raise the moving Sand:
Barcaean Troops befiege the narrow Shore;
And from the Sea Pigmalion threatens more.
Propitious Heaven, and gracious Juno, lead
This wandering Navy to your needful Aid:
How will your Empire spread, your City rise
From such an Union, and with such Allies!
Implore the Favor of the Powers above;
And leave the Conduct of the rest to Love.
Continue still your hospitable way,
And still invent occasions of their Stay;
'Till Storms, and winter Winds, shall cease to threat,
And Plancks and Oars, repair their shattered Fleet.
These Words, which from a Friend, and Sister came,
With Ease resolved the Scruples of her Fame;
And added Fury to the kindled Flame.
Inspired with Hope, the Project they pursue;
On every Altar Sacrifice renew;
A chosen Ewe of two Years old they pay
To Ceres, Bacchus, and the God of Day:
Preferring Juno's Power: For Juno ties
The Nuptial Knot, and makes the Marriage Joys.
The beauteous Queen before her Altar stands,
And holds the Golden Goblet in her Hands:
A milk-white Heifar she with Flowers adorns,
And pours the ruddy Wine betwixt her Horns;
To the Lady Mary Giffard

AE. 4. l. 80.


And while the Priests with Prayer the Gods invoke,
She feeds their Altars with Sabaean Smoke.
With hourly Care the Sacrifice renews,
And anxiously the panting Entrails Views.
What Priestly Rites, alas! what Pious Art,
What Vows avail to cure a bleeding Heart!
A gentle Fire she feeds within her Veins;
Where the soft God secure in silence reigns.
Sick with desire, and seeking him she loves,
From Street to Street, the raving Dido roves.
So when the watchful Shepherd, from the Blind,
Wounds with a random Shaft the careless Hind;
Distracted with her pain she flies the Woods,
Bounds over the Lawn, and seeks the silent Floods;
With fruitless Care; for still the fatal Dart
Sticks in her side; and ranckles in her Heart.
And now she leads the Trojan Chief, along
The lofty Walls, amidst the buisie Throng;
Displays her Tyrian Wealth, and rising Town,
Which Love, without his Labor, makes his own.
This Pomp she shows to tempt her wondering Guest;
Her falt'ring Tongue forbids to speak the rest.
When Day declines, and Feasts renew the Night,
Still on his Face she feeds her famished sight;
She longs again to hear the Prince relate
His own Adventures, and the Trojan Fate:
He tells it over and over; but still in vain;
For still she begs to hear it, once again.
The Hearer on the Speaker's Mouth depends;
And thus the Tragic Story never ends.
Then, when they part, when Phoebe's paler Light
Withdraws, and falling Stars to Sleep invite,
She last remains, when when every Guest is gone,
Sits on the Bed he pressed, and sighs alone;
Absent, her absent Hero sees and hears;
Or in her Bosom young Ascanius bears:
And seeks the Father's Image in the Child,
If Love by Likeness might be so beguiled.
Mean time the rising Towers are at a stand:
No Labors exercise the youthful Band:
Nor use of Arts, nor Toils of Arms they know;
The Mole is left unfinished to the Foe.
The Mounds, the Works, the Walls, neglected lie,
And, left unbuilt, are shorter of the Sky.
But when Imperial Juno, from above,
Saw Dido fettered in the Chains of Love;
Hot with the Venom, which her Veins inflamed,
And by no sense of Shame to be reclaimed:
With soothing Words to Venus she begun.
High Praises, endless Honors you have won,
And mighty Trophies with your worthy Son:
Two Gods a silly Woman have undone.
Nor am I ignorant, you both suspect
This rising City, which my Hands erect:
But shall Celestial Discord never cease?
It Is better ended in a lasting Peace.
You stand possessed of all your Soul desired;
Poor Dido with consuming Love is fired:
Your Trojan with my Tyrian let us join,
So Dido shall be yours, Aeneas mine:
One common Kingdom, one united Line.
Elisa shall a Dardan Lord obey,
And lofty Carthage for a Dower convey.
Then Venus, who her hidden Fraud descried,
(Which would the Scepter of the World, misguide
To Lybian Shores,) thus artfully replied,
Who but a Fool, would Wars with Juno choose,
And such Alliance, and such Gifts refuse?
If Fortune with our joint Desires comply:
The Doubt is all from Jove, and Destiny.
Lest he forbid, with absolute Command,
To mix the People in one common Land.
Or will the Trojan, and the Tyrian Line,
In lasting Leagues, and sure Succession join?
But you, the Partner of his Bed and Throne,
May move his Mind; my Wishes are your own.
Mine, said Imperial Juno, be the Care;
Time urges, now, to perfect this Affair:
Attend my Counsel, and the Secret share.
When next the Sun his rising Light displays,
And guilds the World below, with Purple Rays;
The Queen, Aeneas, and the Tyrian Court,
Shall to the shady Woods, for Silvan Game, resort.
There, while the Huntsmen pitch their Toils around,
And cheerful Horns, from Side to Side, resound;
A Pitchy Cloud shall cover all the Plain
With Hail, and Thunder, and tempestuous Rain:
The fearful Train shall take their speedy Flight,
Dispersed, and all involved in gloomy Night:
One Cave a grateful Shelter shall afford
To the fair Princess, and the Trojan Lord.
I will my self, the bridal Bed prepare,
If you, to bless the Nuptials, will be there:
So shall their Loves be crowned with due Delights,
And Hymen shall be present at the Rites.
The Queen of Love consents, and closely smiles
At her vain Project, and discovered Wiles.
The rosy Morn was risen from the Main,
And Horns and Hounds awake the Princely Train:
They issue early through the City Gate,
Where the more wakeful Huntsmen ready wait,
With Nets, and Toils, and Darts, beside the force
Of Spartan Dogs, and swift Massylian Horse.
The Tyrian Peers, and Officers of State,
For the slow Queen, in Anti-Chambers wait:
Her lofty Courser, in the Court below,
(Who his Majestic Rider seems to know,)
Proud of his Purple Trappings, paws the Ground;
And champs the Golden Bitt; and spreads the Foam around.
The Queen at length appears: On either Hand
The brawny Guards in Martial Order stand.
A flow'rd Cymarr, with Golden Fringe, she wore;
And at her Back a Golden Quiver bore:
Her flowing Hair, a Golden Caul restrains;
A golden Clasp, the Tyrian Robe sustains.
Then young Ascanius, with a sprightly Grace,
Leads on the Trojan Youth to view the Chase.
But far above the rest in beauty shines
The great Aeneas, when the Troop he joins:
Like fair Apollo, when he leaves the frost
Of wintry Xanthus, and the Lycian Coast;
When to his Native Delos he resorts,
Ordains the Dances, and renews the Sports:
Where painted Scythians, mixed with Cretan Bands,
Before the joyful Altars join their Hands.
Himself, on Cynthus walking, sees below
The merry Madness of the sacred Show.
Green Wreaths of Bays his length of Hair enclose,
A Golden Fillet binds his awful Brows:
His Quiver sounds: Not less the Prince is seen
In manly Presence, or in lofty Mien.
Now had they reached the Hills, and stormed the Seat
Of salvage Beasts, in Dens, their last Retreat;
The Cry pursues the Mountain-Goats; they bound
From Rock to Rock, and keep the craggy Ground:
To The Right Honble. Hugh Ld Clifford Baron of Chudleigh in ye County of Devon,

AE. 4. l. 230.


Quite otherwise the Stags, a trembling Train,
In Herds unsingl'd, scour the dusty Plain;
And a long Chase, in open view, maintain.
The glad Ascanius, as his Courser guides,
Spurs through the Vale; and these and those outrides.
His Horses flanks and sides are forced to feel
The clanking lash, and goring of the Steel.
Impatiently he views the feeble Prey,
Wishing some Nobler Beast to cross his way.
And rather would the tusky Boar attend,
Or see the Lion from the Hills descend.
Mean time, the gathering Clouds obscure the Skies;
From Pole to Pole the forky Lightning flies;
The rattling Thunders roll; and Juno pours
A wintry Deluge down; and founding Showers.
The Company dispersed, to Coverts ride,
And seek the homely Cotts, or Mountains hollow side.
The rapid Rains, descending from the Hills,
To rolling Torrents raise the creeping Rills.
The Queen and Prince, as Love or Fortune guides,
One common Cavern in her Bosom hides.
Then first the trembling Earth the signal gave;
And flashing Fires enlighten all the Cave:
Hell from below, and Juno from above,
And howling Nymphs, were conscious to their Love.
From this ill Omend Hour, in Time arose
Debate and Death, and all succeeding woes.
The Queen whom sense of Honor could not move
No longer made a Secret of her Love;
But called it Marriage, by that specious Name,
To veil the Crime and sanctify the Shame.
The loud Report through Lybian Cities goes;
Fame, the great Ill, from fmall beginnings grows.
Swift from the first; and every Moment brings
New Vigor to her flights, new Pinions to her wings.
Soon grows the Pygmee to Gygantic size;
Her Feet on Earth, her Forehead in the Skies:
Enraged against the Gods, revengful Earth
Produced her last of the Titanian birth.
Swift is her walk, more swift her winged have:
A monstrous Fantom, horrible and vast;
As many Plumes as raise her lofty flight,
So many piercing Eyes enlarge her sight:
Millions of opening Mouths to Fame belong;
And every Mouth is furnished with a Tongue:
And round with listening Ears the flying Plague is hung.
She fills the peaceful Universe with Cries;
No Slumbers ever close her wakeful Eyes.
By Day from lofty Towers her Head she shows;
And spreads through trembling Crowds disastrous News.
With Court Informers haunts, and Royal Spies,
Things done relates, not done she feigns; and mingles Truth with Lies.
Talk is her business; and her chief delight
To tell of Prodigies, and cause affright.
She fills the Peoples Ears with Dido's Name;
Who, lost to Honor, and the sense of Shame,
Admits into her Throne and Nuptial Bed
A wandering Guest, who from his Country fled:
Whole days with him she passes in delights;
And wastes in Luxury long Winter Nights.
Forgetful of her Fame, and Royal Trust;
Dissolved in Ease, abandoned to her Lust.
The Goddess widely spreads the loud Report;
And flies at length to King Hyarba's Court.
When first possessed with this unwelcome News,
Whom did he not of Men and Gods accuse!
This Prince, from ravished Garamantis born,
A hundred Temples did with Spoils adorn,
In Ammon's Honor, his Celestial Sire;
A hundred Altars fed, with wakeful Fire:
And through his vast Dominions, Priests ordained,
Whose watchful Care these holy Rites maintained.
The Gates and Columns were with Garlands crowned,
And Blood of Victim Beasts enrich the Ground.
He, when he heard a Fugitive could move
The Tyrian Princess, who disdained his Love,
His Breast with Fury burned, his Eyes with Fire;
Mad with Despair, impatient with Desire.
Then on the Sacred Altars pouring Wine,
He thus with Prayers implored his Sire divine.
Great Jove, propitious to the Moorish Race,
Who feast on painted Beds, with Offerings grace
Thy Temples, and adore thy Power Divine
With offered Victims, and with sparkling Wine:
See thou not this? or do we fear in vain
Thy boasted Thunder, and thy thoughtless Reign?
Do thy broad Hands the forky Lightnings lance,
Thine are the Bolts, or the blind work of Chance?
A wandering Woman builds, within our State,
A little Town, bought at an easy Rate;
She pays me Homage, and my Grants allow,
A narrow space of Lybian Lands to plough.
Yet scorning me, by Passion blindly led,
Admits a banished Trojan to her Bed:
And now this other Paris, with his Train
Of conquered Cowards, must in Afric reign!
(Whom, what they are, their Looks and Garb confess;
Their Locks with Oil perfumed, their Lydian dress:)
He takes the Spoil, enjoys the Princely Dame;
And I, rejected I, adore an empty Name.
His Vows, in haughty Terms, he thus preferred,
And held his Altar's Horns; the mighty Thund'rer heard,
Then cast his Eyes on Carthage, where he found
The lustful Pair, in lawless pleasure drowned.
Lost in their Loves, insensible of Shame;
And both forgetful of their better Fame.
He calls Cyllenius; and the God attends;
By whom his menacing Command he sends.
Go, mount the Western Winds, and cleave the Sky;
Then, with a swift descent, to Carthage fly:
There find the Trojan Chief, who wastes his Days
In sloathful Riot, and inglorious Ease.
Nor minds the future City, given by Fate;
To him this Message from my Mouth relate.
Not so, fair Venus hoped, when twice she won
Thy Life with Prayers; nor promised such a Son.
Hers was a Hero, destined to command
A Martial Race; and rule the Latian Land.
Who should his ancient Line from Teucer draw;
And, on the conquered World, impose the Law.
If Glory cannot move a Mind so mean,
Nor future Praise, from fading Pleasure wean,
Yet why should he defraud his Son of Fame;
And grudge the Romans their Immortal Name!
What are his vain Designs! what hopes he more,
From his long lingering on a hostile Shore?
Regardless to redeem his Honor lost,
And for his Race to gain the Ausonian Coast!
Bid him with Speed the Tyrian Court forsake;
With this Command the slumbering Warrior wake.
Hermes obeys; with Golden Pinions binds
His flying Feet, and mounts the Western Winds:
And whether over the Seas or Earth he flies,
With rapid Force, they bear him down the Skies.
To John Walkeden of ye. Inner Temple Esquire:r

AE. 4. l. 230.


But first he grasps within his awful Hand,
The mark of Sovereign Power, his Magic Wand:
With this, he draws the Ghosts from hollow Graves,
With this he drives them down the Stygian Waves;
With this he seals in Sleep, the wakeful sight;
And Eyes, though closed in Death restores to Light.
Thus armed, the God begins his Airy Race;
And drives the racking Clouds along the liquid Space.
Now sees the Tops of Atlas, as he flies;
Whose brawny Back supports the starry Skies:
Atlas, whose Head with Piny Forests crowned,
Is beaten by the Winds; with foggy Vapors bound.
Snows hide his Shoulders; from beneath his Chin
The Founts of rolling Streams their Race begin:
A beard of Ice on his large Breast depends:
Here poised upon his Wings, the God descends.
Then, rested thus, he from the towering height
Plunged downward, with precipitated Flight:
Lights on the Seas, and skims along the Flood:
As Waterfowl, who seek their fishy Food,
Less, and yet less, to distant Prospect show,
By turns they dance aloft, and dive below:
Like these, the steerage of his Wings he plies;
And near the surface of the Water flies.
'Till having passed the Seas, and crossed the Sands,
He closed his Wings, and stooped on Lybian Lands:
Where Shepherds once were housed in homely Sheds,
Now Towers within the Clouds, advance their Heads.
Arriving there, he found the Trojan Prince,
New Ramparts raising for the Town's defense:
A Purple Scarf, with Gold embroidered over,
(Queen Dido's Gift) about his Waste he wore;
A Sword with glittering Gems diversified,
For Ornament, not use, hung idly by his side.
Then thus, with winged Words, the God began;
(Resuming his own Shape) degenerate Man,
Thou Woman's Property, what make thou here,
These foreign Walls, and Tyrian Towers to rear?
Forgetful of thy own? All powerful Jove,
Who sways the World below, and Heaven above,
Has sent me down, with this severe Command:
What means thy lingering in the Lybian Land?
If Glory cannot move a Mind so mean,
Nor future Praise, from flitting Pleasure wean,
Regard the Fortunes of thy rising Heir;
The promised Crown let young Ascanius wear.
To whom the Ausonian Scepter, and the State
Of Rome's Imperial Name, is owed by Fate.
So spoke the God; and speaking took his flight,
Involved in Clouds; and vanished out of sight.
The Pious Prince was seized with sudden Fear;
Mute was his Tongue, and upright stood his Hair:
Revolving in his Mind the stern Command,
He longs to fly, and loathes the charming Land.
What should he say, or how should he begin,
What Course, alas! remains, to steer between
The offended Lover, and the Powerful Queen!
This way, and that, he turns his anxious Mind,
And all Expedients tries, and none can find:
Fixed on the Deed, but doubtful of the Means;
After long Thought to this Advice he leans.
Three Chiefs he calls, commands them to repair
The Fleet, and ship their Men with silent Care:
Some plausible Pretense he bids them find,
To color what in secret he designed.
Himself, mean time, the softest Hours would choose,
Before the Lovesick Lady heard the News.
And move her tender Mind, by slow degrees,
To suffer what the Sovereign Power decrees:
Jove will inspire him, when, and what to say:
They hear with Pleasure, and with haste obey.
But soon the Queen perceives the thin Disguise;
(What Arts can blind a jealous Woman's Eyes!)
She was the first to find the secret Fraud,
Before the fatal News was blazed abroad.
Love, the first Motions of the Lover hears,
Quick to presage, and even in Safety fears.
Nor impious Fame was wanting to report
The Ships repaired; the Trojans thick Resort,
And purpose to forsake the Tyrian Court.
Frantic with Fear, impatient of the Wound,
And impotent of Mind, she roves the City round.
Less wild the Bacchanalian Dames appear,
When, from afar, their nightly God they hear,
And houl about the Hills, and shake the wreathy Spear.
At length she finds the dear perfidious Man;
Prevents his formed Excuse, and thus began.
Base and ungrateful, could you hope to fly,
And undisover'd escape a Lover's Eye!
Nor could my Kindness your Compassion move,
Nor plighted Vows, nor dearer bands of Love!
Or is the Death of a despairing Queen
Not worth preventing, though too well foreseen?
Even when the Wint'ry Winds command your stay,
You dare the Tempests, and defy the Sea.
False, as you are, suppose you were not bound
To Lands unknown, and foreign Coasts to found;
Were Troy restored, and Priam's happy Reign,
Now durst you tempt for Troy, the raging Main?
See, whom you fly; am I the Foe you shun?
Now by those holy Vows, so late begun,
By this right Hand, (since I have nothing more
To challenge, but the Faith you gave before;)
I beg you by these Tears too truly shed,
By the new Pleasures of our Nuptial Bed;
If ever Dido, when you most were kind,
Were pleasing in your Eyes, or touched your Mind;
By these my Prayers, if Prayers may yet have Place,
Pity the Fortunes of a falling Race.
For you I have provoked a Tyrant's Hate,
Incensed the Lybian, and the Tyrian State;
For you alone I suffer in my Fame;
Bereft of Honor, and exposed to Shame:
Whom have I now to trust, (ungrateful Guest,)
That only Name remains of all the rest!
What have I left, or whither can I fly;
Must I attend Pygmalion's Cruelty!
Or till Hyarba shall in Triumph lead
A Queen, that proudly scorned his proffered Bed!
Had you deferred, at least, your hasty Flight,
And left behind some Pledge of our delight,
Some Babe to bless the Mother's mournful sight;
Some young Aeneas, to supply your place;
Whose Features might express his Father's Face;
I should not then complain to live bereft
Of all my Husband, or be wholly left.
Here paused the Queen; unmoved he holds his Eyes,
By Jove's Command; nor suffered Love to rise,
Though heaving in his Heart; and thus at length, replies.
Fair Queen, you never can enough repeat
Your boundless Favors, or I own my Debt:
Nor can my Mind forget Eliza's Name,
While vital Breath inspires this Mortal Frame.
This, only let me speak in my Defense,
I never hoped a secret Flight from hence:
Much less pretended to the Lawful Claim
Of Sacred Nuptials, or, a Husband's Name.
For if indulgent Heaven would leave me free,
And not submit my Life to Fate's Decree,
My Choice would lead me to the Trojan Shore,
Those Relics to review, their Dust adore;
And Priam's ruined Palace to restore.
But now the Delphian Oracle Commands,
And Fate invites me to the Latian Lands.
That is the promised Place to which I steer,
And all my Vows are terminated there.
If you, a Tyrian, and a Stranger born,
With Walls and Towers a Lybian Town adorn;
Why may not we, like you, a Foreign Race,
Like you seek shelter in a Foreign Place?
As often as the Night obscures the Skies
With humid Shades, or twinkling Stars arise,
Anchises angry Ghost in Dreams appears;
Chides my delay, and fills my Soul with fears:
And young Ascanius justly may complain,
Of his defrauded Fate, and destined Reign.
Even now the Herald of the Gods appeared,
Waking I saw him, and his Message heard.
From Jove he came commissioned, Heavenly bright
With Radiant Beams, and manifest to Sight.
The Sender and the Sent, I both attest,
These Walls he entered, and those Words expressed.
Fair Queen, oppose not what the Gods command;
Forced by my Fate, I leave your happy Land.
Thus, while he spoke, already She began,
With sparkling Eyes, to view the guilty Man:
From Head to Foot surveyed his Person over,
Nor longer these outrageous Threats forbore.
False as thou art, and more than false, forsworn;
Not sprung from Noble Blood, nor Goddess-born,
But hewn from hardened Entrails of a Rock;
And rough Hyrcanian Tigers gave thee suck.
Why should I fawn, what have I worse to fear?
Did he once look, or lent a listening Ear;
Sighed when I sob'd, or shed one kindly Tear?
All Symptoms of a base Ungrateful Mind,
So foul, that which is worse, it is hard to find.
Of Man's Injustice, why should I complain?
The Gods, and Jove himself behold in vain
Triumphant Treason, yet no Thunder flies:
Nor Juno views my Wrongs with equal Eyes;
Faithless is Earth, and Faithless are the Skies!
Justice is fled, and Truth is now no more;
I saved the Shipwrack'd Exile on my Shore:
With needful Food his hungry Trojans fed;
I took the Traitor to my Throne and Bed:
Fool that I was -- it is little to repeat
The rest, I stored and Rigged his ruined Flect.
I rave, I rave: A God's Command he pleads,
And makes Heaven accessory to his Deeds.
Now Lycian Lotts, and now the Delian God;
Now Hermes is employed from Jove's abode,
To warn him hence; as if the peaceful State
Of Heavenly Powers were touched with Humane Fate!
But go; thy flight no longer I detain;
Go seek thy promised Kingdom through the Main:
Yet if the Heavens will hear my Pious Vow,
The faithless Waves, not half so false as thou;
Or secret Sands, shall Sepulchers afford
To thy proud Vessels, and their perjured Lord.
Then shall thou call on injured Dido's Name;
Dido shall come, in a black Sulph'ry flame;
When death has once dissolved her Mortal frame.
Shall smile to see the Traitor vainly weep,
Her angry Ghost arising from the Deep,
Shall haunt thee waking, and disturb thy Sleep.
At least my Shade thy Punishment shall know;
And Fame shall spread the pleasing News below.
Abruptly here she stops: Then turns away
Her loathing Eyes, and shuns the sight of Day.
Amazed he stood, revolving in his Mind
What Speech to frame, and what Excuse to find.
Her fearful Maids their fainting Mistress led;
And softly laid her on her Ivory Bed.
But good Aeneas, though he much desired
To give that Pity, which her Grief required,
Though much he mourned, and labored with his Love,
Resolved at length, obeys the Will of Jove:
Reviews his Forces; they with early Care
Unmoor their Vessels, and for Sea prepare.
The Fleet is soon afloat, in all its Pride:
And well calk'd Galleys in the Harbor ride.
Then Oaks for Oars they felled; or as they stood,
Of its green Arms despoiled the growing Wood.
Studious of Flight: The Beach is covered over
With Trojan Bands that blacken all the Shore:
On every side are seen, descending down,
Thick swarms of Soldiers laden from the Town.
Thus, in Battalia, march embodied Ants,
Fearful of Winter, and of future Wants,
TO invade the Corn, and to their Cells convey
The plundered Forage of their yellow Prey.
The sable Troops, along the narrow Tracks,
Scarce bear the weighty Burden on their Backs:
Some set their Shoulders to the ponderous Grain;
Some guard the Spoil, some lash the lagging Train;
All ply their several Tasks, and equal Toil sustain.
What Pangs the tender Breast of Dido tore,
When, from the Tower, she saw the covered Shore,
And heard the Shouts of Sailors from afar,
Mixed with the Murmurs of the watery War?
All powerful Love, what Changes can thou cause
In Human Hearts, subjected to thy Laws!
Once more her haughty Soul the Tyrant bends;
To Prayers and mean Submissions she descends.
No female Arts or Aids she left untried,
Nor Counsels unexplor'd, before she died.
Look, Anna, look; the Trojans crowd to Sea,
They spread their Canvass, and their Anchors weigh.
The shouting Crew, their Ships with Garlands binds;
Invoke the Sea-Gods, and invite the Winds.
Could I have thought this threatening Blow so near,
My tender Soul had been forewarned to bear.
But do not you my last Request deny,
With yon perfidious Man your Interest try;
And bring me News, if I must live or dye.
You are his Favorite, you alone can find
The dark recesses of his inmost Mind:
In all his trusted Secrets you have part,
And know the soft Approaches to his Heart.
Haste then, and humbly seek my haughty Foe;
Tell him, I did not with the Grecians go;
Nor did my Fleet against his Friends employ,
Nor swore the Ruin of unhappy Troy.
Nor moved with Hands profane his Father's Dust;
Why should he then reject a suit so just!
Whom does he shun, and whither would he fly;
Can he this last, this only Prayer deny!
Let him at least his dangerous Flight delay,
Wait better Winds, and hope a calmer Sea.
The Nuptials he disclaims I urge no more;
Let him pursue the promised Latian Shore.
A short delay is all I ask him now,
A pause of Grief; an interval from Woe:
'Till my soft Soul be tempered to sustain
Accustomed Sorrows, and inured to Pain.
If you in Pity grant this one Request,
My Death shall leave you of my Crown possessed.
This mournful message, Pious Anna bears,
And seconds, with her own, her Sister's Tears:
But all her Arts are still employed in vain;
Again she comes, and is refused again.
His hardened Heart nor Prayers nor Threatenings move;
Fate, and the God, had stopped his Ears to Love.
As when the Winds their airy Quarrel try;
Justling from every quarter of the Sky;
This way and that, the Mountain Oak they bend,
His Boughs they shatter, and his Branches rend;
With Leaves, and falling Mast, they spread the Ground,
The hollow Valleys echo to the Sound:
Unmoved, the Royal Plant their Fury mocks;
Or shaken, clings more closely to the Rocks:
Far as he shoots his towering Head on high,
So deep in Earth his fixed Foundations lie.
No less a Storm the Trojan Hero bears;
Thick Messages and loud Complaints he hears;
And bandy'd Words, still beating on his Ears.
Sighs, Groans and Tears, proclaim his inward Pains,
But the firm purpose of his Heart remains.
The wretched Queen, pursued by cruel Fate,
Begins at length the light of Heaven to hate:
And loathes to live: Then dire Portents she sees,
To hasten on the Death her Soul decrees.
Strange to relate: for when before the Shrine
She pours, in Sacrifice, the Purple Wine,
The Purple Wine is turned to putrid Blood:
And the white offered Milk, converts to Mud.
This dire Presage, to her alone revealed,
From all, and even her Sister, she concealed.
A Marble Temple stood within the Grove,
Sacred to Death, and to her murdered Love;
That honored Chapel she had hung around
With snowy Fleeces, and with Garlands crowned:
Often, when she visited this lonely Dome,
Strange Voices issued from her Husband's Tomb:
She thought she heard him summon her away;
Invite her to his Grave; and chide her stay.
Hourly it is heard, when with a bodeing Note
The solitary Screech-Owl strains her Throat:
And on a Chimney's top, or Turret's hight,
With Songs obscene, disturbs the Silence of the Night.
Besides, old Prophesies augment her Fears;
And stern Aeneas in her Dreams appears,
^^sdainful as by Day: She seems alone,
To wander in her Sleep, through ways unknown,
Guidless and dark: or, in a Desert Plain,
(...) seek her Subjects, and to seek in vain.
(...)k Pentheus, when distracted with his Fear,
He saw two Suns, and double Thebes appear:
Or mad Orestes, when his Mother's Ghost
^ull in his Face, infernal Torches tossed;
And shook her snaky locks: He shuns the sight,
Flies over the Stage, surprised with mortal fright;
The Furies guard the Door; and intercept his flight.
Now, sinking underneath a load of Grief,
From Death alone, she seeks her last Relief:
The Time and Means, resolved within her Breast,
She to her mournful Sister, thus addressed.
(Dissembling hope, her cloudy front she clears,
And a false Vigor in her Eyes appears.)
Rejoice she said, instructed from above,
My Lover I shall gain, or lose my Love.
Nigh rising Atlas, next the falling Sun,
Long tracts of Ethiopian Clymates run:
There, a Massylian Priestess I have found,
Honored for Age; for Magic Arts renowned:
The Hesperian Temple was her trusted Care;
'Twas she supplied the wakeful Dragons Fare.
She Poppy-Seeds in Honey taught to steep;
Reclaimed his Rage; and soothed him into sleep.
She watched the Golden Fruit; her Charms unbind
The Chains of Love; or fix them on the Mind.
She stops the Torrents, leaves the Channel dry;
Repels the Stars; and backward bears the Sky.
The yawning Earth rebellows to her Call;
Pale Ghosts ascend; and Mountain Ashes fall.
Witness, ye Gods, and thou my better part,
How loath I am to try this impious Art!
Within the secret Court, with silent Care,
Erect a lofty Pile, exposed in Air:
Hang on the topmost part, the Trojan Vest;
Spoils, Arms, and Presents of my faithless Guest.
Next, under these, the bridal Bed be placed,
Where I my Ruin in his Arms embraced:
All Relics of the Wretch are doomed to Fire;
For so the Priestess, and her Charms require.
Thus far she said, and farther Speech forbears:
A Mortal Paleness in her Face appears:
Yet, the mistrustless Anna, could not find
The secret Funeral, in these Rites designed;
Nor thought so dire a Rage possessed her Mind.
Unknowing of a Train concealed so well,
She feared no worse than when Sichaeus fell:
Therefore obeys. The fatal Pile they rear,
Within the secret Court, exposed in Air.
The cloven Holms and Pines are heaped on high;
And Garlands on the hollow Spaces lie.
Sad Cypress, Vervain, Eugh, compose the Wreath;
And every baleful green denoting Death.
The Queen, determined to the fatal Deed,
The Spoils and Sword he left, in order spread:
And the Man's Image on the Nuptial Bed.
And now (the sacred Altars placed around)
The Priestess enters, with her Hair unbound,
And thrice invokes the Powers below the Ground.
Night, Erebus, and Chaos she proclaims,
And threefold Hecat, with her hundred Names,
And three Diana's: next she sprinkles round,
With feigned Avernian Drops, the hallowed ground;
Culls hoary Simples, found by Phoebe's Light,
With brazen Sickles reaped at Noon of Night.
Then mixes baleful Juices in the Bowl:
And cuts the Forehead of a newborn Fool;
Robbing the Mother's love. The destined Queen
Observes, assisting at the Rites obscene:
A leavened Cake in her devoted Hands
She holds, and next the highest Altar stands:
One tender Foot was shod, her other bare;
Girt was her gathered Gown, and loose her Hair.
Thus dressed, she summoned with her dying Breath,
The Heavens and Planets conscious of her Death:
And every Power, if any rules above,
Who minds, or who revenges injured Love.
'Twas dead of Night, when weary Bodies close
Their Eyes in balmy Sleep, and soft Repose:
To Henry Tasburgh Esquire of Bodney in ye County of Norfolk.

AE. 4. l. 730.


The Winds no longer whisper through the Woods,
Nor murmuring Tides disturb the gentle Floods.
The Stars in silent order moved around,
And Peace, with downy wings, was brooding on the ground.
The Flocks and Herds, and parti-colour'd Fowl,
Which haunt the Woods, or swim the weedy Pool;
Stretched on the quiet Earth securely lay,
Forgetting the past Labors of the day.
All else of Nature's common Gift partake;
Unhappy Dido was alone awake.
Nor Sleep nor Ease the Furious Queen can find,
Sleep fled her Eyes, as Quiet fled her mind.
Despair, and Rage, and Love, divide her heart;
Despair and Rage had some, but Love the greater part.
Then thus she said within her secret Mind:
What shall I do, what Succor can I find!
Become a Supplyant to Hyarba's Pride,
And take my turn, to Court and be denied!
Shall I with this ungrateful Trojan go,
Forsake an Empire, and attend a Foe?
Himself I refug'd, and his Train relieved;
It Is true; but am I sure to be received?
An Exile follows whom a Queen relieved!
Can Gratitude in Trojan Souls have place!
Laomedon still lives in all his Race!
Then, shall I seek alone the Churlish Crew,
Or with my Fleet their flying Sails pursue?
What force have I but those, whom scarce before
I drew reluctant from their Native Shore?
Will they again Embark at my desire,
Once more sustain the Seas, and quit their second Tire?
Rather with Steel thy guilty Breast invade,
And take the Fortune thou thy self have made.
Your pity, Sister, first seduced my Mind;
Or seconded too well, what I designed.
These dear-bought Pleasures had I never known,
Had I continued free, and still my own;
Avoiding Love; I had not found Despair:
But shared with Salvage Beasts the Common Air.
Like them a lonely life I might have led,
Not mourned the Living, nor disturbed the Dead.
These Thoughts she brooded in her anxious Breast;
On Board, the Trojan found more easy rest.
Resolved to sail, in Sleep he passed the Night;
And ordered all things for his early flight.
To whom once more the winged God appears;
His former Youthful Mien and Shape he wears,
And with this new alarm invades his Ears.
Sleep'st thou, O Goddess born! and can thou drown
Thy needful Cares, so near a Hostile Town?
Beset with Foes; nor hear'st the Western Gales
Invite thy passage, and Inspire thy sails?
She harbors in her Heart a furious hate;
And thou shall find the dire Effects too late;
Fixed on Revenge, and Obstinate to die:
Haste swiftly hence, while thou have power to fly.
The Sea with Ships will soon be covered over,
And blazing Firebrands kindle all the Shore.
Prevent her rage, while Night obscures the Skies;
And sail before the purple Morn arise.
Who knows what Hazards thy Delay may bring?
Woman's a various and a changeful Thing.
Thus Hermes in the Dream; then took his flight,
Aloft in Air unseen; and mixed with Night.
Twice warned by the Celestial Messenger,
The pious Pious arose with hasty fear:
Then rowz'd his drowsy Train without delay,
Haste to your banks; your crooked Anchors weigh;
And spread your flying Sails, and stand to Sea.
A God commands; he stood before my sight;
And urged us once again to speedy flight.
O sacred Power, what Power so e're thou art,
To thy blessed Orders I resign my heart:
Lead thou the way; protect thy Trojan Bands;
And prosper the Design thy Will Commands.
He said, and drawing forth his flaming Sword,
His thundering Arm divides the many twisted Cord:
An emulating Zeal inspires his Train;
They run, they snatch; they rush into the main.
With headlong haste they leave the desert Shores,
And brush the liquid Seas with laboring Oars.
Aurora now had left her Saffron Bed,
And beams of early Light the Heavens o'respread,
When from a Tower the Queen, with wakeful Eyes,
Saw Day point upward from the rosy Skies:
She looked to Seaward, but the Sea was void,
And scarce in ken the sailing Ships descried:
Stung with despite, and furious with despair,
She struck her trembling Breast, and tore her Hair.
And shall the ungrateful Traitor go, she said,
My Land forsaken, and my Love betrayed?
Shall we not Arm, not rush from every Street,
To follow, sink, and burn his perjured Fleet?
Haste, haul my Galleys out, pursue the Foe:
Bring flaming Brands, set sail, and swiftly row.
What have I said? where am I? Fury turns
My Brain; and my distempered Bosom burns.
Then, when I gave my Person and my Throne,
This Hate, this Rage, had been more timely shown.
See now the promised Faith, the vaunted Name,
The Pious Man, who, rushing through the Flame,
Preserved his Gods; and to the Phrygian Shore
The Burden of his feeble Father bore!
I should have torn him piecemeal; strow'd in Floods
His scattered Limbs, or left exposed in Woods:
Destroyed his Friends and Son; and from the Fire
Have set the reeking Boy before the Sire.
Events are doubtful, which on Battles wait;
Yet where is the doubt, to Souls secure of Fate!
My Tyrians, at their injured Queen's Command,
Had tossed their Fires amid the Trojan Band:
At once extinguished all the faithless Name;
And I my self, in vengeance of my Shame,
Had fallen upon the Pile to mend the Funeral Flame.
Thou Sun, who view'st at once the World below,
Thou Juno, Guardian of the Nuptial Vow,
Thou Hecat, hearken from thy dark abodes;
Ye Furies, Fiends, and violated Gods,
All Powers invoked with Dido's dying breath,
Attend her Curses, and avenge her death.
If so the Fates ordain, and Jove commands,
The ungrateful Wretch should find the Latian Lands,
Yet let a Race untamed, and haughty Foes,
His peaceful Entrance with dire Arms oppose;
Oppressed with Numbers in the unequal Field,
His Men discouraged, and himself expelled,
Let him for Succor sue from place to place,
Torn from his Subjects, and his Son's embrace:
First let him see his Friends in Battle slain;
And their untimely Fate lament in vain:
And when, at length, the cruel War shall cease;
On hard Conditions may he buy his Peace.
Nor let him then enjoy supreme Command;
But fall untimely, by some hostile Hand:
And lie unbury'd on the barren Sand.
These are my Prayers, and this my dying Will:
And you my Tyrians every Curse fulfill.
Perpetual Hate, and mortal Wars proclaim,
Against the Prince, the People, and the Name.
These grateful Offerings on my Grave bestow;
Nor League, nor Love, the jarring Nations know:
Now, and from hence in every future Age,
When Rage excites your Arms, and Strength supplies the Rage:
Rise some Avenger of our Lybian Blood,
With Fire and Sword pursue the perjured Brood:
Our Arms, our Seas, our Shores, opposed to theirs,
And the same hate descend on all our Heirs.
This said, within her anxious Mind she weighs
The Means of cutting short her odious Days.
Then to Sicheus's Nurse, she briefly said,
(For when she left her Country, hers was dead)
Go Barce, call my Sister; let her Care
The solemn Rites of Sacrifice prepare:
The Sheep, and all the attoneing Offerings bring;
Sprinkling her Body from the Crystal Spring
With living Drops: then let her come, and thou
With sacred Fillets, bind thy hoary Brow.
Thus will I pay my Vows, to Stygian Jove;
And end the Cares of my disastrous Love.
Then cast the Trojan Image on the Fire;
And as that burns, my Passion shall expire.
The Nurse moves onward, with officious Care,
And all the speed her aged Limbs can bear.
But furious Dido, with dark Thoughts involved,
Shook at the mighty Mischief she resolved.
With livid Spots distinguished was her Face,
Red were her rolling Eyes, and discomposed her Pace:
Ghastly she gazed, with Pain she drew her Breath,
And Nature shivered at approaching Death.
Then swiftly to the fatal place she passed;
And mounts the Funeral Pile, with furious haste.
Unsheaths the Sword the Trojan left behind,
(Not for so dire an Enterprise designed,)
But when she viewed the Garments loosely spread,
Which once he wore, and saw the conscious Bed,
She paused, and, with a Sigh, the Robes embraced;
Then on the Couch her trembling Body cast,
Repressed the ready Tears, and spoke her last.
Dear Pledges of my Love, while Heaven so pleased,
Receive a Soul, of Mortal Anguish eased:
My fatal Course is finished; and I go
A glorious Name, among the Ghosts below.
A lofty City by my Hands is raised;
Pygmalion punished, and my Lord appeased.
What could my Fortune have afforded more,
Had the false Trojan never touched my Shore!
Then kissed the Couch; and must I die, she said;
And unrevenged; it is doubly to be dead!
Yet even this Death with Pleasure I receive;
On any Terms, it is better than to live.
These Flames, from far, may the false Trojan view;
These boding Omens his base flight pursue.
She said, and struck: Deep entered in her side
The piercing Steel, with reeking Purple died:
Clogged in the Wound the cruel Weapon stands;
The spouting Blood came streaming on her Hands.
Her sad Attendants saw the deadly Stroke,
And with loud Cries the sounding Palace shook.
Distracted from the fatal sight they fled;
And through the Town the dismal Rumor spread.
First from the frighted Court, the Yell began,
Redoubled thence from House to House it ran:
The groans of Men, with Shrieks, Laments, and Cries
Of mixing Women, mount the vaulted Skies.
Not less the Clamor, than if ancient Tire,
Or the new Carthage, set by Foes on Fire,
The rolling Ruin, with their loved Abodes,
Involved the blazing Temples of their Gods.
Her Sister hears, and, furious with Despair,
She beats her Breast, and rends her yellow Hair:
And calling on Eliza's Name aloud,
Runs breathless to the Place, and breaks the Crowd.
Was all that Pomp of Woe for this prepared,
These Fires, this Funeral Pile, these Altars reared;
Was all this Train of Plots contrived, said she,
All only to deceive unhappy me?
Which is the worst, did thou in Death pretend
To scorn thy Sister, or delude thy Friend!
Thy summoned Sister, and thy Friend had come:
One Sword had served us both, one common Tomb.
Was I to raise the Pile, the Powers invoke,
Not to be present at the fatal Stroke?
At once thou have destroyed thy self and me;
Thy Town, thy Senate, and thy Colony!
Bring Water, bathe the Wound; while I in death
Lay close my Lips to hers; and catch the flying Breath.
This said, she mounts the Pile with eager haste;
And in her Arms the gasping Queen embraced:
Her Temples chafed; and her own Garments tore
To stanch the streaming Blood, and cleanse the Gore.
Thrice Dido tried to raise her drooping Head,
And fainting thrice, fell groveling on the Bed.
Thrice opened her heavy Eyes, and sought the Light,
But having found it, sicken'd at the sight;
And closed her Lids at last, in endless Night.
Then Juno, grieving that she should sustain
A Death so lingering, and so full of Pain;
Sent Iris down, to free her from the Strife
Of laboring Nature, and dissolve her Life.
For since she died, not doomed by Heavens Decree,
Or her own Crime; but Human Casualty;
And rage of Love, that plunged her in Despair,
The Sisters had not cut the topmost Hair;
Which Proserpine, and they can only know;
Nor made her sacred to the Shades below.
Downward the various Goodess took her flight;
And drew a thousand Colors from the Light:
Then stood above the dying Lover's Head,
And said, I thus devote thee to the dead.
This Offering to the Infernal Gods I bear:
Thus while she spoke, she cut the fatal Hair;
The struggling Soul was loosed; and Life dissolved in Air.
The Fifth Book of the Aeneis.
The Argument.
Aeneas setting sail from Africa, is driven by a Storm on the Coasts of Sicily:
Where he is hospitably received by his friend Acestes, King of part of the
Island, and born of Trojan Parentage. He applies himself to celebrate the
Memory of his Father with Divine Honors: And accordingly institutes Funeral
Games, and appoints Prizes for those who should conquer in them. While the
Ceremonies were performing, Juno sends Iris to persuade the Trojan Women to
burn the Ships, who upon her instigation set fire to them, which burnt four,
and would have consumed the rest, had not Jupiter by a miraculous Shower
extinguished it. Upon this Aeneas by the advice of one of his Generals, and a
Vision of his Father, builds a City for the Women, Old Men, and others, who
were either unfit for War, or weary of the Voyage, and sails for Italy: Venus
procures of Neptune a safe Voyage for him and all his Men, excepting only his
Pilot Palinurus, who was unfortunately lost.

To the most Illustrious Prince Charles Duke of St Albans Master Falconer to
his Maty. and Captain of ye Honble. Band of Gent Pensioners

AE. 5. l. 2.


MEan time the Trojan cuts his watery way,
Fixed on his Voyage, through the curling Sea:
Then, casting back his Eyes, with dire Amaze,
Sees on the Punic Shore the mounting Blaze.
The Cause unknown; yet his presaging Mind,
The Fate of Dido from the Fire divined:
He knew the stormy Souls of Womankind:
What secret Springs their eager Passions move,
How capable of Death for injured Love.
Dire Auguries from hence the Trojans draw;
'Till neither Fires, nor shining Shores they saw.
Now Seas and Skies, their Prospect only bound;
An empty space above, a floating Field around.
But soon the Heavens with shadows were o'respread;
A swelling Cloud hung hovering over their Head:
Livid it looked, (the threatening of a Storm;)
Then Night and Horror Ocean's Face deform.
The Pilot, Palinurus, cried aloud,
What Gusts of Weather from that gathering Cloud
My Thoughts presage; e're yet the Tempest roars,
Stand to your Tackle, Mates, and stretch your Oars;
Contract your swelling Sails, and luff to Wind:
The frighted Crew perform the Task assigned.
Then, to his fearless Chief, not Heaven, said he,
Tho Jove himself should promise Italy,
Can stem the Torrent of this raging Sea.
Mark how the shifting Winds from West arise,
And what collected Night involves the Skies!
Nor can our shaken Vessels live at Sea,
Much less against the Tempest force their way;
It Is Fate diverts our Course; and Fate we must obey.
Not far from hence, if I observed aright
The southing of the Stars, and Polar Light,
Sicilia lies; whose hospitable Shores
In safety we may reach with struggling Oars.
Aeneas then replied, too sure I find,
We strive in vain against the Seas, and Wind:
Now shift your Sails: What place can please me more
Than what you promise, the Sicilian Shore;
Whose hallowed Earth Anchises Bones contains,
And where a Prince of Trojan Lineage reigns?
The Course resolved, before the Western Wind
They scud amain; and make the Port assigned.
Mean time Acestes, from a lofty Stand,
Beheld the Fleet descending on the Land;
And not unmindful of his ancient Race,
Down from the Cliff he ran with eager Pace;
And held the Hero in a strict Embrace.
Of a rough Lybian Bear the Spoils he wore;
And either Hand a pointed Javelin bore.
His Mother was a Dame of Dardan Blood;
His Sire Crinisus, a Sicilian Flood;
He welcomes his returning Friends ashore
With plenteous Country Cates; and homely Store.
Now, when the following Morn had chased away
The flying Stars, and light restored the Day,
Aeneas called the Trojan Troops around;
And thus bespoke them from a rising Ground.
Offspring of Heaven, Divine Dardanian Race,
The Sun revolving through the Etherial Space,
The shining Circle of the Year has filled,
Since first this Isle my Father's Ashes held:
And now the rising Day renews the Year,
(A Day for ever sad, for ever dear,)
This would I celebrate with Annual Games,
With Gifts on Altars pil'd, and holy Flames,
Tho banished to Getulia's barren Sands,
Caught on the Grecian Seas, or hostile Lands:
But since this happy Storm our Fleet has driven,
(Not, as I deem, without the Will of Heaven,)
Upon these friendly Shores, and flowery Plains,
Which hide Anchises, and his blessed Remains;
Let us with Joy perform his Honors due;
And pray for prosperous Winds, our Voyage to renew.
Pray, that in Towns, and Temples of our own,
The Name of great Anchises may be known;
And yearly Games may spread the Gods renown.
Our Sports, Acestes of the Trojan Race,
With royal Gifts, ordained, is pleased to grace:
Two Steers on every Ship the King bestows;
His Gods and ours, shall share your equal Vows.
Besides, if nine days hence, the rosy Morn
Shall with unclouded Light the Skies adorn,
That Day with solemn Sports I mean to grace;
Light Galleys on the Seas, shall run a watery Race.
Some shall in Swiftness for the Goal contend,
And others try the twanging Bow to bend:
The strong with Iron Gauntlets armed shall stand,
Opposed in Combat on the yellow Sand.
Let all be present at the Games prepared;
And joyful Victors wait the Just Reward.
But now assist the Rites, with Garlands crowned;
He said, and first his Brows with Myrtle bound.
Then Helymus, by his Example led,
And old Acestes, each adorned his Head;
Thus, young Ascanius, with a sprightly Grace,
His Temples tied, and all the Trojan Race.
Aeneas then advanced amidst the Train,
By thousands followed through the fruitful Plain,
To great Anchises Tomb: Which when he found,
He poured to Bacchus, on the hallowed Ground,
Two Bowls of sparkling Wine, of Milk two more,
And two from offered Bulls of Purple Gore.
With Roses then the Sepulcher he strow'd;
And thus, his Father's Ghost bespoke aloud.
Hail, O ye Holy Manes; hail again
Paternal Ashes, now reviewed in vain!
The Gods permitted not, that you, with me,
Should reach the promised Shores of Italy;
Or Tiber's Flood, what Flood so e're it be.
Scarce had he finished, when, with speckled Pride,
A Serpent from the Tomb began to glide;
His hugy Bulk on sev'n high Volumes rolled;
Blue was his breadth of Back, but streaked with scaly Gold:
Thus riding on his Curls, he seemed to pass
A rolling Fire along; and singe the Grass.
More various Colors through his Body run,
Than Iris when her Bow imbibes the Sun;
Betwixt the rising Altars, and around,
The sacred Monster shot along the Ground;
With harmless play amidst the Bowls he passed;
And with his lolling Tongue assayed the Taste:
Thus fed with Holy Food, the wondrous Guest
Within the hollow Tomb retired to rest.
The Pious Prince, surpri^'d at what he viewed,
The Funeral Honors with more Zeal renewed:
Doubtful if this the Place's Genius were,
Or Guardian of his Father's Sepulcher.
Five Sheep, according to the Rites, he slew;
As many Swine, and Steers of sable Hue;
New generous Wine he from the Goblets poured,
And called his Fathers Ghost, from Hell restored.
The glad Attendants in long Order come,
Offering their Gifts at great Anchises Tomb:
Some add more Oxen, some divide the Spoil,
Some place the Chargers on the grassy Soil;
Some blow the Fires and offered Entrails broil.
Now came the Day desired; the Skies were bright
With rosy Luster of the rising Light:
The bord'ring People, rowz'd by sounding Fame
Of Trojan Feasts, and great Acestes Name;
The crowded Shore with Acclamations fill,
Part to behold, and part to prove their Skill.
And first the Gifts in Public view they place,
Green Laurel Wreaths, and Palm, (the Victors grace:)
Within the Circle, Arms and Tripods lie;
Ingotts of Gold, and Silver, heaped on high;
And Vests embroidered of the Tyrian dye.
The Trumpet's clangor then the Feast proclaims;
And all prepare for their appointed Games.
Four Galleys first, which equal Rowers bear,
Advancing, in the watery Lists appear.
The speedy Dolphin, that out-strips the Wind,
Bore Mnestheus, Author of the Memmian kind:
Gyas, the vast Chymaera's Bulk commands,
Which rising like a towering City stands:
Three Trojans tug at every laboring Oar;
Three Banks in three degrees the Sailors bore;
Beneath their sturdy Strokes the Billows roar.
Sergesthus, who began the Sergian Race,
In the great Centaur took the leading Place:
Cloanthus on the Seagreen Scylla stood;
From whom Cluentius draws his Trojan Blood.
Far in the Sea, against the foaming Shore,
There stands a Rock; the raging Billows roar
Above his Head in Storms; but when it is clear,
Uncurl their ridgy Backs, and at his Foot appear.
In Peace below the gentle Waters run;
The Cormorants above, lie basking in the Sun.
On this the Hero fixed an Oak in sight,
The mark to guide the Mariners aright.
To bear with this, the Seamen stretch their Oars;
Then round the Rock they steer, and seek the former Shoars.
The Lots decide their place; above the rest,
Each Leader shining in his Tyrian Vest:
The common Crew, with Wreaths of Poplar Boughs.
Their Temples crown, and shade their sweaty Brows.
Besmeared with Oil, their naked Shoulders shine;
All take their Seats, and wait the sounding sign.
They gripe their Oars, and every panting Breast
Is raised by turns with Hope, by turns with Fear depressed.
To the Right Honble: Arthur Herbert Earl of Torrington and Baron of Torbay

AE 5 l: 160


The clangor of the Trumpet gives the Sign;
At once they start, advancing in a Line:
With shouts the Sailors rend the starry Skys,
Lashed with their Oars, the smoaky Billows rise;
Sparkles the briny Main, and the vexed Ocean fries.
Exact in time, with equal Strokes they row;
At once the brushing Oars, and brazen prow
Dash up the sandy Waves, and open the Depths below.
Not fiery Coursers, in a Chariot Race,
Invade the Field with half so swift a Pace.
Not the fierce Driver with more Fury lends
The sounding Lash; and, e're the Stroke descends,
Low to the Wheels his pliant Body bends.
The partial Crowd their Hopes and Fears divide;
And aid, with eager shouts, the favored Side.
Cries, Murmurs, Clamours, with a mixing Sound,
From Woods to Woods, from Hills to Hills rebound.
Amidst the loud Applauses of the Shore,
Gyas outstrip'd the rest, and sprung before;
Cloanthus, better manned, pursued him fast;
But his o're-masted Gally checked his Haste.
The Centaur, and the Dolphin, brush the brine
With equal Oars, advancing in a Line:
And now the mighty Centaur seems to lead,
And now the speedy Dolphin gets a head:
Now Board to Board the rival Vessels row;
The Billows lave the Skies, and Ocean groans below.
They reached the Mark; proud Gyas and his Train,
In Triumph rode the Victors of the Main:
But steering round, he charged his Pilot stand
More close to Shore, and skim along the Sand.
Let others bear to Sea. Menaetes heard,
But secret shelves too cautiously he feared:
And fearing, sought the Deep; and still aloof he steered.
With louder Cries the Captain called again;
Bear to the rocky Shore, and shun the Main.
He spoke, and speaking at his stern he saw
The bold Cloanthus near the Shelvings draw;
Betwixt the mark and him the Scylla stood,
And in a closer Compass plowed the Flood,
He passed the Mark; and wheeling got before;
Gyas blasphemed the Gods, devoutly swore,
Cried out for Anger, and his Hair he tore.
Mindless of others Lives, (so high was grown
His rising Rage,) and careless of his own:
The trembling Dotard to the Deck he drew,
Then hoisted up, and overboard he threw,
This done he seized the Helm; his Fellows cheered;
Turned short upon the Shelfs, and madly steered.
Hardly his Head, the plunging Pilot rears,
Clogged with his Clothes, and cumber'd with his Years:
Now dropping wet, he climbs the Cliff with Pain;
The Crowd that saw him fall, and float again,
Shout from the distant Shore; and loudly laughed,
To see his heaving Breast disgorge the briny Draught.
The following Centaur, and the Dolphin's Crew,
Their vanished hopes of Victory renew:
While Gyas lags, they kindle in the Race,
To reach the Mark; Sergesthus takes the place:
Mnestheus pursues; and while around they wind,
Comes up, not half his Gally's length behind.
Then, on the Deck amidst his Mates appeared,
And thus their drooping Courages he cheered.
My Friends, and Hector's Followers heretofore;
Exert your Vigor, tug the laboring Oar;
Stretch to your Strokes, my still unconquered Crew,
Whom from the flaming Walls of Troy I drew.
In this, our common Interest, let me find
That strength of Hand, that courage of the Mind,
As when you stem'd the strong Malaean Flood,
And over the Syrtes broken Billows rowed.
I seek not now the foremost Palm to gain;
Tho yet -- But ah, that haughty Wish is vain!
Let those enjoy it whom the Gods ordain.
But to be last, the Lags of all the Race,
Redeem your selves and me from that Disgrace.
Now one and all, they tug amain; they row
At the full stretch, and shake the Brazen Prow.
The Sea beneath 'em sinks; their laboring sides
Are swelled, and Sweat runs gutt'ring down in Tides.
Chance aids their daring with unhop'd Success;
Sergesthus, eager with his Beak, to press
Betwixt the Rival Gally and the Rock;
Shuts up the unwieldy Centaur in the Lock.
The Vessel struck, and with the dreadful shock
Her Oars she shivered, and her Head she broke.
The trembling Rowers from their Banks arise,
And anxious for themselves renounce the Prize.
With Iron Poles they heave her off the Shores;
And gather, from the Sea, their floating Oars.
The Crew of Mnestheus, with elated Minds,
Urge their Success, and call the willing Winds:
Then ply their Oars, and cut their liquid way;
In larger Compass on the roomy Sea.
As when the Dove her Rocky Hold forsakes,
Rowz'd in a Fright, her sounding Wings she shakes
The Cavern rings with clatt'ring; out she flies,
And leaves her Callow Care, and cleaves the Skies;
At first she flutters; but at length she springs,
To smoother flight, and shoots upon her Wings:
So Mnestheus in the Dolphin cuts the Sea,
And flying with a force, that force assists his Way.
Sergesthus in the Centaur soon he passed,
Wedged in the Rocky Sholes, and sticking fast.
In vain the Victor he with Cries implores,
And practices to row with shattered Oars.
Then Mnestheus bears with Gyas, and out-flies:
The Ship without a Pilot yields the Prize.
Unvanquish'd Scylla now alone remains;
Her he pursues; and all his vigor strains.
Shouts from the favoring Multitude arise,
Applauding Echo to the Shouts replies;
Shouts, Wishes, and Applause run rattling through the Skies.
These Clamours with disdain the Scylla heard;
Much grudged the Praise, but more the robbed Reward:
Resolved to hold their own, they mend their pace;
All obstinate to dye, or gain the Race.
Raised with Success, the Dolphin swistly ran,
(For they can Conquer who believe they can:)
Both urge their Oars, and Fortune both supplies;
And both, perhaps had shared an equal Prize;
When to the Seas Cloanthus holds his Hands,
And Succor from the Watery Powers Demands:
Gods of the liquid Realms, on which I row,
If given by you, the Laurel bind my Brow,
Assist to make me guilty of my Vow.
A Snow-white Bull shall on your Shore be slain,
His offered Entrails cast into the Main;
And ruddy Wine from Golden Goblets thrown,
Your grateful Gift and my Return shall own.
The Quire of Nymphs, and Phorcus from below,
With Virgin Panopea, heard his Vow;
And old Portunus, with his breadth of Hand,
Pushed on, and sped the Gally to the Land.
Swift as a Shaft, or winged Wind, she flies;
And darting to the Port, obtains the Prize.
The Herald summons all, and then proclaims
Cloanthus Conqu'ror of the Naval Games.
The Prince with Laurel crowns the Victor's Head,
And three fat Steers are to his Vessel led;
The Ships Reward: with generous Wine beside;
And Sums of Silver, which the Crew divide.
The Leaders are distinguished from the rest;
The Victor honored with a nobler Vest:
Where Gold and Purple strive in equal Rows;
And Needle Work its happy Cost bestows.
There, Ganymede is wrought with living Art,
Chasing through Ida's Groves the trembling Heart:
Breathless he seems, yet eager to pursue;
When from aloft, descends in open view,
The Bird of Jove; and sowsing on his Prey,
With crooked Tallons bears the Boy away.
In vain, with lifted Hands, and gazing Eyes,
His Guards behold him soaring through the Skies;
And Dogs pursue his Flight, with imitated Cries.
Mnestheus the second Victor was declared;
And summoned there, the second Prize he shared.
A Coat of Mail, which brave Demoleus bore;
More brave Aeneas from his Shoulders tore;
In single Combat on the Trojan Shore.
This was ordained for Mnestheus to possess;
In War for his Defense; for Ornament in Peace.
Rich was the Gift, and glorious to behold;
But yet so ponderous with its Plates of Gold,
That scarce two Servants could the Weight sustain;
Yet, loaded thus, Demoleus over the Plain
Pursued, and lightly seized the Trojan Train.
The Third succeeding to the last Reward,
Two goodly Bowls of Massy Silver shared;
With Figures prominent, and richly wrought:
And two Brass Caldrons from Dodona brought.
Thus, all rewarded by the Hero's hands,
Their conquering Temples bound with Purple Bands.
And now Sergesthus, clearing from the Rock,
Brought back his Gally shattered with the shock.
Forlorn she looked, without an aiding Oar;
And howted, by the Vulgar, made to Shore.
As when a Snake, surprised upon the Road,
Is crushed athwart her Body by the load
Of heavy Wheels; or with a Mortal Wound
Her Belly bruised, and trodden to the Ground:
In vain, with loosened curls, she crawls along,
Yet fierce above, she brandishes her Tongue:
Glares with her Eyes, and bristles with her Scales,
But grovelling in the Dust, her parts unsound she trails.
So slowly to the Port the Centaur tends,
But what she wants in Oars, with Sails amends:
Yet, for his Gally saved, the grateful Prince,
Is pleased the unhappy Chief to recompense.
Pholoe, the Cretan Slave, rewards his Care,
Beauteous her self, with lovely Twins, as fair.
From thence his way the Trojan Hero bent,
Into the neighboring Plain, with Mountains pent;
Whose sides were shaded with surrounding Wood:
Full in the midst of this fair Valley stood
A Native Theater, which rising flow,
By just degrees, o're-look'd the Ground below.
High on a Sylvan Throne the Leader sat;
A numerous Train attend in Solemn State;
Here those, that in the rapid Course delight,
Desire of Honor, and the Prize invite.
The Rival Runners, without Order stand,
The Trojans, mixed with the Sicilian Band.
First Nisus, with Euryalus, appears,
Euryalus a Boy of blooming Years;
With sprightly Grace, and equal Beauty crowned:
Nisus, for Friendship to the Youth, renowned.
Diores, next, of Priam's Royal Race,
Then Salius, joined with Patron took their Place:
But Patron in Arcadia had his Birth,
And Salius his, from Acarnanian Earth.
Then two Sicilian Youths, the Names of these
Swift Helymus, and lovely Panopes:
Both jolly Huntsmen, both in Forests bred,
And owning old Acestes for their Head.
With several others of Ignobler Name;
Whom Time has not delivered over to Fame.
To these the Hero thus his Thoughts explained,
In Words, which general Approbation gained.
One common Largess is for all designed:
The Vanquished and the Victor shall be joined.
Two Darts of polished Steel, and Gnosian Wood,
A Silvered studded Ax alike bestowed.
The foremost three have Olive Wreaths decreed;
The first of these obtains a stately Steed
Adorned with Trappings; and the next in Fame,
The Quiver of an Amazonian Dame;
With feathered Thracian Arrows well supplied,
A Golden Belt shall gird his Manly side;
Which with a sparkling Diamond shall be tied:
The third this Grecian Helmet shall content.
He said; to their appointed Base they went:
With beating Hearts the expected Sign receive,
And, starting all at once, the Barrier leave.
Spread out, as on the winged Winds, they flew,
And seized the distant Goal with greedy view.
Shot from the Crowd, swift Nisus all o're-pass'd;
Nor Storms, nor Thunder, equal half his haste.
The next, but though the next, yet far dis-join'd,
Came Salius, and Euryalus behind;
Then Helymus, whom young Diores plied,
Step after step, and almost side by side:
His Shoulders pressing, and in longer Space,
Had won, or left at least a dubious Race.
Now spent, the Goal they almost reach at last;
When eager Nisus, hapless in his haste,
Slipped first, and slipping, fell upon the Plain,
Soaked with the Blood of Oxen, newly slain:
The careless Victor had not marked his way;
But treading where the treacherous Puddle lay,
His Heels flew up; and on the grassy Floor,
He fell, besmeared with Filth, and Holy Gore.
Not mindless then, Euryalus, of thee,
Nor of the Sacred Bonds of Amity;
He strove the immediate Rival's hope to cross;
And caught the Foot of Salius as he rose:
So Salius lay extended on the Plain;
Euryalus springs out, the Prize to gain;
And leaves the Crowd; applauding Peals attend
The Victor to the Goal, who vanquished by his Friend.
Next Helymus, and then Diores came;
By two Misfortunes made the third in Fame.
But Salius enters; and, exclaiming loud
For Justice, deafens, and disturbs the Crowd:
Urges his Cause may in the Court be heard;
And pleads the Prize is wrongfully conferred.
But Favor for Euryalus appears;
His blooming Beauty, with his tender Tears,
To Anthony Hammond of Somersham in the County of Huntingdon Esqr.

AE 5. l: 425.


Had bribed the Judges to protect his Claim;
Besides Diores does as loud exclaim:
Who vainly reaches at the last Reward,
If the first Palm on Salius be conferred.
Then thus the Prince; let no Disputes arise:
Where Fortune placed it, I award the Prize.
But Fortune's Errors give me leave to mend,
At least to pity my deserving Friend.
He said, and from among the Spoils, he draws,
(Ponderous with shaggy Main, and Golden Paws)
A Lyon's Hide; to Salius this he gives:
Nisus, with Envy sees the Gift, and grieves.
If such Rewards to vanquished Men are due,
He said, and Falling is to rise by you,
What Prize may Nisus from your Bounty claim,
Who merited the first Rewards and Fame?
In falling, both an equal Fortune tried;
Would Fortune for my Fall so well provide!
With this he pointed to his Face, and showed
His Hands, and all his Habit smeared with Blood.
The indulgent Father of the People smiled;
And caused to be produced an ample Shield;
Of wondrous Art by Didymaon wrought,
Long since from Neptune's Bars in Triumph brought.
This given to Nisus; he divides the rest;
And equal Justice, in his Gifts, expressed.
The Race thus ended, and Rewards bestowed;
Once more the Prince bespeaks the attentive Crowd.
If there be here, whose dauntless Courage dare
In Gauntlet fight, with Limbs and Body bare,
His Opposite sustain in open view,
Stand forth the Champion; and the Games renew.
Two Prizes I propose, and thus divide,
A Bull with gilded Horns, and Fillets tied,
Shall be the Portion of the conquering Chief:
A Sword and Helm shall cheer the Loser's Grief.
Then haughty Dares in the Lists appears;
Stalking he strides, his Head erected bears:
His nervous Arms the weighty Gauntlet weild;
And loud Applauses echo through the Field.
Dares alone, in Combat used to stand
The match of mighty Paris hand to hand:
The same, at Hector's Fun'rals undertook
Gygantick Butes, of the Amician Stock;
And by the Stroke of his resistless Hand,
Stretched the vast Bulk upon the yellow Sand.
Such Dares was; and such he strod along,
And drew the Wonder of the gazing Throng.
His brawny Back, and ample Breast he shows;
His lifted Arms around his Head he throws;
And deals, in whistling Air, his empty Blows.
His Match is sought; but through the trembling Band,
Not one dares answer to the proud Demand.
Presuming of his Force, with sparkling Eyes,
Already he devours the promised Prize.
He claims the Bull with awless Insolence;
And having seized his Horns, accosts the Prince.
If none my matchless Valor dares oppose,
How long shall Dares wait his dastard Foes?
Permit me, Chief, permit without Delay,
To lead this uncontended Gift away.
The Crowd assents; and, with redoubled Cries,
For the proud Challenger demands the Prize.
Acestes, fired with just Disdain, to see
The Palm usurped without a Victory;
Reproch'd Entellus thus, who sat beside,
And heard, and saw unmoved, the Trojan's Pride:
Once, but in vain, a Champion of Renown,
So tamely can you bear the ravished Crown?
A Prize in triumph born before your sight,
And shun for fear the danger of the Fight?
Where is our Eryx now, the boasted Name,
The God who taught your thundering Arm the Game;
Where now your baffled Honor, where the Spoil
That filled your House, and Fame that filled our Isle?
Entellus, thus: My Soul is still the same,
Unmoved with Fear, and moved with Martial Fame:
But my chill Blood is curdled in my Veins;
And scarce the Shadow of a Man remains.
Oh, could I turn to that fair Prime again,
That Prime, of which this Boaster is so vain,
The Brave who this decrepid Age defies,
Should feel my force, without the promised Prize.
He said, and rising at the word, he threw
Two ponderous Gauntlets down, in open view:
Gauntlets, which Eryx wont in Fight to wield,
And sheath his hands with in the listed field.
With Fear and Wonder seized, the Crowd beholds
The Gloves of Death, with sev'n distinguished folds,
Of tough Bull Hides; the space within is spread
With Iron, or with loads of heavy Lead.
Dares himself was daunted at the sight,
Renounced his Challenge, and refused to fight.
Astonished at their weight the Hero stands,
And poised the ponderous Engines in his hands.
What had your wonder, said Entellus, been,
Had you the Gauntlets of Alcides seen,
Or viewed the stern debate on this unhappy Green!
These which I bear, your Brother Eryx bore,
Still marked with battered Brains, and mingled Gore.
With these he long sustained the Herculean Arm;
And these I weilded while my Blood was warm:
This languish'd Frame, while better Spirits fed,
E're Age unstrung my Nerves, or Time o'resnow'd my Head.
But if the Challenger these Arms refuse,
And cannot wield their weight, or dare not use;
If great Aeneas, and Acestes join
In his Request, these Gauntlets I resign:
Let us with equal Arms perform the Fight,
And let him leave to Fear, since I resign my Right.
This said, Entellus for the Strife prepares;
Stripped of his quilted Coat, his Body bares:
Composed of mighty Bones and Brawn, he stands,
A goodly towering Obj^ct on the Sands.
Then just Aeneas equal Arms supplied,
Which round their Shoulders to their Wrists they tied.
Both on the tiptoe stand, at full extent,
Their Arms aloft, their Bodies inly bent;
Their Heads from aiming Blows they bear a far;
With clashing Gauntlets then provoke the War.
One on his Youth and pliant Limbs relies;
One on his Sinews, and his Giant size.
The last is stiff with Age, his Motion slow,
He heaves for Breath, he staggers to and fro;
And Clouds of issuing Smoke his Nostrils loudly blow.
Yet equal in Success, they ward, they strike;
Their ways are different, but their Art alike.
Before, behind, the blows are dealt; around
Their hollow sides the rattling Thumps resound.
A Storm of Strokes, well meant, with fury flies,
And errs about their Temples, Ears, and Eyes.
Nor always errs; for often the Gauntlet draws
A sweeping stroke, along the crackling Jaws.
To Henry St John of Lydiard Tregoz Esqr.

AE 5. l: 590.


Heavy with Age, Entellus stands his Ground,
But with his warping Body wards the Wound.
His Hand, and watchful Eye keep even pace;
While Dares traverses, and shifts his place.
And like a Captain, who beleaguers round,
Some strong built Castle, on a rising Ground,
Views all the approaches with observing Eyes,
This, and that other part, in vain he tries;
And more on Industry, than Force relies.
With Hands on high, Entellus threats the Foe;
But Dares watched the Motion from below,
And slipped aside, and shunned the long descending Blow.
Entellus wastes his Forces on the Wind;
And thus deluded of the Stroke designed,
Headlong, and heavy fell: his ample Breast,
And weighty Limbs, his ancient Mother pressed.
So falls a hollow Pine, that long had stood
On Ida's height, or Erymanthus Wood,
Torn from the Roots: the differing Nations rise,
And Shouts, and mingled Murmurs, rend the Skies.
Acestes runs, with eager haste, to raise
The fallen Companion of his youthful Days:
Dauntless he rose, and to the Fight returned:
With shame his glowing Cheeks, his Eyes with fury burned.
Disdain, and conscious Virtue fired his Breast;
And with redoubled Force his Foe he pressed.
He lays on load with either Hand, amain,
And headlong drives the Trojan over the Plain.
Nor stops, nor stays; nor rest, nor Breath allows,
But Storms of Strokes descend about his Brows;
A rattling Tempest, and a Hail of Blows.
But now the Prince, who saw the wild Increase
Of Wounds, commands the Combatants to cease:
And bounds Entellus Wrath, and bids the Peace.
First to the Trojan spent with Toil he came,
And soothed his Sorrow for the suffered Shame.
What Fury seized my Friend, the Gods, said he,
To him propitious, and averse to thee,
Have given his Arm superior Force to thine;
It Is Madness to contend with Strength Divine.
The Gauntlet Fight thus ended, from the Shore,
His faithful Friends unhappy Dares bore:
His Mouth and Nostrils, poured a Purple Flood;
And pounded Teeth, came rushing with his Blood.
Faintly he staggered through the hissing Throng;
And hung his Head, and trail'd his Legs along.
The Sword and Casque, are carried by his Train;
But with his Foe the Palm and Ox remain.
The Champion, then, before Aeneas came,
Proud of his Prize; but prouder of his Fame;
O Goddess-born, and you Dardanian Host,
Mark with Attention, and forgive my Boast:
Learn what I was, by what remains; and know
From what impending Fate, you saved my Foe.
Sternly he spoke; and then confronts the Bull;
And, on his ample Forehead, aiming full,
The deadly Stroke descending, pierced the Skull.
Down drops the Beast; nor needs a second Wound:
But sprawls in pangs of Death; and spurns the Ground.
Then, thus: In Dares stead I offer this;
Eryx, accept a nobler Sacrifice:
Take the last Gift my withered Arms can yield,
Thy Gauntlets I resign; and here renounce the Field.
This done, Aeneas orders, for the close,
The strife of Archers, with contending Bows.
The Mast, Sergesthus shattered Gally bore,
With his own Hands, he raises on the Shore.
To Stephen Waller Dr: of Laws

AE. 5. l. 645.


A fluttering Dove upon the Top they tie,
The living Mark, at which their Arrows fly.
The rival Archers in a Line advance;
Their turn of Shooting to receive from Chance.
A Helmet holds their Names: The Lots are drawn,
On the first Scroll was read Hippocoon:
The People shout; upon the next was found
Young Mnestheus, late with Naval Honors crowned.
The third contained Eurytion's Noble Name,
Thy Brother, Pandarus, and next in Fame:
Whom Pallas urged the Treaty to confound,
And send among the Greeks a feathered Wound.
Acestes in the bottom, last remained;
Whom not his Age from Youthful Sports restrained.
Soon, all with Vigor bend their trusty Bows,
And from the Quiver each his Arrow chose,
Hippocoon's was the first: with forceful sway
It flew, and, whizzing, cut the liquid way:
Fixed in the Mast the feathered Weapon stands,
The fearful Pidgeon flutters in her Bands;
And the Tree trembled: and the shouting Cries
Of the pleased People, rend the vaulted Skies.
Then Mnestheus to the head his Arrow drove,
With lifted Eyes; and took his Aim above;
But made a glancing Shot, and missed the Dove.
Yet missed so narrow, that he cut the Cord
Which fastened, by the Foot, the flitting Bird.
The Captive thus released, away she flies,
And beats with clapping Wings, the yielding Skies.
His Bow already bent, Eurytion stood,
And having first invoked his Brother God,
His winged Shaft with eager haste he sped;
The fatal Message reached her as she fled:
She leaves her Life aloft, she strikes the Ground;
And renders back the Weapon in the Wound.
Acestes grudging at his Lot, remains,
Without a Prize to gratify his Pains.
Yet shooting upward, sends his Shaft, to show
An Archer's Art, and boast his twanging Bow.
The pointed Arrow gave a dire Portent;
And latter Augures judge from this Event.
Chafed by the speed, it fired; and as it flew,
A Trail of following Flames, ascending drew:
Kindling they mount; and mark the shiny Way:
Across the Skies as falling Meteors play,
And vanish into Wind; or in a Blaze decay.
The Trojans and Sicilians wildly stare:
And trembling, turn their Wonder into Prayer.
The Dardan Prince put on a smiling Face,
And strained Acestes with a close Embrace:
Then hon'ring him with Gifts above the rest,
Turned the bad Omen, nor his Fears confessed.
The Gods, said he, this Miracle have wrought;
And ordered you the Prize without the Lot.
Accept this Goblet rough with figured Gold,
Which Thracian Cisseus gave my Sire of old:
This Pledge of ancient Amity receive,
Which to my second Sire I justly give.
He said, and with the Trumpets chearsul sound,
Proclaimed him Victor, and with Laurel crowned.
Nor good Eurytion envied him the Prize;
Though he transfixed the Pidgeon in the Skies.
Who cut the Line, with second Gifts was graced;
The third was his, whose Arrow pierced the Mast.
The Chief, before the Games were wholly done,
Called Periphantes, Tutor to his Son;
And whispered thus; with speed Ascanius find,
And if his Childish Troop be ready joined;
On Hors^-back let him grace his Grandsire's Day,
And lead his Equals armed, in just Array.
He said, and calling out, the Cirque he clears;
The Crowd withdrawn, an open Plain appears.
And now the Noble Youths, of Form Divine,
Advance before their Fathers, in a Line:
The Riders grace the Steeds; the Steeds with Glory shine.
Thus marching on, in Military Pride,
Shouts of Applause resound from side to fide.
Their Casques, adorned with Laurel Wreaths, they wear.
Each brandishing aloft a Cornel Spear.
Some at their Backs their gilded Quivers bore;
Their Chains of burnished Gold hung down before.
Three graceful Troops they formed upon the Green;
Three graceful Leaders at their Head were seen;
Twelve followed every Chief, and left a Space between.
The first young Priam led; a lovely Boy,
Whose Grandsire was the unhappy King of Troy:
His Race in after times was known to Fame,
New Honors adding to the Latian Name;
And well the Royal Boy his Thracian Steed became.
White were the Fetlocks of his Feet before;
And on his Front a snowy Star he bore:
Then beauteous Atys, with Iulus bred,
Of equal Age, the second Squadron led.
The last in Order, but the first in place,
First in the lovely Features of his Face;
Rode fair Ascanius on a fiery Steed,
Queen Dido's Gift, and of the Tyrian breed.
Sure Coursers for the rest the King ordains;
With Golden Bitts adorned, and Purple Reins.
The pleased Spectators peals of Shouts renew;
And all the Parents in the Children view:
Their Make, their Motions, and their sprightly Grace;
And Hopes and Fears alternate in their Face.
The unfledged Commanders, and their Martial Train,
First make the Circuit of the sandy Plain,
Around their Sires: And at the appointed Sign,
Drawn up in beauteous Order form a Line:
The second Signal sounds; the Troop divides,
In three distinguished parts, with three distinguished Guides.
Again they close, and once again dis-join,
In Troop to Troop opposed, and Line to Line.
They meet, they wheel, they throw their Darts afar
With harmless Rage, and well dissembled War.
Then in a round the mingled Bodies run;
Flying they follow, and pursuing shun.
Broken they break, and rallying, they renew
In other Forms the Military show.
At last, in order, undiscerned they join;
And march together, in a friendly Line.
And, as the Cretan Labyrinth of old,
With wandering Ways, and many a winding fold,
Involved the weary Feet, without redress,
In a round Error, which denied recess;
So fought the Trojan Boys in warlike Play,
Turned, and returned, and still a different way.
Thus Dolphins, in the Deep, each other chase,
In Circles, when they swim around the watery Race.
This Game, these Carousels Ascanius taught;
And, building Alba, to the Latins brought.
Showed what he learned: The Latin Sires impart,
To their succeeding Sons, the graceful Art:
From these Imperial Rome received the Game;
Which Troy, the Youths the Trojan Troop, they name.
To ye most Illustrious Prince William Duke of Gloucester andct.

AE 5. l. 7^^.


Thus far the sacred Sports they celebrate:
But Fortune soon resumed her ancient hate.
For while they pay the dead his Annual dues,
Those envied Rites Saturnian Juno views.
And sends the Goddess of the various bow,
To try new Methods of Revenge below:
Supplies the Winds to wing her Airy way;
Where in the Port secure the Navy lay.
Swiftly fair Iris down her Arch descends;
And undiscerned her fatal Voyage ends.
She saw the gathering Crowd; and gliding thence,
The desert Shore, and Fleet without defense.
The Trojan Matrons on the Sands alone,
With Sighs and Tears, Anchises death bemoan.
Then, turning to the Sea their weeping Eyes,
Their pity to themselves, renews their Cries.
Alas! said one, what Oceans yet remain
For us to sail; what Labors to sustain!
All take the Word; and with a general groan,
Implore the Gods for Peace; and Places of their own.
The Goddess, great in Mischief, views their pains;
And in a Woman's Form her heavenly Limbs restrains.
In Face and Shape, old Beroe she became,
Doriclus Wife, a venerable Dame;
Once blessed with Riches, and a Mother's Name.
Thus changed, amidst the crying Crow'd she ran,
Mixed with the Matrons, and these words began.
O wretched we, whom not the Grecian Power,
Nor Flames destroyed, in Troy's unhappy hour!
O wretched we, reserved by Cruel Fate,
Beyond the Ruins of the sinking State!
Now sev'n revolving Years are wholly run,
Since this improsp'rous Voyage we begun:
Since tossed from Shores to Shores, from Lands to Lands,
Inhospitable Rocks and barren Sands;
Wandering in Exile, through the stormy Sea,
We search in vain for flying Italy.
Now Cast by Fortune on this kindred Land,
What should our Rest, and rising Walls withstand,
Or hinder here to fix our banished Band?
O, Country lost, and Gods redeemed in vain,
If still in endless Exile we remain!
Shall we no more the Trojan Walls renew,
Or Streams of some dissembled Simois view!
Haste, join with me, the unhappy Fleet consume:
Cassandra bids, and I declare her doom.
In sleep I saw her; she supplied my hands,
(For this I more than dreamt) with flaming Brands:
With these, said she, these wandering Ships destroy;
These are your fatal Seats, and this your Troy.
Time calls you now, the precious Hour employ.
Slack not the good Presage, while Heaven inspires
Our Minds to dare, and gives the ready Fires.
See Neptune's Altars minister their Brands;
The God is pleased; the God supplies our hands.
Then, from the Pile, a flaming Firr she drew,
And, tossed in Air, amidst the Galleys threw.
Wrapped in a maze, the Matrons wildly stare:
Then Pyrgo, reverenced for her hoary Hair,
Pyrgo, the Nurse of Priam's numerous Race,
No Beroe this, tho she belies her Face:
What Terrors from her frowning Front arise;
Behold a Goddess in her ardent Eyes!
What Rays around her heavenly Face are seen,
Mark her Majestic Voice, and more than mortal Mien!
Beroe but now I left; whom pined with pain,
Her Age and Anguish from these Rites detain.
She said; the Matrons, seized with new Amaze,
Roll their malignant Eyes, and on the Navy gaze.
They fear, and hope, and neither part obey:
They hope the fated Land, but fear the fatal Way.
The Goddess, having done her Task below,
Mounts up on equal Wings, and bends her painted Bow.
Struck with the sight, and feiz'd with Rage Divine;
The Matrons prosecute their mad Design:
They shriek aloud, they snatch, with Impious Hands,
The food of Altars, Firs, and flaming Brands.
Green Leaves, and Saplings, mingled in their haste;
And smoking Torches on the Ships they cast.
The Flame, unstop'd at first, more Fury gains;
And Vulcan rides at large with loosened Reins:
Triumphant to the painted Sterns he soars,
And seizes in his way, the Banks, and crackling Oars.
Eumelus was the first, the News to bear,
While yet they crowd the Rural Theater.
Then what they hear, is witnessed by their Eyes;
A storm of Sparkles, and of Flames arise.
Ascanius took the Alarm, while yet he led
His early Warriors on his prancing Steed.
And spurring on, his Equals soon o'repass'd,
Nor could his frighted Friends reclaim his haste.
Soon as the Royal Youth appeared in view,
He sent his Voice before him as he flew;
What Madness moves you, Matrons, to destroy
The last Remainders of unhappy Troy!
Not hostile Fleets, but your own hopes you burn,
And on your Friends, your fatal Fury turn.
Behold your own Ascanius: while he said,
He drew his glittering Helmet from his Head;
In which the Youths to sportful Arms he led.
By this, Aeneas and his Train appear;
And now the Women, seized with Shame and Fear,
Dispersed, to Woods and Caverns take their Flight;
Abhor their Actions, and avoid the Light:
Their Friends acknowledge, and their Error find;
And shake the Goddess from their altered Mind.
Not so the raging Fires their Fury cease;
But lurking in the Seams, with seeming Peace,
Work on their way, amid the smouldring Tow,
Sure in Destruction, but in Motion slow.
The silent Plague, through the green Timber eats,
And vomits out a tardy Flame, by fits.
Down to the Keels, and upward to the Sails,
The Fire descends, or mounts; but still prevails:
Nor Buckets poured, nor strength of Human Hand,
Can the victorious Element withstand.
The Pious Hero rends his Robe, and throws
To Heaven his Hands, and with his Hands his Vows.
O Jove, he cried, if Prayers can yet have place;
If thou abhorr'st not all the Dardan Race;
If any spark of Pity still remain;
If Gods are Gods, and not invoked in vain;
Yet spare the Relics of the Trojan Train.
Yet from the Flames our burning Vessels free:
Or let thy Fury fall alone on me.
At this devoted Head thy Thunder throw,
And send the willing Sacrifice below.
Scarce had he said, when Southern Storms arise,
From Pole to Pole, the forky Lightning flies;
Loud rattling shakes the Mountains, and the Plain:
Heaven bellies downward, and descends in Rain.
Whole Sheets of Water from the Clouds are sent,
Which hissing through the Planks, the Flames prevent:
And stop the fiery Pest: Four Ships alone
Burn to the wast; and for the Fleet atone.
But doubtful thoughts the Hero's Heart divide;
If he should still in Sicily reside,
Forgetful of his Fates; or tempt the Main,
In hope the promised Italy to gain.
Then Nautes, old, and wise, to whom alone
The Will of Heaven, by Pallas was fore-shown;
Versed in Portents, experienced and inspired,
To tell Events, and what the Fates required:
Thus while he stood, to neither part inclined,
With cheerful Words relieved his laboring Mind.
O Goddess-born, resigned in every state,
With Patience bear, with Prudence push your Fate.
By suffering well, our Fortune we subdue;
Fly when she frowns, and when she calls pursue.
Your Friend Acestes is of Trojan Kind,
To him disclose the Secrets of your Mind:
Trust in his Hands your old and useless Train,
Too numerous for the Ships which yet remain:
The feeble, old, indulgent of their Ease,
The Dames who dread the Dangers of the Seas,
With all the dastard Crew, who dare not stand
The shock of Battle with your Foes by Land;
Here you may build a common Town for all;
And from Acestes name, Acesta call.
The Reasons, with his Friend's Experience joined,
Encouraged much, but more disturbed his Mind.
'Twas dead of Night; when to his slumbering Eyes,
His Father's Shade descended from the Skies;
And thus he spoke: O more than vital Breath
Loved while I lived, and dear even after Death;
O Son, in various Toils and Troubles tossed,
The King of Heaven employs my careful Ghost
On his Commands; the God who saved from Fire
Your flaming Fleet, and heard your just desire:
The Wholesome Counsel of your Friend receive;
And here, the Coward Train, and Women leave:
The chosen Youth, and those who nobly dare,
Transport; to tempt the Dangers of the War.
The stern Italians will their Courage try;
Rough are their Manners, and their Minds are high.
But first to Pluto's Palace you shall go,
And seek my Shade among the blessed below.
For not with impious Ghosts my Soul remains,
Nor suffers, with the Damned, perpetual Pains;
But breaths the living Air of soft Elysian Plains.
The chaste Sybilla shall your steps convey;
And Blood of offered Victims free the way.
There shall you know what Realms the Gods assign;
And learn the Fates and Fortunes of your Line.
But now, farewell; I vanish with the Night;
And feel the blast of Heavens approaching Light:
He said, and mixed with Shades, and took his airy flight.
Whether so fast, the filial Duty cried,
And why, ah why, the wished Embrace denied!
He said, and rose: as holy Zeal inspires
He rakes hot Embers, and renews the Fires.
His Country Gods and Vesta, then adores
With Cakes and Incense; and their Aid implores.
Next, for his Friends, and Royal Host he sent,
Revealed his Vision and the Gods intent,
With his own Purpose: All, without delay,
The Will of Jove, and his Desires obey.
They list with Women each degenerate Name,
Who dares not hazard Life, for future Fame.
These they cashier; the brave remaining few,
Oars, Banks, and Cables half consumed renew.
The Prince designs a City with the Plough;
The Lots their several Tenements allow.
This part is named from Ilium, that from Troy;
And the new King ascends the Throme with Joy.
A chosen Senate from the People draws;
Appoints the Judges, and ordains the Laws.
Then on the top of Eryx, they begin
To raise a Temple to the Paphian Queen:
Anchises, last, is honored as a God,
A Priest is added, annual Gifts bestowed;
And Groves are planted round his blessed Abode,
Nine days they pass in Feasts, their Temples crowned;
And fumes of Incense in the Fanes abound.
Then, from the South arose a ge^ntle Breeze,
That curled the smoothness of the glassy Seas:
The rising Winds, a ruffling Gale afford,
And call the merry Mariners aboard.
Now loud Laments along the Shores resound,
Of parting Friends in close Embraces bound.
The trembling Women, the degenerate Train,
Who shunned the frightful dangers of the Main;
Even those desire to fail, and take their share
Of the rough Passage, and the promised War.
Whom Good Aeneas chears; and recommends
To their new Master's Care, his fearful Friends.
On Eryx Altars three sat Calves he lays;
A Lamb new fallen to the stormy Seas;
Then flips his Haulsers, and his Anchors weighs.
High on the Deck, the Godlike Hero stands;
With Olive crowned; a Charger in his Hands;
Then cast the reeking Entrails in the brine,
And poured the Sacrifice of Purple Wine.
Fresh Gales arise, with equal Strokes they vye,
And brush the buxom Seas, and over the Billows fly.
Mean time the Mother-Goddess, full of Fears,
To Neptune thus addressed, with tender Tears.
The Pride of Jove's Imperious Queen, the Rage,
The malice which no Sufferings can assuage,
Compel me to these Prayers: Since neither Fate,
Nor Time, nor Pity, can remove her hate.
Even Jove is thwarted by his haughty Wife;
Still vanquished, yet she still renews the Strife.
As if 'twere little to consume the Town
Which awed the World; and wore the Imperial Crown:
She prosecutes the Ghost of Troy with Pains;
And gnaws, even to the Bones, the last Remains.
Let her the Causes of her Hatred tell;
But you can witness its Effects too well.
You saw the Storm she raised on Lybian Floods,
That mixed the mounting Billows with the Clouds.
When, bribing Eolus, she shook the Main;
And moved Rebellion in your watery Reign.
With Fury she possessed the Dardan Dames;
To burn their Fleet with execrable Flames.
And forced Aeneas, when his Ships were lost,
To leave his Foll'wers on a Foreign Coast.
For what remains, your Godhead I implore;
And trust my Son to your protecting Power.
If neither Jove's, nor Fate's decree withstand,
Secure his Passage to the Latian Land.
Then thus the mighty Ruler of the Main,
What may not Venus hope, from Neptune's Reign?
My Kingdom claims your Birth: my late Defense
Of your endangered Fleet, may claim your Confidence.
Nor less by Land than Sea, my Deeds declare,
How much your loved Aeneas is my Care.
Thee Xanthus, and thee Simois I attest:
Your Trojan Troops, when proud Achilles pressed,
To Edmond Waller of Beacons Field in the County of Bucks Esquire

AE 5. l. 1075


And drove before him headlong on the Plain
And dashed against the Walls the trembling T^^^^
When Floods were filled with bodies of the slain.
When Crimson Xanthus, doubtful of his way,
Stood up on ridges to behold the Sea;
New heaps came tumbling in, and choked his way:
When your Aeneas fought, but fought with odds
Of Force unequal, and unequal Gods;
I spread a Cloud before the Victor's sight,
Sustained the vanquished, and secured his flight.
Even then secured him, when I sought with joy
The vowed destruction of ungrateful Troy.
My Will's the same: Fair Goddess fear no more,
Your Fleet shall safely gain the Latian Shore:
Their lives are given; one destined Head alone
Shall perish, and for Multitudes atone.
Thus having armed with Hopes her anxious Mind,
His finny Team Saturnian Neptune joined.
Then, adds the foamy Bridle to their Jaws;
And to the loosened Reins permits the Laws.
High on the Waves his Azure Car he guides,
Its Axles thunder, and the Sea subsides;
And the smooth Ocean rowls her silent Tides.
The Tempests fly before their Father's face,
Trains of inferior Gods his Triumph grace;
And Monster Whales before their Master play,
And Quires of Tritons crowd the watery way.
The Martial'd Powers, in equal Troops divide,
To right and left: the Gods his better side
Enclose, and on the worse the Nymphs and Nereids ride.
Now smiling Hope, with sweet Vicissitude,
Within the Hero's Mind, his Joys renewed.
He calls to raise the Masts, the Sheats display;
The Cheerful Crew with diligence obey;
They scud before the Wind, and sail in open Sea.
A Head of all the Master Pilot steers,
And as he leads, the following Navy veers.
The Steeds of Night had traveled half the Sky,
The drowzy Rowers on their Benches lie;
When the soft God of Sleep, with easy flight,
Descends, and draws behind a trail of Light.
Thou Palinurus art his destined Prey;
To thee alone he takes his fatal way.
Dire Dreams to thee, and Iron Sleep he bears;
And lighting on thy Prow, the Form of Phorbas wears.
Then thus the Traitor God began his Tale:
The Winds, my Friend, inspire a pleasing gale;
The Ships, without thy Care, securely sail.
Now steal an hour of sweet Repose; and I
Will take the Rudder, and thy room supply.
To whom the yauning Pilot, half asleep;
Me do thou bid to trust the treacherous Deep!
The Harlot-smiles of her dissembling Face,
And to her Faith commit the Trojan Race?
Shall I believe the Siren South again,
And, often betrayed, not know the Monster Main?
He said, his fastened hands the Rudder keep,
And fixed on Heaven, his Eyes repel invading Sleep.
The God was wroth, and at his Temples threw
A Branch in Lethe dipped, and drunk with Stygian Dew:
The Pilot, vanquished by the Power Divine,
Soon closed his swimming Eyes, and lay supine.
Scarce were his Limbs extended at their length,
The God, insulting with superior Strength,
Fell heavy on him, plunged him in the Sea,
And, with the Stern, the Rudder tore away.
Headlong he fell, and struggling in the Main,
Cried out for helping hands, but cried in vain:
The Victor Demon mounts obscure in Air;
While the Ship sails without the Pilot's care.
On Neptune's Faith the floating Fleet relies;
But what the Man forsook, the God supplies;
And over the dangerous Deep secure the Navy flies.
Glides by the Syren's Cliffs, a shelfy Coast,
Long infamous for Ships, and Sailors lost;
And white with Bones: The impetuous Ocean roars;
And Rocks rebellow from the sounding Shores.
The watchful Hero felt the knocks; and found
The tossing Vessel sailed on shoaly Ground.
Sure of his Pilot's loss, he takes himself
The Helm, and steers aloof, and shuns the Shelf.
Inly he grieved; and groaning from his Breast,
Deplored his Death; and thus his Pain expressed:
For Faith reposed on Seas, and on the flattering Sky,
Thy naked Corpse is doomed, on Shores unknown to lie.
The Sixth Book of the Aeneis.
The Argument.
The Sibyl foretells Aeneas the Adventures he should meet with in Italy. She
attends him to Hell; describing to him the various Scenes of that Place, and
conducting him to his Father Anchises. Who instructs him in those sublime
Mysteries of the Soul of the World, and the Transmigration: And shows him that
glorious Race of Heroes, which was to descend from him, and his Posterity.

HE said, and wept: Then spread his Sails before
The Winds, and reached at length the Cuman Shore:
Their Anchors dropped, his Crew the Vessels moor.
They turn their Heads to Sea; their Sterns to Land;
And greet with greedy Joy the Italian Strand.
Some strike from clashing Flints their fiery Seed;
Some gather Sticks, the kindled Flames to feed:
Or search for hollow Trees, and fell the Woods,
Or trace through Valleys the discovered Floods.
Thus, while their several Charges they fulfill,
The Pious Prince ascends the sacred Hill
Where Phoebus is adored; and seeks the Shade,
Which hides from sight, his venerable Maid.
Deep in a Cave the Sibyl makes abode;
Thence full of Fate returns, and of the God.
Through Trivia's Grove they walk; and now behold,
And enter now, the Temple roof'd with Gold.
When Dedalus, to shun the Cretan Shore,
His heavy Limbs on jointed Pinions bore,
(The first who sailed in Air,) it is sung by Fame,
To the Cumaean Coast at length he came;
And, here alighting, built this costly Frame.
To ye Right Honble Basil Earl of Denbigh Vis-count Fielding Baron Newenham
Padox and St Lis

AE. 6. l. ^


Inscribed to Phoebus, here he hung on high
The steerage of his Wings, that cut the Sky:
Then over the lofty Gate his Art embossed
Androgeos Death, and Offerings to his Ghost.
Sev'n Youths from Athens yearly sent, to meet
The Fate appointed by revengeful Creet.
And next to these the dreadful Urn was placed,
In which the destined Name by Lots were cast:
The mournful Parents stand around in Tears;
And rising Creet against their Shore appears.
There too, in living Sculpture, might be seen
The mad Affection of the Cretan Queen:
Then how she cheats her bellowing Lover's Eye:
The rushing leap, the doubtful Progeny,
The lower part a Beast, a Man above,
The Monument of their polluted Love.
Nor far from thence he engraved the wondrous Maze;
A thousand Doors, a thousand winding Ways;
Here dwells the Monster, hid from Human View,
Not to be found, but by the faithful Clue:
'Till the kind Artist, moved with Pious Grief,
Lent to the loving Maid this last Relief.
And all those erring Paths described so well,
That Theseus conquered, and the Monster fell.
Here hapless Icarus had found his part;
Had not the Father's Grief restrained his Art.
He twice essayed to cast his Son in Gold;
Twice from his Hands he dropped the forming Mould.
All this with wondering Eyes Aeneas viewed:
Each varying Object his Delight renewed.
Prepared to read the rest, Achates came,
And by his side the mad divining Dame;
The Priestess of the God, Deiphobe her Name.
Time suffers not, she said, to feed your Eyes
With empty Pleasures: haste the Sacrifice.
Sev'n Bullocks yet unyok'd, for Phoebus choose,
And for Diana sev'n unspotted Ewes.
This said, the Servants urge the Sacred Rites;
While to the Temple she the Prince invites.
A spacious Cave, within its farmost part,
Was hewed and fashioned by laborious Art.
Through the Hills hollow sides: Before the place,
A hundred Doors a hundred Entries grace:
As many Voices issue; and the sound
Of Sibyl's Words as many times rebound.
Now to the Mouth they come: Aloud she cries,
This is the time, enquire your Destinies.
He comes, behold the God! Thus while she said,
(And shivering at the sacred Entry staid)
Her Color changed, her Face was not the same,
And hollow Groans from her deep Spirit came.
Her Hair stood up; convulsive Rage possessed
Her trembling Limbs, and heaved her laboring Breast.
Greater than Human Kind she seemed to look:
And with an Accent, more than Mortal, spoke.
Her staring Eyes with sparling Fury roll;
When all the God came rushing on her Soul.
Swiftly she turned, and foaming as she spoke,
Why this Delay, she cried; the Powers invoke.
Thy Prayers alone can open this abode,
Else vain are my Demands, and dumb the God.
She said no more: The trembling Trojans hear;
O're-spread with a damp Sweat, and holy Fear.
The Prince himself, with awful Dread possessed,
His Vows to great Apollo thus addressed.
Indulgent God, propitious Power to Troy,
Swift to relieve, unwilling to destroy;
Directed by whose Hand, the Dardan Dart
Pierced the proud Grecian's only Mortal part:
Thus far, by Fates Decrees, and thy Commands,
Through ambient Seas, and through devouring Sands,
Our exiled Crew has sought the Ausonian Ground:
And now, at length, the flying Coast is found.
Thus far the Fate of Troy, from place to place,
With Fury has pursued her wandering Race:
Here cease ye Powers, and let your Vengeance end,
Troy is no more, and can no more offend.
And thou, O sacred Maid, inspired to see
The Event of things in dark Futurity;
Give me, what Heaven has promised to my Fate,
To conquer and command the Latian State:
To fix my wandering Gods; and find a place
For the long Exiles of the Trojan Race.
Then shall my grateful Hands a Temple rear
To the twin Gods, with Vows and solemn Prayer;
And Annual Rites, and Festivals, and Games,
Shall be performed to their auspicious Names.
Nor shall thou want thy Honors in my Land,
For there thy faithful Oracles shall stand,
Preserved in Shrines: and every Sacred Lay,
Which, by thy Mouth, Apollo shall convey.
All shall be treasured, by a chosen Train
Of holy Priests, and ever shall remain.
But, oh! commit not thy prophetic Mind
To flitting Leaves, the sport of every Wind:
Lest they disperse in Air our empty Fate:
Write not, but, what the Powers ordain, relate.
Struggling in vain, impatient of her Load,
And laboring underneath the ponderous God,
The more she strove to shake him from her Breast,
With more, and far superior Force he pressed:
Commands his Entrance, and without Control,
Usurps her Organs, and inspires her Soul.
Now, with a furious Blast, the hundred Doors
Open of themselves; a rushing Wirlwind roars
Within the Cave; and Sibyl's Voice restores.
Escaped the Dangers of the watery Reign,
Yet more, and greater Ills, by Land remain.
The Coast so long desired, (nor doubt the Event)
Thy Troops shall reach, but having reached, repent.
Wars, horrid Wars I view; a field of Blood;
And Tyber rolling with a Purple Flood.
Simois nor Xanthus shall be wanting there;
A new Achilles shall in Arms appear:
And he, too, Goddess-born: fierce Juno's Hate,
Added to hostile Force, shall urge thy Fate.
To what strange Nations shall not thou resort,
Driven to solicit Aid at every Court!
The Cause the same which Ilium once oppressed,
A foreign Mistress, and a foreign Guest.
But thou, secure of Soul, unbent with Woes,
The more thy Fortune frowns, the more oppose.
The dawnings of thy Safety, shall be shown,
From whence thou least shall hope, a Grecian Town.
Thus, from the dark Recess, the Sibyl spoke,
And the resisting Air the Thunder broke;
The Cave rebellow'd; and the Temple shook.
The ambiguous God, who ruled her laboring Breast,
In these mysterious Words his Mind expressed:
Some Truths revealed, in Terms involved the rest.
At length her Fury fell; her foaming ceased,
And, ebbing in her Soul, the God decreased.
Then thus the Chief: no Terror to my view,
No frightful Face of Danger can be new.
To Sr Fleetwood Sheppard Knight, Gent: Usher of ye Black Rod

AE. ^ l. 150.


Inured to suffer, and resolved to dare,
The Fates, without my Power, shall be without my Care.
This let me crave, since near your Grove the Road
To Hell lies open, and the dark Abode,
Which Acheron surrounds, the innavigable Flood:
Conduct me through the Regions void of Light,
And lead me longing to my Father's sight.
For him, a thousand Dangers I have sought;
And, rushing where the thickest Grecians fought,
Safe on my Back the sacred Burden brought.
He, for my sake, the raging Ocean tried,
And Wrath of Heaven; my still auspicious Guide,
And bore beyond the strength decrepid Age supplied.
Often since he breathed his last, in dead of Night,
His reverend Image stood before my sight;
Enjoined to seek below, his holy Shade;
Conducted there, by your unerring aid.
But you, if pious Minds by Prayers are won,
Oblige the Father, and protect the Son.
Yours is the Power; nor Proserpine in vain
Has made you Priestess of her nightly Reign.
If Orpheus, armed with his enchanting Lyre,
The ruthless King with Pity could inspire;
And from the Shades below redeem his Wife:
If Pollux, offering his alternate Life,
Could free his Brother; and can daily go
By turns aloft, by turns descend below:
Why name I Theseus, or his greater Friend,
Who trod the downward Path, and upward could ascend!
Not less than theirs, from Jove my Lineage came:
My Mother greater, my Descent the same.
So prayed the Trojan Prince; and while he prayed
His Hand upon the holy Altar laid.
Then thus replied the Prophetess Divine:
O Goddess born! of Great Anchises Line;
The Gates of Hell are open Night and day;
Smooth the Descent, and easy is the Way:
But, to return, and view the cheerful Skies;
In this the Task, and mighty Labor lies.
To few great Jupiter imparts this Grace:
And those of shining Worth, and Heavenly Race.
Betwixt those Regions, and our upper Light,
Deep Forests, and impenetrable Night
Possess the middle space: The Infernal Bounds
Cocytus, with his sable Waves, surrounds.
But if so dire a Love your Soul invades;
As twice below to view the trembling Shades;
If you so hard a Toil will undertake,
As twice to pass the innavigable Lake;
Receive my Counsel. In the Neighboring Grove
There stands a Tree; the Queen of Stygian Jove
Claims it her own; thick Woods, and gloomy Night,
Conceal the happy Plant from Humane sight.
One Bough it bears; but, wondrous to behold;
The ductile Rind, and Leaves, of Radiant Gold:
This, from the vulgar Branches must be torn,
And to fair Proserpine, the Present born:
E're leave be given to tempt the nether Skies:
The first thus rent, a second will arise;
And the same Metal the same room supplies.
Look round the Wood, with lifted Eyes, to see
The lurking Gold upon the fatal Tree:
Then rend it off, as holy Rites command:
The willing Metal will obey thy hand,
Following with ease, if, favored by thy Fate,
Thou art foredoom'd to view the Stygian State:
If not, no labor can the Tree constrain:
And strength of stubborn Arms, and Steel are vain.
Besides, you know not, while you here attend
The unworthy Fate of your unhappy Friend:
Breathless he lies: And his unbury'd Ghost,
Deprived of Funeral Rites, pollutes your Host.
Pay first his Pious Dues: And for the dead,
Two sable Sheep around his Hearse be led.
Then, living Turfs upon his Body lay;
This done, securely take the destined Way,
To find the Regions destitute of Day.
She said: and held her Peace. Aeneas went
Sad from the Cave, and full of Discontent;
Unknowing whom the sacred Sibyl meant.
Achates, the Companion of his Breast,
Goes grieving by his side; with equal Cares oppressed.
Walking, they talked, and fruitlesly divined
What Friend, the Priestess by those Words designed.
But soon they found an Object to deplore;
Misenus lay extended on the Shore.
Son to the God of Winds; none so renowned,
The Warrior Trumpet in the Field to sound:
With breathing Brass to kindle fierce Alarms;
And rouse to dare their Fate, in honorable Arms.
He served great Hector; and was ever near;
Not with his Trumpet only, but his Spear.
But, by Pelides Arms, when Hector fell,
He chose Aeneas, and he chose as well.
Swollen with Applause, and aiming still at more,
He now provokes the Sea Gods from the Shore;
With Envy Triton heard the Martial sound,
And the bold Champion, for his Challenge, drowned.
Then cast his mangled Carcass on the Strand*
The gazing Crowd around the Body stand.
All weep, but most Aeneas mourns his Fate;
And hastens to perform the Funeral state.
In Altar-wise, a stately Pile they rear;
The Basis broad below, and top advanced in Air.
An ancient Wood, fit for the Work designed,
(The shady Covert of the Salvage Kind)
The Trojans found: The sounding Axe is plied:
Firs, Pines, and Pitch-Trees, and the towering Pride
Of Forest Ashes, feel the fatal Stroke:
And piercing Wedges cleave the stubborn Oak.
Huge Trunks of Trees, felled from the steepy Crown
Of the bare Mountains, roll with Ruin down.
Armed like the rest the Trojan Prince appears:
And, by his pious Labor, urges theirs.
Thus while he wrought, revolving in his Mind,
The ways to compass what his Wish designed,
He cast his Eyes upon the gloomy Grove;
And then with Vows implored the Queen of Love.
O may thy Power, propitious still to me,
Conduct my steps to find the fatal Tree,
In this deep Forest; since the Sibyl's Breath
Foretold, alas! too true, Misenus Death.
Scarce had he said, when full before his sight
Two Doves, descending from their Airy Flight,
Secure upon the grassy Plain alight.
He knew his Mother's Birds: and thus he prayed:
Be you my Guides, with your auspicious Aid:
And lead my Footsteps, 'till the Branch be found,
Whose glittering Shadow guilds the sacred Ground:
And thou, great Parent! with Celestial Care,
In this Distress, be present to my Prayer.
Thus having said, he stopped: With watchful sight,
Observing still the motions of their Flight.
To Sr: Tho: Dyke of Horeham in ye County of Sussex Bart:

AE. 6. l. 280


To Mrs: Anne Baynard Daughter of Dr. Ednd: Baynard of the Family of Leckham in
ye County of Wilts

AE 6. l 31^


What course they took, what happy Signs they show.
They fed, and fluttering by degrees, withdrew
Still farther from the Place; but still in view.
Hopping, and flying, thus they led him on
To the slow Lake; whose baleful Stench to shun,
They winged their Flight aloft; then, stooping low,
Perched on the double Tree, that bears the golden Bough.
Through the green Leafs the glittering Shadows glow;
As on the sacred Oak, the wintry Misleto:
Where the proud Mother views her precious Brood;
And happier Branches, which she never sowed.
Such was the glittering; such the ruddy Rind,
And dancing Leaves, that wantoned in the Wind.
He seized the shining Bough with griping hold;
And rent away, with ease, the lingering Gold.
Then, to the Sibyl's Palace bore the Prize.
Mean time, the Trojan Troops, with weeping Eyes,
To dead Misenus pay his Obsequies.
First, from the Ground, a lofty Pile they rear,
Of Pitch-trees, Oaks, and Pines, and unctuous Firr:
The Fabrick's Front with Cypress Twigs they strew;
And stick the sides with Boughs of baleful Yeugh.
The topmost part, his glittering Arms adorn;
Warm Waters, then, in brazen Caldrons born,
Are poured to wash his Body, Joint by Joint:
And fragrant Oils the stiffen'd Limbs anoint.
With Groans and Cries Misenus they deplore:
Then on a Bier, with Purple covered over,
The breathless Body, thus bewailed, they lay:
And fire the Pile, their Faces turned away:
(Such reverend Rites their Fathers used to pay.)
Pure Oil, and Incense, on the Fire they throw:
And Fat of Victims, which his Friends bestow.
These Gifts, the greedy Flames to Dust devour;
Then, on the living Coals, red Wine they pour:
And last, the Relics by themselves dispose;
Which in a brazen Urn the Priests enclose.
Old Chorineus compassed thrice the Crew;
And dipped an Olive Branch in holy Dew;
Which thrice he sprinkled round; and thrice aloud
Invoked the dead, and then dismissed the Crowd.
But good Aeneas ordered on the Shore
A stately Tomb; whose top a Trumpet bore:
A Soldier's Fauchion, and a Sea-man's Oar.
Thus was his Friend interred: And deathless Fame
Still to the lofty Cape consigns his Name.
These Rites performed, the Prince, without delay,
Hastes to the nether World, his destined Way.
Deep was the Cave; and downward as it went
From the wide Mouth, a rocky rough Descent;
And here the access a gloomy Grove defends;
And there the unnavigable Lake extends.
Over whose unhappy Waters, void of Light,
No Bird presumes to steer his Airy Flight;
Such deadly Stenches from the depth arise,
And steaming Sulphur, that infects the Skies.
From hence the Grecian Bards their Legends make,
And give the name Avernus to the Lake.
Four sable Bullocks, in the Yoke untaught,
For Sacrifice the pious Hero brought.
The Priestess pours the Wine betwixt their Horns:
Then cuts the curling Hair; that first Oblation burns.
Invoking Hecate hither to repair;
(A powerful Name in Hell, and upper Air.)
The sacred Priests with ready Knives bereave
The Beasts of Life; and in full Bowls receive
The streaming Blood: A Lamb to Hell and Night,
(The sable Wool without a streak of white)
Aeneas offers: And, by Fates decree,
A barren Heifar, Proserpine to thee.
With Holocausts he Pluto's Altar fills:
Sev'n brawny Bulls with his own Hand he kills:
Then on the broiling Entrails Oil he pours;
Which, ointed thus, the raging Flame devours.
Late, the Nocturnal Sacrifice begun;
Nor ended, 'till the next returning Sun.
Then Earth began to bellow, Trees to dance;
And howling Dogs in glimmering Light advance;
E're Hecate came: Far hence be Souls profane,
The Sibyl cried, and from the Grove abstain.
Now, Trojan, take the way thy Fates afford:
Assume thy Courage, and unsheath thy Sword.
She said, and passed along the gloomy Space:
The Prince pursued her Steps with equal pace.
Ye Realms, yet unreveal'd to human sight,
Ye Gods, who rule the Regions of the Night,
Ye gliding Ghosts, permit me to relate
The mystic Wonders of your silent State.
Obscure they went through dreery Shades, that led
Along the waste Dominions of the dead:
Thus wander Travelers in Woods by Night,
By the Moon's doubtful, and malignant Light:
When Jove in dusky Clouds involves the Skies;
And the faint Crescent shoots by fits before their Eyes.
Just in the Gate, and in the Jaws of Hell,
Revengeful Cares, and sullen Sorrows dwell;
And pale Diseases, and repining Age;
Want, Fear, and Famine's unresisted rage.
Here Toils, and Death, and Death's half-brother, Sleep,
Forms terrible to view, their Centry keep:
With anxious Pleasures of a guilty Mind,
Deep Frauds before, and open Force behind:
The Furies Iron Beds, and Strife that shakes
Her hissing Tresses, and unfolds her Snakes.
Full in the midst of this infernal Road,
An Elm displays her dusky Arms abroad;
The God of Sleep there hides his heavy Head:
And empty Dreams on every Leaf are spread.
Of various Forms unnumber'd Specters more;
Centaurs, and double Shapes, besiege the Door:
Before the Passage horrid Hydra stands,
And Briareus with all his hundred Hands:
Gorgons, Geryon with his triple Frame;
And vain Chimaera vomits empty Flame.
The Chief unsheathed his shining Steel, prepared,
Tho seized with sudden Fear, to force the Guard.
Offering his brandished Weapon at their Face;
Had not the Sibyl stopped his eager Pace,
And told him what those empty Fantomes were;
Forms without Bodies, and impassive Air.
Hence to deep Acheron they take their way;
Whose troubled Eddies, thick with Ooze and Clay,
Are whirled aloft, and in Cocytus lost:
There Charon stands, who rules the dreary Coast:
A sordid God; down from his hoary Chin
A length of Beard descends; uncomb'd, unclean:
His Eyes, like hollow Furnaces on Fire:
A Girdle, foul with grease, binds his obscene Attire.
He spreads his Canvas, with his Pole he steers;
The Freights of flitting Ghosts in his thin Bottom beats.
He looked in Years; yet in his Years were seen
A youthful Vigor, and Autumnal green.
An Airy Crowd came rushing where he stood;
Which filled the Margin of the fatal Flood.
To John Lenknor Esqr: of West Deane in the County of Sussex

AE. 6. l: 390


Husbands and Wives, Boys and unmarry'd Maids;
And mighty Heroes more Majestic Shades.
And Youths, entombed before their Fathers Eyes,
With hollow Groans, and Shrieks, and feeble Cries:
Thick as the Leaves in Autumn strew the Woods:
Or Fowls, by Winter forced, forsake the Floods,
And wing their hasty flight to happier Lands:
Such, and so thick, the shivering Army stands:
And press for passage with extended hands.
Now these, now those, the surly Boatman bore:
The rest he drove to distance from the Shore.
The Hero, who beheld with wondering Eyes,
The Tumult mixed with Shrieks, Laments, and Cries;
Asked of his Guide, what the rude Concourse meant?
Why to the Shore the thronging People bent?
What Forms of Law, among the Ghosts were used?
Why some were ferry'd over, and some refused?
Son of Anchises, Offspring of the Gods,
The Sibyl said; you see the Stygian Floods,
The Sacred Stream, which Heaven's Imperial State
Attests in Oaths, and fears to violate.
The Ghosts rejected, are the unhappy Crew
Deprived of Sepulchers* and Funeral due.
The Boatman Charon; those, the buried host,
He Ferries over to the Farther Coast.
Nor dares his Transport Vessel cross the Waves,
With such whose Bones are not composed in Graves.
A hundred years they wander on the Shore,
At length, their Penance done, are wafted over.
The Trojan Chief his forward pace repressed;
Revolving anxious Thoughts within his Breast.
He saw his Friends, who whelmed beneath the Waves,
Their Funeral Honors claimed, and asked their quiet Graves.
The lost Leucaspis in the Crowd he knew;
And the brave Leader of the Lycian Crew:
Whom, on the Tyrrhene Seas, the Tempests met;
The Sailors mastered, and the Ship o'reset.
Amidst the Spirits Palinurus pressed;
Yet fresh from life; a new admitted Guest.
Who, while he steering viewed the Stars, and bore
His Course from Afric, to the Latian Shore,
Fell headlong down. The Trojan fixed his view;
And scarcely through the gloom the sullen Shadow knew.
Then thus the Prince. What envious Power, O Friend,
Brought your loved life to this disastrous end?
For Phoebus, ever true in all he said,
Has, in your fate alone, my Faith betrayed?
The God foretold you should not die, before
You reached, secure from Seas, the Italian Shore?
Is this the unerring Power? The Ghost replied,
Nor Phoebus flattered, nor his Answers ly'd;
Nor envious Gods have sent me to the Deep:
But while the Stars, and course of Heaven I keep,
My wearied Eyes were seized with fatal sleep.
I fell; and with my weight, the Helm constrained,
Was drawn along, which yet my gripe retained.
Now by the Winds, and raging Waves, I swear,
Your Safety, more than mine, was then my Care:
Lest, of the Guide bereft, the Rudder lost,
Your Ship should run against the the rocky Coast.
Three blustering Nights, born by the Southern blast,
I floated; and discovered Land at last:
High on a Mounting Wave, my head I bore:
Forcing my Strength, and gathering to the Shore:
Panting, but but past the danger, now I seized
The Craggy Cliffs, and my tired Members eased:
While, cumber'd with my dropping Clothes, I lay,
The cruel Nation, covetous of Prey,
Stained with my Blood the unhospitable Coast:
And now, by Winds and Waves, my lifeless Limbs are tossed.
Which O avert, by yon Etherial Light
Which I have lost, for this eternal Night:
Or if by dearer ties you may be won,
By your dead Sire, and by your living Son,
Redeem from this Reproach, my wandering Ghost;
Or with your Navy seek the Velin Coast:
And in a peaceful Grave my Corpse compose:
Or, if a nearer way your Mother shows,
Without whose Aid, you durst not undertake
This frightful Passage over the Stygian Lake;
Lend to this Wretch your Hand, and waft him over
To the sweet Banks of yon forbidden Shore.
Scarce had he said, the Prophetess began;
What Hopes delude thee, miserable Man?
Think thou thus unintomb'd to cross the Floods,
To view the Furies, and Infernal Gods;
And visit, without leave, the dark abodes?
Attend the term of long revolving Years:
Fate, and the dooming Gods, are deaf to Tears.
This Comfort of thy dire Misfortune take;
The Wrath of Heaven, inflicted for thy sake,
With Vengeance shall pursue the inhumane Coast.
Till they propitiate thy offended Ghost,
And raise a Tomb, with Vows, and solemn Prayer;
And Palinurus name the Place shall bear.
This calmed his Cares: soothed with his future Fame;
And pleased to hear his propagated Name.
Now nearer to the Stygian Lake they draw:
Whom from the Shore, the surly Boatman saw:
Observed their Passage through the shady Wood;
And marked their near Approaches to the Flood:
Then thus he called aloud, inflamed with Wrath;
Mortal, what e're, who this forbidden Path
In Arms presum'st to tread, I charge thee stand,
And tell thy Name, and Buis'ness in the Land.
Know this, the Realm of Night; the Stygian Shore:
My Boat conveys no living Bodies over:
Nor was I pleased great Theseus once to bear;
Who forced a Passage with his pointed Spear;
Nor strong Alcides, Men of mighty Fame;
And from the immortal Gods their Lineage came.
In Fetters one the barking Porter tied,
And took him trembling from his Sov'raign's side:
Two sought by Force to seize his beauteous Bride.
To whom the Sibyl thus, compose thy Mind:
Nor Frauds are here contrived, nor Force designed.
Still may the Dog the wandering Troops constrain
Of Airy Ghosts; and vex the guilty Train;
And with her grisly Lord his lovely Queen remain.
The Trojan Chief, whose Lineage is from Jove,
Much famed for Arms, and more for filial Love,
Is sent to seek his Sire, in your Elisian Grove.
If neither Piety, nor Heaven's Command,
Can gain his Passage to the Stygian Strand,
This fatal Present shall prevail, at least;
Then showed the shining Bough, concealed within her Vest.
No more was needful: for the gloomy God
Stood mute with Awe, to see the Golden Rod:
Admired the destined Offering to his Queen;
(A venerable Gift so rarely seen)
His Fury thus appeased, he puts to Land:
The Ghosts forsake their Seats, at his Command:
He clears the Deck, receives the mighty Freight,
The leaky Vessel groans beneath the weight.
Slowly he sails; and scarcely stems the Tides:
The pressing Water pours within her sides.
His Passengers at length are wafted over;
Exposed in muddy Weeds, upon the miry Shore.
No sooner landed, in his Den they found
The triple Porter of the Stygian Sound:
Grim Cerberus; who soon began to rear
His crested Snakes, and armed his bristling Hair.
The prudent Sibyl had before prepared
A Sop, in Honey steeped, to charm the Guard.
Which, mixed with powerful Drugs, she cast before
His greedy grinning Jaws, just opened to roar:
With three enormous Mouths he gapes; and straight,
With Hunger pressed, devours the pleasing Bait.
Long draughts of Sleep his monstrous Limbs enslave;
He reels, and falling, fills the spacious Cave.
The Keeper charmed, the Chief without Delay
Passed on, and took the irremeable way.
Before the Gates, the Cries of Babes new born,
Whom Fate had from their tender Mothers torn,
Assault his Ears: Then those, whom Form of Laws
Condemned to die, when Traitors judged their Cause.
Nor want they Lots, nor Judges to review
The wrongful Sentence, and award a new.
Minos, the strict Inquisitor, appears;
And Lives and Crimes, with his Assessors, hears.
Round, in his Urn, the blended Balls he rowls;
Absolves the Just, and dooms the Guilty Souls.
The next in Place, and Punishment, are they
Who prodigally throw their Souls away.
Fools, who repining at their wretched State,
And loathing anxious life, suborned their Fate.
With late Repentance, now they would retrieve
The Bodies they forsook, and wish to live.
Their Pains and Poverty desire to bear,
To view the Light of Heaven, and breath the vital Air:
But Fate forbids; the Stygian Floods oppose;
And, with nine circling Streams, the captive Souls enclose.
Not far from thence, the mournful Fields appear;
So called from Lovers that inhabit there.
The Souls, whom that unhappy Flame invades,
In secret Solitude, and Myrtle Shades,
Make endless Moans, and pining with Desire,
Lament too late, their unextinguish'd Fire.
Here Procris, Eryphile here, he found
Baring her Breast, yet bleeding with the Wound
Made by her Son. He saw Pasiphae there,
With Phaedra's Ghost, a foul incestuous pair;
Chaste Laodamia, with Evadne, moves:
Unhappy both; but loyal in their Loves.
Caeneus, a Woman once, and once a Man;
But ending in the Sex she first began.
Not far from these Phoenician Dido stood;
Fresh from her Wound, her Bosom bathed in Blood.
Whom, when the Trojan Hero hardly knew,
Obscure in Shades, and with a doubtful view,
(Doubtful as he who sees through dusky Night,
Or thinks he sees the Moon's uncertain Light:)
With Tears he first approached the sullen Shade;
And, as his Love inspired him, thus he said.
Unhappy Queen! then is the common breath
Of Rumor true, in your reported Death,
And I, alas, the Cause! by Heaven, I vow,
And all the Powers that rule the Realms below,
To John Pulteney of the Parish of St: James's Westminster Esquire.

AE. 6. l. 615


Unwilling I forsook your friendly State:
Commanded by the Gods, and forced by Fate.
Those Gods, that Fate, whose unresisted Might
Have sent me to these Regions, void of Light,
Through the vast Empire of eternal Night.
Nor dared I to presume, that, pressed with Grief,
My Flight should urge you to this dire Relief.
Stay, stay your Steps, and listen to my Vows:
It Is the last Interview that Fate allows!
In vain he thus attempts her Mind to move,
With Tears, and Prayers, and late repenting Love.
Disdainfully she looked; then turning round,
But fixed her Eyes unmoved upon the Ground.
And, what he says, and swears, regards no more
Than the deaf Rocks, when the loud Billows roar.
But whirled away, to shun his hateful sight,
Hid in the Forest, and the Shades of Night.
Then sought Sicheus, through the shady Grove,
Who answered all her Cares, and equaled all her Love.
Some pious Tears the pitying Hero paid;
And followed with his Eyes the flitting Shade.
Then took the forward Way, by Fate ordained,
And, with his Guide, the farther Fields attained;
Where, severed from the rest, the Warrior Souls remained.
Tideus he met, with Meleager's Race;
The Pride of Armies, and the Soldier's Grace;
And pale Adrastus with his ghastly Face.
Of Trojan Chiefs he viewed a numerous Train:
All much lamented, all in Battle slain.
Glaucus and Medon, high above the rest,
Antenor's Sons, and Ceres sacred Priest:
And proud Ideus, Priam's Charioteer;
Who shakes his empty Reins, and aims his Airy Spear.
The gladsome Ghosts, in circling Troops, attend,
And with unwearied Eyes behold their Friend.
Delight to hover near; and long to know
What buis'ness brought him to the Realms below.
But Argive Chiefs, and Agamemnon's Train,
When his refulgent Arms flashed through the shady Plain,
Fled from his well known Face, with wonted Fear,
As when his thundering Sword, and pointed Spear,
Drove headlong to their Ships, and gleaned the routed Rear.
They raised a feeble Cry, with trembling Notes:
But the weak Voice deceived their gasping Throats.
Here Priam's Son, Deiphobus, he found:
Whose Face and Limbs were one continued Wound.
Dishonest, with lop'd Arms, the Youth appears:
Spoiled of his Nose, and shortened of his Ears.
He scarcely knew him, striving to disown
His blotted Form, and blushing to be known.
And therefore first began. O Teucer's Race,
Who durst thy faultless Figure thus deface?
What heart could wish, what hand inflict this dire Disgrace?
It Was famed, that in our last and fatal Night,
Your single Prowess long sustained the Fight:
Till tired, not forced, a glorious Fate you chose:
And fell upon a Heap of slaughtered Foes.
But in remembrance of so brave a Deed,
A Tomb, and Funeral Honors I decreed:
Thrice called your Manes, on the Trojan Plains:
The place your Armor, and your Name retains.
Your Body too I sought; and had I found,
Designed for Burial in your Native Ground.
The Ghost replied, your Piety has paid
All needful Rites, to rest my wandering Shade:
But cruel Fate, and my more cruel Wife,
To Grecian Swords betrayed my sleeping Life.
To Christopher Knight Esquire of Chanton in Hantshire

AE. 6. l. 675.


These are the Monuments of Helen's Love:
The Shame I bear below, the Marks I bore above.
You know in what deluding Joys we past
The Night, that was by Heaven decreed our last.
For when the fatal Horse, descending down,
Pregnant with Arms, overwhelmed the unhappy Town;
She feigned Nocturnal Orgyes: left my Bed,
And, mixed with Trojan Dames, the Dances led.
Then, waving high her Torch, the Signal made,
Which roused the Grecians from their Ambuscade.
With Watching overworn, with Cares oppressed,
Unhappy I had laid me down to rest;
And heavy Sleep my weary Limbs possessed.
Mean time my worthy Wife, our Arms mislay'd;
And from beneath my head my Sword conveyed:
The Door unlatch'd; and with repeated calls,
Invites her former Lord within my walls.
Thus in her Crime her confidence she placed:
And with new Treasons would redeem the past.
What need I more, into the Room they ran;
And meanly murdered a defenseless Man.
Ulysses, basely born, first led the way:
Avenging Powers! with Justice if I pray,
That Fortune be their own another day.
But answer you; and in your turn relate,
What brought you, living, to the Stygian State?
Driven by the Winds and Errors of the Sea,
Or did you Heavens Superior Doom obey?
Or tell what other Chance conducts your way?
To view, with Mortal Eyes, our dark Retreats,
Tumults and Torments of the Infernal Seats?
While thus, in talk, the flying Hours they pass,
The Sun had finished more than half his Race:
And they, perhaps, in Words and Tears had spent
The little time of stay, which Heaven had lent.
But thus the Sibyl chides their long delay;
Night rushes down, and headlong drives the Day:
It Is here, in different Paths, the way divides:
The right, to Pluto's Golden Palace guides:
The left to that unhappy Region tends,
Which to the depth of Tartarus descends;
The Seat of Night profound, and punished Fiends.
Then thus Deiphobus: O Sacred Maid!
Forbear to chide; and be your Will Obeyed:
Lo to the secret Shadows I retire,
To pay my Penance 'till my Years expire.
Proceed Auspicious Prince, with Glory Crowned,
And born to better Fates than I have found.
He said; and while he said, his Steps he turned
To Secret Shadows; and in silence Mourned.
The Hero, looking on the left, espied
A lofty Tower, and strong on every side
With treble Walls, which Phlegethon surrounds,
Whose fiery Flood the burning Empire bounds:
And pressed betwixt the Rocks, the bellowing noise resounds.
Wide is the fronting Gate, and raised on high
With Adamantine Columns, threats the Sky.
Vain is the force of Man, and Heavens as van,
To crush the Pillars which the Pile sustain.
Sublime on these a Tower of Steel is reared;
And dire Tisiphone there keeps the Ward.
Girt in her sanguine Gown, by Night and Day,
Observant of the Souls that pass the downward way:
From hence are heard the Groans of Ghosts, the pains
Of sounding Lashes, and of dragging Chains.
The Trojan stood astonished at their Cries;
And asked his Guide, from whence those Yells arise?
And what the Crimes and what the Tortures were,
And loud Laments that rent the liquid Air?
She thus replied: The chaste and holy Race,
Are all forbidden this polluted Place.
But Hecate, when she gave to rule the Woods,
Then led me trembling through these dire Abodes:
And taught the Tortures of the avenging Gods.
These are the Realms of unrelenting Fate:
And awful Rhadamanthus rules the State.
He hears and judges each committed Crime;
Enquires into the Manner, Place, and Time.
The conscious Wretch must all his Acts reveal:
Loath to confefs, unable to conceal:
From the first Moment of his vital Breath,
To his last Hour of unrepenting Death.
Straight, over the guilty Ghost, the Fury shakes
The sounding Whip, and brandishes her Snakes:
And the pale Sinner, with her Sisters, takes.
Then, of it self, unfolds the Eternal Door:
With dreadful Sounds the brazen Hinges roar.
You see, before the Gate, what stalking Ghost
Commands the Guard, what Centries keep the Post:
More formidable Hydra stands within;
Whose Jaws with Iron Teeth severely grin.
The gaping Gulf, low to the Center lies;
And twice as deep as Earth is distant from the Skies.
The Rivals of the Gods, the Titan Race,
Here singed with Lightning, roll within the unfathomed space.
Here lie the Alaean Twins, (I saw them both)
Enormous Bodies, of Gigantick Growth;
Who dared in Fight the Thund'rer to defy;
Affect his Heaven, and force him from the Sky.
Salmoneus, suffering cruel Pains, I found,
For emulating Jove; the rattling Sound
Of Mimick Thunder, and the glittering Blaze
Of pointed Lightnings, and their forky Rays.
Through Elis, and the Grecian Towns he flew:
The audacious Wretch four fiery Coursers drew:
He waved a Torch aloft, and, madly vain,
Sought Godlike Worship from a Servile Train.
Ambitious Fool, with horny Hoofs to pass
Over hollow Arches, of resounding Brass;
To rival Thunder, in its rapid Course:
And imitate inimitable Force.
But he, the King of Heaven, obscure on high,
Barred his red Arm, and launching from the Sky
His writhen Bolt, not shaking empty Smoke,
Down to the deep Abyss the flaming Felon struck.
There Tityus was to see; who took his Birth
From Heaven, his Nursing from the foodful Earth.
Here his Gygantic Limbs, with large Embrace,
Infold nine Acres of Infernal Space.
A ravenous Vulture in his opened side,
Her crooked Beak and cruel Tallons tried:
Still for the growing Liver dig'd his Breast;
The growing Liver still supplied the Feast.
Still are his Entrails fruitful to their Pains:
The immortal Hunger lasts, the immortal Food remains.
Ixion and Perithous I could name;
And more Thessalian Chiefs of mighty Fame.
High over their Heads a mouldering Rock is placed,
That promises a fall; and shakes at every Blast.
They lie below, on Golden Beds displayed,
And genial Feasts, with Regal Pomp, are made.
The Queen of Furies by their sides is set;
And snatches from their Mouths the untasted Meat.
Which, if they touch, her hissing Snakes she rears:
Tossing her Torch, and thundering in their Ears.
Then they, who Brothers better Claim disown,
Expel their Parents, and usurp the Throne;
Defraud their Clients, and to Lucre sold,
Sit brooding on unprofitable Gold:
Who dare not give, and even refuse to lend
To their poor Kindred, or a wanting Friend:
Vast is the Throng of these; nor less the Train
Of lustful Youths, for foul Adultry slain.
Hosts of Deserters, who their Honor sold,
And basely broke their Faith for Bribes of Gold:
All these within the Dungeon's depth remain:
Despairing Pardon, and expecting Pain.
Ask not what Pains; nor farther seek to know
Their Process, or the Forms of Law below.
Some roll a weighty Stone; some laid along,
And bound with burning Wires, on Spokes of Wheels are hung.
Unhappy Theseus, doomed for ever there,
Is fixed by Fate on his Eternal Chair:
And wretched Phlegias warns the World with Cries;
(Could Warning make the World more just or wise,)
Learn Righteousness, and dread the avenging Deities.
To Tyrants others have their Country sold,
Imposing Foreign Lords, for Foreign Gold:
Some have old Laws repealed, new Statutes made;
Not as the People pleased, but as they paid.
With Incest some their Daughters Bed profaned,
All dared the worst of Ills, and what they dared, attained.
Had I a hundred Mouths, a hundred Tongues,
And Throats of Brass, inspired with Iron Lungs,
I could not half those horrid Crimes repeat:
Nor half the Punishments those Crimes have met.
But let us haste our Voyage to pursue;
The Walls of Pluto's Palace are in view.
The Gate, and Iron Arch above it, stands:
On Anvils labored by the Cyclops Hands.
Before our farther way the Fates allow,
Here must we fix on high the Golden Bough.
She said, and through the gloomy Shades they past,
And chose the middle Path: Arrived at last,
The Prince, with living Water, sprinkled over
His Limbs, and Body; then approached the Door.
Possessed the Porch, and on the Front above
He fixed the fatal Bough, required by Pluto's Love.
These Holy Rites performed, they took their Way,
Where long extended Plains of Pleasure lay.
The verdant Fields with those of Heaven may vye;
With Ether vested, and a Purple Sky:
The blissful Seats of Happy Souls below:
Stars of their own, and their own Suns they know.
Their Airy Limbs in Sports they exercise,
And, on the Green, contend the Wrestler's Prize.
Some, in Heroic Verse, divinely sing;
Others in artful Measures lead the ring.
The Thracian Bard, surrounded by the rest,
There stands conspicuous in his flowing Vest.
His flying Fingers, and harmonious Quill,
Strike sev'n distinguished Notes, and sev'n at once they fill.
Here found they Teucer's old Heroic Race;
Born better times and happier Years to grace.
Assaracus and Ilus here enjoy
Perpetual Fame, with him who founded Troy.
The Chief beheld their Chariots from afar;
Their shining Arms, and Coursers trained to War:
Their Lances fixed in Earth, their Steeds around,
Free from their Harness, graze the flowery Ground.
The love of Horses which they had, alive,
And care of Chariots, after Death survive.
Some cheerful Souls, were feasting on the Plain;
Some did the Song, and some the Choir maintain.
Beneath a Laurel Shade, where mighty Po
Mounts up to Woods above, and hides his Head below.
Here Patriots live, who, for their Countries good,
In fighting Fields, were prodigal of Blood:
Priests of unblemished Lives here make Abode;
And Poets worthy their inspiring God:
And searching Wits, of more Mechanic parts,
Who graced their Age with new invented Arts.
Those who, to worth, their Bounty did extend;
And those who knew that Bounty to commend.
The Heads of these with holy Fillets bound;
And all their Temples were with Garlands crowned.
To these the Sibyl thus her Speech addressed:
And first, to him surrounded by the rest;
Towering his Height, and ample was his Breast;
Say happy Souls, Divine Musaeus say,
Where lives Anchises, and where lies our Way
To find the Hero, for whose only sake
We sought the dark Abodes, and crossed the bitter Lake?
To this the Sacred Poet thus replied;
In no fixed place the Happy Souls reside.
In Groves we live; and lie on mossy Beds
By Crystal Streams, that murmur through the Meads:
But pass yon easy Hill, and thence descend,
The Path conducts you to your Journeys end.
This said, he led them up the Mountains brow,
And shows them all the shining Fields below;
They wind the Hill, and through the blissful Meadows go.
But old Anchises, in a flowery Vale,
Reviewed his mustered Race; and took the Tale.
Those Happy Spirits, which ordained by Fate,
For future Beings, and new Bodies wait.
With studious Thought observed the illustrious Throng;
In Nature's Order as they passed along.
Their Names, their Fates, their Conduct, and their Care,
In peaceful Senates, and successful War.
He, when Aeneas on the Plain appears,
Meets him with open Arms, and falling Tears.
Welcome, he said, the Gods undoubted Race,
O long expected to my dear Embrace;
Once more it is given me to behold your Face!
The Love, and Pious Duty which you pay,
Have passed the Perils of so hard a way.
It Is true, computing times, I now believed
The happy Day approached; nor are my Hopes deceived.
What length of Lands, what Oceans have you passed,
What Storms sustained, and on what Shores been cast?
How have I feared your Fate! But feared it most,
When Love assailed you, on the Lybian Coast.
To this, the Filial Duty thus replies;
Your sacred Ghost, before my sleeping Eyes,
Appeared; and often urged this painful Enterprise.
After long tossing on the Tyrrhene Sea,
My Navy rides at Anchor in the Bay.
But reach your Hand, oh Parent Shade, nor shun
The dear Embraces of your longing Son!
He said; and falling Tears his Face bedew:
Then thrice, around his Neck, his Arms he threw;
And thrice the flitting Shadow slipped away;
Like Winds, or empty Dreams that fly the Day.
Now in a secret Vale, the Trojan sees
A separate Grove, through which a gentle Breeze
Plays with a passing Breath, and whispers through the Trees.
And just before the Confines of the Wood,
The gliding Lethe leads her silent Flood.
About the Boughs an Airy Nation flew,
Thick as the humming Bees, that hunt the Golden Dew;
In Summer's heat, on tops of Lillies feed,
And creep within their Bells, to suck the balmy Seed.
The winged Army roams the Fields around;
The Rivers and the Rocks remurmur to the sound.
Aeneas wondering stood: Then asked the Cause,
Which to the Stream the Crowding People draws.
Then thus the Sire. The Souls that throng the Flood
Are those, to Whom, by Fate, are other Bodies owed:
In Lethe's Lake they long Oblivion taste;
Of future Life secure, forgetful of the Past.
Long has my Soul desired this time, and place,
To set before your sight your glorious Race.
That this presaging Joy may fire your Mind,
To seek the Shores by Destiny designed.
O Father, can it be, that Souls sublime,
Return to visit our Terrestrial Clime?
And that the Generous Mind, released by Death,
Can Covet lazy Limbs, and Mortal Breath?
Anchises then, in order, thus begun
To clear those Wonders to his Godlike Son.
Know first, that Heaven, and Earth's compacted Frame,
And flowing Waters, and the starry Flame,
And both the Radiant Lights, one Common Soul
Inspires, and feeds, and animates the whole.
This Active Mind infused through all the Space,
Unites and mingles with the mighty Mass.
Hence Men and Beasts the Breath of Life obtain;
And Birds of Air, and Monsters of the Main.
The Etherial Vigor is in all the same,
And every Soul is filled with equal Flame:
As much as Earthy Limbs, and gross allay
Of Mortal Members, subject to decay,
Blunt not the Beams of Heaven and edge of Day.
From this course Mixture of Terrestial parts,
Desire, and Fear, by turns possess their Hearts:
And Grief, and Joy: Nor can the grovelling Mind,
In the dark Dungeon of the Limbs confined,
Assert the Native Skies; or own its heavenly Kind.
Nor Death it self can wholly wash their Stains;
But long contracted Filth, even in the Soul remains.
The Relics of inveterate Vice they wear;
And Spots of Sin obscene, in every Face appear.
For this are various Penances enjoined;
And some are hung to bleach, upon the Wind;
Some plunged in Waters, others purged in Fires,
Till all the Dregs are drained: and all the Rust expires:
All have their Manes, and those Manes bear:
The few, so cleans'd to these Abodes repair:
And breath, in ample Fields, the soft Elysian Air.
Then are they happy, when by length of time
The Scurf is worn away, of each committed Crime.
No Speck is left, of their habitual Stains;
But the pure Ether of the Soul remains.
But, when a Thousand rolling Years are past,
(So long their Punishments and Penance last;)
Whole Droves of Minds are, by the driving God,
Compelled to drink the deep Lethaean Flood:
In large forgetful draughts to steep the Cares
Of their past Labors, and their Irksom Years.
That, unrememb'ring of its former Pain,
The Soul may suffer mortal Flesh again.
Thus having said; the Father Spirit, leads
The Priestess and his Son through Swarms of Shades.
And takes a rising Ground, from thence to see
The long Procession of his Progeny.
Survey (pursued the Sire) this airy Throng;
As, offered to thy view, they pass along.
These are the Italian Names, which Fate will join
With ours, and graff upon the Trojan Line.
Observe the Youth who first appears in sight;
And holds the nearest Station to the Light:
Already seems to snuff the vital Air;
And leans just forward, on a shining Spear,
Silvius is he: thy last begotten Race;
But first in order sent, to fill thy place,
An Alban Name; but mixed with Dardan Blood;
Born in the Covert of a shady Wood:
Him fair Lavinia, thy surviving Wife,
Shall breed in Groves, to lead a solitary Life.
In Alba he shall fix his Royal Seat:
And, born a King, a Race of Kings beget.
Then Procas, Honor of the Trojan Name,
Capys, and Numitor, of endless Fame.
A second Silvius after these appears;
Silvius Aeneas, for thy Name he bears.
For Arms and Justice equally renowned;
Who, late restored, in Alba shall be crowned.
How great they look, how vig'rously they wield
Their weighty Lances, and sustain the Shield!
But they, who crowned with Oaken Wreaths appear,
Shall Gabian Walls, and strong Fidena rear:
Nomentum, Bola, with Pometia, found;
And raise Colatian Towers on Rocky Ground.
All these shall then be Towns of mighty Fame;
Though now they lie obscure; and Lands without a Name.
See Romulus the great, born to restore
The Crown that once his injured Grandsire wore.
This Prince, a Priestess of our Blood shall bear;
And like his Sire in Arms he shall appear.
Two rising Crests his Royal Head adorn;
Born from a God, himself to Godhead born.
His Sire already signs him for the Skies,
And marks his Seat amidst the Deities.
Auspicious Chief! thy Race in times to come
Shall spread the Conquests of Imperial Rome.
Rome whose ascending Towers shall Heaven invade;
Involving Earth and Ocean in her Shade.
High as the Mother of the Gods in place;
And proud, like her, of an Immortal Race.
Then when in Pomp she makes the Phrygian round;
With Golden Turrets on her Temples crowned:
A hundred Gods her sweeping Train supply;
Her Offspring all, and all command the Sky.
Now fix your Sight, and stand intent, to see
Your Roman Race, and Julian Progeny.
The mighty Caesar waits his vital Hour;
Impatient for the World, and grasps his promised Power.
But next behold the Youth of Form Divine,
Caesar himself, exalted in his Line;
Augustus, promised often, and long foretold,
Sent to the Realm that Saturn ruled of old;
Born to restore a better Age of Gold.
Afric, and India, shall his Power obey,
He shall extend his propagated Sway,
Beyond the Solar Year; without the starry Way.
Where Atlas turns the rolling Heavens around;
And his broad Shoulders with their Lights are crowned.
At his foreseen Approach, already quake
The Caspian Kingdoms, and Maeotian Lake.
Their Seers behold the Tempest from afar;
And threatening Oracles denounce the War.
Nile hears him knocking at his sev'nfold Gates;
And seeks his hidden Spring, and fears his Nephew's Fates*
Nor Hercules more Lands or Labors knew,
Not though the brazen-footed Hind he slew;
To Robert Harley of Bramton Castle in ye County of Hereford Esquire

AE. 6. l. 1085.


Freed Erymanthus from the foaming Boar,
And dipped his Arrows in Lernaean Gore.
Nor Bacchus, turning from his Indian War,
By Tigers drawn triumphant in his Car,
From Nisus top descending on the Plains;
With curling Vines around his purple Reins.
And doubt we yet through Dangers to pursue
The Paths of Honor, and a Crown in view?
But what is the Man, who from afar appears,
His Head with Olive crowned, his Hand a Censer bears?
His hoary Beard, and holy Vestments bring
His lost Idea back: I know the Roman King.
He shall to peaceful Rome new Laws ordain:
Called from his mean abode, a Scepter to sustain.
Him, Tullus next in Dignity succeeds;
An active Prince, and prone to Martial Deeds.
For fighting Fields his Troops he shall prepare,
Disused to Toils, and Triumphs of the War.
By dint of Sword his Crown he shall increase;
And scour his Armor from the Rust of Peace.
Whom Ancus follows, with a fawning Air;
But vain within, and proudly popular.
Next view the Tarquin Kings: The avenging Sword
Of Brutus, justly drawn, and Rome restored.
He first renews the Rods, and Axe severe;
And gives the Consuls Royal Robes to wear.
His Sons, who seek the Tyrant to sustain,
And long for Arbitrary Lords again,
With Ignominy scourged, in open sight,
He dooms to Death deserved; asserting Public Right.
Unhappy Man, to break the Pious Laws
Of Nature, pleading in his Children's Cause!
However the doubtful Fact is understood,
It Is Love of Honor, and his Country's good:
The Consul, not the Father, sheds the Blood.
Behold Torquatus the same Track pursue;
And next, the three devoted Decij view.
The Drusian Line, Camillus loaded home
With Standards well redeemed, and foreign Foes overcome.
The Pair you see in equal Armor shine;
(Now, Friends below, in close Embraces join:
But when they leave the shady Realms of Night,
And, clothed in Bodies, breath your upper Light,)
With mortal Hate each other shall pursue:
What Wars, what Wounds, what Slaughter shall ensue!
From Alpine Heights the Father first descends;
His Daughter's Husband in the Plain attends:
His Daughter's Husband arms his Eastern Friends.
Embrace again, my Sons, be Foes no more:
Nor stain your Country with her Childrens Gore.
And thou, the first, lay down thy lawless claim;
Thou, of my Blood, who bear the Julian Name.
Another comes, who shall in Triumph ride;
And to the Capitol his Chariot guide;
From conquered Corinth, rich with Grecian Spoils.
And yet another, famed for Warlike Toils,
On Argos shall impose the Roman Laws:
And, on the Greeks, revenge the Trojan Cause:
Shall drag in Chains their Achillaean Race;
Shall vindicate his Ancestors Disgrace:
And Pallas, for her violated Place.
Great Cato there, for Gravity renowned,
And conquering Cossus goes with Laurels crowned.
Who can omit the Gracchi, who declare
The Scipio's Worth, those Thunderbolts of War,
The double Bane of Carthage? Who can see,
Without esteem for virtuous Poverty,
Severe Fabritius, or can cease to admire
The Ploughman Consul in his Course Attire!
Tired as I am, my Praise the Fabij claim;
And thou great Hero, greatest of thy Name;
Ordained in War to save the sinking State,
And, by Delays, to put a stop to Fate!
Let others better mold the running Mass
Of Metals, and inform the breathing Brass;
And soften into Flesh a Marble Face:
Plead better at the Bar; describe the Skies,
And when the Stars descend, and when they rise.
But, Rome, it is thine alone, with awful sway,
To rule Mankind; and make the World obey;
Disposing Peace, and War, thy own Majestic Way.
To tame the Proud, the fettered Slave to free;
These are Imperial Arts, and worthy thee.
He paused: And while with wondering Eyes they viewed
The passing Spirits, thus his Speech renewed.
See great Marcellus! how, untir'd in Toils,
He moves with Manly grace, how rich with Regal Spoils
He, when his Country, (threatened with Alarms,)
Requires his Courage, and his Conquering Arms,
Shall more than once the Punic Bands affright:
Shall kill the Gaulish King in single Fight:
Then, to the Capitol in Triumph move,
And the third Spoils shall grace Feretrian Jove.
Aeneas, here, beheld of Form Divine
A Godlike Youth, in glittering Armor shine:
With great Marcellus keeping equal pace;
But gloomy were his Eyes, dejected was his Face:
He saw, and, wondering, asked his airy Guide,
What, and of whence was he, who pressed the Hero's side?
His Son, or one of his Illustrious Name,
How like the former, and almost the same:
Observe the Crowds that compass him around;
All gaze, and all admire, and raise a shouting sound:
But hovering Mists around his Brows are spread,
And Night, with sable Shades, involves his Head.
Seek not to know (the Ghost replied with Tears)
The Sorrows of thy Sons, in future Years.
This Youth (the blissful Vision of a day)
Shall just be shown on Earth, and snatched away.
The Gods too high had raised the Roman State;
Were but their Gifts as permanent as great.
What groans of Men shall fill the Martian Field!
How fierce a Blaze his flaming Pile shall yield!
What Funeral Pomp shall floating Tiber see,
When, rising from his Bed, he views the sad Solemnity!
No Youth shall equal hopes of Glory give:
No Youth afford so great a Cause to grieve.
The Trojan Honor, and the Roman Boast;
Admired when living, and Adored when lost!
Mirror of ancient Faith in early Youth!
Undaunted Worth, Inviolable Truth!
No Foe unpunished in the fighting Field,
Shall dare thee Foot to Foot, with Sword and Shield.
Much less, in Arms oppose thy matchless Force,
When thy sharp Spurs shall urge thy foaming Horse.
Ah, could thou break through Fates severe Decree,
A new Marcellus shall arise in thee!
Full Canisters of fragrant Lillies bring,
Mixed with the Purple Roses of the Spring:
Let me with Funeral Flowers his Body strew;
This Gift which Parents to their Children owe,
This unavailing Gift, at least I may bestow!
Thus having said, He led the Hero round
The confines of the blessed Elysian Ground.
Which, when Anchises to his Son had shown,
And fired his Mind to mount the promised Throne,
He tells the future Wars, ordained by Fate;
The Strength and Customs of the Latian State:
The Prince, and People: And fore-arms his Care
With Rules, to push his Fortune, or to bear.
Two Gates the silent House of Sleep adorn;
Of polished Ivory this, that of transparent Horn:
Of various things discoursing as he passed,
Anchises hither bends his Steps at last.
Then, through the Gate of Ivory, he dismissed
His valiant Offspring, and Divining Guest.
Straight to the Ships Aeneas took his way;
Embarked his Men, and skim'd along the Sea:
Still Coasting, till he gained Cajeta's Bay.
At length on Oozy ground his Galleys moor:
Their Heads are turned to Sea, their Sterns to Shore.
The Seventh Book of the Aeneis.
The Argument.
King Latinus entertains Aeneas, and promises him his only Daughter, Lavinia,
the Heiress of his Crown. Turnus being in Love with her, favored by her
Mother, and stirred up by Juno, and Alecto, breaks the Treaty which was made,
and engages in his Quarrel, Mezentius, Camilla, Messapus, and many others of
the Neighboring Princes; whose Forces and the Names of their Commanders are
here particularly related.

AND thou, O Matron of Immortal Fame!
Here Dying, to the Shore have left thy Name:
Cajeta still the place is called from thee,
The Nurse of great Aeneas Infancy.
Here rest thy Bones in rich Hesperia's Plains,
Thy Name ('it is all a Ghost can have) remains.
Now, when the Prince her Funeral Rites had paid,
He plough'd the Tyrrhene Seas with Sails displayed.
From Land a gentle Breeze arose by Night,
Serenely shone the Stars, the Moon was bright,
And the Sea trembled with her Silver Light.
Now near the Shelves of Circe's Shores they run,
(Circe the rich, the Daughter of the Sun)
A dangerous Coast: The Goddess wastes her Days
In joyous Songs, the Rocks resound her Lays:
In spinning, or the Loom, she spends the Night,
And Cedar Brands supply her Father's Light.
From hence were heard, (rebellowing to the Main,)
The Roars of Lions that refuse the Chain,
The Grunts of Bristled Boars, and Groans of Bears,
And Herds of Howling Wolves that stun the Sailors Ears.
To the Right Honble Henry Earl of Romney Viscount Sydney of Shippy Baron
Milton Master General of the Ordinance Ld Warden of the Cinque Ports andct

AE. 7. l: 2.


These from their Caverns, at the close of Night,
Fill the sad Isle with Horror and Affright.
Darkling they mourn their Fate, whom Circe's Power
(That watched the Moon, and Planetary Hour)
With Words and wicked Herbs, from Human Kind
Had altered, and in Brutal Shapes confined.
Which Monsters, lest the Trojans pious Host
Should bear, or touch upon the enchanted Coast;
Propitious Neptune steered their Course by Night,
With rising Gales, that sped their happy Flight.
Supplied with these, they skim the sounding Shore,
And hear the swelling Surges vainly roar.
Now when the rosy Morn began to rise,
And waved her Saffron Streamer through the Skies;
When Thetis blushed in Purple, not her own,
And from her Face the breathing Winds were blown:
A sudden Silence sat upon the Sea,
And sweeping Oars, with Struggling, urge their Way.
The Trojan, from the Main beheld a Wood,
Which thick with Shades, and a brown Horror, stood:
Betwixt the Trees the Tyber took his Course,
With Whirlpools dimpled; and with downward Force.
That drove the Sand along, he took his Way,
And rolled his yellow Billows to the Sea.
About him, and above, and round the Wood,
The Birds that haunt the Borders of his Flood;
That bathed within, or bask'd upon his side,
To tuneful Songs their narrow Throats applied.
The Captain gives Command, the joyful Train
Glide through the gloomy Shade, and leave the Main.
Now, Erato, thy Poet's Mind inspire,
And fill his Soul with thy Celestial Fire.
Relate what Latium was, her ancient Kings:
Declare the past, and present State of things,
When first the Trojan Fleet Ausonia sought;
And how the Rivals loved, and how they fought.
These are my Theme, and how the War began,
And how concluded by the Godlike Man.
For I shall sing of Battles, Blood, and Rage,
Which Princes, and their People did engage:
And haughty Souls, that moved with mutual Hate,
In fighting Fields pursued and found their Fate:
That roused the Tyrrhene Realm with loud Alarms,
And peaceful Italy involved in Arms.
A larger Scene of Action is displayed,
And, rising hence, a greater Work is weighed.
Latinus old and mild, had long possessed
The Latian Scepter, and his People blessed:
His Father Faunus: a Laurentian Dame
His Mother, fair Marica was her Name.
But Faunus came from Picus, Picus drew
His Birth from Saturn, if Records be true.
Thus King Latinus, in the third Degree,
Had Saturn Author of his Family.
But this old peaceful Prince, as Heaven decreed,
Was blessed with no Male Issue to succeed:
His Sons in blooming Youth were snatched by Fate;
One only Daughter heir'd the Royal State.
Fired with her Love, and with Ambition led,
The neighboring Princes court her nuptial Bed.
Among the Crowd, but far above the rest,
Young Turnus to the Beauteous Maid addressed.
Turnus, for great Descent, and graceful Mien,
Was first, and favored by the Latian Queen:
With him she strove to join Lavinia's Hand:
But dire Portents the purposed Match withstand.
Deep in the Palace, of long Growth there stood
A Laurels Trunk, a venerable Wood;
Where Rites Divine were paid; whose holy Hair
Was kept, and cut with superstitious Care.
This Plant Latinus, when his Town he walled,
Then found, and from the Tree Laurentum called:
And last in Honor of his new Abode,
He vowed the Laurel, to the Lawrel's God.
It happened once, (a bodeing Prodigy,)
A swarm of Bees, that cut the liquid Sky,
Unknown from whence they took their airy flight,
Upon the topmost Branch in Clouds alight:
There, with their clasping Feet together clung,
And a long Cluster srom the Laurel hung.
An ancient Augur prophesied from hence:
Behold on Latian Shores a foreign Prince!
From the same parts of Heaven his Navy stands,
To the same parts on Earth: his Army lands;
The Town he conquers, and the Tower commands.
Yet more, when fair Lavinia fed the Fire
Before the Gods, and stood beside her Sire;
Strange to relate, the Flames, involved in Smoke
Of Incense, from the sacred Altar broke;
Caught her dishevelled Hair, and rich Attire;
Her Crown and Jewels crackled in the Fire:
From thence the fuming Trail began to spread,
And lambent Glories danced about her Head.
This new Portent the Seer with Wonder views;
Then pausing, thus his Prophecy renews.
The Nymph who scatters flaming Fires around,
Shall shine with Honor, shall herself be crowned:
But, caused by her irrevocable Fate,
War shall the Country waste, and change the State.
Latinus, frighted with this dire Ostent,
For Counsel to his Father Faunus went:
And sought the Shades renowned for Prophecy,
Which near Albunea's sulfurous Fountain lie.
To these the Latian, and the Sabine Land
Fly, when distressed, and thence Relief demand.
The Priest on Skins of Offerings takes his Ease;
And nightly Visions in his Slumber sees:
A swarm of thin aerial Shapes appears,
And, fluttering round his Temples, deafs his Ears:
These he consults, the future Fates to know,
From Powers above, and from the Fiends below.
Here, for the Gods advice, Latinus flies,
Offering a hundred Sheep for Sacrifice:
Their wooly Fleeces, as the Rites required,
He laid beneath him, and to Rest retired.
No sooner were his Eyes in Slumber bound,
When, from above, a more than Mortal Sound
Invades his Ears; and thus the Vision spoke:
Seek not, my Seed, in Latian Bands to Yoke
Our fair Lavinia, nor the Gods provoke.
A foreign Son upon thy Shore descends,
Whose Martial Fame from Pole to Pole extends.
His Race in Arms, and Arts of Peace renowned,
Not Latium shall contain, nor Europe bound:
It Is theirs what e're the Sun surveys around.
These Answers in the silent Night received,
The King himself divulged, the Land believed:
The Fame through all the Neighboring Nations flew,
When now the Trojan Navy was in view.
Beneath a shady Tree the Hero spread
His Table on the Turf, with Cakes of Bread;
And, with his Chiefs, on Forest Fruits he fed.
They sat, and (not without the God's Command)
Their homely Fare dispatched; the hungry Band
To Anthony Henley of ye Grange in Hantshire Esqr:

AE. 7 l. 152


Invade their Trenchers next, and soon devour,
To mend the scanty Meal, their Cakes of Flower.
Ascanius this observed, and, smiling, said,
See, we devour the Plates on which we fed.
The Speech had Omen, that the Trojan Race
Should find Repose, and this the Time and Place.
Aeneas took the Word, and thus replies;
(Confessing Fate with Wonder in his Eyes)
All hail, O Earth! all hail my household Gods,
Behold the destined place of your Abodes!
For thus Anchises prophesied of old,
And this our fatal place of Rest foretold.
"When on a Foreign Shore, instead of Meat,
"By Famine forced, your Trenchers you shall eat;
"Then Ease your weary Trojans will attend:
"And the long Labors of your Voyage end.
"Remember on that happy Coast to build:
"And with a Trench enclose the fruitful Field.
This was that Famine, this the fatal place,
Which ends the Wandering of our exiled Race.
Then, on to Morrow's Dawn, your Care employ,
To search the Land, and where the Cities lie,
And what the Men; but give this Day to Joy.
Now pour to Jove, and after Jove is blessed,
Call great Anchises to the Genial Feast:
Crown high the Goblets with a cheerful Draught;
Enjoy the present Hour, adjourn the future Thought.
Thus having said, the Hero bound his Brows.
With leafy Branches, then performed his Vows:
Adoring first the Genius of the Place;
Then Earth, the Mother of the Heavenly Race;
The Nymphs, and native Godheads yet unknown,
And Night, and all the Stars that guild her sable Throne.
And ancient Cybel, and Idaean Jove;
And last his Sire below, and Mother Queen above.
Then Heavens high Monarch thundered thrice aloud,
And thrice he shook aloft, a Golden Cloud.
Soon through the joyful Camp a Rumor flew,
The time was come their City to renew:
Then every Brow with cheerful Green is crowned,
The Feasts are doubled, and the Bowls go round.
When next the rosy Morn disclosed the Day,
The Scouts to several parts divide their Way,
To learn the Natives Names, their Towns, explore
The Coasts, and Trendings of the crooked Shore:
Here Tyber flows, and here Numicus stands,
Here warlike Latins hold the happy Lands.
The Pious Chief, who sought by peaceful Ways,
To found his Empire, and his Town to raise;
A hundred Youths from all his Train elects;
And to the Latian Court their Course directs:
(The spacious Palace where their Prince resides;)
And all their heads with Wreaths of Olive hides.
They go commissioned to require a Peace;
And carry Presents to procure Access.
Thus while they speed their Pace, the Prince designs
His new elected Seat, and draws the Lines:
The Trojans round the place a Rampire cast,
And Palisades about the Trenches placed.
Mean time the Train, proceeding on their way,
From far the Town, and lofty Towers survey:
At length approach the Walls: without the Gate
They see the Boys, and Latian Youth debate
The Martial Prizes on the dusty Plain;
Some drive the Cars, and some the Coursers rein:
Some bend the stubborn Bow for Victory;
And some with Darts their active Sinews try.
A posting Messenger dispatched from hence,
Of this fair Troop advised their aged Prince;
That foreign Men, of mighty Stature, came;
Uncouth their Habit, and unknown their Name.
The King ordains their entrance, and ascends
His Regal Seat, surrounded by his Friends.
The Palace built by Picus, vast and Proud,
Supported by a hundred Pillars stood
And round incompas'd with a rising Wood.
The Pile o'relook'd the Town, and drew the sight;
Surpised at once with Reverence and Delight.
There Kings received the Marks of Sovereign Power:
In State the Monarchs marched, the Lictors bore
Their Awful Axes, and the Rods before.
Here the Tribunal stood, the House of Prayer;
And here the sacred Senators repair:
All at large Tables, in long order set,
A Ram their Offering, and a Ram their Meat.
Above the Portal, Carved in Cedar Wood,
Placed in their Ranks, their Godlike Grandsires stood.
Old Saturn, with his crooked Scythe, on high;
And Italus, that led the Colony:
And ancient Janus, with his double Face,
And Bunch of Keys, the Porter of the place.
There good Sabinus, planter of the Vines,
On a short Pruning-hook his Head reclines:
And studiously surveys his generous Wines.
Then Warlike Kings, who for their Country fought,
And honorable Wounds from Battle brought.
Around the Posts hung Helmets, Darts, and Spears;
And Captive Chariots, Axes, Shields, and Bars,
And broken Beaks of Ships, the Trophies of their Wars.
Above the rest, as Chief of all the Band,
Was Picus placed, a Buckler in his hand;
His other waved a long divining Wand.
Girt in his Gabin Gown the Hero sat:
Yet could not with his Art avoid his Fate.
For Circe long had loved the Youth in vain,
Till Love, refused, converted to Disdain:
Then mixing powerful Herbs, with Magic Art,
She changed his Form, who could not change his heart.
Constrained him in a Bird, and made him fly,
With party-colored Plumes, a Chattring Pie.
On this high Temple, on a Chair of State,
The Seat of Audience, old Latinus sat;
Then gave admiffion to the Trojan Train,
And thus, with pleasing accents, he b^gan.
Tell me, ye Trojans, for that Name you own,
Nor is your Course upon our Coasts unknown;
Say what you seek, and whither were you bound?
Were you by stress of Weather cast a-ground?
Such dangers as on Seas are often seen,
And often befall to miserable Men?
Or come, your Shipping in our Ports to lay,
Spent and disabl'd in so long a way?
Say what you want, the Latians you shall find
Not forced to Goodness, but by Will inclined:
For since the time of Saturn's holy Reign,
His Hospitable Customs we retain.
I call to mind, but (Time the Tale has worn,)
The Arunci told; that Dardanus, though born
On Latian Plains, yet sought the Phrygian Shore,
And Samothracia, Samos called before:
From Tuscan Coritum he claimed his Birth,
But after, when exempt from Mortal Earth,
From thence ascended to his kindred Skies,
A God, and as a God augments their Sacrifice.
He said. Ilioneus made this Reply,
O King, of Faunus Royal Family!
To George Stepney Esqr. His Maties. Envoy Extrary: to Several Princes in,
Germany and one of the Coincill of Trade

AE. 7. l. 2^^


Nor Wint'ry Winds to Latium forced our way,
Nor did the Stars our wandering Course betray.
Willing we sought your Shores, and hither bound,
The Port so long desired, at length we found.
From our sweet Homes and ancient Realms expelled;
Great as the greatest that the Sun beheld.
The God began our Line, who rules above,
And as our Race, our King descends from Jove:
And hither are we come, by his Command,
To crave Admission in your happy Land.
How dire a Tempest, from Mycenae poured,
Our Plains, our Temples, and our Town devoured;
What was the Waste of War, what fierce Alarms
Shook Asia's Crown with Europaean Arms;
Even such have heard, if any such there be,
Whose Earth is bounded by the frozen Sea:
And such as born beneath the burning Sky,
And sultry Sun betwixt the Tropicks lie.
From that dire Deluge, through the watery Waste,
Such length of Years, such various Perils past:
At last escaped, to Latium we repair,
To beg what you without your Want may spare;
The common Water, and the common Air.
Sheds which our selves will build, and mean abodes,
Fit to receive and serve our banished Gods.
Nor our Admission shall your Realm disgrace,
Nor length of time our Gratitude efface.
Besides, what endless Honor you shall gain
To save and shelter Troy's unhappy Train.
Now, by my Sovereign, and his Fate I swear,
Renowned for Faith in Peace, for Force in War;
Often our Alliance other Lands desired,
And what we seek of you, of us required.
Despise not then, that in our Hands we bear
These Holy Boughs, and sue with Words of Prayer.
Fate and the Gods, by their supreme Command,
Have doomed our Ships to seek the Latian Land.
To these abodes our Fleet Apollo sends;
Here Dardanus was born, and hither tends:
Where Thuscan Tyber rowls with rapid Force,
And where Numicus opes his Holy Source.
Besides our Prince presents, with his Request,
Some small Remains of what his Sire possessed.
This Golden Charger, snatched from burning Troy,
Anchises did in Sacrifice employ:
This Royal Robe, and this Tiara wore
Old Priam, and this Golden Scepter bore
In full Assemblies, and in solemn Games;
These Purple Vests were weaved by Dardan Dames.
Thus while he spoke, Latinus rowld around
His Eyes, and fixed a while upon the Ground.
Intent he seemed, and anxious in his Breast;
Not by the Scepter moved, or Kingly Vest:
But pond'ring future Things of wondrous Weight;
Succession, Empire, and his Daughter's Fate:
On these he mused within his thoughtful Mind;
And then revolved what Faunus had divined.
This was the Foreign Prince, by Fate decreed
To share his Scepter, and Lavinia's Bed:
This was the Race, that sure Portents foreshew
To sway the World, and Land and Sea subdue.
At length he raised his cheerful Head, and spoke*
The Powers, said he, the Powers we both invoke,
To you, and yours, and mine, propitious be,
And firm our Purpose with their Augury.
Have what you ask; your Presents I receive,
Land where, and when you please, with ample Leave:
Partake and use my Kingdom as your own;
All shall be yours, while I command the Crown.
And if my wished Alliance please your King,
Tell him he should not send the Peace, but bring:
Then let him not a Friend's Embraces fear;
The Peace is made when I behold him here.
Besides this Answer, tell my Royal Guest,
I add to his Commands, my own Request:
One only Daughter heirs my Crown and State,
Whom, not our Oracles, nor Heaven, nor Fate,
Nor frequent Prodigies permit to join
With any Native of the Ausonian Line.
A foreign Son-in-Law shall come from far,
(Such is our Doom) a Chief renowned in War:
Whose Race shall bear alost the Latian Name,
And through the conquered World diffuse our Fame.
Himself to be the Man the Fates require,
I firmly judge, and what I judge, desire.
He said, and then on each bestowed a Steed;
Three hundred Horses, in high Stables f^d,
Stood ready, shining all, and smoothly dressed;
Of these he chose the fairest and the best,
To mount the Trojan Troop; at his Command,
The Steeds caparison'd with Purple stand;
With Golden Trappings, glorious to behold,
And champ betwixt their Teeth the foaming Gold.
Then to his absent Guest the King decreed
A pair of Coursers born of Heavenly Breed:
Who from their Nostrils breathed Etherial Fire;
Whom Circe stole from her Celestial Sire:
By substituting Mares, produced on Earth,
Whose Wombs conceived a more than Mortal Birth.
These draw the Chariot which Latinus sends;
And the rich Present to the Prince commends.
Sublime on stately Steeds the Trojans born;
To their expecting Lord with Peace return.
But jealous Juno, from Pachynus height,
As she from Argos took her airy Flight,
Beheld, with envious Eyes, this hateful Sight.
She saw the Trojan, and his joyful Train
Descend upon the Shore, desert the Main;
Design a Town, and with unhop'd Success
The Ambassadors return with promised Peace.
Then pierced with Pain, she shook her haughty Head;
Sighed from her inward Soul; and thus she said.
O hated Offspring of my Phrygian Foes!
O Fates of Troy, which Juno's Fates oppose!
Could they not fall unpitied, on the Plain,
But slain revive, and taken, escape again?
When execrable Troy in Ashes lay,
Through Fires, and Swords, and Seas, they forced their Way.
Then vanquished Juno must in vain contend,
Her Rage disarmed, her Empire at an end.
Breathless and tired, is all my Fury spent,
Or does my glutted Spleen at length relent?
As if 'twere little from their Town to chase,
I through the Seas pursued their exiled Race:
Engaged the Heaven's, opposed the Stormy Main;
But Billows roared, and Tempests raged in vain.
What have my Scylla's and my Sirtes done,
When these they overpass, and those they shun?
On Tyber's Shores they land, secure of Fate,
Triumphant over the Storms and Juno's Hate.
Mars could in mutual Blood the Centaurs bath,
And Jove himself gave way to Cynthia's Wrath;
Who sent the tusky Boar to Calydon:
What great Offense had either People done?
But I, the Confort of the Thunderer,
Have waged a long and unsuccessful War:
With various Arts and Arms in vain have toiled,
And by a Mortal Man at length am foiled.
If native Power prevail not, shall I doubt
To seek for needful Succor from without:
If Jove and Heaven my just Desires deny,
Hell shall the Power of Heaven and Jove supply.
Grant that the Fates have firm'd, by their Decree,
The Trojan Race to reign in Italy;
At least I can defer the Nuptial Day,
And with protracted Wars the Peace delay:
With Blood the dear Alliance shall be bought;
And both the People to Destruction brought.
So shall the Son-in-Law, and Father join,
With Ruin, War, and Waste of either Line.
O fatal Maid! thy Marriage is endowed
With Phrygian, Latian, and Rutulian Blood!
Bellona leads thee to thy Lover's Hand,
Another Queen brings forth another Brand;
To burn with foreign Fires her native Land!
A second Paris, differing but in Name,
Shall fire his Country with a second Flame.
Thus having said, she sinks beneath the Ground,
With furious haste, and shoots the Stygian Sound;
To rowze Alecto from the Infernal Seat
Of her dire Sisters, and their dark Retreat.
This Fury, fit for her Intent, she chose;
One who delights in Wars, and Human Woes.
Even Pluto hates his own misshapen Race:
Her Sister-Furies fly her hideous Face:
So frightful are the Forms the Monster takes,
So fierce the Hissings of her speckled Snakes.
Her Juno finds, and thus inflames her Spite:
O Virgin Daughter of Eternal Night,
Give me this once thy Labor, to sustain
My Right, and execute my just disdain.
Let not the Trojans, with a feigned Pretense
Of proffered Peace, delude the Latian Prince:
Expel from Italy that odious Name,
And let not Juno suffer in her Fame.
It Is thine to ruin Realms, o'return a State,
Betwixt the dearest Friends to raise Debate;
And kindle kindred Blood to mutual Hate.
Thy Hand over Towns the funeral Torch displays,
And forms a thousand Ills ten thousand Ways.
Now shake from out thy fruitful Breast, the Seeds
Of Envy, Discord, and of Cruel Deeds:
Confound the Peace established, and prepare
Their Souls to Hatred, and their Hands to War.
Smeared as she was with black Gorgonean Blood,
The Fury sprang above the Stygian Flood:
And on her wicker Wings, sublime through Night,
She to the Latian Palace took her Flight.
There sought the Queen's Apartment, stood before
The peaceful Threshold, and besieged the Door.
Restless Amata lay, her swelling Breast
Fired with Disdain for Turnus dispossessed,
And the new Nuptials of the Trojan Guest.
From her black bloody Locks the Fury shakes
Her darling Plague, the Favorite of her Snakes:
With her full Force she threw the poisonous Dart,
And fixed it deep within Amata's Heart.
That thus envenomed she might kindle Rage,
And sacrifice to Strife her House and Husbands Age.
Unseen, unfelt, the fiery Serpent skims
Betwixt her Linen, and her naked Limbs.
His baleful Breath inspiring, as he glides,
Now like a Chain around her Neck he rides;
Now like a Fillet to her Head repairs,
And with his Circling Volumes folds her Hairs:
At first the silent Venom slid with ease,
And seized her cooler Senses by degrees;
Then e're the infected Mass was fired too far,
In Plaintive Accents she began the War:
And thus bespoke her Husband; Shall, she said,
A wandering Prince enjoy Lavinia's Bed?
If Nature plead not in a Parent's Heart,
Pity my Tears, and pity her Desert:
I know, my dearest Lord, the time will come,
You would, in vain, reverse your Cruel doom:
The faithless Pirate soon will set to Sea,
And bear the Royal Virgin far away!
A Guest like him, a Trojan Guest before,
In show of friendship, sought the Spartan Shore;
And ravished Helen from her Husband bore.
Think on a King's inviolable Word;
And think on Turnus, her once plighted Lord:
To this false Foreigner you give your Throne,
And wrong a Friend, a Kinsman, and a Son.
Resume your ancient Care; and if the God
Your Sire, and you, resolve on Foreign Blood:
Know all are Foreign, in a larger Sense,
Not born your Subjects, or derived from hence.
Then if the Line of Turnus you retrace;
He springs from Inachus of Argive Race.
But when she saw her Reasons idly spent,
And could not move him from his fixed Intent;
She flew to rage; for now the Snake possessed
Her vital parts, and poisoned all her Breast;
She raves, she runs with a distracted pace,
And fills, with horrid howls, the public Place.
And, as young Striplings whip the Top for sport,
On the smooth Pavement of an empty Court;
The wooden Engine flies and whirls about,
Admired, with Clamours, of the Beardless rout;
They lash aloud, each other they provoke,
And lend their little Souls at every stroke:
Thus fares the Queen, and thus her fury blows
Amidst the Crowd, and kindles as she goes.
Nor yet content, she strains her Malice more,
And adds new Ills to those contrived before:
She flies the Town, and, mixing with a throng
Of madding Matrons, bears the Bride along:
Wandering through Woods and Wilds, and devious ways,
And with these Arts the Trojan Match delays.
She feigned the Rites of Bacchus! cried aloud,
And to the Buxom God the Virgin vowed.
Evoe, O Bacchus thus began the Song,
And Evoe! answered all the Female Throng:
O Virgin! worthy thee alone, she cried;
O worthy thee alone, the Crew replied.
For thee she feeds her Hair, she leads thy Dance,
And with thy winding Ivy crowns her Lance.
Like fury seized the rest; the progress known,
All seek the Mountains, and forsake the Town:
All Clad in Skins of Beasts the Javelin bear,
Give to the wanton Winds their flowing Hair:
And shrieks and showtings rend the passive Air.
The Queen, her self, inspired with Rage Divine,
Shook high above her head a flaming Pine:
Then rolled her haggar'd Eyes around the throng,
And sung, in Turnus Name, the Nuptial Song:
To Colll: Thomas Farrington of the Parish of St: James's Westminster

AE 7. l. 559


Io ye Latian Dames, if any here
Hold, your unhappy Queen, Amata, dear;
If there be here, she said, who dare maintain
My Right, nor think the Name of Mother vain:
Unbind your Fillets, loose your flowing Hair,
And Orgies, and Nocturnal Rites prepare.
Amata's Breast the Fury thus invades,
And fires with Rage, amid the Silvan Shades.
Then when she found her Venom spread so far,
The Royal House embroiled in Civil War:
Raised on her dusky Wings she cleaves the Skies,
And seeks the Palace where young Turnus lies*
His Town, as Fame reports, was built of old
By Danae, pregnant with Almighty Gold:
Who fled her Father's Rage, and with a Train
Of following Argives, through the stormy Main,
Driven by the Southern Blasts, was fated here to reign.
'Twas Ardua once, now Ardea's Name it bears:
Once a fair City, now consumed with Years.
Here in his lofty Palace Turnus lay,
Betwixt the Confines of the Night and Day,
Secure in Sleep: The Fury laid aside
Her Looks and Limbs, and with new methods tried,
The foulness of the insernal Form to hide.
Prop'd on a Staff, she takes a trembling Mien,
Her Face is furrowed, and her Front obscene:
Deep dinted Wrinckles on her Cheek she draws,
Sunk are her Eyes, and toothless are her Jaws:
Her hoary Hair with holy Fillets bound,
Her Temples with an Olive Wreath are crowned.
Old Chalibe, who kept the sacred Fane
Of Juno, now she seemed, and thus began,
Appearng in a Dream, to rouse the careless Man.
Shall Turnus then such endless Toil sustain,
In fighting Fields, and conquer Towns in vain:
Win, for a Trojan Head to wear the Prize,
Usurp thy Crown, enjoy thy Victories?
The Bride and Scepter which thy Blood has bought,
The King transfers, and Foreign Heirs are sought:
Go now, deluded Man, and seek again
New Toils, new Dangers on the dusty Plain.
Repel the Tuscan Foes, their City seize,
Protect the Latians in luxurious Ease.
This Dream all-pow'rful Juno sends, I bear
Her mighty Mandates, and her Words you hear.
Haste, arm your Ardeans, issue to the Plain,
With Fate to friend, assault the Trojan Train:
Their thoughtless Chiefs, their painted Ships that lie
In Tyber's Mouth, with Fire and Sword destroy.
The Latian King, unless he shall submit,
Own his old Promise, and his new forget;
Let him, in Arms, the Power of Turnus prove,
And learn to fear whom he disdains to Love.
For such is Heavens Command. The youthful Prince
With Scorn replied, and made this bold Defense.
You tell me, Mother, what I knew before,
The Phrygian Fleet is landed on the Shore:
I neither fear, nor will provoke the War;
My Fate is Juno's most peculiar Care.
But Time has made you dote, and vainly tell
Of Arms imagined, in your lonely Cell:
Go, be the Temple and the Gods your Care,
Permit to Men the Thought of Peace and War.
These haughty Words Alecto's Rage provoke,
And frighted Turnus trembled as she spoke.
Her Eyes grow stiffen'd, and with Sulphur burn,
Her hideous Looks, and hellish Form return:
Her curling Snakes, with Hissings fill the Place,
And open all the Furies of her Face:
Then, darting Fire from her malignant Eyes,
She cast him backward as he strove to rise,
And, lingering, sought to frame some new Replies.
High on her Head she rears two twisted Snakes,
Her Chains she rattles, and her Whip she shakes;
And churning bloody Foam, thus loudly speaks.
Behold whom Time has made to dote, and tell
Of Arms, imagined in her lonely Cell:
Behold the Fates Infernal Minister;
War, Death, Destruction, in my Hand I bear.
Thus having said, her smould'ring Torch impressed,
With her full Force, she plunged into his Breast.
Aghast he waked, and, starting from his Bed,
Cold Sweat, in clammy Drops, his Limbs o'respread.
Arms, Arms, he cries, my Sword and Shield prepare;
He breaths Defiance, Blood, and Mortal War.
So when with crackling Flames a Cauldron fries,
The bubling Waters from the Bottom rise:
Above the Brims they force their fiery way;
Black Vapors climb aloft, and cloud the Day.
The Peace polluted thus, a chosen Band
He first commissions to the Latian Land;
In threatening Embassy: Then raised the rest,
To meet in Arms the intruding Trojan Guest:
To force the Foes from the Lavinian Shore,
And Italy's endangered Peace restore.
Himself alone, an equal Match he boasts,
To fight the Phrygian and Ausonian Hoasts.
The Gods invoked, the Rutuli prepare
Their Arms, and warm each other to the War.
His Beauty these, and those his blooming Age,
The rest his House, and his own Fame engage.
While Turnus urges thus his Enterprise;
The Stygian Fury to the Trojans flies:
New Frauds invents, and takes a steepy Stand,
Which overlooks the Vale with wide Command;
Where fair Ascanius, and his youthful Train,
With Horns and Hounds a hunting Match ordain,
And pitch their Toils around the shady Plain.
The Fury fires the Pack; they snuff, they vent,
And fill their hungry Nostrils with the Scent.
'Twas of a well grown Stag, whose Antlers rise
High over his Front, his Beams invade the Skies:
From this light Cause, the Infernal Maid prepares
The Country Churls to Mischief, Hate, and Wars.
The stately Beast, the Two Tyrrheidae bred,
Snatched from his Dam, and the tame Youngling fed.
Their Father Tyrrheus did his Fodder bring,
Tyrrheus, chief Ranger to the Latian King:
Their Sister Silvia cherished with her Care
The little Wanton, and did Wreaths prepare
To hang his budding Horns: with Ribbons tied
His tender Neck, and combed his silken Hide;
And bathed his Body. Patient of Command,
In time he grew, and growing used to Hand.
He waited at his Master's Board for Food;
Then sought his salvage Kindred in the Wood:
Where grazing all the Day, at Night he came
To his known Lodgings, and his Country Dame.
This household Beast, that used the Woodland Grounds,
Was viewed at first by the young Hero's Hounds;
As down the Stream he swam, to seek Retreat
In the cool Waters, and to quench his Heat.
Ascanius young, and eager of his Game,
Soon bent his Bow, uncertain in his Aim:
To ye Right Honble: ye Lady Mary Sackvile daughter to Charles Earl of Dorset
and Middlesex

AE. 7. l. 675.


But the dire Fiend the fatal Arrow guides,
Which pierced his Bowels through his panting sides.
The bleeding Creature issues from the Floods,
Possessed with Fear, and seeks his known abodes;
His old familiar Hearth, and household Gods.
He falls, he fills the House with heavy Groans,
Implores their Pity, and his Pain bemoans.
Young Silvia beats her Breast, and cries aloud
For Succor, from the clownish Neighborhood:
The Churls assemble; for the Fiend, who lay
In the close Woody Covert, urged their way.
One with a Brand, yet burning from the Flame;
Armed with a knotty Club, another came:
What e're they catch or find, without their Care,
Their Fury makes an Instrument of War.
Tyrrheus, the Foster-Father of the Beast,
Then clench'd a Hatchet in his horny Fist:
But held his Hand from the descending Stroke,
And left his Wedge within the cloven Oak,
To whet their Courage, and their Rage provoke.
And now the Goddess, exercised in Ill,
Who watched an Hour to work her impious Will,
Ascends the Roof, and to her crooked Horn,
Such as was then by Latian Shepherds born,
Adds all her Breath, the Rocks and Woods around,
And Mountains, tremble at the infernal Sound.
The Sacred Lake of Trivia from afar,
The Veline Fountains, and sulphurous Nar,
Shake at the baleful Blast, the Signal of the War.
Young Mothers wildly stare, with Fear possessed,
And strain their helpless Infants to their Breast.
The Clowns, a boisterous, rude, ungoverned Crew,
With furious haste to the loud Summons flew.
The Powers of Troy then issuing on the Plain,
With fresh Recruits their youthful Chief sustain:
Not theirs a raw and unexperienced Train,
But a firm Body of embattel'd Men.
At first, while Fortune favored neither side,
The Fight with Clubs and burning Brands was tried:
But now, both Parties reinfor'd, the Fields
Are bright with flaming Swords and brazen Shields.
A shining Harvest either Host displays,
And shoots against the Sun with equal Rays.
Thus when a black-brow'd Gust begins to rise,
White Foam at first on the curled Ocean fries;
Then roars the Main, the Billows mount the Skies:
'Till by the Fury of the Storm full blown,
The muddy Bottom over the Clouds is thrown.
First Almon falls, old Tyrrheus eldest Care,
Pierced with an Arrow from the distant War:
Fixed in his Throat the flying Weapon stood,
And stopped his Breath, and drank his vital Blood.
Huge Heaps of slain above the Body rise;
Among the rest, the rich Galesus lies:
A good old Man, while Peace he preached in vain,
Amidst the Madness of the unruly Train.
Five Herds, five bleating Flocks his Pastures filled,
His Lands a hundred Yoke of Oxen tilled.
Thus, while in equal Scales their Fortune stood,
The Fury bathed them in each others Blood.
Then having fixed the Fight, exulting flies,
And bears fulfilled her Promise to the Skies.
To Juno thus she speaks; Behold, it is done,
The Blood already drawn, the War begun;
The Discord is complete, nor can they cease
The dire Debate, nor you command the Peace.
Now since the Latian and the Trojan Brood
Have tasted Vengeance, and the Sweets of Blood;
Speak, and my Power shall add this Office more:
The Neighboring Nations of the Ausonian Shore
Shall hear the dreadful Rumor, from afar,
Of armed Invasion, and embrace the War.
Then Juno thus; The grateful Work is done,
The Seeds of Discord sowed, the War begun:
Frauds, Fears, and Fury have possessed the State,
And fixed the Causes of a lasting Hate:
A bloody Hymen shall the Alliance join
Betwixt the Trojan and Ausonian Line:
But thou with Speed to Night and Hell repair,
For not the Gods, nor angry Jove will bear
Thy lawless wandering walks, in upper Air.
Leave what remains to me. Saturnia said:
The sullen Fiend her sounding Wings displayed;
Unwilling left the Light, and sought the nether Shade.
In midst of Italy, well known to Fame,
There lies a Lake, Amsanctus is the Name,
Below the lofty Mounts: On either side
Thick Forests, the forbidden Entrance hide:
Full in the Center of the sacred Wood
An Arm arises of the Stygian Flood;
Which, breaking from beneath with bellowing sound,
Whirls the black Waves and rattling Stones around.
Here Pluto pants for Breath from out his Cell,
And opens wide the grinning Jaws of Hell.
To this Infernal Lake the Fury flies;
Here hides her hated Head, and frees the laboring Skies.
Saturnian Juna now, with double Care,
Attends the fatal Process of the War.
The Clowns returned, from Battle bear the slain,
Implore the Gods, and to their King complain.
The Corpse of Almon and the rest are shown,
Shrieks, Clamours, Murmurs fill the frighted Town.
Ambitious Turnus in the Press appears,
And, aggravating Crimes, augments their Fears:
Proclaims his Private Injuries aloud,
A Solemn Promise made, and disavow'd;
A foreign Son is sought, and a mixed Mungril Brood.
Then they, whose Mothers, frantic with their Fear,
In Woods and Wilds the Flags of Bacchus bear,
And lead his Dances with dishevelled hair,
Increase the Clamor, and the War demand,
(Such was Amata's Interest in the Land)
Against the Public Sanctions of the Peace,
Against all Omens of their ill Success;
With Fates averse, the Rout in Arms resort,
To Force their Monarch, and insult the Court.
But like a Rock unmoved, a Rock that braves
The rageing Tempest and the rising Waves,
Prop'd on himself he stands: His solid sides
Wash off the Sea-weeds, and the sounding Tides:
So stood the Pious Prince unmoved: and long
Sustained the madness of the noisie Throng.
But when he found that Juno's Power prevailed,
And all the Methods of cool Counsel sailed,
He calls the Gods to witness their offense,
Disclaims the War, asserts his Innocence.
Hurried by Fate, he cries, and born before
A furious Wind, we leave the faithful Shore:
O more than Madmen! you your selves shall bear
The guilt of Blood and Sacrilegious War:
Thou, Turnus, shall atone it by thy Fate,
And pray to Heaven for Peace, but pray too late.
For me, my stormy Voyage at an end,
I to the Port of Death securely tend.
The Funeral Pomp which to your Kings you pay,
Is all I want, and all you take away.
He said no more, but in his Walls confined,
Shut out the Woes which he too well divined:
Nor with the rising Storm would vainly strive,
But left the Helm, and let the Vessel drive.
A solemn Custom was observed of old,
Which Latium held, and now the Romans hold;
Their Standard, when in fighting Fields they rear
Against the fierce Hircanians, or declare
The Scythian, Indian, or Arabian War:
Or from the boasting Parthians would regain
Their Eagles lost in Carrhae's bloody Plain:
Two Gates of Steel (the Name of Mars they bear)
And still are worshipped with religious Fear;
Before his Temple stand: The dire abode,
And the feared Issues of the furious God,
Are fenced with Brazen Bolts; without the Gates,
The wary Guardian Janus doubly waits.
Then, when the sacred Senate votes the Wars,
The Roman Consul their Decree declares,
And in his Robes the sounding Gates unbars.
The Youth in Military Shouts arise,
And the loud Trumpets break the yielding Skies.
These Rites of old by Sovereign Princes used,
Were the King's Office, but the King refused.
Deaf to their Cries, nor would the Gates unbar
Of sacred Peace, or loose the imprisoned War:
But hid his Head, and, safe from loud Alarms,
Abhorred the wicked Ministry of Arms.
Then Heavens Imperious Queen came down from high;
At her Approach the Brazen Hinges fly,
The Gates are forced, and every falling Bar,
And like a Tempest issues out the War.
The peaceful Cities of the Ausonian Shore,
Lulled in their Ease, and undisturbed before;
Are all on Fire, and some with studious Care,
Their restiff Steeds in sandy Plains prepare:
Some their soft Limbs in painful Marches try,
And War is all their Wish, and Arms the general Cry.
Part scour the rusty Shields with Seam, and part
New grind the blunted Ax, and point the Dart:
With Joy they view the waving Ensigns fly,
And hear the Trumpet's Clangor pierce the Sky.
Five Cities forge their Arms; the Atinian Powers,
Antemnae, Tybur with her lofty Towers,
Ardea the proud, the Crustumerian Town:
All these of old were places of Renown.
Some hammer Helmets for the fighting Field,
Some twine young Sallows to support the Shield;
The Croslet some, and some the Cuishes mould,
With Silver plated, and with ductile Gold.
The rustic Honors of the Scythe and Share,
Give place to Swords and Plumes, the Pride of War.
Old Fauchions are new tempered in the Fires:
The sounding Trumpet every Soul inspires.
The Word is given, with eager Speed they lace
The shining Headpiece, and the Shield embrace.
The neighing Steeds are to the Chariot tied,
The trusty Weapon sits on every side.
And now the mighty Labor is begun,
Ye Muses open all your Helicon.
Sing you the Chiefs that swayed the Ausonian Land,
Their Arms, and Armies under their Command:
What Warriors in our ancient Clime were bred,
What Soldiers followed, and what Heroes led.
For well you know, and can record alone,
What Fame to future times conveys but darkly down.
Mezentius first appeared upon the Plain,
Scorn fate upon his Brows, and sour Disdain;
Defying Earth and Heaven: Etruria lost,
He brings to Turnus's Aid his baffled Host.
The charming Lausus, full of youthful Fire,
Rode in the Rank, and next his sullen Sire:
To Turnus only second in the Grace
Of Manly Mien, and features of the Face.
A skilful Horseman, and a Huntsman bred,
With Fates averse a thousand Men he led:
His Sire unworthy of so brave a Son;
Himself well worthy of a happier Throne.
Next Aventinus drives his Chariot round
The Latian Plains, with Palms and Laurels crowned.
Proud of his Steeds he smoaks along the Field,
His Father's Hydra fills his ample Shield.
A hundred Serpents hiss about the Brims;
The Son of Hercules he justly seems,
By his broad Shoulders and Gigantick Limbs.
Of Heavenly part, and part of Earthly Blood,
A mortal Woman mixing with a God.
For strong Alcides, after he had slain
The triple Geryon, drove from conquered Spain
His captive Herds, and thence in Triumph led;
On Tuscan Tyber's flowery Banks they fed.
Then on Mount Aventine, the Son of Jove
The Priestess Rhea found, and forced to Love.
For Arms his Men long Piles and Jav'lins bore,
And Poles with pointed Steel their Foes in Battle gore.
Like Hercules himself, his Son appears,
In Salvage Pomp a Lyon's Hide he wears;
About his Shoulders hangs the shaggy Skin,
The Teeth, and gaping Jaws severely grin.
Thus like the God his Father, homely dressed,
He strides into the Hall, a horrid Guest.
Then two Twin-Brothers from fair Tybur came,
(Which from their Brother Tyburs took the Name,)
Fierce Coras, and Catillus, void of Fear,
Armed Argive Horse they led, and in the Front appear.
Like Cloud-born Centaurs, from the Mountain's height,
With rapid Course descending to the Fight;
They rush along, the rattling Woods give way,
The Branches bend before their sweepy Sway.
Nor was Praeneste's Founder wanting there,
Whom Fame reports the Son of Mulciber:
Found in the Fire, and fostered in the Plains;
A Shepherd and a King at once he reigns,
And leads to Turnus Aid his Country Swains.
His own Praeneste sends a chosen Band,
With those who plough Saturnia's Gabine Land:
Besides the Succor which cold Anien yields,
The Rocks of Hernicus, and rosy Fields;
Anagnia fat, and Father Amasene,
A numerous Rout, but all of naked Men:
Nor Arms they wear, nor Swords and Bucklers wield,
Nor drive the Chariot through the dusty Field:
But whirle from Leathern Slings huge Balls of Lead;
And Spoils of yellow Wolves adorn their Head:
The Left Foot naked, when they march to fight,
But in a Bull's raw Hide they sheath the Right.
Messapus next, (great Neptune was his Sire)
Secure of Steel, and fated from the Fire;
In Pomp appears: And with his Ardour warms
A heartless Train, unexercis'd in Arms:
The just Faliscans he to Battle brings,
And those who live where Lake Ciminia springs;
And where Feronia's Grove and Temple stands,
Who till Fescennian or Flavinian Lands:
All these in order march, and marching sing
The warlike Actions of their Sea-born King.
Like a long Team of Snowy Swans on high,
Which clap their Wings, and cleave the liquid Sky,
When homeward from their watery Pastures born,
They sing, and Asia's Lakes their Notes return.
Not one who heard their Music from afar,
Would think these Troops an Army trained to War:
But Flocks of Fowl, that when the Tempests roar,
With their hoarse gabling seek the silent Shore.
Then Clausus came, who led a numerous Band
Of Troops embodied, from the Sabine Land:
And in himself alone, an Army brought,
'Twas he the noble Claudian Race begot:
The Claudian Race, ordained, in times to come,
To share the Greatness of Imperial Rome.
He led the Cures forth of old Renown,
Mutuscans from their Olive-bearing Town;
And all the Eretian Powers: Besides a Band
That followed from Velinum's dewy Land:
And Amiternian Troops, of mighty Fame,
And Mountaineers, that from Severus came.
And from the craggy Cliffs of Tetrica,
And those where yellow Tyber takes his way,
And where Himella's wanton Waters play.
Casperia sends her Arms, with those that lie
By Fabaris, and fruitful Foruli:
The warlike Aids of Horta next appear,
And the cold Nursians come to close the Rear:
Mixed with the Natives born of Latin Blood,
Whom Allia washes with her fatal Flood.
Not thicker Billows beat the Lybian Main,
When pale Orion sets in wint'ry Rain;
Not thicker Harvests on rich Hermus rise,
Or Lycian Fields, when Phoebus burns the Skies;
Than stand these Troops: Their Bucklers ring around,
Their Trampling turns the Turf, and shakes the solid Ground.
High in his Chariot then Halesus came,
A Foe by Birth to Troy's unhappy Name:
From Agamemnon born; to Turnus Aid,
A thousand Men the youthful Hero led;
Who till the Massick Soil, for Wine renowned,
And fierce Auruncans from their Hilly Ground:
And those who live by Sidicinian Shores,
And where, with shoaly Foords Vulturnus roars;
Cales and Osca's old Inhabitants,
And rough Saticulans inured to Wants:
Light demi-Launces from afar they throw,
Fastened with Leathern Thongs to gaul the Foe.
Short crooked Swords in closer Fight they wear,
And on their warding Arm light Bucklers bear.
Nor Oebalus, shall thou be left unsung,
From Nymph Semethis and old Telon sprung:
Who then in Teleboan Capri reigned,
But that short Isle the ambitious Youth disdained;
And over Campagnia stretched his ample Sway;
Where swelling Sarnus seeks the Tyrrhene Sea:
Over Batulum, and where Abella sees,
From her high Towers, the Harvest of her Trees.
All these (as was the Teuton use of old)
Wield Brazen Swords, and Brazen Bucklers hold:
Sling weighty Stones when from afar they fight;
Their Casques are Cork, a Covering thick and light.
Next these in Rank, the warlike Ufens went,
And led the Mountain Troops that Nursia sent.
The rude Equicolae his Rule obeyed,
Hunting their Sport, and Plund'ring was their Trade.
In Arms they plough'd, to Battle still prepared;
Their Soil was barren, and their Hearts were hard.
Umbro the Priest the proud Marrubians led,
By King Archippus sent to Turnus aid;
And peaceful Olives crowned his hoary head.
His Wand and holy Words, the Viper's rage,
And venomed wounds of Serpents, could assuage.
He, when he pleased with powerful Juice to steep
Their Temples, shut their Eyes in pleasing Sleep.
But vain were Marsian Herbs, and Magic Art,
To cure the Wound given by the Dardan Dart.
Yet his untimely Fate, the Angitian Woods
In sighs remurmur'd, to the Fucine Floods.
The Son of famed Hippolitus was there;
Famed as his Sire, and as his Mother fair.
Whom in Egerian Groves Aricia bore,
And nursed his Youth along the Marshy Shore:
Where great Diana's peaceful Altars flame,
In fruitful Fields, and Virbius was his Name.
Hippolitus, as old Records have said,
Was by his Stepdam sought to share her Bed:
But when no Female Arts his Mind could move,
She turned to furious Hate her impious Love.
Torn by Wild Horses on the sandy Shore,
Another's Crimes the unhappy Hunter bore;
Glutting his Father's Eyes with guiltless gore.
But chaste Diana, who his death deplored,
With Aesculapian Herbs his life restored.
Then Jove, who saw from high, with just disdain,
The dead inspired with Vital Breath again,
Struck to the Center with his flaming Dart
The unhappy Founder of the Godlike Art.
But Trivia kept in secret Shades alone,
Her care, Hippolitus, to Fate unknown;
And called him Virbius in the Egerian Grove:
Where then he lived obscure, but safe from Jove.
For this, from Trivia's Temple and her Wood,
Are Coursers driven, who shed their Master's Blood;
Affrighted by the Monsters of the Flood.
His Son, the Second Virbius, yet retained
His Fathers Art, and Warrior Steeds he rein'd.
Amid the Troops, and like the leading God,
High over the rest in Arms the Graceful Turnus rode:
A triple Pile of Plumes his Crest adorned,
On which with belching Flames Chimaera burned:
The more the Winds his kindled Course inspire,
The more with fury burned the blazing Fire.
Fair Io graced his Shield, but Io now
With Horns exalted stands, and seems to low:
(A noble charge) her Keeper by her side,
To watch her Walks his hundred Eyes applied.
And on the Brims her Sire, the watery God,
Rolled from a Silver Urn his Crystal Flood.
A Cloud of Foot succeeds, and fills the Fields
With Swords and pointed Spears, and clatt'ring Shields;
Of Argives, and of old Sicanian Bands,
And those who Plow the rich Sutulian Lands;
Auruncan Youth and those Sacrana yieids,
And the proud Labicans with painted Shields.
And those who near Numician Streams reside,
And those whom Tyber's holy Forests hide;
Or Circes Hills from the main Land divide.
Where Ufens glides along the lowly Lands,
Or the black Water of Pomptina stands.
Last from the Volscians fair Camilla came;
And led her warlike Troops, a Warrior Dame:
To Charles Fox of ye Parish of St: Martins in ye Fields Esqr.

AE. 7. l. 1075.


Unbred to Spinning, in the Loom unskilled,
She chose the nobler Pallas of the Field.
Mixed with the first, the fierce Virago fought,
Sustained the Toils of Arms, the Danger sought:
Outstrip'd the Winds in speed upon the Plain,
Flew over the Fields, nor hurt the bearded Grain:
She swept the Seas, and as she skim'd along,
Her flying Feet unbath'd on Billows hung.
Men, Boys, and Women stupid with Surprise,
Where e're she passes, fix their wondering Eyes:
Longing they look, and gaping at the Sight,
Devour her over and over with vast Delight.
Her Purple Habit sits with such a Grace
On her smooth Shoulders, and so suits her Face:
Her Head with Ringlets of her Hair is crowned,
And in a Golden Caul the Curls are bound.
She shakes her Myrtle Javelin: And, behind,
Her Lycian Quiver dances in the Wind.
The Eighth Book of the Aeneis.
The Argument.
The War being now begun, both the Generals make all possible Preparations.
Tumus sends to Diomedes. Aeneas goes in Person to beg Succors from Evander and
the Tuscans. Evander receives him kindly, furnishes him with Men, and sends his
Son Pallas with him. Vulcan, at the Request of Venus, makes Arms for her Son
Aeneas, and draws on his Shield the most memorable Actions of his Posterity.

WHen Turnus had assembled all his Powers;
His Standard planted on Laurentum's Towers;
When now the sprightly Trumpet, from afar,
Had given the Signal of approaching War,
Had roused the neighing Steeds to scour the Fields,
While the fierce Riders clatter'd on their Shields,
Trembling with Rage, the Latian Youth prepare
To join the Allies, and headlong rush to War.
Fierce Ufens, and Messapus, led the Crowd;
With bold Mezentius, who blasphemed aloud.
These, through the Country took their wastful Course;
The Fields to forage, and to gather Force.
Then Venulus to Diomede they send,
To beg his Aid Ausonia to defend:
Declare the common Danger; and inform
The Grecian Leader of the growing Storm:
Aeneas landed on the Latian Coast,
With banished Gods, and with a baffled Host;
Yet now aspired to Conquest of the State;
And claimed a Title from the Gods and Fate.
What numerous Nations in his Quarrel came,
And how they spread his formidable Name:
To ye Right Honble. Tho Earl of Ailesbury and Elgin Viscount Bruce of
Ampthill Baron Bruce of Whorleton Shelton and Kinloss andct.

AE. 8. l. 2.


What he designed, what Mischiefs might arise,
If Fortune favored his first Enterprise,
Was left for him to weigh: whose equal Fears,
And common Interest was involved in theirs.
While Turnus and the Allies thus urge the War,
The Trojan floating in a Flood of Care,
Beholds the Tempest which his Foes prepare.
This way and that he turns his anxious Mind;
Thinks, and rejects the Counsels he designed.
Explores himself in vain, in every part,
And gives no rest to his distracted Heart.
So when the Sun by Day, or Moon by Night,
Strike, on the polished Brass, their trembling Light,
The glittering Species here and there divide;
And cast their dubious Beams from side to side:
Now on the Walls, now on the Pavement play,
And to the Cieling flash the glaring Day.
'Twas Night: And weary Nature lul'd asleep
The Birds of Air, and Fishes of the Deep;
And Beasts, and Mortal Men: The Trojan Chief
Was laid on Tyber's Banks, oppressed with Grief,
And found in silent Slumber late Relief.
Then, through the Shadows of the Poplar Wood,
Arose the Father of the Roman Flood;
An Azure Robe was over his Body spread,
A Wreath of shady Reeds adorned his Head:
Thus, manifest to Sight, the God appeared*
And with these pleasing Words his Sorrow cheered.
Undoubted Offspring of Etherial Race,
O long expected in this promised Place,
Who, through the Foes, have born thy banished Gods,
Restored them to their Hearths, and old Abodes;
This is thy happy Home! The Clime where Fate
Ordains thee to restore the Trojan State.
Fear not, the War shall end in lasting Peace;
And all the Rage of haughty Juno cease.
And that this nightly Vision may not seem
The Effect of Fancy, or an idle Dream,
A Sow beneath an Oak shall lie along;
All white her self, and white her thirty Young.
When thirty rolling Years have run their Race,
Thy Son, Ascanius, on this empty Space,
Shall build a Royal Town, of lasting Fame;
Which from this Omen shall receive the Name.
Time shall approve the Truth: For what remains,
And how with sure Success to crown thy Pains,
With Patience next attend. A banished Band,
Driven with Evander from the Arcadian Land,
Have planted here: and placed on high their Walls;
Their Town the Founder, Palanteum calls:
Derived from Pallas, his great Grandsire's Name:
But the fierce Latians old Possession claim:
With War infesting the new Colony;
These make thy Friends, and on their Aid rely.
To thy free Passage I submit my Streams:
Wake Son of Venus from thy pleasing Dreams;
And, when the setting Stars are lost in Day,
To Juno's Power thy just Devotion pay.
With Sacrifice the wrathful Queen appease;
Her Pride at length shall fall, her Fury cease.
When thou return'st victorious from the War,
Perform thy Vows to me with grateful Care.
The God am I, whose yellow Water flows
Around these Fields, and fattens as it goes:
Tyber my Name: among the rolling Floods,
Renowned on Earth, esteemed among the Gods.
This is my certain Seat: In Times to come,
My Waves shall wash the Walls of mighty Rome.
He said; and plunged below, while yet he spoke:
His Dream Aeneas and his Sleep forsook.
He rose, and looking up, beheld the Skies
With Purple blushing, and the Day arise.
Then, Water in his hollow Palm he took,
From Tyber's Flood; and thus the Powers bespoke.
Laurentian Nymphs, by whom the Streams are fed,
And Father Tyber, in thy sacred Bed
Receive Aeneas; and from Danger keep.
Whatever Fount, whatever holy deep,
Conceals thy watery Stores; where e're they rise,
And, bubling from below, salute the Skies:
Thou King of horned Floods, whose plenteous Urn
Suffices Fatness to the fruitful Corn,
For this thy kind Compassion of our Woes,
Shall share my Morning Song, and Evening Vows.
But, oh! be present to thy Peoples Aid;
And firm the gracious Promise thou have made.
Thus having said, two Galleys, from his Stores,
With Care he chooses; Man's, and fits with Oars.
Now on the Shore the fatal Swine is found:
Wondrous to tell; she lay along the Ground:
Her well fed Offspring at her Udders hung;
She white her self, and white her thirty young.
Aeneas takes the Mother, and her Brood,
And all on Juno's Altar are bestowed.
The foll'wing Night, and the succeeding Day,
Propitious Tyber smoothed his watery Way:
He rowld his River back; and poised he stood;
A gentle Swelling, and a peaceful Flood.
The Trojans mount their Ships; they put from Shore,
Born on the Waves, and scarcely dip an Oar.
Shouts from the Land give Omen to their Course;
And the pitched Vessels glide with easy Force.
The Woods and Waters, wonder at the Gleam
Of Shields, and painted Ships, that stem the Stream.
One Summer's Night, and one whole Day they pass,
Betwixt the green-wood Shades; and cut the liquid Glass.
The fiery Sun had finished half his Race;
Looked back, and doubted in the middle Space:
When they from far beheld the rising Towers,
The Tops of Sheds, and Shepherds lowly Bowers:
Thin as they stood, which, then of homely Clay,
Now rise in Marble, from the Roman Sway.
These Cots, (Evander's Kingdom, mean and poor)
The Trojan saw; and turned his Ships to Shore.
'Twas on a solemn Day: The Arcadian States,
The King and Prince without the City Gates,
Then paid their Offerings in a sacred Grove,
To Hercules, the Warrior Son of Jove.
Thick Clouds of rolling Smoke involve the Sky:
And Fat of Entrails on his Altar fry.
But when they saw the Ships that stemmed the Flood,
And glittered through the Covert of the Wood,
They rose with Fear; and left the unfinished Feast:
'Till dauntless Pallas reassur'd the rest,
To pay the Rites. Himself without delay
A Javelin seized, and singly took his Way.
Then gained a rising Ground; and called from far.
Resolve me, Strangers, whence, and what you are;
Your Buis'ness here; and bring you Peace or War?
High on the Stern, Aeneas took his Stand,
And held a Branch of Olive in his Hand;
While thus he spoke. The Phrygians Arms you see;
Expelled from Troy, provoked in Italy
By Latian Foes, with War unjustly made:
At first affianc'd, and at last betrayed.
This Message bear: The Trojans and their Chief
Bring holy Peace; and beg the King's Relief.
Struck with so great a Name, and all on fire,
The Youth Replies, Whatever you require,
Your Fame exacts: Upon our Shores descend,
A welcome Guest, and what you wish, a Friend.
He said; and downward hasting to the Strand,
Embraced the Stranger Prince, and joined his Hand.
Conducted to the Grove, Aeneas broke
The silence first, and thus the King bespoke.
Best of the Greeks, to whom, by Fates Command,
I bear these peaceful Branches in my hand;
Undaunted I approach you; though I know
Your Birth is Grecian, and your Land my Foe:
From Atreus though your ancient Lineage came;
And both the Brother Kings your Kindred claim:
Yet, my self-conscious Worth, your high Renown,
Your Virtue, through the Neighboring Nations blown,
Our Fathers mingled Blood, Apollo's Voice,
Have led me hither, less by Need than Choice.
Our Founder Dardanus, as Fame has sung,
And Greeks acknowledge, from Electra sprung:
Electra from the Loins of Atlas came;
Atlas whose Head sustains the Starry Frame.
Your Sire is Mercury; whom long before
On cold Cyllene's top fair Maja bore.
Maja the fair, on Fame if we rely,
Was Atlas Daughter, who sustains the Sky.
Thus from one common Source our Streams divide:
Ours is the Trojan, yours the Arcadian side.
Raised by these Hopes, I sent no News before:
Nor asked your leave, nor did your Faith implore;
But come, without a Pledge, my own Ambassador.
The same Rutulians, who with Arms pursue
The Trojan Race, are equal Foes to you.
Our Host expelled, what farther Force can stay
The Victor Troops from Universal Sway?
Then will they stretch their Power athwart the Land;
And either Sea from side to side command.
Receive our offered Faith: and give us thine;
Ours is a generous, and experienced Line:
We want not Hearts, nor Bodies for the War;
In Council cautious, and in Fields we dare.
He said; and while he spoke, with piercing Eyes,
Evander viewed the Man with vast surprise.
Pleased with his Action, ravished with his Face,
Then answered briefly, with a Royal grace.
O Valiant Leader of the Trojan Line,
In whom the Features of thy Father shine;
How I recall Anchises, how I see
His Motions, Mien, and all my Friend in thee!
Long tho it be, it is fresh within my Mind,
When Priam, to his Sister's Court designed
A welcome Visit, with a friendly stay;
And, through the Arcadian Kingdom took his way.
Then, past a Boy, the callow Down began
To shade my Chin, and call me first a Man.
I saw the shining Train, with vast delight,
And Priam's goodly Person pleased my sight:
But great Anchises, far above the rest,
With awful Wonder fired my Youthful Breast.
I longed to join, in Friendship's holy Bands,
Our mutual Hearts, and plight our mutual Hands.
I first accosted him: I su'd, I sought,
And, with a loving force, to Pheneus brought.
He gave me, when at length constrained to go,
A Lycian Quiver, and a Gnossian Bow:
A Vest embroidered, glorious to behold,
And two rich Bridles, with their Bits of Gold,
Which my Son's Coursers in obedience hold.
The League you ask I offer, as your Right:
And when to Morrow's Sun reveals the Light,
With swift Supplies you shall be sent away:
Now celebrate, with us, this solemn Day;
Whose Holy Rites admit no long Delay.
Honor our Annual Feast; and take your Seat
With friendly Welcome, at a homely Treat.
Thus having said, the Bowls (removed for Fear)
The Youths replac'd; and soon restored the Cheer.
On sods of Turf he set the Soldiers round;
A Maple Throne, raised higher from the Ground,
Received the Trojan Chief: And over the Bed,
A Lyon's shaggy Hide for Ornament they spread.
The Loaves were served in Canisters; the Wine
In Bowls, the Priest renewed the Rites Divine:
Broiled Entrails are their Food; and Beefs continued Chine.
But, when the Rage of Hunger was repressed,
Thus spoke Evander to his Royal Guest.
These Rites, these Altars, and this Feast, O King,
From no vain Fears, or Superstition spring:
Or blind Devotion, or from blinder Chance;
Or heady Zeal, or brutal Ignorance:
But, saved from Danger, with a grateful Sense,
The Labors of a God we recompense.
See, from afar, yon Rock that mates the Sky;
About whose Feet such Heaps of Rubbish lie:
Such indigested Ruin; bleak and bare,
How desert now it stands, exposed in Air!
'Twas once a Robber's Den; enclosed around
With living Stone, and deep beneath the Ground.
The Monster Cacus, more than half a Beast,
This Hold, impervious to the Sun, possessed.
The Pavement ever foul with Human Gore;
Heads, and their mangled Members, hung the Door.
Vulcan this Plague begot: And, like his Sire,
Black Clouds he belched, and flakes of livid Fire.
Time, long expected, eased us of our Load:
And brought the needful Presence of a God.
The avenging Force of Hercules, from Spain,
Arrived in Triumph, from Geryon slain;
Thrice lived the Giant, and thrice lived in vain.
His Prize, the lowing Herds, Alcides drove
Near Tyber's Bank, to graze the shady Grove.
Allured with Hope of Plunder, and intent
By Force to rob, by Fraud to circumvent;
The brutal Cacus, as by Chance they strayed,
Four Oxen thence, and four fair Kine conveyed.
And, lest the printed Footsteps might be seen,
He dragged 'em backwards to his rocky Den.
The Tracks averse, a lying Notice gave;
And led the Searcher backward from the Cave.
Mean time the Herdsman Hero shifts his place:
To find fresh Pasture, and untrodden Grass.
The Beasts, who missed their Mates, filled all around
With Bellowings, and the Rocks restored the Sound.
One Heifar who had heard her Love complain,
Roared from the Cave; and made the Project vain.
Alcides found the Fraud: With Rage he shook,
And tossed about his Head his knotted Oak.
Swift as the Winds, or Scythian Arrows flight,
He clomb, with eager haste, the Aerial height.
Then first we saw the Monster mend his Pace:
Fear in his Eyes, and Paleness in his Face,
Confessed the Gods approach: Trembling he springs,
As Terror had increased his Feet with Wings:
Nor stayed for Stairs; but down the Depth he threw
His Body; on his Back the Door he drew.
The Door, a Rib of living Rock; with Pains
His Father hewed it out, and bound with Iron Chains.
He broke the heavy Lincks; the Mountain closed;
And Bars and Leavers to his Foe opposed.
The Wretch had hardly made his Dungeon fast;
The fierce Avenger came with bounding haste:
Surveyed the Mouth of the forbidden hold;
And here and there his raging Eyes he rolled.
He gnash'd his Teeth; and thrice he compassed round
With winged speed the Circuit of the Ground.
Thrice at the Cavern's Mouth he pulled in vain,
And, panting, thrice desisted from his Pain.
A pointed flinty Rock, all bare, and black,
Grew gibbous from behind the Mountains Back:
Owls, Ravens, all ill Omens of the Night,
Here built their Nests, and hither winged their Flight.
The leaning Head hung threatening over the Flood:
And nodded to the left: The Hero stood
Adverse, with planted Feet, and from the right,
Tugged at the solid Stone with all his might.
Thus heaved, the fixed Foundations of the Rock
Gave way: Heaven echoed at the rattling Shock.
Tumbling it choked the Flood: On either side
The Banks leap backward; and the Streams divide.
The Sky shrunk upward with unusual Dread:
And trembling Tyber dived beneath his Bed.
The Court of Cacus stands revealed to sight;
The Cavern glares with new admitted Light.
So the pent Vapors with a rumbling Sound
Heave from below; and rend the hollow Ground:
A sounding Flaw succeeds: And from on high,
The Gods, with Hate beheld the nether Sky:
The Ghosts repine at violated Night;
And curse the invading Sun; and sicken at the sight.
The graceless Monster caught in open Day,
Enclosed, and in Despair to fly away;
Howls horrible from underneath, and fills
His hollow Palace, with unmanly Yells.
The Hero stands above; and from afar
Plies him with Darts, and Stones, and distant War.
He, from his Nostrils, and huge Mouth, expires
Black Clouds of Smoke, amidst his Father's Fires.
Gathering, with each repeated Blast, the Night:
To make uncertain Aim, and erring Sight.
The wrathful God, then plunges from above,
And where in thickest Waves the Sparkles drove,
There lights; and wades through Fumes, and gropes his Way;
Half singed, half stifled, 'till he grasps his Prey.
The Monster, spewing fruitless Flames, he found;
He squeezed his Throat, he writhed his Neck around,
And in a Knot his cripled Members bound.
Then, from their Sockets, tore his burning Eyes;
Rowld on a heap the breathless Robber lies.
The Doors, unbarr'd, receive the rushing Day;
And thorough Lights disclose the ravished Prey.
The Bulls redeemed, breathe open Air again;
Next, by the Feet, they drag him from his Den.
The wondering Neighborhood, with glad surprise,
Behold his shagged Breast, his Giant Size,
His Mouth that flames no more, and his extinguished Eyes.
From that auspicious Day, with Rites Divine,
We worship at the Hero's Holy Shrine.
Potitius first ordained these annual Vows,
As Priests, were added the Pinarian House:
Who raised this Altar in the Sacred Shade;
Where Honors, ever due, for ever shall be paid.
For these Deserts, and this high Virtue shown,
Ye warlike Youths, your Heads with Garlands crown.
Fill high the Goblets with a sparkling Flood:
And with deep Draughts invoke our common God.
This said, a double Wreath Evander twined:
And Poplars black and white his Temples bind.
Then Brims his ample Bowl: With like Design
The rest invoke the Gods, with sprinkled Wine.
Mean time the Sun descended from the Skies;
And the bright Evening-Star began to rise.
And now the Priests, Potitius at their Head,
In Skins of Beasts involved, the long Procession led:
Held high the flaming Tapers in their Hands;
As Custom had prescribed their holy Bands:
Then with a second Course the Tables load:
And with full Chargers offer to the God.
The Salij sing; and cense his Altars round
With Saban Smoke, their Heads with Poplar bound.
One Choire of old, another of the young;
To dance, and bear the Burden of the Song.
The Lay records the Labors, and the Praise,
And all the Immortal Acts of Hercules.
First, how the mighty Babe, when swathed in Bands,
The Serpents strangled, with his Infant Hands:
Then, as in Years, and matchless Force he grew,
The Oechalian Walls, and Trojan overthrew.
Besides a thousand Hazards they relate,
Procured by Juno's, and Euristheus's Hate.
Thy Hands, unconquered Hero, could subdue
The Cloud-born Centaurs, and the Monster Crew.
Nor thy resistless Arm the Bull withstood:
Nor He the roaring Terror of the Wood.
The triple Porter of the Stygian Seat,
With lolling Tongue, lay fawning at thy Feet:
And, seized with Fear, forgot his mangled Meat.
The Infernal Waters trembled at thy Sight;
Thee, God, no face of Danger could Affright.
Not huge Typhoeus, nor the unnumber'd Snake,
Increased with hissing Heads, in Lerna's Lake.
Hail Jove's undoubted Son! An added Grace
To Heaven, and the great Author of thy Race.
Receive the gratful Offerings, which we pay,
And smile propitious on thy solemn Day.
In Numbers, thus, they sung: Above the rest,
The Den, and Death of Cacus crown the Feast.
The Woods to hollow Vales convey the Sound;
The Vales to Hills, and Hills the Notes rebound.
The Rites performed, the cheerful Train retire.
Betwixt young Pallas, and his aged Sire
The Trojan passed, the City to survey;
And pleafing Talk beguiled the tedious Way.
The Stranger cast around his curious Eyes;
New Objects viewing still, with new Surprise.
With greedy Joy enquires of various Things;
And Acts and Monuments of Ancient Kings.
Then thus the Founder of the Roman Towers:
These Woods were first the Seat of Silvan Powers,
Of Nymphs, and Fauns, and salvage Men, who took
Their Birth from Trunks of Trees, and stubborn Oak.
Nor Laws they knew, nor Manners, nor the Care
Of laboring Oxen, or the shining Share:
Nor Arts of Gain, nor what they gained to spare.
Their Exercise the Chase: the running Flood
Supplied their Thirst; the Trees supplied their Food.
Then Saturn came, who fled the Power of Jove,
Robbed of his Realms, and banished from above.
To the Honble. Robert Bruce Second son to Robert late Earl of Ailesbury



The Men, dispersed on Hills, to Towns he brought;
And Laws ordained, and Civil Customs taught:
And Latium called the Land where safe he lay,
From his Unduteous Son, and his Usurping Sway.
With his mild Empire, Peace and Plenty came:
And hence the Golden Times derived their name.
A more degenerate, and discolored Age,
Succeeded this, with Avarice and Rage.
The Ausonians, then, and bold Sicanians came;
And Saturn's Empire often changed the name.
Then Kings, Gygantick Tybris, and the rest,
With Arbitrary Sway the Land oppressed.
For Tybers flood was Albula before:
Till, from the Tyrants Fate, his name it bore.
I last arrived, driven from my native home,
By Fortune's Power, and Fate's resistless Doom.
Long tossed on Seas I sought this happy Land:
Warned by my Mother Nymph, and called by Heavens Command.
Thus, walking on, he spoke: and showed the Gate,
Since called Carmental by the Roman State;
Where stood an Altar, Sacred to the Name
Of old Carmenta, the Prophetic Dame:
Who to her Son foretold the Aenean Race,
Sublime in Fame, and Rome's Imperial Place.
Then shows the Forest, which in after times,
Fierce Romulus, for perpetrated Crimes,
A Sacred Refuge made: with this, the Shrine
Where Pan below the Rock had Rites Divine.
Then tells of Argus death, his murdered Guest,
Whose Grave, and Tomb, his Innocence attest.
Thence, to the steep Tarpeian Rock he leads;
Now Roof'd with Gold; then thatched with homely Reeds.
A Reverent fear (such Superstition reigns
Among the rude) even then possessed the Swains.
Some God they knew, what God they could not tell,
Did there amidst the sacred horror dwell.
The Arcadians thought him Jove; and said they saw
The mighty Thund'rer with Majestic awe;
Who shook his Shield, and dealt his Bolts around;
And scattered Tempests on the teeming Ground.
Then saw two heaps of Ruins; once they stood
Two stately Towns, on either side the Flood.
Saturnia's and Janicula's Remains:
And, either place, the Founder's Name retains.
Discoursing thus together, they resort
Where poor Evander kept his Country Court.
They viewed the ground of Rome's litigious Hall;
Once Oxen lowed, where now the Lawyers bawl.
Then, stooping, through the Narrow Gate they pressed,
When thus the King bespoke his Trojan Guest.
Mean as it is, this Palace, and this Door,
Received Alcides, then a Conqueror.
Dare to be poor: accept our homely Food
Which feasted him; and emulate a God.
Then, underneath a lowly Roof, he led
The weary Prince; and laid him on a Bed:
The stuffing Leaves, which Hides of Bears o'respread.
Now Night had shed her silver Dews around,
And with her sable Wings embraced the Ground,
When Love's fair Goddess, anxious for her Son;
(New Tumults rising, and new Wars begun)
Couched with her Husband, in his Golden Bed,
With these alluring Words invokes his aid.
And, that her pleasing Speech his Mind may move,
Inspires each accent with the Charms of Love.
While Cruel Fate conspired with Grecian Powers,
To level with the Ground the Trojan Towers;
I asked not Aid the unhappy to restore:
Nor did the Succor of thy Skill implore.
Nor urged the Labors of my Lord in vain;
A sinking Empire longer to sustain.
Though much I owed to Priam's House; and more
The Dangers of Aeneas did deplore.
But now by Jove's Command, and Fates Decree,
His Race is doomed to reign in Italy;
With humble Suit I beg thy needful Art,
O still propitious Power, that rules my Heart!
A Mother kneels a suppliant for her Son.
By Thetis and Aurora thou were won
To forge impenetrable Shields; and grace,
With fated Arms, a less illustrious Race.
Behold, what haughty Nations are combined
Against the Relics of the Phrygian Kind;
With Fire and Sword my People to destroy;
And conquer Venus twice, in conquering Troy.
She said; and strait her Arms, of snowy hue,
About her unresolving Husband threw.
Her soft Embraces soon infuse Desire:
His Bones and Marrow sudden Warmth inspire;
And all the Godhead feels the wonted Fire.
Not half so swift the rattling Thunder flies,
Or forky Lightnings flash along the Skies.
The Goddess, proud of her successful Wiles,
And conscious of her Form, in secret Smiles.
Then thus, the Power, obnoxious to her Charms,
Panting, and half dissolving in her Arms:
Why seek you Reasons for a Cause so just;
Or your own Beauties, or my Love distrust?
Long since, had you required my helpful Hand,
The Artificer, and Art you might command,
To labor Arms for Troy: Nor Jove, nor Fate,
Confined their Empire to so short a Date.
And, if you now desire new Wars to wage,
My Skill I promise; and my Pains engage.
Whatever melting Metals can conspire,
Or breathing Bellows, or the forming Fire,
Is freely yours: Your anxious Fears remove:
And think no Task is difficult to Love.
Trembling he spoke; and eager of her Charms,
He snatched the willing Goddess to his Arms;
'Till in her Lap infused, he lay possessed
Of full Desire, and sunk to pleasing Rest.
Now when the Night her middle race had rode;
And his first Slumber had refreshed the God;
The time when early Housewifes leave the Bed;
And living Embers on the Hearth they spread;
Supply the Lamp, and call the Maids to rise,
With yawning Mouths, and with half opened Eyes;
They ply the Distaff by the winking Light;
And to their daily Labor add the Night.
Thus frugally they earn their Childrens Bread:
And uncorrupted keep the Nuptial Bed.
Not less concerned, nor at a later Hour,
Rose from his downy Couch the forging Power.
Sacred to Vulcan's Name an Isle there lay,
Betwixt Sicilia's Coasts and Lipare;
Raised high on smoking Rocks, and deep below,
In hollow Caves the Fires of Aetna glow.
The Cyclops here their heavy Hammers deal;
Loud Strokes, and hissings of tormented Steel
Are heard around: The boiling Waters roar;
And smoaky Flames through fuming Tunnels soar.
Hither, the Father of the Fire, by Night,
Through the brown Air precipitates his Flight.
To Christopher Rich of Grays Inn Esquire

AE. 8. l: 560


On their Eternal Anvils here he found
The Brethren beating, and the Blows go round:
A load of pointless Thunder now there lies
Before their Hands, to ripen for the Skies:
These Darts, for angry Jove, they daily cast:
Consumed on Mortals with prodigious waste.
Three Rays of writhen Rain, of Fire three more,
Of winged Southern Winds, and cloudy Store
As many parts, the dreadful Mixture frame:
And Fears are added, and avenging Flame.
Inferior Ministers, for Mars repair
His broken Axeltrees, and blunted War:
And send him forth again, with furbish'd Arms,
To wake the lazy War, with Trumpets loud Alarms.
The rest refresh the scaly Snakes, that fold
The Shield of Pallas; and renew their Gold.
Full on the Crest the Gorgon's Head they place,
With Eyes that roll in Death, and with distorted Face.
My Sons, said Vulcan, set your Tasks aside,
Your Strength, and Master Skill, must now be tried.
Arms, for a Hero forge: Arms that require
Your Force, your Speed, and all your forming Fire.
He said: They set their former Work aside:
And their new Toils with eager haste divide.
A Flood of molten Silver, Brass, and Gold,
And deadly Steel, in the large Furnace rolled;
Of this, their artful Hands a Shield prepare;
Alone sufficient to sustain the War.
Sev'n Orbs within a spacious round they close;
One stirs the Fire, and one the Bellows blows.
The hissing Steel is in the Smithy drowned;
The Grot with beaten Anvils groans around.
By turns their Arms advance, in equal time:
By turns their Hands descend, and Hammers chime.
They turn the glowing Mass, with crooked Tongs:
The fiery Work proceeds, with Rustic Songs.
While, at the Lemnian God's Command, they urge
Their Labors thus, and ply the Eolian Forge:
The cheerful Morn salutes Evander's Eyes;
And Songs of chirping Birds invite to rise.
He leaves his lowly Bed; his Buskins meet
Above his Ankles; Sandals sheath his Feet:
He sets his trusty Sword upon his side;
And over his Shoulder throws a Panther's Hide.
Two Menial Dogs before their Master pressed:
Thus clad, and guarded thus, he seeks his Kingly Guest.
Mindful of promised Aid, he mends his Pace:
But meets Aeneas in the middle Space.
Young Pallas did his Father's Steps attend;
And true Achates waited on his Friend.
They join their Hands; a secret Seat they chufe;
The Arcadian first, their former Talk renews.
Undaunted Prince, I never can believe
The Trojan Empire lost, while you survive.
Command the Assistance of a faithful Friend:
But feeble are the Succors I can send.
Our narrow Kingdom, here the Tyber bounds;
That other side the Latian State surrounds;
Insults our Walls, and wastes our fruitful Grounds.
But mighty Nations I prepare, to join
Their Arms with yours, and aid your just Design.
You come, as by your better Genius sent:
And Fortune seems to favor your intent.
Not far from hence there stands a Hilly Town,
Of ancient Building, and of high Renown;
Torn from the Tuscans, by the Lydian Race;
Who gave the Name of Caere, to the Place
Once Agyllina called: It flourished long
In Pride of Wealth; and warlike People strong.
'Till cursed Mezentius, in a fatal Hour,
Assumed the Crown, with Arbitrary Power.
What Words can paint those execrable Times;
The Subjects Sufferings, and the Tyrant's Crimes!
That Blood, those Murders, O ye Gods replace
On his own Head, and on his impious Race!
The living, and the Dead, at his Command
Were coupled, Face to Face, and Hand to Hand:
'Till choked with Stench, in loathed Embraces tied,
The lingering Wretches pined away, and died.
Thus plunged in Ills, and meditating more,
The People's Patience tired, no longer bore
The raging Monster: But with Arms beset
His House, and Vengeance and Destruction threat.
They fire his Palace: While the Flame ascends,
They force his Guards; and execute his Friends.
He cleaves the Crowd; and favored by the Night,
To Turnus's friendly Court directs his flight.
By just Revenge the Tuscans set on Fire,
With Arms, their King to Punishment require:
Their numerous Troops, now mustered on the Strand,
My Counsel shall submit to your Command.
Their Navy swarms upon the Coasts: They cry
To hoist their Anchors; but the Gods deny.
An ancient Augur, skilled in future Fate,
With these foreboding Words restrains their Hate.
Ye brave in Arms, ye Lydian Blood, the Flower
Of Tuscan Youth, and choice of all their Power,
Whom just Revenge against Mezentius arms,
To seek your Tyrant's Death, by lawful Arms:
Know this; no Native of our Land may lead
This powerful People: Seek a Foreign Head.
Awed with these Words, in Camps they still abide;
And wait with longing Looks their promised Guide.
Tarchon, the Tuscan Chief, to me has sent
Their Crown, and every Regal Ornament:
The People join their own with his Desire;
And All, my Conduct, as their King, require.
But the chill Blood that creeps within my Veins,
And Age, and lifeless Limbs unfit for Pains,
And a Soul conscious of its own Decay,
Have forced me to refuse Imperial Sway.
My Pallas were more fit to mount the Throne;
And should, but he is a Sabine Mother's Son;
And half a Native: But in you combine
A Manly Vigor, and a Foreign Line.
Where Fate and smiling Fortune show the Way,
Pursue the ready Path to Sovereign Sway.
The Staff of my declining Days, my Son,
Shall make your good or ill Success his own.
In fighting Fields from you shall learn to dare:
And serve the hard Apprentiship of War.
Your matchless Courage, and your Conduct view;
And early shall begin to admire and copy you.
Besides, two hundred Horse he shall command:
Though few, a warlike and well chosen Band.
These in my Name are listed: And my Son
As many more has added in his own.
Scarce had he said; Achates and his Guest,
With downcast Eyes their silent Grief expressed:
Who short of Succors; and in deep Despair,
Shook at the dismal Prospect of the War.
But his bright Mother, from a breaking Cloud,
To cheer her Issue, thundered thrice aloud.
Thrice, forky Lightning flashed along the Sky;
And Tyrrhene Trumpets thrice were heard on high.
Then, gazing up, repeated Peals they hear:
And, in a Heaven serene, refulgent Arms appear;
Red'ning the Skies, and glittering all around,
The tempered Metals clash; and yield a Silver sound.
The rest stood trembling, struck with awe divine,
Aeneas only conscious to the Sign:
Presaged the Event; and joyful viewed, above,
The accomplished Promise of the Queen of Love.
Then, to the Arcadian King: This Prodigy
(Dismiss your Fear) belongs alone to me.
Heaven calls me to the War: The expected Sign
Is given of promised Aid, and Arms Divine.
My Goddess-Mother; whose Indulgent Care,
Foresaw the Dangers of the growing War;
This Omen gave; when Bright Vulcanian Arms,
Fated from force of Steel by Stygian Charms,
Suspended, shone on high: She then foreshow'd
Approaching Fights, and Fields to float in Blood.
Turnus shall dearly pay for Faith forsworn;
And Corpse, and Swords, and Shields, on Tyber born,
Shall choke his Flood: Now sound the loud Alarms;
And Latian Troops prepare your perjured Arms.
He said; and rising from his homely Throne,
The Solemn Rites of Hercules begun:
And on his Altars waked the sleeping Fires:
Then cheerful to his Household-Gods retires.
There offers chosen Sheep: The Arcadian King
And Trojan Youth the same Oblations bring.
Next of his Men, and Ships, he makes review,
Draws out the best, and ablest of the Crew.
Down with the falling Stream the Refuse run:
To raise with joyful News his drooping Son.
Steeds are prepared to mount the Trojan Band;
Who wait their Leader to the Tyrrhene Land.
A sprightly Courser, fairer than the rest,
The King himself presents his Royal Guest.
A Lions Hide his Back and Limbs infold;
Precious with studded work, and Paws of Gold.
Fame through the little City spreads aloud
The intended March, amid the fearful Crowd:
The Matrons beat their Breasts; dissolve in Tears;
And double their Devotion in their Fears.
The War at hand appears with more affright:
And rises every Moment to the sight.
Then, old Evander, with a close embrace,
Strained his departing Friend; and Tears o're-flow his Face:
Would Heaven, said he, my strength and youth recall,
Such as I was beneath Preneste's Wall;
Then when I made the foremost Foes retire,
And set whole heaps of conquered Shields on Fire.
When Herilus in single Fight I slew;
Whom with three lives Feronia did endue:
And thrice I sent him to the Stygian Shore;
Till the last Ebbing Soul returned no more:
Such, if I stood renewed, not these Alarms,
Nor Death, should rend me from my Pallas arms:
Nor proud Mezentius, thus unpunished, boast
His Rapes and Murders on the Tuscan Coast.
Ye Gods! and mighty Jove, in pity bring
Relief, and hear a Father, and a King.
If Fate and you, reserve these Eyes, to see
My Son return with peace and Victory;
If the loved Boy shall bless his Father's sight;
If we shall meet again with more delight;
Then draw my Life in length, let me sustain,
In hopes of his Embrace, the worst of Pain.
But if your hard Decrees, which O I dread,
Have doomed to death his undeserving head;
This, O this very Moment, let me die;
While Hopes and Fears in equal balance lie.
While yet Possessed of all his Youthful Charms,
I strain him close within these Aged Arms:
Before that fatal news my Soul shall wound!
He said, and, swooning, sunk upon the ground;
His Servants bore him off: And softly laid
His languish'd Limbs upon his homely Bed.
The Horsemen march; the Gates are opened wide;
Aeneas at their head, Achates by his side.
Next these the Trojan Leaders rode along:
Last, follows in the Rear, the Arcadian Throng.
Young Pallas shone conspicuous over the rest;
Gilded his Arms, Embroidered was his Vest.
So, from the Seas, exerts his radiant head
The Star, by whom the Lights of Heaven are led:
Shakes from his rosy Locks the perly Dews;
Dispels the darkness, and the Day renews.
The trembling Wives, the Walls and Turrets crowd;
And follow, with their Eyes, the dusty Cloud:
Which Winds disperse by fits; and show from far
The blaze of Arms, and Shields, and shining War.
The Troops, drawn up in beautiful Array,
Over heathy Plains pursue the ready way.
Repeated peals of showts are heard around:
The Neighing Coursers answer to the sound:
And shake with horny Hoofs the solid ground.
A greenwood Shade, for long Religion known,
Stands by the Streams that wash the Tuscan Town:
Encompassed round with gloomy Hills above,
Which add a holy horror to the Grove.
The first Inhabitants, of Grecian Blood,
That sacred Forest to Sylvanus vowed:
The Guardian of their Flocks, and Fields; and pay
Their due Devotions on his annual day.
Not far from hence, along the River's side,
In Tents secure, the Tuscan Troops abide;
By Tarchon led. Now, from a rising ground,
Aeneas cast his wondering Eyes around;
And all the Tyrrhene Army had in sight,
Stretched on the spacious Plain from left to right.
Thither his warlike Train the Trojan led;
Refreshed his Men, and wearied Horses fed.
Mean time the Mother Goddess, crowned with Charms,
Breaks through the Clouds, and brings the fated Arms.
Within a winding Vale she finds her Son,
On the cool Rivers' Banks, retired alone.
She shows her heavenly Form, without disguise,
And gives her self to his desiring Eyes.
Behold, she said, performed, in every part
My promise made; and Vulcan's labored Art.
Now seek, secure, the Latian Enemy;
And haughty Turnus to the Field defy.
She said: And having first her Son embraced;
The radiant Arms beneath an Oak she placed.
Proud of the Gift, he rolled his greedy sight
Around the Work, and gazed with vast delight.
He lifts, he turns, he poizes, and admires
The Crested Helm, that vomits radiant Fires:
His hands the fatal Sword, and Corslet hold:
One keen with tempered Steel, one stiff with Gold.
Both ample, flaming both, and beamy bright:
So shines a Cloud, when edged with adverse Light.
He shakes the pointed Spear; and longs to try
The plated Cuishes, on his manly thigh,
But most admires the Shields Mysterious mould,
And Roman Triumphs rising on the Gold.
To Sr. Godfry Kneller Knight Principal Painter to his Majesty

AE. 8. l. 805


For those, embossed, the Heavenly Smith had wrought,
(Not in the Rolls of future Fate untaught,)
The Wars in Order, and the Race Divine
Of Warriors, issuing from the Julian Line.
The Cave of Mars was dressed with mossy Greens:
There, by the Wolf, were laid the Martial Twins.
Intrepid on her swelling Dugs they hung;
The foster Dam loll'd out her fawning Tongue:
They sucked secure, while bending Back her Head,
She licked their tender Limbs; and formed them as they fed.
Not far from thence new Rome appears, with Games
Projected for the Rape of Sabine Dames.
The Pit resounds with Shrieks: A War succeeds,
For breach of Public Faith, and unexampl'd Deeds.
Here for Revenge the Sabine Troops contend:
The Romans there with Arms the Prey defend.
Wearied with tedious War, at length they cease;
And both the Kings and Kingdoms plight the Peace.
The friendly Chiefs, before Jove's Altar stand;
Both armed, with each a Charger in his Hand:
A fatted Sow, for Sacrifice is led;
With Imprecations on the perjured Head.
Near this, the Traitor Metius, stretched between
Four fiery Steeds, is dragged along the Green;
By Tullus doom: The Brambles drink his Blood;
And his torn Limbs are left, the Vulture's Food.
There, Porsena to Rome proud Tarquin brings;
And would by Force restore the banished Kings.
One Tyrant, for his fellow Tyrant fights:
The Roman Youth assert their Native Rights.
Before the Town the Tuscan Army lies:
To win by Famine, or by Fraud surprise.
Their King, half threatening, half disdaining stood:
While Cocles broke the Bridge; and stem'd the Flood.
The Captive Maids there tempt the raging Tide:
Escaped from their Chains, with Clelia for their Guide.
High on a Rock Heroic Manlius stood;
To guard the Temple, and the Temple's God:
Then Rome was poor; and there you might behold
The Palace, thatched with Straw, now roof'd with Gold.
The Silver Goofe before the shining Gate
There flew; and by her Cackle, saved the State.
She told the Gauls approach: The approaching Gauls,
Obscure in Night, ascend, and seize the Walls.
The Gold, dissembled well their yellow Hair:
And Golden Chains on their white Necks they wear.
Gold are their Vests: Long Alpine Spears they wield:
And their left Arm sustains a length of Shield.
Hard by, the leaping Salian Priests advance:
And naked through the Streets the mad Luperci dance:
In Caps of Wool. The Targets dropped from Heaven:
Here modest Matrons in soft Litters driven,
To pay their Vows in solemn Pomp appear:
And odorous Gums in their chaste Hands they bear.
Far hence removed, the Stygian Seats are seen:
Pains of the damned, and punished Catiline:
Hung on a Rock the Traitor; and around,
The Furies hissing from the nether Ground.
Apart from these, the happy Souls, he draws:
And Cato's holy Ghost, dispensing Laws.
Betwixt the Quarters, flows a Golden Sea:
But foaming Surges, there, in Silver play.
The dancing Dolphins, with their Tails, divide
The glittering Waves; and cut the precious Tide.
Amid the Main, two mighty Fleets engage
Their Brazen Beaks; opposed with equal Rage.
Actium, surveys the well disputed Prize:
Leucate's watery Plain, with foamy Billows fries.
Young Caesar, on the Stern, in Armor bright;
Here leads the Romans and their Gods to fight:
His beamy Temples shoot their Flames afar;
And over his Head is hung the Julian Star.
Agrippa seconds him, with prosperous Gales:
And, with propitious Gods, his Foes assails.
A Naval Crown, that binds his Manly Brows,
The happy Fortune of the Fight foreshows.
Ranged on the Line opposed, Antonius brings
Barbarian Aids, and Troops of Eastern Kings.
The Arabians near, and Bactrians from afar,
Of Tongues discordant, and a mingled War.
And, rich in gaudy Robes, amidst the Strife,
His ill Fate follows him; the Egyptian Wife.
Moving they fight: With Oars, and forky Prows,
The Froth is gathered; and the Water glows.
It seems, as if the Cyclades again
Were rooted up, and justled in the Main:
Or floating Mountains, floating Mountains meet:
Such is the fierce Encounter of the Fleet.
Fireballs are thrown; and pointed Jav'lins fly:
The Fields of Neptune take a Purple Dye.
The Queen her self, amidst the loud Alarms,
With Cymbals tossed her fainting Soldiers warms.
Fool as she was; who had not yet divined
Her cruel Fate; nor saw the Snakes behind.
Her Country Gods, the Monsters of the Sky,
Great Neptune, Pallas, and Love's Queen, defy.
The Dog Anubis barks, but barks in vain;
Nor longer dares oppose the Aetherial Train.
Mars, in the middle of the shining Shield
Is engraved, and strides along the liquid Field.
The Dirae sowse from Heaven, with swift Descent:
And Discord, died in Blood, with Garments rent,
Divides the Preace: Her Steps, Bellona treads,
And shakes her Iron Rod above their Heads.
This seen, Apollo, from his Actian height,
Pours down his Arrows: At whose winged flight
The trembling Indians, and Egyptians yield:
And soft Sabaeans quit the watery Field.
The fatal Mistress hoists her silken Sails;
And, shrinking from the Fight, invokes the Gales.
Aghast she looks; and heaves her Breast, for Breath:
Panting, and pale with fear of future Death.
The God had figured her, as driven along,
By Winds and Waves; and scudding through the Throng.
Just opposite, sad Nilus, opens wide
His Arms, and ample Bosom, to the Tide.
And spreads his Mantle over the winding Coast:
In which he wraps his Queen, and hides the flying Ho^^^
The Victor, to the Gods his Thanks expressed*
And Rome triumphant, with his Presence blessed.
Three hundred Temples in the Town he placed:
With Spoils and Altars every Temple graced.
Three shining Nights, and three succeeding Days,
The Fields resound with Shouts; the Streets with Praise
The Domes with Songs, the Theaters with Plays.
All Altars flame: Before each Altar lies,
Drenched in his Gore, the destined Sacrifice.
Great Caesar sits sublime upon his Throne;
Before Apollo's Porch of Parian Stone:
Accepts the Presents vowed for Victory;
And hangs the monumental Crowns on high.
Vast Crowds of vanquished Nations march along:
Various in Arms, in Habit, and in Tongue.
Here, Mulciber assigns the proper Place
For Carians, and the ungirt Numidian Race;
Then ranks the Thracians in the second Row;
With Scythians, expert in the Dart and Bow.
And here the tamed Euphrates humbly glides;
And there the Rhine submits her swelling Tides.
And proud Araxes, whom no Bridge could bind:
The Danes unconquered Offspring, march behind;
And Morini, the last of Human Kind.
These Figures, on the Shield divinely wrought,
By Vulcan labored, and by Venus brought,
With Joy and Wonder fill the Hero's thought.
Unknown the Names, he yet admires the Grace;
And bears aloft the Fame, and Fortune of his Race.
The Ninth Book of the Aeneis.
The Argument.
Turnus takes Advantage of Aeneas 's Absence, fires some of his Ships, (which
are transformed into Sea-Nymphs) and assaults his Camp. The Trojans reduced to
the last Extremities, send Nisus and Euryalus to recall Aeneas; which furnishes
the Poet with that admirable Episode of their Friendship, Generosity; and the
conclusion of their Adventures.

WHile these Affairs in distant Places passed,
The various Iris Juno sends with haste,
To find bold Turnus, who, with anxious Thought,
The secret Shade of his great Grandsire sought.
Retired alone she found the daring Man;
And opened her rosy Lips, and thus began.
What none of all the Gods could grant thy Vows;
That, Turnus, this auspicious Day bestows.
Aeneas, gone to seek the Arcadian Prince,
Has left the Trojan Camp without defense;
And, short of Succors there; employs his Pains
In Parts remote to raise the Tuscan Swains:
Now snatch an Hour that favors thy Designs,
Unite thy Forces, and attack their Lines.
This said, on equal Wings she poised her Weight,
And formed a radiant Rainbow in her flight.
The Daunian Hero lifts his Hands and Eyes;
And thus invokes the Goddess as she flies.
Iris, the Grace of Heaven, what Power Divine
Has sent thee down, through dusky Clouds to shine?
See they divide; immortal Day appears;
And glittering Planets dancing in their Spheres!
To the Right Honble. Robert Earl of Sunderland Ld. Chamberlain of his
Majesty's Household and

AE. 9. l. 2.


With Joy, these happy Omens I obey;
And follow to the War, the God that leads the Way.
Thus having said, as by the Brook he stood,
He scoop'd the Water from the Crystal Flood;
Then with his Hands the drops to Heaven he throws,
And loads the Powers above with offered Vows.
Now march the bold Confed'rates through the Plain;
Well horsed, well clad, a rich and shining Train:
Messapus leads the Van; and in the Rear,
The Sons of Tyrrheus in bright Arms appear.
In the Main Battle, with his flaming Crest,
The mighty Turnus towers above the rest:
Silent they move; majestically slow,
Like ebbing Nile, or Ganges in his flow.
The Trojans view the dusty Cloud from far;
And the dark Menace of the distant War.
Caicus from the Rampire saw it rise,
Blackning the Fields, and thickning through the Skies.
Then to his Fellows thus aloud he calls,
What rolling Clouds, my Friends, approach the Walls?
Arm, arm, and man the Works; prepare your Spears,
And pointed Darts; the Latian Host appears.
Thus warned, they shut their Gates; with Shouts ascend
The Bulwarks, and secure their Foes attend.
For their wise General with foreseeing Care,
Had charged them not to tempt the doubtful War:
Nor, though provoked, in open Fields advance;
But close within their Lines attend their chance.
Unwilling, yet they keep the strict Command;
And sourly wait in Arms the Hostile Band.
The fiery Turnus flew before the rest,
A Pye-ball'd Steed of Thracian Strain he pressed;
His Helm of massy Gold; and Crimson was his Crest.
With twenty Horse to fecond his Designs,
An unexpected Foe, he faced the Lines.
Is there, he said, in Arms who bravely dare,
His Leader's Honor, and his Danger share?
Then, spurring on, his brandished Dart he threw,
In sign of War, applauding Shouts ensue.
Amazed to find a dastard Race that run
Behind the Rampires, and the Battle shun,
He rides around the Camp, with rolling Eyes,
And stops at every Post; and every Passage tries.
So roams the nightly Wolf about the Fold,
Wet with descending Showers, and stiff with cold;
He howls for Hunger, and he grins for Pain;
His gnashing Teeth are exercised in vain:
And impotent of Anger, finds no way
In his distended Paws to grasp the Prey.
The Mothers listen; but the bleating Lambs
Securely swig the Dug, beneath the Dams.
Thus ranges eager Turnus over the Plain,
Sharp with Desire, and furious with Disdain:
Surveys each Passage with a piercing Sight;
To force his Foes in equal Field to fight.
Thus, while he gazes round, at length he spies
Where, fenced with strong Redoubts, their Navy lies;
Close underneath the Walls: The washing Tide
Secures from all approach this weaker side.
He takes the wished Occasion; fills his Hand
With ready Fires, and shakes a flaming Brand:
Urged by his Presence, every Soul is warmed,
And every Hand with kindled Firrs is armed.
From the fired Pines the scattering Sparkles fly;
Fat Vapors mixed with Flames involve the Sky.
What Power, O Muses, could avert the Flame
Which threatened, in the Fleet, the Trojan Name!
Tell: For the Fact through length of Time obscure,
Is hard to Faith; yet shall the Fame endure.
It Is said, that when the Chief prepared his flight,
And felled his Timber from Mount Ida's height,
The Grandam Goddess then approached her Son,
And with a Mother's Majesty begun.
Grant me, she said, the sole Request I bring.
Since conquered Heaven has owned you for its King:
On Ida's Brows, for Ages past, there stood,
With Firrs and Maples filled, a shady Wood:
And on the Summit rose a Sacred Grove,
Where I was worshipped with Religious Love;
Those Woods, that Holy Grove, my long delight,
I gave the Trojan Prince, to speed his flight.
Now filled with Fear, on their behalf I come;
Let neither Winds o'reset, nor Waves intomb
The floating Forests of the Sacred Pine;
But let it be their Safety to be mine.
Then thus replied her awful Son; who rowls
The radiant Stars, and Heaven and Earth controuls;
How dare you, Mother, endless Date demand,
For Vessels molded by a Mortal Hand?
What then is Fate? Shall bold Aeneas ride
Of Safety certain, on the uncertain Tide?
Yet what I can, I grant: When, wafted over,
The Chief is landed on the Latian Shore,
Whatever Ships escape the raging Storms,
At my Command shall change their fading Forms
To Nymphs Divine: and plow the watery Way,
Like Dotis, and the Daughters of the Sea.
To seal his sacred Vow, by Styx he swore,
The Lake of liquid Pitch, the dreery Shore;
And Phlegethon's innavigable Flood,
And the black Regions of his Brother God:
He said; and shook the Skies with his Imperial Nod.
And now at length the numbered Hours were come,
Prefixed by Fate's irrevocable Doom,
When the great Mother of the Gods was free
To save her Ships, and finish Jove's Decree.
First, from the Quarter of the Morn, there sprung
A Light that signed the Heavens, and shot along:
Then from a Cloud, fringed round with Golden Fires,
Were Timbrels heard, and Berecynthian Quires:
And last a Voice, with more than Mortal Sounds,
Both Hosts in Arms opposed, with equal Horror wounds.
O Trojan Race, your needless Aid forbear;
And know my Ships are my peculiar Care.
With greater ease the bold Rutulian may,
With hissing Brands, attempt to burn the Sea,
Than sindge my sacred Pines. But you my Charge,
Loosed from your crooked Anchors lanch at large,
Exalted each a Nymph: Forsake the Sand,
And swim the Seas, at Cybele's Command.
No sooner had the Goddess ceased to speak,
When lo, the obedient Ships, their Haulsers break;
And, strange to tell, like Dolphins in the Main,
They plunge their Prows, and dive, and spring again:
As many beauteous Maids the Billows sweep,
As rode before tall Vessels on the Deep.
The Foes, surpised with Wonder, stood aghast,
Messapus curbed his fiery Courser's haste;
Old Tyber roared; and raising up his Head,
Called back his Waters to their Oozy Bed.
Turnus alone, undaunted, bore the Shock;
And with these Words his trembling Troops bespoke*
These Monsters for the Trojans Fate are meant,
And are by Jove for black Presages sent.
He takes the Cowards last Relief away;
For fly they cannot; and, constrained to stay,
Must yield unfought, a base inglorious Prey.
To Thomas Foley Junr: of Great Witley Court in the County of Worcester Esquire.

AE. 9. l. 130.


The liquid half of all the Globe, is lost;
Heaven shuts the Seas, and we secure the Coast.
Theirs is no more, than that small spot of Ground,
Which Millions of our Martial Troops surround.
Their Fates I fear not; or vain Oracles;
'Twas given to Venus, they should cross the Seas:
And land secure upon the Latian Plains,
Their promised Hour is passed, and mine remains.
It Is in the Fate of Turnus, to destroy
With Sword and Fire the faithless Race of Troy.
Shall such Affronts as these, alone inflame
The Grecian Brothers, and the Grecian Name?
My Cause and theirs is one; a fatal Strife,
And final Ruin, for a ravished Wife.
Was It not enough, that, punished for the Crime,
They fell; but will they fall a second Time?
One would have thought they paid enough before,
To curse the costly Sex; and durst offend no more.
Can they securely trust their feeble Wall,
A slight Partition, a thin Interval,
Betwixt their Fate and them; when Troy, though built
By Hands Divine, yet perished by their Guilt?
Lend me, for once, my Friends, your valiant Hands,
To force from out their Lines these dastard Bands.
Less than a thousand Ships will end this War;
Nor Vulcan needs his fated Arms prepare.
Let all the Tuscans, all the Arcadians join,
Nor these, nor those shall frustrate my Design.
Let them not fear the Treasons of the Night;
The robbed Palladium, the pretended flight:
Our Onset shall be made in open Light.
No wooden Engine shall their Town betray,
Fires they shall have around, but Fires by Day.
No Grecian Babes before their Camp appear,
Whom Hector's Arms detained, to the tenth tardy Year.
Now, since the Sun is rolling to the West,
Give we the silent Night to neeedful Rest:
Refresh your Bodies, and your Arms prepare,
The Morn shall end the small Remains of War.
The Post of Honor to Messapus falls,
To keep the Nightly Guard; to watch the Walls;
To pitch the Fires at Distances around,
And close the Trojans in their scanty Ground.
Twice seven Rutulian Captains ready stand;
And twice seven hundred Horse these Chiefs command:
All clad in shining Arms the Works invest;
Each with a radiant Helm, and waving Crest.
Stretched at their length, they press the grassy Ground;
They laugh, they sing, the jolly Bowls go round:
With Lights, and cheerful Fires renew the Day;
And pass the wakeful Night in Feasts and Play.
The Trojans, from above, their Foes beheld;
And with armed Legions all the Rampires filled:
Seized with Affright, their Gates they first explore,
Join Works to Works with Bridges; Tower to Tower:
Thus all things needful for Defense, abound;
Mnestheus, and brave Seresthus walk the round:
Commissioned by their Absent Prince, to share
The common Danger, and divide the Care.
The Soldiers draw their Lots; and as they fall,
By turns relieve each other on the Wall.
Nigh where the Foes their utmost Guards advance,
To watch the Gate, was warlike Nisus chance.
His Father Hyrtacus of Noble Blood;
His Mother was a Hunt'ress of the Wood:
And sent him to the Wars; well could he bear
His Lance in fight, and dart the flying Spear:
But better skilled unerring Shafts to send:
Beside him stood Euryalus his Friend.
Euryalus, than whom the Trojan Host
No fairer Face, or fweeter Air could boast.
Scarce had the Down to shade his Cheeks begun;
One was their Care, and their Delight was one.
One Common hazard in the War they shared;
And now were both by choice upon the Guard.
Then Nisus, thus: Or do the Gods inspire
This warmth, or make we Gods of our Desire?
A generous ardour boils within my Breast,
Eager of Action, Enemy to Rest:
This urges me to fight, and fires my Mind,
To leave a memorable Name behind.
Thou see the Foe secure: how faintly shine
Their scattered Fires! the most in Sleep supine;
Along the ground, an easy Conquest lie;
The wakeful few, the fuming Flaggon ply:
All hushed around. Now hear what I revolve;
A Thought unripe; and scarcely yet resolve.
Our absent Prince both Camp and Council mourn;
By Message both would hasten his return:
If they confer what I demand, on thee,
(For Fame is Recompense enough for me)
Methinks, beneath yon Hill, I have espied
A way that safely will my passage guide.
Euryalus stood listening while he spoke;
With love of Praise, and noble Envy struck;
Then to his ardent Friend exposed his Mind:
All this alone, and leaving me behind,
Am I unworthy, Nisus, to be joined?
Think thou I can my share of Glory yield,
Or send thee unassisted to the Field?
Not so my Father taught my Childhood Arms;
Born in a Siege, and bred among Alarms!
Nor is my Youth unworthy of my Friend,
Nor of the Heaven-born Hero I attend.
The thing called Life, with ease I can disclaim;
And think it over sold to purchase Fame.
Then Nisus, thus; alas! thy tender years
Would minister new matter to my Fears:
So may the Gods, who view this friendly Strife,
Restore me to thy loved Embrace with life,
Condemned to pay my Vows (as sure I trust,)
This thy Request is Cruel and Unjust.
But if some Chance, as many Chances are,
And doubtful Hazards in the deeds of War;
If one should reach my Head, there let it fall,
And spare thy Life; I would not perish all.
Thy bloomy Youth deserves a longer date;
Live thou to mourn thy Love's unhappy Fate:
To bear my mangled Body from the Foe;
Or buy it back, and Funeral Rites bestow.
Or if hard Fortune shall those Dues deny,
Thou can at least an empty Tomb supply.
O let not me the Widows Tears renew;
Nor let a Mother's Curse my Name pursue;
Thy Pious Parent, who, for love of thee,
Forsook the Coasts of friendly Sicily,
Her Age, committing to the Seas and Wind,
When every weary Matron staid behind.
To this, Euryalus, you plead in vain,
And but protract the Cause you cannot gain:
No more delays, but haste. With that he wakes
The nodding Watch; each to his Office takes.
The Guard relieved, the generous Couple went
To find the Council at the Royal Tent.
All Creatures else forgot their daily Care;
And Sleep, the common Gift of Nature, share:
Except the Trojan Peers, who wakeful sat
In nightly Council for the endangered State.
They vote a Message to their absent Chief;
Show their Distress; and beg a swift Relief.
Amid the Camp a silent Seat they chose,
Remote from Clamor, and secure from Foes.
On their left Arms their ample Shields they bear,
The right reclined upon the bending Spear.
Now Nisus and his Friend approach the Guard,
And beg Admission, eager to be heard:
The Affair important, not to be deferred.
Ascanius bids 'em be conducted in;
Ord'ring the more experienced to begin.
Then Nisus thus. Ye Fathers lend your Ears;
Nor judge our bold Attempt beyond our Years.
The Foe securely drenched in Sleep and Wine,
Neglect their Watch; the Fires but thinly shine:
And where the Smoke, in cloudy Vapors flies,
Covering the Plain, and curling to the Skies,
Betwixt two Paths, which at the Gate divide,
Close by the Sea, a Passage we have spied,
Which will our way to great Aeneas guide.
Expect each Hour to see him safe again,
Loaded with Spoils of Foes in Battle slain.
Snatch we the lucky Minute while we may:
Nor can we be mistaken in the way;
For hunting in the Vale, we both have seen
The rising Turrets, and the Stream between;
And know the winding Course, with every Ford.
He ceased: And old Alethes took the Word.
Our Country Gods, in whom our Trust we place,
Will yet from Ruin save the Trojan Race:
While we behold such dauntless Worth appear
In dawning Youth; and Souls so void of Fear.
Then, into Tears of Joy the Father broke;
Each in his longing Arms by Turns he took:
Panted and paused; and thus again he spoke.
Ye brave young Men, what equal Gifts can we,
In recompencc of such Desert, decree?
The greatest, sure, and best you can receive,
The Gods, and your own conscious Worth will give.
The rest our grateful General will bestow;
And young Ascanius 'till his Manhood owe.
And I, whose Welfare in my Father lies,
Ascanius adds, by the great Deities,
By my dear Country, by my household Gods,
By hoary Vesta's Rites, and dark Abodes,
Adjure you both; (on you my Fortune stands,
That and my Faith I plight into your Hands:)
Make me but happy in his safe Return,
Whose wanted Presence I can only mourn;
Your common Gift shall two large Goblets be,
Of Silver, wrought with curious Imagery;
And high embossed, which, when old Priam reigned,
My conquering Sire at sacked Arisba gained.
And more, two Tripods cast in antic Mould,
With two great Talents of the finest Gold:
Beside a costly Bowl, ingrav'd with Art,
Which Dido gave, when first she gave her Heart.
But if in conquered Italy we reign,
When Spoils by Lot the Victor shall obtain;
Thou saw the Courser by proud Turnus pressed,
That, Nisus, and his Arms, and nodding Crest,
And Shield, from Chance exempt, shall be thy Share;
Twelve laboring Slaves, twelve Handmaids young and fair,
All clad in rich Attire, and trained with Care.
And last, a Latian Field with fruitful Plains;
And a large Portion of the King's Domains.
But thou, whose Years are more to mine allied,
No Fate my vowed Affection shall divide
From thee, Heroic Youth; be wholly mine:
Take full Possession; all my Soul is thine.
One Faith, one Fame, one Fate shall both attend;
My Life's Companion, and my Bosom Friend.
My Peace shall be committed to thy Care,
And to thy Conduct, my Concerns in War.
Then thus the young Euryalus replied;
Whatever Fortune, good or bad betide,
The same shall be my Age, as now my Youth;
No time shall find me wanting to my Truth.
This only from your Goodness let me gain;
(And this ungranted, all Rewards are vain)
Of Priam's Royal Race my Mother came;
And sure the best that ever bore the Name:
Whom neither Troy, nor Sicily could hold
From me departing, but o'respent, and old,
My Fate she followed; ignorant of this,
Whatever Danger, neither parting Kiss,
Nor pious Blessing taken, her I leave;
And, in this only Act of all my Life deceive.
By this right Hand, and conscious Night I swear,
My Soul so sad a farewell could not bear.
Be you her Comfort; fill my vacant place,
(Permit me to presume so great a Grace)
Support her Age, forsaken and distressed,
That hope alone will fortify my Breast
Against the worst of Fortunes, and of Fears.
He said: The moved Assistants melt in Tears.
Then thus Ascanius, (wonder-struck to see
That Image of his filial Piety;)
So great Beginnings, in so green an Age,
Exact the Faith, which I again engage.
Thy Mother all the Dues shall justly claim
Creusa had; and only want the Name.
Whatever Event thy bold Attempt shall have,
It Is Merit to have born a Son so brave.
Now by my Head, a sacred Oath, I swear,
(My Father used it) what returning here
Crowned with Success, I for thy self prepare,
That, if thou fail, shall thy loved Mother share.
He said; and weeping while he spoke the Word,
From his broad Belt he drew a shining Sword,
Magnificent with Gold. Lycaon made,
And in an Ivory Scabbard sheathed the Blade:
This was his Gift: Great Mnestheus gave his Friend
A Lyon's Hide, his Body to defend:
And good Alethes furnished him beside,
With his own trusty Helm, of Temper tried.
Thus armed they went. The Noble Trojans wait
Their issuing forth, and follow to the Gate.
With Prayers and Vows, above the rest appears
Ascanius, manly far beyond his Years.
And Messages committed to their Care,
Which all in Winds were lost, and flitting Air.
The Trenches first they passed: Then took their Way
Where their proud Foes in pitched Pavilions lay;
To many fatal, e're themselves were slain:
They found the careless Host dispersed upon the Plain.
Who gorged, and drunk with Wine, supinely snore;
Unharnass'd Chariots stand along the Shore:
Amidst the Wheels and Reins, the Goblet by,
A Medly of Debauch and War they lie.
Observing Nisus showed his Friend the sight;
Behold a Conquest gained without a Fight.
To ye Honble: Colonel George Cholmondeley Colonel of his Majestys Troop of
Granadier Guards and Groom of his Majties: Bedchamber

AE. 9. l. 435.


Occasion offers, and I stand prepared;
There lies our Way; be thou upon the Guard,
And look around; while I securely go,
And a hew Passage, through the sleeping Foe.
Softly he spoke; then striding, took his way,
With his drawn Sword, where haughty Rhamnes lay:
His Head raised high, on Tapestry beneath,
And heaving from his Breast, he drew his Breath:
A King and Prophet by King Turnus loved;
But Fate by Prescience cannot be removed.
Him, and his sleeping Slaves he slew. Then spies
Where Rhemus, with his rich Retinue lies:
His Armor-bearer first, and next he kills
His Charioteer, entrenched betwixt the Wheels
And his loved Horses: Last invades their Lord;
Full on his Neck he drives the fatal Sword:
The gasping Head flies off; a Purple flood
Flows from the Trunk, that welters in the Blood:
Which by the spurning Heels, dispersed around,
The Bed besprinkles, and bedews the Ground.
Lamus the bold, and Lamyrus the strong,
He slew; and then Serranus fair and young:
From Dice and Wine the Youth retired to Rest,
And puffed the fumy God from out his Breast:
Even then he dreamt of Drink and lucky Play;
More lucky had it lasted 'till the Day.
The famished Lion thus, with Hunger bold;
O'releaps the Fences of the Nightly Fold;
And tears the peaceful Flocks: With silent Awe
Trembling they lie, and pant beneath his Paw.
Nor with less Rage Euryalus employs
The wrathful Sword, or fewer Foes destroys:
But on the ignoble Crowd his Fury flew:
He Fadus, Hebesus, and Rhaetus slew.
Oppressed with heavy Sleep the former fall,
But Rhoetus wakeful, and observing all:
Behind a spacious Jarr he slink'd for fear;
The fatal Iron found, and reached him there.
For as he rose, it pierced his naked side;
And reeking, thence returned in Crimson died.
The Wound pours out a Stream of Wine and Blood,
The Purple Soul comes floating in the flood.
Now where Messapus Quartered they arrive;
The Fires were fainting there, and just alive.
The Warriour-Horses tied in order fed;
Nisus observed the Discipline, and said,
Our eager thirst of Blood may both betray;
And see the scattered Streaks of dawning day,
Foe to Nocturnal Thefts: No more, my Friend,
Here let our glutted Execution end:
A Lane through slaughtered Bodies we have made:
The bold Euryalus, though loath, obeyed.
Of Arms, and Arras, and of Plate they find
A precious load; but these they leave behind.
Yet fond of gaudy Spoils the Boy would stay
To make the rich Caparison his prey,
Which on the steed of conquered Rhamnes lay.
Nor did his Eyes less longingly behold
The Girdle-Belt, with Nails of burnished Gold.
This Present Cedicus the Rich, bestowed
On Remulus, when Friendship first they vowed:
And absent, joined in hospitable ties;
He dying, to his Heir bequeathed the Prize:
Till by the Conquering Ardean Troops oppressed
He fell; and they the Glorious Gift possessed.
These Glittering Spoils (now made the Victor's gain)
He to his body suits; but suits in vain.
Messapus Helm he finds among the rest,
And laces on, and wears the waving Crest.
Proud of their Conquest, prouder of their Prey,
They leave the Camp; and take the ready way.
But far they had not passed, before they spied
Three hundred Horse with Volscens for their Guide.
The Queen a Legion to King Turnus sent,
But the swift Horse the slower Foot outwent;
And now advancing, sought the Leader's Tent.
They saw the Pair; for through the doubtful shade
His shineing Helm Euryalus betrayed,
On which the Moon with full reflection played.
It Is not for naught, cried Volscens, from the Crow'd,
These Men go there; then raised his Voice aloud:
Stand, stand: why thus in Arms, and whither bent;
From whence, to whom, and on what Errand sent?
Silent they scud away, and haste their flight,
To Neighboring Woods, and trust themselves to night.
The speedy Horse all passages belay,
And spur their smoking Steeds to Cross their way;
And watch each Entrance of the winding Wood;
Black was the Forest, thick with Beech it stood:
Horrid with Fern, and intricate with Thorn,
Few Paths of Humane Feet or Tracks of Beasts were worn
The darkness of the Shades, his heavy Prey,
And Fear, misled the Younger from his way.
But Nisus hit the Turns with happier haste,
And thoughtless of his Friend, the Forest passed:
And Alban Plains, from Alba's Name so called,
Where King Latinus then his Oxen stall'd.
Till turning at the length, he stood his ground,
And missed his Friend, and cast his Eyes around;
Ah Wretch, he cried, where have I left behind
The unhappy Youth, where shall I hope to find?
Or what way take! again He ventures back:
And treads the Mazes of his former track.
He winds the Wood, and listening hears the noise
Of trampling Coursers, and the Riders voice.
The sound approached, and suddenly he viewed
The Foes enclosing, and his Friend pursued:
Forelay'd and taken, while he strove in vain,
The shelter of the friendly Shades to gain.
What should he next attempt! what Arms employ,
What fruitless Force to free the Captive Boy?
Or desperate should he rush and lose his Life,
With odds oppressed, in such unequal strife?
Resolved at length, his pointed Spear he shook;
And casting on the Moon a mournful look,
Guardian of Groves, and Goddess of the Night;
Fair, Queen, he said, direct my Dart aright:
If e're my Pious Father for my sake
Did grateful Offerings on thy Altars make;
Or I increased them with my Silvan toils,
And hung thy Holy Roofs, with Salvage Spoils;
Give me to scatter these. Then from his Ear
He poised, and aimed, and lanch'd the trembling Spear.
The deadly Weapon, hiffing from the Grove,
Impetuous on the back of Sulmo drove:
Pierced his thin Armor, drank his Vital Blood,
And in his Body left the broken Wood.
He staggers round, his Eyeballs roll in Death,
And with short sobs he gasps away his Breath.
All stand amazed; a second Javelin flies,
With equal strength, and quivers through the Skies;
This through thy Temples, Tagus, forced the way,
And in the Brain-pan warmly buried lay.
Fierce Volscens foams with Rage, and gazing round,
Descried not him who gave the Fatal Wound:
To Sr: Ion Percivale Bart. of Barton in the County of Cork in Ireland

AE. 9. l. 590


Nor knew to fix Revenge: but thou, he cries,
Shall pay for both, and at the Prisoner flies,
With his drawn Sword. Then struck with deep Despair,
That cruel sight the Lover could not bear:
But from his Covert rushed in open view,
And sent his Voice before him as he flew.
Me, me, he cried, turn all your Swords alone
On me; the Fact confessed, the Fault my own.
He neither could nor durst, the guiltless Youth;
Ye Moon and Stars bear Witness to the Truth!
His only Crime, (if Friendship can offend,)
Is too much Love; to his unhappy Friend.
Too late he speaks; the Sword, which Fury guides,
Driven with full Force, had pierced his tender Sides.
Down fell the beauteous Youth; the yawning Wound
Gushed out a Purple Stream, and stained the Ground.
His snowy Neck reclines upon his Breast,
Like a fair Flower by the keen Share oppressed:
Like a white Poppy sinking on the Plain,
Whose heavy Head is overcharged with Rain.
Despair, and Rage, and Vengeance justly vowed,
Drove Nisus headlong on the hostile Crowd:
Volscens he seeks; on him alone he bends;
Born back, and bored, by his surrounding Friends,
Onward he pressed: and kept him still in sight;
Then whirled aloft his Sword, with all his might:
The unnerring Steel descended while he spoke;
Pierced his wide Mouth, and through his Weazon broke:
Dying, he flew; and stagg'ring on the Plain,
With smimming Eyes he sought his Lover slain:
Then quiet on his bleeding Bosom fell;
Content in Death, to be revenged so well.
O happy Friends! for if my Verse can give
Immortal Life, your Fame shall ever live:
Fixed as the Capitol's Foundation lies;
And spread, where e're the Roman Eagle flies!
The conquering Party, first divide the Prey,
Then their slain General to the Camp convey.
With Wonder, as they went, the Troops were filled,
To see such Numbers whom so few had killed.
Serranus, Rhamnes, and the rest they found;
Vast Crowds the dying and the dead surround:
And the yet reeking Blood o'reflows the Ground.
All knew the Helmet which Messapus lost;
But mourned a Purchase, that so dear had cost.
Now rose the ruddy Morn from Tithon's Bed;
And with the Dawns of Day the Skies o'respread.
Nor long the Sun his daily Course withheld,
But added Colors to the World revealed.
When early Turnus wak'ning with the Light,
All clad in Armor calls his Troops to fight.
His Martial Men with fierce Harangues he fired;
And his own Ardor, in their Souls inspired.
This done, to give new Terror to his Foes,
The Heads of Nisus, and his Friend he shows,
Raised high on pointed Spears: A ghastly Sight;
Loud peals of Shouts ensue, and barbarous Delight.
Mean time the Trojans run, where Danger calls,
They line their Trenches, and they man their Walls:
In Front extended to the left they stood:
Safe was the right surrounded by the Flood.
But casting from their Towers a frightful view,
They saw the Faces, which too well they knew;
Though then disguised in Death, and smeared all over
With Filth obscene, and dropping putrid Gore.
Soon hasty Fame, through the sad City bears
The mournful Message to the Mother's Ears:
An icy Cold benums her Limbs: She shakes:
Her Cheeks the Blood, her Hand the Web forsakes.
She runs the Rampires round amidst the War,
Nor fears the flying Darts: She rends her Hair,
And fills with loud Laments the liquid Air.
Thus then, my loved Euryalus appears;
Thus looks the Prop of my declining Years!
Was It on this Face, my famished Eyes I fed,
Ah how unlike the living, is the dead!
And could thou leave me, cruel, thus alone,
Not one kind Kiss from a departing Son!
No Look, no last adieu before he went,
In an ill-boding Hour to Slaughter sent!
Cold on the Ground, and pressing foreign Clay,
To Latian Dogs, and Fowls he lies a Prey!
Nor was I near to close his dying Eyes,
To wash his Wounds, to weep his Obsequies:
To call about his Corpse his crying Friends,
Or spread the Mantle, (made for other ends,)
On his dear Body, which I wove with Care,
Nor did my daily Pains, or nightly labor spare.
Where shall I find his Corpse, what Earth sustains
His Trunk dismembered, and his cold Remains?
For this, alas, I left my needful Ease,
Exposed my Life to Winds, and winter Seas!
If any pity touch Rutulian Hearts,
Here empty all your Quivers, all your Darts:
Or if they fail, thou Jove conclude my Woe,
And send me Thunderstruck to Shades below!
Her Shrieks and Clamours, pierce the Trojans Ears,
Unman their Courage, and augment their Fears:
Nor young Ascanius could the sight sustain,
Nor old Ilioneus his Tears restrain:
But Actor and Idoeus, jointly sent,
To bear the madding Mother to her Tent.
And now the Trumpets terribly from far,
With rattling Clangor, rouse the sleepy War.
The Soldiers Shouts succeed the Brazen Sounds;
And Heaven, from Pole to Pole, the Noise rebounds.
The Volscians bear their Shields upon their Head,
And rushing forward, from a moving Shed;
These fill the Ditch, those pull the Bulwarks down:
Some raise the Ladders, others scale the Town.
But where void Spaces on the Walls appear,
Or thin Defense, they pour their Forces there.
With Poles and missive Weapons from afar,
The Trojans keep aloof the rising War.
Taught by their ten Years Siege defensive fight;
They roll down Ribs of Rocks, an unresisted Weight:
To break the Penthouse with the ponderous Blow;
Which yet the patient Volscians undergo.
But could not bear the unequal Combat long;
For where the Trojans find the thickest Throng,
The Ruin falls: Their shattered Shields give way,
And their crushed Heads become an easy Prey.
They shrink for Fear, abated of their Rage,
Nor longer dare in a blind Fight engage.
Contented now to gaul them from below
With Darts and Slings, and with the distant Bow.
Elsewhere Mezentius, terrible to view,
A blazing Pine within the Trenches threw.
But brave Messapus, Neptune's warlike Son,
Broke down the Palisades, the Trenches Won,
And loud for Ladders calls, to scale the Town.
Calliope begin: Ye sacred Nine,
Inspire your Poet in his high Design;
To sing what Slaughter manly Turnus made:
What Souls he sent below the Stygian Shade.
What Fame the Soldiers with their Captain share,
And the vast Circuit of the fatal War.
For you in singing Martial Facts excel;
You best remember; and alone can tell.
There stood a Tower, amazing to the sight,
Built up of Beams; and of stupendous height;
Art, and the nature of the Place conspired,
To furnish all the Strength, that War required.
To level this, the bold Italians join;
The wary Trojans obviate their design:
With weighty Stones o'rewhelm their Troops below,
Shoot through the Loopholes, and sharp Jav'lins throw.
Turnus, the Chief, tossed from his thundering Hand,
Against the wooden Walls, a flaming Brand:
It stuck, the fiery Plague: The Winds were high;
The Planks were seasoned, and the Timber dry.
Contagion caught the Posts: It spread along,
Scorched, and to distance drove the scattered Throng.
The Trojans fled; the Fire pursued amain,
Still gathering fast upon the trembling Train;
Till crowding to the Corners of the Wall,
Down the Defense, and the Defenders fall.
The mighty flaw makes Heaven it self resound,
The Dead, and dying Trojans strew the Ground.
The Tower that followed on the fallen Crew,
Whelmed over their Heads, and buried whom it slew:
Some stuck upon the Darts themselves had sent;
All, the same equal Ruin underwent.
Young Lycus and Helenor only escape;
Saved, how they know not, from the steepy Leap.
Helenor, elder of the two; by Birth,
On one side Royal, one a Son of Earth,
Whom to the Lydian King, Lycimnia bare,
And sent her boasted Bastard to the War:
(A Privilege which none but Freemen share.)
Slight were his Arms, a Sword and Silver Shield,
No Marks of Honor charged its empty Field.
Light as he fell, so light the Youth arose,
And rising found himself amidst his Foes.
Nor flight was left, nor hopes to force his Way;
Emboldened by Despair, he stood at Bay:
And like a Stag, whom all the Troop surrounds
Of eager Huntsmen, and invading Hounds;
Resolved on Death, he dissipates his Fears,
And bounds aloft, against the pointed Spears:
So dares the Youth, secure of Death; and throws
His dying Body, on his thickest Foes.
But Lycus, swifter of his Feet, by far,
Runs, doubles, winds and turns, amidst the War:
Springs to the Walls, and leaves his Foes behind,
And snatches at the Beam he first can find.
Looks up, and leaps aloft at all the stretch,
In hopes the helping Hand of some kind Friend to reach.
But Turnus followed hard his hunted Prey,
(His Spear had almost reached him in the way,
Short of his Reins, and scarce a Span behind,)
Fool, said the Chief, though fleeter than the Wind,
Coud'st thou presume to escape, when I pursue?
He said, and downward by the Feet he drew
The trembling Dastard: at the Tug he falls,
Vast Ruins come along, rent from the smoking Walls.
Thus on some silver Swan, or timorous Hare,
Jove's Bird comes sowsing down, from upper Air;
Her crooked Tallons truss the fearful Prey:
Then out of sight she soars, and wings her way.
So seizes the grim Wolf the tender Lamb,
In vain lamented by the bleating Dam.
Then rushing onward, with a barbr'ous cry,
The Troops of Turnus to the Combat fly.
The Ditch with Faggots filled, the daring Foe
Tossed Firebrands to the steepy Turrets throw.
Ilioneus, as bold Lucetius came
To force the Gate, and feed the kindling Flame,
Rolled down the Fragment of a Rock so right,
It crushed him double underneath the weight.
Two more young Liger and Asylas slew;
To bend the Bow young Liger better knew;
Asylas best the pointed Javelin threw.
Brave Caeneus laid Ortygius on the Plain,
The Victor Caeneus was by Turnus slain.
By the same Hand, Clonius and Itys fall,
Sagar, and Ida, standing on the Wall.
From Capys Arms his Fate Privernus found;
Hurt by Themilla first; but slight the Wound;
His Shield thrown by, to mitigate the smart,
He clapped his Hand upon the wounded part:
The second Shaft came swift and unespy'd,
And pierced his Hand, and nailed it to his side:
Transfixed his breathing Lungs, and beating heart;
The Soul came issuing out, and hissed against the Dart.
The Son of Arcens shone amid the rest,
In glittering Armor, and a Purple Vest.
Fair was his Face, his Eyes inspiring Love,
Bred by his Father in the Martian Grove;
Where the fat Altars of Palicus flame,
And sent in Arms to purchase early Fame.
Him, when he spied from far the Thuscan King,
Laid by the Lance, and took him to the Sling:
Thrice whirled the Thong around his head, and threw:
The heated Lead half melted as it flew:
It pierced his hollow Temples and his Brain;
The Youth came tumbling down, and spurned the Plain.
Then Young Ascanius, who before this day
Was wont in Woods to shoot the salvage Prey,
First bent in Martial Strife, the twanging Bow;
And exercised against a Humane Foe.
With this bereft Numanus of his life,
Who Turnus younger Sister took to Wife.
Proud of his Realm, and of his Royal Bride,
Vaunting before his Troops, and lengthened with a Stride,
In these Insulting terms, the Trojans he defied.
Twice Conquered Cowards, now your shame is shown,
Cooped up a second time within your Town!
Who dare not issue forth in open Field,
But hold your Walls before you for a Shield:
Thus threat you War, thus our Alliance force!
What Gods what madness hither steered your Course!
You shall not find the Sons of Atreus here,
Nor need the Frauds of sly Ulysses fear.
Strong from the Cradle, of a sturdy Brood,
We bear our newborn Infants to the Flood;
There bathed amid the Stream, our Boys we hold,
With Winter hardened, and inured to Cold.
They wake before the Day to range the Wood,
Kill e're they eat, nor taste unconquered Food.
No Sports, but what belong to War they know,
To break the stubborn Colt, to bend the Bow.
Our youth, of Labor patient, earn their Bread;
Hardly they work, with frugal Diet fed.
From Ploughs and Harrows sent to seek Renown,
They fight in Fields, and storm the shaken Town.
No part of Life from Toils of War is free;
No change in Age, or difference in Degree.
We plow, and till in Arms; our Oxen feel,
Instead of Goads, the Spur, and pointed Steel:
The inverted Lance makes Furrows in the Plain;
Even time that changes all, yet changes us in vain:
The Body, not the Mind: Nor can control
The immortal Vigor, or abate the Soul.
Our Helms defend the Young, disguise the Gray:
We live by Plunder, and delight in Prey.
Your Vests embroidered with rich Purple shine;
In Sloth you Glory, and in Dances join.
Your Vests have sweeping Sleeves: With female Pride,
Your Turbants underneath your Chins are tied.
Go, Phrygians, to your Dindymus again;
Go, less than Women, in the Shapes of Men.
Go, mixed with Eunuchs, in the Mother's Rites,
Where with unequal Sound the Flute invites.
Sing, dance, and howl by turns in Ida's Shade;
Resign the War to Men, who know the Martial Trade.
This foul Reproach, Ascanius could not hear
With Patience, or a vowed Revenge forbear.
At the full stretch of both his Hands, he drew,
And almost joined the Horns of the tough Eugh.
But first, before the Throne of Jove he stood;
And thus with lifted Hands invoked the God.
My first Attempt, great Jupiter succeed;
An annual Offering in thy Grove shall bleed:
A snow-white Steer, before thy Altar led,
Who like his Mother bears aloft his Head,
Buts with his threatening Brows, and bellowing stands,
And dares the Fight, and spurns the yellow Sands.
Jove bowed the Heavens, and lent a gracious Ear,
And thundered on the left, amidst the clear.
Sounded at once the Bow; and swiftly flies
The feathered Death, and hisfes through the Skies.
The Steel through both his Temples forced the way:
Extended on the Ground, Numanus lay.
Go now, vain Boaster, and true Valor scorn;
The Phrygians twice subdued, yet make this third Return.
Ascanius said no more: The Trojans shake
The Heavens with Shouting, and new Vigor take.
Apollo then bestrode a Golden Cloud,
To view the feats of Arms, and fighting Crowd;
And thus the beardless Victor, he bespoke aloud.
Advance Illustrious Youth, increase in Fame,
And wide from East to West extend thy Name.
Offspring of Gods thy self; and Rome shall owe
To thee, a Race of Demigods below.
This is the Way to Heaven: The Powers Divine
From this beginning date the Julian Line.
To thee, to them, and their victorious Heirs,
The conquered War is due; and the vast World is theirs.
Troy is too narrow for thy Name. He said,
And plunging downward shot his radiant Head;
Dispelled the breathing Air, that broke his Flight,
Shorn of his Beams, a Man to Mortal sight.
Old Butes Form he took, Anchises Squire,
Now left to rule Ascanius, by his Sire:
His wrinkled Visage, and his hoary Hairs,
His Mien, his Habit, and his Arms he wears;
And thus salutes the Boy, too forward for his Years.
Suffice it thee, thy Father's worthy Son,
The warlike Prize thou have already won:
The God of Archers gives thy Youth a part
Of his own Praise; nor envies equal Art.
Now tempt the War no more. He said, and flew
Obscure in Air, and vanished from their view.
The Trojans, by his Arms, their Patron know;
And hear the twanging of his Heavenly Bow.
Then duteous Force they use; and Phoebus Name,
To keep from Fight, the Youth too fond of Fame.
Undaunted they themselves no Danger shun:
From Wall to Wall, the Shouts and Clamours run.
They bend their Bows; they whirl their Slings around:
Heaps of spent Arrows fall; and strew the Ground;
And Helms, and Shields, and rattling Arms resound.
The Combat thickens, like the Storm that flies
From Westward, when the Show'ry Kids arise:
Or patt'ring Hail comes pouring on the Main,
When Jupiter descends in hardened Rain.
Or bellowing Clouds burst with a stormy Sound,
And with an armed Winter strew the Ground.
Pand'rus and Bitias, Thunderbolts of War,
Whom Hiera, to bold Alcanor bare
On Ida's Top, two Youths of Height and Size,
Like Firrs that on their Mother Mountain rise;
Presuming on their Force, the Gates unbar,
And of their own Accord invite the War.
With Fates averse, against their King's Command,
Armed on the right, and on the left they stand;
And flank the Passage: Shining Steel they wear,
And waving Crests, above their Heads appear.
Thus two tall Oaks, that Padus Banks adorn,
Lift up to Heaven their leafy Heads unshorn;
And overpress'd with Nature's heavy load,
Dance to the whistling Winds, and at each other nod.
In flows a Tide of Latians, when they see
The Gate set open, and the Passage free.
Bold Quercens, with rash Tmarus rushing on,
Equicolus, that in bright Armor shone,
And Haemon first, but soon repulsed they fly,
Or in the well-defended Pass they dye.
These with Success are fired, and those with Rage;
And each on equal Terms at length engage.
Drawn from their Lines, and issuing on the Plain,
The Trojans hand to hand the Fight maintain.
Fierce Turnus in another Quarter fought,
When suddenly the unhop'd for News was brought;
The Foes had left the fastness of their Place,
Prevailed in Fight, and had his Men in Chase.
He quits the Attack, and, to prevent their Fate,
Runs, where the Giant Brothers guard the Gate.
The first he met, Antiphates the brave,
But base begotten on a Theban Slave;
Sarpedon's Son he slew: The deadly Dart
Found Passage through his Breast, and pierced his Heart.
Fixed in the Wound the Italian Cornel stood;
Warmed in his Lungs, and in his vital Blood.
Aphidnus next, and Erymanthus dies,
And Meropes, and the Gygantick Size
Of Bitias, threatening with his ardent Eyes.
Not by the feeble Dart he fell oppressed,
A Dart were lost, within that roomy Breast;
But from a knotted Lance, large, heavy, strong;
Which roared like Thunder as it whirled along:
Not two Bull-hides the impetuous Force withhold;
Nor Coat of double Male, with Scales of Gold.
Down sunk the Monster-Bulk, and pressed the Ground;
His Arms and clatt'ring Shield, on the vast Body sound.
Not with less Ruin, than the Bajan Mole,
(Raised on the Seas the Surges to control,)
At once comes tumbling down the rocky Wall,
Prone to the Deep the Stones disjointed fall,
Of the vast Pile; the scattered Ocean flies;
Black Sands, discolored Froth, and mingled Mud arise.
The frighted Billows roll, and seek the Shores:
Then trembles Prochyta, then Ischia roars:
Typhoeus thrown beneath, by Jove's Command,
Astonished at the Flaw, that shakes the Land,
Soon shifts his weary Side, and scarce awake,
With Wonder feels the weight press lighter on his Back.
The Warrior God the Latian Troops inspired;
New strung their Sinews, and their Courage fired:
But chills the Trojan Hearts with cold Affright;
Then black Despair precipitates their Flight.
When Pandarus beheld his Brother killed,
The Town with Fear, and wild Confusion filled,
He turns the Hindges of the heavy Gate
With both his Hands; and adds his Shoulders to the weight.
Some happier Friends, within the Walls enclosed;
The rest shut out, to certain Death exposed.
Fool as he was, and frantic in his Care,
TO admit young Turnus, and include the War.
He thrust amid the Crowd, securely bold;
Like a fierce Tiger pent amid the Fold.
Too late his blazing Buckler they descry;
And sparkling Fires that shot from either Eye:
His mighty Members, and his ample Breast,
His ratt'ling Armor, and his Crimson Crest.
Far from that hated Face the Trojans fly;
All but the Fool who sought his Destiny.
Mad Pandarus steps forth, with Vengeance vowed
For Bitias's Death, and threatens thus aloud.
These are not Ardea's Walls, nor this the Town
Amata proffers with Lavinia's Crown:
It Is hostile Earth you tread; of hope bereft,
No means of safe Return by flight are left.
To whom with Countenance calm, and Soul sedate,
Thus Turnus: Then begin; and try thy Fate:
My Message to the Ghost of Priam bear,
Tell him a new Achilles sent thee there.
A Lance of tough ground-Ash the Trojan threw,
Rough in the Rind, and knotted as it grew,
With his full force he whirled it first around;
But the soft yielding Air received the wound:
Imperial Juno turned the Course before;
And fixed the wandering Weapon in the door.
But hope not thou, said Turnus, when I strike,
To shun thy Fate, our Force is not alike:
Nor thy Steel tempered by the Lemnian God:
Then rising, on is utmost stretch he stood:
And aimed from high, the full descending blow
Cleaves the broad Front, and beardless Cheeks in two:
Down sinks the Giant with a thundering sound,
His ponderous Limbs oppress the trembling ground;
Blood, Brains, and Foam, gush from the gaping Wound.
Scalp, Face, and Shoulders, the keen Steel divides;
And the shared Visage hangs on equal sides.
The Trojans fly from their approaching Fate:
And had the Victor then secured the Gate,
And, to his Troops without, unclos'd the Bars;
One lucky Day had ended all his Wars.
But boiling Youth, and blind Desire of Blood,
Pushed on his Fury, to pursue the Crowd:
Hamstring'd behind unhappy Gyges died;
Then Phalaris is added to his side:
The pointed Jav'lins from the dead he drew,
And their Friends Arms against their Fellows threw.
Strong Halys stands in vain; weak Phlegys flies;
Saturnia, still at hand, new Force and Fire supplies.
To Mr John Clos Jerman

AE. 9. l. 1010.


Then Halius, Prytanis, Alcander fall;
(Engaged against the Foes who scaled the Wall:)
But whom they feared without, they found within:
At last, though late, by Linceus he was seen.
He calls new Succors, and assaults the Prince,
But weak his Force, and vain is their Defense.
Turned to the right, his Sword the Hero drew;
And at one blow the bold Aggressor slew.
He joints the Neck: And with a stroke so strong
The Helm flies off; and bears the Head along.
Next him, the Huntsman Amycus he killed,
In Darts, envenomed, and in Poison skilled.
Then Clytius fell beneath his fatal Spear,
And Creteus, whom the Muses held so dear:
He fought with Courage, and he sung the fight:
Arms were his buis'ness, Verses his delight.
The Trojan Chiefs behold, with Rage and Grief,
Their slaughtered Friends, and hasten their Relief.
Bold Mnestheus rallies first the broken Train,
Whom brave Seresthus, and his Troop sustain.
To save the living, and revenge the dead;
Aginst one Warriour's Arms all Troy they led.
O, void of Sense and Courage, Mnestheus cried,
Where can you hope your Coward Heads to hide?
Ah, where beyond these Rampires can you run!
One Man, and in your Camp enclosed, you shun!
Shall then a single Sword such Slaughter boast,
And pass unpunished from a Numerous Host?
Forsaking Honor, and renouncing Fame,
Your Gods, your Country, and your King you shame.
This just Reproach their Virtue does excite,
They stand, they join, they thicken to the Fight.
Now Turnus doubts, and yet disdains to yield;
But with slow paces measures back the Field.
And Inches to the Walls, where Tyber's Tide,
Washing the Camp, defends the weaker side.
The more he loses, they advance the more;
And tread in every Step he trod before.
They showt, they bear him back, and whom by Might
They cannot Conquer, they oppress with Weight.
As compassed with a Wood of Spears around,
The Lordly Lion, still maintains his Ground.
Grins horrible, retires, and turns again;
Threats his distended Paws, and shakes his Mane;
He loses while in vain he presses on,
Nor will his Courage let him dare to run:
So Turnus fares; and unresolved of flight,
Moves tardy back, and just recedes from fight.
Yet twice, enraged, the Combat he renews;
Twice breaks, and twice his broken Foes pursues:
But now they swarm; and with fresh Troops supplied,
Come rolling on, and rush from every side.
Nor Juno, who sustained his Arms before,
Dares with new strength suffice the exhausted store.
For Jove, with sour Commands, sent Iris down,
To force the Invader from the frighted Town.
With Labor spent, no Longer can he wield
The heavy Fauchion, or sustain the Shield:
Overwhelmed with Darts, which from afar they fling,
The Weapons round his hollow Temples ring:
His golden Helm gives way: with stony blows
Battered, and flat, and beaten to his Brows.
His Crest is rash'd away; his ample Shield
Is falsify'd, and round with Jav'lins filled.
The Foe now faint, the Trojans overwhelm:
And Mnestheus lays hard load upon his Helm.
Sick sweat succeeds, he drops at every pore,
With driving Dust his Cheeks are pasted over.
Shorter and shorter every Gasp he takes,
And vain Efforts, and hurtless Blows he makes.
Armed as he was, at length, he leaped from high;
Plunged in the Flood, and made the Waters fly.
The yellow God, the welcome Burden bore,
And wiped the Sweat, and washed away the Gore:
Then gently wafts him to the farther Coast;
And sends him safe to cheer his anxious Host.
The Tenth Book of the Aeneis.
Jupiter calling a Council of the Gods, forbids them to engage in either Party.
At Aeneas 's return there is a bloody Battle: Turnus killing Pallas; Aeneas,
Lausus and Mezentius. Mezentius is described as an Atheist; Lausus as a pious
and virtuous Youth: The different Actions and Death of these two, are the
Subject of a Noble Episode.

THE Gates of Heaven unfold; Jove summons all
The Gods to Council, in the Common Hall.
Sublimely seated, he surveys from far
The Fields, the Camp, the Fortune of the War;
And all the inferior World: From first to last
The Sovereign Senate in Degrees are placed.
Then thus the Almighty Sire began. Ye Gods,
Natives, or Denizons, of blessed Abodes;
From whence these Murmurs, and this change of Mind,
This backward Fate from what was first designed?
Why this protracted War? When my Commands
Pronounced a Peace, and gave the Latian Lands.
What Fear or Hope on either part divides
Our Heavens, and arms our Powers on different sides?
A lawful Time of War at length will come,
(Nor need your haste anticipate the Doom,)
When Carthage shall contest the World with Rome:
Shall force the rigid Rocks, and Alpine Chains;
And like a Flood come pouring on the Plains.
Then is your time for Faction and Debate,
For partial Favor, and permitted Hate.
Let now your immature Dissension cease;
Sit quiet, and compose your Souls to Peace.
To ye Right Honble: John Ld. Viscount Fitzharding of Beare-haven and Bawn
Berkley of Rathdowne in ye Kingdom of Ireland and Master of ye Horse to Her
Royal Highness the Princess Anne of Denmark

AE. 10. l. 1.


Thus Jupiter in few unfolds the Charge:
But lovely Venus thus replies at large.
O Power immense, Eternal Energy!
(For to what else Protection can we fly,)
See thou the proud Rutulians, how they dare
In Fields, unpunished, and insult my Care?
How lofty Turnus vaunts amidst his Train,
In shining Arms, triumphant on the Plain?
Even in their Lines and Trenches they contend;
And scarce their Walls the Trojan Troops defend:
The Town is filled with Slaughter, and o'refloats,
With a red Deluge, their increasing Moats.
Aeneas ignorant, and far from thence,
Has left a Camp exposed, without Defense.
This endless outrage shall they still sustain?
Shall Troy renewed be forced, and fired again?
A second Siege my banished Issue fears,
And a new Diomede in Arms appears.
One more audacious Mortal will be found;
And I thy Daughter wait another Wound.
Yet, if with Fates averse, without thy Leave,
The Latian Lands my Progeny receive;
Bear they the Pains of violated Law,
And thy Protection from their Aid withdraw.
But if the Gods their sure Success foretell,
If those of Heaven consent with those of Hell,
To promise Italy; who dare debate
The Power of Jove, or fix another Fate?
What should I tell of Tempests on the Main,
Of Eolus usurping Neptune's Reign?
Of Iris sent; with Bachanalian Heat,
TO inspire the Matrons, and destroy the Fleet.
Now Juno to the Stygian Sky descends,
Sollicites Hell for Aid, and arms the Fiends.
That new Example wanted yet above:
An Act that well became the Wife of Jove.
Alecto, raised by her, with Rage inflames
The peaceful Bosoms of the Latian Dames.
Imperial Sway no more exalts my Mind:
(Such hopes I had indeed, while Heaven was kind)
Now let my happier Foes possess my place,
Whom Jove prefers before the Trojan Race;
And conquer they, whom you with Conquest grace.
Since you can spare, from all your wide Command,
No spot of Earth, no hospitable Land,
Which may my wandering Fugitives receive;
(Since haughty Juno will not give you leave)
Then, Father, (if I still may use that Name)
By ruined Troy, yet smoking from the Flame,
I beg you let Ascanius, by my Care,
Be freed from Danger, and dismissed the War:
Inglorious let him live, without a Crown;
The Father may be cast on Coasts unknown,
Struggling with Fate; but let me save the Son.
Mine is Cythera, mine the Cyprian Towers;
In those Recesses, and those sacred Bowers,
Obscurely let him rest; his Right resign
To promised Empire, and his Julian Line.
Then Carthage may the Ausonian Towns destroy,
Nor fear the Race of a rejected Boy.
What profits it my Son, to escape the Fire,
Armed with his Gods, and loaded with his Sire;
To pass the Perils of the Seas and Wind,
Evade the Greeks, and leave the War behind;
To reach the Italian Shores: If after all,
Our second Pergamus is doomed to fall?
Much better had he curbed his high Desires,
And hovered over his ill extinguished Fires.
To Simois Banks the Fugitives restore,
And give them back to War, and all the Woes before.
Deep indignation swelled Saturnia's Heart:
And must I own, she said, my secret Smart?
What with more decence were in silence kept,
And but for this unjust Reproach had slept?
Did God, or Man, your Favorite Son advise,
With War unhop'd the Latians to surprise?
By Fate you boast, and by the Gods Decree,
He left his Native Land for Italy:
Confess the Truth; by mad Cassandra, more
Than Heaven, inspired, he sought a foreign Shore!
Did I persuade to trust his second Troy,
To the raw Conduct of a beardless Boy?
With Walls unfinished, which himself forsakes,
And through the Waves a wandering Voyage makes?
When have I urged him meanly to demand
The Tuscan Aid, and arm a quiet Land?
Did I or Iris give this mad Advice,
Or made the Fool himself the fatal Choice?
You think it hard, the Latians should destroy
With Swords your Trojans, and with Fires your Troy:
Hard and unjust indeed, for Men to draw
Their Native Air, nor take a foreign Law:
That Turnus is permitted still to live,
To whom his Birth a God and Goddess give:
But yet it is just and lawful for your Line,
To drive their Fields, and Force with Fraud to join.
Realms, not your own, among your Clans divide,
And from the Bridegroom tear the promised Bride:
Petition, while you public Arms prepare;
Pretend a Peace, and yet provoke a War.
'Twas given to you, your darling Son to shroud,
To draw the Dastard from the fighting Crowd;
And for a Man obtend an empty Cloud.
From flaming Fleets you turned the Fire away,
And changed the Ships to Daughters of the Sea.
But it is my Crime, the Queen of Heaven offends,
If she presume to save her suffering Friends.
Your Son, not knowing what his Foes decree,
You say is absent: Absent let him be.
Yours is Cythera, yours the Cyprian Towers,
The soft Recesses, and the Sacred Bowers.
Why do you then these needless Arms prepare,
And thus provoke a People prone to War?
Did I with Fire the Trojan Town deface,
Or hinder from return your exiled Race?
Was I the Cause of Mischief, or the Man,
Whose lawless Lust the bloody War began?
Think on whose Faith the Adult'rous Youth relied;
Who promised, who procured the Spartan Bride?
When all the united States of Greece combined,
To purge the World of the perfidious Kind;
Then was your time to fear the Trojan Fate:
Your Quarrels and Complaints are now too late.
Thus Juno. Murmurs rise, with mixed Applause;
Just as they favor, or dislike the Cause:
So Winds, when yet unfledged in Woods they lie,
In whispers first their tender Voices try:
Then issue on the Main with bellowing rage,
And Storms to trembling Mariners presage.
Then thus to both replied the Imperial God,
Who shakes Heavens Axels with his awful Nod.
(When he begins, the silent Senate stand
With Reverence, listening to the dread Command:
The Clouds dispel; the Winds their Breath restrain;
And the hushed Waves lie flatted on the Main.)
Coelestials! Your attentive Ears incline;
Since, said the God, the Trojans must not join
In wished Alliance with the Latian Line;
Since endless jarrings, and immortal Hate,
Tend but to discompose our happy State;
The War henceforward be resigned to Fate.
Each to his proper Fortune stand or fall,
Equal and unconcerned I look on all.
Rutulians, Trojans, are the same to me;
And both shall draw the Lots their Fates decree.
Let these assault; if Fortune be their Friend;
And if she favors those, let those defend:
The Fates will find their way. The Thund'rer said;
And shook the sacred Honors of his Head;
Attesting Styx, the Inviolable Flood,
And the black Regions of his Brother God
Trembled the Poles of Heaven; and Earth confessed the Nod.
This end the Sessions had: The Senate rise,
And to his Palace wait their Sovereign through the Skies.
Mean time, intent upon their Siege, the Foes
Within their Walls the Trojan Host enclose:
They wound, they kill, they watch at every Gate:
Renew the Fires, and urge their happy Fate.
The Aeneans wish in vain their wanted Chief,
Hopeless of flight, more hopeless of Relief:
Thin on the Towers they stand; and even thofe few,
A feeble, fainting, and dejected Crew:
Yet in the face of Danger some there stood:
The two bold Brothers of Sarpedon's Blood,
Asius, and Acmon: both the Assaraci;
Young Haemon, and though young, resolved to dye.
With these were Clarus and Thymaetes joined;
Tibris and Castor, both of Lycian Kind.
From Acmon's Hands a rolling Stone there came,
So large, if half deserved a Mountain's Name:
Strong sinew'd was the Youth, and big of Bone,
His Brother Mnestheus could not more have done:
Or the great Father of the intrepid Son.
Some Firebrands throw, some flights of Arrows send;
And some with Darts, and some with Stones defend.
Amid the Press appears the beauteous Boy,
The Care of Venus, and the Hope of Troy.
His lovely Face unarmed, his Head was bare,
In ringlets over his Shoulders hung his Hair.
His Forehead circled with a Diadem;
Distinguished from the Crowd, he shines a Gem,
Enchas'd in Gold, or Polished Ivory set,
Amidst the meaner foil of sable Jett.
Nor Ismarus was wanting to the War,
Directing Ointed Arrows from afar;
And Death with Poison armed: In Lydia born,
Where plenteous Harvests the fat Fields adorn:
Where proud Pactolus floats the fruitful Lands,
And leaves a rich manure of Golden Sands.
There Capys, Author of the Capuan Name:
And there was Mnestheus too increased in Fame:
Since Turnus from the Camp He cast with shame.
Thus Mortal War was waged on either side,
Mean time the Hero cuts the Nightly Tide.
For, anxious, from Evander when he went,
He sought the Tyrrhene Camp, and Tarchon's Tent;
Exposed the Cause of coming to the Chief;
His Name, and Country told, and asked Relief:
Proposed the Terms; his own small strength declared,
What Vengeance proud Mezentius had prepared:
What Turnus, bold and violent, designed;
Then showed the slippry state of Humane-kind,
And fickle Fortune; warned him to beware:
And to his wholesome Counsel added Prayer.
Tarchon, without delay, the Treaty signs;
And to the Trojan Troops the Tuscan joins.
They soon set sail; nor now the Fates withstand;
Their Forces trusted with a Foreign Hand.
Aeneas leads; upon his Stern appear,
Two Lions carved, which rising Ida bear:
Ida, to wandering Trojans ever dear.
Under their grateful Shade Aeneas sat,
Revolving Wars Events, and various Fate.
His left young Pallas kept, fixed to his side,
And often of Winds inquired, and of the Tide:
Often of the Stars, and of their watery Way;
And what he suffered both by Land and Sea.
Now sacred Sisters open all your Spring,
The Tuscan Leaders, and their Army sing;
Which followed great Aeneas to the War:
Their Arms, their Numbers, and their Names declare.
A thousand Youths brave Massicus obey,
Born in the Tiger, through the foaming Sea;
From Asium brought, and Cosa, by his Care;
For Arms, light Quivers, Bows, and Shafts they bear.
Fierce Abas next, his Men bright Armor wore;
His Stern, Apollo's Golden Statue bore.
Six hundred Populonea sent along,
All skilled in Martial Exercise, and strong.
Three hundred more for Battle Ilva joins,
An Isle renowned for Steel, and unexhausted Mines.
Asylas on his Prow the third appears,
Who Heaven interprets, and the wandering Stars:
From offered Entrails Prodigies expounds,
And Peals of Thunder, with presaging Sounds.
A thousand Spears in warlike Order stand,
Sent by the Pisans under his Command.
Fair Astur follows in the watery Field,
Proud of his managed Horse, and painted Shield.
Gravisca, noisome from the neighboring Fen,
And his own Coere sent three hundred Men:
With those which Minio's Fields, and Pyrgi gave;
All bred in Arms, unanimous and brave.
Thou Muse the Name of Cyniras renew,
And brave Cupavo followed but by few:
Whose Helm confessed the Lineage of the Man,
And bore, with Wings displayed, a silver Swan.
Love was the fault of his famed Ancestry,
Whose Forms, and Fortunes in his Ensigns fly.
For Cycnus loved unhappy Phaeton,
And sung his Loss in Poplar Groves, alone;
Beneath the Sister shades to sooth his Grief;
Heaven heard his Song, and hastened his Relief:
And changed to snowy Plumes his hoary Hair,
And winged his Flight, to chant aloft in Air.
His Son Cupavo brushed the briny Flood;
Upon his Stern a brawny Centaur stood,
Who heaved a Rock, and threatening still to throw,
With lifted Hands, alarmed the Seas below:
They seemed to fear the formidable Sight,
And rolled their Billows on, to speed his Flight.
Ocnus was next, who led his Native Train,
Of hardy Warriors, through the watery Plain.
The Son of Manto, by the Tuscan Stream,
From whence the Mantuan Town derives the Name.
An ancient City, but of mixed Descent,
Three several Tribes compose the Government:
Four Towns are under each; but all obey
The Mantuan Laws, and own the Tuscan Sway.
Hate to Mezentius, armed five hundred more,
Whom Mincius from his Sire Benacus bore;
(Mincius with Wreaths of Reeds his forehead covered over.)
These grave Auletes leads. A hundred sweep,
With stretching Oars at once the glassy deep:
Him, and his Martial Train, the Triton bears,
High on his Poop the Seagreen God appears:
Frowning he seems his crooked Shell to sound,
And at the Blast the Billows dance around.
A hairy Man above the Waste he shows,
A Porpoise Tail beneath his Belly grows;
And ends a Fish: His Breast the Waves divides,
And Froth and Foam augment the murmuring Tides.
Full thirty Ships transport the chosen Train,
For Troy's Relief, and scour the briny Main.
Now was the World sorsaken by the Sun,
And Phoebe half her nightly Race had run.
The careful Chief, who never closed his Eyes,
Himself the Rudder holds, the Sails supplies.
A Choir of Nereids meet him on the Flood,
Once his own Galleys, hewn from Ida's Wood:
But now as many Nymphs the Sea they sweep,
As rode before tall Vessels on the Deep.
They know him from afar; and, in a Ring,
Enclose the Ship that bore the Trojan King.
Cymodoce, whose Voice excelled the rest,
Above the Waves advanced her snowy Breast,
Her right Hand stops the Stern, her left divides
The curling Ocean, and corrects the Tides:
She spoke for all the Choir; and thus began,
With pleasing Words to warn the unknowing Man.
Sleeps our loved Lord? O Goddess-born! awake,
Spread every Sail, pursue your watery Track;
And haste your Course. Your Navy once were we,
From Ida's Height descending to the Sea:
'Till Turnus, as at Anchor fixed we stood,
Presumed to violate our holy Wood.
Then loosed from Shore we fled his Fires profane;
(Unwillingly we broke our Master's Chain)
And since have sought you through the Tuscan Main.
The mighty Mother changed our Forms to these,
And gave us Life Immortal in the Seas.
But young Ascanius, in his Camp distressed,
By your insulting Foes is hardly pressed.
The Arcadian Horsemen, and Etrurian Host
Advance in order on the Latian Coast:
To cut their way the Daunian Chief designs,
Before their Troops can reach the Trojan Lines.
Thou, when the rosy Morn restores the Light,
First arm thy Soldiers for the ensuing Fight:
Thy self the fated Sword of Vulcan wield,
And bear aloft the impenetrable Shield.
To Morrow's Sun, unless my Skill be vain,
Shall see huge heaps of Foes in Battle slain.
Parting, she spoke; and with Immortal Force,
Pushed on the Vessel in her watery Course:
(For well she knew the Way) impelled behind,
The Ship flew forward, and outstrip'd the Wind.
The rest make up: Unknowing of the cause
The Chief admires their Speed, and happy Omens draws.
Then thus he prayed, and fixed on Heaven his Eyes;
Hear thou, great Mother of the Deities!
With Turrets crowned, (on Ida's holy Hill,
Fierce Tigers, rein'd and curbed, obey thy Will.)
Firm thy own Omens, lead us on to fight,
And let thy Phrygians conquer in thy right.
He said no more. And now renewing Day
Had chased the Shadows of the Night away.
He charged the Soldiers with preventing Care,
Their Flags to follow, and their Arms prepare;
Warned of the ensuing Fight, and bad'em hope the War.
Now, from his lofty Poop, he viewed below
His Camp encompassed, and the enclosing Foe.
His blazing Shield embraced, he held on high;
The Camp receive the sign, and with loud Shouts reply.
Hope arms their Anger: From their Towers they throw
Their Darts with double Force, and drive the Foe.
Thus, at the signal given, the Cranes arise
Before the stormy South, and blacken all the Skies.
King Turnus wondered at the Fight renewed;
'Till, looking back, the Trojan Fleet he viewed:
The Seas with swelling Canvass covered over;
And the swift Ships descending on the Shore.
The Latians saw from far, with dazzled Eyes,
The radiant Crest that seemed in Flames to rise,
And dart diffusive Fires around the Field;
And the keen glittering of the Golden Shield.
Thus threatening Comets, when by Night they rise,
Shoot sanguine Streams, and sadden all the Skies:
So Sirius, flashing forth sinister Lights,
Pale humane kind with Plagues, and with dry Famine frights.
Yet Turnus, with undaunted Mind is bent
To man the Shores, and hinder their Descent:
And thus awakes the Courage of his Friends.
What you so long have wished, kind Fortune sends:
In equal Arms to meet the invading Foe:
You find, and find him at Advantage now.
Yours is the Day, you need but only dare:
Your Swords will make you Masters of the War.
Your Sires, your Sons, your Houses, and your Lands,
And dearest Wifes, are all within your Hands.
Be mindful of the Race from whence you came;
And emulate in Arms your Fathers Fame.
Now take the Time, while stagg'ring yet they stand
With Feet unfirm; and prepossess the Strand:
Fortune befriends the bold. Nor more he said,
But balanced whom to leave, and whom to lead:
Then these elects, the Landing to prevent;
And those he leaves to keep the City pent.
Mean time the Trojan sends his Troops ashore:
Some are by Boats exposed, by Bridges more.
With laboring Oars they bear along the Strand,
Where the Tide languishes, and leap a-land.
Tarchon observes the Coast with careful Eyes,
And where no Foord he finds, no Water fryes,
Nor Billows with unequal Murmurs roar;
But smoothly slide along, and swell the Shore;
That Course he steered, and thus he gave command,
Here ply your Oars, and at all hazard land:
Force on the Vessel that her Keel may wound
This hated Soil, and furrow hostile Ground.
Let me securely land, I ask no more,
Then sink my Ships, or shatter on the Shore.
This fiery Speech inflames his fearful Friends,
They tug at every Oar; and every Stretcher bends:
They run their Ships aground, the Vessels knock,
(Thus forced ashore) and tremble with the shock.
Tarchon's alone was lost, that stranded stood,
Stuck on a Bank, and beaten by the Flood.
She breaks her Back, the loosened Sides give way,
And plunge the Tuscan Soldiers in the Sea.
Their broken Oars, and floating Planks withstand
Their Passage, while they labor to the Land;
And ebbing Tides bear back upon the uncertain Sand.
Now Turnus leads his Troops, without delay,
Advancing to the Margin of the Sea.
The Trumpets sound: Aeneas first assailed
The Clowns new raised and raw; and soon prevailed.
To ye Right Honble: Sr: Robert Howard Auditor of his Maties. Exchequer, and
one of ye Lords of his Majties. most Honble: Prioy Council

AE. 10. l. 450.


Great Thereon fell, an Omen of the Fight:
Great Thereon large of Limbs, of Giant height.
He first in open Field defied the Prince,
But Armor scaled with Gold was no Defense
Against the fated Sword, which opened wide
His plated Shield, and pierced his naked side.
Next, Lycas fell; who, not like others born,
Was from his wretched Mother ripped and torn:
Sacred, O Phoebus! from his Birth to thee,
For his beginning Life from biting Steel was free.
Not far from him was Gyas laid along,
Of monst'rous Bulk; with Cisseus fierce and strong:
Vain Bulk and Strength; for when the Chief assailed,
Nor Valor, nor Herculean Arms availed;
Nor their famed Father, wont in War to go
With great Alcides, while he toiled below.
The noisie Pharos next received his Death,
Aeneas writhed his Dart, and stopped his bawling Breath.
Then wretched Cydon had received his Doom,
Who courted Clytius in his beardless Bloom,
And sought with lust obscene polluted Joys:
The Trojan Sword had cured his love of Boys,
Had not his sev'n bold Brethren stopped the Course
Of the fierce Champion, with united Force.
Sev'n Darts were thrown at once, and some rebound
From his bright Shield, some on his Helmet sound:
The rest had reached him, but his Mother's Care
Prevented those, and turned aside in Air.
The Prince then called Achates, to supply
The Spears, that knew the way to Victory.
Those fatal Weapons, which inured to Blood,
In Grecian Bodies under Ilium stood:
Not one of those my Hand shall toss in vain
Against our Foes, on this contended Plain.
He said: Then seized a mighty Spear, and threw;
Which, winged with Fate, through Maeon's Buckler flew:
Pierced all the brazen Plates, and reached his Heart:
He staggered with intolerable Smart.
Alcanor saw; and reached, but reached in vain,
His helping Hand, his Brother to sustain.
A second Spear, which kept the former Course,
From the same Hand, and sent with equal Force,
His right Arm pierced, and holding on, bereft
His use of both, and pinioned down his left.
Then Numitor, from his dead Brother drew
The ill-omend Spear, and at the Trojan threw:
Preventing Fate directs the Lance awry,
Which glancing, only marked Achates Thigh.
In Pride of Youth the Sabine Clausus came,
And from afar, at Driops took his Aim.
The Spear flew hissing through the middle Space,
And pierced his Throat, directed at his Face:
It stopped at once the Passage of his Wind,
And the free Soul to flitting Air resigned:
His Forehead was the first that struck the Ground;
Lifeblood, and Life rushed mingled through the Wound.
He slew three Brothers of the Borean Race,
And three, whom Ismarus, their Native Place,
Had sent to War, but all the Sons of Thrace.
Halesus next, the bold Aurunci leads;
The Son of Neptune to his Aid succeeds,
Conspicuous on his Horse: On either Hand
These fight to keep, and those to win the Land.
With mutual Blood the Ausonian Soil is died,
While on its Borders each their Claim decide.
As wint'ry Winds contending in the Sky,
With equal force of Lungs their Titles try.
They rage, they roar; the doubtful rack of Heaven
Stands without Motion, and the Tide undriv'n:
Each bent to conquer, neither side to yield;
They long suspend the Fortune of the Field.
Both Armies thus perform what Courage can:
Foot set to Foot, and crowded Man to Man.
But in another part, the Arcadian Horse,
With ill Success engage the Latin Force.
For where the impetuous Torrent rushing down,
Huge craggy Stones, and rooted Trees had thrown:
They left their Coursers, and unused to Fight
On Foot, were scattered in a shameful flight.
Pallas, who with Disdain and Grief, had viewed
His Foes pursuing, and his Friends pursued;
Used Threatenings mixed with Prayers, his last Ressource;
With these to move their Minds, with those to fire their Force.
Which way, Companions! Whether would you run?
By you your selves, and mighty Battles won;
By my great Sire, by his established Name,
And early promise of my Future Fame;
By my Youth emulous of equal Right,
To share his Honors, shun ignoble Flight.
Trust not your Feet, your Hands must hew your way
Through yon black Body, and that thick Array:
It Is through that forward Path that we must come:
There lies our Way, and that our Passage home.
Nor Powers above, nor Destinies below,
Oppress our Arms; with equal Strength we go;
With Mortal Hands to meet a Mortal Foe.
See on what Foot we stand: A scanty Shore;
The Sea behind, our Enemies before:
No Passage left, unless we swim the Main;
Or forcing these, the Trojan Trenches gain.
This said, he strode with eager haste along,
And bore amidst the thickest of the Throng.
Lagus, the first he met, with Fate to Foe,
Had heaved a Stone of mighty Weight to throw:
Stooping, the Spear descended on his Chine,
Just where the Bone distinguished either Loin:
It stuck so fast, so deeply buried lay,
That scarce the Victor forced the Steel away.
Hisbon came on, but while he moved too slow
To wished Revenge, the Prince prevents his Blow:
For warding his at once, at once he pressed;
And plunged the fatal Weapon in his Breast.
Then lewd Anchemolus he laid in Dust,
Who stained his Stepdam's Bed with impious Lust.
And after him the Daucian Twins were slain,
Laris and Thimbrus, on the Latian Plain:
So wondrous like in Feature, Shape, and Size,
As caused an Error in their Parents Eyes.
Grateful Mistake! but soon the Sword decides
The nice Distinction, and their Fate divides.
For Thimbrus Head was lop'd: and Laris Hand
Dismembered, sought its Owner on the Strand:
The trembling Fingers yet the Fauchion strain,
And threaten still the intended Stroke in vain.
Now, to renew the Charge, the Arcadians came:
Sight of such Acts, and sense of honest Shame,
And Grief, with Anger mixed, their Minds inflame.
Then, with a casual Blow was Rhaeteus slain,
Who chanced, as Pallas threw, to cross the Plain:
The flying Spear was after Ilus sent,
But Rhaeteus hapen'd on a Death unmeant:
From Teuthras, and from Tyres while he fled,
The Lance, athwart his Body, laid him dead:
Rolled from his Chariot with a Mortal Wound,
And intercepted Fate, he spurned the Ground.
As, when in Summer, welcome Winds arise,
The watchful Shepherd to the Forest flies,
And fires the midmost Plants; Contagion spreads,
And catching Flames infect the neighboring Heads;
Around the Forest flies the furious Blast,
And all the leafie Nation sinks at last;
And Vulcan rides in Triumph over the Wast;
The Pastor pleased with his dire Victory,
Beholds the satiate Flames in Sheets ascend the Sky:
So Pallas's Troops their scattered Strength unite;
And pouring on their Foes, their Prince delight.
Halesus came, fierce with desire of Blood,
(But first collected in his Arms he stood)
Advancing then, he plied the Spear so well,
Ladon, Demodocus, and Pheres fell:
Around his Head he tossed his glittering Brand,
And from Strimonius hewed his better Hand,
Held up to guard his Throat: Then hurled a Stone
At Thoas ample Front, and pierced the Bone:
It struck beneath the space of either Eye,
And Blood, and mingled Brains, together fly.
Deep skilled in future Fates, Halesus Sire,
Did with the Youth to lonely Groves retire:
But when the Father's Mortal Race was run,
Dire Destiny laid hold upon the Son,
And haul'd him to the War: to find beneath
The Evandrian Spear, a memorable Death.
Pallas the Encounter seeks, but e're he throws,
To Tuscan Tyber thus addressed his Vows:
O sacred Stream direct my flying Dart;
And give to pass the proud Halesus Heart:
His Arms and Spoils thy holy Oak shall bear:
Pleased with the Bribe, the God received his Prayer.
For while his Shield protects a Friend distressed,
The Dart came driving on, and pierced his Breast.
But Lausus, no small portion of the War,
Permits not Panick Fear to reign too far,
Caused by the Death of so renowned a Knight;
But by his own Example chears the Fight.
Fierce Abas first he slew, Abas, the stay
Of Trojan Hopes, and hind'rance of the Day.
The Phrygian Troops escaped the Greeks in vain,
They, and their mixed Allies, now load the Plain.
To the rude shock of War both Armies came,
Their Leaders equal, and their Strength the same.
The Rear so pressed the Front, they could not wield
Their angry Weapons, to dispute the Field.
Here Pallas urges on, and Lausus there,
Of equal Youth and Beauty both appear,
But both by Fate forbid to breath their Native Air.
Their Congress in the Field great Jove withstands,
Both doomed to fall, but fall by greater Hands.
Mean time Juturna warns the Daunian Chief
Of Lausus Danger, urging swift Relief.
With his driven Chariot he divides the Crowd,
And making to his Friends, thus calls aloud:
Let none presume his needless Aid to join;
Retire, and clear the Field, the Fight is mine:
To this right Hand is Pallas only due:
Oh were his Father here my just Revenge to view!
From the forbidden Space his Men retired;
Pallas, their Awe, and his stern Words admired:
Surveyed him over and over with wondering sight,
Struck with his haughty Mien, and towering Height.
Then to the King; your empty Vaunts forbear:
Success I hope, and Fate I cannot fear.
Alive or dead, I shall deserve a Name:
Jove is impartial, and to both the same.
He said, and to the void advanced his Pace;
Pale Horror sat on each Arcadian Face.
Then Turnus, from his Chariot leaping light,
Addressed himself on Foot to single Fight.
And, as a Lion, when he spies from far
A Bull, that seems to meditate the War;
Bending his Neck, and spurning back the Sand,
Runs roaring downward from his hilly Stand:
Imagine eager Turnus not more slow,
To rush from high on his unequal Foe.
Young Pallas, when he saw the Chief advance
Within due distance of his flying Lance;
Prepares to charge him first: Resolved to try
If Fortune would his want of Force supply.
And thus to Heaven and Hercules addressed.
Alcides, once on Earth Evander's Guest,
His Son adjures you by those Holy Rites,
That hospitable Board, those Genial Nights;
Assist my great Attempt to gain this Prize,
And let proud Turnus view, with dying Eyes,
His ravished Spoils. 'Twas heard, the vain Request;
Alcides mourned: And stifled Sighs within his Breast.
Then Jove, to sooth his Sorrow, thus began:
Short bounds of Life are set to Mortal Man,
It Is Virtues work alone to stretch the narrow Span.
So many Sons of Gods in bloody Fight,
Around the Walls of Troy, have lost the Light:
My own Sarpedon fell beneath his Foe,
Nor I, his mighty Sire, could ward the Blow.
Even Turnus shortly shall resign his Breath;
And stands already on the Verge of Death.
This said, the God permits the fatal Fight,
But from the Latian Fields averts his sight.
Now with full Force his Spear young Pallas threw;
And having thrown, his shining Fauchion drew:
The Steel just grazed along the Shoulder Joint,
And marked it slightly with the glancing Point.
Fierce Turnus first to nearer distance drew,
And poised his pointed Spear before he threw:
Then, as the winged Weapon whiz'd along;
See now, said he, whose Arm is better strung.
The Spear kept on the fatal Course, unstay'd
By Plates of Ir'n, which over the Shield were laid:
Through folded Brass, and tough Bull-hides it passed,
His Corslet pierced, and reached his Heart at last.
In vain the Youth tugs at the broken Wood,
The Soul comes issuing with the vital Blood:
He falls; his Arms upon his Body sound;
And with his bloody Teeth he bites the Ground.
Turnus bestrode the Corpse: Arcadians hear,
Said he; my Message to your Master bear:
Such as the Sire deserved, the Son I send:
It costs him dear to be the Phrygians Friend.
The lifeless Body, tell him, I bestow
Unasked, to please his wandering Ghost below.
He said, and trampled down with all the Force
Of his left Foot, and spurned the wretched Corse:
Then snatched the shining Belt, with Gold inlaid;
The Belt Eurytion's artful Hands had made:
Where fifty fatal Brides, expressed to sight,
All, in the compass of one mournful Night,
Deprived their Bridegrooms of returning Light.
To Sr: John Leveson Gower of Trentham in, Staffordshire Baronet

AE. 10. l. 690.


In an ill Hour insulting Turnus tore
Those Golden Spoils, and in a worse he wore.
O Mortals! blind in Fate, who never know
To bear high Fortune, or endure the low!
The Time shall come, when Turnus, but in vain,
Shall wish untouched the Trophies of the slain:
Shall wish the fatal Belt were far away;
And curse the dire Remembrance of the Day.
The sad Arcadians from the unhappy Field,
Bear back the breathless Body on a Shield.
O Grace and Grief of War! at once restored
With Praises to thy Sire, at once deplored.
One Day first sent thee to the fighting Field,
Beheld whole heaps of Foes in Battle killed;
One Day beheld thee dead, and born upon thy Shield.
This dismal News, not from uncertain Fame,
But sad Spectators, to the Hero came:
His Friends upon the brink of Ruin stand,
Unless relieved by his victorious Hand.
He whirls his Sword around, without delay,
And hews through adverse Foes an ample Way;
To find fierce Turnus, of his Conquest proud:
Evander, Pallas, all that Friendship owed
To large Deserts, are present to his Eyes;
His plighted Hand, and hospitable Ties.
Four Sons of Sulmo, four whom Ufens bred,
He took in fight, and living Victims led,
To please the Ghost of Pallas; and expire
In Sacrifice, before his Funeral Fire.
At Magus next he threw: He stooped below
The flying Spear, and shunned the promised Blow.
Then creeping, clasped the Hero's Knees, and prayed*
By young Iulus, by thy Father's Shade,
O spare my Life, and send me back to see
My longing Sire, and tender Progeny.
A lofty House I have, and Wealth untold,
In Silver Ingots, and in Bars of Gold:
All these, and Sums besides, which see no Day,
The Ransom of this one poor Life shall pay.
If I survive, shall Troy the less prevail?
A single Soul's too light to turn the Scale.
He said. The Hero sternly thus replied:
Thy Bars, and Ingots, and the Sums beside,
Leave for thy Childrens Lot. Thy Turnus broke
All Rules of War, by one relentless Stroke
When Pallas fell: So deems, nor deems alone,
My Father's Shadow, but my living Son.
Thus having said, of kind Remorse bereft,
He seized his Helm, and dragged him with his left:
Then with his right Hand, while his Neck he wreathed,
Up to the hilts his shining Fauchion sheathed.
Apollo's Priest, Emonides, was near,
His holy Fillets on his Front appear;
Glittering in Arms he shone amidst the Crowd;
Much of his God, more of his Purple proud:
Him the fierce Trojan followed through the Field;
The holy Coward fell: And forced to yield,
The Prince stood over the Priest; and at one Blow,
Sent him an Offering to the Shades below.
His Arms Seresthus on his Shoulders bears,
Designed a Trophee to the God of Wars.
Vulcanian Caeculus renews the Fight;
And Umbro born upon the Mountains Height:
The Champion chears his Troops to encounter those:
And seeks Revenge himself on other Foes.
At Anxur's Shield he drove, and at the Blow,
Both Shield and Arm to Ground together go.
Anxur had boasted much of magic Charms,
And thought he wore impenetrable Arms;
So made by muttered Spells: And from the Spheres,
Had Life secured, in vain, for length of Years.
Then Tarquitus the Field in Triumph trod;
A Nymph his Mother, and his Sire a God.
Exulting in bright Arms he braves the Prince;
With his protended Lance He makes defense:
Bears back his feeble Foe; then pressing on,
Arrests his better Hand, and drags him down.
Stands over the prostrate Wretch, and as he lay,
Vain Tales inventing, and prepared to pray:
Mows off his Head, the Trunk a Moment stood,
Then sunk, and rolled along the Sand in Blood.
The vengeful Victor thus upbraids the slain;
Lie there, proud Man unpitied, on the Plain:
Lie there, inglorious, and without a Tomb,
Far from thy Mother, and thy Native Home:
Exposed to salvage Beasts, and Birds of Prey;
Or thrown for Food to Monsters of the Sea.
On Lycas and Antaeus next he ran,
Two Chiefs of Turnus, and who led his Van.
They fled for Fear; with these he chased along,
Camers the yellow Locked, and Numa strong,
Both great in Arms, and both were fair, and young:
Camers, was Son to Volscens lately slain;
In Wealth surpassing all the Latian Train,
And in Amycla fixed his silent, easy Reign.
And as Aegeon, when with Heaven he strove,
Stood opposite in Arms to mighty Jove;
Moved all his hundred Hands, provoked the War,
Defied the forky Lightning from afar:
At fifty Mouths his flaming Breath expires,
And Flash for Flash returns, and Fires for Fires:
In his right Hand as many Swords he wields,
And takes the Thunder on as many Shields:
With Strength like his the Trojan Hero stood,
And soon the Fields with falling Corpse were strowd,
When once his Fauchion found the Taste of Blood.
With Fury scarce to be conceived, he flew
Against Niphaeus, whom four Coursers drew.
They, when they see the fiery Chief advance,
And pushing at their Chests his pointed Lance;
Wheeled with so swift a Motion, mad with Fear,
They threw their Master headlong from the Chair:
They stare, they start, nor stop their Course before
They bear the bounding Chariot to the Shore.
Now Lucagus, and Liger scour the Plains,
With two white Steeds, but Liger holds the Reins,
And Lucagus the lofty Seat maintains.
Bold Brethren both, the former waved in Air
His flaming Sword; Aeneas couched his Spear,
Unused to Threats, and more unused to Fear.
Then Liger thus. Thy Confidence is vain
To escape from hence, as from the Trojan Plain:
Nor these the Steeds which Diomede bestrode,
Nor this the Chariot where Achilles rode:
Nor Venus's Veil is here, nor Neptune's Shield:
Thy fatal Hour is come; and this the Field.
Thus Liger vainly vaunts: The Trojan Peer
Returned his answer with his flying Spear.
As Lucagus to lash his Horses bends,
Prone to the Wheels, and his left Foot protends:
Prepared for Fight, the fatal Dart arrives,
And through the borders of his Buckler drives.
Passed through; and pierced his Groin, the deadly Wound,
Cast from his Chariot, rolled him on the Ground.
Whom thus the Chief upbraids with scornful spite:
Blame not the slowness of your Steeds in flight;
Vain Shadows did not force their swift Retreat:
But you your self forsake your empty Seat.
He said, and seized at once the loosened Rein,
(For Liger lay already on the Plain,
By the same Shock) then, stretching out his Hands,
The Recreant thus his wretched Life demands.
Now by thy self, O more than Mortal Man!
By her and him from whom thy Breath began,
Who formed thee thus Divine, I beg thee spare
This forfeit Life, and hear thy Suppliant's Prayer.
Thus much he spoke, and more he would have said,
But the stern Hero turned aside his Head,
And cut him short. I hear another Man,
You talked not thus before the Fight began;
Now take your turn: And, as a Brother should,
Attend your Brother to the Stygian Flood:
Then through his Breast his fatal Sword he sent,
And the Soul issued at the bloody Vent.
As Storms the Skies, and Torrents tear the Ground,
Thus raged the Prince, and scattered Deaths around:
At length Ascanius, and the Trojan Train,
Broke from the Camp, so long besieged in vain.
Mean time the King of Gods and Mortal Man,
Held Conference with his Queen, and thus began:
My Sister Goddess, and well pleasing Wife,
Still think you Venus's Aid supports the Strife;
Sustains her Trojans: Or themselves alone,
With inborn Valor force their Fortune on?
How fierce in Fight, with Courage undecay'd;
Judge if such Warriors want immortal Aid.
To whom the Goddess, with the charming Eyes,
Soft in her Tone submissively replies.
Why, O my loving Lord, whose Frown I fear,
And cannot, unconcerned, your Anger bear;
Why urge you thus my Grief? When if I still,
(As once I was) were Mistress of your Will:
From your Almighty Power, your pleasing Wife
Might gain the Grace of lengthning Turnus's Life:
Securely snatch him from the fatal Fight,
And give him to his aged Father's sight.
Now let him perish, since you hold it good,
And glut the Trojans with his pious Blood.
Yet from our Lineage he derives his Name,
And in the fourth degree, from God Pilumnus came:
Yet he devoutly pays you Rites Divine,
And offers daily Incense at your Shrine.
Then shortly thus the Sovereign God replied;
Since in my Power and Goodness you confide;
If for a little Space, a lengthened Span,
You beg Reprieve for this expiring Man:
I grant you leave to take your Turnus hence,
From Instant Fate, and can so far dispense.
But if some secret Meaning lies beneath,
To save the short-lived Youth from destined Death:
Or if a farther Thought you entertain,
To change the Fates; you feed your hopes in vain.
To whom the Goddess thus, with weeping Eyes,
And what if that Request your Tongue denies,
Your Heart should grant; and not a short Reprieve,
But length of certain Life to Turnus give.
Now speedy Death attends the guiltless Youth,
If my presaging Soul divines with Truth.
Which, O! I wish might err through causeless Fears,
And you, (for you have Power) prolong his Years.
Thus having said, involved in Clouds, she flies,
And drives a Storm before her through the Skies.
Swift she descends, alighting on the Plain,
Where the fierce Foes a dubious Fight maintain.
Of Air condensed, a Spectre soon she made,
And what Aeneas was, such seemed the Shade.
Adorned with Dardan Arms, the Phantom bore
His Head aloft, a Plumy Crest he wore:
This Hand appeared a shining Sword to wield,
And that sustained an imitated Shield:
With manly Mien He stalked along the Ground;
Nor wanted Voice belied, nor vaunting Sound.
(Thus haunting Ghosts appear to waking Sight,
Or dreadful Visions in our Dreams by Night.)
The Spectre seems the Daunian Chief to dare,
And flourishes his empty Sword in Air:
At this advancing Turnus hurled his Spear;
The Phantom wheeled, and seemed to fly for Fear.
Deluded Turnus thought the Trojan fled,
And with vain hopes his haughty Fancy fed.
Whether, O Coward, (thus he calls aloud,
Nor found he spoke to Wind, and chased a Cloud;)
Why thus forsake your Bride? Receive from me
The fated Land you sought so long by Sea.
He said, and brandishing at once his Blade,
With eager Pace pursued the flying Shade.
By chance a Ship was fastened to the Shore,
Which from old Clusium King Osinius bore:
The Planks were ready laid for safe ascent;
For shelter there the trembling Shadow bent:
And skip'd, and sculk'd, and under Hatches went.
Exulting Turnus, with regardless haste,
Ascends the Plank, and to the Gally passed:
Scarce had he reached the Prow, Saturnia's Hand
The Haulsers cuts, and shoots the Ship from Land.
With Wind in Poop, the Vessel plows the Sea,
And measures back with speed her former Way.
Mean time Aeneas seeks his absent Foe,
And sends his slaughtered Troops to Shades below.
The guileful Phantom now forsook the shroud,
And flew sublime, and vanished in a Cloud.
Too late young Turnus the Delusion found,
Far on the Sea, still making from the Ground.
Then thankless for a Life redeemed by Shame;
With sense of Honor stung, and forfeit Fame:
Fearful besides of what in Fight had passed,
His Hands, and hagger'd Eyes to Heaven he cast.
O Jove! he cried, for what Offense have I
Deserved to bear this endless Infamy:
Whence am I forced, and whether am I born,
How, and with what Reproach shall I return?
Shall ever I behold the Latian Plain,
Or see Laurentum's lofty Towers again?
What will they say of their deserting Chief?
The War was mine, I fly from their Relief:
I led to Slaughter, and in Slaughter leave;
And even from hence their dying Groans receive.
Here over-match'd in Fight, in heaps they lie,
There scattered over the Fields ignobly fly.
Gape wide, O Earth! and draw me down alive,
Or, oh ye pitying Winds, a Wretch relieve;
On Sands or Shelves the splitting Vessel drive:
Or set me Shipwrack'd on some desert Shore,
Where no Rutulian Eyes may see me more:
Unknown to Friends, or Foes, or conscious Fame,
Lest she should follow, and my flight proclaim.
Thus Turnus raved, and various Fates revolved,
The Choice was doubtful, but the Death resolved.
And now the Sword, and now the Sea took place:
That to revenge, and this to purge Disgrace.
Sometimes he thought to swim the stormy Main,
By stretch of Arms the distant Shore to gain:
Thrice he the Sword assayed, and thrice the Flood;
But Juno moved with Pity both withstood:
And thrice repressed his Rage: strong Gales supplied,
And pushed the Vessel over the swelling Tide.
At length she lands him on his Native Shores,
And to his Father's longing Arms restores.
Mean time, by Jove's Impulse, Mezentius armed:
Succeeding Turnus; with his ardour warmed
His fainting Friends, reproached their shameful flight,
Repelled the Victors, and renewed the Fight.
Against their King the Tuscan Troops conspire,
Such is their Hate, and such their fierce desire
Of wished Revenge: On him, and him alone,
All Hands employed, and all their Darts are thrown.
He, like a solid Rock by Seas enclosed,
To raging Winds and roaring Waves opposed;
From his proud Summit looking down, disdains
Their empty Menace, and unmoved remains.
Beneath his Feet fell haughty Hebrus dead,
Then Latagus; and Palmus as he fled:
At Latagus a weighty Stone he flung,
His Face was flatted, and his Helmet rung.
But Palmus from behind receives his Wound,
Hamstring'd he falls, and grovels on the Ground:
His Crest and Armor from his Body torn,
Thy Shoulders, Lausus, and thy Head adorn.
Evas and Mymas, both of Troy, he slew,
Mymas his Birth from fair Theano drew:
Born on that fatal Night, when, big with Fire,
The Queen produced young Paris to his Sire.
But Paris in the Phrygian Fields was slain,
Unthinking Mymas on the Latian Plain.
And as a salvage Boar on Mountains bred,
With forest Mast, and fatning Marshes fed;
When once he sees himself in Toils enclosed,
By Huntsmen and their eager Hounds opposed:
He whets his Tusks, and turns, and dares the War:
The Invaders dart their Jav'lins from afar;
All keep aloof, and safely shout around,
But none presumes to give a nearer Wound.
He frets and froaths, erects his bristled Hide,
And shakes a Grove of Lances from his Side:
Not otherwise the Troops, with Hate inspired,
And just Revenge, against the Tyrant fired;
Their Darts with Clamor at a distance drive:
And only keep the languish'd War alive.
From Coritus came Acron to the Fight,
Who left his Spouse betroath'd, and unconsummate Night.
Mezentius sees him through the Squadrons ride,
Proud of the Purple Favors of his Bride.
Then, as a hungry Lion, who beholds
A Gamesom Goat, who frisks about the Folds;
Or beamy stag that grazes on the Plain:
He runs, he roars, he shakes his rising Mane;
He grins, and opens wide his greedy Jaws,
The Prey lies panting underneath his Paws:
He fills his famished Maw, his Mouth runs over
With unchew'd Morsels, while he churns the Gore:
So proud Mezentius rushes on his Foes,
And first unhappy Acron overthrows:
Stretched at his length, he spurns the swarthy Ground,
The Lance besmeared with Blood, lies broken in the wound.
Then with Disdain the haughty Victor viewed
Orodes flying, nor the Wretch pursued:
Nor thought the Dastard's Back deserved a Wound,
But running gained the Advantage of the Ground.
Then turning short, he met him Face to Face,
To give his Victory the better grace.
Orodes falls, in equal Fight oppressed:
Mezentius fixed his Foot upon his Breast,
And rested Lance: And thus aloud he cries,
Lo here the Champion of my Rebels lies.
The Fields around with Io Paean ring,
And peals of Shouts applaud the conquering King.
At this the vanquished, with his dying Breath,
Thus faintly spoke, and prophesied in Death:
Nor thou, proud Man, unpunished shall remain;
Like Death attends thee on this fatal Plain.
Then, sourly smiling, thus the King replied,
For what belongs to me let Jove provide:
But dye thou first, whatever Chance ensue:
He said, and from the Wound the Weapon drew:
A hovering Mist came swimming over his sight,
And sealed his Eyes in everlasting Night.
By Caedicus, Alcathous was slain,
Sacrator laid Hydaspes on the Plain:
Orses the strong to greater Strength must yield;
He, with Parthenius, were by Rapo killed.
Then brave Messapus Ericetes slew,
Who from Lycaon's Blood his Lineage drew.
But from his headstrong Horse his Fate he found,
Who threw his Master as he made a bound,
The Chief alighting, stuck him to the Ground.
Then Clonius hand to hand, on Foot assails,
The Trojan sinks, and Neptune's Son prevails.
Agis the Lycian stepping forth with Pride,
To single Fight the boldest Foe defied.
Whom Tuscan Valerus by Force o'recame,
And not belied his mighty Father's Fame.
Salius to Death the great Antronius fent,
But the same Fate the Victor underwent:
Slain by Nealces Hand, well skilled to throw
The flying Dart, and draw the far-deceiving Bow.
Thus equal Deaths are dealt with equal Chance;
By turns they quit their Ground, by turns advance:
Victors, and vanquished, in the various Field,
Nor wholly overcome, nor wholly yield.
The Gods from Heaven survey the fatal Strife,
And mourn the Miseries of Human Life.
Above the rest two Goddesses appear
Concerned for each: Here Venus, Juno there:
Amidst the Crowd Infernal Ate shakes
Her Scourge aloft, and Crest of hissing Snakes.
Once more the proud Mezentius, with Disdain,
Brandished his Spear, and rushed into the Plain:
Where towering in the midmost Ranks he stood,
Like tall Orion stalking over the Flood:
When with his brawny Breast he cuts the Waves,
His Shoulders scarce the topmost Billow laves.
Or like a Mountain Ash, whose Roots are spread,
Deep fixed in Earth, in Clouds he hides his Head.
The Trojan Prince beheld him from afar,
And dauntless undertook the doubtful War.
Collected in his Strength, and like a Rock,
Poised on his Base, Mezentius stood the Shock.
He stood, and measuring first with careful Eyes,
The space his Spear could reach, aloud he cries:
My strong right Hand, and Sword, assist my Stroke;
(Those only Gods Mezentius will invoke)
His Armor from the Trojan Pyrate torn,
By my triumphant Lausus shall be worn.
To Sr: Charles Orby Baronet of Burton Pednarden in ye County of Lincoln

AE. 10. l. 1125.


He said, and with his utmost force he threw
The massy Spear, which, hissing as it flew,
Reached the Celestial Shield that stopped the course;
But glancing thence, the yet unbroken Force
Took a new bent obliquely, and betwixt
The Side and Bowels famed Anthores fixed.
Anthores had from Argos traveled far,
Alcides Friend, and Brother of the War:
'Till tired with Toils, fair Italy he chose,
And in Evander's Palace sought Repose:
Now falling by another's Wound, his Eyes
He casts to Heaven, on Argos thinks, and dies.
The pious Trojan then his Javelin sent,
The Shield gave way: Through treble Plates it went
Of solid Brass, of Linen trebly rolled,
And three Bull-hides which round the Buckler rolled.
All these it passed, resistless in the Course,
Transpierc'd his Thigh, and spent its dying Force.
The gaping Wound gushed out a Crimson Flood;
The Trojan, glad with sight of hostile Blood,
His Fauchion drew, to closer Fight addressed,
And with new Force his fainting Foe oppressed.
His Father's Peril Lausus viewed with Grief,
He sighed, he wept, he ran to his Relief.
And here, Heroic Youth, it is here I must
To thy immortal Memory be just;
And sing an Act so noble and so new,
Posterity will scarce believe it is true.
Pained with his Wound, and useless for the Fight,
The Father sought to save himself by Flight:
Encumbered, slow he dragged the Spear along,
Which pierced his thigh, and in his Buckler hung.
The pious Youth, resolved on Death, below
The lifted Sword, springs forth to face the Foe;
Protects his Parent, and prevents the Blow.
Shouts of Applause ran ringing through the Field,
To see the Son the vanquished Father shield:
All fired with generous Indignation strive;
And with a storm of Darts, to distance drive
The Trojan Chief; who held at Bay from far,
On his Vulcanian Orb sustained the War.
As when thick Hail comes rattling in the Wind,
The Plowman, Passenger, and laboring Hind,
For shelter to the neighboring Covert fly;
Or housed, or safe in hollow Caverns lie:
But that o'reblown, when Heaven above 'em smiles,
Return to Travel, and renew their Toils:
Aeneas thus overwhelmed on every side,
The storm of Darts, undaunted, did abide;
And thus to Lausus loud with friendly threatening cried.
Why will thou rush to certain Death, and Rage
In rash Attempts, beyond thy tender Age:
Betrayed by pious Love? Nor thus forborne
The Youth desists, but with insulting Scorn
Provokes the lingering Prince: Whose Patience tired,
Gave Place, and all his Breast with Fury fired.
For now the Fates prepared their cruel Sheers;
And lifted high the flaming Sword appears:
Which full descending, with a frightful sway,
Through Shield and Corslet forced the impetuous Way,
And buried deep in his fair Bosom lay.
The purple Streams through the thin Armor strove,
And drenched the imbroider'd Coat his Mother wove:
And Life at length forsook his heaving Heart,
Loath from so sweet a Mansion to depart.
But when, with Blood, and Paleness all o'respread,
The pious Prince beheld young Lausus dead;
He grieved, he wept, the sight an Image brought
Of his own filial Love; a sadly pleasing Thought.
Then stretched his Hand to hold him up, and said,
Poor hapless Youth! what Praises can be paid
To Love so great, to such transcendent Store
Of early Worth, and sure Presage of more?
Accept what e're Aeneas can afford,
Untouched thy Arms, untaken be thy Sword:
And all that pleased thee living still remain
Inviolate, and sacred to the slain.
Thy Body on thy Parents I bestow,
To rest thy Soul, at least if Shadows know,
Or have a sense of human Things below.
There to thy fellow Ghosts with Glory tell,
'Twas by the great Aeneas hand I fell.
With this his distant Friends he beckons near,
Provokes their Duty, and prevents their Fear:
Himself assists to lift him from the Ground,
With clotted Locks, and Blood that well'd from out the Wound.
Mean time his Father, now no Father, stood,
And washed his Wounds by Tyber's yellow Flood:
Oppressed with Anguish, panting, and o'respent,
His fainting Limbs against an Oak he leant.
A Bough his Brazen Helmet did sustain,
His heavier Arms lay scattered on the Plain.
A chosen Train of Youth around him stand,
His drooping Head was rested on his hand:
His grisly Beard his pensive Bosom sought,
And all on Lausus ran his restless thought.
Careful, concerned his Danger to prevent,
He much inquired, and many a Message sent
To warn him from the Field: Alas! in vain,
Behold his mournful Followers bear him slain:
Over his broad Shield still gushed the yawning Wound,
And drew a bloody Trail along the Ground.
Far off he heard their Cries, far off divined
The dire Event, with a foreboding Mind.
With Dust he sprinkled first his hoary Head,
Then both his lifted hands to Heaven he spread;
Last, the dear Corpse embracing, thus he said.
What Joys, alas! could this frail Being give,
That I have been so covetous to live?
To see my Son, and such a Son, resign
His Life a Ransom for preserving mine?
And am I then preserved, and art thou lost?
How much too dear has that Redemption cost!
It Is now my bitter Banishment I feel;
This is a Wound too deep for time to heal.
My Guilt thy growing Virtues did defame;
My Blackness blotted thy unblemished Name.
Chased from a Throne, abandoned, and exiled
For foul Misdeeds, were Punishments too mild:
I owed my People these, and from their hate,
With less Resentment could have born my Fate.
And yet I live, and yet sustain the sight
Of hated Men, and of more hated Light:
But will not long. With that he raised from Ground
His fainting Limbs, that staggered with his Wound.
Yet with a Mind resolved, and unappal'd
With Pains or Perils, for his Courser called:
Well mouthed, well managed, whom himself did dress,
With daily Care, and mounted with Success;
His Aid in Arms, his Ornament in Peace.
Soothing his Courage with a gentle Stroke,
The Steed seemed sensible, while thus he spoke.
O Rhaebus we have lived too long for me,
(If Life and long were Terms that could agree)
This Day thou either shall bring back the Head,
And bloody Trophies of the Trojan dead:
This Day thou either shall revenge my Woe
For murdered Lausus, on his cruel Foe;
Or if inexorable Fate deny
Our Conquest, with thy conquered Master dye:
For after such a Lord, I rest secure,
Thou will no foreign Reins, or Trojan Load endure.
He said: And straight the officious Courser kneels
To take his wonted Weight. His Hands he fills
With pointed Jav'lins: On his Head he laced
His glittering Helm, which terribly was graced
With waving Horse-hair, nodding from afar;
Then spurred his thundering Steed amidst the War.
Love, Anguish, Wrath, and Grief, to Madness wrought,
Despair, and secret Shame, and conscious thought
Of inborn Worth, his laboring Soul oppressed,
Rolled in his Eyes, and raged within his Breast.
Then loud he called Aeneas thrice by Name,
The loud repeated Voice to glad Aeneas came.
Great Jove, he said, and the far-shooting God,
Inspire thy Mind to make thy Challenge good.
He spoke no more, but hastened, void of Fear,
And threatened with his long protended Spear.
To whom Mezentius thus. Thy Vaunts are vain,
My Lausus lies extended on the Plain:
He Is lost! thy Conquest is already won,
The wretched Sire is murdered in the Son.
Nor Fate I fear, but all the Gods defy,
Forbear thy Threats, my Business is to dye;
But first receive this parting Legacy.
He said: And straight a whirling Dart he sent:
Another after, and another went.
Round in a spacious Ring he rides the Field,
And vainly plies the impenetrable Shield:
Thrice rode he round, and thrice Aeneas wheeled.
Turned as he turned; the Golden Orb withstood
The Strokes, and bore about an Iron Wood.
Impatient of Delay, and weary grown,
Still to defend, and to defend alone:
To wrench the Darts which in his Buckler light,
Urged, and o're-labour'd in unequal Fight:
At length resolved, he throws with all his Force,
Full at the Temples of the Warrior Horse.
Just where the Stroke was aimed, the unerring Spear
Made way, and stood transfixed through either Ear.
Seized with unwonted Pain, surpised with Fright,
The wounded Steed curvets; and, raised upright,
Lights on his Feet before: His Hoofs behind
Spring up in Air aloft, and lash the Wind.
Down comes the Rider headlong from his height,
His Horse came after with unweildy weight:
And flound'ring forward, pitching on his Head,
His Lord's encumbered Sholuder overlaid.
From either Host the mingled Shouts, and Cries,
Of Trojans and Rutulians rend the Skies.
Aeneas hastening, waved his fatal Sword
High over his head, with this reproachful Word.
Now, where are now thy Vaunts, the fierce Disdain
Of proud Mezentius, and the lofty Strain?
Struggling, and wildly staring on the Skies,
With scarce recovered Sight, he thus replies.
Why these insulting Words, this waste of Breath,
To Souls undaunted, and secure of Death?
It Is no Dishonor for the Brave to dye,
Nor came I here with hope of Victory:
Nor ask I Life, nor fought with that design,
As I had used my Fortune, use thou thine.
My dying Son contracted no such Band;
The Gift is hateful from his Murd'rer's hand.
To Tho: Hopkins of ye Middle Temple Esquire.



For this, this only Favor let me sue,
(If Pity can to conquered Foes be due)
Refuse it not: But let my Body have,
The last Retreat of Human Kind, a Grave.
Too well I know the insulting People's Hate;
Protect me from their Vengeance after Fate:
This Refuge for my poor Remains provide,
And lay my much loved Lausus by my side:
He said, and to his Throat the Sword applied.
The Crimson Stream distained his Arms around,
And the disdainful Soul came rushing through the Wound.
The Eleventh Book of the Aeneis.
The Argument.
Aeneas erects a Trophy of the Spoils of Mezentius; grants a Truce for burying
the dead; and sends home the Body of Pallas with great Solemnity. Latinus calls
a Council to propose offers of Peace to Aeneas, which occasions great Animosity
betwixt Turnus and Drances: In the mean time there is a sharp Engagement of the
Horse; wherein Camilla signalizes her self; is killed: And the Latin Troops
are entirely defeated.

SCarce had the rosy Morning raised her Head
Above the Waves, and left her watery Bed;
The Pious Chief, whom double Cares attend
For his unbury'd Soldiers, and his Friend:
Yet first to Heaven performed a Victor's Vows;
He barred an ancient Oak of all her Boughs:
Then on a rising Ground the Trunk he placed;
Which with the Spoils of his dead Foe he graced.
The Coat of Arms by proud Mezentius worn,
Now on a naked Snag in Triumph born,
Was hung on high; and glittered from afar:
A Trophy sacred to the God of War.
Above his Arms, fixed on the leafless Wood,
Appeared his Plumy Crest, distilling Blood;
His brazen Buckler on the left was seen;
Trunchions of shivered Lances hung between:
And on the right was placed his Corslet, bored;
And to the Neck was tied his unavailing Sword.
A Crowd of Chiefs enclose the Godlike Man:
Who thus, conspicuous in the midst, began.
Our Toils, my Friends, are crowned with sure Success:
The greater Part performed, atchieve the less.
To ye Right Noble Charles Duke of Shrensbury Marquis of Alton Earl of
Shrensbury Wexford and Water-ford, Baron Talbot Strange of Blackmere Gifford of
Brimsfield andct One of the Lords of his Ma.ties most Hon.ble Privy Council
Principal Secretary of State, and Knight of ye most Noble Order of the Garter.

AE. 11. l. 1.


Now follow cheerful to the trembling Town;
Press but an Entrance, and presume it won.
Fear is no more: For fierce Mezentius lies,
As the first Fruits of War, a Sacrifice.
Turnus shall fall extended on the Plain;
And in this Omen is already slain.
Prepared in Arms pursue your happy Chance;
That none unwarn'd may plead his Ignorance:
And I, at Heaven's appointed Hour, may find
Your warlike Ensigns waving in the Wind.
Mean time the Rites and Funeral Pomps prepare,
Due to your dead Companions of the War:
The last Respect the living can bestow,
To shield their Shadows from Contempt below.
That conquered Earth be theirs for which they fought;
And which for us with their own blood they bought.
But first the Corpse of our unhappy Friend,
To the sad City of Evander send:
Who not inglorious in his Ages bloom
Was hurried hence by too severe a Doom.
Thus, weeping while he spoke, he took his Way,
Where, new in Death, lamented Pallas lay:
Acaetes watched the Corpse; whose Youth deserved
The Father's Trust, and now the Son he served
With equal Faith, but less auspicious Care:
The Attendants of the slain, his Sorrow share.
A Troop of Trojans mixed with these appear,
And mourning Matrons with dishevelled Hair.
Soon as the Prince appears, they raise a Cry;
All beat their Breasts, and Echoes rend the Sky.
They rear his drooping Forehead from the Ground;
But when Aeneas viewed the grisly Wound
Which Pallas in his Manly Bosom bore,
And the fair Flesh distained with Purple Gore:
First, melting into Tears, the pious Man
Deplored so sad a sight, then thus began.
Unhappy Youth! When Fortune gave the rest
Of my full Wishes, she refused the best!
She came; but brought not thee along; to bless
My longing Eyes, and share in my Success:
She grudged thy safe Return the Triumphs due
To prosperous Valor, in the public View.
Not thus I promised, when thy Father lent
Thy needful Succor with a sad Consent;
Embraced me parting for the Etrurian Land,
And sent me to possess a large Command.
He warned, and from his own Experience told,
Our Foes were warlike, disciplined, and bold:
And now perhaps, in hopes of thy return,
Rich Odours on his loaded Altars burn;
While we, with vain officious Pomp, prepare
To send him back his Portion of the War;
A bloody breathless Body: which can owe
No farther Debt, but to the Powers below.
The wretched Father, e're his Race is run,
Shall view the Funeral Honors of his Son.
These are my Triumphs of the Latian War;
Fruits of my plighted Faith, and boasted Care.
And yet, unhappy Sire, thou shall not see
A Son, whose Death disgraced his Ancestry:
Thou shall not blush, old Man, however grieved:
Thy Pallas no dishonest Wound received.
He died no Death to make thee wish, too late,
Thou had not lived to see his shameful Fate:
But what a Champion has the Ausonian Coast,
And what a Friend have thou, Ascanius, lost!
Thus having mourned, he gave the Word around,
To raise the lifeless Body from the Ground;
And chose a thousand Horse, the flower of all
His warlike Troops, to wait the Funeral:
To bear him back, and share Evander's Grief;
(A well becoming, but a weak Relief.)
Of Oaken Twigs they twist an easy Bier;
Then on their Shoulders the sad Burden rear.
The Body on this Rural Hearse is born,
Strewed Leaves and Funeral Greens the Bier adorn.
All pale he lies, and looks a lovely Flower,
New cropped by Virgin Hands, to dress the Bower;
Unfaded yet, but yet unfed below,
No more to Mother Earth or the green Stem shall owe.
Then two fair Vests, of wondrous Work and Cost,
Of Purple woven, and with Gold embossed,
For Ornament the Trojan Hero brought,
Which with her Hands Sidonian Dido wrought.
One Vest arrayed the Corpse, and one they spread
Over his closed Eyes, and wrapped around his Head:
That when the yellow Hair in Flame should fall,
The catching Fire might burn the Golden Caul.
Besides, the Spoils of Foes in Battle slain,
When he descended on the Latian Plain:
Arms, Trappings, Horses, by the Hearse are led
In long Array, (the Atchievments of the Dead.)
Then, pinioned with their hands behind, appear
The unhappy Captives, marching in the Rear:
Appointed Offerings in the Victor's Name,
To sprinkle with their Blood, the Funeral Flame.
Inferior Trophies by the Chiefs are born;
Gantlets and Helms, their heads and hands adorn:
And fair Inscriptions fixed, and Titles read,
Of Latian Leaders conquered by the Dead.
Acaetes on his Pupil's Corpse attends,
With feeble Steps; supported by his Friends:
Pausing at every Pace; in Sorrow drowned,
Betwixt their Arms he sinks upon the Ground.
Where groveling, while he lies in deep Despair,
He beats his Breast, and rends his hoary Hair.
The Champion's Chariot next is seen to roll,
Besmeared with hostile blood, and honorably foul.
To close the Pomp, Aethon, the Steed of State,
Is led, the Fun'rals of his Lord to wait.
Stripped of his Trappings, with a sullen Pace
He walks, and the big Tears run rolling down his Face.
The Lance of Pallas, and the Crimson Crest,
Are born behind; the Victor seized the rest.
The March begins: The Trumpets hoarsly sound,
The Pikes and Lances trail along the Ground.
Thus while the Trojan and Arcadian Horse,
To Pallantean Towers direct their Course,
In long Procession ranked; the pious Chief
Stopped in the Rear, and gave a vent to Grief.
The public Care, he said, which War attends
Diverts our present Woes, at least suspends:
Peace with the Manes of great Pallas dwell;
Hail holy Relics, and a last farewell!
He said no more, but inly though he mourned,
Restrained his Tears, and to the Camp returned.
Now Suppliants, from Laurentum sent, demand
A Truce, with Olive Branches in their hand.
Obtest his Clemency, and from the Plain
Beg leave to draw the Bodies of their slain.
They plead, that none those common Rites deny
To conquered Foes, that in fair Battle dye.
All cause of Hate was ended in their Death;
Nor could he War with Bodies void of Breath.
A King, they hoped, would hear a King's Request:
Whose Son he once was called, and once his Guest.
Their Suit, which was too just to be denied,
The Hero grants, and farther thus replied:
O Latian Princes, how severe a Fate
In causeless Quarrels has involved your State!
And armed against an unoffending Man,
Who sought your Friendship e're the War began!
You beg a Truce, which I would gladly give,
Not only for the slain, but those who live.
I came not hither but by Heaven's Command,
And sent by Fate to share the Latian Land.
Nor wage I Wars unjust; your King denied
My proffered Friendship, and my promised Bride.
Left me for Turnus; Turnus then should try
His Cause in Arms, to Conquer or to dye.
My Right and his are in dispute: The slain
Fell without fault, our Quarrel to maintain.
In equal Arms let us alone contend;
And let him vanquish, whom his Fates befriend.
This is the way, so tell him, to possess
The Royal Virgin, and restore the Peace.
Bear this my Message back; with ample leave
That your slain Friends may Funeral Rites receive.
Thus having said, the Ambassadors amazed,
Stood mute a while, and on each other gazed:
Drances, their Chief, who harbored in his Breast
Long hate to Turnus, as his Foe professed,
Broke silence first, and to the Godlike Man,
With graceful action bowing, thus began.
Auspicious Prince, in Arms a mighty Name,
But yet whose Actions far transcend your Fame;
Would I your Justice or your Force express,
Thought can but equal; and all Words are less:
Your Answer we shall thankfully relate,
And Favors granted to the Latian State:
If wished Success our Labor shall attend,
Think Peace concluded, and the King your Friend:
Let Turnus leave the Realm to your Command;
And seek Alliance in some other Land:
Build you the City which your Fates assign;
We shall be proud in the great Work to join.
Thus Drances; and his Words so well persuade
The rest empowered, that soon a Truce is made.
Twelve days the term allowed: And during those,
Latians and Trojans, now no longer Foes,
Mixed in the Woods, for Funeral Piles prepare,
To fell the Timber, and forget the War.
Loud Axes through the groaning Groves resound:
Oak, Mountain Ash, and Poplar, spread the Ground:
Firrs fall from high: And some the Trunks receive,
In Laden Wains, with Wedges some they cleave.
And now the Fatal News, by Fame is blown
Through the short Circuit of the Arcadian Town,
Of Pallas slain: By Fame, which just before
His Triumphs on distended Pinions bore.
Rushing from out the Gate, the People stand,
Each with a Funeral Flambeau in his hand:
Wildly they stare, distracted with amaze:
The Fields are lightened with a fiery blaze,
That cast a sullen Splendour on their Friends,
(The marching Troop which their dead Prince attends.)
Both Parties meet: They raise a doleful Cry:
The Matrons from the Walls with shrieks reply;
And their mixed mourning rends the vaulted Sky.
The Town is filled with Tumult and with Tears;
Till the loud Clamours reach Evander's Ears:
Forgetful of his State, he runs along,
With a disordered pace, and cleaves the Throng:
To Sr. Walter Kirkham Blount of Sodington in the County of Worcester Bart.

AE 11. l. 215


Falls on the Corpse, and groaning there he lies,
With silent Grief that speaks but at his Eyes:
Short Sighs and Sobs succeed; 'till Sorrow breaks
A Passage, and at once he weeps and speaks.
O Pallas! thou have failed thy plighted Word!
To fight with Caution, not to tempt the Sword:
I warned thee, but in vain; for well I knew
What Perils youthful Ardour would pursue:
That boiling Blood would carry thee too far;
Young as thou were in Dangers, raw to War!
O cursed Essay of Arms, disast'rous Doom,
Prelude of bloody Fields, and Fights to come!
Hard Elements of unauspicious War,
Vain Vows to Heaven, and unavailing Care!
Thrice happy thou, dear Partner of my Bed,
Whose holy Soul the Stroke of Fortune fled:
Praescious of Ills, and leaving me behind,
To drink the Dregs of Life by Fate assigned.
Beyond the Goal of Nature I have gone;
My Pallas late set out, but reached too soon.
If, for my League against the Ausonian State,
Amidst their Weapons I had found my Fate,
(Deserved from them,) then I had been returned
A breathless Victor, and my Son had mourned.
Yet will I not my Trojan Friend upbraid,
Nor grudge the Alliance I so gladly made.
'Twas not his Fault my Pallas fell so young,
But my own Crime for having lived too long.
Yet, since the Gods had destined him to dye,
At least he led the way to Victory:
First for his Friends he won the fatal Shore,
And sent whole Herds of slaughtered Foes before:
A Death too great, too glorious to deplore.
Nor will I add new Honors to thy Grave;
Content with those the Trojan Hero gave.
That Funeral Pomp thy Phrygian Friends designed;
In which the Tuscan Chiefs, and Army joined:
Great Spoils, and Trophies gained by thee, they bear:
Then let thy own Atchievments be thy share.
Even thou, O Turnus, had a Trophy stood,
Whose mighty Trunk had better graced the Wood,
If Pallas had arrived, with equal length
Of Years, to match thy Bulk with equal Strength.
But why, unhappy Man, do thou detain
These Troops, to view the Tears thou shedst in vain!
Go, Friends, this Message to your Lord relate;
Tell him, that if I bear my bitter Fate,
And after Pallas Death, live lingering on,
It Is to behold his Vengeance for my Son.
I stay for Turnus; whose devoted Head
Is owing to the living and the dead:
My Son and I expect it from his Hand;
It Is all that he can give, or we demand.
Joy is no more: But I would gladly go,
To greet my Pallas with such News below.
The Morn had now dispelled the Shades of Night;
Restoring Toils, when she restored the Light:
The Trojan King, and Tuscan Chief, command
To raise the Piles, along the winding Strand:
Their Friends convey the dead to Funeral Fires;
Black smould'ring Smoke from the green Wood expires;
The Light of Heaven is choked, and the new Day retires.
Then thrice around the kindled Piles they go:
(For ancient Custom had ordained it so)
Thrice Horse and Foot about the Fires are led,
And thrice with loud Laments they hail the dead.
To ye Honble John Noel Esquire 2d Son to ye Rt Honble: Baptist late Ld Viscount
Campden Baron of Ridlington and Ilmington

AE. 11. l. 290.


Tears trickling down their Breasts bedew the Ground;
And Drums and Trumpets mix their mournful Sound.
Amid the Blaze, their pious Brethren throw
The Spoils, in Battle taken from the Foe:
Helms, Bitts embossed, and Swords of shining Steel;
One casts a Target, one a Chariot Wheel:
Some to their Fellows their own Arms restore;
The Fauchions which in luckless Fight they bore:
Their Bucklers pierced, their Darts bestowed in vain,
And shivered Lances gathered from the Plain.
Whole Herds of offered Bulls about the Fire,
And bristled Boars, and wooly Sheep expire.
Around the Piles a careful Troop attends,
To watch the wasting Flames, and weep their burning Friends.
Lingering along the Shore, 'till dewy Night,
New decks the Face of Heaven with starry Light.
The conquered Latians, with like Pious Care,
Piles without number for their Dead prepare;
Part, in the Places where they fell, are laid;
And part are to the neighboring Fields conveyed.
The Corpse of Kings, and Captains of Renown,
Born off in State, are buried in the Town:
The rest, unhonour'd, and without a Name,
Are cast a common heap to feed the Flame.
Trojans and Latians vie with like desires:
To make the Field of Battle shine with Fires:
And the promiscuous Blaze to Heaven aspires.
Now had the Morning thrice renewed the Light,
And thrice dispelled the Shadows of the Night;
When those who round the wasted Fires remain,
Perform the last sad Office to the slain:
They rake the yet warm Ashes, from below;
These, and the Bones unburn'd, in Earth bestow:
These Relics with their Country Rites they grace;
And raise a mount of Turf to mark the place.
But in the Palace of the King, appears
A Scene more solemn, and a Pomp of Tears.
Maids, Matrons, Widows, mix their common Moans:
Orphans their Sires, and Sires lament their Sons.
All in that universal Sorrow share,
And curse the Cause of this unhappy War.
A broken League, a Bride unjustly sought,
A Crown usurped, which with their Blood is bought!
These are the Crimes, with which they load the Name
Of Turnus, and on him alone exclaim.
Let him, who lords it over the Ausonian Land,
Engage the Trojan Hero hand to hand:
His is the Gain, our Lot is but to serve:
It Is just, the sway he seeks, he shoud deserve.
This Drances aggravates; and adds, with spite,
His Foe expects, and dares him to the Fight.
Nor Turnus wants a Party to support
His Cause and Credit, in the Latian Court.
His former Acts secure his present Fame;
And the Queen shades him with her mighty Name.
While thus their factious Minds with Fury burn;
The Legates from the Aetolian Prince return:
Sad News they bring, that after all the Cost,
And Care employed, their Embassy is lost:
That Diomede refused his Aid in War;
Unmoved with Presents, and as deaf to Prayer.
Some new Alliance must elsewhere be sought;
Or Peace with Troy on hard Conditions bought.
Latinus, sunk in Sorrow, finds too late,
A Foreign Son is pointed out by Fate:
And till Aeneas shall Lavinia wed,
The wrath of Heaven is hovering over his Head.
Rem nulli obscuram nostrae nec vocis egentem
Consulis O bone Rex Cuncti se scire fatentur
Quid fortuna ferat populi sed dicere mussant
Det libertatem fande flatusque remittat
Cujus ob auspicum infaustum moresque sinistros
Dicam equidem licet arma mihi mortemque minetur
Lumina tot cecidisse ducum totamque videmus
Consedisse urbem luctu
To ye most Honble. John's Marquess of Normanby Earl of Mulgrave and Knight. of ye
most noble Order of ye Garter

AE. 11. l. 365


The Gods, he saw, espoused the juster side,
When late their Titles in the Field were tried:
Witness the fresh Laments, and Funeral Tears undry'd.
Thus, full of anxious Thought, he summons all
The Latian Senate to the Council Hall:
The Princes come, commanded by their Head,
And crowd the Paths that to the Palace lead.
Supreme in Power, and reverenced for his Years,
He takes the Throne, and in the midst appears:
Majestically sad, he sits in State,
And bids his Envoys their Success relate.
When Venulus began, the murmuring Sound
Was hushed, and sacred Silence reigned around.
We have, said he, performed your high Command;
And passed with Peril a long Tract of Land:
We reached the Place desired, with Wonder filled,
The Grecian Tents, and rising Towers beheld.
Great Diomede has compassed round with Walls
The City, which Argyripa he calls;
From his own Argos named: We touched, with Joy,
The Royal Hand that razed unhappy Troy.
When introduced, our Presents first we bring,
Then crave an instant Audience from the King:
His Leave obtained, our Native Soil we name;
And tell the important Cause for which we came.
Attentively he heard us, while we spoke;
Then, with soft Accents, and a pleasing Look,
Made this return. Ausonian Race, of old
Renowned for Peace, and for an Age of Gold,
What Madness has your altered Minds possessed,
To change for War hereditary Rest?
Solicit Arms unknown, and tempt the Sword,
(A needless Ill your Ancestors abhorred?)
We; (for my self I speak, and all the Name
Of Grecians, who to Troy's Destruction came;)
Omitting those who were in Battle slain,
Or born by rolling Simois to the Main:
Not one but suffered, and too dearly bought
The Prize of Honor which in Arms he sought.
Some doomed to Death, and some in Exile driven,
Outcasts, abandoned by the Care of Heaven:
So worn, so wretched, so despised a Crew,
As even old Priam might with Pity view.
Witness the Vessels by Minerva tossed
In Storms, the vengeful Capharaean Coast;
The Eubaean Rocks! The Prince, whose Brother led
Our Armies to revenge his injured Bed,
In Egypt lost; Ulysses, with his Men,
Have seen Charybdis, and the Cyclops Den:
Why should I name Idomeneus, in vain
Restored to Scepters, and expelled again?
Or young Achilles by his Rival slain?
Even he, the King of Men, the foremost Name
Of all the Greeks, and most renowned by Fame,
The proud Revenger of another's Wife,
Yet by his own Adult'ress lost his Life:
Fell at his Threshold, and the Spoils of Troy,
The foul Polluters of his Bed enjoy.
The Gods have envied me the sweets of Life,
My much loved Country, and my more loved Wife:
Banished from both, I mourn; while in the Sky
Transformed to Birds, my lost Companions fly:
Hovering about the Coasts they make their Moan;
And cuff the Cliffs with Pinions not their own.
What squalid Specter, in the dead of Night,
Break my short Sleep, and skim before my sight!
I might have promised to my self those Harms,
Mad as I was, when I with Mortal Arms
Presumed against Immortal Powers to move;
And violate with Wounds the Queen of Love.
Such Arms, this Hand shall never more employ;
No Hate remains with me to ruined Troy.
I war not with its Dust; nor am I glad
To think of past Events, or good or bad.
Your Presents I return: What e're you bring
To buy my Friendship, send the Trojan King.
We met in fight, I know him to my Cost;
With what a whirling force his Lance he tossed:
Heavens what a spring was in his Arm, to throw:
How high he held his Shield, and rose at every blow!
Had Troy produced two more, his Match in Might,
They would have changed the Fortune of the Fight:
The Invasion of the Greeks had been returned:
Our Empire wasted, and our Cities burned.
The long Defense the Trojan People made,
The War protracted, and the Siege delayed,
Were due to Hector's and this Hero's hand:
Both brave alike, and equal in Command;
Aeneas, not inferior in the Field,
In pious reverence to the Gods, excelled.
Make peace, ye Latians, and avoid with Care
The impending Dangers of a fatal War.
He said no more; but with this cold Excuse,
Refused the Alliance, and advised a Truce.
Thus Venulus concluded his Report.
A Jarring Murmur filled the factious Court:
As when a Torrent rowls with rapid force,
And dashes over the Stones that stop the Course;
The Flood, constrained within a scanty space,
Roars horrible along the uneasy race:
White foam in gathering Eddies floats around:
The rocky Shores rebellow to the sound.
The Murmur ceased: Then from his lofty Throne
The King invoked the Gods, and thus begun.
I wish, ye Latins, what we now debate
Had been resolved before it was too late:
Much better had it been for you and me,
Unforced by this our last Necessity,
To have been earlier wise; than now to call
A Council, when the Foe surrounds the Wall.
O Citizens! we wage unequal War,
With men, not only Heaven's peculiar Care,
But Heaven's own Race: Unconquered in the Field,
Or Conquered, yet unknowing how to yield.
What Hopes you had in Diomede, lay down:
Our Hopes must center on our selves alone.
Yet those how feeble, and, indeed, how vain,
You see too well; nor need my Words explain.
Vanquished without ressource; laid flat by Fate,
Factions within, a Foe without the Gate;
Not but I grant, that all performed their parts,
With manly Force, and with undaunted Hearts:
With our united Strength the War we waged;
With equal Numbers, equal Arms engaged:
You see the Event. -- Now hear what I propose,
To save our Friends, and satisfy our Foes:
A Tract of Land the Latins have possessed
Along the Tyber, stretching to the West,
Which now Rutulians and Auruncans till:
And their mixed Cattle graze the fruitful Hill;
Those Mountains filled with Firs, that lower Land,
If you consent, the Trojan shall Command.
Called into part of what is ours; and there,
On terms agreed, the common Country share.
There let 'em build, and settle if they please;
Unless they choose once more to cross the Seas,
In search of Seats remote from Italy;
And from unwelcome Inmates set us free.
Then twice ten Galleys let us build with Speed,
Or twice as many more, if more they need;
Materials are at hand: A well-grown Wood
Runs equal with the Margin of the Flood:
Let them the Number, and the Form assign;
The Care and Cost of all the Stores be mine.
To treat the Peace, a hundred Senators
Shall be commissioned hence with ample Powers;
With Olive crowned: The Presents they shall bear,
A Purple Robe, a Royal Ivory Chair;
And all the marks of Sway that Latian Monarchs wear;
And Sums of Gold. Among your selves debate
This great Affair, and save the sinking State.
Then Drances took the word; who grudged, long since,
The rising Glories of the Daunian Prince.
Factious and rich, bold at the Council Board,
But cautious in the Field, he shunned the Sword;
A closs Caballer, and Tongue-valiant Lord.
Noble his Mother was, and near the Throne,
But what his Father's Parentage, unknown.
He rose, and took the Advantage of the Times,
To load young Turnus with invidious Crimes.
Such Truths, O King, said he, your Words contain,
As strike the Sense, and all Replies are vain.
Nor are your Loyal Subjects now to seek
What common Needs require; but fear to speak.
Let him give leave of Speech, that haughty Man,
Whose Pride this unauspicious War began:
For whose Ambition (let me dare to say,
Fear set apart, though Death is in my Way)
The Plains of Latium run with Blood arround;
So many Valiant Heroes bite the Ground:
Dejected Grief in every Face appears;
A Town in Mourning, and a Land in Tears.
While he the undoubted Author of our Harms,
The Man who menaces the Gods with Arms,
Yet, after all his Boasts, forsook the Fight,
And sought his safety in ignoble Flight.
Now, best of Kings, since you propose to send
Such bounteous Presents to your Trojan Friend;
Add yet a greater at our joint Request,
One which he values more than all the rest;
Give him the fair Lavinia for his Bride:
With that Alliance let the League be tied:
And for the bleeding Land a lasting Peace provide.
Let Insolence no longer awe the Throne,
But with a Father's Right bestow your own.
For this Maligner of the general Good,
If still we fear his Force, he must be wooed:
His haughty Godhead we with Prayers implore,
Your Scepter to release, and our just Rights restore.
O cursed Cause of all our Ills, must we
Wage Wars unjust, and fall in Fight for thee!
What right have thou to rule the Latian State,
And send us out to meet our certain Fate?
It Is a destructive War; from Turnus Hand
Our Peace and public safety we demand.
Let the fair Bride to the brave Chief remain;
If not, the Peace without the Pledge is vain.
Turnus, I know you think me not your Friend,
Nor will I much with your Belief contend:
I beg your Greatness not to give the Law
In others Realms, but, beaten, to withdraw.
Pity your own, or pity our Estate;
Nor twist our Fortunes with your sinking Fate.
Your Interest is the War should never cease;
But we have felt enough, to wish the Peace:
A Land exhausted to the last remains,
Depopulated Towns, and driven Plains.
Yet, if desire of Fame, and thirst of Power,
A Beauteous Princess, with a Crown in Dower,
So fire your Mind, in Arms assert your Right;
And meet your Foe, who dares you to the Fight.
Mankind, it seems, is made for you alone;
We, but the Slaves who mount you to the Throne:
A base ignoble Crowd, without a Name,
Unwept, unworthy of the Funeral Flame:
By Duty bound to forfeit each his Life,
That Turnus may possess a Royal Wife.
Permit not, Mighty Man, so mean a Crew
Should share such Triumphs; and detain from you
The Post of Honor, your unquestioned Due:
Rather alone your matchless Force employ;
To merit, what alone you must enjoy.
These Words, so full of Malice, mixed with Art,
Inflamed with Rage the youthful Hero's Heart.
Then groaning from the bottom of his Breast,
He heaved for Wind, and thus his Wrath expressed.
You, Drances, never want a Stream of Words,
Then, when the Public Need requires our Swords.
First in the Council-hall to steer the State;
And ever foremost at a Tongue debate.
While our strong Walls secure us from the Foe,
E're yet with Blood our Ditches overflow:
But let the potent Orator declaim,
And with the brand of Coward blot my Name;
Free Leave is given him, when his fatal Hand
Has covered with more Corpse the sanguine Strand;
And high as mine his towering Trophies stand.
If any Doubt remains who dares the most,
Let us decide it at the Trojans cost:
And issue both abrest, where Honor calls;
Foes are not far to seek without the Walls.
Unless his noisie Tongue can only fight;
And Feet were given him but to speed his Flight.
I beaten from the Field? I forced away?
Who, but so known a Dastard, dares to say?
Had he but even beheld the Fight, his Eyes
Had witnessed for me what his Tongue denies:
What heaps of Trojans by this Hand were slain,
And how the bloody Tyber swelled the Main.
All saw, but he, the Arcadian Troops retire,
In scattered Squadrons, and their Prince expire.
The Giant Brothers, in their Camp, have found
I was not forced with ease to quit my Ground.
Not such the Trojans tried me, when enclosed,
I singly their united Arms opposed:
First forced an Entrance through their thick Array;
Then, glutted with their Slaughter, freed my Way.
It Is a destructive War? So let it be,
But to the Phrygian Pirate, and to thee.
Mean time proceed to fill the People's Ears
With false Reports, their Minds with panick Fears:
Extol the Strength of a twice conquered Race,
Our Foes encourage, and our Friends debase.
Believe thy Fables, and the Trojan Town
Triumphant stands, the Grecians are overthrown:
Suppliant at Hector's Feet Achilles lies;
And Diomede from fierce Aeneas flies.
Say rapid Aufidus with awful Dread
Runs backward from the Sea, and hides his Head,
When the great Trojan on his Bank appears:
For that is as true as thy dissembled Fears
Of my Revenge: Dismiss that Vanity,
Thou, Drances, art below a Death from me.
Let that vile Soul in that vile Body rest;
The Lodging is well worthy of the Guest.
Now, Royal Father, to the present state
Of our Affairs, and of this high Debate;
If in your Arms thus early you diffide,
And think your Fortune is already tried;
If one Defeat has brought us down so low;
As never more in Fields to meet the Foe;
Then I conclude for Peace: It Is time to treat,
And lie like Vassals at the Victor's Feet.
But oh, if any ancient Blood remains,
One drop of all our Father's in our Veins;
That Man would I prefer before the rest,
Who dared his Death with an undaunted Breast;
Who comely fell, by no dishonest Wound,
To shun that Sight; and dying gnawed the Ground.
But if we still have fresh Recruits in store,
If our Confederates can afford us more;
If the contended Field we bravely fought;
And not a bloodless Victory was bought:
Their Losses equaled ours, and for their slain,
With equal Fires they filled the shining Plain;
Why thus unforced should we so tamely yield;
And e're the Trumpet sounds, resign the Field?
Good unexpected, Evils unforeseen,
Appear by Turns, as Fortune shifts the Scene:
Some, raised aloft, come tumbling down amain;
Then fall so hard, they bound and rise again.
If Diomede refuse his Aid to lend,
The great Messapus yet remains our Friend:
Tolumnius, who foretells Events, is ours;
The Italian Chiefs, and Princes, join their Powers:
Nor least in Number, nor in Name the last,
Your own brave Subjects have your Cause embraced.
Above the rest, the Volscian Amazon
Contains an Army in her self alone:
And heads a Squadron, terrible to sight,
With glittering Shields, in Brazen Armor bright.
Yet if the Foe a single Fight demand,
And I alone the Public Peace withstand;
If you consent, he shall not be refused,
Nor find a Hand to Victory unused.
This new Achilles, let him take the Field,
With fated Armor, and Vulcanian Shield;
For you, my Royal Father, and my Fame,
I, Turnus, not the least of all my Name,
Devote my Soul. He calls me hand to hand,
And I alone will answer his Demand.
Drances shall rest secure, and neither share
The Danger, nor divide the Prize of War.
While they debate; nor these nor those will yield;
Aeneas draws his Forces to the Field:
And moves his Camp. The Scouts, with flying Speed
Return, and through the frighted City spread
The unpleasing News, the Trojans are descried,
In Battle marching by the River side;
And bending to the Town. They take the Allarm,
Some tremble, some are bold, all in Confusion arm.
The impetuous Youth press forward to the Field;
They clash the Sword, and clatter on the Shield:
The fearful Matrons raise a screaming Cry;
Old feeble Men with fainter Groans reply:
A jarring Sound results, and mingles in the Sky.
Like that of Swans remurm'ring to the Floods;
Or Birds of differing kinds in hollow Woods.
Turnus the occasion takes, and cries aloud,
Talk on, ye quaint Haranguers of the Crowd:
Declaim in praise of Peace, when Danger calls;
And the fierce Foes in Arms approach the Walls.
He said, and turning short, with speedy Pace,
Casts back a scornful Glance, and quits the Place.
Thou, Volusus, the Volscian Troops command
To mount; and lead thy self our Ardean Band.
Messapus, and Catillus, post your Force
Along the Fields, to charge the Trojan Horse.
Some guard the Passes, others man the Wall;
Drawn up in Arms, the rest attend my Call.
They swarm from every Quarter of the Town;
And with disordered haste the Rampires crown.
Good old Latinus, when he saw, too late,
The gathering Storm, just breaking on the State,
Dismissed the Council, 'till a fitter time.
And owned his easy Temper as his Crime:
Who, forced against his reason, had complied
To break the Treaty for the promised Bride.
Some help to sink new Trenches, others aid
To ram the Stones, or raise the Palisade.
Hoarse Trumpets sound the Alarm: Around the Walls
Runs a distracted Crew, whom their last Labor calls.
A sad Procession in the Streets is seen,
Of Matrons that attend the Mother Queen:
High in her Chair she sits, and at her side,
With downcast Eyes appears the fatal Bride.
They mount the Cliff, where Pallas's Temple stands;
Prayers in their Mouths, and Presents in their Hands:
With Censers, first they fume the sacred Shrine;
Then in this common Supplication join.
O Patroness of Arms, unspotted Maid,
Propitious hear, and lend thy Latins Aid:
Break short the Pirat's Lance; pronounce his Fate,
And lay the Phrygian low before the Gate.
Now Turnus arms for Fight: His Back and Breast,
Well tempered Steel, and scaly Brass invest:
The Cuishes, which his brawny Thighs infold,
Are mingled Metal damask'd over with Gold.
His faithful Fauchion sits upon his side;
Nor Casque, nor Crest, his manly Features hide:
But bare to view, amid surrounding Friends,
With Godlike Grace, he from the Tower descends.
Exulting in his Strength, he seems to dare
His absent Rival, and to promise War.
Freed from his Keepers, thus with broken Reins,
The wanton Courser prances over the Plains:
Or in the Pride of Youth o'releaps the Mounds;
And snuffs the Females in forbidden Grounds.
Or seeks his wat'ring in the well known Flood,
To quench his Thirst, and cool his fiery Blood:
He swims luxuriant, in the liquid Plain,
And over his Shoulder flows his waving Mane:
He neighs, he snorts, he bears his Head on high;
Before his ample Chest the frothy Waters fly.
Soon as the Prince appears without the Gate,
The Volcians, with their Virgin Leader, wait
His last Commands. Then with a graceful Mien,
Lights from her lofty Steed, the Warrior Queen:
Her Squadron imitates, and each descends;
Whose common Suit Camilla thus commends.
If Sense of Honor, if a Soul secure
Of inborn Worth, that can all Tests endure,
Can promise ought; or on it self rely,
Greatly to dare, to conquer or to dye:
Then, I alone, sustained by these, will meet
The Tyrrhene Troops, and promise their Defeat.
Ours be the Danger, ours the sole Renown;
You, General, stay behind, and guard the Town.
Turnus a while stood mute, with glad Surprise,
And on the fierce Virago fixed his Eyes:
Then thus returned: O Grace of Italy,
With what becoming Thanks can I reply!
Not only Words lie laboring in my Breast;
But Thought it self is by thy Praise oppressed.
Yet rob me not of all, but let me join
My Toils, my Hazard, and my Fame, with thine.
The Trojan, (not in Stratagem unskilled,)
Sends his light Foot before to scour the Field:
Himself, through steep Ascents, and thorny Brakes,
A larger Compass to the City takes.
This news my Scouts confirm: And I prepare
To foil his Cunning, and his Force to dare.
With chosen Foot his Passage to forelay;
And place an Ambush in the winding way.
Thou, with thy Volscians, face the Tuscan Horse:
The brave Messapus shall thy Troops enforce;
With those of Tibur; and the Latian Band:
Subjected all to thy Supreme Command.
This said, he warns Messapus to the War:
Then every Chief exhorts, with equal Care.
All thus encouraged, his own Troops he joins,
And hastes to prosecute his deep Designs.
Enclosed with Hills, a winding Valley lies,
By Nature formed for Fraud, and fitted for Surprise:
A narrow Track, by Human Steps untrode,
Leads, through perplexing Thorns, to this obscure abode.
High over the Vale a steepy Mountain stands;
Whence the surveying Sight the nether Ground commands.
The top is level: an offensive Seat
Of War; and from the War a safe Retreat.
For, on the right, and left, is room to press
The Foes at hand, or from afar distress:
To drive 'em headlong downward; and to pour
On their descending backs, a stony shower.
Thither young Turnus took the well known way;
Possessed the Pass, and in blind Ambush lay.
Mean time, Latonian Phoebe from the Skies,
Beheld the approaching War with hateful Eyes.
And called the light-foot Opis, to her aid,
Her most beloved, and ever trusty Maid.
Then with a sigh began: Camilla goes
To meet her Death, amidst her Fatal Foes.
The Nymph I loved of all my Mortal Train;
Invested with Diana's Arms, in vain.
Nor is my kindness for the Virgin, new,
'Twas born with Her, and with her Years it grew:
Her Father Metabus, when forced away
From old Privernum, for Tyrannick sway;
Snatched up, and saved from his prevailing Foes,
This tender Babe, Companion of his Woes.
Casmilla was her Mother; but he drowned,
One hissing Letter in a softer sound,
And called Camilla. Through the Woods, he flies;
Wrapped in his Robe the Royal Infant lies.
His Foes in sight, he mends his weary pace;
With shouts and clamours they pursue the Chase.
The Banks of Amasene at length he gains;
The raging Flood his farther flight restrains:
Raised over the Borders with unusual Rains.
Prepared to Plunge into the Stream, He fears:
Not for himself, but for the Charge he bears.
Anxious he stops a while; and thinks in haste;
Then, desperate in Distress, resolves at last.
A knotty Lance of well-boil'd Oak he bore;
The middle part with Cork he covered over:
He closed the Child within the hollow Space;
With Twigs of bending Osier bound the Case.
Then poised the Spear, heavy with Human Weight;
And thus invoked my Favor for the Freight.
Accept, great Goddess of the Woods, he said,
Sent by her Sire, this dedicated Maid:
Through Air she flies a Suppliant to thy Shrine;
And the first Weapons that she knows, are thine.
He said; and with full Force the Spear he threw:
Above the sounding Waves Camilla flew.
Then, pressed by Foes, he stemmed the stormy Tide;
And gained, by stress of Arms, the farther Side.
His fastened Spear he pulled from out the Ground;
And, Victor of his Vows, his Infant Nymph unbound.
Nor after that, in Towns which Walls enclose,
Would trust his hunted Life amidst his Foes.
But rough, in open Air he chose to lie:
Earth was his Couch, his Covering was the Sky.
On Hills unshorn, or in a desert Den,
He shunned the dire Society of Men.
A Shepherd's solitary Life he led:
His Daughter with the Milk of Mares he fed;
The Dugs of Bears, and every Salvage Beast,
He drew, and through her Lips the Liquor pressed.
The little Amazon could scarcely go,
He loads her with a Quiver and a Bow:
And, that she might her stagg'ring Steps command,
He with a slender Javelin fills her Hand:
Her flowing Hair no golden Fillet bound;
Nor swept her trayling Robe the dusty Ground.
Instead of these, a Tyger's Hide o'respread
Her Back and Shoulders, fastened to her Head.
The flying Dart she first attempts to fling;
And round her tender Temples tossed the Sling:
Then, as her Strength with Years increased, began
To pierce aloft in Air the soaring Swan:
And from the Clouds to fetch the Heron and the Crane.
The TuscanMatrons with each other vy'd,
To bless their Rival Sons with such a Bride:
But she disdains their Love; to share with me
The Silvan Shades, and vowed Virginity.
And, oh! I wish, contented with my Cares
Of Salvage Spoils, she had not sought the Wars:
Then had she been of my Celestial Train;
And shunned the Fate that dooms her to be slain.
But, since opposing Heaven's Decree, she goes
To find her Death among forbidden Foes;
Haste with these Arms, and take thy steepy flight,
Where, with the Gods averse, the Latins fight:
This Bow to thee, this Quiver, I bequeath,
This chosen Arrow to revenge her Death.
By what e're Hand Camilla shall be slain,
Or of the Trojan, or Italian Train,
Let him not pass unpunished from the Plain.
Then, in a hollow Cloud, my self will Aid,
To bear the breathless Body of my Maid:
Unspoil'd shall be her Arms, and unprofan'd
Her holy Limbs with any Human Hand:
And in a Marble Tomb laid in her Native Land.
She said: The faithful Nymph descends from high
With rapid flight, and cuts the sounding Sky;
Black Clouds and stormy Winds around her Body fly.
By this, the Trojan and the Tuscan Horse,
Drawn up in Squadrons, with united Force,
Approach the Walls; the sprightly Coursers bound;
Press forward on their Bitts, and shift their Ground:
Shields, Arms, and Spears, flash horrible from far;
And the Fields glitter with a waving War.
Opposed to these, come on with furious Force,
Messapus, Coras, and the Latian Horse;
These in the Body placed; on either hand
Sustained, and closed by fair Camilla's Band.
Advancing in a Line, they couch their Spears;
And less and less the middle Space appears.
Thick Smoke obscures the Field: And scarce are seen
The neighing Coursers, and the shouting Men.
In distance of their Darts they stop their Course;
Then Man to Man they rush, and Horse to Horse.
The face of Heaven their flying Jav'lins hide;
And Deaths unseen are dealt on either side.
Tyrrhenus, and Aconteus, void of Fear,
By metled Coursers born in full Carreer,
Meet first opposed: and, with a mighty Shock,
Their Horses Heads against each other knock.
Far from his Steed is fierce Aconteus cast;
As with an Engin's force, or Lightning's blast:
He rowls along in Blood, and breathes his last.
The Latin Squadrons take a sudden fright;
And sling their Shields behind, to save their Backs in flight.
Spurring at speed to their own Walls they drew;
Close in the rear the Tuscan Troops pursue:
And urge their flight. Asylas leads the Chase;
'Till seized with Shame they wheel about and face:
Receive their Foes, and raise a threatening Cry:
The Tuscans take their turn to fear and fly.
So swelling Surges, with a thundering Roar,
Driven on each others Backs, insult the Shore;
Bound over the Rocks, incroach upon the Land;
And far upon the Beach eject the Sand.
Then backward with a Swing, they take their Way;
Repulsed from upper Ground, and seek their Mother Sea:
With equal hurry quit the invaded Shore;
And swallow back the Sand, and Stones they spewed before.
Twice were the Tuscans Masters of the Field,
Twice by the Latins, in their turn repelled.
Ashamed at length, to the third Charge they ran
Both Hoasts resolved, and mingled Man to Man:
Now dying Groans are heard, the Fields are strow'd
With falling Bodies, and are drunk with Blood:
Arms, Horses, Men, on heaps together lie:
Confused the Fight, and more confused the Cry.
Orsilochus, who durst not press too near
Strong Remulus, at distance drove his Spear;
And stuck the Steel beneath his Horses Ear:
The fiery Steed, impatient of the Wound,
Curvets, and springing upward with a Bound,
His helpless Lord cast backward on the Ground.
Catillus pierced Iolas first; then drew
His reeking Lance, and at Herminius threw:
The mighty Champion of the Tuscan Crew.
His Neck and Throat unarmed, his Head was bare,
But shaded with a length of yellow Hair:
Secure, he fought, exposed on every part,
A spacious mark for Swords, and for the Dart:
Across the Shoulders came the flying Wound;
Transfixed, he fell, and doubled to the Ground.
The Sands with streaming Blood are sanguine died;
And Death with Honor, sought on either side.
Resistless through the War, Camilla rode;
In Danger unappall'd, and pleased with Blood.
One side was bare for her exerted Breast;
One Shoulder with her painted Quiver pressed.
Now from afar her Fatal Jav'lins play;
Now with her Axe's edge she hews her Way:
Diana's Arms upon her Shoulder found;
And when, too closely pressed, she quits the Ground;
From her bent Bow she sends a backward Wound.
Her Maids, in Martial Pomp, on either side,
Larina, Tulla, fierce Tarpeia ride;
Italians all: in Peace, their Queen's delight:
In War the bold Companions of the Fight.
So marched the Thracian Amazons of old,
When Thermodon with bloody Billows rolled:
Such Troops as these in shining Arms were seen;
When Theseus met in Fight their Maiden Queen.
Such to the Field Penthisilea led,
From the fierce Virgin when the Grecians fled:
With such, returned Triumphant from the War;
Her Maids with Cries attend the lofty Carr:
They clash with manly force their Moony Shields;
With Female Showts refound the Phrygian Fields.
Who foremost, and who last, Heroic Maid,
On the cold Earth were by thy Courage laid?
Thy Spear, of Mountain Ash, Eumenius first,
With fury driven, from side to side transpierc'd:
A purple Stream came spowting from the Wound;
Bathed in his Blood he lies, and bites the Ground.
Lyris and Pagasus at once she slew;
The former, as the slackened Reins he drew,
Of his faint steed: the latter, as he stretched
His Arm to prop his Friend, the Javelin reached.
By the same Weapon, sent from the same Hand,
Both fall together, and both spurn the Sand.
Amastrus next is added to the slain:
The rest in Rout she follows over the Plain.
Tereus, Harpalicus, Demophoon,
And Chromys, at full Speed her Fury shun.
Of all her deadly Darts, not one she lost;
Each was attended with a Trojan Ghost.
Young Ornithus bestrode a Hunter Steed,
Swift for the Chase, and of Apulian Breed:
Him, from afar, she spied in Arms unknown;
Over his broad Back an Oxes hide was thrown:
His Helm a Wolf, whose gaping Jaws were spread,
A covering for his Cheeks, and grinn'd around his Head.
He clench'd within his Hand an Iron Prong;
And towered above the rest, conspicuous in the Throng.
Him soon she singled from the flying Train,
And slew with ease: Then thus insults the slain.
Vain Hunter did thou think through Woods to chase
The Salvage Herd, a vile and trembling Race:
Here cease thy Vaunts, and own my Victory;
A Woman-Warrior was too strong for thee.
Yet if the Ghosts demand the Conqu'ror's Name,
Confessing great Camilla, save thy Shame.
Then Butes, and Orsilochus, she slew:
The bulkiest Bodies of the Trojan Crew.
But Butes Breast to Breast: the Spear descends
Above the Gorget, where his Helmet ends;
And over the Shield which his left Side defends.
Orsilochus and she, their Coursers ply;
He seems to follow, and she seems to fly.
But in a narrower Ring she makes the Race;
And then he flies, and she pursues the Chase.
Gathering at length on her deluded Foe,
She swings her Axe, and rises to the Blow:
To the Right Honble* William Berkley Baron Berkley of Stratton andct.

AE. 11. l. 1035.


Full on the Helm behind, with such a sway
The Weapon falls, the riven Steel gives way:
He groans, he roars, he sues in vain for Grace;
Brains, mingled with his Blood, besmear his Face.
Astonished Aunus just arrives by Chance,
To see his Fall, nor farther dares advance:
But fixing on the horrid Maid his Eye,
He stares, and shakes, and finds it vain to fly.
Yet like a true Ligurian, born to cheat,
(At least while Fortune favored his Deceit)
Cries out aloud, what Courage have you shown,
Who trust your Coursers Strength, and not your own?
Forego the vantage of your Horse, alight,
And then on equal Terms begin the Fight:
It shall be seen, weak Woman, what you can,
When Foot to Foot, you combat with a Man.
He said: She glows with Anger and Disdain,
Dismounts with speed to dare him on the Plain;
And leaves her Horse at large among her Train.
With her drawn Sword defies him to the Field;
And marching, lifts aloft her maiden Shield:
The Youth, who thought his Cunning did succeed,
Reins round his Horse, and urges all his Speed.
Adds the remembrance of the Spur, and hides
The goring Rowels in his bleeding Sides.
Vain Fool, and Coward, cries the lofty Maid,
Caught in the Train, which thou thy self have laid!
On others practice thy Ligurian Arts;
Thin Stratagems, and Tricks of little Hearts
Are lost on me. Nor shall thou safe retire,
With vaunting Lies to thy fallacious Sire.
At this, so fast her flying Feet she sped,
That soon she strained beyond his Horse's Head:
Then turning short, at once she seized the Rein,
And laid the Boaster groveling on the Plain.
Not with more ease the Falcon from above,
Trusses, in middle Air, the trembling Drove:
Then Plumes the Prey, in her strong Pounces bound:
The Feathers foul with Blood come tumbling to the ground.
Now mighty Jove, from his superior height,
With his broad Eye surveys the unequal Fight.
He fires the Breast of Tarchon with Disdain;
And sends him to redeem the abandoned Plain.
Betwixt the broken Ranks the Tuscan rides,
And these encourages, and those he chides:
Recalls each Leader, by his Name, from flight;
Renews their Ardour; and restores the Fight.
What Panick Fear has seized your Souls, O shame,
O Brand perpetual of the Etrurian Name;
Cowards incurable, a Woman's Hand
Drives, breaks, and scatters your ignoble Band!
Now cast away the Sword, and quit the Shield:
What use of Weapons which you dare not wield?
Not thus you fly your Female Foes, by Night,
Nor shun the Feast, when the full Bowls invite:
When to fat Offerings the glad Augur calls;
And the shrill Horn-pipe sounds to Bacchanals.
These are your studied Cares; your lewd Delight;
Swift to debauch; but slow to Manly Fight.
Thus having said, he spurs amid the Foes;
Not managing the Life he meant to lose.
The first he found he seized, with headlong haste,
In his strong Gripe; and clasped around the Waste:
'Twas Venulus; whom from his Horse he tore,
And, (laid athwart his own,) in Triumph bore.
Loud Shouts ensue: The Latins turn their Eyes,
And view the unusual sight with vast Surprise.
The fiery Tarchon, flying over the Plains,
Pressed in his Arms the ponderous Prey sustains:
Then, with his shortened Spear, explores around
His jointed Arms, to fix a deadly Wound.
Nor less the Captive struggles for his Life;
He writhes his Body to prolong the Strife:
And, fencing for his naked Throat, exerts
His utmost Vigor, and the point averts.
So stoops the yellow Eagle from on high,
And bears a speckled Serpent through the Sky;
Fast'ning his crooked Tallons on the Prey:
The Prisoner hisses through the liquid Way,
Resists the Royal Hawk, and though oppressed,
She fights in Volumes, and erects her Crest:
Turned to her Foe, she stiffens every Scale;
And shoots her forky Tongue, and whisks her threatening Tail.
Against the Victour all Defense is weak;
The imperial Bird still plies her with his Beak:
He tears her Bowels, and her Breast he gores;
Then claps his Pinions, and securely soars.
Thus, through the midst of circling Enemies,
Strong Tarchon snatched and bore away his Prize:
The Tyrrhene Troops, that shrunk before, now press
The Latins, and presume the like Success.
Then, Aruns doomed to Death, his Arts assayed
To murder, unespy'd, the Volscian Maid,
This way, and that his winding Course he bends;
And wheresoever she turns, her Steps attends.
When she retires victorious from the Chase,
He wheels about with Care, and shifts his place:
When rushing on, she seeks her Foes in Fight,
He keeps aloof, but keeps her still in sight:
He threats, and trembles, trying every Way
Unseen to kill, and safely to betray.
Chloreus, the Priest of Cybele, from far,
Glittering in Phrygian Arms amidst the War,
Was by the Virgin viewed: The Steed he pressed
Was proud with Trappings; and his brawny Chest
With Scales of gilded Brass was covered over:
A Robe of Tyrian Dye the Rider wore.
With deadly Wounds he gaul'd the distant Eoe;
Gnossian his Shafts, and Lycian was his Bow:
A Golden Helm his Front, and head surrounds;
A gilded Quiver from his Shoulder sounds.
Gold, weaved with Linen, on his Thighs he wore:
With Flowers of Needlework distinguished over:
With Golden Buckles bound, and gathered up before.
Him, the fierce Maid beheld with ardent Eyes;
Fond and Ambitious of so Rich a Prize:
Or that the Temple might his Trophies hold,
Or else to shine her self in Trojan Gold:
Blind in her haste, she chases him alone,
And seeks his Life, regardless of her own.
This lucky Moment the slye Traitor chose:
Then, starting from his Ambush up he rose,
And threw, but first to Heaven addressed his Vows.
O Patron of Soractes high Abodes,
Phoebus the Ruling Power among the Gods;
Whom first we serve, whole Woods of unctuous Pine
Are felled for thee, and to thy Glory shine;
By thee protected, with our naked Soles,
Through Flames unsing'd we march, and tread the kindled Coals:
Give me, propitious Power, to wash away
The Stains of this dishonorable Day:
Nor Spoils, nor Triumph, from the Fact I claim;
But with my future Actions trust my Fame.
Let me, by stealth; this Female Plague overcome;
And from the Field, return inglorious home.
To Arthur Manwaringe of Ightfield in the County of Salop Esqr:

AE. 11. l. 1150.


Apollo heard, and granting half his Prayer,
Shuffled in Winds the rest, and tossed in empty Air.
He gives the Death desired; his safe return,
By Southern Tempests to the Seas is born.
Now, when the Javelin whizz'd along the Skies,
Both Armies on Camilla turned their Eyes,
Directed by the Sound: Of either Host,
The unhappy Virgin, though concerned the most,
Was only deaf; so greedy was she bent
On Golden Spoils, and on her Prey intent:
Till in her Pap the winged Weapon stood
Infix'd; and deeply drunk the purple Blood.
Her sad Attendants hasten to sustain
Their dying Lady drooping on the Plain.
Far from their sight the trembling Aruns flies,
With beating Heart, and Fear confused with Joys;
Nor dares he farther to pursue his Blow;
Or even to bear the sight of his expiring Foe.
As when the Wolf has torn a Bullocks Hide,
At unawares, or ranch'd the Shepherd's Side:
Conscious of his audacious deed, he flies,
And claps his quivering Tail between his Thighs:
So, speeding once, the Wretch no more attends;
But spurring forward herds among his Friends.
She wrench'd the Javelin with her dying Hands;
But wedged within her Breast the Weapon stands:
The Wood she draws, the steely Point remains,
She staggers in her Seat, with agonizing Pains:
A gathering Mist o'reclouds her cheerful Eyes;
And from her Cheeks the rosy Color flies.
Then, turns to her, whom, of her Female Train,
She trusted most, and thus she speaks with Pain.
Acca, it is past! He swims before my sight,
Inexorable Death; and claims his right.
Bear my last Words to Turnus, fly with speed,
And bid him timely to my Charge succeed:
Repel the Trojans, and the Town relieve:
Farewell; and in this Kiss my parting Breath receive.
She said; and sliding, sunk upon the Plain;
Dying, her opened Hand forsakes the Rein;
Short, and more short, she pants: By slow degrees
Her Mind the Passage from her Body frees.
She drops her Sword, she nods her plumy Crest;
Her drooping Head declining on her Breast:
In the last Sigh her struggling Soul expires;
And murmuring with Disdain, to Stygian Sounds retires.
A Shout, that struck the Golden Stars, ensued:
Despair and Rage, the languish'd Fight renewed.
The Trojan Troops, and Tuscans in a Line,
Advance to charge; the mixed Arcadians join.
But Cynthia's Maid, high seated, from afar
Surveys the Field, and fortune of the War:
Unmoved a while, 'till prostrate on the Plain,
Welt'ring in Blood, she sees Camilla slain;
And round her Corpse, of Friends and Foes a fighting Train.
Then, from the bottom of her Breast, she drew
A mournful Sigh, and these sad Words ensue:
Too dear a Fine, ah much lamented Maid,
For warring with the Trojans, thou have paid!
Nor ought availed, in this unhappy Strife,
Diana's sacred Arms, to save thy Life.
Yet unrevenged thy Goddess will not leave
Her Vot'rys Death, nor with vain Sorrow grieve.
Branded the Wretch, and be his Name abhorred;
But after Ages shall thy Praise record.
The inglorious Coward soon shall press the Plain;
Thus vows thy Queen, and thus the Fates ordain.
High over the Field, there stood a hilly Mound;
Sacred the Place, and spread with Oaks around;
Where, in a Marble Tomb, Dercennus lay,
A King that once in Latium bore the Sway.
The beauteous Opis thither bent her flight,
To mark the Traitor Aruns, from the height.
Him, in refulgent Arms she soon espied,
Swollen with success, and loudly thus she cried.
Thy backward steps, vain boaster, are too late;
Turn, like a Man at length, and meet thy Fate.
Charged with my Message to Camilla go;
And say I sent thee to the Shades below;
An Honor undeserved from Cynthia's Bow.
She said: and from her Quiver chose with speed
The winged Shaft, predestined for the Deed:
Then, to the stubborn Eugh her strength applied;
Till the far distant Horns approached on either side.
The Bow-string touched her Breast, so strong she drew;
Whizzing in Air the fatal Arrow flew.
At once the twanging Bow, and sounding Dart
The Traitor heard, and felt the point within his heart.
Him, beating with his heels, in pangs of death,
His flying Friends to foreign Fields bequeath.
The Conquering Damsel, with expanded Wings,
The welcome Message to her Mistress brings.
Their Leader lost, the Volscians quit the Field;
And, unsustain'd, the Chiefs of Turnus yield.
The frighted Soldiers, when their Captains fly,
More on their speed than on their Strength rely.
Confused in flight, they bear each other down:
And spur their Horses headlong to the Town.
Driven by their Foes, and to their Fears resigned,
Not once they turn; but take their Wounds behind.
These drop the Shield, and those the Lance forego;
Or on their Shoulders bear the slackened Bow.
The Hoofs of Horses with a rattling sound,
Beat short, and thick, and shake the rotten ground.
Black clouds of dust, come rolling in the Sky,
And over the darkened Walls, and Rampires fly.
The trembling Matrons, from their lofty Stands,
Rend Heaven with Female Shrieks; and wring their Hands
All pressing on, Pursuers and pursued,
Are crushed in Crowds, a Mingled multitude.
Some happy few escape: the Throng too late
Rush on for Entrance, till they choke the Gate.
Even in the sight of home, the wretched Sire
Looks on, and sees his helpless Son expire.
Then, in a fright, the folding Gates they close:
But leave their Friends excluded with their Foes.
The vanquished cry; the Victors loudly shout;
It Is Terror all within; and Slaughter all without.
Blind in their Fear, they bounce against the wall,
Or to their Moats pursued, precipitate their fall.
The Latian Virgins, valiant with despair,
Armed on the Towr's the Common Danger share:
So much of Zeal their Country's Cause inspired;
So much Camilla's great Example fired.
Poles, sharpened in the flames, from high they throw;
With imitated Darts to gaul the Foe.
Their Lives, for Godlike freedom they bequeath;
And crowd each other to be first in death.
Mean time, to Turnus, ambush'd in the shade,
With heavy tidings, came the Unhappy Maid.
The Volscians overthrown, Camilla killed,
The Foes entirely Masters of the Field,
Like a resistless Flood, come rolling on:
The cry goes off the Plain, and thickens to the Town.
Inflamed with Rage, (for so the Furies fire
The Daunian's Breast, and so the Fates require,)
He leaves the hilly Pass, the Woods in vain
Possessed, and downward issues on the Plain:
Scarce was he gone, when to the Streights, now freed
From secret Foes, the Trojan Troops succeed.
Through the black Forest, and the ferny Brake,
Unknowingly secure, their Way they take.
From the rough Mountains to the Plain descend;
And there, in Order drawn, their Line extend.
Both Armies, now, in open Fields are seen:
Nor far the distance of the Space between.
Both to the City bend: Aeneas sees,
Through smoking Fields, his hastening Enemies.
And Turnus views the Trojans in Array,
And hears the approaching Horses proudly neigh.
Soon had their Hoasts in bloody Battle joined;
But westward to the Sea the Sun declined.
Entrenched before the Town, both Armies lie:
While Night with sable Wings o'respreads the Sky.
The Twelfth Book of the Aeneis.
The Argument.
Turnus challenges Aeneas to a single Combat: Articles are agreed on, but
broken by the Rutili, who wound Aeneas: He is miraculously cured by Venus,
forces Turnus to a Duel, and concludes the Poem with his Death.

WHen Turnus saw the Latins leave the Field;
Their Armies broken, and their Courage quelled;
Himself become the Mark of public Spite,
His Honor questioned for the promised Fight:
The more he was with Vulgar hate oppressed;
The more his Fury boiled within his Breast:
He rowz'd his Vigor for the last Debate;
And raised his haughty Soul, to meet his Fate.
As when the Swains the Lybian Lion chase,
He makes a sour Retreat, nor mends his Pace;
But if the pointed Javelin pierce his Side,
The lordly Beast returns with double Pride:
He wrenches out the Steel, he roars for Pain;
His sides he lashes, and erects his Mane.
So Turnus fares; his Eye Balls flash with Fire,
And his wide Nostrils Clouds of Smoke expire.
Trembling with Rage, around the Court he ran;
At length approached the King, and thus began.
No more excuses or Delays: I stand
In Arms prepared to Combat, hand to hand,
This base Deserter of his Native Land.
The Trojan, by his Word, is bound to take
The same Conditions which himself did make.
To ye Right Honble: Phillip Lord Stanhope Earl of Chesterfield Baron of
Shelford in the Kingdom of England

AE. 12. l. 1.


Renew the Truce, the solemn Rites prepare;
And to my single Virtue trust the War.
The Latians unconcerned shall see the Fight;
This Arm unaided shall assert your Right:
Then, if my prostrate Body press the Plain,
To him the Crown, and beauteous Bride remain.
To whom the King sedately thus replied;
Brave Youth, the more your Valor has been tried,
The more becomes it us, with due Respect
To weigh the chance of War, which you neglect.
You want not Wealth, or a successive Throne,
Or Cities, which your Arms have made your own;
My Towns and Treasures are at your Command;
And stored with blooming Beauties is my Land:
Laurentum more than one Lavinia sees,
Unmarry'd, fair, of Noble Families.
Now let me speak; and you with Patience hear,
Things which perhaps may grate a Lover's Ear:
But sound Advice, proceeding from a heart,
Sincerely yours, and free from fraudful Art.
The Gods, by Signs, have manifestly shown,
No Prince, Italian born, should heir my Throne:
Often have our Augurs, in Prediction skilled,
And often our Priests, a Foreign Son revealed.
Yet, won by Worth, that cannot be withstood,
Bribed by my Kindness to my kindred Blood,
Urged by my Wife, who would not be denied;
I promised my Lavinia for your Bride:
Her from her plighted Lord by force I took;
All ties of Treaties, and of Honor broke:
On your Account I waged an impious War,
With what Success it is needless to declare;
I, and my Subjects feel; and you have had your Share.
Twice vanquished, while in bloody Fields we strive,
Scarce in our Walls, we keep our Hopes alive:
The rolling Flood runs warm with human Gore;
The Bones of Latians, blanch the neighboring Shore:
Why put I not an end to this Debate,
Still unresolved, and still a Slave to Fate?
If Turnus's Death a lasting Peace can give,
Why should I not procure it, while you live.
Should I to doubtful Arms your Youth betray,
What would my Kinsmen, the Rutulians, say?
And should you fall in Fight, (which Heaven defend)
How curse the Cause, which hastened to his end,
The Daughter's Lover, and the Father's Friend?
Weigh in your Mind, the various Chance of War,
Pity your Parent's Age; and ease his Care.
Such balmy Words he poured, but all in vain;
The proffered Medicine but provoked the Pain.
The wrathful Youth disdaining the Relief,
With intermitting Sobs, thus vents his Grief.
The care, O best of Fathers, which you take
For my Concerns, at my Desire, forsake.
Permit me not to languish out my Days;
But make the best exchange of Life for Praise.
This Arm, this Lance, can well dispute the Prize;
And the Blood follows, where the Weapon flies:
His Goddess Mother is not near, to shroud
The flying Coward, with an empty Cloud.
But now the Queen, who feared for Turnus Life,
And loathed the hard Conditions of the Strife,
Held him by Force; and, dying in his Death,
In these sad Accents gave her Sorrow breath.
O Turnus I adjure thee by these Tears;
And what e're price Amata's Honor bears
Within thy Breast, since thou art all my hope,
My sickly Mind's repose, my sinking Age's Prop;
Since on the safety of thy Life alone,
Depends Latinus, and the Latian Throne:
Refuse me not this one, this only Prayer;
To wave the Combat, and pursue the War.
Whatever chance attends this fatal Strife,
Think it includes in thine Amata's Life.
I cannot live a Slave; or see my Throne
Usurped by Strangers, or a Trojan Son.
At this, a Flood of Tears Lavinia shed;
A crimson Blush her beauteous Face o'respread;
Varying her Cheeks by Turns, with white and red.
The driving Colors, never at a stay,
Run here and there; and flush, and fade away.
Delightful change! Thus Indian Ivory shows,
Which with the bord'ring Paint of Purple glows;
Or Lillies damask'd by the neighboring Rose.
The Lover gazed, and burning with desire,
The more he looked, the more he fed the Fire:
Revenge, and jealous Rage, and secret Spite;
Roll in his Breast, and rowze him to the Fight.
Then fixing on the Queen his ardent Eyes,
Firm to his first intent, he thus replies.
O Mother, do not by your Tears prepare
Such boding Omens, and prejudge the War.
Resolved on Fight, I am no longer free
To shun my Death, if Heaven my Death decree.
Then turning to the Herald, thus pursues;
Go, greet the Trojan with ungrateful News,
Denounce from me, that when to Morrow's Light
Shall guild the Heavens, he need not urge the Fight:
The Trojan and Rutulian Troops, no more
Shall dye, with mutual Blood, the Latian Shore:
Our single Swords the Quarrel shall decide,
And to the Victor be the beauteous Bride.
He said, and striding on, with speedy Pace,
He sought his Coursers of the Thracian Race.
At his Approach, they toss their Heads on high;
And proudly neighing, promise Victory.
The Sires of these Orythia sent from far,
To grace Pilumnus, when he went to War.
The drifts of Thracian Snows were scarce so white
Nor Northern Winds in fleetness matched their Flight.
Officious Grooms stand ready by his Side;
And some with Combs their flowing Manes divide,
And others stroke their Chests, and gently sooth their Pride.
He sheathed his Limbs in Arms; a tempered Mass
Of golden Metal those, and Mountain Brass.
Then to his Head his glittering Helm he tied;
And girt his faithful Fauchion to his side.
In his Aetnean Forge, the God of Fire
That Fauchion labored sor the Hero's Sire:
Immortal Keenness on the Blade bestowed,
And plunged it hissing in the Stygian Flood.
Prop'd on a Pillar, which the Ceiling bore,
Was placed the Lance Auruncan Actor wore;
Which with such Force he brandished in his Hand,
The tough Ash trembled like an Osyer Wand.
Then cried, O ponderous Spoil of Actor slain,
And never yet by Turnus tossed in vain,
Fail not this Day thy wonted Force: But go,
Sent by this Hand, to pierce the Trojan Foe:
Give me to tear his Corslet from his Breast,
And from that Eunuch Head, to rend the Crest:
Dragged in the Dust, his frizled Hair to soil;
Hot from the vexing Ir'n, and smeared with fragrant Oil.
Thus while he raves, from his wide Nostrils flies
A fiery Steam, and Sparkles from his Eyes.
So fares the Bull in his loved Female's sight;
Proudly he bellows, and preludes the fight:
He tries his goring Horns against a Tree;
And meditates his absent Enemy:
He pushes at the Winds, he digs the Strand
With his black Hoofs, and spurns the yellow Sand.
Nor less the Trojan, in his Lemnian Arms,
To future Fight his Manly Courage warms:
He whets his Fury, and with Joy prepares,
To terminate at once the lingering Wars.
To cheer his Cheifs, and tender Son, relates
What Heaven had promised, and expounds the Fates.
Then to the Latian King he sends, to cease
The Rage of Arms, and ratifies the Peace.
The Morn ensuing from the Mountain's height,
Had scarcely spread the Skies with rosy Light;
The Etherial Coursers bounding from the Sea,
From out their flaming Nostrils breathed the Day:
When now the Trojan and Rutulian Guard,
In friendly Labor joined, the List prepared.
Beneath the Walls, they measure out the Space;
Then sacred Altars rear, on sods of Grass;
Where, with Religious Rites, their common Gods they place.
In purest white, the Priests their Heads attire,
And living Waters bear, and holy Fire:
And over their Linen Hoods, and shaded Hair,
Long twisted Wreaths of sacred Vervain wear.
In Order issuing from the Town, appears
The Latin Legion, armed with pointed Spears;
And from the Fields, advancing on a Line,
The Trojan and the Tuscan Forces join:
Their various Arms afford a pleasing Sight;
A peaceful Train they seem, in Peace prepared for Fight.
Betwixt the Ranks the proud Commanders ride,
Glittering with Gold, and Vests in Purple died.
Here Mnestheus Author of the Memmian Line,
And there Messapus born of Seed Divine.
The Sign is given, and round the listed Space,
Each Man in order fills his proper Place.
Reclining on their ample Shields, they stand;
And fix their pointed Lances in the Sand.
Now, studious of the sight, a numerous Throng
Of either Sex promiscuous, old and young,
Swarm from the Town: By those who rest behind,
The Gates and Walls, and Houses tops are lined.
Mean time the Queen of Heaven beheld the sight,
With Eyes unpleas'd, from Mount Albano's height:
(Since called Albano, by succeeding Fame,
But then an empty Hill, without a Name.)
She thence surveyed the Field, the Trojan Powers,
The Latian Squadrons, and Laurentine Towers.
Then thus the Goddess of the Skies bespake,
With Sighs and Tears, the Goddess of the Lake;
King Turnus Sister, once a lovely Maid,
E're to the Lust of lawless Jove betrayed:
Compressed by Force, but by the grateful God,
Now made the Nais of the neighboring Flood.
O Nymph, the Pride of living Lakes, said she,
O most renowned, and most beloved by me,
Long have thou known, nor need I to record
The wanton sallies of my wandering Lord:
Of every Latian fair, whom Jove misled,
To mount by Stealth my violated Bed,
To thee alone I grudged not his Embrace;
But gave a part of Heaven, and an unenvied Place.
To ye Honble. Brigadier Edward Fitzpatrick



Now learn from me, thy near approaching Grief,
Nor think my Wishes want to thy Relief.
While fortune favored, nor Heaven's King denied,
To lend my Succor to the Latian side,
I saved thy Brother, and the sinking State:
But now he struggles with unequal Fate;
And goes with Gods averse, o'rematch'd in Might,
To meet inevitable Death in Fight:
Nor must I break the Truce, nor can sustain the sight.
Thou, if thou dare, thy present Aid supply;
It well becomes a Sister's Care to try.
At this the lovely Nymph, with Grief oppressed,
Thrice tore her Hair, and beat her comely Breast.
To whom Saturnia thus; thy Tears are late;
Haste, snatch him, if he can be snatched from Fate:
New Tumults kindle, violate the Truce;
Who knows what changeful Fortune may produce?
It Is not a Crime to attempt what I decree,
Or if it were, discharge the Crime on me.
She said, and, sailing on the winged Wind,
Left the sad Nymph suspended in her Mind.
And now in Pomp the peaceful Kings appear:
Four Steeds the Chariot of Latinus bear:
Twelve golden Beams around his Temples play,
To mark his Lineage from the God of Day.
Two snowy Coursers Turnus's Chariot yoke,
And in his Hand two Massy Spears he shook:
Then issued from the Camp, in Arms Divine,
Aeneas, Author of the Roman Line:
And by his side Ascanius took his Place,
The second Hope of Rome's Immortal Race.
Adorned in white, a reverend Priest appears;
And Offerings to the flaming Altars bears;
A Porket, and a Lamb, that never suffered Shears.
Then, to the rising Sun he turns his Eyes,
And strews the Beasts, designed for Sacrifice,
With Salt, and Meal: With like officious Care
He marks their Foreheads, and he clips their Hair.
Betwixt their Horns the Purple Wine he sheds,
With the same generous Juice the Flame he feeds.
Aeneas then unsheathed his shining Sword,
And thus with pious Prayers the Gods adored.
All-seeing Sun, and thou Ausonian Soil,
For which I have sustained so long a Toil,
Thou King of Heaven, and thou the Queen of Air,
(Propitious now, and reconciled by Prayer,)
Thou God of War, whose unresisted Sway
The Labors and Events of Arms obey;
Ye living Fountains, and ye running Floods,
All Powers of Ocean, all Etherial Gods,
Hear, and bear Record: if I fall in Field,
Or Recreant in the Fight, to Turnus yield,
My Trojans shall increase Evander's Town;
Ascanius shall renounce the Ausonian Crown:
All Claims, all Questions of Debate shall cease;
Nor he, nor they, with Force infringe the Peace.
But if my juster Arms prevail in Fight,
As sure they shall, if I divine aright,
My Trojans shall not over the Italians Reign;
Both equal, both unconquered shall remain:
Joined in their Laws, their Lands, and their Abodes;
I ask but Altars for my weary Gods:
The Care of those Religious Rites be mine;
The Crown to King Latinus I resign:
His be the Sovereign Sway. Nor will I share
His Power in Peace, or his Command in War.
For me, my Friends another Town shall frame,
And bless the rising Towers, with fair Lavinia's Name.
Thus he. Then with erected Eyes and Hands,
The Latian King before his Altar stands.
By the same Heaven, said he, and Earth, and Main,
And all the Powers, that all the three contain;
By Hell below, and by that upper God,
Whose Thunder signs the Peace, who seals it with his Nod;
So let Latona's double Offspring hear,
And double fronted Janus, what I swear;
I touch the sacred Altars, touch the Flames,
And all those Powers attest, and all their Names:
Whatever Chance befall on either Side,
No term of time this Union shall divide:
No Force, no Fortune, shall my Vows unbind,
Or shake the steadfast Tenor of my Mind:
Not though the circling Seas should break their Bound,
Overflow the Shores, or sap the solid Ground;
Not though the Lamps of Heaven their Spheres forsake,
Hurled down, and hissing in the nether Lake:
Even as this Royal Scepter, (for he bore
A Scepter in his Hand) shall never more
Shoot out in Branches, or renew the Birth;
(An Orphan now, cut from the Mother Earth
By the keen Axe, dishonored of its Hair,
And cased in Brass, for Latian Kings to bear.)
When thus in public view the Peace was tied,
With solemn Vows, and sworn on either side,
All dues performed which holy Rites require;
The Victim Beasts are slain before the Fire:
The trembling Entrails from their Bodies torn,
And to the fatten'd Flames in Chargers born.
Already the Rutulians deemed their Man
O'rematch'd in Arms, before the Fight began.
First rising Fears are whispered through the Crowd;
Then, gathering sound, they murmur more aloud.
Now side to side, they measure with their Eyes
The Champions bulk, their Sinews, and their Sise:
The nearer they approach, the more is known
The apparent Disadvantage of their own.
Turnus himself, appears in public sight,
Conscious of Fate, desponding of the Fight.
Slowly he moves; and at his Altar stands
With eyes dejected, and with trembling hands:
And while he mutters undistinguished Prayers,
A livid deadness in his Cheeks appears.
With anxious Pleasure when Juturna viewed
The increasing Fright of the mad Multitude,
When their short Sighs, and thickning Sobs she heard,
And found their ready Minds for Change prepared;
Dissembling her immortal Form, she took
Camertus Mien, his Habit, and his Look;
A Chief of ancient Blood: in Arms well known
Was his great Sire, and he, his greater Son.
His Shape assumed, amid the Ranks she ran,
And humouring their first Motions, thus began.
For shame, Rutulians, can you bear the sight,
Of one exposed for all, in single Fight?
Can we, before the Face of Heaven, confess
Our Courage colder, or our Numbers less?
View all the Trojan Host, the Arcadian Band,
And Tuscan Army; count 'em as they stand,
Undaunted to the Battle, if we go,
Scarce every second Man will share a Foe.
Turnus, it is true, in this unequal Strife
Shall lose, with Honor, his devoted Life:
Or change it rather for immortal Fame,
Succeeding to the Gods, from whence he came:
But you, a servile, and inglorious Band,
For Foreign Lords shall sow your Native Land:
Those fruitful Fields, your fighting Fathers gained,
Which have so long their lazy Sons sustained.
With Words like these, she carried her Design;
A rising Murmur runs along the Line.
Then even the City Troops, and Latians, tired
With tedious War, seem with new Souls inspired:
Their Champion's Fate with Pity they lament;
And of the League, so lately sworn, repent.
Nor fails the Goddess to foment the Rage
With lying Wonders, and a false Presage:
But adds a Sign, which, present to their Eyes,
Inspires new Courage, and a glad Surprise.
For, sudden, in the fiery Tracts above,
Appears in Pomp the Imperial Bird of Jove:
A plump of Fowl he spies, that swim the Lakes;
And over their Heads his sounding Pinions shakes.
Then stooping on the fairest of the Train,
In his strong Tallons trussed a silver Swan.
The Italians wonder at the unusual sight;
But while he lags, and labors in his flight,
Behold the Dastard Fowl return anew;
And with united force the Foe pursue:
Clamorous around the Royal Hawk they fly;
And thick'ning in a Cloud, o'reshade the Sky.
They cuff, they scratch, they cross his airy Course;
Nor can the encumbered Bird sustain their Force:
But vexed, not vanquished, drops the ponderous Prey;
And, lightened of his Burden, wings his Way.
The Ausonian Bands with Shouts salute the sight:
Eager of Action, and demand the Fight.
Then King Tolumnius, versed in Augur's Arts,
Cries out, and thus his boasted Skill imparts.
At length it is granted, what I long desired;
This, this is what my frequent Vows required.
Ye Gods, I take your Omen, and obey;
Advance, my Friends, and charge, I lead the Way.
These are the Foreign Foes, whose impious Band,
Like that rapacious Bird, infest our Land:
But soon, like him, they shall be forced to Sea
By Strength united, and forego the Prey:
Your timely Succor to your Country bring;
Haste to the Rescue; and redeem your King.
He said: And pressing onward, through the Crew,
Poised in his lifted Arm, his Lance he threw.
The winged Weapon, whistling in the Wind,
Came driving on; nor missed the Mark designed.
At once the Cornel rattled in the Skies;
At once tumultuous Shouts, and Clamours rise.
Nine Brothers in a goodly Band there stood,
Born of Arcadian mixed with Tuscan Blood:
Gylippus Sons: The fatal Javelin flew,
Aimed at the midmost of the friendly Crew.
A Passage through the jointed Arms it found,
Just where the Belt was to the Body bound;
And struck the gentle Youth, extended on the Ground.
Then fired with pious Rage, the generous Train
Run madly forward, to revenge the slain.
And some with eager haste their Jav'lins throw;
And some, with Sword in hand, assault the Foe.
The wished Insult the Latin Troops embrace;
And meet their Ardour in the middle Space.
The Trojans, Tuscans, and Arcadian Line,
With equal Courage obviate their Design.
Peace leaves the violated Fields; and Hate
Both Armies urges to their mutual Fate.
With impious Haste their Altars are o'return'd,
The Sacrifice half broiled, and half unburn'd.
Thick Storms of Steel from either Army fly,
And Clouds of clashing Darts obscure the Sky:
Brands from the Fire, are missive Weapons made;
With Chargers, Bowls, and all the Priestly Trade.
Latinus frighted, hastens from the Fray,
And bears his unregarded Gods away.
These on their Horses vault, those yoke the Car;
The rest with Swords on high, run headlong to the War.
Messapus, eager to confound the Peace,
Spurred his hot Courser through the fighting Preace,
At King Aulestes; by his Purple known
A Tuscan Prince, and by his Regal Crown:
And with a Shock encount'ring, bore him down.
Backward he fell; and as his Fate designed,
The Ruins of an Altar were behind:
There pitching on his Shoulders, and his Head,
Amid the scattering Fires he lay supinely spread.
The beamy Spear, descending from above,
His Cuirass pierced, and through his Body drove.
Then, with a scornful Smile, the Victor cries;
The Gods have found a fitter Sacrifice.
Greedy of Spoils, the Italians strip the dead
Of his rich Armor; and uncrown his Head.
Priest Chorinaeus armed his better Hand,
From his own Altar, with a blazing Brand:
And, as Ebusus with a thundering Pace
Advanced to Battle, dashed it on his Face:
His bristly Beard shines out with sudden Fires,
The crackling Crop a noisome scent expires.
Following the blow, he seized his curling Crown
With his left Hand; his other cast him down.
The prostrate Body with his Knees he pressed;
And plunged his holy Poniard in his Breast.
While Podalirius, with his Sword, pursued
The Shepherd Alsus through the flying Crowd,
Swiftly he turns; and aims a deadly blow,
Full on the Front of his unwary Foe.
The broad Axe enters, with a crashing Sound,
And cleaves the Chin, with one continued Wound:
Warm Blood, and mingled Brains, besmear his Arms around.
An Iron Sleep his stupid Eyes oppressed,
And sealed their heavy Lids in endless rest.
But good Aeneas rushed amid the Bands,
Bare was his Head, and naked were his Hands,
In sign of Truce: Then thus he cries aloud,
What sudden Rage, what new Desire of Blood
Inflames your altered Minds? O Trojans cease
From impious Arms, nor violate the Peace.
By Human Sanctions, and by Laws Divine,
The Terms are all agreed, the War is mine.
Dismiss your Fears, and let the Fight ensue;
This Hand alone shall right the Gods and you:
Our injured Altars, and their broken Vow,
To this avenging Sword the faithless Turnus owe.
Thus while he spoke, unmindful of Defense,
A winged Arrow struck the Pious Prince.
But whether from some Human Hand it came,
Or Hostile God, is left unknown by Fame:
No Human Hand, or Hostile God was found,
To boast the Triumph of so base a Wound.
When Turnus saw the Trojan quit the Plain,
His Chiefs dismayed, his Troops a fainting Train:
The unhop'd Event his heightened Soul inspires,
At once his Arms and Coursers he requires.
Then, with a leap, his lofty Chariot gains,
And with a ready hand assumes the Reins.
He drives impetuous, and where e're he goes,
He leaves behind a Lane of slaughtered Foes.
These his Lance reaches, over those he rowls
His rapid Car, and crushes out their Souls:
In vain the vanquished fly; the Victor sends
The dead Men's Weapons at their living Friends.
Thus on the Banks of Hebrus freezing Flood
The God of Battel's in his angry Mood,
Clashing his Sword against his brazen Shield,
Lets loose the Reins, and scours along the Field:
Before the Wind his fiery Coursers fly,
Groans the sad Earth, resounds the rattling Sky.
Wrath, Terror, Treason, Tumult, and Despair,
Dire Faces, and deformed, surround the Car;
Friends of the God, and Followers of the War.
With Fury not unlike, nor less Disdain,
Exulting Turnus flies along the Plain:
His smoking Horses, at their utmost Speed,
He lashes on; and urges over the dead.
Their Fetlocks run with Blood; and when they bound,
The Gore, and gathering Dust, are dashed around.
Thamyris and Pholus, Masters of the War,
He killed at hand, but Sthelenus afar:
From far the Sons of Imbracus he slew,
Glaucus, and Lades, of the Lycian Crew:
Both taught to fight on Foot, in Battle joined;
Or mount the Courser that outstrips the Wind.
Mean time Eumedes, vaunting in the Field,
New fired the Trojans, and their Foes repelled.
This Son of Dolon bore his Grandsire's Name;
But emulated more his Father's Fame.
His guileful Father, sent a nightly Spy,
The Grecian Camp and Order to descry:
Hard Enterprise, and well he might require
Achilles Carr, and Horses for his hire:
But, met upon the Scout, the Etolian Prince
In Death bestowed a juster Recompense.
Fierce Turnus viewed the Trojan from afar;
And lanch'd his Javelin from his lofty Carr:
Then lightly leaping down pursued the Blow,
And, pressing with his Foot, his prostrate Foe,
Wrench'd from his feeble hold the shining Sword;
And plunged it in the Bosom of its Lord.
Possess, said he, the fruit of all thy Pains,
And measure, at thy length, our Latian Plains.
Thus are my Foes rewarded by my hand,
Thus may they build their Town, and thus enjoy the Land.
Then Dares, Butes, Sybaris he slew,
Whom over his Neck his flound'ring Courser threw.
As when loud Boreas with his blustering Train,
Stoops from above, incumbent on the Main;
Where e're he flies, he drives the Rack before;
And rowls the Billows on the Aegean Shore:
So where resistless Turnus takes his Course,
The scattered Squadrons bend before his force:
His Crest of Horses Hair is blown behind,
By adverse Air; and rustles in the Wind.
This, haughty Phegeus saw with high Disdain,
And as the Chariot rolled along the Plain,
Light from the Ground he leapt, and seized the Rein.
Thus hung in Air, he still retained his hold;
The Coursers frighted, and their Course controlled.
The Lance of Turnus reached him as he hung,
And pierced his plated Arms; but passed along,
And only razed the Skin: he turned, and held
Against his threatening Foe his ample Shield:
To Thomas Hobbs Dr: in Phisic

En: 12. l 570.


Then called for Aid: but while he cried in vain,
The Chariot bore him backward on the Plain.
He lies reversed; the Victor King descends,
And strikes so justly where his Helmet ends,
He lops the Head. The Latian Fields are drunk
With streams that issue from the bleeding Trunk.
While he triumphs, and while the Trojans yield,
The wounded Prince is forced to leave the Field:
Strong Mnestheus, and Achates often tried,
And young Ascanius, weeping by his side,
Conduct him to his Tent: Scarce can he rear
His Limbs from Earth, supported on his Spear.
Resolved in Mind, regardless of the Smart,
He tugs with both his Hands, and breaks the Dart.
The Steel remains. No readier way he found
To draw the Weapon, than to enlarge the Wound.
Eager of Fight, impatient of delay,
He begs; and his unwilling Friends obey.
Iapis was at hand to prove his Art,
Whose blooming Youth so fired Apollo's Heart,
That for his Love he proffered to bestow
His tuneful Harp, and his unerring Bow.
The pious Youth, more studious how to save
His aged Sire, now sinking to the Grave,
Pr^ferr'd the power of Plants, and silent Praise
Of healing Arts, before Phoebeian Bays.
Prop'd on his Lance the pensive Hero stood,
And heard, and saw unmoved, the mourning Crowd.
The famed Physician tucks his Robes around,
With ready Hands, and hastens to the Wound.
With gentle Touches he performs his part,
This way and that, soliciting the Dart,
And exercises all his Heavenly Art.
All softning Simples, known of Sovereign Use,
He presses out, and pours their noble Juice;
These first infused, to lenifie the Pain,
He tugs with Pincers, but he tugs in vain.
Then, to the Patron of his Art he prayed;
The Patron of his Art refused his Aid.
Mean time the War approaches to the Tents;
The Allarm grows hotter, and the Noise augments:
The driving Dust proclaims the Danger near,
And first their Friends, and then their Foes appear;
Their Friends retreat, their Foes pursue the Rear.
The Camp is filled with Terror and Affright,
The hissing Shafts within the Trench alight:
An undistinguished Noise ascends the Sky;
The Shouts of those who kill, and Groans of those who dye.
But now the Goddess Mother, moved with Grief,
And pierced with Pity, hastens her Relief.
A Branch of healing Dittany she brought;
Which in the Cretan Fields with Care she sought:
Rough is the Stem, which woolly Leafs surround;
The Leafs with Flowers, the Flowers with Purple crowned:
Well known to wounded Goats; a sure Relief
To draw the pointed Steel, and ease the Grief.
This Venus brings, in Clouds involved; and brews
The extracted Liquor with Ambrosian Dews,
And odorous Panacee: Unseen she stands,
Temp'ring the mixture with her Heavenly Hands:
And pours it in a Bowl, already crowned
With Juice of medc'nal herbs prepared to bathe the Wound.
The Leech, unknowing of superior Art,
Which aids the Cure, with this foments the part;
And in a Moment ceased the raging smart.
Stanch'd is the Blood, and in the bottom stands:
The Steel, but scarcely touched with tender Hands,
Moves up, and follows of its own Accord;
And Health and Vigor are at once restored.
Iapis first perceived the closing Wound;
And first the Footsteps of a God he found.
Arms, Arms, he cries, the Sword and Shield prepare,
And send the willing Chief, renewed to War.
This is no Mortal Work, no Cure of mine,
Nor Art's effect, but done by Hands Divine:
Some God our General to the Battle fends;
Some God preserves his Life for greater Ends.
The Hero arms in haste: His hands infold
His Thighs with Cuisses of refulgent Gold:
Inflamed to fight, and rushing to the Field,
That Hand sustaining the Celestial Shield,
This gripes the Lance; and with such Vigor shakes,
That to the Rest the beamy Weapon quakes.
Then, with a close Embrace he strained his Son;
And kissing through his Helmet, thus begun.
My Son, from my Example learn the War,
In Camps to suffer, and in Fields to dare:
But happier Chance than mine attend thy Care.
This Day my hand thy tender Age shall shield,
And crown with Honors of the conquered Field:
Thou, when thy riper Years shall send thee forth,
To toils of War, be mindful of my Worth:
Assert thy birthright; and in Arms be known,
For Hector's Nephew, and Aeneas's Son.
He said, and, striding, issued on the Plain;
Anteus, and Mnestheus, and a numerous Train
Attend his Steps: The rest their Weapons take,
And crowding to the Field, the Camp forsake.
A cloud of blinding Dust is raised around;
Labors beneath their Feet the trembling ground.
Now Turnus, posted on a Hill, from far
Beheld the progress of the moving War:
With him the Latins viewed the covered Plains;
And the chill Blood ran backward in their Veins.
Juturna saw the advancing Troops appear;
And heard the hostile Sound, and fled for Fear.
Aeneas leads; and draws a sweeping Train,
Closed in their Ranks, and pouring on the Plain.
As when a Whirlwind rushing to the Shore,
From the mid Ocean, drives the Waves before:
The painful Hind, with heavy Heart foresees,
The flatted Fields, and slaughter of the Trees;
With like impetuous Rage the Prince appears,
Before his doubled Front; nor less Destruction bears.
And now both Armies shock, in open Field;
Osyris is by strong Thymbraeus killed.
Archetius, Ufens, Epulon, are slain;
(All famed in Arms, and of the Latian Train;)
By Gyas, Mnestheus, and Achates Hand:
The fatal Augur falls, by whofe command
The Truce was broken, and whose Lance embru'd
With Trojan Blood, the unhappy Fight renewed.
Loud Shouts and Clamours rend the liquid Sky;
And over the Field the frighted Latins fly.
The Prince disdains the Dastards to pursue,
Nor moves to meet in Arms the fighting few:
Turnus alone, amid the dusky Plain,
He seeks, and to the Combat calls in vain.
Juturna heard, and seized with Mortal Fear,
Forced from the Beam her Brother's Charioteer;
Assumes his Shape, his Armor, and his Mien;
And like Metiscus, in his Seat is seen.
As the black Swallow near the Palace plies;
Over empty Courts, and under Arches flies;
Now hawks aloft, now skims along the Flood,
To furnish her loquacious Nest with Food:
So drives the rapid Goddess over the Plains;
The smoking Horses run with loosened Reins.
She steers a various Course among the Foes;
Now here, now there, her conquering Brother shows:
Now with a straight, now with a wheeling flight,
She turns, and bends, but shuns the single Fight.
Aeneas, fired with Fury, breaks the Crowd,
And seeks his Foe, and calls by name aloud:
He runs within a narrower Ring, and tries
To stop the Chariot, but the Chariot flies.
If he but gain a glimps, Juturna fears,
And far away the Daunian Hero bears.
What should he do! nor Arts nor Arms avail;
And various Cares in vain his Mind assail.
The great Messapus thundering through the Field,
In his left hand two pointed Jav'lins held;
Encountering on the Prince, one Dart he drew,
And with unerring aim, and utmost Vigor threw.
Aeneas saw it come, and stooping low
Beneath his Buckler, shunned the threatening blow.
The Weapon hissed above his Head, and tore
The waving Plume, which on his Helm he wore.
Forced by this hostile Act, and fired with spite,
That flying Turnus still declined the Fight;
The Prince, whose Piety had long repelled
His inborn ardour, now invades the Field:
Invokes the Powers of violated Peace,
Their Rites, and injured Altars to redress:
Then, to his Rage abandoning the Rein,
With Blood and slaughtered Bodies fills the Plain.
What God can tell, what Numbers can display
The various Labors of that fatal Day!
What Chiefs, and Champions fell on either side,
In Combat slain, or by what Deaths they died?
Whom Turnus, whom the Trojan Hero killed:
Who shared the Fame, and fortune of the Field?
Jove, could thou view, and not avert thy sight,
Two jarring Nations joined in cruel fight,
Whom Leagues of lasting Love so shortly shall unite!
Aeneas first Rutulian Sucro found,
Whose Valor made the Trojans quit their Ground:
Betwixt his Ribs the Javelin drove so just,
It reached his Heart, nor needs a second Thrust.
Now Turnus, at two blows, two Brethren slew;
First from his Horse fierce Amycus he threw;
Then leaping on the Ground, on Foot assailed
Diores, and in equal Fight prevailed.
Their lifeless Trunks he leaves upon the place;
Their Heads distilling Gore, his Chariot grace.
Three cold on Earth the Trojan Hero threw;
Whom without respite at one Charge he slew.
Cethegus, Tanais, Tagus, fell oppressed,
And sad Onythes, added to the rest;
Of Theban Blood, whom Peridia bore.
Turnus, two Brothers from the Lycian Shore,
And from Apollo's Fane to Battle sent,
O'rethrew, nor Phoebus could their Fate prevent.
Peaceful Menaetes after these he killed,
Who long had shunned the Dangers of the Field:
On Lerna's Lake a silent Life he led,
And with his Nets and Angle earned his Bread.
Nor pompous Cares, nor Palaces he knew,
But wisely from the infectious World withdrew.
Poor was his House; his Father's painful Hand
Discharged his Rent, and plough'd another's Land.
As Flames among the lofty Woods are thrown,
On different sides, and both by Winds are blown,
The Laurels crackle in the sputt'ring Fire;
The frighted Silvans from their Shades retire:
Or as two neighboring Torrents fall from high,
Rapid they run; the foamy Waters fry:
They roll to Sea with unresisted Force,
And down the Rocks precipitate their Course:
Not with less rage the Rival Heroes take
Their different Ways; nor less Destruction make.
With Spears afar, with Swords at hand they strike;
And zeal of Slaughter fires their Souls alike.
Like them, their dauntless Men maintain the Field,
And Hearts are pierced unknowing how to yield:
They blow for blow return, and wound for wound;
And heaps of Bodies raise the level Ground.
Murranus, boasting of his Blood, that springs
From a long Royal Race of Latian Kings,
Is by the Trojan from his Chariot thrown,
Crushed with the weight of an unweildy Stone:
Betwixt the Wheels he fell; the Wheels that bore
His living Load, his dying Body tore.
His starting Steeds, to shun the glittering Sword,
Paw down his trampled Limbs, forgetful of their Lord.
Fierce Hillus threatened high; and face to face
Affronted Turnus in the middle space:
The Prince encountered him in full Carreer,
And at his Temples aimed his deadly Spear:
So fatally the flying Weapon sped,
That through his Brazen Helm it pierced his Head.
Nor Cisseus coud'st thou escape from Turnus hand,
In vain the strongest of the Arcadian Band:
Nor to Cupentus could his Gods afford,
Availing Aid against the Aenean Sword:
Which to his naked Heart pursued the Course:
Nor could his plated Shield sustain the Force.
Iolas fell, whom not the Grecian Powers,
Nor great Subvertor of the Trojan Towers,
Were doomed to kill, while Heaven prolonged his Date:
But who can pass the Bounds prefixed by Fate?
In high Lyrnessus, and in Troy, he held
Two Palaces, and was from each expelled:
Of all the mighty Man, the last Remains
A little spot of Foreign Earth contains.
And now both Hosts their broken Troops unite,
In equal Ranks, and mix in mortal Fight.
Seresthus, and undaunted Mnestheus join
The Trojan, Tuscan, and Arcadian Line:
Sea-born Messapus, with Atinas, heads
The Latin Squadrons, and to Battle leads.
They strike, they push, they throng the scanty space;
Resolved on Death, impatient of Disgrace;
And where one falls, another fills his Place.
The Cyprian Goddess now inspires her Son
To leave the unfinished Fight, and storm the Town.
For while he rowls his Eyes around the Plain,
In quest of Turnus, whom he seeks in vain,
He views the ungarded City from afar,
In careless quiet, and secure of War:
Occasion offers, and excites his Mind,
To dare beyond the Task he first designed.
Resolved, he calls his Chiefs: they leave the Fight;
Attended thus, he takes a neighboring Height:
The crowding Troops about their General stand,
All under Arms, and wait his high Command.
Then thus the lofty Prince: Hear and obey,
Ye Trojan Bands, without the least delay.
Jove is with us, and what I have decreed
Requires our utmost Vigor, and our Speed.
Your instant Arms against the Town prepare;
The source of Mischief, and the Seat of War.
This Day the Latian Towers, that mate the Sky,
Shall level with the Plain in Ashes lie:
The People shall be Slaves; unless in time
They kneel for Pardon, and repent their Crime.
Twice have our Foes been vanquished on the Plain;
Then shall I wait till Turnus will be slain?
Your Force against the perjured City bend:
There it began, and there the War shall end.
The Peace profaned our rightful Arms requires:
Cleanse the polluted Place with purging Fires.
He finished; and one Soul inspiring all,
Formed in a Wedge, the Foot approach the Wall.
Without the Town, an unprovided Train
Of gaping, gazing Citizens are slain.
Some Firebrands, others scaling Ladders bear;
And those they toss aloft, and these they rear:
The Flames now lanch'd, the feathered Arrows fly,
And Clouds of missive Arms obscure the Sky.
Advancing to the Front, the Hero stands,
And stretching out to Heaven his Pious Hands;
Attests the Gods, asserts his Innocence,
Upbraids with breach of Faith the Ausonian Prince:
Declares the Royal Honor doubly stained,
And twice the Rites of holy Peace profaned.
Dissenting Clamours in the Town arise;
Each will be heard, and all at once advise.
One part for Peace, and one for War contends:
Some would exclude their Foes, and some admit their Friends.
The helpless King is hurried in the Throng;
And what e're Tide prevails, is born along.
Thus when the Swain, within a hollow Rock,
Invades the Bees, with suffocating Smoke,
They run around, or labor on their Wings,
Disused to flight; and shoot their sleepy Stings:
To shun the bitter Fumes in vain they try;
Black Vapors, issuing from the Vent, involve the Sky.
But Fate, and envious Fortune, now prepare
To plunge the Latins in the last despair.
The Queen, who saw the Foes invade the Town;
And brands on tops of burning Houses thrown:
Cast round her Eyes, distracted with her Fear;
No Troops of Turnus in the Field appear.
Once more she stares abroad, but still in vain:
And then concludes the Royal Youth is slain.
Mad with her Anguish, impotent to bear
The mighty Grief, she loathes the vital Air.
She calls her self the Cause of all this Ill,
And owns the dire Effects of her ungoverned Will:
She raves against the Gods, she beats her Breast,
She tears with both her hands her Purple Vest.
Then round a Beam a running Noose she tied;
And, fastened by the Neck, obscenely died.
Soon as the fatal News by Fame was blown,
And to her Dames, and to her Daughter known;
The sad Lavinia rends her yellow Hair,
And rosy Cheeks; the rest her Sorrow share:
With Shrieks the Palace rings, and Madness of Despair.
The spreading Rumor fills the Public Place;
Confusion, Fear, Distraction, and Disgrace,
And silent shame, are seen in every Face.
Latinus tears his Garments as he goes,
Both for his public, and his private Woes:
With Filth his venerable Beard besmears,
And sordid Dust deforms his Silver Hairs.
And much he blames the softness of his Mind,
Obnoxious to the Charms of Womankind,
And soon seduced to change, what he so well designed:
To break the solemn League so long desired,
Nor finish what his Fates, and those of Troy required.
Now Turnus rowls aloof over empty Plains,
And here and there some straggling Foes he gleans.
His flying Coursers please him less and less,
Ashamed of easy Fight, and cheap Success.
Thus half contented, anxious in his Mind,
The distant Cries come driving in the Wind:
Shouts from the Walls, but Shouts in Murmurs drowned;
A jarring mixture, and a boding sound.
Alas, said he, what mean these dismal Cries,
What doleful Clamours from the Town arise?
Confused he stops, and backward pulls the Reins:
She, who the Driver's Office now sustains,
Replies; Neglect, my Lord, these new Alarms;
Here fight, and urge the Fortune of your Arms:
There want not others to defend the Wall:
If by your Rival's Hand the Italians fall,
So shall your fatal Sword his Friends oppress,
In Honor equal, equal in Success.
To this, the Prince; O Sister, (for I knew
The Peace infringed, proceeded first from you,)
I knew you, when you mingled first in Fight,
And now in vain you would deceive my Sight:
Why, Goddess, this unprofitable Care?
Who sent you down from Heaven, involved in Air,
Your share of Mortal Sorrows to sustain,
And see your Brother bleeding on the Plain?
For, to what Power can Turnus have recourse,
Or how resist his Fates prevailing force!
These Eyes beheld Murranus bite the Ground,
Mighty the Man, and mighty Was the Wound.
I heard my dearest Friend, with dying Breath,
My Name invoking to revenge his Death:
Brave Ufens fell with Honor on the Place;
To shun the shameful sight of my disgrace.
On Earth supine, a Manly Corpse he lies;
His Vest and Armor are the Victor's Prize.
Then, shall I see Laurentum in a flame,
Which only wanted to complete my shame?
How will the Latins hoot their Champion's flight;
How Drances will be pleased, and point them to the sight!
Is Death so hard to bear? Ye Gods below,
(Since those above so small Compassion show,)
Receive a Soul unsullied yet with shame,
Which not belies my great Forefather's Name.
He said: And while he spoke, with flying speed,
Came Sages urging on his foamy Steed;
Fixed on his wounded Face a Shaft he bore,
And seeking Turnus sent his Voice before:
Turnus, on you, on you alone depends
Our last Relief; compassionate your Friends.
Like Lightning, fierce Aeneas, rolling on,
With Arms invests, with Flames invades the Town:
The Brands are tossed on high; the Winds conspire
To drive along the Deluge of the Fire:
All Eyes are fixed on you; your Foes rejoice;
Even the King staggers, and suspends his Choice:
Doubts to deliver, or defend the Town;
Whom to reject, or whom to call his Son.
The Queen, on whom your utmost hopes were placed,
Her self suborning Death, has breathed her last.
It Is true, Messapus, fearless of his Fate,
With fierce Atinas Aid, defends the Gate:
On every side surrounded by the Foe;
The more they kill, the greater Numbers grow;
An Iron Harvest mounts, and still remains to mow.
You, far aloof from your forsaken Bands,
Your rolling Chariot drive over empty Sands.
Stupid he sat, his Eyes on Earth declined,
And various Cares revolving in his Mind:
Rage boiling from the bottom of his Breast,
And Sorrow mixed with Shame, his Soul oppressed:
And conscious Worth lay laboring in his Thought;
And Love by Jealousy to Madness wrought.
By slow degrees his Reason drove away
The Mists of Passion, and resumed her Sway.
Then, rising on his Car, he turned his Look;
And saw the Town involved in Fire and Smoke.
A wooden Tower with Flames already blazed,
Which his own Hands on Beams and Rafters raised:
And Bridges laid above to join the Space;
And Wheels below to roll from place to place.
Sister, the Fates have vanquished: Let us go
The way which Heaven and my hard Fortune show.
The Fight is fixed: Nor shall the branded Name
Of a base Coward blot your Brother's Fame.
Death is my choice; but suffer me to try
My Force, and vent my Rage before I dye.
He said, and leaping down without delay,
Through Crowds of scattered Foes he freed his way.
Striding he passed, impetuous as the Wind,
And left the grieving Goddess far behind.
As when a Fragment, from a Mountain torn
By raging Tempests, or by Torrents born,
Or sapp'd by time, or loosened from the Roots,
Prone through the Void the Rocky Ruin shoots,
Rolling from Crag to Crag, from Steep to Steep;
Down sink, at once the Shepherds and their Sheep,
Involved alike, they rush to nether Ground,
Stunned with the shock they fall, and stunned from Earth rebound:
So Turnus, hasting headlong to the Town,
Should'ring and shoving, bore the Squadrons down.
Still pressing onward, to the Walls he drew,
Where Shafts, and Spears, and Darts promiscuous flew;
And sanguine Streams the slippery Ground embrew.
First stretching out his Arm, in sign of Peace,
He cries aloud, to make the Combat cease:
Rutulians hold, and Latin Troops retire;
The Fight is mine, and me the Gods require.
It Is just that I should vindicate alone
The broken Truce, or for the Breach atone.
This Day shall free from Wars the Ausonian State;
Or finish my Misfortunes in my Fate.
Both Armies from their bloody Work desist:
And bearing backward, form a spacious List.
The Trojan Hero who received from Fame
The welcome Sound, and heard the Champion's Name,
Soon leaves the taken Works, and mounted Walls,
Greedy of War, where greater Glory calls.
He springs to Fight, exulting in his Force;
His jointed Armor rattles in the Course.
Like Eryx, or like Athos, great he shows,
Or Father Apennine, when white with Snows,
His Head Divine, obscure in Clouds he hides:
And shakes the sounding Forest on his sides.
The Nations over-awed, surcease the Fight,
Immovable their Bodies, fixed their sight:
Even Death stands still; nor from above they throw
Their Darts, nor drive their batt'ring Rams below.
In silent Order either Army stands;
And drop their Swords, unknowing, from their Hands.
The Ausonian King beholds, with wondering sight,
Two mighty Champions matched in single Fight:
Born under Climes remote; and brought by Fate,
With Swords to try their Titles to the State.
Now in closed Field, each other from afar
They view; and rushing on, begin the War.
They launch their Spears, then hand to hand they meet;
The trembling Soil resounds beneath their Feet:
Their Bucklers clash; thick blows descend from high,
And flakes of Fire from their hard Helmets fly.
Courage conspires with Chance; and both engage
With equal Fortune, and with mutual Rage.
As when two Bulls for their fair Female fight,
In Sila's Shades, or on Taburnus height;
With Horns adverse they meet: the Keeper flies;
Mute stands the Herd, the Heifars roll their Eyes;
And wait the Event; which Victor they shall bear,
And who shall be the Lord, to rule the lusty Year:
With rage of Love the jealous Rivals burn,
And Push for Push, and Wound for Wound return:
Their Dewlaps gored, their sides are lav'd in Blood;
Loud Cries and roaring Sounds rebellow through the Wood:
Such was the Combat in the listed Ground;
So clash their Swords and so their Shields resound.
Jove sets the Beam; in either Scale he lays
The Champions Fate, and each exactly weighs.
On this side Life, and lucky Chance ascends:
Loaded with Death, that other Scale descends.
Raised on the Stretch, young Turnus aims a blow,
Full on the Helm of his unguarded Foe:
Shrill Shouts and Clamours ring on either side;
As Hopes and Fears their panting Hearts divide.
But all in pieces flies the Traitor Sword,
And, in the middle Stroke deserts his Lord.
Now it is but Death, or Flight: disarmed he flies,
When in his Hand, an unknown Hilt he spies.
Fame says that Turnus, when his Steeds he joined,
Hurrying to War, disordered in his Mind,
Snatched the first Weapon, which his haste could find.
'Twas not the fated Sword his Father bore;
But that his Charioteer Metiscus wore.
This, while the Trojans fled, the Toughness held;
But vain against the great Vulcanian Shield,
The mortal-temper'd Steel deceived his Hand:
The shivered fragments shone amid the Sand.
Surprised with fear, he fled along the Field;
And now forthright, and now in Orbits wheeled.
For here the Trojan Troops the List surround;
And there the Pass is closed with Pools and marshy Ground.
Aeneas hastens, though with heavier Pace,
His Wound so newly knit, retards the Chase:
And often his trembling Knees their Aid refuse,
Yet pressing foot by foot his Foe pursues.
Thus, when a fearful Stag is closed around
With Crimson Toils, or in a River found;
High on the Bank the deep-mouthed Hound appears;
Still opening, following still, where e're he steers:
The persecuted Creature, to, and fro,
Turns here and there, to escape his Vmbrian Foe:
Steep is the Ascent; and if he gains the Land,
The Purple Death is pitched along the Strand:
His eager Foe determined to the Chase,
Stretched at his length gains Ground at every Pace:
Now to his beamy Head he makes his way,
And now he holds, or thinks he holds his Prey:
To the Right Honble: Francis North Baron of Guilford

Aen: 12. L 1120.


Just at the pinch the Stag springs out with fear,
He bites the Wind, and fills his sounding Jaws with Air.
The Rocks, the Lakes, the Meadows ring with Cries;
The mortal Tumult mounts, and thunders in the Skies.
Thus flies the Daunian Prince: and, flying, blames
His tardy Troops; and calling by their Names,
Demands his trusty Sword. The Trojan threats
The Realm with Ruin, and their ancient Seats
To lay in Ashes, if they dare supply
With Arms or Aid, his vanquished Enemy:
Thus menacing, he still pursues the Course,
With Vigor, though diminished of his Force.
Ten times, already, round the listed place,
One Chief had fled, and the other given the Chase:
No trivial Prize is played; for on the Life
Or Death of Turnus, now depends the Strife.
Within the space, an Olive Tree had stood,
A sacred Shade, a venerable Wood,
For Vows to Faunus paid, the Latins Guardian God.
Here hung the Vests, and Tablets were ingrav'd,
Of sinking Mariners, from Shipwreck saved.
With heedless Hands the Trojans felled the Tree,
To make the Ground enclosed for Combat free.
Deep in the Root, whether by Fate, or Chance,
Or erring haste, the Trojan drove his Lance:
Then stooped, and tug'd with Force immense to free
The encumbered Spear from the tenacious Tree:
That whom his fainting Limbs pursued in vain,
His flying Weapon might from far attain.
Confused with Fear, bereft of Human Aid,
Then Turnus to the Gods, and first to Faunus prayed.
O Faunus pity, and thou Mother Earth,
Where I thy foster Son received my Birth,
Hold fast the Steel; if my Religious Hand
Your Plant has honored, which your Foes profaned;
Propitious hear my pious Prayer! He said,
Nor with successless Vows invoked their Aid.
The incumbent Hero, wrench'd, and pulled, and strained;
But still the stubborn Earth the Steel detained.
Juturna took her time; and while in vain
He strove, assumed Metiscus Form again:
And, in that imitated Shape, restored
To the despairing Prince, his Daunian Sword.
The Queen of Love, who, with Disdain and Grief,
Saw the bold Nymph afford this prompt Relief;
TO assert her Offspring, with a greater Deed,
From the tough Root the lingering Weapon freed.
Once more erect, the Rival Chiefs advance;
One trusts the Sword, and one the pointed Lance:
And both resolved alike, to try their fatal Chance.
Mean time Imperial Jove to Juno spoke,
Who from a shining Cloud beheld the shock;
What new Arrest, O Queen of Heaven, is sent
To stop the Fates now laboring in the Event.
What farther hopes are left thee to pursue
Divine Aeneas, (and thou know it too,)
Fore-doom'd to these Celestial Seats is due?
What more Attempts for Turnus can be made,
That thus thou ling'rest in this lonely Shade!
Is it becoming of the due Respect,
And awful Honor of a God Elect,
A Wound unworthy of our State to feel;
Patient of Human Hands, and earthly Steel?
Or seems it Just, the Sister should restore,
A second Sword, when one was lost before;
And arm a conquered Wretch, against his Conqueror?
For what without thy knowledge and avow,
Nay more, thy Dictate, durst Juturna do?
At last, in deference to my Love, forbear
To lodge within thy Soul this anxious Care:
Reclined upon my Breast, thy Grief unload;
Who should relieve the Goddess, but the God?
Now, all things to their utmost Issue tend;
Pushed by the Fates to their appointed End:
While leave was given thee, and a lawful Hour
For Vengeance, Wrath, and unresisted Power:
Tossed on the Seas thou cou'd'st thy Foes distress,
And driven ashore, with Hostile Arms oppress:
Deform the Royal House; and from the side
Of the Just Bridegroom, tear the plighted Bride:
Now cease at my Command. The Thund'rer said:
And with dejected Eyes this Answer Juno made.
Because your dread Decree too well I knew;
From Turnus, and from Earth unwilling I withdrew.
Else should you not behold me here alone,
Involved in empty Clouds, my Friends bemoan:
But girt with vengeful Flames, in open sight,
Engaged against my Foes in Mortal Fight.
It Is true Juturna mingled in the Strife
By my Command, to save her Brother's Life;
At least to try: But by the Stygian Lake,
(The most Religious Oath the Gods can take,)
With this restriction, not to bend the Bow,
Or toss the Spear, or trembling Dart to throw.
And now resigned to your Superior Might,
And tired with fruitless Toils, I loath the Fight.
This let me beg, (and this no Fates withstand)
Both for my self, and for your Fathers Land,
That when the Nuptial Bed shall bind the Peace;
(Which I, since you ordain, consent to bless,)
The Laws of either Nation be the same;
But let the Latins still retain their Name:
Speak the same Language which they spoke before;
Wear the same Habits, which their Grandsires wore:
Call them not Trojans: Perish the Renown,
And Name of Troy, with that detested Town.
Latium be Latium still; let Alba reign,
And Rome's immortal Majesty remain.
Then thus the Founder of Mankind replies:
(Unruffled was his Front, serene his Eyes,)
Can Saturn's Issue, and Heavens other Heir,
Such endless Anger in her Bosom bear?
Be Mistress, and your full Desires obtain:
But quench the Choler you foment in vain.
From ancient Blood the Ausonian People sprung,
Shall keep their Name, their Habit, and their Tongue.
The Trojans to their Customs shall be tied,
I will, my self, their common Rites provide;
The Natives shall command, the Foreigners subside.
All shall be Latium; Troy without a Name:
And her lost Sons forget from whence they came.
From Blood so mixed, a pious Race shall flow,
Equal to Gods, excelling all below.
No Nation more Respect to you shall pay,
Or greater Offerings on your Altars lay.
Juno consents, well pleased that her Desires
Had found Success, and from the Cloud retires.
The Peace thus made, the Thund'rer next prepares
To force the watery Goddess from the Wars.
Deep in the dismal Regions, void of Light,
Three Daughters at a Birth were born to Night:
These their brown Mother, brooding on her Care,
Indu'd with windy Wings to flit in Air:
With Serpents girt alike; and crowned with hissing Hair.
In Heaven the Dirae called, and still at hand,
Before the Throne of angry Jove they stand.
His Ministers of Wrath; and ready still
The Minds of Mortal Men with Fears to fill:
When e're the moody Sire, to wreak his Hate
On Realms, or Towns deserving of their Fate,
Hurls down Diseases, Death, and deadly Care,
And terrifies the guilty World with War.
One Sister Plague of these from Heaven he sent,
To fright Juturna with a dire Portent.
The Pest comes whirling down: by far more slow
Springs the swift Arrow from the Parthian Bow,
Or Cydon Eugh; when traversing the Skies,
And drenched in poisonous Juice, the sure Destruction flies.
With such a sudden, and unseen a flight,
Shot through the Clouds the Daughter of the Night.
Soon as the Field enclosed she had in view,
And from afar her destined Quarry knew:
Contracted, to the boding Bird she turns,
Which haunts the ruined Piles, and hallowed Urns;
And beats about the Tombs with nightly Wings;
Where Songs obsence on Sepulchers she sings.
Thus lessened in her Form, with frightful Cries,
The Fury round unhappy Turnus flies,
Flaps on his Shield, and flutters over his Eyes.
A lazy Chilness crept along his Blood,
Choked was his Voice, his Hair with Horror stood.
Juturna from afar beheld her fly,
And knew the ill Omen, by her screaming Cry,
And stridour of her Wings. Amazed with Fear,
Her comely Breast she beat, and rent her flowing Hair.
Ah me, she cries, in this unequal Strife,
What can thy Sister more to save thy Life!
Weak as I am, can I, alas, contend
In Arms, with that inexorable Fiend!
Now, now, I quit the Field! forbear to fright
My tender Soul, ye baleful Birds of Night!
The lashing of your Wings I know too well:
The sounding Flight, and Funeral Screams of Hell!
These are the Gifts you bring from haughty Jove,
The worthy Recompense of ravished Love!
Did he for this exempt my Life from Fate?
O hard Conditions of Immortal State!
Though born to Death, not priviledg'd to dye,
But forced to bear imposed Eternity!
Take back your envious Bribes, and let me go
Companion to my Brother's Ghost below!
The Joys are vanished: Nothing now remains,
Of Life Immortal, but Immortal Pains.
What Earth will open her devouring Womb,
To rest a weary Goddess in the Tomb!
She drew a length of Sighs; nor more she said;
But in her Azure Mantle wrapped her Head:
Then plunged into her Stream, with deep Despair,
And her last Sobs came bubling up in Air.
Now stern Aeneas waves his weighty Spear
Against his Foe, and thus upbraids his Fear,
What farther Subterfuge can Turnus find;
What empty Hopes are harbored in his Mind?
It Is not thy Swiftness can secure thy Flight:
Not with their Feet, but Hands, the Valiant fight.
Vary thy Shape in thousand Forms, and dare
What Skill and Courage can attempt in War:
Wish for the Wings of Winds, to mount the Sky;
Or hid, within the hollow Earth to lie.
The Champion shook his Head; and made this short reply.
No threats of thine, my manly Mind can move:
It Is Hostile Heaven I dread; and Partial Jove.
He, said no more: but with a Sigh, repressed
The mighty Sorrow, in his swelling Breast.
Then, as he rowld his troubled Eyes around,
An Antique Stone he saw: the Common Bound
Of Neighboring Fields; and Barrier of the Ground:
So vast, that Twelve strong Men of modern Days,
The enormous weight from Earth could hardly raise.
He heaved it at a Lift: and poised on high,
Ran stagg'ring on, against his Enemy.
But so disordered, that he scarcely knew
His Way: or what unwieldy weight he threw.
His knocking Knees are bent beneath the Load:
And shivering Cold congeals his vital Blood.
The Stone drops from his arms: and falling short,
For want of Vigor, mocks his vain Effort.
And as, when heavy Sleep has closed the sight,
The sickly Fancy labors in the Night:
We seem to run; and destitute of Force
Our sinking Limbs forsake us in the Course:
In vain we heave for Breath; in vain we cry:
The Nerves unbrac'd, their usual Strength deny;
And, on the Tongue the falt'ring Accents dye:
So Turnus fared: what ever means he tried
All force of Arms, and points of Art employed,
The Fury flew athwart; and made the Endeavor void.
A thousand various Thoughts his Soul confound:
He star'd about; nor Aid nor Issue found:
His own Men stop the Pass; and his own Walls surround.
Once more he pauses; and looks out again:
And seeks the Goddess Charioteer in vain.
Trembling he views the Thundering Chief advance:
And brandishing aloft the deadly Lance:
Amazed he cow'rs beneath his conquering Foe,
Forgets to ward; and waits the coming Blow.
Astonished while he stands, and fixed with Fear,
Aimed at his Shield he sees the impending Spear.
The Hero measured first, with narrow view,
The destined Mark: And rising as he threw,
With its full swing the fatal Weapon flew.
Not with less Rage the rattling Thunder falls;
Or Stones from batt'ring Engines break the Walls:
Swift as a Whirlwind, from an Arm so strong,
The Lance drove on; and bore the Death along.
Naught could his sev'n-fold Shield the Prince avail,
Nor ought beneath his Arms the Coat of Mail;
It pierced through all; and with a grizly Wound,
Transfixed his Thigh, and doubled him to Ground.
With Groans the Latins rend the vaulted Sky:
Woods, Hills, and Valleys, to the Voice reply.
Now low on Earth the lofty Chief is laid;
With Eyes cast upward, and with Arms displayed;
And Recreant thus to the proud Victor prayed.
I know my Death deserved, nor hope to live:
Use what the Gods, and thy good Fortune give.
Yet think; oh think, if Mercy may be shown,
(Thou had a Father once; and have a Son:)
Pity my Sire, now sinking to the Grave;
And for Anchises sake, old Daunus save!
Or, if thy vowed Revenge pursue my Death;
Give to my Friends my Body void of Breath!
The Latian Chiefs have seen me beg my Life;
Thine is the Conquest, thine the Royal Wife:
Against a yielded Man, it is mean ignoble Strife.
In deep Suspense the Trojan seemed to stand;
And just prepared to strike repressed his Hand.
To his Grace James Duke of Ormond Chancellor of the Vniversitys of Oxford and
Dublin Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter etc:

Aen: 12. L. 1360.


He rolled his Eyes, and every Moment felt
His manly Soul with more Compassion melt.
When, casting down a casual Glance, he spied
The Golden Belt that glittered on his side:
The fatal Spoils which haughty Turnus tore
From dying Pallas, and in Triumph wore.
Then rowz'd anew to Wrath, he loudly cries,
(Flames, while he spoke, came flashing from his Eyes:)
Traitor, do thou, do thou to Grace pretend,
Clad, as thou art, in Trophies of my Friend?
To his sad Soul a grateful Offering go;
It Is Pallas, Pallas gives this deadly Blow.
He raised his Arm aloft; and at the Word,
Deep in his Bosom drove the shining Sword.
The streaming Blood distained his Arms around:
And the disdainful Soul came rushing through the Wound.
FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER.
WHAT Virgil wrote in the vigor of his Age, in Plenty and at Ease, I have
undertaken to Translate in my Declining Years: struggling with Wants, oppressed
with Sickness, curbed in my Genius, liable to be misconstrued in all I write;
and my Judges, if they are not very equitable, already prejudiced against me,
by the Lying Character which has been given them of my Morals. Yet steady to my
Principles, and not dispirited with my Afflictions, I have, by the Blessing of
God on my Endeavors, overcome all difficulties; and, in some measure,
acquitted my self of the Debt which I owed the Public, when I undertook this
Work. In the first place therefore, I thankfully acknowledge to the Almighty
Power, the Assistance he has given me in the beginning, the Prosecution, and
Conclusion of my present Studies, which are more happily performed than I could
have promised to my self, when I labored under such Discouragements. For, what
I have done, Imperfect as it is, for want of Health and leisure to Correct it,
will be judged in after Ages, and possibly in the present, to be no dishonor
to my Native Country; whose Language and Poetry would be more esteemed abroad,
if they were better understood. Somewhat (give me leave to say) I have added to
both of them in the choice of Words; and Harmony of Numbers which were wanting,
especially the last, in all our Poets, even in those who being endu'd with
Genius, yet have not Cultivated their Mother Tongue with sufficient Care; or
relying on the Beauty of their Thoughts, have judged the Ornament of Words, and
sweetness of Sound unnecessary. One is for raking in Chaucer (our English
Ennius) for antiquated Words, which are never to be revived, but when Sound or
Significancy is wanting in the present Language. But many of his deserve not
this Redemption, any more than the Crowds of Men who daily die, or are slain
for Sixpence in a Battle, merit to be restored to Life, if a Wish could revive
them. Others have no Ear for Verse, nor choice of Words; nor distinction of
Thoughts; but mingle Farthings with their Gold to make up the Sum. Here is a
Field of Satire opened to me: But since the Revolution, I have wholly renounced
that Talent. For who would give Physic to the Great when he is uncalled? To do
his Patient no good, and endanger himself for his Prescription? Neither am I
ignorant, but I may justly be Condemned for many of those Faults, of which I
have too liberally Arraigned others.

Cynthias Aurem vellit, and admonuit. It Is enough for me, if the Government
will let me pass unquestioned. In the mean time, I am obliged in gratitude, to
return my Thanks to many of them, who have not only distinguished me from
others of the same Party, by a particular exception of Grace, but without
considering the Man, have been Bountiful to the Poet: Have encouraged Virgil to
speak such English, as I could teach him, and rewarded his Interpreter, for the
pains he has taken in bringing him over into Britain, by defraying the Charges
of his Voyage. Even Cerberus, when he had received the Sop, permitted Aeneas to
pass freely to Elysium. Had it been offered me, and I had refused it, yet still
some gratitude is due to such who were willing to oblige me. But how much more
to those from whom I have received the Favors which they have offered to one
of a different Persuasion. Amongst whom I cannot omit naming the Earls of Darby
and of Peterborough. To the first of these, I have not the Honor to be known;
and therefore his liberality as much unexpected, as it was undeserved. The
present Earl of Peterborough has been pleased long since to accept the tenders
of my Service: His Favors are so frequent to me, that I receive them almost by
prescription. No difference of Interests or Opinion have been able to withdraw
his Protection from me: And I might justly be condemned for the most unthankful
of Mankind, if I did not always preserve for him a most profound Respect and
inviolable Gratitude. I must also add, that if the last Aeneid shine amongst
its Fellows, it is owing to the Commands of Sir William Trumball, one of the
Principal Secretaries of State, who recommended it, as his Favorite, to my
Care: and for his sake particularly I have made it mine. For who would confess
weariness, when he enjoined a fresh Labor? I could not but invoke the
assistance of a Muse, for this last Office.

Extremum hunc Arethusa: --
Negat quis Carmina Gallo?
Neither am I to forget the Noble Present which was made me by Gilbert Dolben
Esquire the worthy Son of the late Archbishop of York: who, when I began this
Work, enriched me with all the several Editions of Virgil, and all the
Commentaries of those Editions in Latin. Amongst which, I could not but prefer
the Dolphins; as the last, the shortest, and the most Judicious. Fabrini I had
also sent me from Italy; but either he understands Virgil very imperfectly, or
I have no knowledge of my Author.

Being Invited by that worthy Gentleman, Sir William Bowyer, to Denham-Court, I
Translated the first Georgic at his House, and the greatest part of the last
Aeneid. A more friendly Entertainment no Man ever found. No wonder therefore if
both those Versions surpass the rest, and own the satisfaction I received in
his Converse, with whom I had the honor to be bred in Cambridge, and in the
same College. The Seventh Aeneid was made English at Burleigh, the Magnificent
Abode of the Earl of Exeter: In a Village belonging to his Family I was born,
and under his Roof I endeavored to make that Aeneid appear in English with as
much luster as I could: though my Author has not given the finishing strokes
either to it, or to the Eleventh, as I perhaps could prove in both, if I durst
presume to Criticize my Master.

By a Letter from Will. Walsh of Abberley Esquire (who has so long honored me with
his Friendship, and who, without flattery, is the best Critic of our Nation,)
I have been informed that his Grace the Duke of Shrewsbury has procured a
Printed Copy of the Pastorals, Georgics, and six first Aeneids, from my
Bookseller, and has read them in the Country, together with my Friend. This
Noble Person having been pleased to give them a Commendation, which I presume
not to insert; has made me vain enough to boast of so great a favor, and to
think I have succeeded beyond my hopes; the Character of his Excellent
Judgment, the acuteness of his Wit, and his general Knowledge of good Letters,
being known as well to all the World, as the sweetness of his disposition, his
Humanity, his easiness of access, and desire of obliging those who stand in
need of his protection, are known to all who have approached him; and to me in
particular, who have formerly had the honor of his Conversation. Whoever has
given the World the Translation of part of the third Georgic, which he calls
The Power of Love, has put me to sufficient pains to make my own not inferior
to his: As my Lord Roscommon's Silenus had formerly given me the same trouble.
The most Ingenious Mr. Addison of Oxford has also been as troublesome to me as
the other two, and on the same account. After his Bees, my latter Swarm is
scarcely worth the hiving. Mr. Cowley's praise of a Country Life is Excellent;
but it is rather an imitation of Virgil, than a Version. That I have recovered
in some measure the health which I had lost by too much application to this
Work, is owing, next to God's Mercy, to the Skill and Care of Dr. Guibbons, and
Dr. Hobbs, the two Ornaments of their Profession; whom I can only pay by this
Acknowledgment. The whole Faculty has always been ready to oblige me: and the
only one of them who endeavored to defame me, had it not in his power. I
desire pardon from my Readers for saying so much in relation to my self, which
concerns not them: and with my acknowledgements to all my Subscribers, have
only to add, that the few Notes which follow, are par maniere d'acquit, because
I had obliged my self by Articles, to do somewhat of that kind. These
scattering Observations are rather guesses at my Author's meaning in some
passages, than proofs that so he meant. The Unlearned may have recourse to any
Poetical Dictionary in English, for the Names of Persons, Places, or Fables,
which the Learned need not: But that little which I say, is either new or
necessary. And the first of these qualifications never fails to invite a
Reader, if not to please him.

NOTES and OBSERVATIONS ON Virgil's Works IN ENGLISH.
PAstoral 1. Line 6. There first the Youth of Heavenly Birth I viewed. Virgil
means Octavius Caesar: Heir to Julius: who perhaps had not arrived to his
Twentieth Year, when Virgil saw him first. Vide his Life. Of Heavenly Birth or
Heavenly Blood; because the Julian Family was derived from Julus, Son to
Aeneas, and Grandson to Venus.

Pastoral 2d. Line 65. The Short Narcissus, That is, of short continuance.

Pastoral 3d. Line 95. For him, the God of Shepherds and their Sheep, Phoebus,
not Pan, is here called the God of Shepherds: The Poet alludes to the same
Story, which he touches in the beginning of the Second Georgic, where he calls
Phoebus the Amphrysian Shepherd, because he fed the Sheep and Oxen of Admetus
(with whom he was in Love) on the Hill Amphrysus.

Pastoral 4th. Line 73. Begin Auspicious Boy, etc. In Latin thus. Incipe parve
Puer, risu cognoscere Matrem, etc. I have Translated the Passage to this Sense;
that the Infant smiling on his Mother, singles her out from the rest of the
Company about him. Erythraeus, Bembus, and Joseph Scaliger, are of this
Opinion. Yet they and I may be mistaken. For immediately after, we find these
words, Cui non risere Parents, which imply another Sense, as if the Parents
smiled on the Newborn Infant: And that the Babe on whom they vouchsafed not to
smile, was born to ill Fortune. For they tell a Story, that when Vulcan, the
only Son of Jupiter and Juno came into the World, he was so hard favored, that
both his Parents frowned on him: And Jupiter threw him out of Heaven; he fell
on the Island Lemnos, and was Lame ever afterward. The last Line of the
Pastoral seems to justify this Sense, Nec Deus hunc Mensa, Dea nec dignata
Cubili est. For though he married Venus, yet his Mother Juno was not present at
the Nuptials to bless them; as appears by his Wife's Incontinence. They say
also, that he was banished from the Banquets of the Gods: If so, that
Punishment could be of no long continuance, for Homer makes him present at
their Feasts; and composing a Quarrel betwixt his Parents, with a Bowl of
Nectar. The matter is of no great Consequence; and therefore I adhere to my
Translation, for these two Reasons: First, Virgil has this following Line.
Matri long a docem tulerunt fastidia Menses, as if the Infants smiling on his
Mother, was a Reward to her for bearing him ten Months in her Body, four Weeks
longer than the usual time. Secondly, Catullus is cited by Joseph Scaliger, as
favoring this Opinion, in his Epithalamium of Manlius Torquatus.

Torquatus, volo parvolus
Matris e gremio suae
Porrigens teneras Manus
Dulce rideat ad Patrem, etc.
What if I should steer betwixt the two Extremes, and conclude, that the
Infant, who was to be happy, must not only smile on his Parents, but also they
on him? For Scaliger notes that the Infants who smiled not at their Birth, were
observed to be (...), or sullen (as I have Translated it) during all their
Life: And Servius, and almost all the Modern Commentators affirm, that no Child
was thought Fortunate on whom his Parents smiled not, at his Birth. I observe
farther, that the Ancients thought the Infant who came into the World at the
end of the Tenth Month, was Born to some extraordinary Fortune, good or Bad.
Such was the Birth of the late Prince of Conde, of whom his Mother was not
brought to Bed, 'till almost Eleven Months were expired after his Fathers
Death: Yet the College of Physicians at Paris, concluded he was Lawfully
begotten. My Ingenious Friend, Anthony Henley Esquire desired me to make a Note on
this Passage of Virgil: Adding what I had not Read; that the Jews have been so
Superstitious, as to observe not only the first Look or Action of an Infant,
but also the first Word which the Parent, or any of the Assistants spoke after
the Birth: And from thence they gave a Name to the Child alluding to it.

Pastoral 6. My Lord Roscommon's Notes on this Pastoral, are equal to his
excellent Translation of it; and thither I refer the Reader.

The Eighth and Tenth Pastorals are already Translated to all manner of
advantage, by my excellent Friend, Mr. Stafford. So is the Episode of Camilla,
in the Eleventh Eneid.

This Eight Pastoral is Copied by our Author from two Bucolicks of Theocritus.
Spencer has followed both Virgil and Theocritus, in the Charms which he employs
for Curing Britomartis of her Love. But he had also our Poet's Ceiris in his
Eye: For there not only the Enchantments are to be found; but also the very
Name of Britomartis.

In the Ninth Pastoral, Virgil has made a Collection of many scattering
Passages, which he had Translated from Theocritus: And here he has bound them
into a Nosegay.

Georgic the First. The Poetry of this Book is more sublime than any part of
Virgil, if I have any Taste. And if ever I have Copied his Majestic Style it is
here. The Compliment he makes Augustus almost in the beginning, is ill imitated
by his Successors Lucan and Statius. They Dedicated to Tyrants; and their
Flatteries are gross and fulsome. Virgil's Address is both more lofty and more
just. In the three last Lines of this Georgic, I think I have discovered a
secret Compliment to the Emperor, which none of the Commentators have
observed. Virgil had just before described the Miseries which Rome had
undergone betwixt the Triumvirs and the Commonwealth-Party: In the close of
all, he seems to excuse the Crimes committed by his Patron Caesar, as if he
were constrained against his own Temper to those violent Proceedings, by the
necessity of the Times in general, but more particularly by his two Partners,
Anthony and Lepidus. Fertur Equis Auriga, nec audit Currus habenas. They were
the Headstrong Horses, who hurried Octavius, the trembling Charioteer along,
and were deaf to his* reclaiming them. I observe farther; that the present
Wars, in which all Europe, and part of Asia are engaged at present; are waged
in the same places here described: Atque hinc Euphrates, illinc Germania
Bellum, etc. As if Virgil had Prophesied of this Age.

Georgic. 2d. The Praises of Italy, (Translated by the Learned, and every way
Excellent Mr. Chetwood) which are Printed in one of the Miscellany Poems, are
the greatest Ornament of this Book. Wherein for want of sufficient skill in
Gardening, Agriculture, etc. I may possibly be mistaken in some Terms. But
concerning Grafting, my Honored Friend Sir William Bowyer has assured me, that
Virgil has shown more of Poetry than Skill, at least in relation to our more
Northern Climates. And that many of our Stocks will not receive such Grafts, as
our Po^t tells us would Bear in Italy. Nature has consir'd with Art to make the
Garden at Denham-Court, of Sir William's own Plantation, one of the most
delicious Spots of Ground in England: It contains not above Five Acres, (just
the compass of Alcinous his Garden, described in the Odysses:) But Virgil says
in this very Georgic, Laudato ingentia Rura; Exiguum colito.

Georgic 3d. Line the 45th. Next him, Niphates with inverted Vrn, etc. It has
been objected to me, that I understood not this Passage of Virgil, because I
call Niphates a River, which is a Mountain in Armenia. But the River arising
from the same Mountain, is also called Niphates. And having spoken of Nile
before, I might reasonably think, that Virgil rather meant to couple two
Rivers, than a River and a Mountain.

Line 224. The Male has done, etc. The transition is obscure in Virgil. He
began with Cows, then proceeds to treat of Horses: Now returns to Cows*

Line 476. 'Till the new Ram receives the Exalted Sun. Astrologers tell us,
that the Sun receives his Exaltation in the Sign Aries: Virgil perfectly
understood both Astronomy and Astrology.

Georgic 4. Line 27. That when the Youthful Prince. My most Ingenious Friend
Sir Henry Shere, has observed through a Glass-Hive, that the Young Prince of
the Bees, or Heir presumptive of the Crown, approaches the King's Apartment
with great Reverence; and for three successive Mornings demands permission, to
lead forth a Colony of that Years Bees. If his Petition be granted, which he
seems to make by humble hummings; the Swarm arises under his Conduct: If the
Answer be, le Roy s'avisera, that is, if the Old Monarch think it not
convenient for the Public good, to part with so many of his Subjects; the next
Morning the Prince is found dead, before the Threshold of the Palace.

Line 477. The Poet here records the Names of Fifty River Nymphs. And for once
I have Translated them all. But in the Aeneis I thought not my self obliged to
be so exact; for in naming many Men who were killed by Heroes, I have omitted
some, which would not sound in English Verse.

Line 660. The Episode of Orpheus and Eurydice begins here. And contains the
only Machine which Virgil uses in the Georgics. I have observed in the Epistle
before the Aeneis, that our Author seldom employs Machines but to adorn his
Poem: And that the Action which they seemingly perform, is really produced
without them. Of this Nature is the Legend of the Bees restored by Miracle;
when the Receipt which the Poet gives, would do the Work without one. The only
Beautiful Machine which I remember in the Modern Poets, is in Ariosto. Where
God commands St. Michael to take care, that Paris then Besieged by the
Saracens, should be succored by Rinaldo. In order to this, he enjoins the
Archangel to find Silence and Discord. The first to Conduct the Christian Army
to relieve the Town, with so much secrecy, that their March should not be
discovered; the latter to enter the Camp of the Infidels, and there to sow
Dissension among the Principal Commanders. The Heavenly Messenger takes his way
to an Ancient Monastery; not doubting there to find Silence in her primitive
Abode. But instead of Silence finds Discord: The Monks, being divided into
Factions, about the choice of some New Officer, were at Snic and Snee with
their drawn Knifes. The Satyr needs no Explanation. And here it may be also
observed, that Ambition, Jealousy, and Worldly Interest, and point of Honor,
had made variance both in the Cloister and the Camp; and strict Discipline had
done the Work of Silence, in Conducting the Christian Army to surprise the
Turks.

Aeneid 1. Line 111. And make thee Father of a happy Line. This was an obliging
Promise to Eolus; who had been so unhappy in his former Children, Macareus and
Canace.

Line 196. The Realms of Ocean, and the Fields of Air
Are mine, not his.


Poetically speaking, the Fields of Air, are under the Command of Juno; and her
Vicegerent Eolus. Why then does Neptune call them His? I answer, because being
God of the Seas, Eolus could raise no Tempests in the Atmosphere above them
without his leave. But why does Juno Address to her own Substitute? I answer,
He had an immediate Power over the Winds, whom Juno desires to employ on her
Revenge. That Power was absolute by Land; which Virgil plainly insinuates: For
when Boreas and his Brethren were let loose, he says at first terras turbine
perflant: Then adds, Incubuere Mari: To raise a Tempest on the Sea was
Usurpation on the Prerogative of Neptune; who had given him no leave, and
therefore was enraged at his Attempt. I may also add, that they who are in
Passion, as Neptune then was, are apt to assume to themselves, more than is
properly their due.

Line 450. O Virgin -- etc.
If as you seem the Sister of the Day,
Or one at least of Chaste Diana's Train.


Thus, in the Original.

O Quam te memorem Virgo --
Aut Phoebi Soror, aut Nympharum Sanguinis Vna.
This is a Family Complement, which Aeneas here bestows on Venus. His Father
Anchises had used the very same to that Goddess when he Courted her. This
appears by that very Ancient Greek Poem, in which that Amor is so beautifully
described, and which is thought Homer's: Though it seems to be Written before
his Age.

Line 980. Her Princely Guest was next her side.


This, I confess, is improperly Translated; and according to the Modern Fashion
of sitting at Table. But the Ancient custom of lying on Beds, had not been
understood by the Unlearned Reader.

Aeneid the Second. The Destruction of Veii is here shadowed under that of
Troy: Livy in his Description of it, seems to have emulated in his Prose, and
almost equaled the Beauty of Virgil's Verse.

Aeneid the 3d. Verse 132. And Childrens Children shall the Crown sustain. Et
Nati Natorum, and qui nascentur ab illis.


Virgil Translated this Verse from Homer: Homer had it from Orpheus; and
Orpheus from an Ancient Oracle of Apollo. On this Account it is, that Virgil
immediately Subjoins these Words, Haec Phoebus, etc. Eustathius takes notice,
that the Old Poets were wont to take whole Paragraphs from one another, which
justifies our Poet for what he borrows from Homer. Bochartus in his Letter to
Segrais, mentions an Oracle which he found in the fragments of an Old Greek
Historian: The Sense whereof is this in English; that when the Empire of the
Priamidae should be destroyed, the Line of Anchises should succeed. Venus
therefore, says the Historian, was desirous to have a Son by Anchises, though he
was then in his decrepid Age: Accordingly she had Aeneas. After this she sought
occasion to ruin the Race of Priam; and set on foot the Intrigue of Alexander,
(or Paris) with Helena: She being ravished, Venus pretended still to favor the
Trojans; lest they should restore Helen, in case they should be reduced to the
last Necessity. Whence it appears, that the Controversy betwixt Juno and
Venus, was on no trivial account; but concerned the Succession to a great
Empire.

Aeneid the 4th. Li. 945. And must I dye, she said,
And unrevenged? it is doubly to be dead!
Yet even this Death with pleasure I receive:
On any Terms, it is better than to live.


This is certainly the Sense of Virgil; on which I have paraphrased, to make it
plain. His Words are these; Moriemur Inultae?

Sed Moriamur ait; sic, sic juvat ire sub Vmbras. Servius makes an
Interrogation at the Word sic; thus, sic? Sic juvat ire sub Vmbras Which Mr.
Cowley justly Censures: But his own judgment may perhaps be questioned: For he
would retrench the latter part of the Verse, and leave it a Hemystic. Sed
Moriamur ait. That Virgil never intended to have left any Hemystic, I have
proved already in the Preface. That this Verse was filled up by him, with these
words, sic, juvat ire sub Vmbras, is very probable; if we consider the weight
of them. For this procedure of Dido, does not only contain, that, dira
Execratio, quae nullo expiatur Carmine (as Horace observes in his Canidia) but
besides that, Virgil, who is full of Allusions to History, under another Name,
describes the Decii, devoting themselves to Death this way, though in a better
Cause, in order to the Destruction of the Enemy. The Reader, who will take the
pains to Consult Livy, in his accurate Description of those Decii, thus
devoting themselves, will find a great resemblance betwixt these two Passages.
And it is judiciously observed upon that Verse, -- Nulla fides populis nec
foedera sunto. That Virgil uses in the word sunto a verbum juris, a form of
speaking on Solemn and Religious Occasions: Livy does the like. Note also that
Dido puts her self into the Habitus Gabinus, which was the girding her self
round with one Sleeve of her Vest, which is also according to the Roman
Pontifical, in this dreadful Ceremony, as Livy has observed: which is a farther
confirmation of this Conjecture. So that upon the whole matter, Dido only
doubts whether she should die before she had taken her Revenge, which she
rather wished: But considering that this devoting her self was the most certain
and infallible way of compassing her Vengeance, she thus exclaims; Sic, sic
juvat ire sub umbras:
Hauriat hunc oculis ignem crudelis ab alto
Dardanus, and nostrae secum ferat omnia mortis.
Those Flames from far, may the false Trojan view;
Those boding Omens his base Flight pursue.


Which Translation I take to be according to the Sense of Virgil. I should have
added a Note on that former Verse.

Infelix Dido, nunc te fata impia tangunt. Which in the Edition of Heinsius is
thus Printed. Nunc te facta impia tangunt? The word facta instead of fata, is
reasonably altered. For Virgil says afterward, she died not by Fate, nor by
any deserved Death. Nec Fato, merita nec morte peribat, etc. When I Translated
that Passage, I doubted of the Sense: And therefore omitted that Hemystic; Nunc
te fata impia tangunt. But Heinsius is mistaken only in making an Interrogation
point, instead of a Period. The words facta impia, I suppose are genuine: For
she had perjured her self in her second Marriage. Having firmly resolved, as
she told her Sister, in the beginning of this Aeneid, never to love again,
after the Death of her first Husband; and had confirmed this Resolution, by a
Curse on her self, if she should alter it.

Sed mihi vel tellus optem, prius ima dehiscat, etc.
Ante, pudor, quam te violem, aut tua jura resolvam.
Ille meos, primus, qui me sibi junxit, amores,
Abstulit: Ille habeat secum, servetque sepulcro.
Aeneid the 5th. A great part of this Book is borrowed from Apollonius Rhodius.
And the Reader may observe the great Judgment and distinction of our Author in
what he borrows from the Ancients, by comparing them. I conceive the Reason why
he omits the Horse-race in the Funeral Games, was because he shows Ascanius
afterward on Horseback, with his Troops of Boys, and would not wear that
Subject threadbare; which Statius, in the next Age described so happily.
Virgil seems to me, to have excelled Homer in all those Sports, and to have
labored them the more, in Honor of Octavius, his Patron; who instituted the
like Games for perpetuating the Memory of his Uncle Julius. Piety, as Virgil
calls it, or dutifulness to Parents, being a most popular Virtue among the
Romans.

Aeneid the 6th. Line 586.

The next in place and Punishment are they,
Who prodigally throw their Lives away, etc.
Proxima sort tenent maesti loca, qui sibi letum
Insontes peperere manu, lucemque perosi,
Projecere animas, etc.
This was taken, amongst many other things, from the Tenth Book of Plato de
Republica: No Commentator besides Fabrini, has taken notice of it. Self-murder
was accounted a great Crime by that Divine Philosopher: But the Instances which
he brings, are too many to be inserted in these short Notes. Sir Robert Howard
in his Translation of this Aeneid, which was Printed with his Poems in the Year
1660; has given us the most Learned, and the most Judicious Observations on
this Book, which are extant in our Language.

Line 734. Lo to the secret Shadows I retire,
To pay my Penance, 'till my Years expire.


These two Verses in English seem very different from the Latin. Discedam;
explebo numerum, reddarque tenebris.

Yet they are the Sense of Virgil; at least, according to the common
Interpretation of this place: I will withdraw from your Company; retire to the
Shades, and perform my Penance of a Thousand Years. But I must confess the
Interpretation of those two words, explebo numerum is somewhat Violent, if it
be thus understood, minuam numerum; that is, I will lessen your Company by my
departure. For Deiphobus being a Ghost, can hardly be said to be of their
Number. Perhaps the Poet means by explebo numerum, absolvam sententiam: As if
Deiphobus replied to the Sibil, who was angry at his long Visit: I will only
take my last leave of Aeneas, my Kinsman and my Friend, with one hearty
good-wish for his Health and Welfare, and then leave you to prosecute your
Voyage. That Wish is expressed in the words immediately following. I Decus, I
nostrum, etc. Which contain a direct Answer to what the Sibill said before:
When she upbraided their long Discourse, Nos flendo ducimus horas. This
Conjecture is new, and therefore left to the discretion of the Reader.

L. 981. Know first that Heaven, and Earth's compacted Frame,
And flowing Waters, and the Starry Flame,
And both the radiant Lights, etc.
Principio Coelum, and terras, composque liquentes,
Lucentemque globum Lunae, Titaniaque Astra, etc.


Here the Sun is not expressed, but the Moon only; though a less, and also a
less radiant Light. Perhaps the Copies of Virgil are all false; and that
instead of Titaniaque Astra, he writ Titanaque and Astra; and according to
those words I have made my Translation. It Is most certain, that the Sun ought
not to be omitted; for he is frequently called the Life and Soul of all the
World: And nothing bids so fair for a visible Divinity to those who know no
better, than that glorious Luminary. The Platonists call God the Archetypall
Sun, and the Sun the visible Deity, the inward vital Spirit in the Center of
the Universe, or that Body to which that Spirit is united, and by which-it
exerts it self most powerfully. Now it was the received Hypothesis amongst the
Pythagoreans, that the Sun was situate in the Center of the World: Plato had
it from them, and was himself of the same Opinion; as appears by a passage in
the Timaeus: From which Noble Dialogue is this part of Virgil's Poem taken.

L. 1157. Great Cato there, for gravity renowned, etc.
Quis te Magne Cato, etc.


There is no Question but Virgil here means Cato Major, or the Censor. But the
Name of Cato being also mentioned in the Eighth Aeneid, I doubt whether he
means the same Man in both places. I have said in the Preface, that our Poet
was of Republican Principles; and have given this for one Reason of my Opinion,
that he praised Cato in that Line, Secretisque piis, his dantem jura Catonem.
And accordingly placed him in the Elysian Fields. Montaign thinks this was Cato
the Vtican, the great Enemy of Arbitrary Power, and a professed Foe to Julius
Caesar. Ruaeus would persuade us that Virgil meant the Censor. But why should
the Poet name Cato twice, if he intended the same person? Our Author is too
frugal of his Words and Sense, to commit Tautologies in either. His Memory was
not likely to betray him into such an Error. Nevertheless I continue in the
same Opinion, concerning the Principles of our Poet. He declares them
sufficiently in this Book: Where he praises the first Brutus for expelling the
Tarquins, giving Liberty to Rome, and putting to Death his own Children, who
conspired to restore Tyranny: He calls him only an unhappy Man, for being
forced to that severe Action.

Infelix, utcunque ferent ea facta Minores,
Vincet amor Patriae, laudumque immensa Cupido.
Let the Reader weigh these two Verses, and he must be convinced that I am in
the right: And that I have not much injured my Master in my Translation of them.

Line 1140. Embrace again, my Sons; be Foes no more;
Nor stain your Country with her Childrens gore:
And thou the first, lay down thy lawless claim;
Thou of my Blood, who bear the Julian Name.


This Note, which is out of its proper place, I deferred on purpose, to place
it here: Because it discovers the Principles of our Poet more plainly than any
of the rest.

Tuque prior, tu parce, genus qui ducis Olympo,
Projice tela manu, Sanguis meus!
Anchises here speaks to Julius Caesar; And commands him first to lay down
Arms; which is a plain condemnation of his Cause. Yet observe our Poet's
incomparable Address: For though he shows himself sufficiently to be a
Common-wealth's-man; yet in respect to Augustus, who was his Patron, he uses
the Authority of a Parent, in the Person of Anchises; who had more right to lay
this Injunction on Caesar than on Pompey; because the latter was not of his
Blood. Thus our Author cautiously veils his own opinion, and takes Sanctuary
under Anchises; as if that Ghost would have laid the same Command on Pompey
also, had he been lineally descended from him. What could be more judiciously
contrived, when this was the Aeneid which he chose to read before his Master?

Line 1222. A new Marcellus shall arise in thee.
In Virgil thus. Tu Marcellus eris.


How unpoetically and baldly had this been translated; Thou shall Marcellus be!
Yet some of my Friends were of Opinion, that I mistook the Sense of Virgil in
my Translation. The French Interpreter, observes nothing on this place; but
that it appears by it, the Mourning of Octavia was yet fresh, for the loss of
her Son Marcellus, whom she had by her first Husband: And who dyed in the Year
aburbe condita, 731. And collects from thence that Virgil, reading this Aeneid
before her, in the same Year, had just finished it: That from this time to that
of the Poet's Death, was little more than four Years. So that supposing him to
have written the whole Aeneis in eleven Years; the first six Books must have
taken up seven of those Years: On which Account the six last, must of necessity
be less correct.

Now for the false judgment of my Friends, there is but this little to be said
for them; the words of Virgil, in the Verse preceding are these, -- Siqua fata
aspera rumpas. As if the Poet had meant, if you break through your hard
Destiny, so as to be born, you shall be called Marcellus: But this cannot be
the Sense: for though Marcellus was born, yet he broke not through those hard
Decrees, which doomed him to so immature a death. Much less can Virgil mean,
you shall be the same Marcellus by the Transmigration of his Soul. For
according to the System of our Author, a Thousand Years must be first elapsed,
before the Soul can return into a Humane Body; but the first Marcellus was
slain in the second Punick War. And how many hundred Years were yet wanting, to
the accomplishing his penance, may with ease be gathered, by computing the time
betwixt Scipio and Augustus. By which it is plain, that Virgil cannot mean the
same Marcellus; but one of his Descendants; whom I call a new Marcellus; who so
much resembled his Ancestor, perhaps in his Features, and his Person, but
certainly in his Military Virtues, that Virgil cries out, quantum instar in
ipso est! which I have translated, How like the former, and almost the same.

Line, 1236, and 1237. Two Gates the silent House of Sleep adorn;
Of polished Ivory this; that of transparent Horn.


By the carelessness of the Amanuensis, the two next Lines are wanting, which I
thus supply out of the Original Copy. True Visions through transparent Horn
arise,
Through polished Ivory pass deluding Lies.


Virgil borrowed this Imagination from Homer, Odysses the 19th. Line 562. The
Translation gives the reason, why true Prophetic Dreams are said to pass
through the Gate of Horn, by adding the Epithete transparent: Which is not in
Virgil; whose Words are only these; Sunt geminae Somni portae; quarum altera
fertur
Cornea --


What is pervious to the Sight is clear; and (alluding to this Property,) the
Poet infers such Dreams are of Divine Revelation. Such as pass through the
Ivory Gate, are of the contrary Nature; polished Lies. But there is a better
Reason to be given: For the Ivory alludes to the Teeth, the Horn to the Eyes.
What we see is more credible, than what we only hear; that is, Words that pass
through the Portal of the Mouth, or, Hedge of the Teeth: (which is Homer's
expression for speaking.)

Aen. the 7th. Li. 109. Strange to relate, the Flames involved in Smoke, etc.


Virgil, in this place, takes notice of a great Secret in the Roman Divination:
The Lambent Fires, which rose above the Head, or played about it, were Signs of
Prosperity, such were those which he observed in the second Aeneid: which were
seen mounting from the Crown of Ascanius,

Ecce levis summo de vertice visus Iuli.
Fundere lumen apex.
Smoky Flames, (or involved in Smoke) were of a mixed Omen; such were those
which are here described: For Smoke signifies Tears, because it produces them,
and Flames Happiness. And therefore Virgil says that this Ostent was not only
mirabile visu, but horrendum.

Line 367. One only Daughter heirs my Crown and State.


This has seemed to some an odd Passage: That a King should offer his Daughter
and Heir, to a Stranger Prince, and a wanderer, before he had seen him, and
when he had only heard of his arrival on his Coasts: But these Critics have
not well considered the Simplicity of former times; when the Heroines almost
courted the Marriage of illustrious Men. Yet Virgil here observes the rule of
Decency; Lavinia offers not her self: It Is Latinus, who propounds the Match:
And he had been foretold, both by an Augur, and an Oracle, that he should have
a foreign Son-in-Law; who was also a Hero. Fathers, in those ancient Ages,
considering Birth and Virtue, more than Fortune, in the placing of their
Daughters. Which I could prove by various Examamples: The contrary of which
being now practiced, I dare not say in our Nation, but in France, has not a
little darkened the Luster of their Nobility. That Lavinia was averse to this
Marriage, and for what reason, I shall prove in its proper place.

L. 1020. And where Abella sees, from her high Towers, the Harvest of her
Trees. I observe that Virgil names not Nola, which was not far distant from
Abella: perhaps, because that City, (the same in which Augustus dyed
afterward;) had once refused to give him entertainment; if if we may believe
the Author of his Life. Homer heartily curses another City which had used him
on the same manner: But our Author thought his Silence of the Nolans a
sufficient correction. When a Poet passes by a Place or Person, though a fair
Occasion offers of rememb'ring them, it is a sign he is, or thinks himself, much
disobliged.

Aen. 8. L. 34. So when the Sun by Day, the Moon by Night,
Strike on the polished Brass their trembling Light, etc.


This Similitude is literally taken from Apollonius Rhodius; and it is hard to
say, whether the Original or the Translation excels. But in the Shield which he
describes afterward in this Aeneid, he as much transcends his Master Homer; as
the Arms of Glaucus were richer than those of Diomedes. (...).

Lines 115, and 116. Aeneas takes the Mother, and her Brood,
And all on Juno 's Altar are bestowed.


The Translation is infinitely short of Virgil, whose Words are these; -- Tibi
enim, tibi maxima Juno
Mactat sacra ferens, and cum grege sistit ad aram.


For I could not turn the word Enim into English with any grace. Though it was
of such necessity, in the Roman Rites, that a Sacrifice could not be performed
without it; it is of the same nature, (if I may presume to name that sacred
Mystery) in our words of Consecration at the Altar.

Aeneid the 9th. line 853, 854. At the full stretch of both his Hands, he drew;
And almost joined the Horns of the tough Eugh.


The first of these Lines, is all of Monosyllables; and both Verses are very
rough: But of choice; for it had been easy for me to have smoothed them. But
either my Ear deceives me, or they express the thing which I intended in their
Sound: For the stress of a Bow which is drawn to the full extent, is expressed
in the harshness of the first Verse, clogged not only with Monosyllables, but
with Consonants; and these words, the tough Eugh, which conclude the second
line, seem as forceful, as they are Unharmonious. Homer and Virgil are both
frequent in their adapting Sounds to the thing they signify. One Example will
serve for both; because Virgil borrowed the following Verses from Homer's
Odysses.

Vna Eurusque Notusque ruunt creberque procellis
Africus, and vastos volvunt ad litora fluctus.
(...);
(...).
Our Language is not often capable of these Beauties: though sometimes I have
copied them, of which these Verses are an instance.

Line 1095. His ample Shield --
Is falsify'd; and round with Javelins filled.


When I read this Aeneid to many of my Friends, in company together, most of
them quarreled at the word falsify'd, as an Innovation in our Language. The
fact is confessed; for I remember not to have read it in any English Author;
though perhaps it may be found in Spencer's Fairy Queen: But suppose it be not
there: Why am I forbidden to borrow from the Italian, (a polished Language) the
word which is wanting in my Native Tongue? Terence has often Grecis'd:
Lucretius has followed his Example; and pleaded for it; sic quia me cogit
patrii Sermonis Egestas. Virgil has confirmed it by his frequent practice, and
even Cicero in Prose, wanting terms of Philosophy in the Latin Tongue, has
taken them from Aristotle's Greek. Horace has given us a Rule for Coining
Words, si Graeco font cadunt. Especially when other words are joined with
them, which explain the Sense. I use the word falsify in this place, to mean
that the Shield of Turnus was not of Proof against the Spears and Javlins of
the Trojans; which had pierced it through and through (as we say) in many
places. The words which accompany this new one, make my meaning plain;
according to the Precept which Horace gave. But I said I borrowed the Word from
the Italian: Vide Ariosto, Cant. 26. Ma si l'Vsbergo d' Ambi era perfetto
Che may poter falsarlo in nessun Canto.


Falsar cannot otherwise be turned, than by falsify'd; for his shield was
falsed, is not English. I might indeed have contented my self with saying his
Shield was pierced, and board, and stuck with Javelins; Nec sufficit Vmbo
Ictibus. They who will not admit a new word, may take the old; the matter is
not worth dispute.

Aeneid the 10th. A Choir of Nereids, etc. These were transformed from Ships to
Sea-Nymphs: This is almost as violent a Machine, as the death of Aruns by a
Goddess in the Episode of Camilla. But the Poet makes use of it with greater
Art: For here it carries on the main Design. These new made Divinities, not
only tell Aeneas what had passed in his Camp during his absence; and what was
the present Distress of his Besieged People; and that his Horsemen whom he had
sent by Land, were ready to join him at his Descent; but warn him to provide
for Battle the next day, and foretell him good success: So that this
Episodical Machine is properly a part of the great Poem; For besides what I
have said, they push on his Navy with Celestial Vigor, that it might reach the
Port more speedily, and take the Enemy more unprovided to resist the Landing.
Whereas the Machine relating to Camilla, is only Ornamental: For it has no
effect, which I can find, but to please the Reader, who is concerned, that her
Death should be revenged.

Lines 241, 243. Now Sacred Sisters, open all your Spring,
The Tuscan Leaders, and their Army sing;


The Poet here begins to tell the Names of the Tuscan Captains who followed
Aeneas to the War: And I observe him to be very particular in the description
of their Persons, and not forgetful of their Manners: Exact also, in the
Relation of the Numbers which each of them Command. I doubt not but as in the
fifth Book, he gave us the Names of the Champions, who contended for the
several Prizes, that he might oblige many of the most Ancient Roman Families,
their Descendants; and as in the 7th Book, he Mustered the Auxiliary Forces of
the Latins, on the same Account; so here he gratifies his Tuscan Friends, with
the like remembrance of their Ancestors; and above the rest, Mecaenas his great
Patron: Who being of a Royal Family in Etruria, was probably represented under
one of the Names here mentioned, then known among the Romans, though at so
great a distance, unknown to us. And for his sake chiefly, as I guess, he makes
Aeneas (by whom he always means Augustus) to seek for Aid in the Country of
Mecaenas, thereby to indear his Protector to his Emperor; as if there had been
a former Friendship betwixt their Lines. And who knows, but Mecaenas might
pretend that the Cilnian Family was derived from Tarchon, the Chief Commander
of the Tuscans.

Line 662. Nor I, his mighty Sire, could ward the Blow.


I have mentioned this Passage in my Preface to the Aeneis; to prove, that Fate
was superior to the Gods; and that Jove could neither defer nor alter its
Decrees. Sir Robert Howard has since, been pleased to send me the concurrent
Testimony of Ovid; it is in the last Book of his Metamorphoses; where Venus
complains, that her Descendant, Julius Caesar, was in danger of being Murdered
by Brutus and Cassius, at the head of the Commonwealth-Faction, and desires
them to prevent that Barbarous Assassination. They are moved to Compassion;
they are concerned for Caesar; but the Poet plainly tells us, that it was not
in their power to change Destiny: All they could do, was to testify their
sorrow for his approaching Death, by fore-shewing it with Signs and Prodigies,
as appears by the following Lines.

Talia nequicquam toto Venus aurea Coelo
Verba jacit: Superosque movet: Qui rumpere quanquam
Ferrea non possunt veterum decreta Sororum,
Signa tamen luctus dant haud incerta futuri.
Then she Addresses to her Father Jupiter, hoping Aid from him, because he was
thought Omnipotent. But he, it seems, could do as little as the rest, for he
answers thus.

-- sola insuperabile Fatum
Nata, movere paras? intres licet ipsa sororum
Tecta trium; cernes illic molimine vasto
Ex aere, and solido rerum tabularia ferro:
Quae neque concursum Coeli, neque fulminis iram,
Nec metuunt ullas tuta atque aeterna ruinas.
Invenies illic incisa Adamante perenni
Fata tui Generis, legi ipse, animoque notavi,
Et referam: ne sis etiamnum ignara futuri.
Hic sua complevit; (pro quo Cytherea laboras,)
Tempora, perfectis quos Terrae debuit, annis, etc.
Jupiter you see is only Library Keeper, or Custos Rotulorum to the Fates: For
he offers his Daughter a Cast of his Office, to give her a Sight of their
Decrees; which the inferior Gods were not permitted to read without his leave.
This agrees with what I have said already in the Preface; that they not having
seen the Records, might believe they were his own Handwriting; and
consequently at his disposing either to blott out, or alter, as he saw
convenient. And of this Opinion was Juno in those words, tua qui potes orsa
reflectas. Now the abode of those Destinies being in Hell, we cannot wonder why
the Swearing by Styx, was an inviolable Oath amongst the Gods of Heaven, and
that Jupiter himself should fear to be accused of Forgery by the Fates, if he
altered any thing in their Decrees. Chaos, Night, and Erebus, being the most
Ancient of the Deities, and instituting those fundamental Laws, by which he was
afterward to govern. Hesiod gives us the Genealogy of the Gods, and I think I
may safely infer the rest. I will only add, that Homer was more a Fatalist than
Virgil: For it has been observed, that the word (...), or Fortune, is not to be
found in his two Poems; but instead of it, always (...).

Aeneid the 12. lines 888, and 889. Sea-born Messapus with Atinas, heads
The Latin Squadrons; and to Battle leads.


The Poet had said, in the preceding lines, that Mnestheus, Seresthus, and
Asylas, led on the Trojans, the Tuscans, and the Arcadians: But none of the
Printed Copies, which I have seen, mention any Leader of the Rutulians and
Latins, but Messapus the Son of Neptune. Ruaeus takes notice of this passage,
and seems to wonder at it; but gives no Reason, why Messapus is alone without a
Coadjutor.

The four Verses of Virgil run thus. Totae adeo conversae acies, omnesque Latini
Omnes Dardanidae, Mnestheus, acerque Seresthus
Et Messapus equum Domitor, and fortis Asylas,
Tuscorumque Phalanx, Evandrique Arcadis alae.


I doubt not but the third Line was Originally thus, Et Messapus equum domitor,
and fortis Atinas:

For the two Names of Asylas and Atinas are so like, that one might easily be
mistaken for the other by the Transcribers. And to fortify this Opinion, we
find afterward, in the relation of Sages to Turnus, that Atinas is joined with
Messapus.

Soli, pro portis, Messapus and acer Atinas
Sustentant aciem. --
In general I observe, not only in this Aeneid, but in all thesixth last Books,
that Aeneas is never seen on Horseback, and but once before as I remember, in
the Fourth when he Hunts with Dido. The Reason of this, if I guess aright, was
a secret Compliment which the Poet made to his Countrymen the Romans; the
strength of whose Armies consisted most in Foot; which, I think, were all
Romans and Italians. But their Wings or Squadrons, were made up of their
Allies, who were Foreigners.

Aeneid the 12. Lines 100, 101, 102. At this, a flood of Tears Lavinia shed;
A crimson Blush her beauteous Face o're-spread;
Varying her Cheeks, by turns, with white and red.


Amata, ever partial to the Cause of Turnus, had just before desired him, with
all manner of earnestness, not to engage his Rival in single Fight; which was
his present Resolution. Virgil, though in favor of his Hero, he never tells
us directly, that Lavinia preferred Turnus to Aeneas, yet has insinuated this
preference twice before. For mark in the 7th Aeneid, she left her Father, who
had promised her to Aeneas without asking her consent: And followed her Mother
into the Woods, with a Troop of Bacchanals, where Amata sung the Marriage Song,
in the Name of Turnus; which if she had disliked, she might have opposed. Then
in the 11th. Aeneid, when her Mother went to the Temple of Pallas, to invoke
her Aid against Aeneas; whom she calls by no better Name than Phrygius Praedo,
Lavinia sits by her in the same Chair or Litter, juxtaque Comes Lavinia Virgo,
-- Oculos dejecta decoros. What greater sign of Love, than Fear and Concernment
for the Lover? In the lines which I have quoted she not only sheds Tears but
changes Color. She had been bred up with Turnus, and Aeneas was wholly a
Stranger to her. Turnus in probability was her first Love; and favored by her
Mother, who had the Ascendant over her Father. But I am much deceived, if
(besides what I have said) there be not a secret Satire against the Sex, which
is lurking under this Description of Virgil, who seldom speaks well of Women:
Better indeed of Camilla, than any other; for he commends her Beauty and
Valor: Because he would concern the Reader for her Death. But Valor is no
very proper Praise for Womankind; and Beauty is common to the Sex. He says also
somewhat of Andromache, but transiently: And his Venus is a better Mother than
a Wife, for she owns to Vulcan she had a Son by another Man. The rest are
Juno's, Diana's, Dido's, Amata's, two mad Prophetesses, three Harpies on Earth,
and as many Furies under ground. This Fable of Lavinia includes a secret Moral;
that Women in their choice of Husbands, prefer the younger of their Suitors to
the Elder; are insensible of Merit, fond of Handsomness; and generally
speaking, rather hurried away by their Appetite, than governed by their Reason.

L. 1191, and 1192. This let me beg; (and this no Fates withstand)
Both for my self, and for your Fathers Land, etc.


The words in the Original are these, pro Latio obtestor, pro Majestate tuorum.
Virgil very artfully uses here the word Majestas; which the Romans loved so
well, that they appropriated it to themselves. Majestas Populi Ramani. this
Title applied to Kings, is very Modern, and that is all I will say of it at
present: Though the word requires a larger Note. In the word tuorum, is
included the sense of my Translation, Your Father's Land: Because Saturn the
Father of Jove, had governed that part of Italy, after his expulsion from
Crete. But that on which I most insist, is the Address of the Poet, in this
Speech of Juno. Virgil was sufficiently sensible, as I have said in the
Preface, that whatever the common Opinion was, concerning the Descent of the
Romans from the Trojans; yet the Ancient Customs, Rites, Laws, and Habits, of
those Trojans were wholly lost, and perhaps also that they had never been: And
for this Reason, he introduces Juno in this place; requesting of Jupiter, that
no Memory might remain of Troy, (the Town she hated) that the People hereafter
should not be called Trojans, nor retain any thing which belonged to their
Predecessors. And why might not this also be concerted betwixt our Author and
his Friend Horace, to hinder Augustus from Re-building Troy, and removing
thither the Seat of Empire, a design so unpleasing to the Romans? But of this,
I am not positive, because I have not consulted d'Acier, and the rest of the
Critics, to ascertain the time in which Horace writ the Ode relating to that
Subject.

L. 1224, and 1225. Deep in the dismal Regions, void of Light,
Three Sisters, at a Birth, were born to Night.


The Father of these, (not here mentioned) was Acheron: the Names of the three,
were Alecto, Maegera, and Tysiphone. They were called Furies in Hell, on Earth
Harpies, and in Heaven Dirae: Two of these assisted at the Throne of Jupiter,
and were employed by him, to punish the wickedness of Mankind. These two must
be Megaera, and Tysiphone: Not Alecto: For Juno expressly commands her to return
to Hell, from whence she came; and gives this Reason. Te super Aetherias errare
licentius auras,
Haud Pater ipse velit summi Regnator Olympi:
Cede locis.


Probably this Dira, un-nam'd by the Poet in this Place; might be Tysiphone,
for though we find her in Hell, in the sixth Aeneid, employed in the punishment
of the damned, Continuo sontes, Vltrix accincta flag ello Tisiphone quatit
insultans, etc. Yet afterward she is on Earth in the Tenth Aeneid, and amidst
the Battle. Pallida Tisiphone media inter Millia saevit. Which I guess to be
Tysiphone, the rather, by the Etimology of her Name; which is compounded of
(...) ulciscor; and (...) caedes. Part of her Errand being to affright Turnus,
with the Stings of a guilty Conscience; and denounce Vengeance against him for
breaking the first Treaty, by refusing to yield Lavinia to Aeneas, to whom she
was promised by her Father, and consequently, for being the Author of an unjust
War; and also for violating the second Treaty, by declining the single combat,
which he had stipulated with his Rival, and called the Gods to witness before
their Altars. As for the Names of the Harpies, (so called on Earth) Hesiod
tells us they were Iris, Aello, and Ocypete. Virgil calls one of them Celaeno:
This I doubt not was Alecto; whom Virgil calls in the third Aeneid, Furiarum
maxima: And in the sixth again, by the same Name -- Furiarum maxima, juxta
accubat. That she was the chief of the Furies, appears by her description in
the seventh Aeneid: To which, for haste, I refer the Reader.

FINIS.

