VOX REGNI: OR, The Voice of the Kingdom. BEING A DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE City and
Country.
Country. GOod Neighbor City, Let us revive and renew that intimacy and
correspondency we formerly had in the days of Queen Elizabeth; you know we have
a mutual dependency upon each other, and the Happiness or Misery of the One,
will be the same to the Other: And therefore let us with good Protestant
Hearts, resolve to love each other as Protestants; and live and die together in
a Resolution to Preserve and Defend our Protestant King from all Bloody
Papists; together with our Properties, and the Privileges of Parliament: And
in special manner let us maintain the True Protestant Religion with Heart and
Hand, with Purse and Power, as becomes Christians and Good Subjects; forasmuch
as the Protestant Religion is the Best in the whole World, the good Word of God
being the only Rule thereof, both as touching matters of Faith, and matters of
Conversation; and it does not allow of any kind of wickedness.


City. This Proposal and Desire of the Country, does greatly rejoice the
hearts of all true Protestants in the City: We can heartily and readily say,
One and All, One and All, for our Protestant King, for our
Parliament-Privileges, for our Properties, and for our precious Protestant
Religion: O these things are near and dear unto us! And when we seriously
consider the present dangers that attend the King and Kingdom, and the future
miseries that may come by the cruelty of the bloody Papists, our very hearts
are ready to break. And therefore we do agree with you, to live and die
together, in the Protestant Cause, as before expressed.


Country. If we should not thus agree, our Posterity may pour out Curses both
upon City and Country: For if we suffer the Popish Party to get uppermost, we
shall leave them that will be Protestants nothing to possess but Popish
Cruelty: Farewell then to the precious Gospel of Christ; farewell to the sweet
Ministers of Christ, as well the Conformists as the Nonconformists; Popish
Cruelty will make no difference between them; the same Gallows shall hang them,
and the same Fire shall burn them. O what a dreadful Change will then be in our
Land! Instead of the holy Scriptures in English, there will be Latin Mattins or
Masses, instead of Christ's holy Ordinances, there will be the Inventions and
Traditions of Rome; instead of powerful Soul-searching Ministers, the Land will
be filled with Jesuits, Monks and Friars, like the Locusts that came out of the
bottomless Pit.


City. We are glad that the Country has such a good apprehension and feeling
sense of the miseries which come into a Nation with Popery: We also must say,
If Popery do get uppermost, Undone, V^done, Undone; every way undone; you in
the Country, and w^ in the City, utterly undone: And therefore it highly
concerns us to act according to the old English Proverb, and since we are
Fore-warned, to be Fore-arm'd; especially considering what Endeavors there
has been, and what Longings there now is, for the Death of our Protestant
King, by the Popish Party, because they reckon that then they shall certainly
have a Popish King. Lord have mercy upon us! How dre^dfull(...) we been
deceived! About twenty years ago we could not be persuaded (...)f the Royal
Family would appear for Popery; but then we were swallowed up with expectations
of seeing the happiest days; and being the most happy People upon Earth: But
instead thereof, how have our Goals been filled with Good Christians! yea, even
in the time of the Raging Pestilence? After which, our famous City was set on
Fire, and continued burning four days, in which time more then thirteen
thousand Houses were destroyed; and now, not our Houses only, but our Bodies
also are in danger of Burning: for all the talk is of a Popish Successor, and a
Popish Religion, upon the Death of the King, whom God long preserve.


Country. In troth, good City, when we look back upon things past, and
consider the present state of Affairs, together with what is like to come upon
us, it is a heartbreaking Consideration: But let us cheer up; blessed be God
we have a good Parliament: We have had many a hard tug in choosing them, and
were almost wearied out in looking for their sitting; which made us often
enquire of you in the City what might be the meaning of so many Prorogations;
but you could not tell us: though we did believe the King had some Bad Folks
about Him that might be the cause of it. But when His Majesty was graciously
pleased to send his Proclamation into the Country, wherein He did promise they
should not only Meet, but Sit, it filled the Country Protestants with great
joy.


City. This was the great joy of the City also; and the first day of their
meeting, thousands of People did appear at Westminster to see them: and a
cheerful countenance was in the face of all good Protestants: At which time His
Majesty made a Speech to both Houses of Parliament; in which, He did put the
Parliament upon an Impartial Inquiry into the Plot, and bringing the Lords in
the Tower to a Trial, that Justice might be done; and His Majesty did give unto
them great Assurances that nothing should be wanting on His part to maintain
the Protestant Religion, in concurrence with them in any new means or ways they
should propose to Him, that should consist with preserving the Succession of
the Crown in its due and legal Course of Descent: He also commended unto them
the state of Tangier, and said it would not be long tenable without help from
them; and having pressed them to Unity among themselves, at last concluded,
That the World should see it was not his fault, if this were not a happy
Session.


Country, Verily this was a brave Speech; and we believe this Parliament are
as right for the impartial management of these things, as ever Parliament were
in England: And they do well know that the Country and City chose them for
this very purpose, viz. To inquire into the Plot, so as to find out all that
are guilty of it, of what Rank or Quality soever; and as for the Protestant
Religion, they know England is quite undone, if that be not well secured both
for the present and hereafter; and for the Trial of the Lords in the Tower,
they know the Country is highly displeased and greatly grieved that men
impeached of High Treason, and that by the Commons of England, should be so
long before they be brought to their Trials; for if they be Innocent, it is
great wrong to them; and if they be Guilty, it is no kindness to the Kingdom to
let them live so long. But pray good City, tell us what is the meaning of those
words, The Succession of the Crown in its due and legal Course of Descent.


City. Truly it is a hard matter to hit upon the right meaning of Princes; but
as to those words, some do think it is a keeping of the Crown in the Royal
Family, not suffering it to descend upon any other Persons but such as are of
the Regal Race; and some do think it is a forbidding of the Parliament to
remove any Person whatsoever from the Crown, who by due course ought to have
it, being in the Royal Line.


Country. It it be so, then we must have the next Person in the Succession,
whatever he be as touching Religion, though a Jew, a Turk or a Papist. Indeed,
indeed, this will make our Country cry out, Lord have mercy upon us, Lord have
mercy upon us. But our hope is, our good Parliament will look well to this
great matter. And now we pray you good City, tell us something of the
Proceedings of Parliament.


City. If you will but lay out a little money, you may have the Proceedings of
Parliament in Print; and I would advise you in your several Neighbourhoods to
joy^ together, and then you may have them for a very small matter; besides the
great benefit you will find in conferring with each other, at the reading of
them.


Country. Truly this will be very profitable for us, and it will be a good way
to keep up and maintain Love and good Friendship. But pray let us have some
brief account for the present, for we know you can do it very well, the City
being so near the Parliament, and you are well informed of matters.


City. After the King had ended His Speech, the Commons of England went
together, and chose for their Speaker William Williams Esquire Recorder of Chester,
and the next day they presented him to His Majesty, who approved very well of
him, for indeed he is a good Protestant, and a right Englishman. Then the
House went on with swearing their Members, and appointed their several
Committees. And one of the first things that came before them, was a Dreadful
Information of one Mr. Dangerfield, wherein he declared, How he was concerned
with the Lady Powis, and the Lord Peterborough, in contriving and framing a
Plot that should be cast upon the Presbyterians; and how he was with the Duke
of York in his Closet at Whitehall, who gave him great encouragement to proceed
in that matter; assuring him that the major part of the Gentry in the Northern
Parts were his Friends, and were no strangers to this design. And that the Duke
made diverse Vows to stand by them that were engaged in this thing, that they
should not want money. That whoever happened to be in prison, according to
their stedfastness in the Cause, all possible care should be taken to support
and preserve them. That the Lord Peterborough told him he had an opportunity to
make his Fortune what he would himself, if he would follow the Advice of the
Duke of York, who would certainly be King in a short time. To which Dangerfield
answered, That he valued not his Life to serve the Dukes Interest; and then the
Earl of Peterborough gave him the Title of Captain Willoughby. About four days
after this, he was with the Duke again, who told him that in a short time he
should see the Catholic Religion flourish in this Kingdom, and Heresy torn up
by the Roots; and that he had heard of the Proposal made to him by the Lords
Powis and Arundel, about the taking off the King, and also of Dangerfields
Refusal; and therefore said to Dangerfield, If you value the Religion you
profess, my Interest, and your own Happiness, depend upon my Honor for your
Advancement. To which Dangerfield replied, That he would stand and fall in
defense of the Roman Catholic Religion, and his Highness Service; and that
then he was well satisfied by his ghostly Father, that the King was a condemned
Heretic; and therefore he was not a little concerned that he had refused to
kill the King: And then said, That if his Highness would command him to the
Attempt, he would not fail either to lose his Life or accomplish it. And Mr.
Dangerfield further says, That the Duke then gave him twenty Guinneys, and
said, That if he would be vigorous in what he had undertaken already, he would
so order it, that his Life should not be in the least danger; adding these
words, We are not to have men taken in such daring Actions, but to make a quick
dispatch, and be gone. If you will buy Dangerfields Narrative, as it was given
in at the Bar of the House of Commons, you may see this, and much more.


Country. Good City hold you a little, and let us put in one word, viz. This
makes us think of the old Saying in our Country, that is, Murder will out. And
truly this is no new wickedness, for one Brother to murder another; for the
first murder that ever was in the World, was the murder of a Brother, for Cain
murdered his Brother Abel. But pray good City go on.


City. The House of Lords and the House of Commons have had other Informations,
wherein there is great discoveries of this horrid Plot in England; and besides
there is the beginning of a great discovery of a damnable Plot in Ireland,
which we hear will be printed, and then you will see all, even Beelzebub
himself in the Plot, against our Protestant King, and Protestant Kingdoms.


C^untrey. Truly it is well done of the Parliament to cause these matters to be
printed; for now we see clearly they are not willing the People shall perish
for want of knowledge. But pray let us hear further.


City. The Commons of England have declared, That such as did abhor Ptitioning
the King for the Calling and Sitting of the Parliament, are Betrayers of the
Rights and Privileges of English Subjects.


Country. That pleases us to the heart; for we thought it was a grievous
thing to be counted Criminals for beseeching and entreating His Majesty to do
that which we knew would be for His Good as well as ours. And we thought this
was the way to make it a crime for Servants to beseech their Masters, and
Children to desire their Parents to do those things that are necessary for the
well-being of the Family.


City. The Commons of England have declared, That the Acts of Parliament in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth and King James, made against the Papists, ought not to
extend to the Protestant Dissenters: And are preparing a Bill to Unite all His
Majesty's Protestant Subjects.


Country. Gods blessing on their hearts for that; for it is a sad thing to see
Protestants persecute Protestants. Many good People in the Country have been
often in Prison, and received great trouble from the Bishops Courts, and they
have born all with great patience, and are still very good Neighbors, and in
our Consciences we believe they are very good Subjects to His Majesty: They
follow their Employments, they pay Scot and Lot, and other Taxes to the King,
and they serve God according to their Consciences, without wronging their
fellow Subjects: And to persecute such, is to please the Papists, and do their
work for them, till they have an opportunity to do it themselves against all
Protestants, of which these are a considerable part. But pray good City go on
with your account.


City. The Commons of England have prepared a Bill to Exclude James Duke of
York from Inheriting the Imperial Crowns of England and Ireland, etc.


Country. Now you tell us a great thing indeed! This is laying the Protestant
Ax to the Root of the Popish Tree in England. This indeed is the only way to
preserve us from our present Fears and future Dangers. This makes us think of
that Old Saying in our Country, It is good to be sure: And verily this is the
right way to make all things sure: First, It makes sure of the Safety of the
King; for the Papists will not in all likelihood be then so hasty to murder
him; because if York were excluded by Law, they have no other way to set him in
the Throne, but by the Sword, which after so execrable and horrid an Act as
that of murdering the King, would be a thousand times more difficult for them
to accomplish: But as things are now, they would plead his Title by Law, though
violence should befall the King, which God of his infinite mercy prevent.
Secondly, This is the way to make sure of the Safety of the Protestants, for by
this Law their Hearts will be encouraged and their Hands strengthened to
prevent all designed Mischiefs upon their Persons, Estates, or Religion. But
pray let us hear a little more concerning this Bill.


City. The Commons sent it up to the House of Lords, where after a long Debate
about it, (in which many good Protestant Lords did press the passing of it, and
that they might agree with the Commons) it was Rejected by the major part of
the House.


Country. Alas! alas! This is very unpleasing Intelligence: This will grieve
the hearts of the poor Country Protestants, because their Lives and Lands, and
(which is more then all) the Protestant Religion is still in danger. But what
shall we say, or what shall we think of this Proceeding of our Peers and
Prelates, who are professed Protestants? Can they show us any Law of God,
either in Nature, or in the holy Scripture, That Peers, Prelates or Peasants
are bound to have such a Governor as is engaged by his Principles to destroy
all his Subjects, if they will not be of his Religion? And that this will be
the practice of a Popish Successor, England has had too sad an instance in the
Bloody Reign of Queen Mary. But good City tell us some better news before we
part.


City. The Parliament has resolved to bring the Lords in the Tower to their
Trials, and have already begun with the Lord Stafford, who being upon a full
hearing found Guilty of High Treason by his Peers, has received Sentence of
Death accordingly.


Country. This is what we have long waited for, and this answers to the Kings
Speech at the opening of the Parliament, wherein he desired the Lords in the
Tower might be brought to their Trial, that Justice might be done. But it is now
time to part, let us therefore pray, That our Protestant King may live long,
and our Protestant Parliament may sit long: And from a Popish Successor, who
will bring in Popish Idolatry and Popish Cruelty, Good Lord deliver us. Amen.


FINIS.

