God's Mighty Power Magnified: AS MANIFESTED and REVEALED IN HIS Faithful
Handmaid JOAN VOKINS, WHO Departed this Life the 22d of the 5th Month, 1690,
Having finished her Course, and kept the Faith. Also some Account of her
Exercises, Works of Faith, Labor of Love, and great Travels in the Work of the
Ministry, for the good of Souls.

2 Cor. 4. 7. But we have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the Excellency
of the Power may be of God, and not of us.

2 Cor. 12. 9. And he said, my Grace is sufficient for thee for my Strength is
made perfect in Weakness.

London: Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard in Lombard Street, 1691.

TO THE READER.
Friendly Reader,
THE following Papers and Epistles here Collected together, and Printed for thy
benefit, were not written and given forth by the Will of Man, or worldly
Wisdom, but by the Will and hidden Wisdom of God, which is (and ever was) a
Mystery to the Learned Scribes, and wise Disputants of this World, and as
Foolishness to them.

Therefore if thou would come to receive the comfort that is couched under
the Words and Expressions, and partake of the Sweetness of that Life from
whence they proceeded, then thou must turn in thy Mind to the Manifestation of
the Spirit of Christ, which does enlighten thee and all Mankind, and is in
great Mercy freely given thee to profit withal, which Gift of God is the only
Key that opens the Mysteries of Life and Salvation, and reveals the things of
God; which no Man can know or understand, but by the Inspiration of that same
Holy Spirit, which I desire thou may in Humility wait to feel, to open and
enlarge thy Heart, by inspiring thee, and thereby a good Understanding may
obtain, both to discern the things belonging to thy Peace, and also to savor
and taste thereof, to thy Comfort and Satisfaction, and so to have the Sense
from the Witness in thy own Conscience, from whence the following things came.

So requesting thee to read without Prejudice, in the fear of that God that
searches thy Heart, that thou may receive the Benefit, which in true Love is
heartily wished thee, by

Thy Sincere Friend, O. SANSOM

Note, That the following Papers are not exactly placed, as to the Dates, which
the Reader is desired to pass by.

An Account and Testimony concerning Joan Vokins, from the Quarterly Meeting
for Berkshire.
AS concerning our Dear Friend and well-beloved Sister in the Lord, Joan
Vokins, this Account and Testimony Lives in our Hearts to give forth, That she
was one whom the Lord Called by his Grace, and Endued with Power from on High,
to Preach the Gospel of the Kingdom of Heaven, and (according to her Measure)
her Labor and Exercise therein was Effectual to many; and her Care and
Diligence in her Service very Useful and Profitable in the Churches of Christ,
where she has Traveled, especially in those parts where her Residence was.
She was given up to Serve the Lord with her whole Might, depending on the
Sufficiency of his Power, and did not count her Life, nor any thing of this
World dear unto unto her, for the Works sake which the Lord had called her
unto; but with great Courage and Confidence, trusting in him, (who was her sole
support) she cheerfully exposed her weak Body to Travel, enduring great
Hardships both by Sea and Land, in the Work and Service of the Lord, when many
Perrils and Dangers diverse ways did attend her; and tho outwardly Weak, she was
made Strong through Believing in God's Almighty Power. And now having Fought a
good Fight, and Finished her Course here with Joy, and laid down her Head in
peace; she is Crowned with endless Life and Glory to Sing Praises and
Hallelujah's to the Lord for ever and evermore. And through her Faithfulness to
God in her day, and Valor for his Truth, and Courage and Constancy unto the
End, she has obtained a good Report among all God's People (that knew her) in
her Generation: Her Conversation did Adorn her Christian Profession, and was
such as did become the Gospel; so that she Practiced what she Preached, and was
a Lively Pattern and good Example unto others in her day.

And seeing there are few that are in all things like-minded, then surely the
loss of such a Member in the Churches is great, and her Work and Service wanted
and missed much among us: But seeing it is her great Gain that she is ceased
from her Labors, and our God's good pleasure to Receive her into everlasting
Rest; It is our Duty humbly to submit, and say, Thy will, O God, be done. And,
O Lord, do thou by thy own Power raise up more such Faithful Laborers, and
such Nursing Mothers in thy Israel, as this was, which thou have now removed.

So for the Glorifying of our God, and Magnifying of his Life and Power, which
through Christ Jesus, was Revealed and Manifested in this our dear Friend and
Sister in the Truth aforesaid, we were free to give forth this short Account
and Testimony with our Names Subscribed.

Signed at the Quarterly Meeting at Reading, the 4th of the 3 d Month, 1691.
Paul Newman. William Austell. John Gidden. William Cooper. Oliver Sansom.
William Speakman. Adam Lawrence. John Knowles. John May. William Lambole. James
Potter. Edw. Lockey. James Matthew. John Jagger. John Buy. John Cotterell.
Abraham Bonifeild. John Brown. William Ballard.

The abovesaid Testimony being Read at the Woman's Half years Meeting for the
said County, held at Reading, on the self same day above Specified, and in
Witness of their Unity with their Brethren therein, and truly owning the same,
did also set their Hands as follows.

Martha Weston. Jane Tull. Grace Hutchings. Mary Sandilans. Marjery Potter.
Elizabeth Addams. Marab. Farmborrow. Mary Baker. Mary Buy. Margaret Chandler.
Damaris Burgis. Mary Austell. Deborah Matthew. Joan Orpwood. Rachel Nicholls.
Mary Cooper. Jane Ballard. Mary Cotterell. Marjery Bunce. Alice Glover. Jane
Sansom. Elizab. Wightwick. Elizabeth Bullock. Ann Ball. Mary Brown. Ann Truss.
Frances Wren. Margret Fulbrook.


A Testimony concerning Joan Vokins, by Theophila Townsend.
I Have a Testimony in my Heart to bear for that faithful Servant and
Handmaid of the Lord, Joan Vokins; That she was a virtuous Woman, truly
fearing God, and one that was full of Zeal and Courage in her Testimony for the
Lord, and his blessed Truth in her Day and Time, and did the Work of the Lord
with boldness, and holy Confidence, and much Cheerfulness: She stood a Witness
for the Truth in faithfulness, unto the end of her days, against all that did
rise up in Opposition, or sought to hinder the Prosperity of it where she was
concerned. I have known her above twenty years, and have had a Correspondency
with her by Letters, and have been at her House, and she has been often with
me, whereby I had the knowledge of her Affairs relating to the precious Truth,
and of her godly Care and Diligence in the work of the Lord. She was of a
tender Spirit, ready to hold forth a Hand to the weak, to help them on in the
way of Peace, and to watch over them for good, and encourage them in
well-doing; and much delighted to see those that knew the Truth, grow up into
the Life and Nature of it, to persevere in it in faithfulness, but much
lamenting the state of the unfaithful. She had a godly care upon her for the
Church of Christ in general, but especially where she had labored, and been
conversant. Her tender Care was great; She was a Nursing Mother over the Young
convinced; and in her own Family, great was her Care and Endeavors for her
Husband and Children, that they might partake with her of the Everlasting
Comfort, and Celestial Consolation that is the Portion of the Righteous. The
Lord was very good unto her, and blessed her with a Dispensation of the Gospel,
and gave her a Word in season to speak to their several states and conditions;
and the Lord blessed her Endeavors, and made it effectual for their Benefit,
and her great Comfort and Satisfaction: For she was a great Sufferer in the
time of her first Convincement among her near Relations. And she was a good
Example among them, that by her good Conversation, by the blessing of God, and
assistance of his Grace they were won to the Truth; her care was great for her
Children, that they might come to a sense of Truth; that (she said) when she
saw them cumbered, and their Minds hurried with their worldly Business, that
she would call them together to sit down and wait upon the Lord, and sit with
them, that he might compose their Minds into an inward Retiredness, and said,
the Lord was with her in it, and often refreshed her Spirit among them: And the
Lord let her live to see the Fruits of her labor, and the desire of her Soul
concerning them, and the good effect that her Christian Motherly care had
brought forth, through the blessing of Almighty God, among them; to him be the
Glory, for he is worthy for ever.

Her Father, and Husband, and Children, all came to receive the Truth; and her
Husband is now a Sufferer for Truth, under that cruel Oppression of Tithes, a
Prisoner at Reading-Goal, with her eldest Son for the same: And when they were
called to suffer, she signified to me in a Letter, that it rejoiced her Heart
to see them willing to suffer in so good a Cause. And her zeal and fervency for
the holy Truth was such, that she rejoiced to see her near and dear Relations
suffer for it; not that she was glad because they were Sufferers, but because
they were faithful to the Lord, and did choose rather to suffer than deny their
Testimony against Tithes, that Antichristian Yoke, which the Nation groans
under, the weight of which, the Lord will overturn in his own season, and ease
his own Heritage of that heavy Burden; for he is a never-failing God to his
faithful People. These things are not written only for her sake that is taken
from us, but also for the sakes of them that remain in the Body, that they may
be like-minded with her, and be found in the same Practice, watching against
evil in their Children and Families, and encouraging them in a holy Life, and
judge down Pride and Vanity, and all Superfluity, and every hurtful thing, that
they may receive the same Blessing, and sweet Satisfaction from the Lord, as
this our dear Deceased Friend and Sister did, to the comfort of her Soul, and
renewing of her Zeal and Courage in the Work and Service of the Lord; who in
the Power of God, went on to serve the Lord with all her Might, offering up all
that was near and dear unto her, not sparing her weak Body, which in
appearance, was fitter to keep her Chamber, than travel as she did; who left
Husband and Children, and all outward Enjoyments for the Truth sake, and went
over-Sea to answer the Lord, and clear herself of the Service he had called her
unto; and he was with her, and did support and uphold her by his mighty Power,
and made way for her to travel through several Islands and Provinces, as may be
seen more at large in the following account.

She came to visit me not long before she went last up to London, and told me
she had some Papers she desired might be made public after her Decease,
expecting her time was not long to remain in the Body, being well satisfied,
that she should lay down her Head in Peace with God, let Death come when it
would. Her Trials and Exercises were many, but that which was her greatest
Grief, and heaviest Burden, and most grievous to be born, was her suffering by
false Brethren and Apostates, who under the form and profession of Truth, did
make War, and kick against the Life and Power of it; but her Zeal for God, was
against that Libertine backsliding Spirit: And the Lord bore up her Head, and
supported her at all times, and brought her through it all, and now has taken
her to himself out of all their reach, where She rests from her Labors, and
her works do follow her.

And in her last Letter, dated London in the 4th Month, 1690. she signified,
now her Service was finished, and said, I could gladly have laid down my Body
here among the Lord's Worthies; yet seeing it is otherwise ordered, I submit to
the Will of my God, and do think to go Homeward in a little time, or to this
purpose, as if she had known her time to be near at Hand; and it was very near
indeed, for she did not reach Home, but dyed at Reading in Peace with the Lord,
and in Unity with all his faithful People: And blessed be the worthy Name of
the Lord, she is now set free from all Sorrow, Pain and Weakness of Body, she
was attended with.

And now the Lord has taken her to her Everlasting Rest, out of all Trials,
and her Peace is sure, and her Rest Glorious: Holy high Praises to the God of
all our Mercies and Blessings, who knows best what to do with us, and in what
season to take us out of the World, and when it will be most for his Glory and
our Good: Although we feel the want of her, and bewail our loss, yet our loss
is her great Gain; She was very serviceable in the Country where she lived, and
elsewher; they miss her, and we; all that were acquainted with her, know the
want of her, yet can say in submission to the Will of God, Thy Will be done, O
Lord.

This is what was with me in a Testimony for my dear Deceased Friend and Sister
in the Truth, J. V. with whom my Spirit had true Unity: And though her Body is
removed, yet her Life is with us.

Cirencester, the 10th day of the 2d. Month, 1691. Theophila Townsend.

Mary Drewet's Testimony Concerning Joan Vokins.
COncerning our dear and well-beloved Friend and Sister, Joan Vokins, who was
sometimes Conversant with us, and when it pleased the Lord to order her way to
Visit us, it was very Acceptable and Edifying to the Sincere Hearted that Loved
the Truth: Her Innocent Life and Conversation lives in our Remembrance, and the
sense of the Loving Kindness of the Lord is worthy to be retained and kept in
mind by all his People, which was largely and admirably manifested in
preserving and upholding of her, through many and great Exercises and Trials,
in her Service and Travels in the Work of the Lord, even when great Pains and
Weaknesses of Body were upon her, which did very much attend her all along
since (and sometime before) the Lord was pleased to call her forth in his
Service; but being born up by his Spirit, she was given up in his Will, to be
at his Dispose, and did not look at her own Weakness, but was preserved in the
true Patience, having her Faith standing in the Blessed Power of the Lord, that
failed not; her Afflictions being Rightly Sanctified unto her, so that she was
made able, tho in many Pains and Weaknesses of Body, to undergo and perform the
Service the Lord called her unto with Cheerfulness; and it was her Joy to see
Friends prosper in the Truth; and although her bodily Presence and Speech did seem
Weak, yet her Testimony and Writing was Weighty and Powerful; for the Lord in
the riches of his Love had made her a partaker of Heavenly Treasure in her
Earthen Vessel, which I have heard her often acknowledge, taking nothing to her
self, but Ascribed the Glory and Excellency of the Power, to be the free Gift
of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Her care was great concerning the young
Generation, Exhorting them to be inwardly staid in their Minds, that they might
grow up in the Love and Life of Truth, so as to feel the work of it effected in
their own Hearts, that they might come up to serve the Lord and succeed their
Heavenly minded Parents, who had finished their Course, and wear at Rest in
the Lord. And so now seeing it has pleased the Lord to take unto himself this
our dear Friend, who has done the work of her day in Faithfulness, and is
entered into everlasting Rest and Peace with the Lord, to Sing praise and
Hallelujah's to his Holy Name for ever and for ever more: So desiring that we
who are left a little behind, may prize our time so, as to walk in the
Footsteps of the Faithful that are gone before, who have sought a City as
Faithful Abraham did, whose Builder and Maker is the Lord.

Cirencester, the 11th of the 2d Month. 1691. Mary Drewet.

Concerning our Dear and Tender Mother, Joan Vokins, who departed this Life the
22 d of the 5th Month, 1690. at Reading, in the County of Berks, at our Friend
John Buy 's House.
SHE being come from London homewards, it pleased the Lord to put a stop to her
Journey, and take her to himself out of all Troubles, and from her many sore
Pains, which her poor Body was afflicted with. She was one that did truly fear
the Lord, and sought the Prosperity of his precious Truth above all the Glory
and Honor of this World. Whenever the Lord was pleased to send her forth in
his Service, she went without murmuring, believing the Lord would carry her
through it, though weak in Body; who did enable her to bear a faithful Living
Testimony to his Name, in this her Native Land, and in places remote beyond the
Seas, as in Barbados, and in other parts of America, and in Ireland, through
great Exercises, in Patience and Cheerfulness, it being as Meat and Drink to
her to do his Will. She was one that had a great Care in her Family of us her
Children, that we might be nurtured, and brought up in the Fear of the Lord,
and have a true Regard unto him, and his precious Truth, above all things in
this World. This was her earnest Desire and Prayer to the Lord for us, That we
might be his Children, that so we might truly answer the End for which we were
created.

And now, though we cannot but sorrow for the loss of so near and dear a Mother
as she was to us, both inwardly and outwardly, in giving us good Counsel, to
Edification, from our Childhood; But since it has pleased the Lord to take her
to himself; and considering, she has laid down her Head in the Faith, and full
Assurance of Eternal Happiness, it does out-ballance all; she having ceased
from her Labors, is at rest with the Lord, who is worthy of Praises and Honor
for evermore.

Richard Vokins, jun. Hopeful Vokins. Samuel Burgis. Elizabeth Vokins. Mary
Lockey. Sarah Lawrence. Hannah Burgis.


An Account given by Richard Vokins, junior, of some Words that his dear Mother
spoke to him on her Dying Bed, Viz.
SON,
MY Weakness is great, and my Pains very strong; but the Lord is large in his
Love to me, and good to me; he gives me Patience to bear my Pains, which are
strong.

Ah, Son! I have learned a good Lesson, Paul's* Lesson, in all States to be
content: and now I have nothing to do but to die. So putting forth her Hand, to
take her Leave of me, further said:

Son, Remember the Lord, and he will remember thee: And remember my Love to thy
Wife, and to all my Children. And after a little stop, being weak, and her
Speech low, spoke these Words again: Remember the Lord, and he will remember
you; and be you faithful to him, and he will bless you, and you shall be
blessed.

Richard Vokins.

This is my Testimony concerning my dear Sister, Joan Vokins.
SHE was a True and Faithful Labourer in the Churches of God, where it was her
Care, that all Things might be kept Sweet and Clean, Decent and in Order, as
becomes the Blessed Truth; she having chosen the One thing needful, which is
the better part, that shall never be taken away; and being given up to follow
the Lord faithfully in his Work and Service; Her Prayer often in Public was,
That the Lord would subdue Death and Darkness out of our Meetings and Families;
and we might come to witness him to be a Fountain of Life unto us. She was very
tenderhearted, kind, and Loving, willing to do good unto all, and has left a
good Savor behind her; who though dead, yet lives.

Daniel Bunce.

An Epistle to Friends writ first of all which came to hand, after the fore
going was thus collected together.
UPON the Third Day of the Eleventh Month, 1669, as I lay very sick in my Bed,
I felt the everlasting blessed powerful Life to arise and spring up in my
Heart, which gave Dominion over my bodily weakness, and caused me to write
these few Lines unto you, that so we may consider the large Love of our God,
and praise his holy Name together.

Dear Friends, the tender Bowels of God's Love dearly yearns toward you all;
and in his Light has he made it manifest: therefore it greatly concerns you
all with the pure Light to make diligent search into the very bottom of your
Hearts, whether or no ye be faithful to what is manifest therein: for I write
unto you as unto them that know the Truth, to stir you up to Faithfulness
therein, that the Father's drawings ye may more and more feel, and through it
come to Living Obedience, while the Bowels of tender Mercies are open; for if
you slight his Loving Kindness unto you, is it not just with him to shut up his
Bowels of Compassion? Oh how largely has the pure God of Heaven and Earth
manifested his Loving Kindness unto you! through his Judgments and Mercies, and
through the Reproofs of his Instructions has the way of Life been manifested
largely unto you. Therefore, dear Friends, be not forgetful of his large Love:
Oh, let it never slip out of your remembrance; for you can never prize it to
the worth of it. Therefore it concerns you all to be truly watchful the
remainder of your Days, that so you may see the appearances of his Love, and
with your whole Hearts join thereunto, that no Reserve may be left therein to
stop the Current of the pure Life from flowing into your Souls: And, dear
Hearts, it is in my Heart to stir you up to feel after the pure Life, if happily
you may find it: Whilst the Fountain is open, be ye not negligent, nor
unfaithful; but be faithful and obedient, that so through the Faith that
purifies the Heart, you may draw Water at the Fountain of Life, and feel its
recourse into your Souls; the Virtue whereof makes the Souls of the obedient
fruitful and increasing in God's Love, and in their Unity with each other. But
where the Current is stopped, and the Life has not its free course, there
Death is over the Soul, profess what they will; yea, though they may live in
the very Form of Truth. Therefore, dear Friends, I, in God's Fear, and in the
Bowels of tender Love to your Immortal Souls, do exhort you all to be diligent,
to keep your Meetings, and assemble your selves often together; let not the
gain of the perishing things hinder you of the gain of that which will never
perish; For verily there is none can witness a free recourse unto the Fountain
of Life, but those whose Hearts are gathered out of the perishing things; and
such do partake of the living Springs, which do greatly refresh their immortal
Souls; and it is more to me than I can express. Therefore, dear Hearts, think
not your time long, neither let the World hinder, but keep your Meetings
frequently, there to wait with sincere Hearts; for those that so wait, never
lose their Reward; therefore be ye encouraged to wait upon the Lord, that in
the pure refreshing Life your Souls may come to have an Habitation, the which
to know a dwelling and abiding in, is more precious than words can demonstrate:
And let Patience have its perfect Work in your Hearts, that all Prejudice may
be kept out; for where Envy and Strife is, there is Confusion. Therefore, dear
Friends, it concerns you all to dwell in the Patience, and in the Wisdom that
comes from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits, without Partiality, and without
Hypocrisy. And so the God of Peace establish your Hearts in his everlasting
Truth and Righteousness for ever. Amen. I am

Your Unfeigned Friend, J. V.
The 3 d of the 11th Month, 1669.
This to be read amongst Friends.
A Loving Advertisement unto all those who join together to Persecute the
Innocent.
PIlate and Herod consulted together in this abominable Work, and were made
Friends; although before they were at enmity, as you may see in Luke 23. And in
the same Chapter you may read how Pilate called together the High Priests, the
Rulers, and the People, who had joined together, and falsely and vehemently
accused the Innocent; and when those Persecutors were come (mark how Pilate's
Words run;) Ye have brought this man unto me, as one that perverteth the
people: Behold (says he) I have examined him before you, and I find no fault
in him: Notwithstanding their many Accusations, as you may read of in that
Chapter; no, nor yet Herod neither; for Pilate sent him to Herod to be
examined, and they found no cause for what they did, as Pilate himself
confesses no less than three times before them all, as you may see in ver. 22.
and yet for all this, those wicked Persecutors Enmity was so great against the
Truth, and their Love to Christ Jesus so small, that they joined together with
Judas their Informer, and crucified the Holy One. Oh consider this, you wicked
Persecutors, who have set your Hands to the Devil's Work! did he not enter into
Judas before he informed against Christ? O consider whose Work you are a doing!
and see whether the Scriptures do not testify against the same ever since Cain
and Abel? Oh be advised, and do not slay God's Witness in your Hearts, as
Pilate and Herod, and the rest of that wicked Crew did! for you may see there
was something in Pilate and Herod which let them see there was no fault in
Jesus; they had a Witness for him in their Hearts, which if they had loved and
obeyed, they would not have slain the Lord of Life: But they did then, as you
do now, rebelled against it, and counted it of no value, and chose rather to
please wicked Men, who did then, as you are now doing; they brought their Law
to cover their Wickedness; and said, By their Law he ought to die; and so they
violated the righteous Law of God, which is Light, which manifested in their
Hearts there was no fault in him. Oh! consider this, you envious Persecutors,
and turn to the Light of Christ Jesus, which shines in your dark Hearts, and
read your States there; and cease your evil doing before it be too late, lest
the God of this World blind your Eyes, and harden your Hearts, and bring you to
destruction, as he did Judas, who was a Resister of the Light; I shall appeal
to the Witness for God in your Hearts, and come let us be tried by it: Have you
not done as bad as those before mentioned, yea rather worse? for you have
reproachfully slandered, and falsely accused us behind our back, and caused many
of us to suffer the loss of our Goods, without Examination or Accusation to our
Faces; in this you out-stript the Cruelty of those before-named, and the
Heathen also; for they permitted Paul to be examined, and also to speak for
himself, as you may see in the Scripture, which you call your Rule, and yet do
err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God; for if you did, you
would not wrong and persecute your innocent Neighbors, who do you no harm, but
desire the everlasting Good of all, even of our greatest Enemies. Oh, do you do
by us as you would have us do by you. Would you have us persecute and tear away
your Goods, because you go to your Worship? or because you will not come to
ours? or would you not think it very hard to be so dealt by? Oh, come and be
tried by your own Rule! and read from the beginning to the end, and see whether
the Persecutors were not the false Worshippers in all Generations, and the true
Ones the Sufferers; and were not they as high in their Wisdom and Learning as
you are, who crucified Christ, and set your Original over his Head, of Greek,
Hebrew and Latin? and they counted him of too low a Degree for them to
receive, and they mocked, and scoffed, and derided him, and thereby manifested
their Enmity against him and his Followers then, as you do yours now against us.

Come down, you High-minded Persecutors, and bow before the Lord, and turn to
his Witness in your Hearts which reprove you in secret, and testify for us;
and it has made many of you to confess to our innocence and harmlesness,
notwithstanding the many false Aspersions that the Wicked have cast upon us;
and although we have a Witness in your Hearts for us, yet your Mercies are
still Cruelties toward us. Oh, do not think to hide your selves from the
All-seeing Eye of the Lord! for assuredly his righteous Judgments will find you
out, and then all false Coverings will be too narrow: Do you think your Law
will plead for you then, or them who set it forth excuse you? Oh no! then the
righteous Law of God, which you have violated and broken, and disobeyed now,
will then rise up in Judgment, and bear Witness against you; therefore leave
off all your false Coverings for your Persecution; for they are but deceit, and
will deceive you, and stand you in no stead when you come to account for your
deeds done in the body.

And now you of my Neighbors and Country, who resist the Spirit of the Lord,
and follow the Imaginations of your own dark Hearts, and boast your selves in
Wickedness: As your Forefathers did, so do you; they boasted and said, They
had the Law and the Prophets, and were Abraham 's Seed, and had one Father,
even God; and yet Christ told them plainly, They were of their Father the
Devil, and his works they were doing: and so are you now, who are a striving
against those who worship in the Spirit and in the Truth.

Oh do not strive to limit the Holy Spirit of the Lord, which is but one in the
Male and in the Female! Were not the Scripture's Testimonies to be fulfilled?
Oh! when will you witness that Saying fulfilled, which says on this wise, I
will pour forth of my Spirit upon all Flesh, and my Sons and my Daughters shall
prophecy? [Mark] It Is the Sons and Daughters of the Lord that are led by his
Spirit, and not the Persecutors. Whilst I walked with you in the broad way,
which leads to Destruction, you did not persecute me; but when it pleased the
Lord to turn me from Darkness unto Light, and from Satan's power unto his own,
then your Enmity began: But when I went along with you to your Worship, I had
what this World could afford of the Fatness and Fullness thereof; but I must
needs tell you, I had Leanness in my Soul. Oh search and try whether it be not
so with you, who have gone this many years! For I went with as much Zeal as any
of you; therefore let not your blind Zeal deceive you: I turned not from you
through Enmity against you, but because that dead Worship deceived my Soul; for
when Christ Jesus, through his Love unto my Soul, did make known his Light in
my Heart, which showed me the narrow Way, which leads unto Life; then I chose
rather to suffer with the People of God, than to enjoy your Favor, or all the
Pleasures, or Profits, or Honor this World can afford.

And all you that think ye are a doing, as you should do, turn unto the Light,
that you may see what you are a doing; and may become from Persecutors to be
Sufferers, even as Paul was, through his obedience unto the Light, and he
thought when he was in Darkness and blind Zeal, that he did as he should do:
Oh! therefore take you heed, and be no longer deceived, but turn unto the
Light, before it be too late; for the Time hasteneth and passes away, and
there is nothing else that will stand you in stead when Time shall be no more:
O therefore be awakened and arise from the Dead, that Christ Jesus may be your
Light and your Leader, as he was David's: For what does it profit you to read
the Scriptures, or to hear of the Promises or Mercies of the Lord unto the
Children of Light? This will stand you in no stead, whilst you your selves are
in Darkness, and under the shadow of Death. Oh do not heap up that unto your
selves, which you have no right unto! for you are in the Darkness, in the
Persecuting state, which was, and is always blind: And how dare you in such a
state to appear before the Lord? Do you think his all-seeing Eye does not
behold your Doings? Yes verily; and his Righteous Judgments assuredly will find
you out; and then all your talking of that you live not in, will do you no good.

How often have you and your Teachers been reading and talking of loving
Enemies, and of walking in the Light, as Christ is in the Light, and many such
like things? and yet are found hating of your Souls Friends, who are telling
you the Truth, and reproving you for Evil; and you are so far from walking in
the Light, that you remain in your Sins, and plead for so doing until the last:
Do you think that the Lord will be limited by you until the last Hour?

Oh turn to the Reproofs of his Light in your hearts, which makes manifest the
evil of your ways, whilst the Day of God's Love lasts unto you! that through
his precious Judgments your Souls may come to be redeemed; for it is through
Judgment that Sion witnesses Redemption, and the honest heart loves Judgment;
and if you will obey the Light, it will lead you into Judgment; and when you
come to witness, your Souls redeemed thereby, then you will witness David's
state, who said, O Lord, how I love thy judgments! and he desired the Lord to
send forth his Truth and his Light, to lead him; and it was his Law, and he
walked in it: And if you would do so, you would have the Royal Law of Love in
your hearts; and then you would have Fellowship with Jesus, and feel the
Effects of his Blood to cleanse you from all sin on this the Grave, and then
you will plead no longer to strengthen the Devil's Kingdom; for, if you die in
your sins, you will add greatly to his Kingdom; for those that live and die in
their sins do never inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; for no unclean thing can
come there, but they are for the Lake that burns for ever.

Written the 9th. Day of the 11th. Month, 1670. By one that wishes well to all
Souls, Joan Vokins.

To Friends at and nigh Colebrook and Longford Meeting, and thereaway.
Dear Frinds,
I Having you often in mind, thought it long before I could send a few Lines,
having kept my Bed this three Months or more, and have not been able to write;
and I am very weak still, I could not go from my Bed: But hearing of an
opportunity, have in much weakness written that which lay most upon my Mind,
which is for the building of you up in the most Holy Faith, and encouraging of
you in Well-doing.

Oh my dear and tender Friends, feel the tender Love of the God of Love, that
we may magnify his Name together, though at a distance in Person: O the
unutterable Loving Kindness of our God, what Tongue can declare it? how has he
preserved us, and provided for us hitherto, beyond what our hearts could
desire! Has he not done that for us which none other could do? Has he not
delivered out of Dangers deep, and Difficulties many? Or has he been ever
wanting to us in doing us good? Oh surely no; but he has multiplied his
Mercies, and increased Blessings frequently, and freely, as he in his Wisdom
sees what is most convenient for us: and if he please to feed us with the Bread
of Affliction, and the Water of Adversity; yet let us to his Teachings keep,
that we may learn to profit thereby: Have not the trials and exercises of our
Faith and Patience, brought us to a good Experience of the Love of our God? O
let us keep a narrow watch over our Hearts, that the Enemy may not subtly
creep in under any pretense: for if he be harkened to, he will weaken the
Faith, and Unbelief will enter, and then the murmuring Spirit will be ready to
charge the Lord foolishly. Oh dear Hearts, our tender Father is not wanting,
but is a present help in all our needs: therefore let it be the whole and sole
bent of our minds to perform our Duties unto him.

Oh up and be doing, for the time is come that none must be idle; but all that
would have the wages of well-doing, must be faithful every one in his place;
and none to make excuses: for Ch^^st our Head is full of Virtue, and Strength,
and Might, and ready to communicate to all his Members a suitable and
seasonable supply at all times: and if we (as diligent Servants) wait on him,
our tender Master, he will discover our particular Duties, and show us what is
required of us. Oh let us go on with Courage unanimously, that we may be
helpful one unto another, and so bring honor to our Head, that we may feel his
Power supporting of us upon all occasions, that we may not doubt nor faint in
our Minds by reason of the buffettings of the power of Darkness; but through
the Faith in Christ Jesus we may obtain Victory over all that would hinder the
prosperity of Truth, and keep it under: for Truth must reign, and the Lord will
be honored in the dominion thereof. And he will sweep the Nation with the
Beesom of his Wrath; and the Hypocrites shall be tried, and fear shall surprise
them, and woe will be to them that are at ease in Sion: but well will it be
with them who think nothing too dear to part with for the Truth sake, whose
Hearts are singly resigned to serve the Lord with all that he has given them,
which is no more but our reasonable Duties, which we have good cause diligently
to perform, unto the end, that we may daily feel the virtue of Life continued
and renewed to us unto the end; and in the end a double reward, which our God
has prepared for all that hold out and endure thereunto: Blessed be his Holy
Name for ever, and for evermore.

Dear Friends, feel me in that which thinks no evil, and in it receive my
Salutation, that it may reach unto the same in you: that we may breath one for
another, and be refreshed as Members of one Body: We cannot say one unto
another, I have no need of thee; for there is work for us all in the Vineyard:
Oh let us be diligent while we have time, that we may receive our Penny of Life
to the comforting of our Souls every day; for we do not serve a hard Master.

So in that which engages to his service do I bid you farewell.

The 1st of the 6th Month, 1678. Your Friend in that which engages our Hearts
to serve our God faithfully without any reserve, J. V.

Some account given forth by Joan Vokins of the great Goodness and Mercy of the
Lord toward her, and of the wonderful Works that he has done for her;
conducing to his Glory and her great Joy and Comfort: Written with her own Hand
(a few Months before her decease) as follows.
Something of the tender dealing of the Lord with me ever since my Childhood,
for (blessed be his Name) he preserved me from many Evils that Youth is often
ensnared with; and by his Light (that I then had no acquaintance with) showed
me the vanity and vain Customs of the World when I was very young, and all
along my youth his Good Spirit did still strive with me to preserve me from Sin
and Evil: And if I had at any time, through persuasion of others, gone to that
they called Recreation, I should be so condemned for passing away my precious
time, that I could have no peace, so that I could take no delight in their
Pastime, but was still condemned. And many times I cried to the Righteous God
to reveal his way unto me; and I promised to walk therein whatever I endured.
For the snares of the World, the Lord was pleased to discover, and in some
measure to make known the Cross of Jesus that Crucifies unto the World; and as
I inclined to take it up and follow Jesus through the many Tribulations, he
endowed me with his Almighty Power, wherein has been my help, blessed be his
Worthy Name for ever: for his Loving Kindness never fails, but his Mercies
endure for ever: and his great Compassion and tender Dealing toward my Soul,
when in Darkness and under the Region of the Shadow of Death, is never to be
forgotten; for it has been largely extended unto me, when in deep distress.

When my cry was often, Lord reveal thy Way unto me, that I may walk therein,
whatever I undergo. But when I found the way so strait and narrow, I could very
willingly have turned aside for ease; for Flesh and Blood could not bear that
which I had then to undergo; but blessed and renowned be the Spirit of Truth,
my Comforter, which leads into all Truth; for when I was in a dejected
condition about Reprobation and Election, neither Priest nor Professor could
open the Mystery of Election and Reprobation; but the Spirit of Light and Life
(which is the Spirit of Jesus) opened my Understanding, and revealed the
Mystery of the two Seeds, how that the one is for ever blessed, and the other
cursed: And also what Happiness might be received by taking heed to the Light
that shined in my Heart, which makes manifest, that the way to the Crown of
Glory is through the daily cross to my own Will, and to take Christ's Yoke upon
that Nature that would not be subject. Oh how precious is the Counsel of him
who said, Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for my yoke is easy, and my
burden is light, and ye shall find rest for your souls: And that Rest I sorely
wanted, until I learned of Jesus to be meek and low in Heart, and to suffer for
well-doing; and then (glory unto his Holy Name for ever) his blessed Reward my
Soul was daily made a partaker of; though hated by evil doers, yet loved by the
Lord, and that engaged me to give up to his dispose, and to answer his
requirings, not accounting my self, nor any thing he has give me, too much to
part with, that the Truth may be propagated, and my tender God honored: For
(blessed be his Worthy Name) he has filled my Cup, with the sweet Salvation of
his Son Christ Jesus, the Light and Savior of his poor and helpless Ones, who
have no other to depend upon for Help at all times, but wait daily to be
furnished upon every occasion to serve him in all Faithfulness; for he is
Worthy, my Soul can truly say, for he gave me of his good Spirit, and it was
with me (yet unknown) when I rebelled against it, and was not willing to be
subject to its Leadings, nor observing of its Dictates as I ought to have been:
Oh then did I want power (as many do now) not knowing the sufficiency of the
engrafted Word of God's Grace that is able to save: But when I followed its
counsel, I found it sufficient to bring good to me, out of great afflictions,
beyond my expectation; and then could I plead no excuse, knowing that unto the
Lord Jesus (who had brought great things to pass) I must give my account: for
he has manifested his Power, and I have cause to believe it will never fail
toward his People, if we fail not to obey the manifestation of it; but
Faithfulness is required to the Talent received, for which we must give an
account; and then what can stand us in stead, if we have not an increase? This
was my concern for many Years, and I could not take comfort in Husband or
Children, House, or Land, or any visibles, for want of the Marriage Union with
the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the Souls of those that cannot be
satisfied in them; but are weary of the burden of them, as I was; and God by
his Spirit showed me, he abhorred my self-righteousness; and let me see that in
him was Righteousness, Life and Power; and then I was sensible that he is the
the Light of the World, that enlightens every one that comes into the World;
and that it was striving with me from my Youth, which was before ever I heard
the name Quaker; and then I did believe that there was a People or Church over
whom Christ Jesus was Head, though I could yet not find them, nor be a Member
of them; yet long sought after it sorrowfully, with many strong and fervent
cries and desires: But the Lord in his own due time answered my weary Soul, and
made known more and more of the way of his Truth and People, and at length sent
some of his Messengers, as Instruments in his Hand, for my Encouragement and
Confirmation: Then was I, and many desolate Ones, right glad (whose Souls had
long languished) for the glad Tidings that they brought with them, how that we
might inherit Substance which we had long sought and been searching for, both
in the Scriptures, and amongst Professors of many sorts of Profession; for we
would fain have filled our Souls with the Husks, but that could not satisfy,
we knew not the saving Health of him who said, I wisdom lead in the midst of
the Paths of Judgment, to teach them that love and follow me to inherit
Substance: Oh this is that which did at first convince us, and tendered our
Hearts in the beginning: Then what was too near or dear for us to part with in
the Day of our deep Distress, when none could cure our wounded Souls? Oh how
precious was the Heart-searching Light when we first knew it to shine upon our
Tabernacles, to guide us in the narrow Way wherein is Life, and perfect Peace
for those whose Minds are stayed on the Lord! And when I have read, that he
would keep them in perfect Peace whose Minds are stayed on him, what would not
I have done, that it might have been my condition? But then I could not watch
nor wait, but was as a Ship without an Anchor among the merciless Waves; but
Praises unto the Lord for ever, he caused the Living Hope to spring that
anchored in trying Times. And I was, even as Israel at the red Sea, compassed
all round on every Hand; great was the strait that I was then in, much
hardship; the Sea before, and the Enemy presenting so much impossibility, that
his proud Waves of Temptations, Buffettings, and false Accusations had almost
sunk me under: Oh then did I cry unto the God of Mercy and tender Compassion,
that I might but stand still and behold his Salvation; and he did arise and
rebuke the Enemy, and made way for me to travel on in my Heavenly Progress, and
overturned the Mountains that were on each hand, and dismayed Pharaoh and his
Host (which I may compare my Relations and the Professors unto,) for they
pursued me and made my Suffering great, till they had wearied themselves; and
their Oppression was so sore, that I sometimes was ready to faint, and even to
say, Surely, I shall one Day fall; but Living Praises unto the Almighty, he
has made me a partaker of the sure Mercies of David, and has subdued Truth's
Enemies before him, and kept and preserved me faithful, till several of my
Relations were convinced, that God's Power was with me; and now when my
Husband, and Chhildren, and Relations are with me in a good Meeting, and the
Powerful Presence of the Lord is amongst us; it is a blessed Reward for all,
for one Soul is more worth than all the World, as says the Scripture:
Therefore Faithfulness is very needful, for it does produce a good effect,
whatever we may endure; for the momentary Affliction that we meet with here,
does produce a further weight of Glory hereafter; and in the sense of the same
my Head was born up to endure hardships, when I could willingly have hid or
gotten ease; but I considered that I could not hide from the Lord, who brought
to my remembrance my Promise that I made before his Way was revealed to me; and
if I broke Covenant with the Lord, I should never enter into his Rest: Oh then
a suffering in the Flesh, and a ceasing from Sin, was the delight of my Soul;
although the Enemy ceased not, but Night and Day, as a roaring Lion, and a
cunning Hunter, seeking for the precious Life, and chased my poor Soul as a
Partridge on the Mountains; but my God had showed me that the way to Rest was
through many Troubles, and that he would be at hand to Deliver out of them all
by his Almighty Power: (but I could hardly trust it then,) but yet, turning to
it, I found Preservation by it, when the backsliding of some had like to have
caused me to stumble; but the unerring Spirit of Jesus showed me that if
thousands fall on the one hand, and tens of thousands on the other, that should
not defile me; and if all the rest were Righteous, that should not justify me,
if I did not obey the Truth, now he had made known his Covenant of Life, which
I so deeply engaged to be faithful unto; and then I turned my back on the
World, and all the friendship and glory of it, that I might obtain the favor
of Jesus, who condemned me for my Self-righteousness, as for my known Sins, for
I was cautious of Sinning against the Lord ever since my Youth, and desired
after the best Religion and Company; and when I was very young in years, I
greatly delighted to go to Professors Meetings, and could bring home the Text,
and repeat much of their Sermons, but yet that brought no benefit to my poor
hungry Soul: And when I was in secret, before the all-seeing Eye of the Lord,
he administered Condemnation upon it all, and I had no Peace inwardly; although
none could condemn me for any misdemeanor, as outwardly; but when my own
Righteousness became loathsome to me, then was I made willing to part with all
that had been near and dear unto me, that I might feel and witness the Robe of
Christ's Righteousness revealed, and be clothed therewith. And as for my
Husband and Children, my true and tender Love was so great, that I could have
done or suffered much for them: But if I had disobeyed the Lord, to please
them, I might have provoked him to have withholden his Mercies from us all, and
to bring his Judgments upon us; And then who shall excuse in the Day of
Account? Then if a Man (as the Scripture says) should give the Fruit of his
Body for the Sin of his Soul, it will not be accepted. Then Husbands, and
Wives, and Parents, and Children, and Servants, shall all receive according to
their doings; and none that disobeys the Lord can be excused, no more than Adam
was, when he said, That the Woman gave him the forbidden Fruit, and he did eat,
and so provoked the Lord, that the Curse came upon himself, and could not be
excused. And although Man and Wife should be helpful one to another in
Righteousness, yet too many there are, since the fall, that hinder and hurt
each other, for which an account must be given anavoidably: And this did I
consider many a time, and earnestly endeavor to avoid; notwithstanding the
false Aspersions that might arise, yet I still endeavored to keep my
Conscience clear in the sight of my tender God; and none can lay any thing to
my Charge, except it be for serving the Living and True God, though in that way
that many may call Heresy, yet I do worship him in Spirit and in Truth. For as
Christ Jesus has said, it is come to pass, that our Heavenly Father seeks
such, and always sought such to worship him, in his own Spiritual way of
Worship; which shall stand, when all Idolatry and invented Worships shall fall.

Written aboard the first Ship The 1st month, 1680.
as I went to New England, when none that saw me, expected my life; but the
Lord was with me, and relieved me, and his blessed Power raised me, as at many
other times.

And I arrived at New York the 4th Day of the 3d Month, 80, and a Maiden
Friend, whose Name was Sarah Yoklet, went with me from England, and traveled
with me until I came to Oyster-Bay in Long Island; and the Lord so ordered it,
that when she left me, another Woman-Friend, that had a Testimony, was my
Companion several Months, whose name was Lydia Wright.

Oh matchless Mercies of the Lord, who can rightly consider them as they have
been manifested, and not be tendered, as I am! Oh how long did his tender
Spirit strive with me before I gave up to go to Sea? How did his long Patience
wait and suffer? Surely it is worthy to be remembered; for he might have cut me
off in a disobedient Condition: But blessed and magnified be his
Heart-tendering Power; it bowed me from Year to Year, and brought me into
Subjection, when in a low Condition I could not help my self, nor had no other
to help me: Oh then did it support me in Exercises, sore both in Body and
Spirit; when my Mind has been so dejected, that my Faith almost failed, then
did my tender Father, through the Son of his Love, Christ Jesus, yield me sweet
relief, though in a weary Land, and sweetly encouraged me to travel on; and
many sweet Promises, which before he gave me, as I stood singly resigned to
obey his Commands, and be at his dispose, he was never wanting to fulfill; but
by Sea and Land has multiplied his Mercies, and renewed a right Spirit in me,
to the resolving of Doubts, and casting out of false Fears (everlasting Praises
to his most holy Name); for often did that cause Torment, when the dark
Reasoner was very busy: Then did I cry unto the Lord, and say, Surely thou
know all, and I have none but thee to help, and many Eyes are over me, and
great Difficulties surround me on every hand, and I am the poorest and weakest
that I do know; and if I should fail by the way, how would the Enemy rejoice,
and the Truth be reproached? And much buffeting did I undergo in my long and
sore Exercises; but as I cast my Care upon him, he has cared for me; and
blessed be his Name, he has helped in my greatest straits, and has made hard
things easy, and what he showed me by his pure Spirit of Light for my
encouragement, before I came forth, he has brought to pass: Glory to his Name
for ever, may all those say with my Soul that love the Leadings of the Light of
Jesus; for though it leads through Tribulation, yet it brings the Soul sweet
Consolation, and therefore worthy to be followed through the Self-denial; for
it is through the daily Cross to obtain the Reward of the Crown; and precious is
the feeling of the Life of Jesus to the awakened and illuminated Soul, and that
made the roaring Sea, and dry Land, and lonesome Wilderness all one to me by
Night and by Day; and great was my encouragement to commit all that my Heavenly
Father had given me, to his keeping, and to follow him, and in taking up the
daily Cross, I found Power to preserve me from looking out at my affliction of
Body, when sorely exercised in Mind, ready to sink under the oppression of it;
had not the Spirit of Truth, the Comforter, helped my Infirmities, and taught
me, I had never known how to pray as I ought; but I often read, That the
Prayers of the Lord's Children avail much with him, and in these latter Days,
according to his Promise, his are taught by him, and in Righteousness they
shall be established, and great shall be their Peace: and this is the Effect of
our Heavenly Father's great unspeakable Love to those that watch unto Prayer,
and continue in the same; for I know not how any can expect a Child's Portion,
that breaks his Father's Commands, and does not repent; and who is it but knows
that watching and waiting is generally commanded? Surely it is a Duty that
ought to be performed by every one that is come to an Understanding; and by
believing in Jesus, the Light and Power of God, all may receive strength to
perform it; and for want of Understanding how nigh he was to me in Years that
are past, I was long in a desolate Condition, and could not be satisfied
without acquaintance with the Teachings of his Spirit, which is light: But I
was then in darkness, and under the shadow of Death, longing after the
countenance of the Lord to shine upon my Tabernacle; for if it should be
dissolved, I was not sensible of a better Building eternal in the Heavens;
though I read of them that had, yet I knew not their Foundation; and whatsoever
I builded, it came to loss, till I knew Christ Jesus, the Rock and sure
Foundation of the Heavenly Building: And blessed be his Name, the Inspiration
of his Spirit is very precious, without which none can have a right
Understanding; and I could not find peace with God while I did err for want of
this good Understanding. And my Cry was often to the Lord, to give me an
understanding Heart, that I might discern between things that differ; for the
crooked Serpent, who is very subtle in his Workings, endeavors by Flattery and
Threatenings, Temptations, Buffetings, and false Accusations, to darken the
Heart, and enfeeble the Mind; and if he cannot prevail so, he can transform
himself into the likeness of an Angel of Light, to hinder the traveling ones,
whose Understandings begin to be opened, yet watching in the Light, they come
to see his Snares; then he bestirs him, as a strong Man armed indeed, as by
Experience much might be spoken, since I was first exercised about going this
Voyage; but I shall omit as much as I can, having nothing in my View but
Truth's Prosperity, and preferring it above all, because it is better to me than
all; I can do no less than bare my Testimony unto all People, That it is
Excellency far exceeds the choicest Gold, and the precious Pearls; and the
Spirit of Truth comforts the comfortless, and strengthens the weak, and
relieves the needy: Oh what can be compared to its Power! for it works a change
of the Heart, and preserves from sinning against the Lord, all those that
follow the Leadings of the Light thereof unto amendment of Life, and honors
the Lord by ordering their Conversation aright, according to the Dictates of
his Spirit. Oh, I had rather mourn away all my Days than grieve it, or walk
contrary to it, whatever Reproach I suffer; for I have had a blessed Reward
when I have observed it, and obeyed it; and I hope I shall never forget how the
Power of it brought me into Subjection, and made me willing to be disposed of
by it; and when it had wrought me into a single Resignment, then was my weighty
Concern (touching my Journey to New England) taken off, and a Service laid upon
me to go back, and labor for the Settlement of our Women's Meetings in our
County of Berks, which was no small Cross to take up: But as I daily followed
Jesus, (honored be his worthy Name) he endowed me with his eternal encouraging
Power, and also strengthened the weak and hindermost of the Flock; though Amalek
lay in wait by the way, and the opposite Spirit did strongly strive; yet our
good Shepherd did visit his Handmaids, and (blessed be his Name) filled us with
his overcoming Power, when the Mothers in Israel were so dismayed, as we were
likely to have lost our Women's Meeting; but Praises, Honor, and Renown, be
ascribed unto that Almighty Power that has set up and settled this Women's
Meeting, says my Soul; for it has been a good Reward to me, and fitly
furnished me for the Service that was required, and wonderfully upheld me
therein unto admiration; and I can truly say, my Reward is sufficient, and can
give in a true Testimony, that the Lord owns our Women's Meetings, and has
manifested and magnified his excellent Power therein, to the gladding of our
Hearts, and the refreshing of our Souls wherever I came. Glory to his Name, and
magnified be his preserving Power for ever: He is a God of Wisdom unto the
Foolish, and Strength unto the Weak, and honors his Power in contemptible
Vessels, that it may have its due; for all Honor belongs thereunto: But those
that are in the Wisdom of the World, which comes from beneath, and have many
Arts and Parts, and mind not the Wisdom that comes from above, they take that
to themselves which belongs to God, and that provokes him to Wrath; and he is
angry with such as seek Honor one of another, and do not seek his Honor more
than their own Interest, and Honor to Man; for that has been the overthrow of
many; for God is jealous of his Glory, he will not give it to another, nor his
praise to graven Images; but the secret Arm of his Power is stretched out to
overturn them, and he is on his way, and it is in vain for Flesh to strive
against him, before whom all Nations are but as the drop of a Bucket: for out
of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings he will perfect his praise, both in Males
and Females that give up to serve him; and he brings great things to pass,
contrary to Man's Wisdom or Expectation, that no Flesh might glory in his
Presence.

For when I was exercised about settling the Women's Meeting, I little thought to
be concerned again with going for New England; but after a short time it was
more weighty than ever, and my Exercises more than before; and this I do write,
that no one should murmur, and say, No Exercise is like mine; and this followed
me until the Hand of the All-wise God was so heavy upon me, that I could no
longer stay at home, although both sick and lame, and much to undergo both
inwardly and outwardly, yet did not dare to plead with the Lord any longer, or
to make any Excuse, but truly gave up all, both Life and all that he had given
me, when he required it; and he brought me to be as Clay in the hand of the
Potter. He filled my Vessel with his Heavenly Treasure, and fulfilled that
Scripture that testifies that he has said, I honor them that honor me; and
blessed be the Lord, such Honor have the Earthen Vessels of a Remnant, and the
Excellency of the Power is his, and the Glory of all; for he is worthy of it;
for he is no hard Master, but a sure Rewarder of his faithful Servants, and he
endues them with Power that delights in his Law, and inclines to keep his
Commands, and unto such they are not grievous, but joyous; but looking out
hinders; and therefore let none look at their own Weakness; let my Harms make
others beware, and let us be depending on our good Physician; for he has the
Balm of Gilead that cures both Soul and Body, which makes the weak strong, with
the sweet Cordials of his Life, that relieves the faint hearted and feeble
minded, and through tender Mercy I have found it very needful, and very useful
at all times in all Conditions; else what could I have done when in such a weak
Condition, so many Thousands of Miles from my Habitation? but blessed be the
Lord, and magnified be his preserving Power; as Trials did abound, Patience did
superabound, and that brought me to a good Experience of that which sweetened my
bitter Cups, and that caused the living Hope to spring, that anchors in stormy
times; and then did the Light of my Soul's Beloved shine upon me, and he showed
me what great deliverances he had wrought for me, and what great cause I had to
trust in his Name, that had been a comfortable Refuge unto me at home and
abroad, and also showed me, that his Rod and Staff had comforted me; and he was
always with me, and in the Enjoyment of his Presence did my Soul rejoice in the
midst of great Trials, and then was my cry, Lord, give me and mine the
comfortable enjoyment of thy presence for ever, and then try us as thou
please: Thy preserving Power is all that I desire of thee, and unto it I
commit all, and with thee I leave all; for thou art worthy to dispose of all;
and then would Life flow in as a River, to the comforting and strengthening of
Soul and Body. Everl^sting Praises, and holy Thanksgivings be returned ^o
Christ Jesus; for he is worthy, my Soul can truly say; for I have experienced
his dealings, and seen his mighty works that he has done, even marvellously
for his tender Seed, with which my Soul has traveled, and is often concerned;
for they have much to bear wherever I have been. The Lord my God relieve them
more and more, and work their deliverance for thy own Glory, and the comfort of
thy true traveling ones for evermore.

Written aboard the Ship in ths 3 d Month, Anno 1681.
A further Testimony for the magnifying of that Power that supported my weak
Body, and comforted my poor Soul in my Travels in America: I feel my self
concerned to give a Relation of some particular Places and Service.
FIrst I came to New York, and there had been hurt done by some, that Friends
had lost their 5th Day Meeting, and I labored to settle it again, and God's
Eternal Power wrought wonderfully in me in several Meetings with his people,
and we were well refreshed: And when the Meeting aforesaid was settled again, it
was with me to go to Long Island, and there the Ranters oppressed Friends, but
the Lord had a tender People there, and his Power was amongst them, and we were
sweetly refreshed together; for God's Almighty Power was over all, in all our
Meetings wherever I came, to the subduing of the dark Power that raged in the
Ranters, and the relieving of the tender hearted: Honor and Praises be
ascribed unto it for ever; for it made me sensible of the oppression of the
tender Seed, and for its sake my Soul was in a deep travel; and the Night
before the general Meeting, I was near unto death, and many Friends were with
me, who did not expect my Life, and I was so weak when I came there, that two
Women-Friends led me into the Meeting, and there was a great Meeting of several
sorts of people, and in a little time the God of Wisdom, Life and Power, filled
me with the Word of his Power, and I stood up in the strength thereof, and it
was so prevailing over the Meeting, that Friends were very much comforted and
refreshed, and the Power of Darkness so chained, that the opposing Ranters and
Apostates could not show their antic tricks, nor oppress Friends, as they did
use to do; for they were very abusive in those remote Islands, and commonly did
much Mischief in Friends Meetings: And they that had been convinced, and were
turned again with the Dog to his Vomit, as says the Scripture, and with the
Sow that was washed, to wallow again in the mire, and had made Shipwreck of
Faith and a good Conscience, they were most wicked; and preached Scripture, and
had Truth's Words, and grieved Truth's Spirit, and burdened Friends
exceedingly, and honest Friends could hardly be clear, that had a Testimony,
except they spoke while they were speaking: But when God's Power did arise over
them, it many times put them to silence, even to admiration; and although Friends
Exercise was great, especially them that declared, yet the blessed Effect of
the Almighty Power was, and is a precious Recompense, and a good Reward.

And when my Service was over in Long Island, it was in my Heart to go to Road
Island, to the General Meeting that approached soon after I arrived there; yet
we had a quick passage, through Providence; and when I came to the General
Meeting of Friends, there was that abominable Crew, and Tho. Case, the grand
Ranter, was bawling very loud; and I had been there but a very little time, but
God's living Power did arise most wonderfully, and I declared in the
demonstration thereof, and soon put him to silence; and he went forth, and the
powerful Presence of the Lord was amongst his People; and this General Meeting
in Road Island lasted Four Days together, and I had good Service there, and
God's Eternal Heart-tendering Power was over all, Glory and Living Praises be
unto it for evermore.

And still it was upon me to go to Boston; for that was with me before I came
from home; and I hastened to take a passage in a Sloop, and went with some
Friends, and one was a Maiden Friend, that had a few Words sometimes in
Meetings, who had been there once before, and she and another Friend suffered
much there, both Imprisonment and other Cruelty, for Conscience Sake: But
blessed be the God of all our Mercies, we had peaceable Meetings there, and his
excellent Power was so, that it tendered the people, and there was hardly any
that I saw, but shed tears; there was a Lawyer that had a hand in the suffering
of our Friends that were put to Death, and he was very solid all the while. And
after this I traveled by Sea and Land in the strength of the supporting Power
to many places, whithersoever the Lord ordered me; and as I followed the Line
of his Divine Light, he failed not to endow me with the renewing of his
precious Power, and my Soul has cause to magnisie it, because it enabled me to
answer what the Lord required of me, and fitted me, who was the most unfit, and
the poorest and most helpless that ever I did see concerned in such a Service:
But it was the more to the Honor of the Power of my God that so wonderfully
wrought in my poor weak and helpless Vessel; and many Friends were tendered
thereby (in many places in the sense of my Weakness). Honored and Renowned be
it for ever, says my Soul; for its Manifestation made the Hearts of his People
glad, and we were well refreshed together in all the Meetings that I was at in
New England. And from thence I returned back to Road Island and Long Island;
and when I was clear thereabout, I took Shipping for East Jersey, and the Power
of God was greatly manifested, and through his special Providence we were
preserved, being in great peril and danger of being cast away when we were in
sight of Land; for the Winds being boisterous, and the foaming Sea in so great
a Rage, that we could not cast Anchor to stay the Vessel, being near the
Shoals; but the Lord who has all Power in his hands, delivered us (Praises to
his holy Name), and we safely landed at Shrewsbury (and Elizabeth Dean, that
then traveled with me, was very sick); and we had very good Meetings in East
Jersey, where I met with the Lord among his people, as at other times, blessed
be his Name; and after some time spent amongst them, and that we had been well
refreshed with God's holy precious living Power, it carried me from thence to
West Jersey, and into some part of Pensilvania, (but it had not that Name then)
and in the sense of God's great Love to his tender Seed, I encouraged his
Children to suffer, and to be careful that they did not cause Truth to suffer;
for if they tendered it in their own Bosoms, and traveled with it, the Lord
would bring it over all its Enemies, and it shall reign over all in his due
time; and blessed be his most worthy Name, he soon after brought it to pass by
his delivering Power; and when I had labored that the Gospel-Life might be
lived in, and the Gospel Order established amongst them, there remained the
heavenly power among the tender ones. And the Lord heard the cry of the poor,
and granted the desire of the needy, and visited them with the Gospel-Power;
for a little time after I came home, I had an account, that they had Men's
Meetings and Women's Meetings in the Gospel Light, Life and Power, and were
establishing in the Blessed Order that was testified of, when I was there with
them.

And when I was clear of West Jersey, and those parts, I returned to New York,
in order to take my passage for England; but before I came there, the Living
God (whom I served with all my Heart) further tried me, and laid it weightily
upon me to go to Barbados, which was no little cross to my Mind; but the
overcoming Power of the true and living God wrought so strongly with me, that I
was made willing to take up the Cross, and follow Jesus, through many
Tribulations, and he (magnified be his Power) most wonderfully supported and
conducted me all along: For I took Shipping at New York, and as the Lord put it
into my Heart to visit Friends in the Leeward Islands, so he carried the
Vessel, let them that sailed do what they could; and they could not steer their
Course Barbadoes-Road, although they endeavored it with all their might; and I
had good Service amongst them in the Vessel; and they were made to confess to
the Almighty Power that I testified of; and we laid by Antego a Week before the
Owner would let me go ashore: But the All-wise God ordered it so, that the
Vessel could not go away till I had been there, and performed what Service he
had appointed for me; and blessed be his Name, his Reward was precious; for we
came ashore on a First Day, and I hastened to a Friends Meeting; and when I
came in, I found the Lord's Power was amongst his People, and I had a precious
time with them: There was a little handful of plain hearted Friends, and our
Hearts were tendered, and our Souls comforted, and we rejoiced that the Lord
Jesus had visited us, and caused us in his Love to visit each other.

So when I returned to the Sea again, it came into my Heart to visit Friends at
Nevice; and when I had taken leave of Friends of Antego that came aboard with
me, and God's Heavenly Power was with us, and sweetly refreshed our Souls, as
we were aboard the Vessel, and remained with us; and we were concerned one for
another, not knowing that we should ever see each others Faces more: But see
how the Lord ordered it; as we were sailing on the Sea, it opened in my Heart
to visit Friends at Nevice; but the Owner of the Vessel being a hypocritical
Professer, caused my Exercise to be the more; but the Power of the Lord was
manifest, and the Winds and Sea obeyed, that we were carried to Nevice against
his will; but he would not let me go ashore; for he had heard, That those
should pay a great Fine that carried any Friend thither; and hoysted Sail again
for Barbados, and said, he would weather the Point of Cordilopa; and he
labored Three Weeks, but could not do it: for the Hand of the Lord was against
him; else he might have done it in a few Days, but he provoked the Lord, and
trusted in his Vessel, and in his own Skill; and he locked up the Bread, and
dealt hardly with his Passengers when he saw he should be longer at Sea than at
first he did expect; and he knew that for Three Weeks there was stinking Water,
and we were close by a French Island, and they said, the French would not let
us h^ve any, if we starved: They were Papists, and said, If we came for water,
they would take our Ship for a Prey, and us for Captives: And yet this Owner of
the Vessel would not go to any other Island, until the Merchants that were
aboard threatened him very sorely; and then he put in at a mountainous place,
called Mount serat; and they went all away from me as soon as they were landed;
for I was very weakly, being aboard the Vessel so long, with such bad
Accommodation: I went aboard with my Clothes so wet, that I could wring Water
out of them, and so dried them upon my weakly Body, which cast me into such a
Feverish condition, that I was very dry, and I sat down on the Shore, and a
Girl came to fetch fresh Water near where I sat, and I drank till I sweat, and
then I swooned, and lay some time; but the arising of the Life of Jesus set me
on my Feet again, and in the strength and relief thereof I went to enquire for
a passage for Barbados, and heard of none; but I was not clear of Nevice, but
hearing of a leaking Vessel to go to Antego, took my passage in that, hoping
that way might be made from thence to go to Nevice, and then having got a
passage, it being Night and rainy, I tried to get me a Lodging on the Land, and
the People were generally Irish Papists, but the Lord did so order it, that I
met with an English Woman, and she treated me kindly, but she had neither Bread
nor Drink, but Wine and Sugar; and I desired half a Pint of Madary Wine to be
boiled, and that served me Night and Morning, and the Lord blessed it to me,
and his Holy Power accompanied me; and, while I staid for the Vessel, I had
good service there, though there was no Friend in all the Island; they had
banished a Friend out of it, as I heard, but a little before, and the People
told me they did not dare to have a Meeting, yet I published Truth in the
Streets, and they confessed to it; and so I left Truth honorably amongst them,
and then came aboard the Vessel, where I last took my Passage, and sailed to
the other Vessel, that I had suffered in, and called for the Owner and cleared
my Conscience to him, and told him the Hand of the Lord was against him, and
warned him to Repent, else he should suddenly feel the stroke of it to be heavy
upon him; and inasmuch as his Heart had been too much set on that Bark, he
should shortly see that the Lord would destroy it, and accordingly his Vessel
was split on a Rock in a little time after. So when I, through tender Mercy,
came to Antego again, the Friends told me how they had been concerned for me,
and so had Nevice Friends, and there was a Passage ready for Nevice, and an
honest Woman-Friend, whose name was Mary Humphery, was very ready to go with
me, and Friends there were very joyful of my coming, and we had many good and
powerful Meetings in that Island; and there was a Judge and his Wife came to
Meeting, and People of several sorts, and we had some Meetings at the Houses of
them that were no Friends, and Friends were well satisfied and comforted, and
the mighty Power of God was with us: Glory unto it, for it is worthy over all,
and in us all: Oh that we may have an Eye to its Glory in our whole Lives and
Conversations; for it is by it we live, move, and have our Being; and its
dealing with us, and working for us in that place is worthy to be remembered;
for this was the place that the Owner of the Vessel aforementioned was afraid
to carry me to; but the Lord was on my side, and prevented much Evil when it
was intended; and the Governor of that Place was so kind that he gave us his
Letter of Recommendation to carry with us; and so I came back with M. Humphery
to Antego and to Five Islands, and there we and some Friends that went with us
visited a poor People that complained of their Priest, and said he came to them
but once a Year, and then it was to take that which they had from them; and we
had a precious opportunity to manifest the Truth, and they were very kind to
us, and seemed to be well satisfied and affected.

And then I being clear, and a passage presented for Barbados, as soon as I
was ready I went aboard, and was there sooner than could have been expected:
And when I arrived, I met with many Friends at Bridg-Town, and there took an
account of the Monthly Meetings, and went to them and other Meetings as brief
as I could; and most Days I had two or three Meetings of a Day, both among the
Blacks, and also among the White People: And the Power of the Lord Jesus was
mightily manifested, so that my Soul was often melted therewith, even in the
Meetings of the Negro's or Blacks, as well as among Friends. And when I had
gone through the Island, and was clear, having been well refreshed with
Friends, in the feeling of the Heavenly Power; and in the strength of the same
I came aboard the Ship for my Native Land again.

Written a board the Ship coming from Barbados, in the 3 d Month, 1681. J. V.

BEfore I went to Sea I was two Weeks in the service of Truth in Kent, and then
it was showed me, being at Sandwich, that I should bear my Testimony for God,
and his Divine Spiritual Worship, in a Steeple-House there; and coming home,
the Heavenly Power wrought mightily in my Heart. And when I was clear of those
Countries, I was better in Health than I had been for many Years. And, as the
Light of Jesus showed me before, I left England as is before hinted; so the
Power thereof ordered me when I came back, and it was so weightily on me before
I came ashore, that I thought it long ere I came to Kent to clear my
Conscience, and the God of Sea and Land brought me safely thither, and I
hastened to Sandwich, and on a First Day, being the 5th of the 4th Month, 1681,
I went to the Steeple-House, as it was before me, and had been of a long time,
and in the strength of the Almighty Power I delivered that Message which I
received of the Lord Jesus, saying, The Day is come, spoken of and foretold by
the Prophet, of the pouring forth of God's Spirit upon all Flesh, Sons and
Daughters, etc. And I exhorted them, both Priest and People, to take heed to a
Measure or Manifestation thereof in their own Hearts, (and leave off their
Idolatry) and come to be true Spiritual Worshippers; and I laid before them the
danger of the one, and the benefit of the other; till the Priest caused me to
be haled out; and when I came forth many of his Hearers followed me, and I had
a good opportunity with them, and cleared my self to them, and left them. And
as I was going away, I felt the arising of that Power that is worthy to be
obeyed, and it was with me to go to them again; and when they came from their
worship I met them, first the Mayor and his Company, then the Lawyer and his,
and after that the Priest, with many more; and I invited all to come to our
Spiritual Worship, and I would engage that if any of them, young or old, male
or female, had a Message from the Lord to deliver there, that they should have
liberty, and not be abused, as the Priest caused me to be; for the Man that
haled me out hurt my Arm, so that it was swelled some time after: and I told
the Priest that he was not of the Primitive Faith and Church of Christ,
testified of in Scripture; for there, if any thing was revealed to the Standers
by or Hearers, they might speak one by one; the first holding his peace; and he
was silent before I spoke, and he said I should not have spoken in the Church;
and I asked him what Church that was? for I had spoken in the true Church many
times amongst God's People, and they did not hinder me; and he said Paul spoke
against a Woman's speaking in the Church: I asked him what Woman that was, and
what Church that was that she should not speak in? and he did not answer me,
but went away; and a Woman Friend that was with me took hold of him, and said,
My Friend, answer the Woman's question, (and the Dutch People were coming from
their worship the while,) but the Priest put off his Hat to us and busled away,
and afterward endeavored to send me to Prison; but the God of Power (who
preserved me when much Evil has been intended) prevented him, that he could
not prevail with the Mayor, but he endeavored to harm the Friends of that
place after that I was gone: And after the first Day Meeting was over, I went
the beginning of the Week to some other Meetings, and came again a fourth Day,
and God's Power was over all, and Friends had no harm; and we had another
Heavenly Meeting, and so I came away and left Friends peaceable, and all was
well, blessed be the Lord, and magnified be his preserving Power, over all, for
evermore. Amen says my Soul.

J. V.
I was informed that the Priest above specified, did do his endeavor to stir
up Persecution against Friends, and put the Mayor to some trouble, for not
punishing me; but therein he did, nor could do, no more than manifest his own
Malice, and what Birth he was of: The Lord had set his Bounds.

J. V.



IN all this long Journey, this I can say, (to the Honor and Glory of my
tender God, and to the Praise of his Providential Power,) and be it known to
all, That although I had none to accompany me of my own or Friends providing, yet
the Lord so ordered it, that I had still some honest Woman, or Maiden Friend,
both by Sea and Land. In the first Vessel that ever I was in, I had an honest
ancient maiden Friend, namely Sarah Yoaklet, who was my Companion from London
until I came to Long Island: And then in New England, one Lydia Wright, another
faithful Friend, was willing to travel with me, and did accompany me a
considerable time; and still the Lord so ordered it, that when ever one left
me, that another was ready to take her place to be my Companion. And when I
returned home, there came with me an ancient Maiden Friend, who had been out in
those Countries in the service of Truth six Years, whose name was Margaret
Kerby; and on the 3d of the 4th Month, 1681, I arrived safely at Dover in the
County of Kent, where I was three Weeks in the service of Truth: And after that
(blessed and renowned be the Holy Name of Jesus) I came to London, and after a
little time spent in visiting Friends at London, I came safe home: And as I
pondered weightily, and beheld the Preservation of me and mine, and the
manifold Mercies that we received when so far remote one from another, my Heart
was truly tendered in the sense of my Heavenly Father's Love, and my Soul
magnified the Preserving and Delivering Power, and the cry run through me, Lord
God of my Life, let me and mine never forget thy Goodness, for it is
wonderfully to be admired; and thy unexpressible Love to be considered, by all
those unto whom it has been so largely extended. And as I consider our
nothingness, and thy tenderness toward us, I cannot but abhor self, and
breath, unto thee, that I and mine may for ever hold self in no reputation, and
follow Jesus through the daily cross; wherein I (through tender Mercy) have
found power, when of my self I could do nothing whereby to fulfill what was
required of me, but self was very ready to hinder me, as the self-seeking
Spirit is always those that are not aware of it: And therefore I desire, above
all things, that I and mine, whom the Lord has been so good unto, may be
watchful; and, in order thereunto, I commit all unto that God of Power that
has preserved hitherto, and is able to keep and preserve unto the end: To whom
be all Glory and Praise for evermore. Amen.

J. V.

A Letter written at Gravesend to Friends of the Women's Meeting, by J. V. when
she was going to Sea, for her long Journey. The 24th of the 12th Month, 1679.
DEar and well-beloved Sisters, my Love and Life Salutes you; even in a sense
of the tender Love of my Heavenly Father do I embrace you, and greatly
encourage you to keep your Women's Meetings, and keep up your Testimonies, every
one in your places; for every one has a Testimony for the Pure God, though not
in Words, yet in the Word of Life, which has quickened our Souls, and
powerfully operated thereon, even in our Women's Meeting: Has not the sense of
it been sufficient to engage our Hearts to serve him; and to bare our faithful
Testimony for him in Purity of Life and Conversation, that his Name may be
honored, and the precious Truth propagated? For this you know how long has
been the travail of my Soul amongst you; and, I hope, it will be the travail of
yours in my absence, that if ever we see one another Faces again, it may be
with Joy and not with Sorrow. So let your Breathings be for my Welfare in the
Lord Jesus, as mine are for you; for had it not been to keep Covenant with my
God, I could not have given up my weak Body to the Sea; but in my long and sore
Exercises, I often promised the Pure God, that I would give up my Life as a
Sacrifice, if he would accept of it; and now he has tried me, and if he please
to take it, it is but my reasonable service to offer it up to him; but I did
intend you should have had more timely knowledge of it, but that I could not
tell whether it might have been taken of me; therefore I forbore speaking of it
publicly, till at length I could not come back; but now, in the universal Love
of God, do I take my leave of you all, not knowing whether I may see you again
or not. Remember my dear Love to the Brethren, whose Labor of Love and Work of
Faith is for the Propagating of the precious Truth.

And the Lord God Eternal keep us all close unto himself, in that which neither
Sea nor Land can separate; for in it my Love does truly reach unto you all,
being clear in the sight of my God of all service, save only this which my Life
lies engaged for. Here I stand resigned to live or die in the Will of my God,
and so I desire him to keep me to the end.

And, dear Friends, be Valiant for the Truth, that it may not be undervalued
through a cowardly creeping Libertine Spirit, for that has done too much hurt
already; stand over it, I beseech you all, and quit your selves like faithful
Soldiers, fighting under the Banner of Love, which our tender God has spread
over us, that we may not be ashamed to bear the Cross; and take heed, lest any
cause the Offense of the Cross to cease, for such are Enemies to Christ Jesus,
let them profess what they will; for there is no way to the Crown, but by and
through the Cross. So, in that which brings us into subjection, do I remain
(present with you in Spirit, though absent in Body,) your tender Sister in the
precious Truth.

J. V.
From Gravesend, the 24th of the 12th Month, 1679.
Let this be read in your Women's Meeting, or any where, as a service is seen.
A Letter to her Husband, Richard Vokins, sent from Road Island.
Dear Husband,
MY Love and Life salutes thee, with my dear Children, and my Father, and my
brother O. S. and his Wife, and my Brother D and his Wife, and all the rest of
my dear Friends and Heavenly Relations, dearly desiring your Preservation and
Prosperity in the ever blessed Truth; and then I doubt not but our God will
increase us in our outward store. And, dear Heart, thou art often in my mind,
and the breathing of my Life is for thee, as for my own Soul, and I do believe
that all our Trials will work for good, if we love the Lord Jesus as we ought
to do: Those Trials that we have had, and do now meet with, I hope will fit us
for greater, and I do not know but I may come home again, to suffer with you,
by the strength of the same Power that has preserved us hitherto. Oh magnified
be it for ever, says my Soul, for it has done for me great things. And, dear
Heart, my service is greater here than it was there, and I have pretty well
cleared my self in Long Island, but at New York I am not quite clear but I hope
I shall ere long. I am now at Road-Island, going on to clear my self as fast as
I may, as the Lord makes way for me. I intend to take the Meetings between this
and Boston, and when I am clear there, I hope you may hear further from me, or
see me, in some reasonable time, as our tender God shall be pleased to order:
And by this you may all know that my tender God is with me, and carries me
through many sore Exercises, and his mighty Power enables me to do his Service;
and his Reward is not wanting, blessed be his Name, for all his tender Mercies.
Friends are tender to me, and I am better in Health at present than I have
been; but I have many Ailments attending my weak Body still.

So, dear Heart, let us breathe to our God together, though outwardly far
asunder, yet if it stands with the Will of our Heavenly Father we may see one
another again, to his Honor and our Comfort; and let us pray unto him, Day and
Night, that we may be content, to be at his dispose in Life or Death, together
or asunder, that he may be honored, and our Souls comforted.

And, dear Heart, remember to have an Eye over our dear Children, that they
lose not the sense of Truth, which my Soul has so deeply travailled for, when
I was with them; for it is my fear, now I am from them, that if thou do not
supply my place in my absence, that the Spirit of this World will prevail, and
hinder the Work of the Lord in their Hearts, and in thine too, and that will be
to all our Sorrow. The Lord God Eternal keep us faithful to him unto the end,
that we bare our Testimonies for his Truth with boldness at all times, and in
all places, that we may not be ashamed to confess him before Men if we should
come to be tried for our Lives; for it is a precious advancement to be a worthy
Sufferer; and if the Mighty God do bring me home again, to partake of Suffering
in my Native Land, I hope those Exercises that I now go through will still sit
me for greater; and I hope this is the end for which thee and I am tried. And
so, in the Love of that which is able to preserve us, do I once more salute
thee, and remain,

Thy true and tender Wife, J. V.
From Road-Island, the 14th of the 4th Month, 1680. REmember my dear Love to my
Children, and bid them mind the Lord, and to all Friends of our Meeting, and
let my Son R. tell them that I greatly desire their Faithfulness, and I hope he
will have an honest Testimony for God; and I would have Mary see this Letter,
that she may be of a believing Heart, that if the Lord should bring us together
again, it may be to his Honor, and our great Comfort; the Lord is as well able
to preserve me home; as he was hither, and I hope he will in his time, I must
leave that to him, and so I hope will you; for if we be not contented with his
Will, it will not be well with us: And therefore let us learn Paul's Lesson, for
we have great need in every state to be content. No more, but dear Love, being
in haste,

J. V.



To Oliver Sansom and his Wife.
Dear Brother and Sister,
WHom I dearly love in the Lord Jesus, (our Life) who makes hard things easy,
bitter things sweet, and bares up in the greatest Trials, do I salute you, with
my Mary, my Sister Margery, and the rest of them, earnestly desiring your
Prosperity every way, as for my own Soul. And by this you may know, that though
fore Exercises and Travels attend on every hand; yet I am alive to magnify
that Power that has preserved in Dangers great, and Difficulties many, and is
able to Preserve unto the end, and therefore I desire that we may trust in it,
and obey it, to the honor of it; for it has been manifest in my weak Body, to
the admiration of many of the upright in Heart, and they are very Loving to me
where ever I come: And my tender Father has strengthened me to do his Service
in Long Island, and New York, and in Road-Island, and Boston, and New Jersey,
and those parts of America, and I was in hope to have come home when I was
clear of New England; but the Lord has laid it upon me to go to Barbados, and
in his Strength I am going on in a Vessel that one George Fletcher is Owner and
Master of, who professes Truth. Do you not think that a Line from you would be
very precious to me? I neither heard from, nor saw one of my Native Land since
I left it; but I cannot blame you, not knowing whither to direct it. Remember
my dear Love to all dear Friends of our Men's and Women's Meetings, earnestly
desiring their Faithfulness therein, and in all things else that pertains to
the life of Truth, that we may bear our Testimonies in Uprightness unto the
end, that in the end God may be glorified, and our Souls comforted, for ever
and evermore. Dear Anne Lawrence's Children be in my Mind as well as my own: I
hope you will look after them in my Absence, that we may have comfort of their
Growth in the Truth, if ever we are present again; and if they grow in the
Truth, and Knowledge, and Love of God, then will the Desire of your tender
Sister be answered. And so in that which satisfies our Breathings, I remain,

Your Tender Sister, J. V.
The 1st of the Eighth Month, 1680.
For Friends at Gravesend in Long Island, and elsewhere.
Dear Friends,
MY Love and Life salutes you, and in that which unites unto our God and
endears us in the Heavenly Relation, you are often in my Remembrance; and my
Souls desire is that we may feel each other in a living growth, in that Life
and Love of God which reaches over Sea and Land, and satisfies our Souls, and
causes us to rejoice together in Spirit, as present (though absent in Body)
joining in the God of our sweet Salvation; though in this World we meet with
many bitter Exercises; yet blessed be his holy Name, his sweet Salvation
out-ballances all; and as in the Light we behold it, we have great cause to
magnify that Name that brings it: For there is power to make the Weak
strong, and to establish the Feeble-minded; and we have sufficiently partaken
of its Preservation and Deliverance. Glory and Honor and Praises over all be
returned thereunto, our Souls have cause to say, for all his Mercies and great
Loving Kindness, both Spiritual and Temporal; for his wonted Favors and
renewings of Mercies daily. Who can consider it, and not be bowed into
Tenderness before him? The consideration thereof melts my Heart even at this
time. And the breathing of my Soul is to the God of my Life, that we may all
keep low in the Valley of our Fathers Love, where the Wellspring of Life does
overflow; that our Souls through its sweet Refreshings may live unto him, that
through its arising we may magnify his Name and celebrate his Praises, for
Death and Darkness cannot. And therefore we had need be all watching in the
Light, and waiting for the arisings of Life, that Death and Darkness may be
subdued out of our Families, and out of our Assemblies; that our Families may
be seasoned with the Heart-cleansing and preserving holy Fear, that they may be
of God's Families, and our Assemblies crowned with Life; that Truth may be
promoted thereby in our Generation, and our Posterity blessed in the
Generations to come. For this end the Lord has taken Compassion on us, and
raised us up of all the Families of the Earth; and if we do not answer the
requirings of his Love, he may lay us by, and raise up whom he pleases.

Oh! dear Hearts feel his Love, for it requires Love my Soul can truly say. Oh!
what manner of Love is this (as one said in his day) that he has Loved us
with, that when we were afar off and Strangers to him, he made known his
precious Truth unto us, and revealed a measure thereof in us, to help our
Infirmities and to teach us, when we could find no comfort of all the Teachings
of the Idol Shepherds, nor no help for our Infirmities: Oh how precious was his
voice, and comely was his Countenance, and how tenderly were our Hearts
affected therewith, in the day of our Convincement! Oh it was a day of Love
never to be forgotten! And how has he surrounded us by his Power ever since?
Surely his Fatherly Love has been and is sufficient to oblige us to Obedience;
for he is not wanting to his tender Seed, but is appearing for the Affliction
of Joseph, and to work Deliverance for Jacob, and to relieve the travailing
Seed, in the remote corners of the Earth. There are many going and gone out of
Old England to Pensilvania and New Jarsey, that have been as Instruments in the
Hand of the Lord for the promoting his Truth here; and I hope they will be so
there, to the Honor of his great Name and the Comfort of his Children in the
Neighboring Islands; for the Lord will exalt his Truth, though the Wicked grow
worse and worse.

Therefore let our Hearts magnify his Name, and our Souls (and all that is
within us) return Praises and Thanksgiving unto him, for he is worthy, who is
God blessed for ever, and evermore, Amen, says my Soul, who am a Traveller in
Spirit for the tender Seed, and a Rejoycer in its Prosperity,

Joan Vokins.

This Epistle its supposed was Written soon after her return home.

Let this Epistle be Copied and sent to Matinicoke, to M. Pryer and Friends
thereaway, to be read among them.
Here follows the Copies of some more Letters that she wrote and sent when she
was in America.
To her Husband and Children, the 11th of the 11th Month, 1680. from Nevice.
Dear Husband and Children,
MY endeared Love, in the Love of my tender God, does dearly salute you, and
the breathing of my Soul is unto my tender God, that you may be faithful and
obedient to your Measures received, that you may grow in the Knowledge and Love
of God, and of his Son Christ Jesus, whom to know is Eternal Life, which is
better than Natural Life, or any thing that thereunto belongs: Oh, dear
Hearts, consider of it, and forget not the goodness of the Lord; for
unutterable is his Love toward us: My Heart is tendered in the feeling of it,
and I cannot forget his tender dealing with us; and the cry runs often through
me to the God of my Life, That you may not forget his Goodness, nor slight his
tender Love, nor neglect your Duties to him; for, dear Hearts, he is not an
hard Master, but his Reward is sufficient to engage our Hearts to his Service;
Therefore let our Hearts be encouraged to continue in well-doing, and to watch
against the Enemy, that he may not prevail to draw out your Minds from waiting
upon the Lord: Surely there is great danger does attend you, my dear and tender
ones. Oh let your Hearts be diligent to seek the Honor of God, and the
Exaltation of his Truth above all things; then I shall have the desire of my
Soul answered: For I am greatly concerned for you, and my Prayers are for you
Night and Day, that your Souls may live to God, whatever your Bodies endure:
But for your comfort, I put you in mind of the sweet Promises of him that said,
First seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof, and all things
else shall be added: And I am truly satisfied, he is never failing to fulfill
his sweet Promises unto them that keep his Commandments; and if we love him,
let it be manifest by our keeping his Commands; for he is worthy to be feared,
and trusted in, and depended upon, and had in remembrance continually. The Lord
God of my Life stay your Minds, that you may wait upon him, that in his own
time, and upon his own terms you may partake of the fulfilling of his sweet
Promises, which are attained unto by loving the Light, and living the Life of
Truth.

And so, dear Hearts, let us be singly resigned unto our God; for I can truly
say, his Love is most deeply of an engaging Nature; for by it I have been
preserved from great Dangers, Perils by Sea, and Perils by Land, and Perils
amongst false Brethren; but out of them all his mighty Power delivered me, and
I am yet alive to magnify it, Glory, and Honor, and Everlasting Praises be
unto his Name for evermore, says my Soul; for he daily fills my Heart
therewith, and makes me able to do his Service beyond Expectation; and he is
not wanting to communicate to my Soul (Glory to his worthy Name), but his
Reward is in my Bosom, which glads my Heart, and refreshes my Soul, and upholds
my weak Body, that I am not without hopes of seeing you again; for I have cause
to say, There is nothing impossible unto my God. I have been most of this
Winter upon the roaring Seas, Two Months at a time, and saw no Land, and my
Clothes were not off Two Nights all that time, so far as I can remember, and
there was no convenience for my weak Body: There were French, and Dutch, and
Irish, and Barbarians, and English, and I had fore Exercises amongst them, both
inwardly and outwardly; but yet I had good Service also amongst them, and they
did confess to the Power of my God. And although they were most of them very
wicked, yet they were chained by it, and the Passengers were kind to me for the
Truth's sake; and when it pleased the Lord to bring us to Land, we arrived at
the Island of Antego, in the West Indies, and there I found a precious People,
and had Two Meetings a Day for a Week, with White People and Blacks; and on the
7th Day is their Childrens Meetings, and they have also Men's and Women's
Meetings, and the Gospel Order is established and establishing in those remote
Islands, Glory to God for ever. And they teach their Children G. F's Catechism.
And we went aboard the Ship again, designing for Barbados; but that small
Vessel was so heavy laden, that we could not get from the West Indies, but kept
up and down another Month, that the Passengers were all weary; for Water grew
scarce and stinking, and I was very weak: And when we came to another Island,
we that were Passengers were willing to go a-shoar; but the Vessel did not
enter there; and then my Exercise was very great; for I had great drawings to
go there, and then the Weight of my Service there, remained with me: And a few
Days after we bore up, and went to another Island, where there was no Friends,
and there I went ashore, and some of the other Passengers, and I knew no
person there; the Inhabitants were most part Irish, and I was almost spent when
I came there; but the Lord was exceeding good, and comforted me every way, and
I got a passage back again to Antego; and it remained with me to go to the
Island of Nevice, and I could not be clear of the Weight of it; and when I had
been sweetly refreshed, through the Love of my God, amongst them again at
Antego, way was made for me to go from thence to Nevice, and an honest Widow
went along with me, who was very helpful to me; and we had good Service amongst
the Blacks and Whites; and she remembers her Love to you all, and her Prayers
are with mine unto the Lord for you: And now we are clear of Nevice, and going
again to Antego, and do hope the Lord will make way for me to be at Barbados
ere long; for I do understand it is but a Weeks Sail or Two at most, if the
Wind sit fair. When we came from New York, they spoke of but Three or Four
Weeks Voyage to Barbados, and we came out thence about the time called
Michaelmas, and I have not seen it yet: I sent you many Letters from thence
when I came away, by which you may know my Service in New England, and the time
when I came away from thence. I do not know whether you received any of my
Letters, but I have taken all opportunities I could, both by Sea and Land, to
send. I met with a Vessel upon the Sea the last Letter that I sent, and she was
bound for London. I do long to hear of your Welfare, but I do not blame you
that I receive no Lines, except you could tell whither to direct them. I have
not seen one of my Native Land, that I knew, since I came forth: But the Lord
is with me, and unto his preserving Power I commit you, with my self, and all
the tender ones, that Amalek's Spirit may not hurt the hinder part of the
Flock, nor turn the weak out of the way.

Dear Hearts, let us be single unto God, that our Understandings may be opened,
and kept open, that no subtle Spirit may betray our Innocence: And let us never
forget the Watch; and if we fulfill that Command, God will be honored, and our
Souls comforted for ever and for ever, and for evermore. Forget not your
Family-Meeting on First Days at Evening; let not any thing hinder.

Written in the Island of Nevice, the 11th of the 11th Month, 1680. J. V.

And in the same Letter there were a few Lines added to her Son Thomas Vokins,
being then an Apprentice with William Gibson, in London.
Dear Son T. V.
MY Love salutes thee, and thy dear Master and Mistress, and all the faithful
in Christ Jesus, earnestly desiring your Welfare as my own. And dear Heart, let
thy honest Endeavors answer the Desires of my Heart; for my Soul's breathing
is, that thou may be kept low and chaste, that thou may fear at all times;
that thou may do as Joseph did, that could not sin against his God. Oh dear
Son, it is a precious thing to feel the Awe of the Lord upon thy Heart: Oh that
this may be thy State, that thou may be found watching unto Prayer, and
continue in the same, that thou may witness Preservation from all the Enemies
Snares, and that thy Mind may be stayed in the Light, to wait for the Incomes
of Life; that thou may live to God, and seek his Kingdom, and the
righteousness thereof, and then thou need'st not fear but all things else will
be added. And I hope thy Diligence and Faithfulness to God, and unto thy Master
and Mistress, will increase their Love to thee. So hoping thou will take good
Counsel, and bring forth the Fruit thereof, to the Honor of our precious God,
and to all our Comforts.

This is from thy tender Mother, J. V.

An Epistle to Friends of New York, and there-away.
Dear and well-beloved Friends,
THese Lines are left to your weighty Consideration in this Season, whilst
opportunity does present; for Times and Seasons are in our Father's Hand, and
we know not how soon he may put a period to our days: and therefore we are all
concerned to seek the propagation of the precious Truth, whose Excellency far
exceeds the purest Gold, and the Gain thereof far transcendeth all earthly
Treasure: Oh let it be our greatest care to be affected with it, that we may
say with the Apostle, in a living sense thereof, That Godliness with
contentment is the greatest Gain: for we right well know, that no other Gain is
profitable for our everlasting welfare; neither will any thing else stand us
instead, when our God calls for an Account of our Talents; and therefore let it
be the bent of our Hearts; and the inclinations of our Minds to improve them,
that we may give our Account with joy; that our God may be honored, and our
Souls comforted, when this momentary Pilgrimage shall be ended, and all our
Troubles and Exercises forgotten: where the fullness of that which we have
already the earnest of; being an hundredfold better than any thing we have
parted with for it: and if we should be yet tried to part with all, even Life
and all, it is but our reasonable Service to give it up all to him from whom we
have received it: for what have we (that is good,) but what we have received of
him, and what is it that he is not worthy of? Is not his Love sufficient to
engage our hearts to his Service? Have he not delivered us in Dangers deep, and
Difficulties great, and brought us through many and sore Distresses? And has
he not made us Partakers of many precious Promises? Endless Praises be to his
most holy Name, says my Soul. The feeling of his sweet refreshing Life that he
communicates to my Soul, is a hundredfold better than Husband and Children, or
any other outward Mercies that he has made me partaker of, though very near
and dear unto me.

And now dear Friends the Scriptures are a fulfilling in us; therefore let our
earnest that we have received, engage our hearts to our Master's work, that we
may receive the fullness of that which we already have an earnest of, for we
have not a hard Master to serve: but behold he comes, and his reward is with
him* Oh let us wait for him to enlarge our hearts more and more, then shall we
love to propagate his Truth, and run the way of his Commandments with joy and
great delight, that we may all witness the fulfilling of that sweet Promise of
a hundredfold in this life, and afterward the great and double reward of the
Faithful, which is the joy of the Soul in the Life which is everlasting.

And so, dear Friends, let us all keep a narrow watch over our hearts, that the
Spirit of this World do not creep in, to draw the Mind from that which did at
first convince us; for that is as precious as ever, and never waxes old; and
therefore let our zeal for it never wax cold: but let us prize all
opportunities to assemble together, that we may feel our hearts inclined,
singly to wait, that we may receive a further dispensation of life, that a
growing People we may be; that love unto our God, and unto one another may
abound amongst us; that the Way of our God may not seem unpleasant, nor his
Commands grievous unto any of us; neither that given way unto which would lead
into the liberty of the flesh again, for that is a dividing Spirit, that will
separate from God, and uncement and break the Unity of the Body: it is of a
creeping nature, and enmity lodges in it, whatever it may pretend; and because
it has already wrought in a Mystery, and brought dishonor to the worthy Name
of our God, and reproach upon the precious Truth: Therefore it does deeply
concern us to double our diligence in doing our Duties to honor him, in the
propagating of the Truth.

Oh Friends, let us for ever have this before the view of our Minds, let no
other beloved hinder: for if we love any thing more than this, it will not go
well with us; for our God will search the Camp, and if there be a Babylonish
Garment, or a Wedge of never so precious Gold, yet if the Work of the Lord be
hindered thereby, his Wrath will surely come upon it and consume it: for a
clean Camp the Lord will make, that his Truth may be renowned; and the day of
purifying is come and coming more, in which the Hypocrites shall be tried, and
the upright in heart comforted, although there may be many that were first,
come to be last, and some Judas-like betray their Master; yet the Lord will
spread his Truth in the Nations, and magnify his own Power, by staining the
glory of all flesh, and by laying Self low before him, that it may be had in no
reputation: for he will not give his glory unto another, the Adulterer, nor the
Idolater shall not be decked with his Jewels: for where Self is decked, the
Lord is provoked: but where Self is denied, and the daily Cross taken up, there
the low appearance of the Son of God is bowed unto, which seems contemptible
unto them, who causes the offense of the Cross to cease, and settles upon their
Lees, and sits down in a state of carelessness, thinking themselves secure,
without the performance of their Duty, in Obedience to the measure of Truth
received, that should bring into a Disciple's state: Oh Friends, we all know,
that rest is polluted, let us all up and be doing, that our Lamps may be
trimmed, and we all may be ready to meet the Bridegroom of our Souls, that we
may enter in while the Door is open: but if we delay until the Door is shut,
then it will be in vain to seek, we shall not be able to enter, when the Door
is shut against us: then what will the profession of Truth do for us.

Therefore let us with one heart and mind labor together, and let our
breathings be one for another, that the possession of Life may be more and more
inherited amongst us, that we may be refreshed one in another, when together or
asunder, that a sympathizing one with another, we may have, as Members of one
Body, to the honor of Christ our holy Head, from whom we receive nourishment,
to keep us from withering, and to make us to grow and be useful all in our
measures, that one cannot say unto another, I have no need of thee: for if we
are cemented together as Members of one Body, we must needs be all concerned
for the honor of our Head, and the comfort of one another, I remain,

Your unfeigned Friend in the precious unchangeable Truth: JOAN VOKINS.
This to be read amongst Friends at New York, (or elsewhere) as in the Wisdom
of God it may be seen meet.

Written in the Island of Antegua in the Movings of the Spirit of Truth, and in
the sense which that gave me of the state of Friends there. J. V.



Here follows a LETTER that she wrote on Board the first Vessel going for
America; directed, and sent to some Women-Friends in London.
Dear Friends,
I Cannot forget your labor of love, and sisterly care concerning me, and do
return the acknowledgment thereof, with kind acceptance; and this is to
certify you, that after I left old England, I had no cause of doubt or fear:
but the roaring Sea is to me as the dry Land, because of my heavenly Father's
presence and power, which do make hard things easy, and bitter things sweet,
in whose Arms we are preserved hitherto, and we have great cause to hope we
shall unto the end: for he is with us, and have done for me already, more then
I did expect from his tender hand: I have not had one fit since I came aboard:
but Sarah and I are both Sea-sick: but we have good encouragement in our
Voyage; and here is some Friends, and some other sober People, and I have good
Service amongst them; and the Peace of my God flows in as a River, and his Love
and Life as a mighty Stream, which I would not be separated from, for all that
is in Old England: and let all Friends know, that ask concerning me, that its
very well with my Soul; Glory everlasting be unto my tender God for ever.
Though my Body is weak, yet he that made it, is worthy to have the disposing of
it: and unto him it is resigned; for he has often brought it down, and raised
it up: and can do with it as he pleases.

And let my dear Husband and Friends thereaway know, that I am at home with my
God; though absent from my outward: and he that clothes the Lillies, and feeds
the Ravens, takes care of me as well here, as at home; and as to my bodily
weakness, I am not worse than I was at home: but much easier in my Mind.
Blessed and magnified be the Name of the Lord for ever.

It is troublesome for me to write, the Vessel does so wave. I desire that
Susan Dew, and Mary Elson may see this, or have a Copy of it: and also my dear
Husband and Children, to whom my indeared Love is recommended, and to all our
Friends there-away, that loves the Truth, and walks in it; for they can
sympathize with me, and are partakers of the reward of life with me in our own
Bosoms: which is and has been more to me, since I have been aboard the Vessel,
than my natural Life: and it is the best Cordial that I can ever have; for
healing virtue is in it, by which my Soul and weak Body is strengthened and
comforted in times of great weakness, fore trials and exercises, in the sense
of which my Soul is tendered before the God of my life: not questioning but
that we may see one another faces again with joy, and not with sorrow: and yet
if we do not see face to face; yet if we abide together in Spirit in the work
and service of our God, then shall he be honored, and our Souls comforted, and
so shall I have the desire of my Soul answered; who am a Traveller for the
tender Seed sake, in the service of Truth, wherein I greet you all in the
salutation of my dear love, and therein do take my leave, and bid you farewell
in the Lord JESUS, remaining,

Your true and unfeigned Friend and Sister in the precious Truth, J. V.
From on Shipboard in the Downs, 27th of the 12th Month, 1679.
An Epistle to Friends in Rhode Island, and there-away.
Dear Friends,
MY Love and Life salutes you all that loves the precious Truth, and lives in
it; for they are very dear and near one unto another, even as Epistles written
in one another Hearts that cannot be forgotten; not written with Ink or Pen,
but with the uniting and healing Spirit, that unites us unto our God, and
endears us one unto another, in which I am one with you in Trials and
Exercises, and the breathing of my Soul is unto the God of our lives that all
may be cut off that troubles you; and that Love and Life, and all other
Spiritual Graces and Gifts may be multiplied and increased in and amongst you,
that you may persevere as the Worthies of the Lord, that through renewings of
the right Spirit you may be more and more Conquerours over all that is wrong:
for our God is on his way, Glory to his Name for ever, and he has regard to
the very hindermost of the Flock; therefore let all put on Valor and Courage
to follow the Lamb, for he is on his way Triumphantly; and he and his faithful
Followers shall have the Victory, though we may meet with much by the way, yet
we have great encouragement still to look to him who have hitherto preserved in
dangers deep and difficult; and though in this World we meet with many
Troubles, yet our Helper is nigh, yea, a God at hand to deliver out of them
all. Surely his love is sufficient to engage our Hearts to his Service; for we
have every one a Service for our tender God in our places, and purity of Life
and Conversation is that which will answer to the establishing and confirming
of all that keeps thereunto: though the outward appearance of things may make
some weak ones to reason and question, and be ready to stumble, yet the
Gospel Light and life, and the good order thereof is very comfortable, and as
it is kept unto will resolve all doubts, and stop the dark reasoner, and put a
period to all unprofitable Controversies, which things the Lord grant may be
brought to pass amongst you, and in all the Churches, to the Honor and
Exaltation of his Holy Name and Precious Truth, and the comforting and building
up and establishing of every breathing tender Babe, that he over all may have
the praise, and our Souls the comfort for evermore, Amen, Says your Friend in
the unchangeable Truth,

J. V.
From Barbados, 6th. of the first Month, 1681. Let this be read among Friends
in Rhode Island, as the Wisdom of God shall direct. Here are at the West India
Islands a very good President concerning Children, and I could wish that it
were so among the Lord's People every where. Friends Children meet together
once a week, and sit together with their Parents, and wait upon the Lord, and
are Instructed, and they learn dear G. F's Catechism at home, [and then they
say it at the Meeting once a week] and I do believe that it do produce a good
Effect, and I can truly say, that the Power of the Almighty is amongst them,
for many of them was tendered and let Tears when I was at their Meeting, and
Friends were refreshed. Here in Barbados are Family Meetings very frequently
and comfortable.



An Epistle to Friends in East-Jersey.
Dear Friends,
BE of believing Hearts, and keep to the measure of Light already received,
that none may be veiled in their Understandings, and so come to loss; but that
all may have the benefit of their own measures, that we may Magnify our God
together; for in the feeling of that Spirit that helps our Infirmities and
teaches us, we are greatly encouraged to travel on, though there is much to be
met with by the way. Oh therefore let none be weary in well-doing, but all to
be diligent, that God's Plantation may flourish in every Heart, that he may
have the Fruit to his Glory, for he is making manifest his great love to his
tender Seed in those remote corners of the Earth; and he will make his Power
known, and his Gospel Light is shining, and he will multiply his Mercies, and
increase his Blessings, both Spiritually and Temporally, unto those who live
the Gospel-life, and keep to its blessed Order: Oh the great love and tender
dealings of our God, that he is visiting those Islands, which causes my Soul
often to rejoice; for he have heard the Cry of the poor, and is arisen for the
help of the needy, and have made many willing to leave their Native Land, that
are as Instruments in his hand, for to build up in the pure victorious Faith,
which have long been the breathing of my Soul for you; and for the Seed sake I
have been concerned close with the God of my Life, and the cry in me has often
been unto him to send forth more faithful Laborers amongst you, that his
Vineyard may be dressed and cleansed from all that hinders its growth, and he
has heard, and answered in measure, blessed be his Name. Oh Friends, let every
one be concerned, and none to be idle, but all to the work of the Day, lest
Night come and prevent you.

For now is the day springing from on High visiting you, and the affliction of
Joseph, and the troubles of Jacob the Lord have removed, and for his Seed sake
will yet more appear and work its deliverance in the hearts of all that are
truly tender of it: although the Serpent is very subtle and busy, and always
trying to betray Innocence; yet the Watch being kept, he is prevented, and our
Souls preserved. Therefore, dear Friends, let us not forget that Command, lest
the Enemy should prevail. Oh feel a necessity of watchfulness, that we may keep
our hearts diligently; that we may feel the issues of Life, that the inward Man
may grow and be capable to act for God; for we have every one, both Male and
Female, a Service in our proper places; and them that are diligent in doing
their Duty, shall be sure of a blessed Reward of Life and Peace: therefore let
all be encouraged that are poor and needy, and feeble-minded; Oh let them put
on Courage, yea, the very hindermost of the Flock; for our Captain is
courageous, he goes on Conquering and to Conquer victoriously, and by his Power
he brings great things to pass, and is working deliverance for his suffering
Seed, that have breathed to him in secret, and could not be satisfied, but was
without all hope of help, until the ancient Power was brought to light, and the
Spirit of Truth revealed, to help our Infirmities, and to teach us to depart
from Iniquity, and to do the things that is well pleasing unto our God. Oh the
day of our convincement! in which our hearts and souls were tendered, and we
made sensible of our states, is never to be forgotten; but the Ancient Power
that tendered us then, to be kept unto, that we may do the work of the day; for
the Gospel-day calls for purity of Life to adorn it. Oh that we may be, as John
said, fearing God, and giving glory to him, for the hour of his Judgment is
come; and we and ours ought to fear him, and stand in his awe, and not sin
against him. Oh that we above all things may endeavor that our Families may be
of his Family, and our Assemblies crowned with life, that living Sacrifices may
be offered in our Spiritual Worship: for broken hearts, and contrite spirits,
our tender God will never despise.

And therefore, dear Friends, let us keep low in the Valley of our Father's
love, where the Well springs of Life do flow, that a living People we may be,
to the praise of our God, and the promoting of Truth in Generations to come,
that our Offspring may be encouraged by our good Examples, successively to
honor Truth when we are gone to our Rest, that our Posterity may be blessed of
the Lord, and be to his praise, and our everlasting comfort for ever and for
evermore. Amen.

Written in Barbados in the first Month, 1681.
An Epistle to some Friends in New England, but it has respect to the general
state of Friends there.
T. and Ann Potter,
DEar Friends, my Love do truly reach to you and your Children, desiring your
welfare every way, even as for my own, not forgetting your love to me when I
was there, but in a sense of that love that our God have shed abroad in our
hearts, do I salute you, earnestly desiring that our Children may be his
Children, and that they and we may magnify his power together, though
outwardly far asunder. Oh that we and ours may truly endeavor after this: for
its the breathing of my Soul that we may feel one another in harmless hearts,
that we may breath one for another, and be refreshed one in another, though
absent in body, yet present in spirit, serving our God, and eying him that he
may direct our hearts, and keep our minds staid, that when the winds do blow,
and the storms do beat, we may be upon a sure foundation: for all foundations
shall be tried, and the sandy buildings will not stand in the trying times: and
therefore we had need be builders up of one another in our most holy faith,
that we may be firmly established, and as good soldiers enduring hardships
unto the end; for our Captain is on his way, Glory to his worthy Name, and he
goes on triumphantly conquering, and to conquer, and he and his faithful
Followers shall have the Victory, and his love is sufficient to encourage the
feeble ones, for by his power we have been preserved in dangers many, and very
great and difficult; and he has been a present help in the times of our
greatest need, and though we have in our travel here, met with many troubles,
yet he (who is our God at hand) delivers out of all. Everlasting Praises be
unto his Name for ever: he has made known the spiritual Armor. Oh that we may
rightly prove it, that the Strongholds of Sin and Satan may be pulled down,
and Righteousness and Holiness set up in the place thereof, that our God may be
honored, and his Truth exalted, and his Children comforted for ever and for
evermore, Amen.

Mind my dear love to Elizabeth Hooten, and to the Friend and her Husband,
(that went with me to West Jersey) and to William Aston and his Wife, and Tho.
Leeds and his Wife, and let them know that I should be glad to hear, that a
Meeting were settled at Middleton; and mind my love to S. Cooper, and his Wife
and Family, and let them and other Friends know, that I believe there would be
great Service in establishing a Meeting there; my love to R. Lippingcot,
William Shaddock, and the Friend Warner, and to all the rest of Friends; for my
love is truly to them all, as if I named them and their Wives one by one. And
my servent desire is, that the precious Truth may prosper amongst you: and that
faith and patience and love and life, and all other spiritual graces and gifts,
may abound amongst you: and that all that is wrong may be purged out. Oh that
all of you would wait to feel the renewings of the right Spirit, that there
might be no room in the heart, to entertain the wrong Spirit, to hinder or hurt
innocence.

And the Lord God of my Life discover its subtilty, and keep us all upon our
watch, that none of us may be taken in his snares, for they are many and
dangerous: and therefore I commit you with my self, and all that loves the
Truth, and lives in it, to the never-failing God, who is worthy to be feared
and obeyed, trusted in, and depended upon by us, and all that love him, for
ever and for evermore.

You would say, that I have great cause so to declare, if you did but know what
he has brought me through, since I left you: but blessed be his Name, he
enabled me to do his Service everywhere; and Friends are kind and loving to me
here at Barbados, and so they were at the Leeward Islands. No more, but
unfeigned Love; and rest,

Your Friend and Sister in the precious Truth, Joan Vokins.
From Barbados, 14th of the 1st Month, 1681.
To Friends in West Jersey.
Dear Friend,
WIlliam Peachee, after the Salutation of my Love to Thee and thy Wife and
Friends, This is to let thee and Friends there know, that I cannot forget you:
but the Travel of my Soul is for you: and the tender God of my Life has heard
the Cry of his oppressed Seed, and arrisen and will appear more and more for
its deliverance, although the Philistine Spirit do strongly strive, and Amaleck
lay by the way: yet Israel is greatly encouraged and have great cause to travel
on, for the Captain of our Salvation is going on before us conquering and to
conquer: and he will gather his Sons from far, and his Daughthers from the ends
of the Earth; and for this end he visits the Dark Corners, and for his Seed
sake he has appeared on your behalf, and if you mind the Gospel Light, and live
the Gospel-life, and keep the Gospel Order, then will God's Plantation grow,
and bring forth Fruit to his praise, and then you may expect his Blessings and
Prosperity upon you and yours: but if you slight the great Love of God, and let
in the Spirit of this World and get you other Lovers, that will greatly provoke
the Lord, and cause him to withhold his Mercies from you, and cause you to fail
of your expectations. This loving Caution sprung in my Heart unto you, and in
that which thinks no evil I leave it with you, hoping that in the same you will
receive it, that in the reading our Lives may be refreshed together, though in
Person far asunder: for it is exceeding precious to me, and my life rejoices at
the feeling of a living Brother or Sisters growth in the truth, and it is that
my Soul travels for, who am a friend to it, and as I feed with you in the Land
of the Living, we can sing together as the ransomed of the Lord; and the
breathing of my Soul is, that all that are there may be preserved, and that
many thousands more may be gathered to the Honor of his great and worthy Name
and our mutual Comfort, for ever and for evermore, Amen.

J. V.
From Barbados, 1st Month, 1681.
A short Testimony against that Spirit of Division, that gave forth W. R 's
Book, styled, The Christian Quaker distinguished.
WHereas there is a Libertine Spirit at work, very busy to darken the Hearts
of them that touch with it: I feel a necessity upon me, and that from the Lord,
to bear my Testimony against it; and to caution all the tender ones not to
meddle with it, lest they be tinctured and hurt by it: for it is a subtle
Spirit, and seeks, under fair pretenses, to betray Innocence, and some there
are that are come to a loss thereby, as woeful Experience do daily show; and
therefore let it be considered, how it is with those that are alive to God: and
how it is with those that are within the bounds of that Spirit, which gave
forth W. R's wicked Book, and those that owns it, are they not in a dying
condition, as to the pure Life of Jesus? and let them whose understandings are
not clear, take heed how they read in it, lest they bring a Vail over them
again they know not how: I may say, from a certain sense, that it is a dark
Spirit, and too many are groping therein; and that is the cause they do not see
wherein the difference lies: Oh that every such a one would keep to that which
did at first convince them, that they might have their understandings opened
and kept open, that they might see how far they are on their Spiritual Journey,
that this self-seeking Spirit might not betray in the Wilderness; for there are
howling Deserts, and dangerous Places, where this Spirit have lurking corners,
and creeps in at every turn, if the watch be not duly kept: And therefore let
all take heed and beware of this destroying Spirit, whatever it does pretend,
it is no better than the inwardly ravening Woolf, though clothed outwardly like
a Sheep, and therefore deceives the more: but the Lord will lay it open more
and more for his own Seed sake, that has long suffered: and the upright hearted
who are true to God shall have great encouragement to travel on: but those that
are looking out are in great danger of being ensnared by this Spirit, which may
make their Journey long and tedious, by muddlement of mind, and sometimes go
backwards, yet their way may be so hedged up that they cannot get quite back to
Egypt again, but may die in the Wilderness, if they take not heed. Oh that all,
while they have time, may come into obedience to the Truth, and feed together
in the Land of the Living, that in the feeling of Life we may sing together as
the Ransomed of the Lord, dwelling with him (out of all strife) in purity of
Life, cemented together in the bounds of his Love, with our Affections fixed on
things above.

J V.

To Friends in New England, and thereaway.
Dear Friend,
SAmuel Spicer, my Love salutes thee and thy dear Wife, and Father and Mother
Tilton, if yet alive, and the rest of Friends of your Meeting; and Friends at
New York earnestly desiring your welfare in the Lord Jesus, and breathing to
the God of my Life, that above all things Truth may prosper amongst you, and
that Faith and Love and Peace and Life may be multiplied amongst you, that the
Work of the Day may go on, whatever you meet with to hinder: though the
Philistine Spirit do strive, and Amaleck lie by the way, yet good Encouragement
have we, as faithful Soldiers enduring hardships, to travel on and follow our
Captain fully; for his Reward is sure, though it is through many Trials
obtained; yet when this momentary Pilgrimage is passed through, the greater
weight of Glory will out-ballance all: and in the sense of it, let our Hearts
rejoice; and our Souls magnify that Power that has preserved, and is able to
preserve unto the end: and that in and through it we may be strong in the Lord
Jesus, and fitly furnished to every good Work, that we may never be weary of
well doing, nor faint in our minds: though in this World we meet with many
Troubles, yet we know him that is able to deliver out of them all; and if he
feed with the Bread of Affliction, and the Water of Adversity, yet blessed be
his living Name, he teaches our Souls to profit thereby; and we have cause to
say in this Trying Day, as the three Children did in Ages past, We know that
our God is able to deliver us, if he please; but if he will not, we will still
trust in him: for he has been with us in Six Troubles, and we have good cause
to depend upon him, and to have confidence in him in the Seventh; for it is but
a little while and Persecution and Affliction shall come to an end: but the
Word of Patience, that (preserves in times of great temptation) abides for
ever, and shall never have an end. Glory and Honor and Living Praises be
returned and ascribed unto the God of all our Mercies and Blessings, both
Spiritual and Temporal, which we daily partake of from his fatherly hand: for
he is an never-failing God, and of his loving kindness there is no end: And
unto the Protection of his Almighty Power, which reaches over Sea and Land, do
I commit you, with my own Soul, henceforth and for evermore.

Your Sister in the unchangeable precious Truth, JOAN VOKINS.
From London, the 3 d of the 1st Month, 1682.
To Friends of Crambrook in Kent.
Dear Friends,
MY Love salutes you and the rest of the Faithful in Christ Jesus, who holds
fast their Integrity and retains their first Love: for such are near and dear
unto me, and often in my remembrance, whatever Exercises they undergo: and my
Soul do often breath unto the God of my life, that we may be kept in a wa^^ing
frame, that if Trials and Afflictions do abound, that his sanctifying Power may
superabound, that as faithful Soldiers, we may endure hardships to the end;
that in the end we may receive the greater weight of Glory, that may out
balance all the momentary Afflictions that we meet with in this short
Pilgrimage. O Glory to his Name, who is the Physician of Value, that can cure
both Body and Soul; he is worthy to be trusted in, who never fails them whose
confidence is in him, and all things are possible for his Power to do;
therefore let our dependence be on it for ever, that we may feel it in all our
undertakings, that we may have the benefit of it in the use of the Creatures,
that his Blessing may be upon them, then it will go well with us, whatever may
come. Thus the Lord Jesus brings to pass, for the honor of his own worthy
Name, and the comfort of our weak Bodies, and everlasting benefit of our
immortal Souls, is the desire of

Your true Friend in the unchangeable Truth, J. V.
4th of the 9 Month, 1682.
For the Friends of Abingdon, Meeting in Berkshire.
My dear and well beloved Friends,
IF you will be delivered, then keep to Truth and that will set you free from
Sin, and from Iniquity, and if you would wear the Everlasting Crown: think not
for to sit down at ease, but follow the Lamb through the many Tribulations,
that you may partake of his sweet Consolations: For the more Trials and sore
Exercises do abound, the more the Love and Life of Jesus will super-abound unto
all them that do believe in him and suffer with him, they shall assuredly reign
with him, and be crowned with life, that are faithful unto death: and what is
left upon Record we see fulfilling, that all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus must suffer, and the worst Enemies are them of their own house: let them
read that have experience, for they may understand me, and such I truly
simpathize with, in the patience and suffering of the Lamb: knowing that he and
his Followers are deeply engaged in the spiritual warfare: and truly it is a
precious and a blessed cause to be concerned in: and them that love any thing
more than him, are not worthy to be concerned in his War, neither can such
partake of his Government and Peace, which shall never have end.

Therefore them that go this spiritual warfare, must not be entangled, but must
follow their Captain through the many tribulations, bearing their faithful
Testimonies, that their Garments may be made white, being washed in the Blood
of the Lamb, that the precious adorning of his meek and quiet spirit, we may be
covered with: that we may feel Justification by him in our own hearts: then we
need not fear what Man can do unto us: though all Men should rise up against
us, yet if our God be for us, he can take our part, and plead our cause, and
soon subdue our Enemies, if he pleases: but if he will not so do; yet we have
cause to do as the Three Children did, to trust in him however: for he knows
what is most convenient for us, and he will cause all things to work together
for our good: and if he gives the Bread of Adversity, and the Water of
Affliction, yet glory be to his worthy Name, he teaches us to profit thereby,
and what he orders for us is still for the best: and let us wait to feel his
sanctifying power to strengthen us to follow him, which way soever he leads,
that we may love him above all perishing things, and manifest our Love by
keeping his Commands: and one of his Commands which he gave unto all his, is
(to watch) to be aware of their Souls Enemy, and to enjoy the sweet benefit of
their Souls Friend, which far exceeds the Friendship of all the World, and for
the same we can turn our backs on the glory of the World, and do choose rather
to suffer with the Lamb and his Followers, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season: for that would captivate our Souls: though we might have more
favor from the wicked, and more ease to our bodies: but if hardship be our
portion, and that we must have a sufficient share therein: yet our reward is
sure, if we endure to the end. Glory and honor and praises unto the God of all
our Mercies, and that for evermore; his blessed everlasting reward will
out-ballance all: therefore great encouragement have we to wait upon the Lord
Jesus, for the renewing of our inward Man, that we may continue in well-doing,
those few days we have to come in this momentary Pilgrimage, that in the end
God may be glorified, and our Souls (after all Trials and sore Exercises are
ended) may be everlastingly comforted.

Dear Friends,

By this you may see that I do not forget you, though so weakly in body, that I
cannot visit you; yet am with you in spirit, and as long as we abide in the
precious Truth, the Spirit of Truth writes us, as Epistles in one another's
hearts, that cannot be forgotten: and in the same I dearly salute you, and bid
you farewell in the Lord Jesus, though in this World ye have many besetments:
yet unto his tender compassionate care I commit our Cause, and unto the
Protection of his Almighty Power do I commend you, with my own Soul, henceforth
and for evermore.

Your Sister in the heavenly Relation, J. V.
Chawlow, 1st of the 6th Month. 1683.
Concerning her Journey into Ireland.
Dear Friends,
BY this the blessed Truth, and them that love it may be cleared, that have
unity with me in my Service: for I have a witness in every heart, that I may
appeal unto; but them that take no heed to (the Spirit of God) the true witness
in their own hearts, can have no experience of the work of it in others, and
therefore no marvel if they wonder and perish, as said the Apostle: though they
say daily and weekly, and year after year: it is their duty to love and fear
and obey God with all their hearts, with all their souls, and with all their
strength; yet so far are they from doing of it, that they are ready to cast
Aspersions on those that do: and though it is written in the Liturgy of the
Church of England, that it is their Duties; yet they will not wait upon Jesus
to receive power to perform their Duties; and therefore they abide in unbelief
and disobedience, not considering their time is short, and the work of
Sanctification is great. Oh how dangerous a thing will it be, to have such a
weighty work to do, when there is no time to do it! Well said the Apostle, Work
out your own salvation with fear and trembling: was that the way then; and is
it become ridiculous now, that so many are so much averse to it? Oh where are
the Mockers and Scoffers, and Persecutors of our Age? Who are hearing and
reading the Scriptures without Understanding: Oh that they would take heed to
that which reproves for evil; that their Understandings might be opened by it:
for that is the Spirit that the holy Men were inspired with, that gave forth
the Scriptures: and until the hearts of People be turned to it, their
understandings are so darkened, that they cannot see the state of their own
Souls; much less understand the holy Scripture: and therefore we need not care
what such can say or do against us, (who truly fear the Lord) for our reward is
from him: and we have good cause to serve him, and seek to exalt his blessed
Truth, by preferring it above all things: though Relations may be near and
dear; yet to part with them, and natural Life and all, is but my reasonable
Service, if my God require it; for I have found him a bountiful Master, and no
respecter of Persons: but them that truly fear him, and work righteousness, do
find acceptance with him: and that is more to a Remnant, then to find
acceptance with all the Potentates of the World; for their favor will not
procure peace with God: neither can those live in God's holy heart-cleansing
fear: that offends him to please Man; and in vain will it be for any to hope to
die in favor with God, and not live so in his fear, as not to offend him: and
notwithstanding all the talk of loving the Lord Jesus, and fearing him, yet
there is none does it, but them that leave off doing evil, and learn to do well;
and such keeps his holy Commands, which are not grievous, but joyous to them,
when the Lord does enlarge their hearts, then can they run the way of his
Commands with great delight: but while Man or Woman stands at a distance from
that good Spirit that God has, (in his tender love) given them to profit
withal: they cannot be sensible of the Lord's enlarging their hearts, nor of
his working in them, both to will and to do of his own good pleasure: therefore
let all have regard to the work of God's Holy Spirit in their own hearts, that
they may come to be sensible of the goodness of the Lord, and the mighty works
that he does for their Souls; and from a living experience invite others to
come and taste and see for themselves, how good our God is; for of a truth he is
good unto his Israel, that are of an upright heart in his sight; and they can
say of a truth, That one day in his Courts is better than a thousand years in
the Kings Palaces, and in the presence of the Lord is the fullness of our Soul's
joy: and at his right hand is durable riches and pleasures for evermore: and
indeed it is weighty to consider, how many are preferring the honor of Man,
before the honor of God, and earthly riches before the heavenly treasure: And
how eagerly do Mankind press after outward gain, and slightly esteems the gain
of godliness, though with content it is the greatest gain of all.

But my dear Friends, you that can do nothing against the Truth but for the
Truth, I leave these lines with you, that the weak may not be turned out of the
way, nor the feeble caused to stumble by any false Asperson, that the Devil
through his Instruments may be permitted to cast upon me for the Truths sake:
For I have given no just cause to any to speak evil of me; but if any should
take occasion to speak evil of the Precious Truth, because of my serving it,
let them know, that for this cause it was made known unto me, that I might
truly serve it and not my self; and if they that are Carnally minded would do
so, they would then indeed know, that to be Carnally minded is Death, but to be
Spiritual minded is Life, and Peace, and true Contentment. And this I write as
one that has had a woeful experience of the enmity that lodges in the carnal
mind, and a good experience and privilege that redownds to the Souls of the
Spiritual Minded, and do earnestly desire that those that are carnal and sold
under Sin, (as the Apostle said) may turn unto that which is to say the enmity;
for it is night unto every one: its the Word of the Lord which is the Sword of
his Spirit, and as a Hammer to break down the partition wall of Sin, which
separates the Soul from the presence of the Lord; and it must be known so to
be, before Men can be fit to receive the things of God: and thus may People
come to see between things that differ and not call good evil, and evil good,
and put darkness for light, and light for darkness, as too many do, by which
the Lord has been and is greatly provoked, and his precious Truth vilified,
and his Children daily reproached as evil doers, and that by all sorts and
Sects: it is now as it was in the days past, among the twelve Disciples there
was one Judas, but he did not defile the rest; but he went to the Highpriests
and Rulers, and so sided with them, that loved not the appearance of Jesus: and
so do these now that loves not his spiritual appearance, and can no more
understand the work of his Power in his Children, than they could that said,
they were Abraham's Seed, when Christ told them plainly, that they were of
their Father the Devil, and his works they were a doing, though they were very
high in the World's esteem (at that time) and he very low in theirs: and he
told them the truth, and they hated him; and we have read what became of them,
and of Judas, when he could not find Repentance, though he sought for it. O
therefore let the harms of those, make all the disobedient and gainsayers
beware in time, and seek to honor God by their subjection to the Spirit of
Christ Jesus, who is come to save his People from their sins, by his spiritual
appearance in their hearts, that their Souls may have the Heavenly Sentence
pronounced at last by the Righteous Judge, Well done good and faithful
Servants, enter into the Joy which is prepared for all them that believes in
Christ, and suffers with him, while on the Stage of this World, for theirs is
the blessed Reward in the World that is to come; and they that suffer with him
here, shall reign with him for ever. And in a living sense of his Almighty
Power that has been already manifested is my heart encouraged to go on in his
Service, not looking at weakness, or any outward thing that might by Natural
Reason hinder: for who so poor, who so simple, who so weak, who so unworthy as
I? Surely the Lord God of Love is manifesting his Almighty Power in
contemptible Vessels, that it may be the more magnified; and let all that takes
up the daily Cross, and follows Jesus, magnify his Power; for unto such it is
daily manifested, to supply all their needs, and thereunto do I commit all for
ever and evermore. Amen.

Written by one that breathes for the prosperity of Sion, and desires the
welfare of all People, 27. of the fifth Month, 1686. J. V.

To Friends in Antegua and Nevice-Islands in the West Indies.
DEar Friends in the Heavenly Relation, which is nearer than that of Blood, in
which the God of all our Mercies keep us near unto himself, and one unto
another, that as he renews his Mercies, we may renew our Obedience unto him,
and our love one to another, that while we remain here we may breath one for
another, that we may be refreshed together, though outwardly far asunder; that
as Children of one Father we may feed together at one Table, and be nourished
with the Feast of fat things, that our Heavenly Father has provided for his
sincere ones, unto whom his love has been so largely extended, as to preserve
in dangers deep, and made his wonders known, even unto a poor despised remnant,
that he has daily provided for, Glory to his worthy Name, and magnified be
that Almighty Power, that has been so largely manifested in all our troubles,
and helped us when we could not help our selves, and had none to help. Oh, how
has it wrought deliverances many, unexpectedly! Surely we have cause to trust
in it, and to depend upon it; for I have cause to say to the honor of it,
there is nothing too hard for it to do; I have proved it, and saw its mighty
works to admiration, and it is daily mavelous in my eye; for it is strength
in the midst of my great weakness, and a present help in times of my great
need, and in the blessed enjoyment thereof I am sweetly encouraged to go on in
my place of Service, though in much weakness of Body and outward Affliction:
yet by this you may know that since Friends Sufferings in England ceased, there
was way made for my coming to Ireland; I had gone sooner, but Sufferings were
so great, that I could not leave Friends while it was so, and as soon as ever
Friends came out of Prisons I came for Ireland, before I could get strength
over my long weakness; but least I should not live to come, I came forth in
great weakness, because it remained with me to come, and I have had a good
experience of the tender dealing of the righteous God, who never required me to
do any thing, but he gave me of his never-failing Power to perform it, and in
the strength thereof I Travel on in my Heavenlyh Progress, wherein the Lord God
of all our Comforts and Consolations preserve us all unto the end, whatever we
have yet to meet with, that nothing may be able to separate us from the
enjoyment of our Heavenly Father's love, nor the seasonedness of his
heart-cleansing fear, nor the refreshings of his daily supplies of
Soul-nourishing Life, and supporting Power, but through the feeling of the
same, we may renew our watchfulness, and faithfulness, and continuation in
well-doing, for he is a neverfailing God, and from him all good proceeds, and
therefore worthy to be waited upon all the days of our appointed time; for
praises to the Name of Jesus, we have good cause to wait, and not to be weary:
for certain it is that he accepts of sincere waiting, and he renews the inward
strength of them that truly waits, and diligently observes the dictates of the
right Spirit, and joins not with any thing that is wrong, these receive ability
to do that which is right in the sight of God, and in and through Christ Jesus,
such comes to partake of the daily renewings of Life; whereby the heads of a
Remnant have been born up in great Trials, and sore and various Exercises.
Glory and Honor be unto our God, through his Son Christ Jesus our Savior, for
he has saved us when much evil has been intended against us, and has filled
our Cups, and caused them to overflow; praised, and honored, and renowned be
his Holy Name, for it is worthy, and that for evermore. Amen.

J. V.
Written in Ireland, 7th Month, 16^6.
To the Women's Meeting in the Vale of White Horse in Berks.
DEar and well beloved Sisters, whom I cannot forget, but in that love that
reaches over Sea and Land, do my Soul dearly salute you, hoping that the pure
mind will be stirred up in every one of you, to consider the matchless Mercies
of our tender God, which I do here put you in remembrance of. Oh how has he
manifested his Almighty Power when we have been together in our Women's
Meetings, and how have we been relieved and born up over all Oppositions, both
inwardly and outwardly, and in the Gospel Light have seen the great goodness of
the Lord, and with the Gospel-power been strengthened when we were very weak,
and supported when we were very needy? Has not our Heavenly Father's love been
sufficient to engage our hearts to faithfulness? Oh that it may be as an
Obligation to every one of us, to keep to the Gospel Light, and to live the
Gospel-life, and to love the Gospel Order, for our God is a God of Order, and
he affords precious Opportunities to wait upon him, and if we abide in a good
sense of his love, we shall not forget our times and hours to wait for the
seasons of the Lord; for they are so sweet to the thirsty Soul, that it cannot
be satisfied without them, and therefore many times thinks it long ere the
Meeting-day come, that it might be replenished with the virtue of Christ Jesus
the Head, and strengthened with the rest of the Members: for as we truly gather
in his Name (praises thereunto) he has made us partakers of his Divine Nature:
Oh how has he bedewed our Souls, and caused our Cups to overflow, when the
arisings of his Eternal Power has been felt among us to rebuke the Enemy, and
keep him back, that would have hindered us from serving the precious Truth, and
prevented us of the Privilege of our Women's-Meeting: Oh that we may now take
heed that we give him no advantage, by slighting the Mercies of our tender God,
or neglecting of our Duties, but that in the remembrance of his tender Mercies
and Fatherly Love we may double our diligence in our places of Service, that
our God may be honored, feared, and obeyed by us all, that we may receive the
blessed and sure Reward in the end, when time here as to us shall be no more,
and be in safety from all harms for ever and for evermore. So be it, says the
Soul of your dear Sister in that which is strength to the weak, and help to the
helpless, that Sea nor Land cannot separate,

Joan Vokins.
From the County of Wexford in Ireland, the 26 of the seventh Month, 1686.
POSTSCRIPT.
SO dear hearts by this you may know that my tender God is still exceeding good
unto me, and manifests his great Power, and it is admirable in my eyes, that I
am yet alive, to tell of his wondrous works: but blessed be his worthy Name, he
preserves me by his Almighty Power, and in his tender love provides for me.
Since I gave up all, he is more to me than all, Glory to his Name, and
magnified be his preserving and delivering Power; my Soul has every day cause
to say, for he has done great and wonderful things for my Soul and weak Body,
else I had not been alive at this day; but still am I an object of his tender
pity, and do hope so I shall be the remainder of my little time a Monument to
his Praise. Many sensible Friends here are tendered in the sense of God's love
when they see me travel in so much weakness; and I hope that you and I shall
praise his Name together, and magnify his Eternal Power (though in Person far
asunder) for it is worthy to be magnified, as it has been manifested; for if
that had failed, we had failed; but because that lives, our Souls live to speak
well of the Name of our God, who is above all Gods, and there is none like unto
him: it is honor to us sufficient to serve him, for his Reward is sure, and
blessed be his worthy Name, he makes me a partaker daily of the gain of
Godliness with contentment, which is a continual Feast.

Your Sister in my measure, J. V.



To her Children.
AFter my dear Love to my Husband, This is to signify my tender Love to the
precious Truth, by my Motherly Care for my Children, that whether I live or
die, you may be careful and take heed that you do not stain the Testimony of
Truth, that you have received by wearing of Needless Things, and following the
World's Fashions, in your Clothing and Attire, but remember how I have bred
you up: and consider what manner of persons you ought to be, now you are come
to years of understanding, that you may not grieve the Spirit of the Lord, nor
Me, nor any of his dear Children: but that you may walk as becomes the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you may be good Examples to others, and Patterns
of Plainness and Uprightness in your Conversations among all People; then will
the Blessing of the Lord attend you, and it will be well with you in this
World, and in that which is to come: then shall God be honored, and my Soul
with yours, and with the Souls of all his tender ones that desires the same be
comforted, and Truth promoted over all; and then you will have cause to say
with me, That its Excellency far transcends all that the World can afford, and
will endure when that shall pass away. And therefore forget not the Spirit of
it in your Hearts, but take good heed unto it at your Down-lying, and at your
Up-rising, that you with me may have the benefit of that Promise of the Lord,
who said, he would be with his children at their down-lying, and commune with
them at their up-rising; and in this the day of his great love, he is nigh unto
his Children, and delights in them that abides in a watching and a waiting
frame, and takes council of his Divine Spirit: But woe unto them, that takes
council, but not of me, says the righteous God, and cover with a covering, but
not of my spirit. And, dear Hearts, the day is come that all false Coverings
will be found too short and too narrow, to hide from the Wrath of the Almighty,
and them that are truly the Children of the Lord shall be covered under the
Wing of his Eternal Power, from the Jaw of the strong Destroyer, though he may
cast in Floods of Temptations, and may try by Subtilty to betray Innocence:
yet, dear Hearts, look not at that, lest your Faith should fail, but look unto
the Almighty Power of God, and wait to receive it, and believe in it, and keep
to the measure already received, that will make way for you to escape the
Temptations, when you cannot help your selves, and have no other to depend
upon. Oh then how have he appeared for me, and manifested his preserving and
delivering Power: Oh let your Souls with mine, magnify it, for is it worthy,
and that for evermore.

Truth is the same here as in England, and Friends do not suffer the World's
Fashions to be followed, for both Men and Women here do go plain in their
Apparel, according to Truth, in a comely manner; the Women do not attire their
Heads, setting their Clothes aloft, imitating the World's Fashions, wearing any
needless things, nor in a needless manner: And some public Friends from hence,
are going for England in the service of Truth, and more to go, and they will be
grieved to see Friends Children stain the Truth, by attiring themselves not in
modest Apparel, and it would also be a great grief to me, if my Children should
be some of them. And therefore look to it, I charge you, in God's holy fear,
that you may be warned and escape the dangers that do attend Youth, and be
preserved out of all the Snares of the Evil One, for they are many: And by this
you may see, that I do remember you; and the breathing of my Soul is daily for
you, and for all my Relations; and to them at Farringdon and Charney and
Goosey, and all the rest of Friends there-abouts, mind my Love to them all as
opportunity is, and let them know, that the Lord God of my Life and the length
of my Days, is still exceeding good unto me, and enables me by his Power to do
his Service, and blessed be his holy Name, his precious Reward is with me, and
that causes my Soul to rejoice, and makes my Heart more glad, than the greatest
increase of all outward things: Oh that it may be so with you, that your
delight may be to serve him, according to your measures, that you may clearly
see (by the bright shining of the Light) the vanity and folly of needless
things in Apparel, and to lean after the World's vain unsettled Fashions, is so
far from being comely or an Ornament to any professing Truth, that it is great
cause of shame for any such to wear it: and I am certain, that if you keep to
the Gift of Christ's Spirit, that is given you to teach you to profit, and to
lead you into all truth and plainness) I say, that I am sure that if you
hearken to the Spirit of Christ in your own Hearts, that then these needless
things aforenamed, and foolish Fashions of the World will become a burden to
you, as they are to me, and then you would be soon weary of them, and of all
that is needless; round Attire upon the Head, set up aloft, nor long Ears to
Linen Dressings: I desire, that the Lord may lay it home to your
consideration. And you may also hereby know, that I have had not one well Day
nor Night since I came here; but I am not worse than I was at home. I have
traveled Three hundred Miles and upwards in this Nation of Ireland, and am now
going for the North: I have been often very like for death, but have not lain
by it yet, blessed be the Lord.

I am uncertain when I shall be clear to rereturn, but I intend to go no
further than I have a necessity, because of the weakness of my Body, and the
Winter drawing on, it is hard for me to travel; but the Lord is exceeding good
unto me, beyond what I am able to express. My dear love to all Relations and
Friends. I rest

Your dear Mother, J. V.
From Dublin, 18. 9 Mo. 86.
An Epistle to Friends.
Dear Friends,
IN the Covenant of Life, unto whom the Lord in his unspeakable love has done
so bountifully by, as to reveal his Son in us, visiting our Souls when in a
lost condition and could find no comfort: Oh let his Mercies never be
forgotten, and the consideration of his tender dealing abide with us: and let
the renewings of his tender Mercies, both Spiritual and Temporal, give us fresh
occasions to renew our obedience; for if we abide in the consideration of his
love, we cannot but be tendered in the sense of the same, and brought thereby
into true subjection to the sanctifying Power, by which we have been and are
preserved, notwithstanding all the dangers that has or do attend: Oh the
Excellency of the Power! it is so precious unto a Remnant, that we have
continual cause to glorify our heavenly Father, with all, and over all, for he
is worthy; and if it be with Life and all, it is but our reasonable service; and
those that will save that alive that is to die, do thereby deprive ^^emselves
of Life eternal: and therefore we have all need to dwell low in the
self-denying Spirit, and the daily Cross, that we^ may still enjoy the
convincing Power, that we may travel on in our heavenly Progress with Valor
and Courage, those few days that are to come, in which we may expect many
Troubles: But living Praises to the God of our Lives and Length of our Days, in
him we find that Peace, that Man cannot give nor take from us, and in Christ
Jesus; our Life is hid from all that are in darkness, and under the shadow of
death: and because the Son of God lives, our Souls lives to praise his worthy
renowned Name, his Eternal Power that has been manifested to tender our Hearts,
and to bring us into subjection to so good a Master, daily nourishes and
enriches our Souls with the reward of Life in our Bosoms, which causes us to
say with the Prophet, One day in his Courts is better than a thousand
elsewhere. And surely it is better to be a Doorkeeper in the House of God,
than to dwell in the chiefest Palaces of the wicked: Oh how goodly are the
Tents of Jacob, where we find safety in times of need; as we abide in Covenant
with Jacob's God, we have cause to rejoice as Israel did, when the Rock that
followed them was Christ Jesus, the Rock of Ages, the sure Foundation of the
Faithful, the Hiding Place, as the shadow of a mighty Rock in a weary Land, to
shelter the weary Travelers by the way; the streams of Shilo, that runs so
sweetly to comfort the comfortless, and to strengthen the weak, and relieve the
thirsty Souls: Oh how sweet are Shilo's Brooks, where no Gally with Oars can
pass, where the Water of Life flows softly, but sweetly, without any thing that
flesh and blood can do, for that avails nothing in our heavenly Journey: and
therefore to be had in no reputation, but to be daily denied, and the Cross
taken up, and following of Jesus faithfully and fully toward the Crown, which
is the blessed Recompense for us to look unto, that we may run the Race that is
set before us in patience, that in the end we may obtain the Mark of the Prize
of the High-Calling that is in Christ Jesus, which is a Mystery to those that
do not obey him, but a sweet benefit to them that do obey his Call; for they
are chosen ones, a peculiar People, zealous of good Works, glorifying our
heavenly Father. And here we come to know that Scripture fulfilled, where it is
said, You shall call upon me in times of trouble and I will deliver, and you
shall glorify me. Oh that all the convinced ones, for whom I am so often
concerned, would but consider, that all that are amongst us, might be of us, in
glorifying God, by answering the Divine Requirings of his Love; for we all know
sufficient, but all do not obey; but yet the unfaithfulness of some do not make
void the Reward of the Faithful, God forbid; but the Reward encourages them to
invite all to taste and see for themselves how good the Lord is: for he is
communicating of fresh supplies of his tender Love, and Soul-refreshing Life,
undeclarably unto them that fear him, and dare not offend him: and so loves
him, as to keep his Commands; them he will make partakers of his precious
Promises, for he promised never to leave nor forsake his, and to be with them
at their down-lying and up-rising, and at all times both day and night; and as
we keep covenant with him, he will be with us, and we shall be with him that
lives for ever to give Life to us, who waits upon him, and that we may have it
more abundantly, that we may live to his praise, though amongst a crooked
Generation, who do daily provoke the righteous God; surely the crying sins of
the ungodly have long cried for vengeance in the ears of the mighty God of
Heaven and Earth, and his just Judgments will suddenly find them out: and then
if Daniel, Noah and Lot were there, they shall deliver none but their own
Souls: And therefore we have cause to be concerned as Lot was in Sodom, that we
may be Preachers of Righteousness in our Lives and Conversations, that as the
wicked do dishonor and grieve the Lord, we may be the more careful to honor
and glorify him, by bringing forth much Fruit, for his delight is in such, and
if we abide in Christ Jesus, the true Vine, then shall we be fruitful in every
good Work; for he is the Root from whence we receive Virtue, else we should
wither and soon decay: but blessed be the Root from whence we receive Sap and
Daily Relief: Oh that it may lie always upon our Branches, that we may bring
forth Fruit in due season, and blossom as the Rose of Sharon, and grow as the
Lilly of the Valley, yielding a good savor in our words and actions, that
whether together or asunder, we may be one another joy and crown of rejoicing
in the Lord Jesus, in whom our fresh Springs are, who is the Fountain of all
our Mercies, whose Streams makes glad his whole City, who relieves and
replenishes our Souls, and gives us many fruitful Seasons, and makes our Souls
partakers of the early and latter Rain, and of his eternal Spirit, wherein is
the Bond of Peace, in which the Lord God of all our Mercies, keep us all near
unto himself, and one unto another, that through the enjoyment of the same, we
may magnify his eternal Power, and Praise his most holy Name, for it is worthy
to be honored and renowned over all, and that for ever more, Amen, says the
Soul of your dear Sister, in that which reaches over Sea and Land,

Joan Vokins.
Written at Droghedah in Ireland, the 27. 9 Mo 86. Friends here are well, and
in the enjoyment of Peace and Plenty, blessed be the Lord, and Meetings large
for the most part, and Friends unanimously concerned in the Service of Truth,
as in the beginning, and keep their Zeal for Truth, and delights to live in it.



Here follows a Paper that was printed in 1687, Entitled, A Tender Invitation
unto all those that want Peace with God, by reason of the burden of Sin that
keeps them from acceptance with the Lord Jesus, and from an assurance of
Salvation, though it be very desirable to them.
OH it is the weary and heavy laden that he tenders rest unto, and they that
take heed to his good Spirit which is light, and leaves off that which it
condemns, and follows its Instructions, they obtain the way of Life, and he
becomes their Shepherd, and they hear his Voice, and a Stranger they will not
hear; but they follow him; and he feeds them with that which the Strangers to
his Voice, and hireling Shepherds cannot attain unto, by all their arts or
parts external; but it comes to be enjoyed by Faith in Christ Jesus, that gives
Victory over Sin, and therefore it is time for all People to consider; and as
the Apostle said, To try and examine themselves, whether they be in the true
Faith or no; for there is no true Faith, but that which stands in the Almighty
Power, and that gives Victory over the Powers of Darkness; and without this
Faith it is impossible to please God; as it is left upon Record in the
Scriptures of Truth: So all is to believe in the Son of God, who is the light
of the World, and has enlightened every one that comes into the World, as says
the Scripture; and in the universal love of God, he gave his Son for a Light to
enlighten the Gentiles, and to be Salvation unto the ends of the earth, and he
died for all; and his Love so far extended unto all, both Male and Female, that
he would have none to perish, but that all by turning to his good Spirit, may
be saved from all that the evil Spirit leads into, for whosoever follows the
leadings of the Spirit of Jesus, who is given for a Leader of his People, he
leads them in the Path of Righteousness, and as they come to be Servants of
Righteousness, they come to be free from Sin; but its written in the Scriptures
of Truth, that the Servants of Sin are free from Righteousness, and they that
commit Sin are of the Devil, for he is the Original of Sin; but Jesus Christ is
the Original of the pure and holy undefiled Religion, that keeps from the Evil
of the World, which is Pride, Adultery, Lying, Cheating, and Idolatry, and
Superstition, and other Spots that those are stained with, who are not
acquainted with him, that said, I Wisdom leads in the midst of the Paths of
Judgment, to cause them that love me to inherit Substance; there is much
talking of loving him, but few inclined to keep his Commands; and much talking
of his fear, but little standing in awe, so as not to offend him: but so far
are many from taking heed unto the measure of his Spirit of Light, as he has
placed in their Hearts, that they do not know it leading them to the
heart-cleansing fear; For if they did, how could they plead for Sin, so long as
they remain in these Bodies; whereas it has been said by the Spirit of the
Lord, and left upon Scripture Record, that the fear of the Lord, is as a
Fountain of Life, to depart from the Snares of Death: and the beginning of the
true Wisdom, and a good Understanding, have all they that follow after it, for
they depart from iniquity; and it cleanses the heart, and keeps it clean,
according to the Testimonies the Scriptures bears Record of; and therefore unto
it I recommend all People, that all may have the privilege of it, that their
Hearts may be cleansed; for it is well known, there is no Repentance in the
Grave, but as Death leaves, righteous Judgment will find: and therefore let the
long suffering and patience of the Lord lead to Repentance, such a Repentance
that needs no repenting of, a changing of the heart, abstaining and retraining
from every appearance of evil: this is that which the Lord has long waited
for, and does yet wait to be good and gracious unto all those that confess and
forsake their evil thoughts, words and works, and they shall surely find Mercy
with him, and be acquainted with him, and feel acceptance with him, and know
the work of his sanctifying power, to sanctify throughout in Body, Soul, and
Spirit, that the works of sanctification may not be to do when the Messenger of
Death will not be denied, for then it will be too late to work out our
salvation with fear and trembling: and therefore it would be good for all to
consider, how good the Lord is, in that he has considered the frailty of all
flesh, and has given unto every one a measure of his good Spirit, to help our
Infirmities, and to teach us: But if we neglect this Gift of God, we shall be
unexcusable in the Day of Account, and he will be clear of us all; and
therefore let all be diligent to hear the Word of Reconciliation, that the work
thereof may be experienced, for it begets again unto God, those that were afar
off, and when the work of Regeneration is witnessed, and the Birth of the Water
of Life, and Spirit of Jesus; then the new Creature that avails with God, comes
to be in unity and peace with him, and then the Spirit of Jesus bears witness
to the Spirits of such, that they are the Children of the Lord, but except a
being born again, there can be no entering into the Kingdom; for the first Birth
cannot enter into the first Adam's Nature, all are dead, but they that are
begotten again by the Word of God's power, as the Scripture testifies, they
come to be changed into the Nature of the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven,
the quickening Spirit, in him all such are made alive, and as they live in his
fear, and do not grieve his Spirit, their sufficiency is in the engrafted Word
of his Grace that is able to save, and in the same do witness preservation, as
in the days of old; it is the same that David hid in his heart, that he might
not sin against the Lord, and it was as a Lanthorn unto his feet, and a light
unto his paths: And so it is now, blessed be the Name of the Lord, unto them
that are truly watchful in it; but those that are obeying the power of
darkness, breaks the Command of Christ Jesus; and it is left upon
Scripture-Record, that he did not say only unto one, but unto all, watch; and
surely it is as needful as ever for us to keep a narrow watch, and that in the
Light; for our Souls Enemy works always in the dark, and except we keep a
continual watch over our hearts, in that which does discover his Snares, we
cannot escape: and so let all that have any sense, that it is their Duty to
wait upon the Lord; be careful to keep the Command of watchfulness, that the
Enemy, nor any of his Instruments, do not prevent from waiting in stilness upon
the Lord, for he does renew the strength of them that do truly wait upon him,
and the Lord by his Servant has said, That they shall run and not be weary,
and walk and not faint; and now he is fulfilling the Scripture, wherein it is
said, The children of the Lord shall be taught of the Lord, and they shall be
established in righteousness, and great shall be their peace. Oh let all that
want it hearken unto the true Shepherd of the little Flock, for whom the
Kingdom is prepared, who encourages them, and bids them fear not, though the
Wolfish destroyer is nigh unto them; yet he is the Overseer, and in all Trials
and Exercises he is their preservation; and them that have been exercised
deeply, and tried thoroughly, they can tell of his wonderful works, and have
cause to speak well of his most worthy Name, and to invite others to come and
taste and see for themselves, how good the Lord is, in that he gives all a time
of tender Visitation. Oh! that all People would but consider it before it be
too late, that while the good Spirit of Light is striving, their hearts may be
affected with it, and joined to it, for it will not always strive; and
therefore let such as could not come into Obedience because of Sufferings, now
consider how good the Lord is, in that he has calmed the storms of
Persecution, and opened a door for such as are convinced to come into
Obedience; let them now perform what they promised to the Lord, when they were
looking to see what the Lord would do with his poor despised People (called
Quakers) for, said they, it is the Truth that they suffer for, but we cannot
suffer for it; the Sufferings is too hard for us to bear, else we should own
it. Oh! let all such truly consider the wonderful love of God, his tender mercy
may not be disregarded, nor his great love undervalued, but let every such a
one double their diligence, and make no delays, for delays in this weighty
concern are very dangerous; for who knows how little time they have to come, or
what it may bring forth; therefore that the present time be not ill spent, but
while it is to day, if any will hear his voice, let them not harden their
hearts, as it was in the day of provocation: For many are the invitations of
the great love of God, and if it be slighted, he will certainly withold his
Mercies; and therefore we have great need to embrace his love, that we may not
provoke him to wrath, for he is just, and will render unto all people according
to their doings.

Joan Vokins.
West-Chawlow, 14 of (...) third Month, 168^*
A Testimon^ (...) work of God's Power.
Because of the mavelous love of God in Christ Jesus, I cannot conceal my
Testimony for the wonderful work of his Eternal Power that has been admirably
manifested in my poor Soul and weak frail Body, and if I should not leave a
short Testimony of it to Posterity, I should be very ungrateful; and I pray God
that the sin of Ingratitude may not be laid heavy on any of us professing
Truth, when the Messenger of Death calls, but that while we live we may live in
subjection to his Almighty Power, that when we die, we may seal our Testimonies
thereunto in true submission, and receive the blessed reward of the faithful.

OH what tongue can declare, the wonderful loving kindness of the Lord, as is
experienced by those that obey his Commands; Surely that is the way to abide in
his love, and his great love has been so largely manifested to me, that it has
engaged me so to love him again, as to forsake the Worlds Glory, Customs, and
Fashions, Vanities, Elements, Traditions, and Superstitions, and to take up my
Daily-Cross and follow Jesus through the many Tribulations: But blessed be his
worthy Name; he has filled my cup with his sweet consolations; and caused me
to say, that one day in his Courts, is better then a thousand elsewhere; and I
had rather be a door keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the
pleasantest palace of the Wicked: For until I through tender mercy, had unity
with Jesus in his divine Spirit of Light, my Soul could have no true
satisfaction, though never so self-righteous, but when the heart-searching
Light made manifest my condition, my heart was so affected with it, that I
still desired the operation of the power of it; and as I came to watch in the
measure of it, I became aware of the enemy, and through Faith in Christ Jesus
obtained a waiting state; which could not be obtained by me, but as I felt the
Almighty Power to rebuke the subtle enemy that lies so nigh, but as we are
commanded to watch, we find great benefit by keeping that command. And
magnified be that wonderful power that has preserved in dangers deep, and
difficulties many; there is nothing too hard for it to do, it has often rebuked
the destroyer, and helped the helpless, and strengthen the weak, and supported
the needy, and as we have waited for it, we have been partakers of the arising
of it, to our comfort, when our Souls have been in a desolate condition, when
we cold not help our selves, nor had none to help us: Oh! how has it wrought
by Sea and Land, among false Brethren; it has so signally preserved and
wrought deliverances many, sometimes by ways unexpected; surely its worthy to be
trusted in, and depended upon, and magnified as it has been manifested, my
Soul has cause to say to the Honor and Renown of it, for its perfect strength
has been my support in every great weakness, and in its strength I have
traveled many thousands of Miles by Land, and many thousand Leagues by Sea,
through many and sore exercises, both inwardly and outwardly, and it has
raised my Soul from Death, and my Body many times from the brink of the Grave:
oh let it have the honor of its own Works, says my Soul; for it is worthy,
for it will make the strong to bow, and the weak to be as David, and it is
worthy to be extolled in a wonderful manner, for no heart can be too much
affected with it, there is al-sufficiency in it, to relieve the poor and to
encourage the feeble: though there be much to be met with in our Heavenly
prayers, yet here is a sure defense in stormy times, wherein (glory unto it) I
have found shelter, when many times in a weary condition by reason of exercise
of Soul and Spirit, and weakness and pain of Body: Oh! how many hundred Miles
have I traveled in this the Land of my Nativity, and thousands elsewhere, in
such a condition, not having many well Days in many Years together, but yet
have good cause to say, (to the honor and renown of the sanctifying power of
the God of my life) blessed be the Lord Jesus, his Rod and Staff has comforted
me, and he is always with me, and I have cause to admire the tender dealing of
my Heavenly Father, for he has exercised me in the deep, and made his wonders
known. And I have cause to speak well of his worthy Name, for it has been as
ointment powered into my poor wounded Soul, and it was also so much comfort and
strength to my weak body, that I can tenderly invite others, to come and taste
and see how good that name is that brings salvation, that those that desire for
it, may obtain it; for as the heart comes to be bowed unto the powerful Name of
Jesus, and the Soul and Spirit comes to be gathered into a sense of the great
love of God; there will then be felt a necessity to serve and obey the God of
all our Mercies. And this was with me when in great weakness, when temptations
came in as a flood, and the buffetings of the enemy was ready to overcome; Oh
Blessed and Magnified, and Renowned over all, be that Everlasting Power, that
wrought a resignment so effectually, and caused me to cast my care upon him,
that always cares for his children, who is the holy one, and dwells in the
highest Heavens, and takes regard to them of low degree, for he has been more
to me, then all that this World can produce, and has fulfilled many precious
Scriptures; and has not been wanting as a tender Father, but his mercies of
old, and the continuation of his favors, and the renewing of his tender
dealing, have deeply obliged me to glorify him unto the end, and in the end
for evermore, for he is worthy, for he has redeemed my Soul from out of the
grave of Sin and Death; and now may I say to the praise, and honor, and renown
of his powerful Name, that to live is Christ, and to die is so much gain, that
my soul is deeply affected in a true Consideration of the same; oh that my
posterity and friends for whom my soul has so long breathed and traveled may
be so concerned, that every one may be made partakers of the like precious
faith with me, while on the stage of this World, that we may leave a faithful
Testimony behind, that the generations to come may be induced thereby to fear
and serve the Lord, for he is a sure rewarder of all them that are diligent in
so doing, not only in this Wor^^ but in that which is to come with Life
^^^^^^sting, World wtthout end, Amen.

Joan Vokins.

This was written a few Months before her decease, about the 1st Month, 1690.

To William Cooper and his Wife, dwelling in West-Jersey near Delaware-River
not far from Burlington. These are
DEar and tender friends, William Cooper and M. my love in the unchangable
Truth salutes you, and in the same I still desire your welfare as my own, with
all that holds fast their integrity, and retains their first love, they are as
near and dear unto me as ever, and my entire love truly reaches to them all,
and so I desire thou may let them know, if they have received my Letters and
Epistles, for I have sent several, but my kindsman dying by the way, makes me
question whether what I sent did ever come to any of your hands; for I sent to
you, and to S. Spicer, and to Lidia Wright (as was) and to her Husband, and to
her Sister Mary Andrews, and to several others in Pensilvania side, as well as
on that side, and I should be very glad to hear of your welfare in the Lord
Jesus, for that my soul still travels as truly as when I was amongst you. Oh
that your faithfulness and living obedience may engage our Heavenly Father to
answer the breathing desires of my Soul, for you in those remote places; for I
cannot forget you, but the cry often runs through me for your preservation and
prosperity every way, and that the honor of Truth and the good one of another
may be preferred far more then all other things, that our nearness and dearness
unto our tender God, and one unto another may be felt and witnessed, that we
may praise his worthy Name, and magnify his preserving and delivering Power,
for it has been largely manifested, may a little remnant truly say, that has
known the wonderful works of our God to admiration: Oh we have great cause to
speak well of his Name, and to remember his mercies of old, and to hold the
continuation of his favors in great esteem, and blessed be the Lord Jesus, he
has not been wanting to us, but his renewed Mercies daily, are sufficient to
deeply engage us to renew our faithfulness and obedience, that our heavenly
Father may be pleased to continue and multiply his tender dealings toward us,
that whatever is yet to come, may never be able to separate us from the sense
of his love, or from the seasonedness of his holy fear, or from that cementing
life, that joins us as Members unto Christ our Head, that if Trials should
abound, we may all feel the Love and Life of Jesus to super-abound, that every
bitter Cup that is yet to come may be sweetened, and all hard things made
easy, and we encouraged to travel on in our heavenly progress, keeping a
narrow watch in the precious Light, and diligently waiting in the same, that we
may be filled with heavenly Treasure, for all other is very uncertain: And we
here do meet with a sufficient share of many and variable Exercises; neither do
I expect, that you there do go free; but this is that I do desire above all
things, even your living growth in the precious Truth, and that you may endure
to the end; for they are assuredly happy, and a blessed Reward is prepared for
them: And in a living sense of the same, the Lord God of our Lives keep us
here, and you there, that our Breathings may be continued one for another, that
we may be refreshed one in another, and praise the God of Heaven and Earth
together, (in his one Eternal Spirit) as with one Heart and Soul, for he is
worthy to be had in living remembrance, and his pure power to be magnified and
renowned over all; and unto it I commit us all, for it is over all, and worthy
to have the disposing of us all; and with it I leave all, for there is nothing
too hard for it to do, and it is worthy to be exalted over all Heaven and Earth,
and that for evermore, says the Soul of

your loving Sister in the unchangeable Truth, Joan Vokins.
London, 28. 4 Mo. 90. POSTSCRIPT.
HEre have been a very precious time of heavenly Bedewings at our General
Meeting at this Season, as at many other times, blessed be the God of Heaven
and Earth, his Power has filled the Assemblies of his People; and the
remembrance of you and other remote Islands is signified by Epistles that were
Signed at our Women's Meetings, and ordered to be sent to you, when opportunity
presents, that you may rejoice with us, and joy in the God of your and our
Salvation, in and through Christ Jesus, who lives and abides to make
intercession for us, his poor helpless ones, who have had no helper but him: Oh
glory to his Name for ever, he has been with us in many Troubles, and gives us
cause to believe he will be with us for ever: And unto his tender care do I
commit all our States and Conditions; for fresh and suitable Supplies comes from
him, the Fountain of all our Mercies, to whom be returned the Honor and the
Glory over all, for he is worthy for evermore.

The Lord my God, in his great goodness to me, (after a long time of weakness)
has enabled me, by his Power, to come once more to this Yearly Meeting, to be
refreshed among his worthy ones, and could do no less then cast my Mite into
the Treasury. And when the Epistle comes, as is directed, to West and
East-Jersey and Philadelphia, I entreat thee and thy Wife to let Copies be sent
to York and Long Island.

J. V.



To Antegua and Nevice, etc.
G. W.
DEar Friend, after the Salutation of my Dear Love, which truly reaches to
thee, thy Wife and Friends, This is to let you know, That I cannot forget you
in those remote Islands, but have been often concerned for you in a Travel of
Soul before the Lord, and now having this opportunity (after a long time of
bodily Weakness) to visit Friends at London, I can do no less than let you
know, that, through tender Mercy, I am yet alive, to tell of the Goodness of
the Lord, and to admire the Works of his Almighty Power, and to speak well of
his worthy Name, (for Glory and Honor and Praises thereunto) he is the same as
ever, and his Mercies, and the continuation of his Favors, are never to be
forgotten, and his renewed Goodness and Mercies, both Spiritual and Temporal,
are daily sufficient to engage us to renew our faithfulness and obedience unto
our tender God. Oh that thus it may be with all that he has been so good unto,
as to bring near unto himself and one unto another, who were once afar off from
the Fellowship of the Saints in Light: but blessed be the Lord, who has caused
his Light to shine in our Tabernacles, and showed us the way that we should
walk in; and now Christ Jesus is our Life and Salvation, and he fills our Cups
with sweet Consolation; and as many as do walk in the Light have fellowship one
with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin, and purifies
and fits the Earthen Vessel for the Heavenly Treasure; and the excellency of
the power is of the Lord, and the Glory over all is his, and he is near unto
them that seeks his Glory more than their outward Interest, and he will fill
their Treasuries with this heavenly Treasure, and so as we follow him, we
inherit substance, and have no more need to wander, as in the days past, after
Husks and Shadows, but to keep to the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls; for
blessed be his Name, he feeds us in the green Pastures of Life, and causes us
to lie down by the still Waters, when the raging Sea foams out Mire and Dirt:
Oh this is he that led Israel in the days of old, and never said to the Seed of
Jacob, Seek ye my Face in vain. And therefore, dear Friends, we have cause to
say, to the praise of his holy Name, That goodly are the Tents of Jacob, and
blessed is his dwelling place; for its within the munition of Rocks, where our
Bread is ever sure, and the Water of Life never fails, where the weary finds
sweet repose, and the thirsty are refreshed, and where our Souls feed together,
when our Bodies are far asunder. So therein the Lord preserve us and you unto
the end, that he may have the Honor and our Souls the Benefit for evermore.

And by this thou may know, that we have had a precious time here at London,
at our Yearly Meeting, and many precious Testimonies have been born by Sons and
Daughters, to the Almighty Power of God, that have filled the Assemblies of his
People: Oh how have the Heavenly Dew distilled upon our Branches, and brought
forth Fruit that reaches unto you in these Islands, and I dearly desire it may
be pleasant to your taste, that we may be refreshed one in another, and be one
another joy and rejoicing in the Lord Jesus, and that the Epistles of Love
that were Signed here at our Yearly and Quarterly Meetings, may induce you to
Write again, that you there, may have a correspondency with Friends here, in
the Work and Service, that our God has called us unto, that Spiritual Fruits
may be brought forth and abound in all the Churches, for our heavenly Father
who delights in those that brings forth the Fruits of his Spirit, and every
Member that brings forth Fruit to his praise, he purges and waters with the
Seasons of his early and latter Rain, and causes them to bring forth Fruit more
and more. And so the Dew of the Everlasting Hills rest upon you and us and upon
all the Heritage of God every where, for evermore Amen, says the Soul of

thy true Friend and Sister, in that which reaches over Sea and Land, as length
of time cannot wear out, JOAN VOKINS.
I hope to hear from Nevice as opportunity to present, my Dear Love is to W.
Fifill's Widow, if yet alive, and to all the rest of those that are alive, that
loves the Truth and lives in it, for they are very precious to me.

J. V.


At London.
This was written soon after the Yearly Meeting, 1690. about the end of the 4th
or the beginning of the 5th Month, 1690.

THE END.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for and Sold by Thomas Northcott.
JOhn Burnyeat's Works, Price 2 s. 6 d.

G. Keith's Presbyterian and Independent, Visible Churches, in New England, and
elsewhere, brought to the Test, and examined, according to the Holy Scripture,
Price 1 s. 6 d.

-- His Way to the City of God, 1 s.

-- His Fundamental Truths of Christianity, Price 8 d.

Stephen Crisps Alarm sounded in the Borders of Spiritual Egypt, which shall
be heard in Babylon, Prince 3 d.

-- His Epistle concerning the Present and Succeeding Times, Price 2 d.

G. Fox the Younger's Works, Price 1 s. 8 d.

Elizabeth Bathursts Truths Vindication, Price 8 d.

Sam. Fisher's Works, Price 12 s.

William Tomlinson's Innovations of Popery, Price 6 d.

Buds and Blossoms of Piety, Price 1 s.

G. F's several Treatises, worthy of every true Christian's serious
Consideration, Price 6 d.

R. Barclay's Apology for the True Christian Divinity, Price 4 s.

There is now in the Press Robert Barclay's Works, which will be a Book of 12 s.


