The Word of the Lord to the Inhabitants of LEEDS.
OH Inhabitants of Leeds and the adjacent places belonging,
I am burdened in spirit till I write unto you, and you Rulers and Priests
thereof especially shall know in the day of the Lords account, that I set not
my hand to Paper till I was commanded of the Lord, the fire of whose jealousy
is kindled, though you are not yet come to the feeling of it, to burn and
consume the house of Esau which is as stubble, that his Servant Jacob, (whom
Esau for a time Lords over) may have the Inheriance in the purchased possession
where none can make afraid, and to give his Israel rest and deliverance from
under hard-hearted Pharaoh, in bringing him even all the Seed which is but one,
into the Land of uprightness which flows with milk and honey, that their souls
may be refreshed in the green pastures of love, and every one have rest under
their own vine, and rejoice in the paths of holiness for evermore.

And this is his work notwithwanding the hardness of your hearts, which in
tears I express unto you, and the Lord rebuke that spirit which cannot believe
in the spirit of Truth, which gives every particular who are obedient to feel
after Gods Righteousness and worship in Spirit and Truth, in the true
separation from the carnal, without which Friends you feel and enjoy, all
Profession is but sandy, and building thereon; the time is hasting on a pace,
that the overflowing Scourge must pass, and surely all that's not built upon
the Rock Christ Jesus will be thrown down; Therefore in plainness and in Gods
Love I exhort you to consider your standing, and try what spirit you are of,
and to what root you are grafted in, for such as the tree such is the fruit, if
the Root be holy the branches are holy; And the visitation of Gods Love is yet
to you that you may come to the feeling after him, that not any of you who as
yet are in Ignorance may perish for want of the true Knowledge, But to you that
yet sit in darkness and under the Region of the shadow of death light may
spring up, according to the promise, to work this effect, as it is witnessed by
all the Children of God, 2 Cor. 14. God who commanded light to shine out of
darkness has shined in our hearts, to give us the knowledge of the Glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ; And this is that (the Light) which you must
come as to a chief Cornerstone, which as yet is rejected by you who are of the
World, as is manifest by your practice, and the day is come wherein the Lord
abhors profession without the life and power of godliness, and his Sword of the
Spirit is drawn to cut down that which cumbers the ground, the briars and the
Thorns, which tears the fleece of the sheep; and scarce would suffer them to
live upon the earth.

O People and unwise, do you not know that the Lord has a controversy with
you for these things, and you that are in the Iniquity shall not escape
punishnent, though you join hand in hand, and make many covers from the
Scriptures, and plead for the Traditions and Customs of the Fathers, who lived
in Ignorance as well as you, and through the profession of a Law and the
Scriptures which was read every Sabbath day, crucified the just and did
dispightfully unto the Spirit of Grace, for this I speak in the Truth, that
your life is not according to the Scriptures nor the power of godliness; So
wait, be patient and consider your error, for in this it is partly
demonstrated by your particular acting toward me who am a witness against
your deeds. For thus it was to me, early in the morning upon the fourth day of
the first month, the Word of the Lord came unto me, (mine eyes spiritually
being on the Inhabitants of this place) Go speak unto them, You are a People
fitted for destruction, because you believe not in that which mortifies the
flesh, the Spirit of Truth is that which mortifies the flesh, and who believes
not in this, and waits not in this, destruction is of themselves; and the
Steeple-house sacrifice or service which is external, as the Priests manifests
does not work any thing unto this, the Redemption of the Soul; And when I came
into the Steeple-house he who is called a Pastor or a Minister was expounding
(as it is called) and after he had done, these words beforementioned came on me
to speak, and before I had them all uttered, they manifested themselves not to
be a Church but a Synagogue, according as it is Recorded in John 16. These things
have I spoken unto you that you should not be offended, The time shall come
when they shall cast you out of the Synagogue, so they did, and not only so,
but cast me into prison; And thou who is called the Pastor was speaking to the
people that though some did censure you, yet you were to be so charitable as
not to be violent to them, as even to squeeze blood out of them, or the like,
and then Imediately the little effect of thy words was seen, for as soon as I
had got the words of Truth spoken, away with me to prison; and where is your
charity in this, and what is this but violence, and even to squeeze blood out
of one, for what know you but by such dealings a tender body might be
destroyed, as several of the Innocent witnesses of God has been, for the
Testimony to Truth bearing, in the Prisons of England. And also John Sails
thou gave forth this Doctrine to the people, to feed upon, viz. That the
Ministers work is only to meddle with the external things, as the Sacraments
and the like, and to leave the work of the Spirit to Christ. O thou dark
Antichristian Minister, which never was made a Minister by God, according to
the Testimony wherein all the Ministers of Christ are, Acts 26.16. I have
appeared unto thee for this purpose to make thee a Minister and a witness of
the things which thou have seen, and of the things which shall appear unto
thee, delivering thee from the people and from the Gentiles unto whom now I
send thee, to open their eyes, and to turn them from darknnsse to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins,
and an Inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me; and
John 19.19. As thou have sent me into the World, even so have I also sent them
into the World; Mind this Pastor and People, Christ Jesus was not sent carnally
to meddle with external things, touching the Redemption of souls, but he was in
God Reconciling the world unto himself, preaching deliverance unto those who
was in captivity, and bringing the prisoner out of prison, the seed from under
the bondage and power of Satan, and says he, as thou have sent me into the
world, so have I also sent them into the world, and he prayed that they all
might be one as the Father was one in him and he in him, that they all may be
one in us, that the world might believe that thou have sent me; mark, here is
one cause of the unity, that the World might be convinced and believe the
Father sent him, and in the same message is his Ministers; But who can be
convinced and believe by such dark Pastors as thou art, and you Teachers of
the World generally are, who do not witness the unity with Christ and to be
sent by him only, to witness the work in the eternal, and not in the external
which is temporal? And so you are manifest here by this Doctrine, that you are
of the earth and first man in old Adams Transgression; and so keeps people in
the earth, in the letter and the corrupt, and this brings not people out of the
darkness into the light to sit together with Christ Jesus in the heavenly
places, into the unity of the faith to be refreshed together in Gods Spiritual
Worship, nor your Ministry brings not out of prison but keeps in prison,
contrary to Christ's, to which end the gifts was given by him who ascended up on
high, Ephesians. 4. and gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till all come to the unity of
the Faith, which gives the victory over the World, so over sin, contrary to
your dark Ministry; and to this end was the gifts given to be Pastors and
Teachers, to perfect the Saints, which now all your carnal Sacraments and
Rudiments cannot bring this to pass, viz. perfection in the Saints degree;
Then come and let us reason with you, To what purpose is all your Ringing of
Bells, dead prayers, dead Sermons, Bread and Wine, singing of David's
experiences, Baptizing with a little cold water, being all external things,
which cannot bring to perfect the Saints. I say in the fear of the Lord
consider, what is all these to purpose, and wherein does God require these
things at your hands, seeing you have excluded or separated your selves from
Christ's unity, and so your gifts are bought and sold with money, and may you not
well be called the Merchants of Babylon? Therefore O Royal Seed where ever thou
art, turn away from these, who through covetousness make merchandise of souls,
and are evidently separate by their life and Doctrine from the unity of Christ,
and so from his Ministry, for I show thee that first the power of the light of
Christ working mightily in them, delivers them from a people that sits in
darkness and evil; And then in the time of his love gives the command to them
as Ministers, as he did to Paul in the spirit, when he delivered him from the
persecuting state and dark condition, he sent him to this end, to open their
eyes, and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, etc. which now you Pastors and Ministers so called of Leeds, I charge you
to give an account of this Testimony, viz. your deliverance from the evil, the
pride, the covetousness, the envy, the drunkenness, the lasciviousness, the
feasting of the Rich, and neglecting the poor, the envy and the wrath that is
in the hearts of people, with all the works of the flesh, and that you are
Redeemed from these, and sent by God in the spirit to them to speak the mind of
Christ, without coveting any man's gold or silver, or else be silent for shame,
and come under the judgment, and first pluck the beam out of your own eye, and
then you may see the evil that is in others, which bondages their souls, and so
be profitable to them and not hurtful, till which be witnessed you cannot fly
from the judgment, but are the blind guides, and none but the blind are led by
you; So I beseech you in the spirit of love be warned, and let the light in
your own particulars search you, Rent your hearts, and strip you of every false
covering; This is a false covering, for you to be named Ministers of Christ,
and your work only external, This is a false covering for you to be called
Presbyterians, to lay on hands for the work of the Ministry, and call Elders,
when you never came yet to the babes estate, to desire the sincere milk of the
word, that you may grow thereby to become Elders in the Truth, whilst you have
been taking the letter for the Word, the Baptizing with outward water for the
Baptism of Christ, to give the name Christian, the Bread and Wine carnal for
the Supper of Christ, and the Light of Christ which is able to save to the
utmost all that come to God by him, the light, to be that of a natural
conscience, for the Scripture Records these to be in the power of the Spirit;
Therefore search the Scriptures and see whether these things be so, and you
finding them thus, be ashamed of your forms, and come to Christ the Light who
is the life of men, kiss him that judges, who is the Son of Righteousness,
least his wrath kindle speedily against you, and you be consumed from not being
a people because of disobedience.

And thou Martin Hyles who made this Prison much-what to put the witnesses of
God in which testify against deceit; Remember Hamans policy, wrath and envy
against the upright-hearted Jew, and what did that avail him in the end, or was
not he worse for that and not better? Take heed, in the dread of God I warn
thee to Repentance of thy past actions against the upright-hearted who worship
God in Spirit and Truth, the Righteous Seed, and let thy rashness be turned
into moderation, and thy spirit of fury into love and meekness. And if thou be
a Magistrate, be glad to defend the Innocent, and let true Justice pass upon
the workers of iniquity, for that's the Magistrates place, and this Greeting is
to thee Martin Hyles from thy prisonhouse, And to you all Rulers and Priests
in and about this Leeds, who live in the flesh, and worship not God in Spirit
and Truth, lay aside all superfluity of naughtiness, and let the time past be
sufficient for you to have persecuted the Innocent, and cause the People of God
by Creation to err, who as yet sit in darkness, by your lies and lightness,
pride and vanity, many are yet under your and kept in the Land of darkness, as
sheep scattered in the dark and cloudy day, And your selves with the lust of
your own hearts keep the witness under Deaths Dominion in the particular, And
so may not the dispersed of Israel say what good can be expected from such
Teachers and Leaders who themselves are in bondage to Satan the Prince of
darkness; may not a Lamentation be taken up in the true Prophecy concerning
this people, They build up Zion with blood and Jerusalem with iniquity, the
heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, the
Prophets thereof Divine for money, yet will they lean upon the Lord and say, is
not the Lord among us, none evil can come upon us, is not this your building,
is not this your practice? O Leeds, England and New England, therefore cease
from this wherein ye provoke the Lord to wrath, and let your right eye be put
out as concerning this, and your hand wither and become dead as touching this,
for what will it avail you to strive against the stream; For the Lord to his
People is become a place of Broad Rivers and stream of water, and if ever you
come to Redemption you must be plowed as a field, and separated with the Word
of God from your blood-thirstinesse, pride, arrogance and deceit, the workers
of which cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: Therefore come to the feeling of
the Just which tells you envy is of the Devil, pride and swelling words of
vanity and the lust of the eye is of the World, and not of the Father, and if
any man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him, take counsel at
the Spirit of God and weigh the thing, for this which expresses unto thee in
the love of the Father would not have your souls to perish; So if you love your
souls be obedient, and let not the enemy betray you through his wisdom in
keeping you from the sense of the new Creature, and in that old Adams state
imagines there can be no due order as to Government and Worship (in the
generation chosen out from you) but the living wisdom is made manifest in the
separation from the Worlds Idolatry, in which state our Officers shall be peace
and our Exactors Righteousness, our Judges restored as at the first, and our
Counselors as at the beginning: So the living order of Gods Spirit is not run
from but witnessed, And the Creature waits for the earnest expectation of the
Son of God, to be freed from the bondage of iniquity, and he is the Son of God,
the Light of the World, whom all the Kingdoms of the earth must become his, the
Lord Jesus Christ who is of power, authority and wisdom to Rule over all with a
Rod of iron, and this is that I would bring you up into, out of the carnal and
deceit, wherein is the strife, that in the obedience to the Just you may come
into the enjoyment of Gods Righteousness; And if you here contenin or speak
against this Government, the true sword of the Spirit may be turned against
you; so try your ways and come out of the pit of destruction, that the life of
Innocence you may feel, to partake of the Lambs mercy.

And you friends who are of the Seed, convinced with the Just in your own
particulars, and in stillness, the light in your hearts discovers unto you the
enmity of the unjust, and lets you see the evil of the World, the wickedness
of the times, so that whilst ye are mingled with the heathen which worship not
God in spirit and Truth, you are wrong, and the wrong is unrighteous which
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; Therefore O friends, join with the Righteous
principle that discovers unto you the wrong, the unrighteous, and herein is the
weight and the burden felt which must be cast off, that lets for running the
race of holiness, and the command is grievous to the disobedient but rejoicing
to the Just, he is near, the light, to give thee strength to come through the
power of darkness in your own particulars, then the powers of darkness without
you will be as ashes under the feet of the pure, and the living faith through
your steadfast love to the Truth will increase to purfie the heart and cleanse
your souls with the precious blood of the Lamb slain since the foundation of
the World, and this friends the salvation of your souls is more precious than
all the things of the earth; So in the love of God which would draw you unto
him, and give you a mansion in his house, be faithful and valiant, and look not
at the enemies advantages, which would draw from the least simplicity of the
Gospel to uphold his kingdom which must be thrown down, and the pure Authority
established, so fly not that which is to bring near into Gods love, the Cross,
the obedience unto Gods witness, who waits to lead thee up to the Land of the
living, hear his voice, the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world, and look not at names or Reproaches, but count them Riches, and all
names whatsoever the persons being not in the nature of Christ, there is
rottenness in the bones, and not a sweet savor unto God, which except Christ
the life be witnessed in the mortal body, the soul is under Deaths dominion; So
come forth and partake with the sufferings that thou may Reign with him in
the glorious state, Christ Jesus the Prince of peace, whose banner of love is
stretched forth to Redeem the captives of Judah, and restore the preserved of
Israel, Glory, honor and everlasting praises be given unto him by all the seed
in whom sin Reigns not in their mortal bodies, who are the saints of the most
high God.

Samuel Watson.

THE END.
LONDON: Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1660.


