THE REPAIRER OF THE Breach; A SERMON Preached at the Cathedral Church of
GLOUCESTER, May 29. 166^ being the Anniversary of His MAIESTY'S Birthday, and
happy Entrance into His Emperial City of LONDON.

By THOMAS WASHBOURN, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for William Leak, at the sign of the Crown in Fleet Street,
between the two Temple-Gates. 166^

To the High and Mighty MONARCH, CHARLES the Second, By the Grace of GOD KING of
Great BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most Gracious SOVEREIGN,
THAT I assume the boldness to tender this Sermon to your Sacred MAJESTY, is
not from any the least thought I had that it could be worthy Your reading, who
daily hear the best that the best Learned of Your Clergy preach in-Your Royal
Chapel; but being preached upon that Day which is now made Yours, because Your
MAJESTY on that Day was made Ours, first, by Your Birth; and then, by Your
happy Return to Your People; and being now printed at the importunity of some
of Your MAIESTY's Loyal Subjects that were my Auditors, as also by the
approbation of the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Gloucester, my worthy and
much honored Diocesan; I humbly offer it at Your MAIESTY's feet, hoping with it
to gain the favor of kissing Your MAIESTY's Hands, a favor which You have not
denied (such is Your Benignity and Condescension) to Your meanest Subjects,
though I have not yet been so happy as to obtain it. Not that I wanted an heart
ready with the foremost to wait upon Your MAJESTY, and bid you welcome home;
nor that I wanted the like desires and affections, perhaps without other men,
(for who is totally free from them) to reap some particular benefit in the
first fruits of the Churches Harvest, which till Your coming lay (as it were)
fallow for many years, yielding no increase to the true Proprietary. But as
Imperante Augusto natus est CHRISTUS, CHRIST was born in the Reign of Augustus;
so Imperante CAROLO renata esse Ecclesia CHRISTI, this poor Church of CHRIST in
England is new born, or rather raised from the dead, in the beginning of Your
MAIESTY's* Reign, 1 Cor. 8.
as if you were resolved to make good to us St. Paul's wish to the Corinthians,
Not to reign alone unless we also might reign with You, and share in Your
Triumphs as we had done in Your Sufferings. Some such thoughts, I say again, I
might be tickled with; for it is true, which that learned Knight Sir Robert
Cotton has observed in the life of Your Predecessor, HENRY the 3d, That in
every shift of Princes, there is none (either in Church or State) so mean or
modest, that pleases not himself with some probable object of preferment. But,
SIR, so wonderful, and beyond all expectation, was Your Restoration to Your
Kingdoms, that it struck me with astonishment, and I became like unto them that
dream. Great joy as well as great grief Genesis 45. 26.
over-whelm the spirits, as we read of the Patriarch Jacob. And in this
Deliquium or fainting fit I lay, whiles all sorts crowded to see Your MAJESTY,
and most of my Profession, (which had not bowed their knees to Baal, nor meddled
with them that were given to change, but feared God and the King, and suffered
with and for Your MAJESTY, and Your Royal Father of blessed memory) had
preferments answerable to their merits, before I had the opportunity only of
beholding Your MAIESTY's face; and even then I stood like Phaeton at his
fathers Court at an humble distance admiring his glories.

Ovid. Met. l. 2.
Consistitque procul: neque enim propriora ferebat Lumina.

My weak sight was satisfied with the reflex beams of Your MAJESTY afar off,
which at a nearer approach, and in a direct line, would have dazzled, if not
blinded my eyes. In this reverential posture I continued a good while, saying
within my self as Mephibosheth to David, Let them take 2 Samuel 19. 30.
all, forasmuch as my Lord the King is come again in peace unto his own house.
It will be honor and preferment enough for me, if I may be but owned by Your
MAJESTY for

Your MAIESTY'S most humbly devoted, THOMAS WASHBOURN.

The Repairer of the BREACH. A SREMON, etc.
Isa. 58. 12. And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places:
thou shall raise up the foundations of many generations, and thou shall be
called, The Repairer of the Breach, the Restorer of Paths to dwell in.
IT is an Observation made by the Royal Preacher, Eccles. 3. 1, 2, 3. To every
thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under heaven. A time to
plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted; a time to break down, and
a time to build up. Experience tells us it is so with men, and so with God too,
who is (...), the great Master Builder, the (...), or chief Husbandman, Joh.
15. 1. We find him planting his Church under the Parable of a Vineyard, Isa. 5.
1. fencing it and planting it with the choicest Vines, building a Tower in the
midst of it, verse. 2. And again, verse. 5. we find him resolved to pluck down
the hedge thereof, and break down the wall, and lay it waste. But how, or by
whom would he do this? Not by his own immediate hand from heaven, as he
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah; but by the hand of the Chaldeans, of whom the
Psalmist makes a grievous complaint to God, whether by way of Prophecy, as a
thing to come; or of History, as already past, is uncertain. Psalm. Vid. Dr.
Ham. in locum.
79. 1. O God, the Heathen are come into thine inheritance, thy holy Temple have
they defiled, they have laid Jerusalem on heaps. The Jews being by the just
judgment of God carried Captives by Nebuchadnezzar into Babylon, where they did
duram servire servitutem, endure a long and miserable bondage, began at last to
bethink themselves which way they might pacify Gods wrath, and recover his
favor; to which purpose they ord^ined solemn Fasts, Zech, 7. 5. When ye fasted
and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years, did ye at
all fast unto me, even unto me? And chap. 8. 19. there is mention of these two
months fast, and two more, the fast of the fourth, and the fast of the fifth,
and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth. But when they found
that for all their frequent fastings God was not appeased, nor they delivered,
they were moved to wonder and murmur at it, verse. 3. of this chapter, Wherefore
have we fasted, say they, and thou see not? wherefore have we afflicted our
soul, and thou take no knowledgt? Whereupon God commands his Prophet, verse.
1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people
their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. Let them know, that
their fasts, as they are compounded and made up of the bitter ingredients of
injustice and cruelty, strifes and debates, blood and rapine, would never be
pleasing to God; Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the
fist of wickedness, verse. 4. No, assure your selves, unless to your bodily
fast you join a spiritual, abstain from sin, as you do from meat, and give to
the poor what you spare from your own bellies; unless your acts of mercy and
charity consecrate your fasts to God, they will not be accepted by him, for
this is the fast that he has chosen, to lose the bands of wickedness, to undo
the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free; to deal thy bread to the
hungry, and bring the poor that are cast out to thy house, and when thou see
the naked to cover him, verse. 6, 7. And if this fast be truly and sincerely
kept, then the Prophet promises from the mouth of God, for the mouth of the
Lord has spoken it, verse. 12. that they shall enjoy all the happiness and
prosperity as their hearts can wish, their prayers shall be no sooner made than
heard and granted, verse. 9. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer;
thou shall cry, and he shall say, Here I am. Their sickness shall be turned
into health, their darkness into light, their ungodliness into
righteousness, their shame into glory, verse. 8. Then shall thy light break
forth as the morning, and thy health shall spring forth speedily, and thy
righteousness shall go before thee, the glory of the Lord shall be thy
rereward. And lastly, to come to my Text, Thou shall return from captivity to
thy own native Country, And they that shall be of thee shall build the old
waste places: thou shall raise up the foundations of many generations, and thou
shall be called, The Repairer of the Breach, the Restorer of paths to dwell in.

Division*
In the explication or unfolding of this portion of Scripture, I shall show,

1. What is meant by the waste places, the foundations cast down, the breach or
breaches, for I find the word rendered by Translators in the plural number.

2. By whom these waste places should be built, the foundations raised, the
breaches repaired, the paths restored, which is first expressed in the plural,
They that shall be of thee; secondly, in the singular, relating to some one
extraordinary and more eminent person amongst the rest, that should be most
signally and remarkably instrumental in the designing, ordering, and perfecting
this great and glorious work, Thou shall raise up the foundations of many
generations. Thou shall, etc.

3. The honor and dignity that should accrue to this singular and
superexcellent person for the same, in perpetuam rei memoriam, Thou shall be
called the Repairer of the breach, the Restorer of paths, etc.

Having cleared these points unto you as plainly and briefly as I can,
according to the literal sense; I shall easily and without any enforcement make
application to the time and occasion that has brought us here together.

And first, the waste places, and the ruined foundations, and the Jerusalem in
the letter, but of Christ's Church in the Type of figure. They that refer it
only to the former, as relating to the restoration of the Jewish Church, the
reparation of their decayed Temple and City by Zerubbabel, Ezra, and Nehemia,
are by St. Hierom termed, amici occidentis litera, friends of the St. Hierom
in locum.
killing or dead letter. But pace tanti viri by the Fathers leave, whiles we
hold the latter sense with him, we shall not let go the other, but take both
along with us, as the Text relates to them and us too.

True it was what the Psalmist spoke, Psalm. 79. 7. They have devoured Jacob,
and laid waste his dwelling place; and Psalm. 80. 16. It is burnt with fire, it
is cut down; that is, the City and Temple, which was beautiful for situation,
the joy of the whole earth, Psalm. 48. 2. so beautiful, that he thinks it worthy
of all observation and admiration, verse. 12, 13. Walk about Sion, and go round
about her, tell the towers thereof, mark well her bulwarks, consider her
palaces, that ye may tell it to the generation following. That famous City,
that glorious Temple, with the Towers, the Bulwarks, the Palaces thereof, were
totally demolished, cast down, destroyed, the inhabitants, as many as escaped
the sword and the famine, carried captive into Babylon, where they continued
seventy years, and with tears in their eyes bewailed the miserable desolation
of their Church and State, Psalm. 137. 1. By the waters of Babylon we sat down
and wept, when we remembered Sion. He must have a heart of flint, as hard as the
nether millstone, that could think upon Sion in this condition as she was, and
not dissolve and melt into a shour of tears. We sat down and wept; whereupon
St. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 136.
St. Chrysostom, (...), they do not slightly mourn, or take on a little, but
make it their business, their eyes vying with the Rivers of Babylon which
should most overflow their banks.

In what a lamentable case were Gods people all this while, when not only
maenia Jerusalimae, as Vatablus understands it here) the walls of Jerusalem,
but fundamenta Ecclesiae and Reipublicae, the very foundations of Church and
Commonwealth were not only sh ken, but shattered to pieces, and the children
of Edom had now their desire, when they cried, Down with it, down with it even
to the ground; or as the last Translation reads it, Raze it, raze it even to
the foundations thereof, verse. 7. of the same Psalm. The King and the Priest,
the Lords and the Commons, all were made Prisoners and captives, from him that
s^te on the Throne, to her that grindeth at the mill, God delivered his
strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemies hand, Psalm. 78. 61.

And now are we not ready to expostul^te in the words of the 80 Psalm. verse.
12, 13. Why have thou then broken down her hedges, so that all they that do
pass by the way do pluck her? The Boar out of the wood does waste it, and the
wild beast out of the field does devour it. Why haste thou suffered those great
Tyrants, the Kings of Assyria and Babylon to break in upon this thy Vinyard,
and root out the Vine which thine own right hand has planted? Why have thou
scattered us among the Heathen, so that they which hate us spoil our goods? The
answer is soon returned* The fault was not in the Lord of the Vineyard, who had
done what he could for it, planted it with his own hand, watered it with the
dew of his heavenly benediction, hedged it with his divine Providence; but the
fault was in the Vine it self, as he complains, Isa. 5. 4. When I looked it
should bring forth grapes, it brought forth wild grapes. What wild grapes? he
tells us, verse. 7. He looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for
righteousness, but behold a cry. And therefore it follows, verse. 9. Many
houses shall be desolate, even great and fair without inhabitant. This, this
was the cause that the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, that is, the house of
Israel, and the men of Juda his pleasant plant, was so eaten up, so trodden
down, verse. 5. This was the cause the Christian Church went to wrack by
persecution under Heathen Emperors, Almighty God making them his Rod to scourge
his backsliding people into repentance and better obedience; for we are not
unlike a child's Top, that never goes upright without whipping. Cyprian de
Lapsis.
So St. Cyprian speaking of the times of Decius, Quia traditam nobis divinitus
disciplinam pax longa corruperat, jacentem fidem and pene dixerim dormientem
censura coelestis erexit. Because long peace had corrupted the good order and
discipline of the Church, delivered to us by divine Authority, the wisdom of
God thought fit by the hand of his justice to awake the dull and drousie, and
almost dead faith of Christians. And from the same cause Eusebius derives the
Original of Dioclesians persecution, in whose words as in a glass we may see
the face of our own Eusebius. l. 8. Eccles. Hist. c. 1.
times, with all its deformities; take the Latin for want of the Greek,
Postquam vero res nostrae per nimiam libertatem ad mollitiem ac segnitiem
degenerarunt, and alii alios sunt odio and contumeliis prosecuti, etc. After
that our affairs through too great a liberty degenerated into sloth and
delicacy, and that one began to prosecute another with hate and contumely; and
when we our selves only opposed our selves with words of strife and
contention, when dissimulation and hypocrisy was grown to the height of
malice, Et qui pastcros nostri videbantur, repulsa pietatis norma matuis inter
se contentionibus fuerunt inflammati, etc. And they that were or pretended to
be our Pastors and Ministers, casting off the rule of piety, blew the coals of
discord among themselves till it grew to a flame, and every one made his own
ambition play the Tyrant as he listed; when such was the hardness of our
hearts, that we were not touched with any sense or feeling thereof, nor
endeavored to appease Gods wrath, but as if we thought God did not regard, and
would not punish our sins, but were such an one as the Heathen phansied him,
Nec ben pro meritis capitur, nec tangitur ira.
We ceased not to add sin unto sin, and then behold the divine judgment, after
its usual manner, began to visit us by degrees. Ita ut persecutio a fratribus
qui in militia erant exordia sumeret. So that our persecution took its rise and
beginning from our brethren that were in the militia; then, then I say,
according to that of the Prophet, Lam. 2. The Lord covered the daughter of Sion
with a clowd in his anger, and cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty
of Israel, and remembered not his footstool in the day of his anger. The Lord
swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, and has thrown down in his wrath
the strong holds of the daughter of Juda, he has brought them down to the
ground: he has polluted the Kingdom and the Princes thereof: he has increased
in the daughter of Juda mourning and lamentation, and he has violently taken
away his tabernacle, he has destroyed the places of the assembly. The Lord
has caused the solemn feasts to be forgotten in Sion, and has despised in the
indignation of his anger the King and the Priest.

By this we have discovered what is meant by the old waste places, the ruined
foundations, the breach or breaches that were made in the Israel of God, with
the reason thereof; which has opened my passage to my second Query.

Ex te erunt, And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places,
etc.

In the seventh chapter of Nehemia, there is a long catalogue of the people,
the Priests and the Levites, that had leave from the King of Babylon to go up
to Jerusalem and build the waste places, especially the Temple; their whole
number is computed to be forty two thousand three hundred and threescore, verse.
66. among whom the grandees or chief are expressed by name, verse. 7. and of
those I find most honorable mention of two above all the rest, (as upon whose
shoulders rested the main of the work) Nehemia and Zerubbabel; and therefore we
shall insist somewhat upon both, as we meet with them recorded in sacred story.

And first of Nehemias; He was cup bearer to King Artaxerxes, as he himself
tells us chap. 1. 11. and a great favorite he was, as appears chap. 2. for
when he (commiserating the miserable estate of his native country) presented a
cup of wine to the King with a heavy heart, which discovered it self in a sad
face, the King said unto him, Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not
sick? this is nothing else but sorrow of heart, verse. 2. To which Nehemia
replied, verse. 3. first, praying for the King, though a heathen, as his duty
was; then telling him the cause of his sadness, Let the King live for ever.
Why should not my countenance be sad, when the City, the place of my fathers
sepulcher, lies waste, and the gates thereof are consumed with fire? Then the
King said unto me; For what d st thou make request? verse. 4. It seems the King
was willing to grant him whatsoever he should ask in reason. Observe the piety
of the man, before he petitions the King, he makes supplication to the King of
heaven* and that was the sure way to speed, for the hearts of Kings are in the
hand of God; So I prayed (says he) to the God of heaven, and I said unto the
King, if it please the King, and if thy servant have found favor in thy sight
that thou would send me unto Juda, unto the City of my fathers sepulchers,
that I may build it. Whereupon the King dispatcheth him with a Commission and
credential Letters to the Governors beyond the River, that they might convey
him over to Juda, and with a Letter to Asaph the keeper of the Kings Forest,
that he might give him timber to make beams for the gates of the palace which
appertained to the house, and for the wall of the City, and for the house of
God, verse. 8. and to secure him by the way, (for they that enterprise good and
great designs, as this was, are like to meet with strong opposition) the King
sent Captains of the Army and Horsemen with him, verse. 9. Notwithstanding he,
like a prudent man, resolves to carry on the business more by policy than
power. He comes to Jerusalem, the Metropolis or head City of Judea, and was
there some time before he told any man what God h^d put in his heart to do at
Jerusalem, verse. 12. Then he takes a private survey of the ruined walls; and
when things were ripe for the work, he said unto the Nobles, the Rulers, the
Priests, and the rest of the people, Ye see the distress that we are in, how
Jerusalem lies waste, and the gates thereof are burnt with fire. Come and let
us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that we be no more a reproach. Then I told
them of the hand of my God which was good upon me. And they said, Let us rise
up and build. So they strengthened their hands for this good work, verse. 17,
18. Yet could not he with all his assistants carry on the work so smoothly* but
that he met with some disturbance, a phanatick party to hinder and oppose him;
and to head them, they had a notable Leader, one Sanballat, verse. 10. When
Sanballat the H^romite, and Tobiah the servant the Ammonite, heard of it, it
grieved them exceedingly, that there was come a man to seek the welfare of the
children of Israel. And therefore they fall first to jeer and scoff at them,
verse. 19. They laughed us to scorn, and despised us, saying, What is the thing
that ye do? But Nehemia answered, verse. 20. The God of heaven he will prosper
us, therefore we his servants will arise and build; but ye have no portion, nor
right, nor memorial in Jerusalem. From scoffs they proceed to secret plots and
force of arms, verse. 7, 8. But when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the Arabians,
and the Ammonites, and the Ashdoties, heard, that the walls of Jerusalem were
made up, and that the breaches began to be stopped, then they were very wroth,
and conspired all of them together to come and to fight against Jerusalem and
to hinder it. And this they contrived in a clandestine way, saying, They shall
not know, neither see, till we come in the midst amongst them, and slay them,
and cause the work to cease, verse. 11. Whereupon Nehemiah plays the part of a
pious and vigilant Commander, falling to his prayers, and setting a strict
watch, verse. 9. Nevertheless we made our prayer unto our God, and set a watch
against them day and night; and raised a new militia, verse. 13, 14. Therefore
set I in the lower places behind the wall, and on the higher places; I, even I
set the people after their families, with their swords, their spears, and their
bows. And I looked, and rose up, and said unto the nobles, and to the rulers,
and to the rest of the people, Be not afraid of them; remember the Lord is
great and terrible, and fight for your brethren, your sons and your daughters,
your wives and your houses. When all this would not make him desist, he
receives an intimation, that they intended to ass^ssinate his person, chap. 6
10. They will come to slay thee, yet he still retains his wonted courage,
saying, Should such a man as I flee? Thus he stood like a Colosius unmoved and
undaunted till he had done the work. And now we have found the man that in the
singular number may well be styled, Reparator ruinarum, the Repairer of the
Breach.

But can we find out never another? Yes* we have him Ezr. 1. 8. by the name of
Shesbazzar the Prince of Juda, or chief Governor deputed to that office by King
Cyrus, and commissionated to build the Temple, chap. 5. 14. and build he did,
verse. 16. Then came the same Shesbazzar and laid the foundation of the house of
God which is in Jerusalem. This Shesbazzar is the same with Zerubbabel, who as
a Prince is named in the first place among those that came from Babylon, as the
Captain General, chap. 2. 2. and chap. 5. 2. Then rose up Zerubbabel, etc. And
Hag. 1. 14. The Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel,
governor of Juda, etc. If we look into his genealogy, Matthew. 1. 12. we shall
find him like Moecenas descended from ancient Kings, Josias begat Jechonias,
and Jechonias begat Salathiel, and Salathiel begat Zerubbabel. This Zerubbabel,
whose spirit God stirred up to this grand employment, went through his work
with all alacrity and activity, Ezr. 3. he re-edifieth the Temple in despite of
all adversaries; the manner and means how it should be done by him is foretold,
Zech. 4. 6, 7. This is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel, saying, Not by
might, nor by tower, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of hosts. What art thou,
O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain, and he shall
bring forth the head-stone thereof with shoutings, crying Grace, grace unto it.
Two great blocks were in the way to discourage Zerubbabel in the work, the one
was the weakness of his party that should assist him, the other the strength
of the enemy that would oppose him.

First, The weakness of his own party, they were but a small remnant of the
poor captive Jews, whose spirits were dejected with their tedious servitude and
extreme oppression; and this might make Zerubbabel diffident of the event, and
reason thus against it: The work is great that we are to undertake, and our
strength but little, and therefore in all probability our endeavors are like to
be frustrated, and we to perish in the undertaking. To this God speaks, Not by
might, or army (as it is in the Margin) nor by power, but by my Spirit, says
the Lord of hosts. Know, this work is not to be effected by human help merely,
but by divine power; not by strength of man, but by the Spirit of God, whose
strength is made perfect in weakness; by his Spirit who is Lord of hosts, and
commands all the Armies of heaven and earth. Though you had no strength at all,
though you had no life at all left in you, though you were but an heap of dead
and dry bones, God can bring you together, put new life in you, and cause you
on a sudden to start up a numerous Army, as in Ezeki^ls vision, chap. 37. 10.
yea, though these bones were laid in the grave, covered never so deep in the
earth, God can raise you thence. To such a desperate condition was Israel
reduced at that time, that God was fain to quicken and revive their dead hope
by the parable of those dry bones, verse. 11, 12. Then he said unto me, Son of
man, these bones are the whole house of Israel: behold, they say, our bones are
dried, and our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts. Therefore prophecy
and say unto them* Thus says the Lord God, Behold, O my people, I will open
your graves, and cause you to come out of your graves, and bring you into the
land of Israel. The argument holds, a majori ad minus, he that can raise the
dead out of their graves, can bring you out of captivity. Nay more, not only
from dry bones, but from very stones God can raise up children unto Abraham,
rather than his Church should not be builded.

This block thus removed out of the way, the other yet behind was the mighty
power of Zerubbabels enemies, which is therefore called a great Mountain, and
he speaks unto it by an Apostrophe, as the more emphatical expression, Who art
thou, O great Mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain. Thou have
hitherto oppressed my people, and kept them in bondage: But beh^ld, I am against
thee, says the Lord, which destroyest all the earth; and I will stretch out
mine hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and make thee a burnt
mountain, Jer. 51. 25.

Before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain. Though thou art high and strong
as a great Mountain, seem in thine own eyes and others also irresistible,
invincible; thy pride shall be brought down, thy high looks abased, thy mighty
strength abated, thy huge and vast body laid level with the earth, and be made
a plain, so that all thy opposition shall be as nothing, and all difficulties
made plain and easy to Zerubbabel, by the power of my Spirit that shall
support him, and suppress all his opposers.

It follows, He shall bring forth the head stone thereof with shoutings,
crying, Grace, grace unto it; verse. 7. that is, He shall accomplish the
building with the joyful acclamations of the beholders, even to the wonder and
astonishment of his very enemies, that shall say and say again, Grace, grace
unto it. And not to it alone, but to us by it shall great grace and glory also
come; and that they did say so, the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 126. 2. Then said
they among the Heathen, The Lord has done great things for them; which the
Jews as their echo resounded back again, verse. 3. Yea, the Lord has done
great things for us, whereof we rejoice.

Lastly, The Prophet adds as a Corollary and confirmation of all, verse. 8, 9.
Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, The hands of Zerubbabel
have laid the foundation of this house, his hands shall also finish it;
statutum esse, it is a statute, a decree past in the highest Court of Heaven,
not to be reversed, that as Zerubbabel has begun the work, and laid the first
stone, the head-stone of the corner; so with a non obstante, maugre all
contradiction, he shall put to his last hand and complete the work.

Thus you see by whom this great work was effected.

Multorum manibus grande levatur onus, Many hands went to it, but two
especially, Nehemia and Zerubbabel, they were the principal instruments under
God for the carrying on of the same, and therefore both of them justly meriting
the style and title of honor and dignity that is here given in the Text, which
is my third point, Vocaberis reparator ruinarum, Thou shall be called, The
repairer of the breach, etc.

And indeed, what better, what nobler title can be bestowed Quanto honestius
est principi si reparator ruinarum vocetur, quam vastator civitatum? as
Marlorat notes well upon the place; How much more honorable is it for a Prince
to be called the repairer of ruins, than the destroyer of Cities? It was a
vain and horrible brag of Senacherib, which he spoke as tending to the honor of
his predecessors, and himself too as descended from them, 2 King. 19. 11.
Behold, thou have heard what the Kings of Assyria have done to all lands, by
destroying them utterly. And the like we read of Alexander and Pompey, who were
called Great from the great conquests and bloody victories they achieved,
glorying in the many thousands, yea, millions, they had slain. The two famous
Scipios had their sirn^mes from the Countries they subdued, the one was called
Africanus, the other Asiaticus. How much a better title was that of Solomon,
and our King James of happy memory, Rex pacificus. I have heard it credibly
reported (fides sit penes authorem) I would not wittingly and willingly father
a falsehood upon the worst of men, but give even the devil his due) that the
late Oliver Cromwell (in whom hypocrisy and tyranny strove which should be
predominant) boasted, he had been the death of near upon 40000 Scots in their
own Country and at Worcester, where besides what were slain in fight, many were
killed in cool blood, a cruelty which a Turk would be ashamed of. I have read
of Knolls his Turk. hist.
a greater Warrior, and a better man than he, Tamberlane, who having fought a
battle with the Muscovites, wherein he had slain upon the turf about 40000 men,
and taking a view of the dead, was so far from rejoicing at the sight, that he
lamented the condition of such as commanded great Armies, commending his
fathers quiet course of life; accounting him happy in seeking for rest, and the
other most unhappy, who by the destruction of their own kind sought to advance
their own glory; protesting himself even from his heart, grieved to see such
sad tokens and trophies of his victory.

Hence then let Princes and great ones learn how to raise themselves a glorious
name, that may survive them, and be sweet and precious when their bodies rot
and consume in their sepulchers, while others take a pride and pleasure to kill
and destroy, let them labor to save and preserve the world in peace; while
others pull down and lay waste Cities and Temples, let them raise up and repair
the breaches, so shall they be truly called (...), gracious Lords, Luke 22. 25.
Et reparatores ruinarum, the repairers of breaches, the restorers of paths to
dwell in; which will be far greater glory to them, than if they accumulated all
the titles of honor, that either Heraldry can invent, or this world confer. It
was well said by our late King of glorious memory, to his Son our gracious
Sovereign that now reigns, whom God preserve long among us, (...). 27
I had rather you should be CHARLES le Bon, than le Grand, Good, than Great.
Greatness has no better Character than that of Goodness, without which,
it is but (...), a cold and livelesse carcass of nobility, like a ruddy color
in a picture that has no life or heat in it, a rich cabinet without a jewel:
With such an empty casket of honor without virtue, Minutius Minutius Felix
Felix thus elegantly expostulates, Fascibus and purpuris gloriaris? vanus
error hominis, and inanis cultus dignitatis fulgere purpura, mente sordescere.
Nobilitate gloriaris? parents tuos laudas; omnes pari sort nascimur, sola
virtute distinguimur. Do thou glory that thou art invested with highest
dignities, clothed with Purple and Ermin? Alas, thou deceivest thy self; to be
glorious in apparel, and sordid in soul, is but a vain error, and whiles thy
face shines with Moses's, thy better part is clouded with Egyptian darkness.
In boasting of thy noble birth, thou praisest thy parents, not thy self, if
thou degenerate.

Nam genus and proavos and quae non fecimus ipsi
Vix ea nostra voco.
We are born alike, being hewed all out of the same Rock, our father Adam; it is
only virtue and noble actions that distinguish and set us above the vulgar.
When Moses goes about to describe the genealogy of the Patriarch Noah, he
begins it thus, These are the generations of Noah: And Noah was a just man and
perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God, Genesis 6. 9. Will thou be
famous in thy generations as Noah? be just and upright as Noah, and thou shall
be Chronicled in the book of fame to all succeeding generations. Vocaberis,
etc. thou shall have an honorable name like this in the Text, Thou shall be
called, The repairer of the breach, the restorer of thy Country's peace and
liberty.

The Wiseman is almost Non-plust and gravel'd, to think what praises should be
given to these Repairers of breaches, Ecclus. 49. 11, 12, 13. How shall we
praise this Zerubbabel which was a ring on the right hand, so was Jesus the son
of Josedec: these men in their time builded the house, and set up the Sanctuary
of the Lord again, which was prepared for an everlasting worship. And among the
elect was Nehemias, whose renown is great, which set up for us the walls that
were fallen, and set up the gates and the bars, and laid the foundations of our
houses.

But behold a greater than Nehemias or Zerubbabel is here. This Zerubbabel, the
chief among these Repairers, was a type of Christ, and so is presented to us by
the Prophet, Hag. chap. ult. verse. ult. In that day, says the Lord of Hosts,
will I take thee, O Zerubbabel my servant, the son of Shealtiel, and will make
thee as a signet; for I have chosen these, says the Lord of hosts. Christ was
the true Zerubbabel, whom God the Father chose from everlasting to be his
servant, in performing the great work of our Redemption: Isa. 42. 1. Behold my
servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights: I have put my
Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. This is he that
has built his Church upon a Rock, against which the gates of hell shall not
prevail. This is he that has raised up the foundations of many generations,
and therefore is most worthy to be called, The Repairer of the breach, that
vast breach which was long since made between God and man, that breach which
was made between Jew and Gentile. Quae deserta fuerant in Judaeis, dicimus
aedificari in Ecclesia, non ad breve tempus, sed in perpetuum: and fundamenta
illius ex utroque populi, id est, in duabus generationibus suscitanda, the
waste places in the Church of the Jews are built up by Christ in the Christian
Church, and the foundations thereof raised of both people, that is, in those
two generations of Jews and Gentiles. So St. Hierom understands my Text,
according to that of St. Paul, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. He is our peace* who has made
both one, and has broken down the middle wall of partition between us, that he
might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross. And because he humbled
himself to the form of a servant to the death of the cross, therefore God has
highly exalted him, and given him a name (above this name in the Text, and)
above every name (besides) that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow,
etc. Phil. 2. 7, 8 9.

I have done with the Explication of my Text, I come now to make some
Application of it to the time.

I need not tell you of our wast places, our ruined foundations, our vast
breaches, they are too obvious to every eye, he that runs may re^d them. They
may be reduced to these two heads, Breaches and Ruins and Wastes made both in
Church and Commonwealth.

To begin with the Church, for that is Gods method, Judgment commonly begins at
the house of God. And, good God, who can think upon the Breaches, and not cry
out with Job c. 22. v 6. Even when I remember, I am afraid, and trembling
takes hold on my flesh, this were enough to make a good Christian turn Quaker,
and yet be a good Christian still. Not to speak of the material buildings, the
goodly foundations of ancient Churches demolished and run to ruin, concerning
which there goes a Proverb to the scandal of our Religion (though our Religion
were not the cause of it) Pater noster set them up, and our father plucked them
down. I shall not insist upon these external breaches and ruins in the Church,
though in respect of them also, I may take up the Psalmists words, Psalm 102.
13, 14. Thou shall arise O God, and have mercy upon Sion: for the time to
favor her, yea the set time is come; And why, thy servants think upon her
stones, and it pitieth them to see her in the dust.

The most considerable breaches were in the spiritual building, (...), Ye are
Gods building, etc. Ephesians. 2. 20.

O what breaches were made in this building! Even breach upon breach, Job 16.
14. Here were the living stones broken, heart broken, the principal Pillars
thrown down? Able, painful and pious Pastors and Preachers (such as Dr. Featly,
that Malleus Hereticorum, and many others of the Clergy, besides the Reverend
Fathers of the Church, the Bishops, of whom the world was not worthy,) cast out
of their places and Livings upon false suggestions and informations; or if
true, deserving rather encouragement and protection; than imprisonment and
ejection. Sequestered and cast out they were, not for any thing really
scandalous, but for being so conscientiou, that they would not take new Oaths
and Covenants contrary to those they had formerly and lawfully taken: and upon
the same score would have suffered death (as some did) rather than run with the
tide of the times against the known Laws of God and man. So wide was this
breach, and so far from being well closed again, till this last year, that
upon their exclusion, either none at all were put in their Livings, as in
diverse Counties of Wales, where the Tyths of many Parishes were engrost in a
few hands, two or three Itinerant Preachers serving for a whole Diocese: or
else for the most part, ignorant and factious persons brought in their places,
whose business it was to sow sedition and false doctrines, and whose
preaching (if I may call it preaching) was full of cursing and bitterness,
Romans 3. 14. And what betrer could be expected from them that enter not by the
door into the sheepfold, but climb up some other way, John 10. 1. not by the
regular way of Ordination, which has been ever observed in the Church of
Christ from the Apostles days to ours.

What better could be expected, when the Prophets two staves were once broken;
the staff of Beauty, and the staff of Bands, Veritas Evangelica, and unitas
Christiana, the true Doctrine and Uniform Discipline of the Church. When these,
I say, were broken to pieces, behold an inundation of Sects and Heresies like a
second Deluge over-flowed the whole Land, they came croaking about us like the
Frogs of Egypt, and swarming like the Locusts out of the bottomless pit.
Barclay in his Icon Animorum, writing of the several Sects in Religion which he
had observed in England in King James his reign, tells a story of a father and
his two sons who constituted or made up a Church between themselves, but these
three not long agreeing, the two sons Excommunicated the Father, and at last
one son the other, so that these three made three distinct Churches in their
conceits, and each one the true. What would he have said, had he lived to see
the many factions and fractions, Divisions and Subdivisions which have spawned
since amongst us. Our Church being well likened by the last Archbishop of
Canterbury in his Speech at his death, to an Oak cleft to shivers with wedges
made out of its own body, and at every cleft, profaneness and irreligion
entering in. It was a most charitable wish of judicious Master Hooker, and most
seasonable for our times, in his answer to Master Travers Supplication in Queen
Elizabeth's reign. Take it in his own words, for they are excellent, and
deserve, as Job speaks in another case, to be graven with an iron pen and lead
in the rock for ever, to be so deeply imprinted in our hearts, as never to be
obliterated or rased out.

Since (says he) there can come nothing of contention but the mutual waste of
the parties contending, till a common Enemy dance in the ashes of them both, I
do heartily wish that the grave advice which Constantine gave for uniting his
Clergy so many times, upon so small occasions, in so lamentable sort divided,
or rather the strict commandment of Christ to his, that they should not be
divided at all, may at length if it be his blessed will prevail so far at
least in this corner of the Christian world, to the burying and quite
forgetting of strife, together with the causes which have either bred it or
brought it up: that things of small moment never disjoyn them, whom one God,
one Lord, one Faith, one Spirit, one Baptism, bands of so great force have
linked, that a respective eye toward things wherewith we should not be
disquieted, make us not, as through infirmity the very Patriarchs themselves
sometimes were, full gorged, unable to speak peaceably to their own brother.
Finally, that no strife may ever be heard of again, but this, who shall hate
strife most, who shall pursue Peace and Unity with swiftest paces. And to this
I hope all my Brethren of the Ministry will say Amen, and make some amends for
the Divisions and Breaches which too many of them through their former
misguided zeal brought into the Church, by their earnest endeavors for a happy
settlement of all matters Ecclesiastical, and by their humble submission to
that Order and Discipline in the Church as is or shall be established by lawful
Authority.

But behold more Breaches yet, the Hebrew (...) is rendered by the LXX. (...), a
Builder, a Maker or Repairer* of hedges. Now the Jews have a saying, Massora
sepes est Legis, Divitiarum sepes decimae, that as their Massora was the hedge
of their Divine Law, comprehending every verse, word, and letter of it, so
Tithes were the hedge of their riches, and beyond a hedge in this respect, as
the same worthy Author has very well observed; for an hedge does only fence
and preserve that which is contained, but Tithes and Offerings did more,
because l. 5. Eccl. Po^.
they procured increase of the heap out of which they were taken, witness that
saying of God himself, Mal. 3. 10. Bring ye all the Tithes into the storehouse,
and prove me therewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the
windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room
enough to receive it. Yet was this hedge going down apace, voted away from the
Church by the Phanatick party, who had devoured them in their imaginary hopes,
and taken ere this time all the houses of God in their possession, if they had
not been in the nick of time strangely prevented. The only way they thought to
enrich themselves, was, to impoverish the Church, and ceaze upon the poor
remains thereof. And whereas Abraham (long before the Law was given by Moses,
and therefore could not be ceremonial) paid Tithes of all the spoils, these
men would make a spoil of all the Tithes; then the Priests received Tithes
from the Soldiers, now the Soldiers would have taken Tithes from the Priests,
though to the ruin of themselves, and their posterities, and the whole Nation,
that would have been involved both in the guilt and punishment, as was the
whole Nation of the Jews for the same sin, Mal. 3. 9.

For my part, I must confess my fears, that the curse which has been upon out
Nation of late years for this sin of sacrilege, amongst other great and crying
sins, will not be taken off clearly (for we see Gods hand is stretched out
still against us in the late plague of immoderate rain and waters, which may
breed a dearth, if not pestilential diseases) till satisfaction be made by
restoring what has been wrested and ravished from the Church. It was the
opinion of that great advancer of learning, Sir Francis Bacon, in his
considerations touching pacification and edification of the Church, presented
to King James, and well-worthy the consideration ofthis present Parliament,
That all Parliaments since the 27 and 31 of Hen. 8. who gave away
Impropriations from the Church, stand in some sort obnoxious, and obliged to
God in conscience, to do somewhat for the Church, to reduce the Patrimony
thereof to a competency; for since they have debarred Christ's spouse of a great
part of her dowry, it were reason they made her a competent Jointure.

And blessed be God that put it into the Kings heart to take care, that all
Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, should out of their Impropriations augment the
small Vicaridges belonging to them in such a reasonable proportion, as the
Tithes will well bear. And it is to be hoped, that this will be a leading-card
to invite and draw on others of the Nobility and Gentry to do the like, as some
of them have done already, to their honor be it spoken, and therein have
preveated his Majesty's desires in that kind, and began to us; I could name
some of them, but that I think they are sufficiently well known to the world.

Consider next the ruins and breaches in the State, Armies raised, Battles
fought, Cities besieged, taken, sacked, Countries harassed, plundered,
Parliaments purged, dissolved at the pleasure of a thing called Protector, or
the Grandees of an Army, the House of Peers abolished, another of mock-Lords
instituted, all the fundamental Laws violated. A breach upon our liberties, by
imprisoning men without showing cause, denying the people their voices in a
free election of Knights and Burgesses.

-- fingit solemnia Campus
Et non admissae dirimit suffragia plebis.
A breach upon our estates, by imposing taxes what they pleased. A breach upon
our consciences, by enforcing Oaths and Covenants contradictory to former
Oaths. And to fill up the measure of our ruins, a breach upon the Head-stone
of the building, the chief stake in our hedge was cut up, when our King of ever
glorious memory was cut off, and most barbarously murdered before his own Royal
gate; a most inhuman unparalled Parricide, Regicide, I had almost said
Deicide, and if I had, it might admit of a sober sense, for Kings are earths
Deities, Gods pictures in a lesser form or model, and God himself has honored
them with his own Name, I have said, Ye are gods, Psalm. 82. 6. yet he did not
fall like one of the Princes, but as if he had been an ordinary or common
malefactor.

Carnificis dextra Cromwelli-potentis obiram
Procumbit.
And when he fell all fell with him, ever since we have been a Tohu and Bohu,
rudis indigestaque moles, a mere Chaos of confusion, a second Babel, or like a
Tennis-ball tossed from hand to hand, a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and
derision to all that were round about us, Psalm. 44. 13.

Sen. Trag.
Nec ulla requies, tempus autt ullum datur
Nisi dum jubetur.
We were put to it beyond Hercules's labors, no rest, no breathing time, no
relaxation from our burdens allowed us by our worse than Egyptian-Taskmasters,
we must make brick without straw, pay contribution doubled and trebled, as they
were pleased to vote it, when many had no money to discharge it, but what (as
the young Prophet said of his ax head) was borrowed. Nor was it safe for any
man to complain of this extreme bondage and oppression, it being our case in
these times as it was the people of Ariminum in Caesar's,

-- genitu sic quisque latente
Lucan,
Non ausus timnesse palam: vox nulla dolori.
Credita --
We were fain to mourn in secret, and not discover our grief in words or tears.
Was it not now high time for us to say with the Psalm. 119. 126.
Psalmist? and indeed Nihil hic nisi vota supersunt, It Is time for thee, Lord,
to work, for they have made void thy Law; yea, all the Laws both of God and
man. When all endeavors of men failed, and no hope of human help appeared,
then was it Gods time to work; and work he did beyond all expectation, even to
admiration. As he stirred up the spirits of Zerubbabel and Nehemias to repair
the breaches in the Jewish Church and State, so has he done for us; we have a
Nehemias and a Zerubbabel as well as they, ex te erunt, and we have them of our
selves. As it was our unhappiness, that like the spider we spun the web of our
miseries out of our own bowels, and with our own hands pulled our own houses
upon our own heads; so it was our happiness again, that God has raised up
from among our selves Heroes, and men of renown, to stand in the gap, to turn
our captivity as the Rivers in the South, to build up our waste places and
repair our breaches: For had we sent abroad for builders, as Solomon did to
Hiram, 2 King. 2. they might have built a Babel instead of a Temple, and
overthrown more with one hand than they set up with two. What tongue can tell,
and what heart would not ache to think, what desolations had been wrought in the
earth, if the way to the Throne had been hewed out by the sword of aliens and
strangers to the Commonwealth of England: Nay, had Sir George Booth's design
gone on, in probability it might have cost hot water, multo sanguine and
vulneribus, etc. and we had seen another A^eldama or bloody field; and even
then the King had been fain to swim unto his Crown through a Red Sea of his
subjects blood, an ungrateful passage both to him and them.

Vsque ade^ miserum esse civili vincere bello.
But blessed be God, that as in Solomon's Temple there was no ax, nor hammer,
nor iron tool heard in the house, while it was in building, 1 King. 6, 7. so in
raising the foundations of this great work, and bringing it to perfection, no
sword nor battle-ax, no instrument of war lifted up, no canon, nor musket,
nor pistol discharged.

Time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, of Samson, and of Jeptha,
of all our worthy Patriots in Parliament, in City, in Country, that by Votes,
Declarations, or other vvays, joined heads, and hands, and hearts, to the
contriving, compassing, completing of this glorious work. Give me leave to
single out one from the rest, unus instar omnium, I hope without envy I may
name him, whose name will be like an ointment poured forth, precious to
posterity, the Lord General Monck, who has upon our stage acted both parts of
Nehemia and Zerubbabel to the life.

As another Nehemias he carried on his work prudently and closely, he came up
to our Jerusalem or Metropolis, and was there some time before he told any man
what God had put in his heart to do. Artis esse, celare artem, a man shows his
art in concealing his art. An unseasonable discovery frustrates a good design,
whiles a discreet silence fits it for maturity. Had he taken off his hood or
veil at the first approach* God knows what resistance he had found, but as long
as he carried it in a clowd, and hung like a Meteor between heaven and earth,
or as the Papists picture Erasmus between heaven and hell, each party took him
for their own, and so neither opposed him. True it is, he put many in a maze,
and the whole City in great fears, when in a seeming compliance with, and
obedience to the command of those that pretended to the supreme authority, like
Samson he went away with the gates of the City, bars and all; but he so on made
them amends by setting them in statu quo, or in a much better condition than he
found them.

Martial.
Vna eademque manus vulnus opemque tulit.
The same hand that brake their head, gave them a plaster. Then again, like
Nehemias, he calls the Nobles and Rulers together, brings in the Secluded
Members to consult how our breaches might be made up; and to secure their
sitting, sets a guard, and raises a strong Militia. Those members having made
some notable Acts, in order to a further settlement, dissolve, and quickly
after a full and free Parliament succeeds them, and prosecutes, if not
perfects, what the other had so well begun. Thus you see how he personates
Nehemias in these particulars.

And may he not pass for a Zerubbabel too? I am sure like Zerubbabel he did
his work not by might, nor by power, but by Gods Spirit. Lambert.
Sanballat marched toward him with a more potent Army than his, which stood
like a great Mountain in his way, but he had virtue enough to remove this
mountain, it became a plain before him, and he might have said to his soldiers
as Caesar in the like case to his, Tela tene jam miles, ait, ferumque tuenti*
Subtrahe: non ullo constet mihi sanguine bellum.
Hold your hands, here is no need of weapons nor blows, this victory shall not
cost a drop of blood: As the Magitians said in another case, so may I in this,
Digitus Dei*est hic, even an Atheist may discover the finger, yea, the whole
hand of God in it, and be, if not converted, at least confounded at the sight.
May I not take up the Apostles exclamation with a little alteration? Behold, ye
despisers, ye phanaticks, and wonder, and perish, for God* has wrought a work
which you would in no wise believe, though a man had declared it beforehand
unto you; nor will your posterity easily credit it, though a man declare it
unto them in the next generation, it will sound in their ears more of a Romance
than a true story* and we our selves that know it to be true, may say of it as
the Jews did of the like in their time, Psalm. 126. 1. When the Lord turned
again the captivity of Sion, then were we like unto them that dream; so
strange, so unexpected, so beyond hope, that it seemed rather a fancy in a
dream than a real deliverance. What remained for him to do that he might make
up the parallel, but that with Zerubbabel he bring forth the head-stone of the
building with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace unto it; and this was done when
CHARLES the Second by the grace of God, etc. was first Proclaimed, and after
Crowned, all the people with loud acclamations crying out, God save the King.

And in him we have found another Zerubbabel, and a greater than the former;
the General was but his (...) (as John the Baptist was to CHRIST) his
Forerunner or Harbinger, to prepare the way before him; and lo, he is come like
Zerubbabel from a strange Country (where he lived in exile diverse years) to his
own native soil and dominions, over which may he and his Posterity reign
happily to the worlds end.

Et nati natorum and qui nascuntur ab illis.
And upon this very day whereon he came into the world, he came into his Royal
City, being just thirty years old, as David was when he began to reign. A
Prince, whom time, and sufferings, and converse with foreign Nations, have
adapted for a Crown and heroic actions. A Prince whom the heavens honored
with a Star at his birth, which prognosticated him to be a man of wonders. A
Prince most justly meriting the title which was given to Titus the Emperor,
Deliciae humanae generis, The delight of mankind, even his enemies being
judges, if yet he can have any enemies, whom God has brought in with so high a
hand, and outstretched an arm.

This is that single person whom God set as a signet on his right hand, and
preserved him as the apple of his eye from the hand of that uncircumcised
^^om^^^.
Philistine at Worcester, who with his numerous Army, like fat Bulls of Bashan,
thought to have closed him in on every side, they said, Persecute and take him,
for there is none to deliver him; but God gave him cause to say with David, My
soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fouler, the snare is broken,
and I am delivered. And from that mir culous escape it was easy to prophecy
of his future felicity, his happy return to us, as it is this day. And though
many concluded him then for a lost man, that this our Sun was set to us, and
had bidden us goodnight for ever; yet we did hope that this Sun would arise
again in glory to our Horizon, and that with healing in his wings, to salve and
cure all the wounds and distempers in the body politic, and Ecclesiastic too,
of this Nation.

When that little Vessel now upon the Thames where it deserves to be kept like
Theseus his ship for a monument to after* ges; when that Vessel, I say, had
safely conveyed his Majesty to the Haven where he would be, methinks I see him
looking back to England, and speaking comfort to his yet loyal, though then
drooping and disconsolate subjects, as Aeneas to his companions in the Poet, --
revocate animos, maestumquc timorem
Millite, forsan and haec clim meminisse juvabit.
Recall your courages, lay aside your fears; both I and you shall have cause to
give God thanks for this deliverance; which we remember this day with all joy
and thankfulness

This is that single Person whom Rebels abjured and devoted to destruction, but
the Lord separated and set apart from the womb to be the Repairer of all our
breaches in Church and State, the Restorer of paths to dwell in. Every one may
now repose himself under the shade of this Royal Oak; and whereas the common
prisons were of late years the proper places for loyal subjects, now they may
sit secure under their own vines and fig trees. -- Deus nobis haec otia fecit.


Again, As Zerubbabel lived long in the King of Babylon's Court, yet retained
his own true Religion, worshipping the God of his fathers in his true way and
manner as he had commanded him: So has his Majesty lived long in the Courts
and Territories of foreign Princes, of different Religion from him, yet, with
Job, he held fast his integrity, stood like a Colossus, or Rock immovable
against all surges of temptations that were raised to shake his faith, to alter
his Religion, witness the sharp assaults (as we have heard) of Monsieur
Militiere and others he met with Beyond Sea. Like Ulysses he bound himself to
the mast of a well-grounded resolution, that no Romish Sirens could draw him
out of the ship of the Church of England, in which he was baptized and
educated, though that ship were like the other wherein Christ and his Disciples
sailed, in all appearance ready to sink; and when he had no power visible to
defend himself, he would be still the Defender of the faith once delivered to
the Saints, therein following the great example of the best of Kings, his Royal
Father, who to his death maintained the Religion of the Church of England, and
died a Martyr for the same.

Lastly, When Sanballat and others beyond the River offered their service to
join with Zerubbabel in carrying on the work, Ezr. 4. 2. saying, Let us build
with you; his answer was, You have nothing to do with us, but we our selves
will build unto the Lord our God, etc. So did his Majesty wave all foreign
aids tendered to him, waiting Gods ways and leisure as the best, who has given
him the hearts of his people, and found a way for his coming in sine coede and
sanguinem, without bloodshed; Thanks be unto God who has given him this
innocent victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus, what the Psalmist spoke
of our Savior, may, in an inferior sense be fitly applied to his anointed,
and our Sovereign, The stone which our late builders refused (if I may call
them builders that were destroyers) is become the head stone of the corner,
This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. This is the day
which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad it.

And that he might be Charles the Great indeed, the great repairer of our
breaches, he has publicly declared his great Mercy in granting a general
Pardon, and passing an Act of Oblivion, yea, and pressing this present
Parliament to a confirmation thereof. He has manifested his great Charity, in
abolishing all notes of discord, and difference of parties, conjuring all his
subjects to a perfect union among themselves. He has show d his Pity in
indulging a liberty to tender consciences in matters of Religion, which disturb
not the peace of the Kingdom. He has expressed his great Justice, in being
himself sworn to govern, not by his arbitrary will, as our late Masters did,
but by the known Laws of the Land, leaving all his Subjects to be tried by
them. But I cast water in the Sea, His own gracious Messages, Letters, and
Declarations, both before and since his coming, speak him much better than I
can, and therefore to them I commend you.

To conclude all, How shall we praise this our Zerubbabel, whose renown is
great, who has set up the Sanctuary of the Lord again for an everlasting
worship, and laid the foundations of our houses, made both Church and State
rise out of their ruins, as the world out of a Chaos, and become glorious to
the wonder of our own and other Nations? How shall we praise him as he
deserves? We will call him the Repairer of our breaches, the Restorer of paths
to dwell in; and we will wish him all prosperity in the Psalmists words, Good
luck have thou with thine honor, ride on because of the word of truth, of
meekness, and of righteousness, and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible
things.

I will dismiss you with the words of Nehemia to the people, chap. 8. verse.
10. Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send portions to them
for whom nothing is prepared: for this day is holy unto our Lord.

Now to the King of Kings, that brought our King this day to us, be ascribed
all honor, and glory, and thanksgiving, this day and for ever, AMEN.

FINIS.
These Books are lately come forth, and sold by William Leak, at the Crown in
Fleet Street between the two Temple-gates.
An exact Abridgment of the Records in the Tower of London, from the Reign of
K. Edward the second, to K Ri hard the third, of all the Parliaments holden in
each Kings reign, and the several Acts in every Parliament, by Sir Robert
Cotton, Knight. and Baronet.

An Apology for the Discipline of the ancient Church, intended especially for
that of our Mother the Church of England, in answer to the Admonitory Letter
lately published by William Nicolson, Archdeacon of Brecon, and now Lord
Bishop of Gloucester.

Le Prince d' Amor, or the Prince of Love, With a collection of several
Ingenious Poems and Songs, by the Wits of the Age. 8.

A learned Exposition of the Apostles Creed, delivered in several Sermons by
William Nicholson Archdeacon of Brecon and now Lord Bishop of Gloucester.,

The Solemn League and Covenant, Arraigned and Condemned, by the sentence of
the Divines of London and Cheshire, etc. by Lawrence Womack, now D D. and
Archdeacon of Suffolk.

The Result of False Principles, or Error convicted by its own evidence, with
Diotrophes his Dialogues, by the Author of the Examination of Tylenus before
the Tryers; whereunto is added a learned Disputation of Dr. Goads, sent by King
James to the Synod at Dort.


