A FULLER ANSWER TO ELIMAS THE SORCERER: OR TO The most Material PART (of a
Feigned Memorial) toward the Discovery OF THE POPISH PLOT, WITH Modest
Reflections upon a Pretended Declaration (of the late DUCHESS) for changing
her RELIGION. Published by Mounsieur Maimburg, and the Learned Resolutions of
diverse our ORTHODOX PRELATES. CONCERNING 1. The Real Presence of Christ in the
Sacrament of the Altar and Communicating in one kind, or both. 2. Infallibility
of the Universal Church. 3. Auricular and a Particular Confession. 4. Prayer
for the Dead.


In a Letter Addressed to Mr. Thomas Jones. by Dr. Richard Watson, Chaplain to
His R. Highness.

LONDON, Printed by H. Brugis, for N. Wolf at the seven Stars in Newgate
street. MDCLXXXIII.

A Fuller ANSWER TO ELIMAS the Sorcerer, etc.
SIR,
IN the last Letter I had from you, (and the last may it be for ever) of July
7. 1682. You first acquainted me with Mounsieur Maimburgs History of
Calvinisme; published in several Editions, not long before: I made speedy
enquiry after it, the rather, because you told me the Nation and you (two
Aequipollents, doubtless) had been more beholding, under God, to that Ex-Iesuit
(so you term him) than to me and my Partners: What Partners you mean, I know
not, nor what share I am to have among them, nor of what; until you make more
plain and public, what you so kindly have assigned me, Ecce hic sto,
vindicandus mea sorti, in Tertullian's Phrase.

The Book I have obtained from London, and found annexed to it, what you
pointed at; Declaration de Madame la Princess D'Iork; by the publication
whereof (for all the other History I am sure you thank him not) how much you,
and your Party, are beholding to that French Gentleman, will very manifestly be
made appear, if but in the Second and Third Paragraphs.

Ie proteste en la presence de Dieutout puissant, etc. Where her Royal Highness
makes most solemn protestation, in the presence of Almighty God, That, since
her return into England, not any person in the world, either directly, or
indirectly, carried her from our Church, to embrace the Catholic Religion;
that the grace of her reconcilement (as they use to call it) she owed solely to
God's mercy; that she her self durst not believe it any Sequel of her daily
Prayers (in the course of her Devotion) ever since she had been in France and
Flanders, adding.

It is very true, That having viewed the Fervor and Devotion among the
Catholics of those Countries, and being sensible of none at all, or very
little in her self, from that time, she never ceased to ask of God the grace,
that if she were not in the true Religion, she might be before she died.

Give me leave, Sir, to be of opinion, till you make it otherwise appear, That
this Pious and Prudent Lady, after her own conviction, and choice made, (if
choose she did) had so much Charity for her Directors, (who e're they were) yea,
and for her Chaplains too, as, when ready to turn her back upon them and their
Offices, she would not spit in their faces, as in defiance, with whom and by
whom, so many hundred times she had paid her Orisons, and made addresses to
the Throne of Grace, (with as much well-tempered Zeal, we thought, though not
alike cloud of Incense, and other pompous Ceremonies, as I had observed any
where, either in France, or Flanders,) but rather intercept, as she hoped, with
the extended Palms of both her hands, all false aspersions, and calumnies,
that might for her sake be cast upon us, by such opprobrious persons as your
self, (if your very self were not the He, she meant to anticipate) whose
measures are wholly broken, and whose maine design is utterly disappointed, by
taking upon her self, what with the danger threatened, you would fain have
imputed to us; but this Passage, Sir, you had no mind to regard, and I cannot
blame you for it, being so directly cross to your purpose.

The two concealed Bishops, we may be sure, shall not escape the fiercest
effects of your rage, if you and your Bloodhounds can trace them out, whom you
precondemn unheard, and deftine as the worst of Criminals, to a most severe, a
fatal Execution, though, for kind Mounsieur Maimburg's sake, the very Jesuits
that lately suffered, should conditionally be recalled to life.

Now, Sir, to leave them (the Bishops I mean) behind, to answer for themselves,
when you can bring 'em to your High Court of Justice, who, you say, Page 4, are
condemned persons in Law, though what Law you name not, nor does any of ours, I
presume, so deeply Sentence the most Bigot-Papist for his Religion, (as I think
was declared from the Bench, more then once, in the late Trials) much less any
in our Communion, for private Sentiments, before public scandal given, and a
fair Conviction.

I must peremptorily demand of you, (and I can do no less) having been so
publicly traduced by you, and thereby exposed to the obloquie (if no worse) of
all true and false Protestants in the three Kingdoms, as public a
retractation of, and plenary satisfaction for the foul injury you have done me;
else, although I may not deny you the indeleble Character of a Priest, I shall
impress upon your Name another, of a like aviternall durance, of a Profligate
Person, and a most malicious Calumniator.

But, Sir, what more yet will be laid to your charge, if that Noble Lady her
self be more grossly and impudently defamed then her Chaplains? if,
notwithstanding those uncertain fluctuations of opinion, agitations of Spirit,
cross collision of thoughts, and perhaps, alternate in consistent resolutions,
she departed either indeterminate in her Religion, or not altogether so adverse
from that her Highness had before Professed, from the first Maturity of her
reason and fit capacity to make her choice? That you may know me to be in
earnest, (with a civil respect praemised to Mounsieur Maimburg's Historical
Narration, and a little suspense made of that credulity you would have us yield
to your Prophetic Inspiration, who pretend a foresight of her change, so many
years antecedent to it) I offer two particulars to the serious consideration of
the present Age, the fears and jealousies of which fly, too often, swifter
then Fame it self with such stories; and to the judgment of Posterity, that may
be diversely misinformed by the praejudice, or in observance of many that
transmit their reports to 'em, which can meet with little opposition, or good
Evidence against them, at that distance.

The first tender I make, is this, which you will, I hope, allow me to
adventure upon my own Reputation, if I add, in verbo Sacerdotis, which I safely
can; That toward the end of my last Quarters waiting in course at White Hall,
her R. H. having been long decumbent in her sickness, and many times in great
extremity of torture, (perhaps, as much of mind, in that distraction, or
convulsion of thoughts, as of body) from the violent assaults and paroxysmes of
her Fever, both yielding alike sad accents, if not articulate complaints, and
much astonishing us, whose attendance in our stations drew us within notice of
it, there being, as it were, an absolute desertion of her little Oratory; which
before, whether her H. were there, or not, used to be well frequented by a
comfortable Audience, that assisted at our Mattins and Even-Song, which, beside
that it pleased God, gave countenance to the Chaplain, in the performance of
his Offices, at the hours appointed, I calling to mind the strictness of her
Commands formerly, and the steadiness of her personal example, in time of
Health, found it necessary for her R. H. to have knowledge of it, in some
seasonable intervall of her griefs, assuring my self her Goodness would not
take amiss such a dutiful and devout expression of a religious desire she
should be daily prayed for by us, when, in that weak condition, she could not
present her self before the little Altar she had erected to pray there with us.
This I did with that caution as became me in the present circumstances, and
committed the care of it to a discreet Lady of her Chamber, who was seldom
absent from her Bedside, desiring her, in the sum of all, to say plainly,
That the Chaplain was in this straight, without her H. suddenly found some
expedient, either to set open the doors of her Oratory, and read Common Prayer
to the painted Wain-Scot; or keep 'em shut, and read none at all, whereof what
sense the Court and City would have, must be left at adventure; The very next
day, when I went into the Privy-Chamber, at the wonted hour, I saw no cause at
all either of complaint, or enquiry after her H. pleasure, and new Order, it
being appointed before my coming, that the Reading-Desk and Books should be
made ready, and when the Bedchamber door should be opened, our Common Prayer
should be read at the very entrance thereinto, whither assembled not only a
considerable number without the door, and within, such Ladies as were either in
immediate attendance, or others privileged to be there, but her H. personally,
as she lay in bed, found, I hope, some comfort and benefit by our Prayers, read
in her hearing, wherein, I doubt not but at that time, she joined in Communion
with us, or else would have ordered it otherwise, This course, for ought I
remember, continued while her infirm condition could comply with it,
throughout my time; After my dismission, what Method therein was observed, my
Reverend Successor in that employment can best report; But this, on all hands,
I believe will easily be yielded; That her Highnesses Sickness more and more
every day prevailing, and consequently the strength of Nature as much decaying,
little abatement, in that anxiety, she had, of mind, and little better
satisfaction of doubts and scruples, or settlement in Religion, considering her
sad condition, can reasonably be supposed; Whether, in this deplorable state,
she might send for her Spiritual Physician, the Ecclesiastic Person mentioned
by her, or some other, I can, with assurance, neither affirm, nor deny; nor
will I doubt more, if he came, of her Highnesses patient attention, and
submission, to all he said, (at a time when she wanted somewhat to allay or
charm the tumult of her Spirits) then I do of what a Learned, and well
Practiced Civilian has sometime told me, That many Testaments are brought in
Court, truly Signed by the Testators, in a dying condition, but upon no other
account of will, or consent, then to be rid of their importunate Kindred,
Allies, or Friends, that they may be free to dispose their Souls to a calm and
serene departure out of this unquiet World; And whether the good Father were
sent for or no, very well known it is, how the Ecclesiastikes of that Communion
use not to be over-modest, as opportunity may serve, in offering their
Assistance to exspiring persons, of what Church, or of what Quality soever,
where they may have admission.

Which puts me in mind of what happened many years since, at Bruges in
Flanders, about the Decease of my Noble Patron, the Lord Hopton, who, on his
last fatal day, being taken speechless somewhat early in the morning, and so
continuing, to the great grief, and disappointment, of his few Domestiques then
about him; In the afternoon the Reverend Mother, or Lady Prioress, of the
English Nunnery, sent a Message, in great haste, to me, that I must needs
attend her immediately, at the Grate, as if she had praepared some special
Cordial for our good Lord, (whom she and all her Votaries respected highly)
that would not only recover his Lordships Speech, but renew his Age, or
protract his life some years longer; when I went to know her pleasure, the good
Lady told me somewhat to this purpose. That, understanding my Lords condition,
she could not be at rest, until she had finished the great Devotion her whole
Monastery had for his Lordship, by recommending two grave Franciscan Friars to
do their last religious Office for him in their way, [ i. e. according to the
Rituall of the Roman Church]; Whereat I was so much surprised, that I had
almost forgot the sedate temper I came to her in, being more prone, upon that
her motion, either to smile, or be angry, then to lament the loss, I every hour
apprehended, might befall me and my fellow servants in a Foreign Country, by
our Lord's Decease; At length, being somewhat recomposed, I minded her
Reverence of what she knew very well, the free converse my Lord had often, in
time of Health, with their Fathers and Friars of any Order, declining no
discourse on any points in controversy they could mention to him, in a Calm and
Christian way; how acceptable it had been, on both sides, though neither Party
could convince the other; and how incongruous it would be, after all the
aforesaid frankness and plain-dealing, now to give his Lordship the trouble of
a faint dispute, if he could have used his Tongue, but now he could not, how
false I must needs prove to him and to my trust, in permitting such religious
Offices to be practiced upon him at the point of Death, which he approved not
of toward any other person, when in perfect health, and vigor of
understanding; Whereupon the over-courteous Lady, whether satisfied, or no,
acquiesced, and retired, as I returned to my languishing good Lord, to perform
my last duty at his Bedside, as his Chaplain, according to the Form or
Permission of our Britannike Church. Whereas, had I taken other measures, it,
most certainly, would have been reported, That the Lord Hopton, if but by
reason of that very ancient Ceremony, their extreme Unction, without a word
spoken, had died so good a Roman Catholic as the best; and his surviving
Chaplain, (or Director in Mr. Iones's sense) had been no other than a Papist in
Masquerade, and for his treachery to so noble and so good a Protestant, had
deserved no less then present death by his Martial Sentence. But I proceed,

To make good my word, and produce my second particular, upon better credit
then my own, (as having it from a person twenty times more interessed in the
Court then my self, and far better acquainted with private passages of moment
there;) When, not only the reports were warm of her R. Highnesses defection
from the Religion professed by the Church of England, but that her Father, the
Earl of Clarendon, had taken notice of it by Letter, (the written Copy whereof
passed from hand to hand) in discharge of his paternal duty, I being not
over-credulous of such a sudden change, upon popular Rumor, in a Personage so
judicious, and deliberate in all her actions, to obtain a certainty of the
Truth, for my private satisfaction, (if no more) writ a Letter upon that
Subject, to a very sage and grave Person, my most worthy friend at Court, from
whom I received this in Answer, or to this effect.

That her R. H. (when this fierce conflict of Soul and Body was almost
finished) when she must needs be sensible of the few hours or minutes she had
to live, and fewer hopes, but by some extraordinary divine assistance, to hold
the encounter unto the end, like a good Christian Lady, desired to have her
last viaticum praepared for her, and like a persevering Member of our Church,
appointed it to be administered, expressly by the hand of the Bishop of Oxford,
that then was, who, by what impediment, or unhappy accident, was not expressly
writ me, came too late, when, if the doors were not shut, the Keepers of the
house were trembling, the Grinders ceasing, and those that had been looking out
of the windows were darkened; And this Daughter of Music being brought low,
her desire failed, because she was going to her long home, where I hope her
divine Manna has never failed, and her celestial, instead of her
sacramental, Cup has overflowed, beyond the satisfaction of her thirsty Soul,
to her eternal joy and ineffable delight in the God of her Salvation.

The Testimony of my courteous Correspondent would be unquaestionable, were his
Name known, which I will not publish, having not asked his leave, but take any
censure, to be made of what he writes, upon my self. The truth of all, or high
probability (without the credit and veracity of which witness) will, I doubt
not, be rationally argued from what here I mean shall follow.

Now, Mr. Jones, after two such unexceptionable Evidences, in your own
expression, let you and I consider, laying aside all praejudice against
Directors, or Confessors, what is reasonable for us to believe of our Deceased
Duchess; Was all this, think you, a piece of Pageantry her R. H. acted, or
exposed to the view of the world, in the very last Scene of her life? But
Mounsieur Maimburg Prints it, as is supposed, from her own hand; I will believe
it so far, when I see, and know the Original; but I will not then believe her
R. H. persisted in the sense of it to her last hour, inferring rather from what
I have here related, That she retracted the said writing in fact, which
perhaps, f^r reasons best known to her self, if not because of her infirmity,
her H. neither declared it by word of mouth, nor signed any such Retractation
with her hand; So that Mounsieur Maimburg may boast, as you say, of a Proselyte
in gilded Paper, and you charge me, with the Party you mean, to little
purpose, if no such final change were resolved on, as you surmise; Toward the
discovery of which Truth, if what I have already writ, be not enough
demonstrative, let us, with all due regard to the Pious memory of that
excellent Princess, take a summary review of the Declaration it self, and see
what we can make probable of its tendency to either term.

Her protestation is plain and positive, as before I minded you, That neither
Papist, nor Protestant, in Masquerade as you suspect, had suggested any thing
to withdraw her from that Religion, wherein by Birth, and so many years
education, observation, converse, hearing, and reading, what Doctrine was
soundly Preached, and learnedly written, she had been well-grounded and settled
to her hearts content, as was evident by many instances to all in attendance on
her, especially the Chaplains, who best know, by the strict duty they were
kept to, how sollicitous her H. was, upon all incident occasions that detained,
or diverted her from the ordinary hour, between three and four in the
Afternoon, to have another ordered, though at seven or eight of Clock in the
Evening, as she could Personally be present in her Oratory at our Prayers.
Which exemplary Devotion for the service of our Church had such an influence,
likewise, upon all, or most of her young Ladies, that, when they had obtained
leave to make a visit, or otherwise to employ the hour, they would frequently
get a little Congregation assembled in their Mothers Chamber, and have the
benefit of our Evening Prayer before they would take Coach.

As for the more public Offices in the Chapel, how praecise her H. was in
her Orders, and how advertent to see them executed, you best know, Mr. Jones,
whose charge it was on the weekdayes, and we all can testify for the Sundays
in our courses, which if we supplied not our selves, were obliged to be
accountable, unto whom we resigned the Pulpit for the day, a considerable time
before, which yet sometimes, you know, would not serve our turn; for so select
were the persons, of whom her R. H. would approve, to Preach before her, that
our opinion, or character, of*em would not pass current, if not conform with
that she had made of them to her self; insomuch as, among others, this singular
instance, I very well remember; That a Learned Person, in great eminency of
place, and of no less popular, yea, Courtly reputation for the elegancy of his
Sermons, having with intendment to pay respect unto, and please her H. taken
that days duty of mine upon himself, when notice thereof was sent into her, a
convenient time before, her answer was a plain Refusal, and a command given,
that I should perform my Course my self, (as I did) or see it otherwise
supplied to her Highnesses better satisfaction; which unexpected
disappointment, as it gave me an uneasy task, to revoke my grant in as smooth
and gentle language as, with necessary caution, I could Penn; so it colored my
modesty with such a blush, as I never had the confidence to visit that Reverend
Person afterward.

Her Highnesses particular care of the Family, with its dependants, at St.
James's, to keep them steady in our Religion, you have Published in her Orders,
delivered to you by the Reverend Bishop of Winchester, but with no order, Sir,
I presume, to make such unhandsome and uncharitable observations on them, as

That the first tended to bring you and the Liturgy into contempt; as if the
Duchess and his Lordship had conspired in that scandalous design; whereas the
true intendment seems rather for the honor, and preference of the Morning
Liturgy to a Morning Sermon, if you mean it separate from the Service; and
denotes the error in their choice, who went to it at Whitchall, where their
presence was not required, nor assistance wanted, when their duty was, to
repair unto the Chapel at St. James's, their oeconomicall, though not
parochial place of public worship; whose forenoon defect of a Sermon was
supplied, you know, in the afternoon, by us the Chaplains in our courses, not
to mention St. Peter's Westminster, St. Margarets, St. Martins, all in our
vicinage, where they could not miss, nor you, in likelihood, of a Congregation,
notwithstanding the diversion of many to Whitchall; or, if you had been thereby
absolutely deserted, the like remedy might have been found, as I told you
before, I succeeded in upon like occasion, and the deviating, or ambulatory,
part of their H. Highnesses Family thereby reclaimed to their duty, without all
jealousy of the Duchess, or contempt drawn upon you by his Lordship.

The fourth Order, you say, tended to enrage several of the Family against you.
I answer, That they might be more, or less, enraged, according to the method
you took for discovery, which was not directed by urgent interrogatives. Are
you Protestant, or Papist? so as they might be under constraint to tell an
untruth, or betray themselves; but rather by enquiry of others, Whether they
made profession of any distinct Religion? what? and where they frequented any
assembly in the practice of it? This and other such gentle, or concealed,
methods used; what apprehensions could you, Sir, have had from their rage in
the Court, and under the protection of both their H. Highnesses?

Lastly, You say, you did begin to Catechize, but was discouraged by the Arts
of the said Bishop.

Mr. Jones, Do not deceive your self by a prejudice against my Lord; for you
did not only begin, but went on confidently several days, I may say weeks,
without that discouragement, until you became so ridiculous to the very
Gentlemen you would pretend to instruct, and so much the discourse of others,
to my knowledge, about the Court, who in some concealed place were your
Auditors, though unseen; who reported afterward what they heard, but could by
no means understand (of which curiosity I was not guilty) that I am of opinion,
my Lord of W. could not but be informed of it, and might silence you by his
power, if you suppressed not your self by your after-prudence, when some good
friend had dealt freely and plainly with you in that particular. So that
certainly you forgot your Order, which was, To Catechize and Instruct the Pages
and others who want instruction, very constantly, according to the Orders of
the Church of England, N. 9. Whereas, I fear in your Zeal for their speedy and
over-full instruction, you ran out to such an excessive length, and so dilated
in a confused Paraphrase, as the Church of England has neither ordered, nor
will allow.

Somewhat like to this Order, not of Catechize, but enquiry, I had received
from her H. long before this of yours, upon notice whereof given, all those
young Gentlemen, that were then Pages, met me at Major Eyres's house, to
sustain the Scrutinie, which, with all alacrity, they did singly, every one in
turn, out of the others hearing; My business was, 1. To sound their
inclinations, or praepossessions, in matters of Religion, as to what was
practiced in either Chapel at St. James's. 2. To search, whether their Tutour
or under-Governour, Mr. Collins, a discreet and sober person, had not been
tampering with them, at any time, and endeavoring to seduce them toward the
other Chapel, as you oddly call it, (according to the style, meseemeth of the
other House, you, formerly, may have been accustomed to) some suggestion, of
like sort with that you now own, having been made, (by whom I know not) to her
R. H. and Mr. Collins rendered a dangerous person to have the guidance of those
young Gentlemen. The account hereof I gave her H. did so well satisfy her, as
the said Mr. Collins was better confirmed in his place, and her Highnesses good
opinion, then before, who had been otherwise supplanted, and certainly
discharged. This passage I recollect, and here recite (still more in
conjunction with you) to strengthen the argument I am about, That her H. from
time to time, was very firm in the Religion of our Reformed Church. I return
now to Mounsieur Maimburg's Printed Declaration.

[ Il est bien vray qu' ayant veu la ferveur et la devotion des Catholics de
ces Pais la, etc.] Whereas her H. so much magnifies the fervor, and devotion,
she had beheld in France, and Flanders, in comparison with which her own was
nothing, or very little, as she judged; that modest opinion justifies more the
method of her humility, then Christian charity, which in this case, if in any,
ought surely to have begun at home; I mean not with a better opinion of her own
person, which yet from others might have deserved it; for that Soul, though of
the greatest Princess, cannot be laid too low, which the more it is by its
self depressed, the higher will it be by God exalted, but of others in the same
Communion, especially being, as we account, reformed, and well refined from
many errors, our Divines discover, so well in their Breviary, as Missal; And
if the eye, or ear, may carry it, I wish the tunsio pectoris, and other
ceremonies retained, I hope, with very warm devotion, by your pious Britains,
Mr. Jones, had occurred to her memory, when she beheld the dropping Beads, and
turning leaves of diverse Offices, by the nimblest fingers of either of the
French or Flemish Ladies; yet far be it from you, or me, Sir, to derogate from
the zeal intended by those good women, (with or without comparison) whom I have
many times beheld, with a very sensible reflection, in whole and full
Congregations, on their bended knees at their Vespers, I am sorry to say, and
our own, many more, in very undue postures, and gestures, unbecoming our
common, or public Prayer, which her R. H. knew very well to be the negligence
of our incurious people, not the Profaneness of our Church, which prescribed
much better, and more beseeming, demeanor in her Canon. The more retired
fervor, and Devotion, of those Foreign Females may be such as among other
Writers, Dr. Vane, our relapsed Countreyman, so highly commends them for, after
he had done the like courtesy for their Clergy, in a glorious harangue, Page
266. Thus

And even the weak Sex of woman, whose natural delicacy, tenderness, and
infirmities, may seem to carry with them a Patent of exemption from
extraordinary severities and mortifications of themselves, yet such is the
omnipotency (a bold word) of Catholic Religion, that even these do equal, if
not excel the men, in the tough exercise of denying themselves, of taking up
their Cross, and imitating of Christ; invited hereunto, more by pure love of
God, and gratitude for his doing, and suffering for them, than for the
expectation of reward.

But little of this came, I presume, within the verge of her R. Highnessesview,
or observation beyond what she had seen at some solemn Anniversary, Omgang or
Procession, if their Canvas Frock or Covering had a woman under it, wherein the
fervor, or excessive Calenture, of their devotion, has now and then, cost a
life, until restrained, or absolutely inhibited by the Bishop of the place.

Their Morning Devotions were more moderate, their early Masses, indeed, well
frequented, though the Host, to few, or none, of them delivered, some private
Office, perhaps that of the H. Virgin, or other Saint seperately acted, or
passed over with a silent motion of the lip; their habit loose, and not over
decent, I will not say over - modest for a Church-Assembly; some slight Veil,
or Huyck^, as they call it, rendered Calyptra, or Palla, as toga a tegendo, soon
put on, and as soon off, much after the rate of our morning Lecturers by
Candel-light heretofore; At their solemn Vespers, on great Festivals, I have
known their Churches well warmed by the zeal of that sex alone, or in the
company of few men, beside their Priests; And a person of Honor once told me,
after he came home soundly crowded, for his curiosity to see their Ceremonies,
at such a time, that having darted himself suddenly behind some Pillar of a
Church for concealment, when he more deliberately looked about him, and
discovered none but women in full Congregation from the Altar to the very door,
apprehending he might be known or suspected to be upon espial, as indeed h was,
he soon Retreated, with some difficulty, being well pleased he had so made a
seasonable escape.

But for all this her Highnesses credulity of their fervor, and devotion, in
one sex, or other, or in both,

[ Ie n' avois pas neantmoin le moindre doubt que la creance d' Eglise
Anglicane ne fust la veritable; etc.] she had not the least doubt, as yet of
the Faith, and truth, professed by the Church of England, nor any scruple, or
trouble of conscience, upon that subject, until the November before she
declared, when she began to read the History of our Reformation, composed by
Dr. Heylin, so much esteemed by persons the best able to judge of it in the
whole Realm, who praepossessed Her with good assurance that the said book would
clear all doubt, and scruple of conscience, that could be made concerning the
said Reformation.

Before I proceed further in my Reflections upon this Paragraph, I wish, I could
be well satisfied in somewhat I understand not, which seems little to
authentize the Declaration of a so prudent, and wary, Princess as you and I,
Mr. Jones, had known her H. to be in all that passed from her, within our
notice; was it not just before, that she declared her self free from all doubt
and scruple? etc. What Reason then had those able and judicious persons to put
her H. upon the task of reading Dr. Heylin's History, as the only book stored
with sufficiency, to deliver Consciences out of all such perplexities, when she
had acquainted them, that none she had? was it ever her custom, think we, in
her garden pleasures, to quit a smooth or Carpet - walk, on set purpose to
entangle, and embroyl, her self in a thicket of Thorns and Briars, to sting her
thoughts with the sense of an overgrown Prince's lewdnes in another Century,
which if it were so ominous, as to dash a blot, at so great a distance upon our
Escuchion, or Entail a curse on Posterity to or beyond the third and fourth
Generation, her Highnesses personal share could be apprehended but as of one
among the many, having no lineal descent from his Loins, nor collateral
Relation to him.

But let the air of this madvertance, or what else it is, expire and vanish;
And take we into consideration the unexpected disappointment her H. met with,
in reading the Doctor's Book, so highly commended to her, so great as great
could be, clear contrary to what was promised [ IN ay trouve au contraire,
etc.] so much it seems, in the general, as, besides her own dissatisfaction,
she thinks it of no force, or efficacy, to becalme any troubled Spirit among
the mean and ordinary sort of people; and I think so too, it being writ in
another style then what is levelled to such low capacities, and in the matter
having a mixture of such variety, as at every turn almost the thread is
broken, and they lose their way. But you, and I, Mr. Jones, can very well
remember, that our eminent Princess was none of the les esprits mediocres,
being more mercuriall then most of the first, or second rank in her Sex; and I
believe, it may be our joint - opinion, that her R. H. was not, at that time of
day, to seek satisfaction about the principles of our Reformation, nor a
stranger to other faithful Writers upon that Subject; who speak no less truth,
and as plain English altogether, in the case, as the worthy, and never enough
magnified, Dr. Heylyn; beside, that, on this occasion, comes into my mind an
expression to our purpose, uttered, many years since, by a learned and
judicious person, who was far better acquainted with her R. H. religious
searches in that kind, then you and I can pretend to be, viz. That he was
enough assured, she understood the state of the question, better then her noble
Father, who at the same time was the great Minister of State, and, however
otherwise unfortunate, the most memorable Restorer, and establisher of our
ruined Church.

Before I come to the three particulars that entangled this pious Lady, I can
not but take notice of two other, wherewith she antecedently charge our
Reformation; 1. Changing the face of the ancient Church; and, 2. Renouncing the
Catholic Religion; both which are most certainly disclaimed by our most
learned and most impartial Controvertists; and the former of the two disowned
by that brisk French Gentleman, Mounsieur de la Militiere, in his address to
our King, which, very probably, her R. H. had read, long before her return into
England, being Printed with the Lord Bishop of Derry's Answer, at the Hague,
1654. where the French Counselor condescends to say, That the Protestants of
this Kingdom, by Episcopacy, Liturgy, and Ceremonies, [which were retained]
had preserved the face, or image, of the Catholic Church; And I remember,
when I was in Flanders, an old Benedictine of our nation asking me, how I liked
the decency of their Churches, and solemnity of their Service, or public
Worship, I answered, to this purpose, That I observed little more in substance,
then what he might have formerly seen, if he had pleased, in our King's
Chapel, St. Paul's London, and St. Peter's Westminster, with the other
Cathedrals we had in England; whereto he somewhat sarcastically replied, That
in Archbishop Laud's time, indeed (which he needed not to have specified in
absolute derogation to all the former from the first Reformation) your Church
washed, and beautified her face a little, but, for all that, more intrinsecally
she was a very slut; Let them look to that, if cause be still, who, after some
intimations given by Bishop Andrews, Mountague, and others, should see
supplied what may be found wanting, and applied by practice, to render her
through-reformed, and preserve her from all such reproach. As for the good old
Monk, if I had been in another Country, I should have wiped his mouth with my
Handkercheif, and opened the eyes of his understanding for a better prospect of
truth among us.

As to the second, I know none but our rigid Calvinists, that became absolute
Renegadoes, and desertors of the Roman Church, much less of the Catholic,
though taken in their own sense, which all good men and moderate among them
will allow us to call what they would have it to be Roman Catholic Reformed;
Reform we did, when they would not, by degrees, what was first found to be
amiss by themselves, before, and at, their little Synod of Trent, (for no other
then so was it, compared to a truly General, or universal Council, Italy
alone being but a spot, or parsell of the Universe;) And retain we did so much
as the circumstances of those times would permit, of the Doctrine and
Discipline transmitted to us from the more ancient, because being, as called,
the Primitive Church, as it extends to the first five Centuries at least, if
no more; which her H. might have found averred by all the Orthodox Fathers, and
other Learned Writers, then, and since then, of our English Nation; whose
works, if they had not come to her sight before, all Libraries, at her desire,
would have been searched for her satisfaction, and why somewhat to that purpose
was not seasonably ordered, I am not to be accountable; And if Mr. Jones had
said no more but that either her R. H. departed from us, or her Directors, who
e're they were, left her solitary in her choice, upon too easy terms, I could
have little contradicted.

That somewhat more of what they opin'd, and practiced, might have been taken
in by our first Reformers, or may be yet by a National Synod, or Convocation,
if commissioned to consider of it, I freely grant, and suppose it to be the
sense of our best Divines; for King James's Apophthegm takes not with all, nor
may be taken in a strict restraint to what is already done, I like not riding
so near; For better Authority then my own, I will cite no other, (and am sure I
can cite no better) then Bishop Andrews, nor any more authentic part of his
works, then his private Prayers; who, in his Manual of Meditations, and
private Devotions, for Monday every week, beggs of the Lord, for the Church
Catholic Confirmation, and Enlargement; Eastern deliverance and unity; Western
(wherein ours is included) perfection and peace; but more expressly for the
British (which is our own) supply of what is wanting, establishment of what
remains; (may the good Prelate's Prayer be answered to perpetuity in the last,
whatsoever becomes of the first) For why we should quit what we have, because
we have not all we would, and go over we well know not, why, or whither, is a
Riddle I yet understand not; nor, if I may enjoy my share in what we have,
though I never have it of what we want, (it being no part of my province to
gain enlargement,) I hope my conscience will never be much perplexed about our
present, wherein soever defective, State.

But the three remarkes her R. H. made in reading Dr. Heylyn's History seemed
so heinous, or odious, as ought not, she thought, to be digested toward a
Reformation.

1. Henry the eight's Luxery, the Popes restraint of which made him struggle,
and at last get loose. 2. The covetousness and sacrilege of the Lord Protector
to Edward the sixth; And 3. The nullity of Queen Elizabeth's Title to the
Crown.
The last of which I do not find asserted, but rather the contrary, by Dr.
Heylyn, who makes the Estate of Sir Thomas Bollen's Family to have become
fortunate by the production of that Princess, to the Realm of England, Page 86.
Who reports the illegitimation of the Lady Mary, and entailing of the Crown,
for the default of issue male, upon the Princess Elizabeth; somewhat he has of
Henry the eight's apprehension, when he became as much offended at his second
Marriage, as he had been at the first, That the legitimation of his Daughter
Elizabeth might be as likely to be called in question, in the time succeeding,
as that of Mary in the former, Page 91. yet afterward, That if her Mother had
only lost her head, though with the loss of her honor, it would have been no
bar to her Daughter Elizabeth from succeeding her Father in the Throne, page
93. And what ground was found out, on which to dissolve the Marriage, he cannot
tell, it not appearing upon record; but that it was dissolved, does, by a
solemn instrument under the Seal of Archbishop Cranmer etc. page 94. And if it
were done errante clave, (as, for ought we know, it might) our doubting
Duchess was not obliged to demurr upon that, unless with intent to suspend her
censure, and her change too, (upon that account) until better assurance, which
neither the Doctor's History, nor any other, I have heard of, could give her.
Finally, whatsoever difficulties might be made, That the Crown did of right
belong to her, when the point was brought to issue, both the Doctor ownes, upon
the death of Queen Mary, and the Parliament then sitting could not deny it her.
Page 101.

Her Highnesses scruple rested then, it seems, upon K. Henry's Lust after
change of Wives, and her abomination of Sacrilege laid to the charge of him
and others, which I know none of our faithful Historians have much endeavored
to excuse, or palliate; It being the sense of them all, which my Lord Bishop of
Derry thus declared in his Schism guarded, page 58. Posterity is not guilty of
their Ancestors transgression further then they do imitate them, or maintain
them. And as for acts of Sacrilege and the like impieties (as certainly Henry
the eighth, and some others cannot be freed from such) they are by us as freely
charged upon the actors, as by any Romanist they can be, says the sound and
learned Dr. Hammond, chapter 7. of Schism, adding, But yet Sacrilege is no more
Schism then Adultery, and the Church, on which one sin has been committed,
cannot be from thence proved to be guilty of every other. These, and a hundred
more authorities to intercept such objections, if the Duchess knew not, her H.
cannot be well excused; and if she did, which may more reasonably be supposed,
how can you and I Mr. Jones, afford credit to Mounsieur Maimburg, that she
would use so weak an argument, to justify her Secess. So that her Highnesses
imagination, was unnecessarily troubled about the concurrence of God's Spirit
with such heinous acts, and manifest impieties, as the libertinage of K. H. 8.
The Lord Protector Seymour's Sacrilege, and Q. Elizabeth's Usurpation, (if it
may be supposed.) But the H. Spirit might go along with a final renunciation
of the Pope's usurpt Supremacy, and tyranny over our King and Nation, after 400
years dispute about the point, with intervalls, and variety of success on
either side; And an Oath may be tendered to maintain the Kings Independent
Praerogative in Church affairs, quoad extra, without any offense, or resistance
of the said H. Spirit; Of which Praerogative yet if a King (which I put at
large, because all Christian Kings are alike concerned in the case) will at any
time remit, and deliver freely, or with some reserve, his Ecclesiastike Power
into the hands of the Church, or into his whom he will constitute, for the
time, Caput unitatis, the Head of unity in his Realm (as many have done, and do
at this present) I know no reason, why the Subject should not submit to that
derivative power, which being held of the King, is ordained of God; For to say,
That, before the Reformation made, any Subject might have withdrawn his
obedience to the King, because the King had vested that part of his power in
the Pope, I fear had been little less than resisting, or at least declining the
ordinance of God; to go on no further in that Text.

But I return to our most unhappily perplexed Princess, who takes offense at
the Bishops, that were of the first Reformers, for pretending their sole design
to have been re-establishing the Doctrine and Discipline of the Primitive
Church, after Henry 8. had enterpriz'd a separation from Rome upon no other
account but his own satisfaction in criminal pleasures: What K. Henry 8's
principal, or less principal intents were, I know none but the ghost of his
Confessor, if raised again, could assure her; The most Reverend Archbishop
Cranmer, no doubt, knew most of his mind, from beginning to end, in the matter
of divorce, and what annexes it had of his criminal pleasures, etc. but, in
what I have seen of his Grace's writing, I met with nothing at all which in
that particular could have gratified her Highness: yet be K. Henry's meaning
altogether so bad as suspected, I understand not why the Reverend Bishops, who
were better inclined, should be involved with him in the sin, being
instruments, under God, of bringing good out of evil, and who, by such degrees
as K. Henry's other policies would permit, made good that pretense, both the
rest of his, and in the few years of Edward 6. his Reign, howsoever managed by
that covetous Lord Protector in his minority, as in a great part, beside other
instances, our Historians have mentioned, does undeniably appear in that little
Code of Reformation, as I may call it, entitled, The institution of a
Christian Man, composed and published by, and with the consent of many pious
and prudent persons, Anno 1537. viz, the two Archbishops at that time, nineteen
of the Bishops, eight Archdeacons, and seventeen Professors of Divinity,
Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws; which book and some other like, beside many
Dedicatory and Praefatory Epistles praefixed to them, if her H. had neither in
possession, nor seen, she was strangely destitute of due assistance, and not
well praepared for so severe a censure in a praecipitate Declaration.

Nor yet much better, I fear, for the application, she next made, to instruct
her self in the controversiall points between us and the Roman-Catholiques,
having not read, as may be presumed, the Primitive Fathers, and Councels, but
relying upon sole Scripture, without the Conciliators of Texts, (if not
opposite, inconsistent in show) nor other authentike Interpreters, but her own
private spirit, perhaps forearmed with prayers and tears, but not praeassured
by promise of Divine assistance, and all desired success in the revelation of
truth, (the solemn objection thrust upon us, successively by the Papists) and a
too forward adventure, which most commonly imports more haste then good speed,
as is here manifested by the sequel, in her own Confession, That the Scripture
she believed not her self, by her self, capable to understand; Yet on her H.
went, and, notwithstanding the distrust she had of self and solitary abilities,
to her astonishment, in the most difficult points of all, drew with her own
Bucket more truth, as she was mis-perswaded, from the bottom of the Well, then
the woman of Samaria could do with hers, who went her way, and left her
water-pot behind her, having her thirst quenched indeed, yet not with the water
she her self had drawn, but with that of the Spirit, infused from the mouth of
the Messiah, the infallible Prophet, the Christ, as the Samaritan so good as
confessed to the Citizens she earnestly called upon to come and see, not to
suddenly believe, until better attested to 'em; Venite and videte, not venite
and credit, as Aquinas has it from St. Chrysostom; And proijciat hydriam qui
vult Evangelizare. He, or she, that will evangelize, or interpret the Gospel
rightly, must leave his Bucket behind him, or break his Water-pot in pieces.

[ IN ay tronve neantmoins, etc.] Yet notwithstanding her distrust, her H.
found what she could not promise her self so soon to discover, several things,
which now appeared so plain, and, according to her judgment, so easy to
comprehend, that she wondered a thousand times, how so long time had passed
without reflecting on 'em;

The particulars, whereof she now was strongly convinced, [ fortement
convaincue] were, 1. The real presence of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament of the
Altar; 2. The infallibility of the Church. 3. Confession, Auricular she means;
And 4. Prayers for the Dead; Of all which could I be convinced by the strongest
argument I have heard, or read, in their Controversiall Writers, I would soon
be so far converted too.

Of the first so many volumes have been written on both sides, that I am
persuaded, there can be little argument invented new on either, to avoid
transcript, or the Author's disrepute of being plagiary, but what is futile in
so serious a quaestion, or what makes the Schism and Distance between us
unnecessarily, if not affectedly, greater; for, setting aside the History of
opinions in the several ages of the Church, the quotations of Fathers, and
other modern Authors, the variety of expressions, every man desiring to utter
his own mind in his own words, I really believe, the substance of what we mean,
as relating to the whole controversy, might be as well, and as intelligibly,
contracted into one single sheet, as spread upon so many thousand quires of
Paper which fly about the world. But to the point.

The real presence [ la presence reelle] in the Sacrament of the Altar was the
first thing her R. H. missed in the Church of England; I hope the Reverend D.
Sutclive did not, whose book she ever had in her hand, when we approached to
administer the body and blood of our Savior to her, upon her knees; If he did,
I am sure his equals, and his superiors, our Church Dignitaries and others,
have not declined the term Real, from the beginning of our Reformation to this
day, nor to declare what is meant by the same, according to the sense and
acception of the Primitive Fathers, whom they cite in multitudes to authorize
the Doctrine of our Church therein; Of some the most eminent I shall render
their own words, and afterward apply my self to what follows.

Let the most Reverend Archbishop Cranmer be the first, who in the Preface of
his Answer unto D. Stephen Gardener p. 1. says

Where I use to speak sometimes (as the old Authors do) that Christ is in the
Sacraments, I mean the same as they did understand the matter, that is to say,
not of Christ's carnal presence in the outward Sacrament, but sometimes of his
Sacramental presence -- -- --

That Christ and his holy Spirit be truly, and indeed, present by their mighty
and sanctifying power, virtue, and grace, in all them that worthily receive the
same.

Again, page 8. of his first Book of the Sacrament. As he gives the Bread, so
gives he his very body to be eaten with our Faith. And therefore I say, that
Christ gives himself truly to be eaten, chawed, and digested, but all is
Spiritually with Faith, not with mouth.

The Reader is to take notice, That when his Grace uses the terms verily and
indeed, which are the same in our Church-Catechisme, I understand his sense
aequivalent to theirs after him, who say, really, upon the like occasion,
neither he nor they meaning more, or less, then our Church does, nor all
otherwise then did the Primitive Fathers; for when really is extended to denote
transubstantially, his Grace afterward utterly disclaimes it.

As does likewise the Right Reverend Bishop Jewel of Sarum, our Church
Apologist against the Papists. page 319. of his Reply to Mr. Harding's Answer;
We teach the people, not that a naked Sign, or Token, but that Christ's Body,
and Blood, indeed and verily is given unto us; that we verily eat it: that we
verily drink it; that we verily be relieved, and live by it. -- Yet we say not,
either that the substance of the Bread or Wine is done away: or that Christ's
Body is let down from Heaven, or made Really, or Fleashly Present in the
Sacrament.

The most Reverend Archbishop Laud declines not at all the word, but commends
it for the best that can be used in the matter of the H. Sacrament, page 188.
of the Relat. of his Conf. speaking of C. Bellarmine, thus; Now if he had left
out Conversion, and affirmed only Christ's real presence there, after a
mysterious; and indeed an ineffable manner, no man could have spoke better.

Again page 192. And for the Church of England, nothing is more plain, than
that it believes and teaches the True and Real presence of Christ in the
Eucharist. And this his Grace declares; not only for himself, but urges, that
Archbishop Cranmer comes more plainly, and more home to it than Frith, [a
Martyr for it that had said enough before] For if you understand (says he) by
this word really, Reipsa, that is in very deed and effectually; so Christ by
the grace and efficacy of his Passion, is indeed and truly present, etc. but if
by this word Really, you understand Corporaliter Corporally, in his natural and
Organical Body, under the Forms of Bread and Wine, it is contrary to the Holy
Word of God.

And so likewise Bishop Ridley. Nay, Bishop Ridley adds yet farther, and
speaks so fully to this Point, as I think no man can add to his Expression.
Both you and I (says he) agree in this: That in the Sacrament is the very true
and natural Body and Blood of Christ, even that which was born of the Virgin
Mary; which ascended into Heaven, which sits on the right hand of God the
Father; which shall come thence to judge the quick and the dead. Only we differ
in modo, etc.

With the aforesaid Prelates the learned Bishop Mountagu thus accords page 250.
of his Answer to the Gagger, He gave substance, and really subsisting essence,
who said, This is my body: this is my Blood: It. page 251. Poor Woodcock or
Catholic Cockscomb, that sendest a Protestant to seek a figure, who is as
real and substantial as any Papist.

Id. afterward in his Appeal page 289. speaking to the Informers. Which Real
presence, in your Divinity, is flat Popery; but not in the Divinity of the
Church of England; for this he cites Bishop Bilson, Andrews, Morton; and for
the easy accommoding the difference between them and us, were it not for the
Jesuits faction on their side, and the Puritans on ours, the incomparable
Hooker, that Puritanomastix, as he calls him.

To this effect is the late Bishop of Durham's first Chapter in his accurate
History of Papal Transubstantiation, where the Real, that is, the true, and
not imaginary Presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, is asserted
out of the Sacred Scriptures, according to the very words praefixed in the
Title of it.

And the most acute, no less solid, Bishop Ier. Tailor in his larger Tractate,
entitled, The Real presence and Spiritual of Christ in the blessed
Sacrament, Proved against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

Which Doctrine is, that no question her H. means, though couched in the word
Real, not considering, perhapps, that Real-Spiritual may altogether as well
be in conjunction as Real-Carnal, or Corporeal; otherwise her complaisance in
the discovery had not been such as to deserve her astonishment, or wonder, when
of so many learned Writers we have upon that Subject, she could scarce have
taken a book in hand which would not have set the term, or true sense and
meaning of it in her view, with the concession of our Church, if she had read,
or heard other of it, the Authors were not well studied in the point, but took
on trust the expressions of our early Writers after the Reformation, whereas
the true state of the Controversy was not so clearly understood at first on
either side as it is now. Said the Bishop of Derry, Sch. Guard. p. 378. And
being so, in the opinion of those I mentioned, and many more may the
difference, so formidable as it looks, be much more easily reconciled then
heretofore, both sides contributing their symbol to a happy peace, and not
struggling for that which never will be made good and evident on either; For
had her H. known or consided, what the Author of Fiat lux says, there have
been fifty, or threescore several interpretations of these few words, Hoc est
corpus meum, This is my body, which, it may be, upon further search he might
have multiplied to a hundred by variety of paraphrase in every man's peculiar
distinct way of expression, and did all those vanish, or return to their first
origin, the literal sense at last, by fixing a more steady eye, or serious
thought then formerly upon the Text? Bishop Mountagu who had many Bibles, and
Interpreters of all sorts about him, after a thorough search, could not so
determine it, but much otherwise, viz. Transubstantiation, or the change of the
substance of Bread and Wine in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by Holy
Writ: but it is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, overthrows the
nature of a Sacrament, and has given occasion unto many superstitions. Appeal
page 297. Yet allthough we deny the change so called to be reasonable, or
intelligible; I remember not that we deny it to be possible; by God's
omnipotence, which is not limited by rules of reason, and natural Philosophy,
in extraordinary transmutations; But to say, God does it, because he can do it,
is no logical argument; nor holds it any more in this, then in a thousand
other things, within the infinitude of his power, which we be sure, are not,
nor do we believe shall be ever actually accomplished.

And why her H. should be troubled in conscience about that she knew, or might
have known, many learned, honest, and industrious men on both sides (for that
is truth, had her H. taken time to look about her) could never attain to,
beyond the (...)! or (...)! I confess is my wonder; yea, and so much the more,
because she had in her own power, which was enough to quiet her own Conscience,
what she alleged she wanted; for I positively demand, who hindered her from
believing Transubstantiation, if by Revelation or self-perswasion, or
submission to the opinion of some admired, or endeared person, she was
prevailed with to believe it true, or intrinsecally to adhaere to it, as if it
were? Who from paying divine worship, after such mis-perswasion or submission,
to the body and blood of our Savior, when tendered to her upon her knees? The
Church directed her R. H. among others, what she would have her do, according
to the Doctrine published in the Confession of it, but the Church enquired not
after what she thought, or with what intention she acted her part in that holy
duty, and, I hope her Conscience was not troubled, because others did not, upon
like principles, or in kind compliance, what she would have them, and tell her
H. so at their hazard. Our Bishop Jewel quotes D. Tonstall, (and seems not to
dislike it) saying thus; Of the manner and mean how this might be (whether by
Transubstantiation, or otherwise) perhaps it had been better to leave every man
that would be Curious, to his own Conjecture: as before the Council of
Laterane, it was left at liberty, Pef. of Apol. page 237. And in general upon
like occasion (wherein this may be supposed included) says that H. Martyr
Archbishop Laud, -- how far that Belief or any other, sinkes into a man's
heart, is for none to judge but God. Conf. p. 213. Further yet, Her ghostly
Father of the Roman Church, if none of ours were to be trusted, might have
instructed her, That Suarez, among diverse other, a learned man of great note
with them, made plain confession, That, to believe Transubstantiation is not
necessary to be taken in to the Doctrine of Faith; and why then should her H.
be so much concerned for it? And D. Fisher sometime Bishop of Rochester, That
it cannot be proved by any Scripture. Bishop Jewel Repl. And if not thence to
be proved, her persuasion was groundess, and her labor in the search
fruitless, if not fallicious as to her self; for most certain it is, those
deep-learned Doctors could dive further into the sense of H. Writ, then a Lady
that meant well, but had little skill in Metaphysics to assist her, which
Suarez himself says this point requires; but against private illumination, or
a self-conceit of it, whether so, or no, I can say nothing. In sum, the
change that does so divide us, what e're it be, is a secret of God's own
making, and a secret of God's own keeping, wherein her H. might have
acquiesced, with the like moderation, as the Lady Elizabeth showed, before she
came to be Queen, which she might have read with the other passages in Dr.
Heylyn's History, very substantially, and significantly, allthough rhythmically
thus expressed,

'Twas God the Word that spoke it,
He took the Bread and brake it,
And what the Word did make it,
That I believe and take it.
I add but one word more; The mysteries being so great, and the difficulties
being so many; I much doubt, whether the more intelligent sort of
Roman-Catholiques do themselves believe Transubstantiation, though so earnest
for it, to obtain the better Character among the more simple Devotes that do;
which when I was in those countries, I adventured to tell some of them, who had
patience enough to hear it, without making a very earnest, much less a
reproachful, answer; and very glad I am, that, upon this occasion, I have met
with countenance, and am confirmed in my suspicion by a most reverend and able
Author, Archbishop Laud Conf. page 192. where his Grace declares opinion in
these few lines.

As for the Learned of those zealous-men, that died in this Cause in Q. Mary's
days, they denied not the Real presence, simply taken, but as their Opposites
forced Transubstantiation upon them, as if that and the Real presence had been
all one; Whereas all the Ancient Christians ever believed the one, and none but
Modern and Superstitious Christians believe the other; if they do believe it:
for I, for my part doubt they do not. And as for the Un-learned in those times,
and all times, their zeal (they holding the Foundation) may eat out their
Ignorances, and leave them safe. Be contented with, That it is the Body of
Christ, and do not seek, nor define; how it is so, and we shall not contest,
nor contend, says Bishop Mountagu in his Appeal, Chapter 31. In which happy medium
may both parties meet, and be indissolubly or indivisibly for ever reconciled.

Of Infallibility.
Her Highnesses next discovery was an Infallibility of the Church, but points
not to any one or more Texts of Scripture, by which she owned her self
convinced; nor yet teils us, what she means by the Church, nor in what points,
or cases, she would have it infallible, unless she intends all; And where is
that, or those Texts of Scripture that did convince her? What concerning
Infallibility she might have learned from our most eminent Writers, I shall
produce, for their sakes who may be under the same difficulty, and, perhaps,
not so successful, or sudden, in meeting with the like satisfaction as our
Duchess did.

As for the most learned, and acute Dr. Ier. Taylour, I can not tell, whether I
were best advise 'em to read, first, or last of all, his 1. Sect. of the second
Part of the Disswalive from Popery, where he treats of it at large; because,
if first, I am afraid they will meet with such Moeanders, uncertain windings,
and short turns of subtilty, I mean not Sophistry, but Scholastike double
refined notices, which he makes unavoidable in the inquiry, as they will hardly
have courage enough to consult any other Author afterward, nor submission
enough to arrest on him. And if they take him last in hand, whatsoever Rock of
Authority, or Reason, they may have built on before, the sharpness of his Pen
and Fancy will be such, as to eat or penetrate into every cleft of it, and not
only break it into shivers, but multiply them into heaps of Sand, which being
washed away by the Spring-tyde of his ingenious approaches, and irresistible
force of his argumentative assaults, their building must needs fall, and be
carried into an Abyss or Ocean, which they can never fathom, or sound the
depth of.

Archbishop Cranmer, in his Answer to Smith's Preface, speaks not home enough
to their purpose, where he says; Truth it is, indeed, that the Church does
never wholly err, for ever in most darkness God shines unto his elect, and in
the midst of all iniquity he governs them so with his holy word and spirit,
that the gates of Hell prevail not against them -- -- -- -- This Church is the
pillar of truth, because it rests upon God's word, which is the true and sure
foundation, and will not suffer it to err and fall. Page 405. 406. It is the
invisible Church his Grace means, for of the outward, and visible, he
absolutely denies it; and this proves, I confess, rather the perpetuity, then
infallibility, of the Church.

Bishop Field recollects several acceptions of the Church, Book 4. Chapter 2.
First, as it comprehends the whole number of believers, that are, and have
been, since Christ appeared in the flesh; which Church, he says, is absolutely
free from all error and ignorance of Divine things, that are to be known by
revelation. The second acception is, as it comprehends only all those
believers, that are, and have been, since the Apostles time; which, in things,
that are, of necessity, to be expressly known by all that will be saved, that it
should err, is impossible; And, further, thinks it as impossible, that any
error, whatsoever, should be found in all the Pastors and Guides of the
Church, thus generally taken. Touching the Church, as it comprehends only
the believers that now are in the world, he says, In things necessary to be
known, and believed expressly, and distinctly, it never is ignorant, much less
does it err; yea, in things that are not absolutely necessary to be known and
believed expressly, and distinctly, it never is ignorant, much less does it
err; yea, in things that are not absolutely necessary to be so known and
believed, we constantly believe, that this Church can never err, nor doubt,
pertinaciously, etc.

But, because I doubt, whether our Princess made reflection upon the Church in
such a diffusive sense, and supposing that she wanted such an Oracle of
Infallibility, as to which there could be access for imediate resolve of
scruples and doubts, upon all occasions, (which, I fear, had her H. lived
longer to make trial, would have been as much missing in the Roman Church, as
in ours,) I must lay aside many other excellent Writers upon this point, I have
before me, or at hand, and take up one, so learned, and Orthodox as the best,
and him the rather, because he uses not to be so nice in uttering his mind
freely and learnedly, and yet making it consistent with the Article of our
Church, though in appearance, point blanck contradictory to what he resolutely
concludes, it is Bishop Mountagu I mean, who in his Appeal, where he justifies
what he had said in his answer to the Gagger; his Position is this,

The Church Representative, true and lawful, never yet erred in Fundamentals,
and therefore I see no cause but to vouch, The Church Representative can not
err,

The Church Representative is a General Council not titularly so, as the
Conventicle of Trent, but plenarily true, general and lawful.

Points Fundamental be such as are immediate unto faith -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Let any man living show me, says he, any historical mistakings,
misreportings, where, when, in what any General Council, according to true
acception, or Church Representative, has so erred in the resolution and
decission of that Council; for in the debating of doubts, questions,
propositions, the case is otherwise, and not the same.

I conceive and acknowledge but four Counsels of this kind, that of Nice, of
Constantinople, of Ephesus, of Chalcedon.

The Church of England may seem to have been of a contrary mind in her
determinations; For Artic. 21. we read thus

General Councels -- -- -- -- -- when they be gathered together (forasmuch as
they be an assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the spirit and
word of God) they may err, and sometime have erred, even in things pertaining
unto God.

Which decision of the Article is not home to this purpose, as he particularly
proves, and has the approbation of the Reverend Dr. Francis White, afterward
Bishop of Ely, that he found nothing therein [in that and his whole Book] but
what is agreeable to the Public Faith, Doctrine and Discipline of the Church
of England, of whose Doctrine the said 21 Article is a noted part.

But because the Bishop leaves this Infallibility at above a thousand years
distance, viz: the last General Council of Chalcedon, attributing no such
thing to any the pretended General Councels since; it is necessary I go seek a
supplement somewhere else, for the guidance of doubting persons, who may be at
loss, what to think the state of the Church has been in so long an intervall;
and, if they take Posterity into their care, what it may be in a much longer
yet to come, before such another General Council meet, now the Latin Church
seems to be finally settled upon the Lees of the Decisions in the Council of
Trent. Among those many I have turned over, I find not where to furnish my self
better then from the (...), the (...), that most glorious Martyr, now a
resplendent starr of magnitude among the Saints above, in his famed Book,
commended by that Royal Martyr not long before he drank of the same Cup, that
bloody Brook in the way to his celestial Crown, Archbishop Laud's Conference
with Mr. Fisher the Jesuit; where his Grace says,

Whether a General Council may err, or not, is a Question of great
consequence in the Church of Christ, To say, It can not err, leaves the Church
not only without remedy against an error once determined; but also without
sense that it may need a remedy, and so without care to seek it -- -- To say,
It can err, seems to expose the members of the Church to an uncertainty and
wavering in the Faith, to make unquiet spirits, not only to disrespect former
Councels of the Church, but also to slight and contemn whatsoever it may now
determine. -- -- -- -- I said, the Determination of a General Council erring
was to stand in force, and to have External Obedience at least yielded to it,
till Evidence of Scripture, or a Demonstration to the Contrary, made the Error
appear; and until thereupon another Council of equal Authority did reverse it.
Page 146. 147.

In the following Considerations is added, with submission to our Mother the
Church of England, and to the Mother of us all, the Universal Catholic Church
of Christ;

That the Assistance of the H. Ghost is without error, that is no quaestion:
and as little there is, That a Council has it.

This, in the abstract, is as home as need to be in the point, but this,
afterward, is somewhat moderated, by distinguishing the infallibility of the
after-Councels from that of the Apostles themselves, Acts, 15. where they say
of themselves, and the Council held by them: It seems good to the Holy Ghost
and to us, (who might indeed, well say it) but he does not find, that any
General Council since, though they did implore, as they ought, the assistance
of that Blessed Spirit, did ever take upon them to say, in-terminis, in express
terms of their Definitions, Visum est Spiritui Sancto, and Nobis; It seemed
good to the Holy Ghost and to us, Acknowledging thereby (as I conceive) a great
deal of difference in the Certainty of those things which a General Council
had after determined in the Church, and those which were settled by the
Apostles, when they sat in Council; But then, again, though he did not find,
That they used this speech punctually in terms, yet the Fathers, when they met
in Council, were Confident, and spoke it out, That They had assistance from the
Holy Ghost; yet so, as that They neither took Themselves, nor the Councels They
sat in, as Infallibly Guided by the Holy Ghost, as the Apostles were; And he
says, Valentia is very right in concluding, That though the Council say, they
are gathered together in the Holy Ghost, yet the Fathers are neither arrogant,
in using the speech, nor yet Infallible for all that. If other their Writers
had used the like moderation, perhaps her R. H. had not been so much concerned
about it.

I expect nothing more will be obtained from other our Controvertists toward
the satisfaction of any in like condition; yet because Mr. Chillingworth had a
more peircing eye of reason then most of the rest, I will sum up his method
so short as I can, and see what we can make good out of it.

This he lays as the groundwork of his Discourse with F. Knott; That the
distinction of Points Fundamental, and not Fundamental, is in this Controversy
good and pertinent: And that the Catholic Church may err in the latter kind
of the said Points.

2. That it is not so prodigiously strange as his adversary thinks: That we
will never be induced to give in a particular Catalogue, what points be
Fundamental. Page 119. 3. That may be Fundamental and necessary to one, which
to another is not so; Which variety of Circumstances makes it imposible to set
down an exact Catalogue of Fundamentals -- and therefore we must content our
selves, by a general description to tell what is Fundamental. 4. It is
sufficient for any man's salvation, to believe that the Scripture is true; and
contains all things necessary for salvation; and to do his best endeavor to
find and believe the true sense of it, without delivering any particular
Catalogue of Fundamentals. Page 120. 5. Though the Church may err in some
points not Fundamental: yet may she have certainty enough in proposing others.
6. He that grants the Church infallible in Fundamentals, and ascribes to the
Apostles the infallible guidance of the Spirit, in a more high and absolute
manner, than to any since them, limits not the Apostles infallibility to
Fundamentals. 7. The Apostles were led into all Truths by the Spirit
efficaciter; The Church is led into all Truths, by the Apostle writings
sufficienter. Page 131. led so as that she may follow; but not so, that she
must.
These assertions of his influence the most part of his long Discourse with the
learned Jesuit; If ought more there be to strengthen them, it may fall in with
what I have yet to add, relating to the invaledity of her R. Highnesses motive
for deserting our Church, upon account of any assurance she could have of
being, more firmly, and finally, settled in this point, upon the grounds and
principles thereof in the Church of Rome; For yiedling, pro dato, not concesso
what the greatest Doctors there would have, more particularly those of ours
that went over to them before this good Lady; I demand, what found they there
beyond what they had here at home? I will fix upon one or two of them, in whose
conversion they so good as tell us, they are most triumphant.

Let the first be Dr. Vane, Chaplain to his late Majesty, who, in the very
entrance to his sixth Chapter of The Infallibility of the Church, begins thus;

Now that the Catholic Church, (which Society of Christians soever it be) is
the only, faithful, and true witness of the matter of God's word, to tell us
what it is, and what is not it, the only true interpreter of the meaning of
God's word, and the last and final judge of all controversies, that may arise
in matters of Religion, and that she is not only true, but that she can not be
otherwise, seeing she is infallible.

Our Church, which is Catholic too, in concurrence with that he went to, is,
he knew, extended to the first four General Councels to the Fathers of the
first five or six hundred years, from whom we receive the Canon we have of the
H. Bible, and to whose writings we go for the interpretation of any Texts that,
any way, seem doubtful, if necessary to be resolved; In others not so
considerable, for ought I know, we leave every man to his own diligence in
comparing Text with Text, for mutual illustration; and to his own reason for
inference of the best truth from the premises he makes himself; or if so
ignorant, he can make none, we send him to the lips of his Parochial Priest,
or some other, at his choice, which certainly should preserve at least, so much
knowledge, as to determine the little difficulties brought to him, according to
the sense of our National Church, if such as whereof she has taken any
notice. For Catholic Tradition we go to the Catholic Writers, so truly
called; For what is unwritten we have no infallible living Oracle to consult,
no more have they, for ought I see, whereof any use can be made to present
satisfaction; and therein we may cry quitts, as afterward I shall briefly show.

The Conclusion herein laid down by D. Cressy, is as follows;

That it belongs alone to the Catholic Church, which is the only Depositary
of Divine Revelations, authoritatively, and with obligation, to propose those
Revelations to all Christians, etc. to interpret the Holy Scriptures, and to
determine all emergent Controversies; and this to the end of the world, in as
much as the Church by virtue of Christ's promises, and assistance, is not only
indefectible, but continually preserved in all truth.

Of what Divine Revelations the Catholic Church is Depositary, I have already
owned, viz. of the H. Scriptures, and the Primitive Fathers, in their Writings,
as being the best and surest Interpreters; The difficulty yet sticks at the
determining emergent Controversies, which may be multiplied in infinitum, by
too dubious, and over-scrupulous persons, so well in smaller, as greater,
matters, in whose behalf, for living Oracles or other certainty of infallible
resolution, I am yet to seek I confess; And therefore setting aside all nice
disputes about indefectibility of their Church, and generality of Truth
preserved by her, I must, and may, I hope, freely demand of Mounsieur
Maimburg's Proxy if he have any in England.

Whether the Controversies, or doubts raised in our Princess's breast, were not
emergent, whereof since her R. H. could not be resolved with us, I may,
modestly, ask whither they sent her for satisfaction; or rather, what
infallible Judge it was, whom they brought to her bedside in that infirm
condition; I would use no railery in these solemn discourses, but their matter
of stating the case in quaestion does, as it were, obliege me to do somewhat
like it, after which short apology, I hope I may be allowed to proceed; The
Pope in person it could not be, who is resident at Rome, and has enough to do
with the Controversies and emergences, that from all parts of Christendom are
carried to him; The Catholic Church it could be less, in what notion soever
taken, whether as Collective, Diffusive, Representative, etc. No Council
sitting, the dispersed Members of any impossibility not consulted; and from the
Conclave, I hope, came not the infallible spirit, I say, not in a Carriers
budget, as my Lord of Derry has been pleased, in a little ironie, to word it,
with reference to that at Trent; In fine, this infallible Judge might be
Monsieur Maimburg himself, or some other Ghostly Father nearer hand, always
readily prepared, In nomine Domini, sanctaeque Matris Ecclesiae, to decide all
Controversies, and clear all scruples in an instant, that could be suggested to
him; If so, then I come about again to my learned Controvertist Mr.
Chillingworth, and borrow two or three questions from him, which I leave to be
applied to the present Case, as thought fit;

1. Whether an ignorant man (I insert, or a knowing, but doubting Lady) be
bound to believe any point to be decreed by the Church, when his Priest or
Ghostly Father assures him, it is so. 2. Whether his ghostly Father may not err
in telling him so: and whether any man can be obliged, under pain of damnation,
to believe an error. 3. Whether he be bound to believe such a thing defined,
when a number of Priests, perhaps ten, or twenty, tell him, it is so; And what
assurance he can have, that they neither err, nor deceive him in this matter.
4. I add another upon my own account, though others may have done it before me;
whether it be not the same Church, which now averrs her self to be infallible,
that made the first decision of it; and if so, how she can be sure, she erred
not, in making the said decision; which may carry on the question in infinitum?
where I leave it; concluding with my Lord Bishop of Derry's question in the
case;

What avails it to say, they have the Church for an infallible Judge, whilst
they are not certain, or do not know, what the Church is; or who this
infallible Judge is, Sch. Guard. Page 406. Or what satisfaction had her R. H. in
deserting our Church, because she found no infallibility pretended by it; and
going over to the Church of Rome, which, though it pretends all that may be to
it, yet in reality can have as little, as appears by what is said above.


CONFESSION.
The next point, wherein her R. H. declares she was convinced, is that of
Confession; The use whereof our Church neither denies, nor discourageth, in any
case, as I know; but, in some, advises; and, in other, wishes, it might be
reduced into practice, no exception being by her made against any frequency,
whereunto poor penitents may be inclined, for quiet of Conscience, and internal
acquiessence; The necessity of it she rejects, yet lays no censure on them
that hold it, so they keep their opinion within their breasts, and neither
impose it on any dissenting brethren, nor publish it to the disturbance of her
members, who may be well enough satisfied, if, when they see cause, they can
open their grief, and, by the ministry of God's holy Word, receive the
benefit, and comfort of absolution.

That I may not be thought, herein, to go beyond my line, or the rule by which
I am to draw it, Mr. Jones, I will consult two or three of our very Orthodox
Fathers, whom, I am sure, you and your party are not able to confute.

Let the Learned Bishop Mountague be the first, in his books before cited, who
says in brief so much as needs, in the case against his Informers, who
alleged for the opinion of our Church, this, That we must not confess our sins
but only unto God.

1. Show me any such inhibition. 2. The most that has been said is, That
private Confession is free, not tied, and therefore Juris positivi, not divini.
3. Therefore happily of convenience, not of absolute necessity. 4. That in a
private Confession unto a Priest, a peculiar enumeration of all sins, both
commission and omission, with all circumstances, and accidents, is never
necessary necessarily; most an end not expedient, nor yet, all things
considered, required. 5. It is confessed, that private Confession unto a
Priest, is of very ancient practice in the Church, of excellent use and
practice, being discreetly handled. 6. We refuse it to none, if men require it,
if need be to have it: We urge it and persuade it in extremis. We require it in
case of perplexity, for the quieting of men disturbed, and their consciences.
7. It has been so acknowledged by those of the Church of Rome; in the
Visitation of the sick, Before the receiving of the Lord's Supper, According to
which doctrine, and injunction, our Bishops do, and should, enquire in their
Visitations, touching the use, and neglect of this so good an order, as did
that pious, learned, and reverend Bishop of Norwich, Dr. Overal in the 21
Article, enquired of in his Visitation 1619. concerning Ministers. And as
perhaps would do (as who of our worthy Prelacy, would not do?) his learned
Successor in that See at Presentiments, were it not for the trouble of
vindicating himself from Popery in the point, against such as you, and your
party, Mr. Jones; which I the rather presume, without his Lordships leave,
because of the excellent Sermon on this subject, many years since Printed,
which I heard Preached by him at St. Mary's in Cambridge, and although
questioned by the Puritanical pragmatick party, yet cleared by all other the
more sound Doctors in that Consistory, and applauded by all intelligent and
right-principled Members in that our famous and flourishing University.
The more modern and most excellent Bishop, Ier. Tailor, although very
censorious and invective, in some circumstances, enjoined, and practiced in the
Church of Rome, is near so indulgent as his Predecessors, in what has been
alleged as allowed by our Church; for in Part 2. Sect. 11. of Disuas: from
Pop: thus he writes;

Whether to confess to a Priest be an advisable discipline, and a good
instance, instrument, and Ministry of Repentance, and may serve many good ends
in the Church, and to the souls of needing persons, it is no part of the
Quaestion..... The Church of England is no way engaged against it, but advises
it and practices it.....

Ibid. P. 483 Indeed in order to Counsel or Comfort, it may be very useful to
tell all that grieves the penitent; all that for which he has no rest, and
cannot get satisfaction.

Were it necessary to search more among our Prelates and other Dignitaries of
our Church, that have freely delivered, and published their mind in this point
or to annex those I have already searched, I could easily comply with it; but
ex copia satietas; and ne quid nimium, a so good caution for moderation, puts a
restraint upon me; Wherefore I much wonder her R. H. should pretend to leave us
for want of Confessors, more then of Preachers; for if she had looked back to
some of our ancient Controvertists (that novellissime may not be charged on the
modern I have produced) she would have met with Bishop Jewel, our great
Apologist, rendering his opinion to like purpose, thus,

The Abuses and Errors set apart, we do no more mislike a Private Confession,
then a Private Sermon. Def. of his Apol. Part 2, Page 133.

But if to others of his time or since, Calvinistically addicted, so
tender-conscienced are they in yielding any thing (though our Church have done
it) toward a charitable and Christian accommodation with the Church of Rome, as
what they have written would in likelihood have little relieved her R. H. in
the trouble she had about it.

The said Church of Rome, indeed, is very strict in this Article, imposing upon
her Penitents a particular enumeration of all mortal sins, with all their
several aggravating circumstances, which our Royal Martyr in his Confer. page
172. says, is either not possible, or, at least, not necessary; and has a
colorable argument for that his opinion; which alone, then applied to the
Marquess, if it fully answer not the sum of all the learned Portuguise
Doctors, And radius, (of whom Bishop Mountagu, gives this singular Elogy above
others, qui ad Concilium Tridentinum attulit and profundissimi Theologimentem,
and linguam Oratoris discrtissimi, that he carried with him to the Council of
Trent the understanding of a most profound Divine, and the tongue of a most
eloquent Orator. Apparat. 1. ss. 75.) I say, if it answer's not the sum of
all that eminent person has, of all our Opposites most pertinently, amassed
for particular and perfect confession, I wish it were strengthened by our most
famed Controvertists of this time, toward the true stating the difference
between us, and then commending the practice of what they approve to the best
advantage, and reforming the frequency, and audacity, of sin in this
licentious age; Which the Romanists in France, and Flanders, do not altogether
with that fervent zeal, and diligent circumspection, as is pretended, at least
on their most solemn Festivals, when, usually, the greatest number address
themselves to their Confessors, publicly in their Churches, who make such a
slight scrutinie, and so indulgently dismiss their penitents, to save time, and
to give all that come the satisfaction to take their turn, that I have often
censured the practice of it there as a mere formal business, without enquiry
into many circumstances of aggravation; Nor do I remember that I ever saw one
single person arise from the knee with a penitential tear of sorrow upon the
cheek.

Yet, that some of their Fathers do, with integrity and discretion, mesnage
that great concern, I will conclude with a report of what an honest Franciscan
Friar, at St. Malo, told me and some other of our Nation; That his course was
this; When any penitent came to him for absolution, he would, the first time,
treat him gently, and impose no hard penance, in consideration of humane
frailty; That the second time he confessed a relapse to the same sin; he would
deal more severely with him; But if the third time he came to be eased of a
like burden, he would not trifle away his time, in discoursing with him, but
bid him go seek another Confessor, for himself would have no more, at all, to
do with him.

PRAYER for the DEAD.
The last conviction our Princess mention's, is of Prayer for the Dead; whereof
she might have been resolved by the same, or other, alike learned Writers, on
our side, so far as can be justified from the Precedent of the ancient Church;
and, I know no new discovery has been of that uncertain state, I mean of the
Dead, as should move us to more charity toward our deceased friends, then they
had for theirs, and so far as they we may adventure without control.

The Right Reverend Bishop of Derry gives us in short, what some others more
enlarge upon; Schism guard. page 231. We condemn not all praying for the dead;
not for their Resurrection, and the consummation of their happiness; but their
[the Papists] prayers for their deliverance out of Purgatory; for it is a great
mistake, to think Purgatory must needs be yielded, when we make such prayers;
For which error, Bishop Mountagu sharply reproves the Gagger, thus; You are a
poor Ignaro, that think, Souls must needs be in Purgatory, that receive
assistance from the Church; It may be your poor understanding will wonder at
it; but know, Sir, I can admit Prayer for the Dead, and deny your Purgatory.
Page 292. Which, I think, he repeats again to the Informers somewhere in his
Appeal.

Bishop Field, Book 3. Chapter 17. explaineth the manner of it among the Ancients,
viz. The custom of remembering the departed, naming their names at the Holy
Table, in the time of the holy mysteries, and offering the Eucharist, (that is
the sacrifice of praise) for there was a most ancient and godly custom,
neither is it any way disliked by us. -- -- In this sort they did most
religiously observe and keep, at the Lord's Table, the commemoration of all the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, and Confessors -- --
--: but if they wished any thing, it was the deliverance from the power of
death, which, as yet, tyranniseth over one part of them, the speedy destroying
of the last enemy, which is Death; the hastening of their resurrection, and
joyful public acquitall of them in that great day, wherein they shall stand
to be judged before the Judge of the quick and the dead. This was the practice
of the whole Church, and this the meaning of their commemorations and prayers,
which was good, and no way to be disliked. -- -- -- It was the opinion of many
of the Fathers, that there is no judgment to pass upon men till the last day;
that all men are holden either in some place under the earth, or else in some
other place appointed for that purpose, so that they come not into Heaven, nor
receive the reward of their labors, till the general judgment.

Seven Greek and Latin Fathers he names, whose opinion is such, and refers to
more, in the forecited Chapter.

But Bishop Tailor, (whose diligence in his researches was indefatigable, and
his discoveries, commonly, more successful then any others) has, beyond the
forementioned, some peculiar observations about this point, which afford great
allowances of Prayer for the Dead, yet no nearer approaches to Purgatory, held
by the Church of Rome. See, Part 2. of his Dissuasive from Popery, Book 2.
Sect. 2. where you will find what follows;

1. All the Fathers did pray for the Dead, yet they never prayed for their
deliverance out of Purgatory, nor ever meant it. 2. Though the Fathers prayed
for the Souls departed, that God would show them mercy; yet it was, that God
would show them mercy in the day of Judgment; In that formidable and dreadful
day, then there is need of much mercy unto us, says St. Chrysostom; so,
generally, Interpreters, Ancient and Modern, do understand it of Onesiphorus.
3. The faithful departed are in the hands of Christ as soon as they die, and
they are very well; And the Souls of the wicked are where it pleases God to
appoint them to be tormented by a fearful expectation of the day of Judgment;
but Heaven and Hell are reserved till the day of Judgment; and the Devils
themselves are reserved in Chains of darkness unto the judgment of the great
day, says St. Jude, and in that day they shall be sentenced, and so shall all
the wicked, to everlasting fire, which, as yet, is but prepared for the Devil
and his Angels for ever. 4. Some of the Ancients speak of visitation of Angels
to be imparted to the Souls departed, which is a mercy; And the hastening of
the day of Judgment is a mercy; And the avenging of the Martyrs upon their
Adversaries is a mercy; for which the souls under the Altar pray, says St.
John in the Revelation: And the Greek Fathers speak of a fiery trial at the day
of judgment, through which every one must pass; and there will be great need of
mercy. 5. After all this; there is a remission of sins proper to this world,
etc. But at the day of judgment there shall be a pardon of sins, that will
crown this pardon, when God shall pronounce us pardoned before all the world;
and when Christ shall actually and presentially rescue us from all the pains
which our sins have deserved; even from everlasting pain: And that is the
final pardon, for which, till it be accomplished, all the faithful do, night
and day, pray incessantly, allthough to many, for whom they do pray, they
friendly believe, that it is now certain, that they shall then be glorified. 6.
St. Austin though, he had reason to pray for pardon and remission for his
Mother, for the reason's already expressed, though he never thought his mother
was in Purgatory. It was upon consideration of the dangers of every Soul that
dies in Adam; and yet he affirms, she was, even before his death, alive unto
Christ. 7. In the next page he reproves that initial error of them that
affirm, Communicantes and offerentes pro Sanctis, imports not a Prayer; And
afterward makes it clear, That the Greek Fathers did really pray for mercy, for
pardon, for a place of rest, for eternal glory, for them who never were in
Purgatory; for it is a great ignorance, he says, to suppose, that when it is
said, the sacrifice or oblation is offered, it must mean only thanksgiving,
being called in St. Dionys, (...), an Eucharisticall Prayer, and the Lord's
Supper is a Sacrifice in genere orationis.
And what more then this, Mr. Jones, did the two most able Bishops that we have
in England confess, as touching Prayer for the Dead, etc. to her R. H. in the
Conference she had with 'em? and less then this how could they own, without a
fallacy put on her, and defrauding the Church of England of what she indulgeth
to her Children, in all that Reason, and Primitive practice will justify? And
if, as to themselves, they made use thereof in private, without making public
profession thereof, what thence has such a puny Presbyter as Mr. Jones to
charge them with, who lets his sling slip at random, being not furnished with
the least pebble that can strike either of them in the forehead? For what is
pretended that one of them confessed more, or answered her H. freely, when she
pressed him upon the other points of Controversy, and principally on the Real
presence of Jesus Chrst in the Holy Sacrament of the Altar.

That were he a Catholic, he would not change Religion; but that having been
educated in a Church, in which he believed there was all that was necessary to
Salvation, and there having received his Baptism, he thought he could not quit
it without great scandal; is no more then what I presume, a great number in
the communion of either Church would say after him; and they that say it not,
do ordinarily, we find, change sides, when they have once prevailed with
themselves to step over that consideration; And what one Noble person, worth
many hundreds of Mr. Iones's inspired party, has seriously owned to me, in his
exile, after much earnest discourse upon that and other points, then whom there
was, while he lived, no more intelligent and impartial, free and familiar,
Antipapist in the Peerage of our Kings dominions, the Lord Hopton, my quondam
Patron, of pious memory, is the Peer I mean.

And if her R. H. had been presented, seasonably, with such a choice
Collection, as I have here made, from the highly learned, and very Orthodox
Grandees of our Church, (which will be further authorized, as occasion may
require, by thrice the number, alike qualified, yea, and dignified too,) I see
no reason, but she might have understood her self Catholic enough where she
was, as in these, so in all other points controverted between the Church of
Rome and us; and no such ardent desire of change, no such inward pains and
horrible disquiets upon account of her discourse with the two most able
Bishops, need have urged her to the least complaint.

What other method her H. took in so important an affair, for her entire
satisfaction, since she has not thought fit more particularly to declare, it
will be no discretion, nor good manners, in me to make conjecture. Certain it
is, she could not do better, then in praying to God from her whole heart, (as,
she says, she did) to calm the inquietude, and agitation of her troubled
spirit, and to give her knowledge of the truth; But did her H. expect the
answer to her prayers should be by immediate divine Revelation? Those Reverend
Bishops could, and would have acquainted her with other precedents, beside that
of prayer, from devout noble Ladies in St. Hierome and other Fathers; And had
she but opened a little book of my Lady Faulklands Letters, she might have seen
the remedy applied to a spirit no less disconsolate and diffident, upon one
account, then her own upon another;

But in this unsteady state of doubts and fears, and an unsettled faith, being
Christmas day, her H. goes to the King's Chapel, to participate of the Holy
Sacrament, which, contrary to her hopes, brought new troubles upon her soul,
and I wonder not a whitt at it, want of the Real presence, or Corporeal in
the Roman sense, being that which did most afflict her, whereof she might be
well assured, little supply, or comfort, was to be had from the King's
Chapel, and so her labor, she thought, was lost.

Her next essay was by address to a Catholic, for counsel, and if possible,
for cure, which now at last, was, as her H. fancied, in some sort, effected by
a good Priest he sent for [ me fit venir un bon Prestre,] with whom conferring
about her interior condition, and souls salvation, the more she parlied, the
more she felt her self intrinsecally carried off, and fortified by grace of the
holy Spirit toward the change of Religion;

A Gentleman of quick dispatch was this good Priest; but I hear nothing yet of
his infallibility her H. lately looked for, unless the other Catholic, who e're
he was, that called him to her, passed his word for it in private, which
security taken, all could not but be oracular that came from his mouth.

Of the H. EUCHARIST in one or both kinds.
As I find in the very first place, was his decision of receiving the H.
Sacrament in one kind, in which one element if were not administered both the
flesh and blood of our Savior, Christ would never have suffered the other to
be subtracted, and his Church deprived of half himself, who promised to abide
with her (whole and entire, no doubt) to the end of the world; Nor could her H.
think her self free to believe otherwise, or that Christ's own words could be
frustrate.

Before I can well apply my self to reflect on this Article of half-communion,
(as our Writers often call it) I think it not altogether impertinent, to
declare my dissatisfaction at the sudden change I observe of a disconsolate
dejected Spirit, to an argumentative and active Soul, in search so
superficial, and so definitive, before full discovery; as if intent upon
contradiction of her own practice so many years, and not startled at so quick
a transition, from the unquestionable security of both elements in the H.
Eucharist to the hazard of enjoying the entire end and effect of neither, when
reduced to one.

I am very prone to suspect something like a chasme, or hiatus here, a defect
in transcript of the Declaration published in her Highnesses name, which
Mounsieur Maimburg best knows wherewith it should be, and, in fidelity to the
trust reposed in him, ought, if so, to be made complete;

Howsoever, to let it pass from hand to hand, as delivered to us, and to wait
upon her R. H. so immediately as she leads the way from her Closet to the
public Schools, I can not but much commend the early exercise of her skill
and prudence, in selecting that part of the question which best will bear
discussion, and arresting her upon assurance of his word, who never did, nor,
being Truth it self, can ever break his promise;

For no notice at all is taken, how many years the Church persisted in
submission to the express words of our Saviors institution, without
substracting or altering ought in the celebration of this H. Sacrament; Whence
Bishop Jewel says, the Question that stands between us is moved thus,

Whether the Holy Communion at any time, within the space of six hundred years
after Christ, were ever Ministered openly in the Church unto the People under
one kind. Repl. to Mr. Hard. Ans. page 96.

Which extent of time he might have drawn out much further, by the concession
(among others) of Cassander, a man professing himself a Roman Catholic,
though of wonderful modesty, moderation, and learning, says Bishop Mountagu,
whose words are these, as by his Lordship cited; It is manifest, that, in
administration of the sacred Sacrament of the Eucharist, the Universal Church
of Christ until this day, and the Western or Roman Church, for more then 1000
years after Christ, especially in their solemn and ordinary dispensation of
this Sacrament, did exhibit and give unto all faithful Christians not one
only, but both the kinds of Bread and Wine, as it is most clear and evident out
of innumerable testimonies of the old Writers, both Greek and Latin, which I
can make good, etc. This he did in part, and the rest we may safely take upon
his honest word, and credit; and 300 years more then he voucheth upon Bishop
Mountagu's, who says after him too, This is every where the custom in all the
World unto this day, but in the Roman exhorbitant Church; and was not quite
abolished in that Church, till about 1300 years after Christ; and by much art,
colluding, and fine forgery, was retained from being cast out of that Church,
in the late Conventicle of Trent, only kept in for a faction, but mightily
opposed by learned, honest, and conscionable Catholics; Whereupon this
resolute and worthy Prelate joins issue with all Papists living, That it never
was otherwise used in all the Church of God, for above 1000 years after
Christ; And, that if all the Papists living prove the contrary, he will
subscribe to all Popery, Ans. to the Gagger, chapter 36. which is fair enough.

So that I shall need call in no more help upon this account, except I may that
observation of Bishop Tailor and others, That the Primitive Church did
excommunicate them that did not receive the holy Sacrament in both kinds. Pref.
to Diss. Page 5.

I return, therefore to her Highnessess argument drawn from the promise, and
veracity, or fidelity of Christ to make it good; Which promise being not
particular, not restrained to his Sacramental presence, upon which we differ;
much less limited to the Patriarchate of Rome, and that under the name or
notion of his Universal Church, exclusive of all other Christians not taken
into her communion; he left her free, at her own hazard, to commit sacrilege
in this kind as in diverse other, and to withdraw her self from him before ever
he withdrew from her; and to afford his fuller presence by both representatives
elsewhere, among a greater number of Christians, by computation, then those
within her pale or Communion, in both kinds of this H. Sacrament united, although
in some other doctrines, ceremonies, and customs, or national, or Provincial,
civical, or rural, or in other dissonancy whatsoever, more, or less, divided;
But her H. had already changed her measures with her Religion, and was already
principled a new by her good Priest, and not permitted to look back upon us
unto whom for ever she had bid adieu. By this time, no doubt, she was taught to
say, That Christ assured us, The Holy Sacrament, (though but a Wafer)
contains his flesh and blood, because the Church has at length declared, he,
or it, shall be so understood; Else we know not where to find any words of
Christ that import the real subsistence of both elements in one, wine in bread,
or bread in wine; eating his blood, or drinking his flesh; His Institution was
otherwise, and so was, accordingly, the practice of the Church for 1300 years
together; And Dr. Cressey confesses Exom. Page 602. This is not a matter of
Doctrine, but mere practice; The Church says not, it is unlawful to take it in
both kinds; Nor do we know, where Christ ever said, It is lawful, or
allowable, to take it but in one; Extraordinary Cases come not under
consideration here, and therefore he might have refrained to mention either the
sick, or antipathetick people. As the Council of Basil ought to have granted
the poor Bohemians their dispensation, without so hard I say not only, but
most impious condition, if in their Consciences they were otherwise persuaded,
as is believed, they were; I shall transcribe it from Archbishop Laud, Conf.
page 198. -- That it may be lawful for them to receive the Sacrament as Christ
commanded them, but not unless they will acknowledge (most opposite to Truth)
that they are not bound by Divine Law to receive it in both kinds. At this
rate our departed Duchess might very well undertake for Christ's both
promising and performing, when her good Priest, (whom now she must say after)
has the like effrontery as others to make him say what they will; Like the
Heretic Severus in Anastasius Sinatia, who maintained it lawful, and even
necessary, according to occasions, and emergent heresies, to alter and change
the Doctrines of Christ: and the Cardinal of Cusa affirmed it lawful diversely
to expound the Scriptures according to the times. See Bishop Tailor, Real
Pres. Sect. 3. Where his Lordship very pertinently observes, That in the sixth
Chapter of St. John's Gospel is earnestly pretended, that our Savior taught
the mystery of Transubstantiation; but with some different opinions; -- -- And
yet very many of the Romanists affirm, That in this Chapter Christ does not
speak of sacramental or oral manducation, or of the Sacrament at all; And
Bellarmine going to excuse it, says in effect, That they did not do it very
honestly, for he affirms, that they did it, that they might confute the
Hussites, and the Lutherans, about the Communion under both kinds: And if it be
so, and not be so, as it may serve a turn, It is so for Transubstantiation, and
it is not so for half-Communion; we have but little reason to rely upon their
Judgment, or Candor, in any exposition of Scripture.

And here says Archbishop Laud, their building with untempered mortar appears
most manifestly, For they have no show to maintain this, but the fiction of
Thomas of Aquin, That he which receives the Body of Christ, receives also his
Blood per concomitantiam, by concomitancy; because the Blood goes always with
the Body; of which Term Thomas was the first Author I can find, Conf. p. 198.
Who was born, says Bellarmine, Anno 1224. and died Anno 1274. And as he was the
first that invented it, so the Council of Constance was the first that decreed
it, after the year 1400. says my Lord of Derry, in his Answer to Mounsieur de
la Militiere.

But be the invention whose it will, Bishop Tailor says, it is a new whimsie
of theirs, which will not serve their turn; for which he gives four reasons,
which are to be found in the forecited Section. And the Bishop of Derry speaks
slightly of it, and good reason why, because we need it not, being secure
without it. Let what will become of Concomitance, says he, whilst we keep our
selves to the Institution of Christ, and the Universal practice of the
Primitive Church. p. 92. But I know, his Lordships Christian charity was ever
such, as, not to condemn so many millions of devout Souls, as, after the
Council of Constance, if not after the more early invention of Thomas Aquinas,
neither had, nor could have, participated the H. Sacrament of the Altar
otherwise then under one kind, (as at that time was, and ever since has been
the standing Decree, or Practice, of the Latin Church) to all the ill effects
and unhappy consequences of a perpetual profanation and sacrilege in a
half-Communion; the fruition and benefit but of a mere Skeleton, a bloodless
carcass, nor vivified, nor vivifying body of Christ; which carries horror in
the very conception, and, where believed, utter affrightment from all future so
imperfect, so insignificant, if not altogether a null-participation;

I am well - assured, neither of their Lordships were unacquainted with that
special Treatise upon this subject written by the pious Cassander, Dignissimus
lectu, A book most worthy the reading, says Grotious, to whose judgment our
moderate Divines are prompt enough favorably to attend; beside what Modrevius
has in his on the same Argument, Vid. H. Gr. Annot. ad Consult. Cassand:
Artic. 21. where he shows, how easily this difference might be accorded, were
it not for the sin of Sacrilege so fiercely laid to the charge of the Roman
Church, in denying the Cup to the Laiety, Which Luther, Melanchthon, and Bucer,
three leading men in the Reformation, thought need not discourage well prepared
Communicants from receivng the Sacrament in one kind, which might be done, they
thought, without sin.

What may be replied to this, sure enough, that great Doctor, and amphibious
Calvinist, Andr. Rivet (on whom I affix that Epithet, because of his living so
long in France and Holland, whence he contracted a perfect knowledge of all
that Sect in either Nation had to urge in any point of Controversy against all
others in Communion with the Church of Rome) had in readiness what apologies
could be made for those three too indulgent Patrons of the Reformation, which
he seperately, and singly, thus allegeth.

1. That Luther, when he came fresh from the Papacy, confessed, se fuisse
Monachum and Papistam insanissimum; That he had been a Monk, and a most mad
Papist, (I think it was but by dilucid intervalls, when he and his rigid
followers became the soberest party of the Protestants,) and requested
therefore, that his writings might be read with commiseration; no wonder then
that he saw not altogether at one prospect or intuition. Certainly, if he
thought it Sacrilege in good earnest, and properly so called, he could not but
know it, at first sight, to be a sin; and the good Doctors apology in his
behalf is but weak, and accordingly the learned Grotius, in his turn, takes no
notice of it. What more for Luther Dr. Rivet adds, Gr. Disc. (...) p. 375.
That he had brought in excuse his infirmity, and, as it were, infancy, and
that, when his mind was more illuminated, he learned to be wise, mends not the
matter much; it takes not off what Grotius affirms, at first he said.

2. Let us therefore see what more he can say for Melanchthon; To show his
better opinion in the Case, he remits us to some select particles of his
Writings, where he expostulates about Christ's Institution, which being in
general for the whole Church, he demands, why one of the species, or kinds,
is taken from part of the Church, whereof the Romanists gave many reasons, such
as they were, in likelihood the same then, as since, which how well they will
hold, is still the question whereof anon, This he confesses, Melanchthon added
afterward, se Ecclesiam excusare, quae hanc injuriam pertulit; that he excused
the Church which suffered the injury; and that is well enough, for we are on
the suffering side; Rivet brings up the rear, and passes his word, That yet
Melanchthon did not excuse those, that forbad not only, but excommunicated,
such as used the Cup; who said he did? not Grotius any where; as I remember;
Who liked well enough where it could be had, and no order of the Church wherein
he was matriculated, interposed to the contrary that the H. Sacrament should be
administered in both kinds, whereof as himself participated, when among them
whose use it was; so, it may be supposed, he advised his Family to do the like
by choice, in a Country, where both were practiced, and a third profession
preferred to both, as in France; For when at Paris, I officiated at the
honorable Residents, Sir Richard Brownes, his widow, and daughter, with a third
Lady of quality, who understood little of our language, after admission asked,
communicated in both with us, according to the form, and ceremony of the knee
prescribed by our Church.

Concerning M. Bucer, Rivet answers directly, nothing to what by Grotius was
alleged, but diverts his Reader another way, to the 74th. Chapter of his
Defense of the Colonian Reformation: which is a usual shift of his, though
imputed by him in this very question, to his more plain-dealing Antagonist; But
what find we there, whither he sends us? why, much after the rate as in
Melanchthon; we find that Bucer says; Quod alteram speciem Sacramenti in
genere auferre, grave Sacrilegium est. That to take away from all Christians in
general, either species of the Sacrament, is grievous Sacrilege; whereas
Grotius denies frequently, that they do it, but in several cases, both of
persons, Nations, and Countries, grant it for the asking; and they that will
not ask it, may go without it, whose fault is it if they do? And what have we
to do with the conditions any foreign Church puts upon the Members of it? which
I believe was my Lord of Derry's meaning, who, perhapps, on very good reserved
reason, had as little mind to answer positively, were the quaestion thus put,
as Dr. Rivet. Do you believe, or not, that whole Christ is present, where by
order of any Church, which beleives not our Saviors Institution, or Precept,
to be so peremptory as we do, either element or species, is separated from the
other? My opinion is, Mr. Bucer so well as others would have been silent in the
case, who, in all his Writings I have met with, that relate to the H.
Eucharist, uses and advises special caution against humane thoughts,
sensible imaginations, logical or philosophical arguments and deductions,
flying up above all such on the wings of Faith, after an humble resignation of
his Reason, which he confesses altogether incapable to comprehend in the
least, this inscrutable, inaccessible mystery in the veil. To some part of this
purpose, peradventure, may be reducible those two Axioms in his Exomolog. N.
10. and 14. which I shall transcribe for the consideration of the learned,
without interpreting to the mere English Reader.

Number. 10. Omnes igitur sensibiles mundi imaginationes, omnis cogitatio loci aut
continui aut contigui, aut commixtionis, ab hac communione and unitate
removendae sunt, admirandaque est in verbo Dei apprehensa, and ex effectis
ejus, operibus novi hominis, suspicienda, pensitanda and fruenda.

Number. 14. Cavendum est, ne praeceptum Domini dilucidum ubique illuminator
habentibus oculos fide, ullis superstitionis grandiloquentijs obscuremus.
Rursus autem cavendum est, ne pondus, majestatem mysteriorum Christi, quae
spiritus sanctus credenda magis, quam scrutanda (nostra quidem ratione)
proposuit, iminuamus interpretationibus, quae magis ex nostris proficisuntur
cogitationibus, quam ex ipsis Dei verbis, and natura mysteriorum ejus:

Which in sense seems to accord with that of St. Augustine, cited by Bishop
Jewel, Def. Apol. p. 220. Rerum Absentium Praesens est Fides, and rerum quae
foris sunt, intus est Fides: and rerum, quae non videntur, videtur Fides.

And now I have mentioned Bishop Jewel, (both Grotius and Rivet being
foreigners) I judge it very pertinent and seasonable here to transcribe what
the said learned and Orthodox Bishop has left us of his judgment impartial
concerning those three great Patrons and Promoters of the Reformation in this
point.

It being alleged by Mr. Harding, That Luther writes to them of Bohemia these
very words Quoniam pulchrum quidem esset, utraque specie Eucharistiae uti, and
Christus hac in re nihil tanquam necessarium praecepit: praestaret pacem and
unitatem, quam Christi ubique praecepit, sectari, quam despecietus sacramenti
contendere. Where as it were a fair thing to use both kinds of the Sacrament,
yet for that Christ herein has commanded nothing, as necessary, it were better
to keep peace and unity, which Christ has every where charged us withal, then
to strive for the outward kinds of the Sacrament.

To this our Bishop makes answer; The words that Luther wrote to them of
Bohemia, were written by him before God had appointed him to publish the Gospel.

And when Mr. Harding (according to the Bishops supposition) urges his saying
opposite to the former, thus, Si quo casu Consilium statueret, etc. If in any
case the Council would so ordain, we would in no wise have both the kinds, but
even then, in despite of the Council, we would have one kind, or neither of
them, and in no wise both; and hold them for accursed, whosoever by authority
of such a Council would have both. The Bishop makes this fair apology for him.

There was nothing further off from Luther's mind then upon any determination
of any Council, to minister the Sacrament under one kind, and so to break
Christ's Institution into halfes. But he thought it not meet, that God's truth
immortal should hang of th'autority of a mortal man, and stand for true no
further, then it should please a man to allow of it. This was the thing that D.
Luther misliked, and thought intolerable. And therefore he said, he would have
God's word received, only because it is God's word, and spoken by him, not
because it is authorized by a Council: and if the Council would allow the
Ministration in one kind, then, he said, he would use Both, because Christ in
his Institution appointed Both. But if the Bishops in the Council would agree
upon Both kinds, as a matter standing wholly in their pleasures, as though they
had full power to control, or to ratify the will of God, then he said, he
would have no regard unto the authority of such a Council, that sets it self
above God, but rather would use one kind only, or none at all. This latter part
I understand not how Luther could make good, nor how he could be free from
arrogance, wherewith Mr. Harding charge him, though for the credit of our
first Reformer, the Bishop takes little notice of it; for I perfectly
understand not, how the parallels that follow, of St. Paul, the Emperor
Tiberius, and the Prophet Esai run in an even line with Luthers Case.

Mr. Harding next would prove Luthers from that opinion of Melanchthon, who had
been Luther's Scholar, and his saying this; Sicut edere suillam, aut abstinere
a suilla, sic alterutra signi part uti, medium esse. That as it is a thing
indifferent to eat swines flesh, or to forbear swines flesh, so it is also to
use which part of the ligne a man lists

Bucer also, says he, is of the same opinion; Ad controversiam, quae est de
una aut utraque specie, tollendam, etc. That the controversy of for the one or
both kinds, may be taken away, it shall be very well done; that holy Church
made it free to receive the Sacrament in one or both kinds* yet under such
condition, as hereby no occasion be given to any body, rashly to condemn the
use, which the Church has so long time kept, nor to judge one another.

So that Melanchthon and Bucer, he says accounted it as a thing indifferent.
To which the Right worthy Bishop makes a more ingenuous answer then did D.
Rivet to Grotious, about the same point and persons, which is this.

Indeed these godly learned men, when they saw that through the malice of their
adversaries, they could not obtain that Christ's Institution might universally
be received, yet they desired at the least it might be left free without
restraint, for every Church to do therein, as they should think good, and that
without murmr, or offense of others. And thus far forth their desire was, it
might be judged free: not that they thought, Christ had not ordained the
Sacrament to be ministered unto the people in both kinds, or that in it self it
is indifferent: but that the faithful of God might indifferently, and freely
use it without controlement, and that it should not be judged Heresy, to do as
Christ had commanded.

If I may after all, be allowed to utter freely a word or two of my own
opinion, it shall be this in general, without restraint, or particular regard
to this difference, or indifference, about one, or both kinds in the
administration of the B. Sacrament. If the Church of England had improved, as
she might, her first Lutheran Reformation (so far as Lutheran it was, or
justifiably might have been) without permitting Calvin, one of another spirit
then the meeker and more wary Melachthon and Bucer to put in his foot, our
controversies had been fewer, our people steadier, and our domestic peace, at
least, by much more entire; It is that Presbyterian Colloquintida that has
spoiled all, the weed that Geneva sent us, and thither we must remit it, there
to take what root it will, or we shall never be at quiet but in our graves, if
there, which may well be doubted.

I proceed somewhat further to such cases, as on all sides are acknowledged of
necessity, in abstemijs and aegrotis, in abstemious and sick persons, the
former of which are dispensed with for the wine, and the latter for either
species, as they are affected; for some have such a drought in their jaws and
palate, as they can eat no Bread; others so much offended at the fumes of
Wine, as they nauseate the very smell. Here Grotius puts the question home,
being resolved to extort an answer; Interim negare non audet, etc. presuming,
Dr. Rivet dares not deny, but, in the foresaid cases, especially, that of the
sick the Sacrament was received entirely, though administered but in one kind;
which deny he does not; nor indeed well can he the argument drawn from thence,
where any Church has published a prohibition of the Cup; for without doubt it
will be owned, that the words of consecration made it a Sacrament in the sick
man's case; and why the same words alike pronounced by a Priest, in the other,
should not have the same effect, will be hard for Dr. Rivet to assign a
satisfactory reason; The little evasions he seems to make are not such as his
Adversary will permit himquietly to go away with, as the rarity of one
instance, or frequency of the other, but few are sick, to the many, the
innumerable multitudes of them, that from age to age have been denied the Cup
by the Church of Rome; But the sick have it, the other element, in voto and
desiderio, in votive wish, and desire why the healthy should not have the like
fervency of devotion for what they want, who can tell the cause, or not condemn
'em for their lukewarm indifferency? or not pity such of them, who, if not
persuaded, they had the whole, would rest content with a half - communion;
though Bellarmine be so courteous as to afford 'em comfort, that its better for
them to participate of an imperfect Sacrament then none at all. Esti enim
Sacrificium sit imperfectum sine utraque specie, tamen praestat imperfectum
habere, quam nullum.

But after all this contest against Sacrilege, the violating Christ's
Institution and positive command, the separation of his blood from his body,
the riffling and robbing so many Christian souls of their hereditary right,
when of age, or ju^^ement, and otherwise prepared duly to take possession of
it; who would have thought that (...) Rivet, of all men, should abate the value
of that prize he had so much contended for, placing it in a lower rank of those
motives, by which, separation was made from Rome, and Protestancy, achieved
with Fire and Sword? Neque tamen haec unquam fuit potissima ratio, cur ab
Ecclesia Romana secessionem fecerint Ecclesiae Reformatae; one it was indeed of
the number; but many more there were of greater moment, plures alias fuisse,
and majoris momenti; which he well knew, says the Doctor, that made the
objection, Apologet. ss. 87. but he well knew withal, as we have likewise
known, to our future terror, that for none of those momentaneous motives,
(nor, perhapps for altogether of the rest) was more blood shed, more lives
lost, and devastation made every where, as one or other party prevailed, then
for this alone; which, the pious peacemaker thought, might much better have
been saved, and so the unity of the Church, without that rupture, have been
preserved, the contrary whereunto he, good man! lamented sadly; Illos vero
miseror, qui propter symbolum sanguinis Christi, tantum sanguinis per illum
sanguinem redemti amarunt effundere, let them interpret it, whom he pittieth,
as most concerned in it. Vot. pro Pace. page 81.

Now, it would be worth enquiry, were it not a business of more length then
what I am about will well permit; Why the Church of Rome is so obstinate in the
case, if so she be, which some endeavor to qualify, to the dissatisfaction of
a greater number, in a greater part of Christendom, then are those in
communion with her, and to the hazard among them of so many souls, who, merely
in compliance, or fear of censure, do they know not what, doubting, if not
denying, within themselves, that to be a Sacrament which they receive, and
consequently, if it be, or be not, going away, without the effect of it for
want of faith, or for having too much presumption upon a moiety of Divine
Institution.

Our great Apologist Bishop Jewel tells us, their own Doctors Alphonsus de
Castro, and John Gerson, have laid them out in this wise particularly, and at
large;

The danger of sheadding: The carrying from place to place: The fouling of the
Cupps: The trouble of men's Beards: The Reserving for the Sick: The turning of
the Wine into Vinegar: The engendring of Flees: The Corruption, or
Putrefaction: The Lothesomeness that may happen, for so many to Drink of one
Cupp: The impossibility of providing one Cupp, that may be sufficient to serve
all the People; In some places Wine is dear, in some other places the Wine will
be from. These, Mr. Harding, be the fairest and greatest of your good causes.
Def. of Apol. P. 318. And to these such as they are, that good Bishop replies
nothing, but after enumeration leaves them to the Readers censure.

Bishop Tailor takes notice but of one, which Bellarmine suggests about
Laymens Beards, which he says, is as ridiculous, as the Doctrine it self is
unreasonable; and if they would shave Laymens Beards, as they do the Clergy,
it would be less inconvenience then what they now feel; and if there be no help
for it, they had better lose their Beards, than lose their share of the Blood
of Christ. Collect. p. 469. Alike answer, it is supposed, might be given to the
rest, which having no more weight in them require no better. D. Rivet says,
they are of no moment, futile all, quas Modrevius exact refellit, and exactly
refuted by Modrevius, whose word we will take for it, and trouble our selves no
further. Only because Bishop Jewel in his review of Gerson, adds one particular
in his Reply; before overseen, or omitted in his Defense, Viz. the incidence of
the Palsy, which, if beyond what the Physicians call a tremour, may have
somewhat of moment in it, and more or less weight with us, who have a due
veneration for the Elements, after Sacramental Consecration, We may so far
consider it as to say, it endures not the test, because being incident so well
to the Priest, as the people, an expedient should have been found that might
equally have secured both, or no notice taken of either, but God's providence,
for preventing, or mercy for pardoning be relied on, who foresaw in every
particular inconvenience what has been found, or can possibly be apprehended,
and yet Christ himself instituted the administration in both kinds.

But to return once again to her R. H. by whom this difficulty was more easily
digested, and determined according to the decree and practice of the Church of
Rome; she is pleased, it seems, to declare, that she would not permit her self,
were she able, (as she will not pretend to be) to dispute the verities of more
grandeur, nor engage in any other point, beyond some few words for
entertainment of discourse, and that without any contestation at all, but
simply to express the motives and reasons of her conversion; Which temper of
moderation had she been pleased to use and observe when with us, toward which
the upright open dealing of the two Bishops seemed to induce her, (whose
unbiassed judgment I am sorry to see outdone, or undervalued, by the witty
artifice, or bolder practice, of a single Priest) her H. might have lived
longer, as the only one of her Mother (on whose two breasts, from infancy, she
had depended for her spiritual alimony, and thrived well by it) the choice one
of her that bare her; the daughters, whensoe'r they saw her, would have blessed
her; As a wall might she have been, with a Palace of silver built upon her, as
the wisest of Kings allegirizeth most elegantly in his Song of divine love.

I draw now toward the Conclusion, the last Paragraph of her Declaration.

P^atteste Dieu etc. Her H. solemn attestation of God, that she had never
thought of changing her religion, could she have believed (and why could she
not?) that salvation might have been had here, where was her birth and
education, is a very severe sentence on King and People, whom she left behind
her, not so much as to allow a bare possibility, what soever in fine, and fact
might have become of all; God be praised, who has given us more charity toward
the worst of them that have least deserved it of us; And God give her R. H.
too, in her present state, all the mercy, that may be, by permission, wished
her, before, and at, the great Day, and above all, that crowning pardon (as
Bishop Tailor calls it) which surmounts so much the absolution of her good
Priest, (so joyfully pronounced over her, when she first did throw her self
into the arms of his all-comprehensive Church) as is the highest Arch of
heaven from the very center of the earth.

What follows, at last, being left at her Highnesses judgment, will and
pleasure, ought to have little contradiction from her quondam Chaplain, who, in
good manners, will but lightly glance, or gloss upon it.

1. That she believed it not necessary for her to declare in public, That it
was neither interest, nor prospect of honors, nor of the fading and perishable
goods she might have by it; that carried to their Church, since on the
contrary, all the world, she says, needs must know, that, by the change of
Religion, she exposed her self to the peril of losing both her friends and
credit; I am none of the world that know it, nor do I believe them to have been
her Highnesses friends, who would be lost upon account of her passing from a
state of sad perplexity and disquiet to one of certain assurance, satisfaction,
and peace within, if so she found it, Other friendship in, or with the world,
is enmity with God; Religion is not to be chosen, or adhaer'd to, against
persuasion of Conscience, be it right or wrong, by the deceitful weights or
measures of worldly friendship; The standard of it is more sublime, and credit
ought not to be so considerable, as a good conscience, in the case, which I
have charity to hope she had, and exercised, without prejudice, or partiality
in her new choice.

2. [ Pay balance et examine plusteurs fois etc] that her R. H. had balanced
and examined often, Whether it were not more expedient for her, to conserve her
friends, her rank, and credit in the Court, by continuing in the exercise of
the Religion professed and practiced by the English Church, then to abandon all
those things, upon a view and hope of happiness in a future life.

I am sorry, I confess, for that plusicurs fois; that the balance, if the beam
were true, (which her self was concerned to look to) should be taken in hand
more then once, (if once had not been too much) and expedience put into the
scale; for, alas! what are the light feathers of Fortune, and Fame, or
Reputation, to the weight of Eternal Glory? what is a Pebble to the Pearl of
price? what the whole world to the worst soul in it, when true merchandise is
to be made, but a cruel purchase of false felicity? And therefore if, for the
time, the eyes of her mind were darkened, her understanding clouded, great,
indeed, was God's mercy, in that, so on a sudden, he became unto her as the
light of the morning, when the Sun arises, a morning without clouds; as the
tender Grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after Rain. 2 Samuel 23.
4. after the many tears she had dropped, in the anxiety of her mind, and
dejection of her spirit, so as she felt no pain, no difficulty to make that
choice, that so decretory choice, and with what advantage, good Lady! before
this time she knows to the full.

3. That the only trouble remaining upon her spirit was an apprehension she had
of what dire influence her change might have upon the poor Catholics of this
Country; what they might suffer upon account of her conversion; praying that
God would give her the grace to suffer patiently with them the disgraces and
afflictions of this life, for the meriting of life eternal.

Indeed the malice, or zeal (if it be so) of the Mobile, or common people, is
seldom moderated by reason, or measured out by Conscience, how much soever
pretended by them which might in this case, so well as others, have caused the
floods to rise, and lift up their voice, which, when they do so, by God's
permission, we, who had made no such choice, or change, felt to our cost; But;
God be praised, we since have found, and so might her R. H. too, if she had
survived, that the Lord, who dwells in Heaven is mightier; and under the
sacred roof of the Kings Palace, in the midst of those fears she might have
hoped for at least personal protection; And all her Catholics, who had taken
the oaths, might have been secure of theirs, keeping within the limits and
boundaries of the Law, while His Majesty shall keep power enough in his hands
to curb and subdue all riotous and rebellious people; which power may he never
part with, nor want a greater at any time, for the safety and honor of his
Royal Person, Crown, and Kingdom, according as the necessity, or expediency,
of all, or any, his State Affairs may require.

Here my Reflections end, upon her Royal Highnesses solemn Declaration, dated
at St. James's, the eighth of August, 1670.

Mounsieur Maimburg's fine Rhetorical Epiphonema, or grand Acclamation, yet
remains, which in civil complement, must not pass away without my notice and
fit respect.

[ Une declaration fi forte, si raisonnable, and si sensee, etc.] A
Declaration, says he, so strong, so reasonable, and so full of sense, by this
admirable Princess, who instructs us with so much sincerity, which have been
the true motives of her conversion; and who, in the sequel, is dead holily in
the Catholic faith,

The strength of it will best appear, when the arguments and stanch or stayed
opinions of those Worthies I have assembled in my Reflections, the main pillars
of the Church her Highnesses left are weakened, and laid in their ruins; The
reasonableness, when the vizard, her good Priest put upon it, is taken off; And
the sense, when the sandy supposition, upon which the pretense of all is
ambiguously founded, shall be well-confirmed, and with full assurance settled.

That she died holily, who lived religiously, I will not doubt; but that she
died, after due consideration, in the precincts of the Roman Church, I confess
I do; In the faith of it that she could not, I am pretty well assured, if but
because her weakness would not allow her sufficient opportunities, in the time
of decumbency, to consult her judgment, her disturbance being so great, with
little, or no, intermission; less to hear, read, and discourse, with pauses
requisite, what might be of strength sufficient (if ought could be) for an
evincement, and prevail for a free resignation of her soul to the sense, and
conduct, of her good Priest;

But, to render the Declaration, as taken with the best advantage, so useful,
so powerful, as by its precedent and greatest efficacy, to convert all sorts,
and degrees, of Protestants, whatsoever, more then all disputes by tongue, or
penn, in which every Heretic, when pressed with argument, takes no care but to
find evasion, and get away so clear, as he may persuade others he was not
vanquished, is, in my opinion, to magnify it overmuch, and to undervalue many
learned and plaindealing Disputants, many judicious and impartial Readers,
whom he will needs have comprehended in that equivocall name of Protestant, as
over-facilely to part with their Faith, and Reason too, and pusillanimously to
yield their Christian liberty to his blind obedience; wherein yet I leave the
Gentleman to enjoy his fancy, and others to like submission and imitation as in
what they shall find themselves by just authority or argument fairly and
clearly convinced, at their own hazard.

That, in effect, he says, There is no Protestant, but who may find a like
origin of his heresy, in some passion of despite, jealousy, ambition, or
libertinage, (by which word, and somewhat more, I suspect Mounsieur Maimburg
may have had a finger in forming this Declaration,) touches not us in England,
who understand the motives and method of our Reformation betters, and our
selves too, then to be concerned in any error or heresy, (were it so) at this
distance, we being no Nominals, as the Mounsieur and his friends would have us,
from Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, or any other; but Reformed Realls, in the first
notion, that is, according to the original Doctrine, and Discipline of the
Ancient Church, the Records whereof were laid open before Christians of better
principles, by which to recover that purity, which the Church of Rome had lost,
and to get clear from those errors they had introduced, of later date.

Therefore, although, in compliance with Mounsieur's advice, such of our
English as understand entirely the establishment of our Church, and true state
of the controversy between them and us, should read this excellent Declaration
in cold blood, et sans pre occupation, without any prejudice (as in earnest I
have done several times, since I took this task in hand) will not judge it a
thing so monstrous, une chose monstrease, that what he calls the Catholic,
but means the Roman faith, which, in above 400 years before Queen Elizabeth,
and but few less before that passive re-establishment by Queen Mary, had no
such settlement as he pretends, by the general consent of our Nation, but
(what our Histories will make appear,) were offering many times, at a
deliverance from Popish thraldom, besides, at an orderly Reformation of some
doctrinall and practical corruptions in the Religion of those times, should be
abolished by that good Queen, upon better terms then her sole and single
interest, (for the interest of some deproedatours about her I will not excuse);
And that we take not her for the first foundress, but the Primitive Fathers and
learned Doctors in the five or six first Centuries, for the Confounders of the
ancient, and, consequently, of our English Church, as it stands at distance
from the Roman. And so I bid a Dieu to Mounsieur Maimburg.

I must now turn about to Mr. Jones, whom, if I should decline, and offer
silently to slip away, or withdraw my hand from the table, I am sure, he would
pull me by the sleeve, if not the tip of my ear, for not regarding his
political, or moral, but most illogicall, inferences from the foresaid
Declaration.

There are but few, says he, to be found, so forsaken of God, and their own
Reason, as are not able to discern and allow, that Secret Enemies are far more
dangerous to all Men and Communities, than open and professed: and that Men
hate to be betrayed worse then to be destroyed

If you intend, Sir this, or what may be the extract of it, as a Major
proposition, you had done well in laying an Assumption to it, (since Dolus
latet in generalibus) and not run away with a Conclusion, one of the praemises
to which is lost; When you put your argument in better form, and dare deal in
explicit syllogismes, (for enthymems are little other then mental
reservations, which you know in whom you hate) you shall be fairly answered by
an express denial, or distinction from what you argue, which will put you to
further proof. Declining therefore such scholastic doings, I must Socratically
ask, according to the several hypotheses in this Paragraph, 1. What secret
enemies you suspect, and upon what ground, either as to separate Individuals,
or Communities in their conjunction? unto whom? or what? If you cannot make out
what you would, why leave you them not at their own hazard? knowing that

Qui fraudem injustam machinatur alteri,
Suo ipse damno antecapit eventum mali.
2. What treachery, or destruction from her Hignesses conference or
Declaration, we are to apprehend? speak out, man, and by no means smother
treason, in whom soever it lurkes; If a new Plot be, give us freely what you
have discovered, which may serve as a train to the rest, that none may escape.

But you proceed thus, They therefore that countenance, or cover, the
Masquerade Enemies of the Church, of the Church of England, prove themselves to
be of the same pernicious conspiracy; the greater they are in Place, and Power,
the greater is the danger to the Public from them, and their detection
therefore the greater service and glory.

Sententias loquitur -- -- It is somewhat ominous to be too sententious: The
worst of men can speak good Proverbs so well as the wise, until themselves
become the subjects of such as they best deserve. Catiline himself, no
quaestion, while he was instructing others in the ways and methods of his
close Conspiracy, until it was mature for action, issued out good counsels for
the public peace, and prosperity, being expedite at disguise, and ingenious
for Masquerade, from his very youth, subdolus and cujuslibet rei simulator ac
dissimulator, the Historian tells us. Having no answer to my former quaestions,
I must again to my interrogating, Who are they, Mr. Jones, that do either
countenance, or cover? Be you not bribed with Sugar-plums to conceal their
names, and the Conspiracy they are contriving; The Mobile will not be raised
else, and so you will lose the benefit of a common cry; And tell, man, what, or
of what, you would have detection made, for salus poulis's sake at least, that
you fall not into condemnation for breaking the highest Law. Tell me further
yet, what glory they are like to gain, proportionate to the service they may do
you in the discovery, whether a pension, or a place in the fifth or
false-hearted Monarchy, or by what other spurious title you mean to
distinguish that you are erecting, with such applycation.

But her late Highness, it seems, is gone off, I hope you will not say with
concealing treason, though you say little less then with reserve of the names
of those whom you point at as the Traitors, having not expressed what Bishops
those two were in Particular, whom all sober Protestants must look on as the
Betrayers of her soul, and this Church.

Was not her Ex-Iesuite, think you in the Plot of this concealment, whose
principle is for Reserve? for

It seems duty, you say, and fidelity to our Church and Nation, to contribute
Intelligence and Observations to detect them farther.

I have heard, Sir, that some such Intelligences and Observations, of as high a
nature, have been frequently bought and sold; And so may these too, for ought I
know; but I never yet traffiqu'd in 'em; you may have 'em about you, but I know
of none in this Country. Yet, to make amends for my ignorance, or negligence
of this sort; I have more then compensated what her Highness failed in, having
expressed, upon this occasion, more then twice two, which shall be twenty, when
cause requires, that, by some parasangs, have out-gone those two mischievous
Bishops, who e're they were; And who, I pray are those sober Protestants that
dare look upon those I named, as Betrayers of their souls, who made address to
'em for ghostly counsel, and advice about Religion? much less were they
treacherous to our Church, who were the principal supporters, and Protectours,
of it; whose names are well worth your notice, and their books, such as deserve
your reading over, more then once; which done, Mr. Jones, tell me seriously,
what false steps they have taken, and wherein it is they have betrayed either
Church, or Nation; Till when lay your hand on your mouth, and speak not evil so
unadvisedly, concerning the Ecclesiastical Rulers of the people.

But you add, They are not in Reason Fathers who are condemned persons in Law

To this calumny you have had my answer, from the very Sages of the Law, who
pronounce no sentence of condemnation for speaking truth, and that according to
the dictates of the ancient Church, which they appeal to, call you it Popery,
or Treachery, or both, or what you will; it is your ignorance, not their
error, which puts a false gloss upon what they say; and your zeal for you know
not what that inflames your passion and hurries you beyond the bounds of
Christian charity and moderation; so that they have not forfeited their
paternal right, or priveledge, by cherishing their children and instructing
them in the same paths they had trod themselves, the old paths, wherein is the
good way, advising them to walk therein, that they might find rest for their
souls P. Ier. 6. 16. As for those that are froward, who say, we will not walk
therein, they leave them to their crooked ways, the ways of darkness, Prove.
2. since they will not follow the light they have set before them.

Yet, you say, the danger and scandal of their ill example is the less, because
they never showed so much Learning and Integrity, as to justify before the
World, their new persuasions, by Pen, or open Practice, or Resignation. A
Papist, or a Mohammedan, that is sincere and Resolute etc.

Since you know not who they are, Mr. Jones, methinks you might have forborne
to judge of what they do, or do not, in public; and what revenge you bear in
mind, you may call in your Party, to exercise upon them whose names are known,
and whose Writings many where to be had; whose opinions are published in Print,
and their practices in our Cathedralls, and Royal Chappells, to be well
attested at this day; All which being not otherwise to be answered, nor their
persons now to be punished, who lie silent in their Graves; all you can do,
when the second time, by the prosperity of the wicked, power shall be in their
hands (which God avert) will be, to burn their books, wheresoever you meet with
them, and, if you have the like malice, the like principles of sacrilegious
impiety, as, not many years ago some had, do as they did, who scattered the
bones of the dead, and threw the Dust of Kings, (greater Potentates then
Bishops) out of their marble chests, or leaden coffins. And if any thing more
can be done to those Popish Prelates, that escapt your judgment, and slipped
slyly into their beds of rest, such as Overall, Andrews, White, Mountagu,
Tailor, Bramhall, and the rest of that Babylonish rabble, you being set on
hanging in this very Page. Hang them up in Effigy, on the post - fact, as
having been false to your Faith, while they lived, and multiplying still by
their books daily proselytes to Antichrist, perverting, if it were possible,
the very Saints themselves.

Yet, in more good earnest, Mr. Jones, you see, their persuasions were not new;
They send you to such Antiquity, as, it seems, you have not conversed with;
and appeal to better authority then their own, to be justified in what they
have written; which you ought to have enquired into, before you had so sharply
censured the two Reverend Fathers of our Church, who were guided by the same
rule, in what they said, and what they owned to be their private practice;
hoping, perhapps, by that latitude, and ingenious communication, to have
induced her R. H. before it might become too late, to a better opinion of our
Church, from which they found her wavering, (if she disguised it not) And for
that their plain and sincere dealing, which was as much as any Casuist, or
Director, (even Campanella's Confessor himself) could do, open the Closet of
his breast, and expose the secrets of it to his, or her, best advantage, by
whom he is consulted; for this faithful discharge of their trust, you are
pleased to gratify them no otherwise, then with the most odious, most
detested, title of Iudas's amongst our Apostles (it is well you allow us any
such as Apostles in that sacred Order) and put upon their account the scandal
of our present misery, (wherein you have but a little portion, Sir, beside what
you wilfully draw upon your self) the Redivision of these Kingdoms, the
dissenting members of which, since the happy Restoration, never would be
obliged by Acts of Oblivion, Pardon, and Indulgence; nor ever will be united in
any Conformity to the Government, Ecclesiastical, or Temporal, the only bond
of our peace, the submissive unity of an humble spirit; nay, your fears, and
fewds, which are made, and multiplied, by the infernal Ghosts, the reascended
boutefeaus of Forty - One, must be charged upon these Bishops, and, that I may
retrive a line or two, which I let pass in the last Paragraph, These good
Bishops, because they will not be persuaded, nor terrified, to give spiritual
counsel, contrary to their own Conscience; because they will not practice
openly what is inconsistent with the rule of common prudence, in our
circumstances; nor spontaneously resign their demesnes, and dignities (for
that is the true intendment of it) to a brood of insatiate Cormorants, and
sacrilegious Seekers, to the still plusultra - designing Impropriators, they
must cedere de via, give place not only to professed Papists, but to most
arrogant, blasphemous, Mahomitans, be termed two - faced Renegadoes, false to
their Faith, and Trust, and Country too, because, in reallity, they are true
to all. For thus you say, let the Reader have it in your own words.

A Papist, or a Mohammedan, that is sincere and Resolute in the profession of
his error, shows more Religion and virtue, than the most Reverend two - faced
Renegado, that is false to his Faith, and Trust, and Country, for worldly
Interest. And indeed, he that is so false to himself, will hardly be true to
any other. Therefore Campanella advises to choose for Confessor, non qui te
diligit, sed qui diligit animam Suam, such who loves his own Soul, not thee.

A little releif, at last, you are pleased to afford 'em, by a lifting
courtesy, (so I will call it) of the burden, too heavy for them to bear,
Multorum manibus -- if it should not here be rather Magnatum manibus -- --
laying part of the guilt upon the shoulders of the Great ones; whose frailties
if they be of eternal permanence, their condition is desperate, never to be
repaired in this World, nor that to come; for so you write;

To these Iudas's amongst our Apostles is chiefly owing the present misery and
Redivision of these flourishing Kingdoms, by new Fears, and Fewds: and not a
little, perhapps, to the Eternal Frailties of great ones, that had rather be
Pleased than Loved: How happy were it for the Nation, if such carnal Compliers
for the sake of grandeur, were as hateful to our Princes, as they are to God
and the rest of Mankind? I have no better account to give to God and the World,
of the latter part of my life, than some zeal and adventures against such
Betrayers, which I have preferred before all worldly Offers and Peace.

Their fault, you say, is, because they had rather be pleased then loved.

The truest love, Subjects have for their Princes, is best attested by their
obedience, and peaceable disposition; by whom when so beloved, certainly, they
are best pleased, there being no inconsistence at all, but if your meaning be,
they had rather be flattered, you were as good say, they had rather be
destroyed; which Princes affect so little as do their people, who pretend so
much care of their Princes preservation, when, sometimes, they are underhand
associating, and contriving their utter ruin. But these great ones, our
Princes, you think have a destructive gift of clemency, the stream whereof runs
in another chanel then you would have it, and, perhaps, of another color; They
are out of their Politics, in making favorites of such, as are undoubtedly
hateful to God and mankind, your intelligence is great, if you write what you
know; and if what you do not, you do it like a man of no understanding, to
pronounce you know not whom odious to God and mankind, because loved by their
Princes, who themselves perhaps expect as little love from your party, as you
profess you have from their favorites. So many years are not passed, but that
many of us, still surviving, can very well remember, what printed professions
of abundant Love and Honor, what Declarations of obedient and Loyal Subjects,
with most humble and affectionate Addresses, were made to our late Sovereign,
of blessed memory; what specious promises of erecting his Royal Person, Crown
and Dignity, to the very highest pinnacle of glory; but, withal, we forget not,
what hard and immajestick conditions, these fair but fraudulent, tenders were
clogged with, how they wrested from him not only his favorites but his forts,
and deprived him in vote, before they could accomplish it in fact, both of his
private solace, and public strength; which, in effect, was, not only to
unking, but unman, him, and so we all know, that in no better performance it
ended, by these several steps of descent (which I shall not enlarge on) so
incongruous proved their Acts to their words, (when they would not trust him,
their liege Lord, and Sovereign, but an upstart Russian, with their Protection)
by reviling, rifling, rebelling, chacing, devesting, restraining, dethroning,
beheading, attempting to break the image of his soul, and posthume reputation,
in pieces, by a malicious, and yet a mercenary Iconoclast, as a Peer of his
Realm and a loyal Gentleman can attest from his own mouth, a fellow that
ruffled his father out of his estate, while alive, and cheated his Prince of
the due reward to his piety, and incomparable Virtue, when, otherwise at rest
in his grave.

You now plainly see, Mr. Jones, what I reflect on, what a sad unprecedented
instance we of these (then unfortunate) Islands have had in all the most
impious particulars, and aggravations recited, with as much detestation as
sorrow, to the perpetual infamy of that forty one, and forty eight, party, with
whom I fear you are become over-and-above-familiar; and so ill as you treat me,
somewhat afflicted I am in your own behalf, that you have no better account to
give unto God, and the World, of the latter part of your life, then what you
spontaneously mention, and little better then boast of, some zeal and
adventures, against such Betrayers, (the character you injuriously give them)
your warm passion, and unnecessary hazard, had been, by much, more laudably
exercised, and undertaken, against another party-rampant, who have better
deserved the justice of your title; And your preference of such fanciful
enterprises, to worldly offers and Peace, will bear the empress but of Knight
errantry, when led into the Lists where any true valor is to be showed. Nor
(believe me) will posterity give it any preference to (if they afford it the
like entertainment as our Predecessors have done of) the Spanish Don in his
encounter with the Mill: but

Hermes omnia solus, and ter unus; You alone are all, as you take the conceit,
and may you so triumph in your thoughts, as the World may hear no more of your
too adventurous exploits, until you have cleared your account of the former,
which I fear you will not be able to do with that success as you promise your
self; And, if you will take my friendly advice, put your Candel under a
Bushel, for altogether hereafter, and leave not the world with an ill scent
whenever your faint light shall exspire.

What I leave in arrear of this Chapter being but a short form of transition,
or preface, to your following impeachment, I pass it over, until I send you my
Final Answer to your devised Calumnies of Schismatic Protestanism, De
Macedos dis-ingenuous treatment, with other our brabbles, (so far as any such
really were, not in Phantomes) at Sea and St. James, till when I rest

SIR, Yours on some better terms, then such usage deserves, RICH. WATSON.

FINIS.

