The PAPISTS Younger Brother: OR, THE VILENESS OF QUAKERISM, DETECTED: As it
has been Printed and Published by Themselves.

And an APPENDIX of the QVAKERS Unsound Faith, which is also gathered out of
their own Printed BOOKS.

By MISOPLANES and PHILALETHES.

Hisce oculis vidi, hisce manibus tractavi, Chemnit. Praef

Neque enim aliunde haereses obortae sunt, aut nata sunt schismata, quam inde
quod sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur. Divus Cyprianus libro primo, Epistola
tertia.

Exodus 20. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

2 Timothy 3.8, 9. Men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith: but they
shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be manifest unto all men.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Brewster, and Simon Miller, at the Crane in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and at the Star at the West End of St. Paul's. 1679.

The PAPISTS Younger Brother: OR, The Vileness of Quakerism detected, etc.
READER,
HE that shall endeavor to take a Quaker off from his conceited bottom, may
sooner remove a Material Church from the old Foundation. However one blow at
the Root may not be unserviceable. My present design is not to trouble this
delicate people; to prevent this, I shall only give them their own Meat cook't
by themselves in their own dish. It Is well known how the Poets were painted of
old, licking up what Homer did cast forth. I shall only present the Quakers
with that which their overcharged Homers have disgorged. I hope this fair
dealing cannot justly offend any of them. I know it is in vain to tell the
Quakers, That their Quakerism is a compound of false-Doctrine, newly-brought to
light; several old Errors new vampt; Antichristian Popery put forth in a new
dress. The Quakers, whose Names are so and so in the flesh, cannot endure to
hear that their false spirit has been delivered of such pitiful offspring:
However I shall endeavor to make their Pamphlets in print tell the Intelligent
Reader at whose doors the Quakers pretended spirit would have their lamentable
brats laid. It Is probable what is written may movere bilem, stir the Quakers
choler; but my design is only to remedy that status or windy spirit that
troubles them, that puts them upon all those irreligious heats with which they
and others by them are so troubled. To read their Enthusiastic follies
transcribed out of their own Books, may be a proper prescription for them. Let
not the Quakers, nor any others believe, that by answering fools according to
their folly, I do write one syllable against the Holy Ghost, who is God; or
that I have scoffed the Quakers as being the Servants of God; I know very well,
Pietas non patitur ludum: Give me leave only to tell the Christian Reader, That
the Quakers do commonly beg the question; they take it for granted always, that
they only are the People of God, his peculiar servants, which is but the true
idolizing conceit of themselves; true humility would make them look upon
themselves with another eye; their silly Quakerism would then be, what it is
indeed, a true cause of their abasement before the Lord. To weigh the Quakers
in the right balance, to take a true estimate of them, their Praters are but
too like Baals Prophets; by their followers that do not know them, they are
fondly doted on: Mahomets Pidgeon and the Quakers Spirit are both alike in
this, neither of them are of God. That man is a mere stranger to their
Scribbles, that knows not what manner of Saints they are in their own Calendar,
The People of God, The Seed of God, The Lords anointed ones that must not be
touched, The Saints of the Most High God: Thus like Simon Magns they give out
that themselves are some great ones, to whom many silly people give heed from
the least to the greatest, as if the false-inspired Quakers were carried forth
by the great power of God. By the way consider it well, it is a woeful mistake to
think or believe, that the Quaker's pretended spirit is the ever-blessed
Spirit, who is God. The vile Doctrines contained in the Quakers printed Books,
are enough to dash this base conceit, this vain belief in pieces. As for my own
particular, I do look for hard measure from my Neighbor- Quakers for this
kindness of love to undeceive them; I have already been sufficiently, without
any just cause, blackmarkt by them; A Judas, A Persecutor of Gods people, A
black Devil, The Porter of Hell, loaded with all the Plagues of Hell, exposed
to all the Devils of Hell. These are some of those unchristian evil-speakings
which some Quakers have used of me. But I need not tell the Impartial Reader
how black the Quakers mouths are, nor how fell they are against any Priests;
nor how expert they are at dying white black; the greatest innocence has not
escaped their blacking live. I thank God they are not my Judges, I must neither
stand nor fall before their bar; I am not one jot the worse for being their
filth and offscouring; I am not in the least induced to retaliate. I shall
only transcribe their own Books to serve as a looking-glass to let the serious
Reader see what base Doctrines are broacht against God above, against the Kings
Majesty below, against the Gospel, the Doctrine which is after godliness,
against the Scripture which is the Word of God; against Jesus Christ, whose
Satisfaction is denied, whose being God-Man is derided, whose Person is not
owned by them. A larger list of the Quakers base Doctrines shall be summed up
in the close of this Discourse, which may not unfitly be called, The Quakers
vain belief, or corrupt Creed. At present I shall not wire-draw one line in
their Books to speak more than their own words will bear. I shall only bespeak
the Readers patience for their very idle discourses; this trouble I cannot
avoid. I do beforehand assure the Reader, That his patience will be sore put
to it, to read such impertinent, rude, ignorant, blasphemous, corrupt, mean
stuff, fathered on God, who is Truth, in whom is no darkness. The Books made
use of, I shall name as I find them named and printed. By these Letters Q. Pr.
the Reader will easily know which words are only taken out of the Quakers
Books.

THE first Book that offers it self to be considered, is thus penned: The
Counterfeit Christian detected; and the real Quaker justified: By a lover of
Truth and Peace, W. P. Printed 1674.

Q. Page 78. Quaker to be no Christian, because he denies a Doctrine not
expressed in Scripture, and yet at that instant to magnify the Scripture as
thy sole Rule? Verily thou make thy self a derision to all wise men.

Pr. Quakers account, than the Doctrine of a Counterfeit Christian, a Doctrine
that has not one place of Scripture to prove it; a Doctrine which is denied by
this real Quaker; a Doctrine which is not expressed in Scripture: To make sure
work, this real Quaker says in effect, That he is a fool or a madman, a man
void of common sense, that would prove the Quaker to be no Christian, for
denying that Christ is a distinct person without us. According to this Quakers
false measure, all the Members of the Church of England (not to mention the
Reformed Churches abroad) are all fools and madmen, they are all void of
common sense; for they do unanimously affirm, That Christ is a distinct Person
without them. To touch at this Quakers Verily, etc. Verily that man is a
Braggadochio, one that does vainly magnify the Scripture to be his sole rule;
nay, he is a laughing stock to all wise men, that would prove a Quaker to be no
Christian, for denying Christ to be a distinct person without us. If this be
not one of the Quakers base Doctrines, asserted by W. P. alias William Pon, let
all wise men judge. According to this real Quakers mind, we have no such Savior
as Jesus Christ, who is God and Man in one Person, distinct without us.

Q. page 79. Reader beware that he be not abused by them: for the word [Person]
(as thou usest it in telling of Christ God-man, a distinct person without thee)
it is no Scripture Phrase.

Pr. Real Quaker justified, says so in effect; The Person of Christ, God-man,
a distinct person without us, this is no Scripture-truth nor phrase: According
to the vainglorious title of this Quaking-Pamphlet, they are
Counterfeit-Christians that do affirm Christ to be God-man, a distinct Person
without them. Is it not high time for the Kings Sacred Majesty to arise and
judge? for by his Quaking-subjects, Christ the King of Glory is basely
dishonored; this Quakers Pen has published this high dishonor.

Q. page end. i. e. 79.

Pr. 's false spirit does here put him upon writing in good earnest against
Christ God-man, a distinct person without us; for these are some of those
suchlike expressions as are of dangerous consequence; as this real Quaker
says, they do occasion people to retain dark and mean apprehensions of God,
Christ, and his place of residence. Without doubt it may be truly said, That
the Quakers light within is not of God; for it prompts them to write so
dishonourably of God the Son, who was sent by God the Father in the likeness of
sinful flesh, thus to be God-man, a distinct person without us, to save us by
faith in his Name. Take it for a most certain truth, It was the Light from
below which served this Quaking- Pen to write so basely concerning Christ, the
Word made flesh, God blessed for evermore.

Q. page 82.

Pr. Joab's fair words at first, Abner was smitten to death by him at last.
Though this Quaker has spoken well of the Holy Scriptures at first, yet in his
last lines they are basely thrust through; he says plainly, that they are not
the rule to direct his understanding, nor to govern his life by; it is not the
Scripture, but the Spirit of Truth, which is this Real Quaker's Rule; it is the
Counterfeit Christian who holds the Scripture to be the Rule of faith and
obedience: This Real Quaker takes the Scripture to be but a blind guide; for
it is the Spirit of Truth that does alone give true discerning: According to
this Quaking-doctrine, the Holy Scriptures do give no true discerning. But
hearken what follows!

Q. page 83.

Pr. the Real Quakers Golden Image, before which all (if they are so filly)
should fall down and worship. In the Quakers blind estimate, the Holy Scripture
is not the Word of God, that this Quaking-fondling, the Light within them, may
be set up for the Rule of faith and practice.

Q. page 84.

Pr. W. P's best reason, assisted with his Light within, is fondly at work to
prove, That the Light and Spirit, and not the Scriptures, were the rule of
their faith, that gave forth the Scripture. Surely it is matter of lamentation
in our Israel, that the Quakers false light, and their lying spirit, do
counterfeit the true Light, and the Holy Spirit, who is God, to decry the
Scriptures from being the Rule of says and life. Who can read these lines
without bleeding hearts! Whose hearts are not touched, to find the Holy
Scriptures reproached in this scurvy manner! Let wise men judge what hard
measure the Holy Scripture meets with from the Real Quaker.

Q. p. 95. Peter.

Pr. Peter knew Christ to be the Son of the living God by a special revelation
from Heaven, therefore the Scripture is not the Rule of faith. May it not be
said without offense, Surely this Quakers Light within burnt dim in his socket;
he saw not well to write by it? It Is no imposing upon the weakest
understanding, to say, That the Light within is no such infallible Teacher as
the Quakers brag of; like the Papists infallible Judge, it is not without its
gross mistakes.

Q. page 103. Go teach, baptizing, Mat. 28, I told thee that no water was
mentioned; and that Luke in Acts the first says, before the Commission
mentioned by Matthew could be given, at least executed, John baptized with
water, but you shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence; and
then comes the Commission in force, Go teach, baptizing, how? with the Holy
Ghost; turning people from darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God.

Pr. Reader judge. However this is most certain, that to deny Water Baptism to
be a Sacrament ordained by Christ himself, is not the received Doctrine of the
Church of England, nor of any other serious Christians under Heaven.

Q. p. 105. Paul says of himself, I may say of his Commission, It was not
behind any of the rest; yet he denies Water Baptism to be any part of it, and
is as plainly rejected by him, in point of institution, as any thing in
Scripture. So that either Water Baptism is none of Christ's Institutions, or
else Paul had no Commission to perform Christ's Institutions, which were strange.

Pr. W.P. was at Oxford to lick glass-windows? Is it the manner of his Light
within, of his bosom-teacher, to dictate at this low rate? However let it be
duly considered, that it is the avowed judgment of a real Quaker, That
Water Baptism is none of Christ's Institutions, and that this Quakers Paul was
of the same mind, which is a most gross mistake.

Q. p. 106. C. i. e. Counterfeit. Thou supposest the Doctrine of Justification
by that righteousness which Christ fulfilled wholly without us, to be a
sin-pleasing and dangerous notion. Quaker. I do so.

Pr. consitentem reum, the Real Quaker confessing himself guilty of a base
Doctrine, That Justification by that Righteousness which Christ fulfilled
wholly without us, is a sin-pleasing and dangerous notion. Thus this great
Gospel Truth, Justification by faith, articulus fidei stantis vel cadentis
Ecclesiae, a main Article of the Christian Faith in Luther's eye, is but a
sin-pleasing and dangerous notion in this Quakers account; as the Papists call
it a Putative righteousness, so the Quaker accounts it no better than a
sin-pleasing and dangerous notion. Thus Justification by Christ's righteousness
imputed by faith, which is a comfortable doctrine in the Church of Englands
eye, is basely murdered betwixt these two thieves.

Q. p. 107. C. i.e. Counterfeit. It is horrible wicked to conclude, That what
Christ has done and suffered without us, is to speak peace to the wicked
whilst such. Quaker. Right.

Pr. England is highly to blame for affirming that we are accounted righteous
before God, only for the merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by faith;
That we are justified by faith only, Ishmael, the bond-womans son, must be cast
forth, yea loathed as a sin-pleasing notion, which is dangerous, rejected as
that which is horrible wicked.

Q. page eadem. finish transgression present and to come; the first removes the
guilt; the second the cause of it. Methinks this should a little allay thy
clamours.

Pr. qui been distinguit, been docet; but this Quaker has missed the Cushion:
With this distinction he does only play the Mountebanks part, he does vainly
please his fond admirers; this counterfeit Balsom is ineffectual; he juggles;
here is neither the whole truth, nor nothing but the truth: Like the Devil,
this Real Quaker has the knack to deliver some truth according to the
Scripture, that he may the better manage his devilish design, and put off his
bad Wares. The first part of this Quaking-distinction is very lame, which any
sober Christian will soon perceive. The latter part of it is full of false
doctrine; the base design of this distinction, is to make Justification by
Christ's Righteousness without us, to be a counterfeit doctrine. Justification
by inherent righteousness only, is the chief mark at which this distinction is
levelled. Thus you see the Papists and Quakers are in a great measure hail
fellows well met; only the Quaker has the honor to be the more perfect Dotard
of the two.

Q. p. 108.

Pr. Rome; He is become a stout Champion under the Pope's banner: behold this
Real Quaker dabling in gross Popery. According to the tenor of his own words,
complete Justification is a making inwardly just, through a purging out of
iniquity, and mortifying of corruption, and bringing in Christ's everlasting
righteousness. Thus the nail is driven to the head by this doughty man of war.
Thus the doctrine of the Church of England is trampled under foot; the Doctrine
of Christ's Righteousness imputed by faith, once counted wholesome, is by the
Quakers Pen declared to be a Counterfeit; but no Quakers have yet obtained by
their Spirit to write any true Oracles. But the worst is yet behind.

Q. p. eadem;

Pr. England does hold fast that which is a Doctrine of Devils, a Doctrine
which does allow the Devils Kingdom to continue in being. Without doubt this is
a base aspersion cast on that Church which is beautiful in the eyes of all
sober Christistians. Christ's Righteousness wholly without, made ours by faith,
a Doctrine of Devils! Whose eyes are not offended to see it in print? Whose
ears do not tingle to hear it read? How base is the Light within W.P. to assert
it? Is this the genuine fruit of this Quakers Infallible Spirit? Is this the
true discerning which it gives? Is it not matter of godly mourning, that that
which the Church of England accounts to be a most wholesome and very comfortable
Doctrine, this ill-principl'd Quaker should term a Doctrine of Devils? May it
not be said without offense, Surely it is high time for the Kings Majesty, the
Defender of the Faith, to gird on His Sword; these that make so bold with this
and other truths of God, are but like stinging-Snakes in the bosom of
Indulgence.

THE next Quaking-Book which I shall acquaint the Reader with, is thus named in
print: The nature of Christianity in the true Light asserted. Written by a
Servant of Christ, G. Whitehead. Printed in the year 1671.

Pr.

Q. page 3. This man has grossly wronged diverse of us, by accusing of us, as if
we did oppose and seek to overthrow the plain testimonies and voices of all the
Prophets and Apostles concerning the true Savior, or the Man Christ Jesus,
whom we have frequently confessed, both as to his Divinity, and as to his
taking upon him a body prepared for him to do the will of God in, according to
the Scriptures of truth.

Pr. Readers with, as if the Quakers were more Orthodox in the Doctrine of
Faith concerning our Saviors Manhood and Divinity, than their own Pen has
already declared them to be. That man knows nothing, who knows not how the
Devil to promote errors and false doctrines, has always used to dress himself,
his Agents, in the garb of truth, to get his bad Wares the better put off. The
Devil was in the right, when he did profess to know Christ to be the Holy One
of God; but he had a devilish end in it. After all the fair paint in these
lines, the Quaker will anon show us his horns; we shall ere long know him to be
no tame beast; before we have done with him, his ill-inspiring spirit will
appear; you may certainly expect from this Quaking-Pamphlet, most base pitiful
stuff.

Q. p. 6. viz. That God-man purchased and completed Reconciliation,
Justification, etc. with God at once without us (which is as good sense as to
say, God purchased them of God).

Pr. Socinianism. Here his inspiring spirit appears in print to Socinianize in
a gross manner: Reconciliation purchased by Christ God-man, this Quaker says
is explained by his Adversary in an unscriptural and nonsensical style: As the
Socinians do, so this Quaker charges his Adversary to write no better sense
concerning Redemption purchased, than to say, that God purchased of God; an old
Socinian cavil! Thus the Light within is at unawares singing the old Cuckoes
song. Thus the Quakers Ignis fatuus, his pretended spirit, has led him into a
Socinian pit. Thus the true Christian Religion by this Quaker is brought to a
lamentable pass. According to this Quaking-scribble, the nature of Christianity
is now asserted in the Light to establish a base Socinian Error, as if it were
the truth from heaven. What a blind pitiful Elf is the Quakers Light within,
that it cannot discern Redemption by Christ God-man, as a purchase made without
us, but as unscriptural and nonsensical? God the Son made man, purchasing our
redemption of God the Father by the price of his own blood, as God incarnate;
This is that blessed Truth explained, which this Socinian-Quaker calls
unscriptural and nonsensical. However this point searched to the bottom,
touches the Quakers to the quick. They cannot endure to hear of Christ
God-man; the Son of God purchasing of God the Father, leans toward the
Doctrine of the Trinity, which the Quaker E.T. termed in mine and others
hearing a blasphemous doctrine.

Q. p. 7. Purchased and Redemption, are used by R. G. in an unscriptural sense,
while he does so nonsensically render it, as God-man having purchased all of
God without.

Pr. Proteus turned into a Socinian shape, sore troubled; it is still no less
than unscriptural and nonsensical to affirm, That God-man has purchased all of
God without. If we should fondly pin our faith on this Quakers sleeve, then
upon easy terms we might bid farwell to the received Doctrine of the Church of
England: Quaker, as that the Godhead and Manhood were joined in one person, who
suffered, was dead and buried, to reconcile his Father to us, and to be a
Sacrifice, not only for original guilt, but also for all actual sins of men;
such true doctrine as this is, belongs not to the nature of this Quakers
Christianity; this is that doctrine which in this Quakers Glass is represented
unjustly to be unscriptural and nonsensical. This blessed Truth, That Christ
God-man has purchased all of God without, is to this Quaker a rock of offense
unjustly taken by him. Without doubt that man is not mistaken who shall say,
That the Quakers do deny Christ to be God-man in one person; this certainly is
no point of any Quakers faith, That Christ God-man has purchased our
Redemption of God the Father by his precious blood without us. If this be true,
then where is, or what is become of this Quakers true Christianity? If this,
with his fellow-Quakers, were enjoined by the Kings Majesty, the Defender of
the true Faith, to subscribe to the 39 Articles of Religion, then by their thus
declaring their unfeigned assent and consent but to the two first Articles
thereof, their false Christian paint would soon fall off; then the Kings
Majesty would soon see what manner of Christians these Saints, Seed, People (as
they call themselves) of the Most High God are.

Q. p. 8. viz. Jesus A Savior, who saves from sin; Christ is anointed with
power from on high; Propitiation, A Sacrifice well pleasing, which is to purge
away sin, and make nigh to God; and which imports forgiveness, reconciliation,
favor, mercy, kindness, etc. Sacrifice, An oblation, or offering to consecrate
or make holy. Reconciliation, An agreement, a setting at one. Covenant, An
accord, agreement, a contract, a treaty, a condition, etc. Atonement, Peace,
quietness betwixt them that are reconciled, or in mutual friendship.
Redemption, A ransoming buying again, rescuing such as were under bondage, or
sold under slavery. Salvation, A saving or a making safe from the hand of an
enemy, destroyer, or oppressor, etc. Imputation, An ascribing, laying to the
charge of, or an accounting, reckoning or thinking. Justification, A making
righteous, just, upright, virtuous, good, perfect, etc. and also an adjudging,
pronouncing and sentencing one that is made righteous, to be so.

Pr.

Q. p. 9.

Pr. Quakers in heart, ill-principl'd in Christianity, who do not see plainly
how this Quakers spirit has put him upon playing the Sophister, as well as an
Ignoramus in it. There is not one syllable of Redemption by purchase to be
found in it: Jesus, Christ, Propitiation, Sacrifice, Reconciliation, Covenant,
Atonement, Redemption, Salvation, Imputation, Justification, are not only
ignorantly but basely explained, to use Dr. G's words (whom I heard preaching
upon that plain literally-meant Text, Mat. 5.10, say, Haec intus transiguntur
omnia) they must be all felt and experimentally fulfilled within professors,
otherwise they are but empty professors and talkers of them; nay further,
unless professors come to this (which they are never likely to do) to have them
fulfilled in them, they are (in a sad case) without the true life and power of
Christianity and true Religion. To give one parting-blow more, Let it be duly
observed, that this Quakers explanation is full of tautologies, and of plain
words darkened by those of more difficult understanding; as also of several vain
repetitions; of all which his Teacher, the Light within, his pretended Lord
God, his Spirit that inspired him, is highly guilty. As for Justification, it
is altogether Popishly explained; a plain instance that the Quakers Light
within, is from Rome below, not from Heaven above; besides, that man is not
imposed upon, that shall hence aver this Quakers Vocabulary to be full of
Socinianism; for here is nothing of Redemption by Christ's blood without us. The
life and power of this Quakers Religion has nothing to do with redemption
purchased by Christ God-man. Once more, consider this Quaking-Dictionary well,
and then it will casily appear, that this Socinianizing Quaker does truly deny
the Lord that bought him, as well as unchristian all those that are not of the
same corrupt mind with him; That all these abovesaid words in their
Quaking-sense must be fulfilled in them.

Q. p. 18. Presbyterians and Independents, in saying, That man's redemption is
purchased by his crucified body; for they say he did not satisfy as man
simply, but as God and man, or as Godman (which is all one as to say, That God
satisfied and paid God; or that God purchased redemption of himself.

Pr. Presbyterians and Independents. According to this Upstart Quaker, Christ's
satisfaction is no Gospel Truth from God in heaven, it is only from below;
according to this Quaker, the Presbyterians and Independents are the known
Fathers of this Infant-truth; the old scum is still before this Quakers eyes;
all his light within does not remove it; God satisfying and paying God, God
purchasing redemption of himself, does still so blind him, as that he cannot as
yet see redemption by price, or satisfaction made by Christ God-man to God the
Fathers Justice, to be a precious Gospel Truth. It Is no slander to say, That
this Quaker has an ill-catechised head, an ignorant spirit to be his guide,
otherwise he had never appeared so ignorant in print. I may truly write without
any just offense, That an ungrounded confident pretense to divine teaching,
has put this deluded Quaker upon devising a Lookingglass for all sorts of
professors, in which nothing of true Christianity is yet to be seen.

Q. p. 24, 25. R. G. We, who since we believed, received the Atonement, shall
after our bodily death be raised from the grave, and be made partakers of that
salvation which through faith and hope we wait for while in the body. Answ.
Thou put salvation at a great distance, showing thy self yet in the grave
of corruption. Is this thy meaning of salvation, that thou hopest and waitest
for while in the body, to be raised from the grave after thy bodily death? What
strange nonsensical language is this? * And was this the salvation that Christ's
second appearance was looked for to effect? Hebr. 9.28. [ For your better
understanding this Quakers mind, take his Marginal note] * He now hopes and
waits for salvation after the bodily death; see his sottishness and confusion;
at other times it was perfectly wrought at once without; or else purchased (he
knows not which) at Jerusalem; but he hopes for it after his bodily death: ah!
the hypocrites hope shall perish.

Pr. Heb. 9.28, truly misunderstood, basely wrested by this Quaker, salvation
after this life ended, is not the salvation that Christ's second coming is
looked for to effect; this Quaker in his marginal note scoffs at his Adversary
for hoping and waiting for salvation after the bodily death; it is no less fault
than sottishness and confusion to hope for salvation after the bodily death;
everlasting life purchased by Christ upon the Cross at Jerusalem, hoped for
after bodily death, this is sottishness and confusion for any faithful
Christians to do; yea, which is far worse, it is a damnable sin to do so; it is
no less than the hypocrites false hope, which shall perish.

Q. p. 29. Son of Mary, to appear outwardly in a bodily existence, to save thee
according to thy words? If thou do, thou may look till thine eyes drop
out, before thou will see such an appearance of him.

Pr. Leviathan-like, out of his nostrils goes smoke to darken the truth;
Christ's appearing the second time without sin to salvation is, according to
this Quaker, in this life, not hereafter; to be raised out of the grave after
the bodily death, to be partakers after death of that resurrection, which is
unto life: this is that sound Divinity, which this Quakers light within him,
knows nothing of; to affirm, that the salvation of sinners, yea, of the whole
world, should be completely finished by Christ's death upon the Cross above 1600
years since, this is strange Doctrine to this ill-principled Quaker; that
Christ's death upon the Cross, so long since past, should be effectual to
deliver from bodily death hereafter, those that believe in him; this is that
comfortable Doctrine, which this Quakers stomach cannot digest: you see
clearly, it is no part of this Quakers faith, to believe that Christ is the Son
of the Virgin Mary, or to look for Christ, as the Son of Mary, to appear
outwardly, in a bodily existence, to save those that believe in his name; this
Quaker is bold to say to this purpose, If any man believes that Christ shall
come at the last day of judgment, to judge the quick and the dead, to adjudg the
righteous to Heaven, to condemn the wicked to Hell, then he may look till his
eyes drop out, before he will see such an appearance of him; after this life is
ended by a bodily death, Christ's last coming to judgment, is no Article of this
Quakers faith; without doubt, Job that was a perfect man, was in the right,
when he said, That he knew that his Redeemer lives, and that he should stand
at the latter day upon the earth: and that in his flesh, when worms had
destroyed his body, he should see God, and his eyes should behold him after his
bodily death, though his reins were consumed within him.

Q. p. 30.

Pr. Tridentine Cabal; his spirit agrees well with those Cabal-men about
justification by works of righteousness: as for Christ's righteousness without
us, made ours by faith, this is that Doctrine which is disowned by this
Papal-Quaker; in this Quaking-account of justification, what has this Quaker
said more, which the Trent-Council has not determined to his hand? Council.
Trid. Cap. 3. Sess. 6. Cum ea renascentia per meritum passionis ejus, gratia,
qua justifiunt, illis tribuatur, Together with the new birth, through the Merit
of Christ's passion, grace, whereby they are made righteous, is imparted to
them. Cap. 7. Sess. 6. Justificatio est and sanctificatio, and renovatio
interioris hominis per voluntariam susceptionem gratiae Justification is both
the sanctification and renovation of the inward man by grace received; as face
answers face in the glass, so do the Quakers and Papists agree together in the
point of Justification by inherent righteousness; they do both disclaim the
works of the Law before grace received; works not done in Christ the Seed, do
not justify, says the Canting-Quaker; Justification is the sanctifying of the
inner man by grace received, say the Papists. The righteousness by faith is,
when the Law is performed in us by the works of the Spirit, says the Quaker;
By grace received in the new birth, are we made righteous, say the Papists:
Thus the Light within which guides the Quakers to scribble concerning
Justification, is nothing else but Trent-Popery infused into them by subtle
Popish Priests, and propagated by the deluded Quakers at this day. This old
Popish Doctrine is that which their Praters put off in their Speakings and
Writings to their followers, as if it were new doctrine from heaven, something
belonging to Christianity, which was not known till the brainsick Quakers made
it known.

Q. p. 32, 33. R. G. scornfully tells us, that in plainer words they of Rome
thus express, That the Apostle excludes from Justification, works which we our
selves do by our strength, without the help of the grace of God, not those
works we do by the aid of the Spirit. [ To these lines this Quaker answers
thus]: They of Rome have given a better definition of Justification, than R.G.
has, and at least shown a better esteem of works of grace, and of the Spirit
of God, than he has done. Now if I be exclaimed against herein for Popery, I
must say, that wherein Papists hold any truth, though in unrighteousness, I
must not therefore deny it; if the Papists, and the Devil also, confess there
is a God and a Christ, must I therefore deny it, or be counted a Papist?

Pr. England, I might tell the Reader how Romans 8.3, 4. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Isa.
45.8. James 2.20, 21, 23. Gal. 3.6. are discoursed from by this Quaker no
otherwise than the Papists have done, to assert Justification by the works of
the Spirit; but it is no new thing with the Devil or his Agents to quote
Scripture to prove that, which God never intended them for. That man is a
stranger to the point of Justification, that knows not, that many Scriptures
have been wrested by the Papists for this purpose, which have been soundly
vindicated from Popish glosses put upon them. This Quaker does but actum agere,
act the Popish old part over again, to amuse unwary Christians with the
rehearsal of them. If this Quakers spirit were of God, he had ere this been
silent in this matter. To use this Quakers own words, I shall tell him, That it
is an old Popish trick to assert Justification by works of the Spirit, from
mistaken Scriptures; and there is certainly no little spice of the old
Law-working spirit in it.

Q. p. 33. for he is the author of eternal salvation to as many as obey him. So
here is righteousness, redemption, and salvation, received in Christ the Light,
through obedience to his Light within.

Pr. usque ad nauseam; by this tedious discourse this Quaker gives us to
understand, that there is no such truth as Justification by faith alone; the
subject matter of his lines is hammered out upon his Popish anvil; there is
nothing for the main said, which any Papist will disown; Justification and
Sanctification are by him ignorantly confounded, but rightly enough according
to the Popish mode; he that shall affirm this Quaker to be one of Abbot
Joachim's Disciples, or one belonging to Seculum Spiritus Sancti, or a
Franciscan Papist in a new dress, is not altogether mistaken; his whole
discourse is a medley of some truth of more falsehood; to glance at the title of
his Pamphlet, you see it plain, unless we are of the same mind with the Papists
in the doctrine of Justification, we are all far from the nature of true
Christianity; in this matter, in this Quakers account, the Church of England,
together with other Reformed Churches, is altogether Antichristian.

Q. p. 40, 41. R.G. his saying, His Apostles and all his Ministers in all ages
-- all in one joint voice pointing to Jesus the Son of Mary, this son of man,
with an Hosanna to the Son of David. Ans. That the holy Prophets, Apostles and
Ministers testified unto Jesus Christ, both as man born of the Virgin, and unto
his Divinity; this is owned. But it appears further; that R. G.'s Hosanna, and
pretended adoration and claim of Salvation, is only to him as the Son of Mary,
as now existing outwardly bodily without us; * whereupon I ask him, if he has
so considered him to be God the Savior, or the Son from the substance of the
Father, as some of his Brethren have confessed the Son is? and that he existeth
outwardly bodily without us, at Gods right hand; what Scripture Proof has he
for these words? and then what and where is Gods right hand? is it visible or
invisible? within us, or without us only? and is Christ the Savior as an
outward bodily existent, or person without us, distinct from God, and on that
consideration to be worshipped as God, yea or nay? And where does the Scripture
say, he is outwardly and bodily glorified at Gods right hand? [ according to
the foregoing Asterisk * you may take this Authors Marginal note] Why did he
not call Mary the Mother of God, (as the Papists do) which to be sure is not
Scripture Language?

Pr. Hosanna due to Christ as the Son of Mary, as now existing bodily without
us. 2ly, Jesus the Son of Mary is not God our Savior. 3ly, That Jesus Christ
is not the Son of the substance of the Father; this is no point of this Quakers
Faith, this is only the confession of Presbyterians and Independents, who are
his adversaries brethren. 4ly, Jesus the Son of Mary does not (to use his own
words) exist outwardly bodily without us at Gods right hand, according to this
Quaker; this is a false doctrine, for which there is no Scripture Proof: as for
Gods right hand, this Quaker does scoffingly ask, what, or where is it? is it
visible or invisible? within us or without us only? Thus Jesus the Son of Mary
sitting on Gods right hand in Heaven, is no article of this Quakers faith. 5ly,
Christ the Savior, the Son of Mary, is no outward bodily existent person
without us, distinct from God; to hold Christ our Savior to be a distinct
person from God the Father, is no part of this Quakers faith. The light within
guides no Quakers to own this great Gospel Truth; their spirit inspires none of
them to be sound in this doctrine of faith; Light of Light, very God of very
God, is none of their faith. 6ly, Christ the Savior, the Son of Mary, is not
to be worshipped as God. Mind it well, the Hypostatical Union on is not owned
by any Quaker; because the Quakers do deny our Savior to be God man in one
person, therefore they deny that the Son of Mary is to be worshipped as God.
7ly, That Christ the Savior, the Son of Mary is outwardly bodily glorified at
Gods right hand, is no Scripture-truth. Lastly, to call Mary the Mother of God,
is a Popish saying, which to be sure is not Scripture Language; in this Quaking
discourse the learned may observe many old Heresies revived, however by this
Quakers golden Calf the nature of true Christianity is made naked, it is stripped
off its primitive glory; it may now truly be called Ichabod, for by this
Quakers most ugly doctrine, the glory is departed from it.

Q. p. 51. Mary, whom thou call God-man, I ask thee, if this be not of kin
to the Papists, calling Mary the Mother of God? and where did the Apostles so
often (or ever) use these expressions, Jesus Christ (God-man, the Son of the
Virgin Mary?) and who were they that said, Is not this the Carpenter, the Son
of Mary? But Peter gave an higher testimony of him, when he said, Thou art
Christ the Son of the living God. But do not the Papists honor him as much as
thou, in their frequent calling him the Son of Mary, as thou have done?

Pr. Mary, or God-man; for he is angry with his adversary for going so often
over with these words, Jesus the Son of Mary, and for calling him God-man; this
Quaker tells us, to call Jesus the Son of Mary, is that which is near of kin to
the Papists, who call Mary the Mother of God. Certainly this Quakers Light
within is very dull-sighted, which can neither discern Jesus to be the Son of
Mary, nor Mary to be the Mother of God the Son, according to his Manhood; Jesus
Christ God-man in one person is a great stumbling block in this Quakers way;
it is against his Light within him to acknowledge Christ to be God and Man in one
person, therefore it must in his eye be Popery to call Christ the Son of Mary,
and Mary the Mother of God; the communication of properties is a doctrine of
which this Quaker takes no notice; it is not to tell whither an ignorant
confidence will hurry those that are led by it; to call Jesus Christ the Son of
Mary, God-man, are those expressions, says the consident Quaker, which were
never used by the Apostles: Behold, what is the result of this ignorant
confidence? is it not this abominable assertion to the shame of true
Christianity, that Jesus Christ, God-man, the Son of Mary, is no Gospeltruth
taught by Christ's own Apostles? To go one step further, to call Jesus the Son
of Mary, is according to this Quakers language, to honor Christ no otherwise
than those that said of him, Is not this the Carpenter, the Son of Mary? Let us
remark it once more, it is but a slight, a vulgar dishonor put on our Savior,
to call him, Jesus the Son of Mary; nay it is Popery, which is commonly counted
Antichristianism, to call Mary the Mother of God; how ignorantly does this
Quaker decry Jesus from being the Son of Mary? because St. Peter testified of
him, saying, Thou art the Son of the living God; therefore it is a false Popish
testimony, that Jesus Christ is the Son of the Virgin Mary, Tremulus naviget ad
Anticyras, this pitiful Quaker wants a necessary dose for his pericranium;
common sense is ashamed of such mean arguing; at this day no serious
Christians, none but deluded Quakers do deny Jesus Christ to be the Son of the
Virgin Mary; the Papists who believe many lies, are not so grossly deceived, as
this Quaker has showed himself to be in this point.

Q. S. C. and George Fox the younger.

Pr. magnum in parvo, very much base doctrine contained in a few leaves.

Q. S. C. and George Fox the younger.

Pr.

Q. p. 6.

Pr.

Q. p. 11. obey the Light within, and then shall thou be delivered from
condemnation.

Pr. Roman Sibboleth; that man is dim-sighted who does not see that Quakerism
serves as a stepping-stone for Popery in this Church and Kingdom.

Q. p. 13, 14. Hearken not to the deceivers,

Pr.

Q. p. 15. And such also are all deceivers, who tell you,

Pr. Timothy was ill-instructed in the knowledge of the Scriptures from his
youth; That St. Paul was grossly mistaken, in saying, That the Scriptures were
able to make him wise unto salvation. But you see these Quakers are strangely
fond of the Light within, so as to cry down the light of Gods own word; as if
nothing but deceitful knowledge were to be gotten by the Scripture, which is
Gods Book. This Quaking-dotage does plainly say, In vain did Timothy know the
Scriptures of a child; in vain do any Parents train up their children in the
knowledge of them; if this be not, what is the ready way to lay poor children
open to the Spirit of Error? to make them a ready prey to the Quakers deluding
spirit of truth? By pursuing this Quaking-fancy, is not the Devil likely to
have a rich ingathering in this Church and Kingdom?

Q. p. 16. Freely you have received, freely give: and Paul made not the Gospel
chargeable: but these Priests that preach for filthy lucre deceive people.

Pr. England; here these Quakers have fired their Beacon, that the youth of
this Church and Kingdom may have timely notice to beware of their best
soul-friends; here the silly sheep are slily counseled against their keepers,
that the Quaking-Wolves in sheeps-cloathing may the better prey upon them: Is
it not very sad, that the youth of this Church and Kingdom must be thus
dangerously prejudiced against Gods Priests, who are his Ambassadors, by whom
God does beseech his Rebel-subjects, that they may be reconciled to God?
Behold, here little children are taught to look upon all teaching-Priests as so
many deceivers, as those Hirelings that preach for money and tithes, which is a
lying slander, as those blind guides that are in the pit of transgression, such
as are not like Christ's true Ministers, as burdeners of that Gospel which plain
Paul made not chargeable, as those Priests that preach for filthy lucre, as
Cheats who deceive the people. According to the baseness of these
Quaking-lines, it is a shame for the King's Sacred Majesty, the Defender of the
true Faith, that such base Priests should be owned by him, be suffered to
preach before him? Is it not likewise another standing-shame, that the Priests
of the Most High God should be thus basely reproacht in print, to the
corrupting of youth, and as yet no exemplary notice taken of it? By the way
observe it well, that the Most Reverend Fathers of this Church are some of
those Priests that are thus stigmatized in these Quakinglines, as well as the
other dignified and inferior Clergy of this Church and Kingdom. The good Lord
rebuke this Quaking ill spirit.

Q. p. 17, 18. And such are no Ministers of Gods word,

Pr. of Gods Word, who tell little children that the Scripture is the word of
God. 3. That they are the Ministers of the Letter, and not the Ministers of
Christ, who are Ministers of the Scripture. May I not say without offense to
any, If the Devil were incarnate, it would well become him to teach such base
Doctrine as this is? By this Doctrine once imbibed, little children are well
fitted to become bad Scholars in the Devils School.

Q. p. 25.

Pr. George Fox the younger comes on the stage of the Quaking-Primmer to act
his part, to make little children believe this Doctrine, to wit, Three Persons
and one God is a false doctrine: That the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, are
no otherwise three Persons, but as the world and their Teachers calls them so.
To say that God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, are three
Persons, but one God, this is to speak we know not what, a mere fancy as we
have imagined, a false doctrine contrary to the Scripture. England, In the
Unity of this Godhead there be Three Persons of one substance, power and
eternity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, is, in this Quakers account,
the Doctrine of the world and their Teachers, a speaking we know not what, a
vain imagination, a corrupt doctrine contrary to the Scripture. If this be not
pestilent doctrine for little children to learn, let all sober Christians judge.

Q, p. 21.

Pr. up the knowledge of the Scriptures, to prepare little Children to slight
them, as being unable to bring them to know God and Christ, and the Spirit of
Truth; according to these Quaking-lines, St. Paul was mistaken, when he said,
that the Scripture was profitable for Doctrine; for, wherein are the holy
Scriptures profitable for Doctrine, if they are unable to bring those that read
them, to know God, Christ, and the Spirit of Truth? certainly it is either a
true or a false knowledge, that is to be gotten of God, Christ, and the Spirit,
by the Scriptures; to exalt the Quakrs Idol, the Light within, little Children
are here taught to slight the holy Scriptures as a dull Book, in the reading
whereof there is nothing of God, Christ, and the Spirit of Truth to be known.
There are many more soulendangering Doctrines in this Primer, but I shall
dismiss them at this present, that I may come to the Quakers Catechism, a Book
of no less dangerous consequence: as Popery of late has spread in this Kingdom
by Popish Catechisms, so the Papal Quakers have set their Catechisms forth to
gain Proselytes; by this means, Pharisee-like, they make their followers
twofold more the children of Hell.

Q. THe Book now under consideration is thus Titled, Two Treatises, the one
Entitled, A New Primer; the other, A New Catechism, both written by William
Smith, Printed 1668.

Pr. New Primer is that Book in which is demonstrated the new and living way; a
specious title this Book has to catch unwary Readers, to draw them cunningly
into the Devils snare; it is written by way of Question and Answer, the Child
inquiring, the Father informing, which is a subtle way to dispense Quakerism:
the other is a new Catechism, both are bound up together, both Primer and
Catechism are the sit for Smithfield, to receive the Hangmans Imprimatur
there; the Catechizing new Primer is betwixt the Father and Child, thus:

Q. p. 2. Child, But is there something of God in my own conscience, that will
give me the knowledge of him? Father, Yes, and there is not any thing else that
can do it.

Pr. Paul says, Is able to make wise to salvation, which is profitable for
instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto every good work; this very Scripture in comparison of the Light
within, is not able to help children in the least to know God, his way and
truth; it does still further appear that the Quakers spirit is not of God,
which does thus debase the Scripture, which is Gods word.

Q. p. 5. Fath. Such as are not Christ's Ministers have their power and
authority from man, and have each man a place of settlement, which is called a
Parish; in that Parish they have Tithes allowed for their maintenance; and they
have a law made by man to compel it; and if any for conscience sake cannot give
it them, then by their Law they sue them, and imprison them, and spoil their
goods; and these are wolves, Child, that are let loose among the lambs to rend
and tear them; and they have places builded in their several Parishes, which
they call Churches; and they observe one day in a week for their worship, and
few hours in that day to perform it; and they have an hourglass, and that is
their time of Preaching, and their eye will be often toward the glass, to see
when it is run, because it is a long hour to them; when the glass is run they
tell their people, the time is now spent, and what has been spoken must
suffice for that time; and this is not the practice of Christ's Ministers.

Pr. Jeroboams Priests, or Baals Prophets, (this Quaker says) we derive our
authority from man; the Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, the Ordination
of Priests and Deacons, is no more but an humane invention, for they have their
power and authority from man* in this Quakers account there is no true Ministry
belonging to the Church of England; the Priests are but so many Tythmongers
settled in every Parish; bloody wolves let loose among the lamb-like Quakers to
rend and tear them; like the Jews they have a law made by man to compel that
which is unjust; they are time-servers, who do observe one day in a week for
their worship, and a few hours in that day to perform it; an hourglass
measures the time of their Preaching, which their eyes are often upon, their
glass run and their time are both spent together: thus in this Quakers eye they
are no better than so many hour-glass-Preachers; behold, what a silly,
scandalous charge is here drawn up against all the Ministers of Gods Word in
this Church and Kingdom? who can believe that the foregoing discourse was
indicted by the infallible spirit, who is God? except a Quaker, none can; how
are the youth of this Kingdom instructed by this Catechizing-Primer to slight
all Gods Ambassadors? Pudet haec opprobria dici, it is a shame of no mean size,
that such base things should be printed and not signally taken notice of.

Q. p. 10. Child. But are not the Scriptures given forth for a rule to walk by?
Fath. The Scriptures are a true testimony of what the Saints were made
witnesses of, but the spirit is the rule; the rule unto them that gave forth
the Scriptures.

Pr.

Q. p. 12. Chapter Then I perceive it is the spirit alone that I am to mind in all
things. Fath. Yes, child, for by minding the spirit alone in all things, thou will come to a good understanding in all things, and be able to put a
difference betwixt that which is true and that which is false.

Pr. and put a difference betwixt that which is true, and that which is false;
the Quakers ill spirit is to be minded in all things, this alone is the true
discerner betwixt truth and falsehood; but pity those poor children that have no
better guide to follow.

Q. p. 33. Chapter Why is not their time, and place, and person right, seeing their
time is upon that day called Sunday, and their place that which is called a
Church, and the persons such as are counted the Ministers of Christ? Fath. Nay,
the Lord God of Power is not limited by any of them; and as for their Sunday,
the Heathen named it, and the Pope named their Church; and their Schools and
Colleges made their Ministers.

Pr. England, as if the Lord of Power were limited by the same; as for the
Lord's Day, this Quaker calls it our Sunday, which the Heathen named; as for the
public place where the members of this visible Church do meet to worship God
in, a material Church, this he says was made by the Pope; as for the persons,
the Ministers of Gods Word, he gives us to understand, that they are none of
them sent of God, for our Schools and Colleges made them all; do not these
Quaking-lines eat like a canker? is not the Church of England debased after a
strange manner?

Q. p. ead. Chapter Fath. Nay, their Doctrine is after the tradition of men, and
not after Christ; and they get their Doctrine by their arts and languages, that
they have learned at Schools and Colleges, and then they read it or speak it
forth in their own wills that are corrupted, and there is no soundness in it.

Pr. England are a sort of pitiful fellows, for their Doctrine is not from
Heaven; like the old Pharisees they teach for Doctrine the tradition of men;
none of them do teach that Doctrine which is after Christ; arts and languages
learnt here below at Schools and Colleges is the whole skill which they have
in the doctrine of Salvation; they are all a sort of pitiful readers, or
speakers out of their own corrupt wills; as for their Doctrine, it is corrupt
like themselves, there is no soundness in it; to speak after this Quaking-rate,
they are like so many corrupt trees, they bring forth corrupt fruit; they are
all bad stewards of the Mysteries of the Gospel. If this be not base railing,
let the world judge.

Q. p. 34, 35. Chapter But is not their praying a service which is accepted of God?
Fath. Nay, for they pray not with the spirit, nor with the understanding, and
some of them cannot pray at all, but as they have prayers made by others, and
have them set in a book to read, as in the Commonprayer-book; so that neither
their preaching nor praying is accepted of God.

Pr. England is altogether naught; as their Preaching, so their Praying is a
service which is not accepted of God; their prayers are carnal, for they pray
not with the spirit; tremulo judice, in their praying they do but offer the
sacrifice of fools, for they pray not with the understanding; as for those
ministering Priests that do warrantably use the Common Prayer Book either in the
Kings-Chappel, or elsewhere (to speak this Quakers mind or sense) they are a
company of dull Ignoramusses, they cannot pray at all; behold a sad case,
except it be in the Quakers dumb meeting, or amongst those that are acted by
the spirit of the Hat, there is no calling on the name of God in faith any
where besides; according to this Quaking rant, is not the Kings Majesty basely
reflected on? has he not a dull Clergy to minister in his Presence? is not
this Church whereof he is a nursing-father, in a bad case, for neither the
Preaching nor praying of her Priests, this Quaker says, is accepted of God?
surely the true Christian Religion is at a low ebb in this Kingdom, that
Quakerism must thus carry the bell; according to this vain-minded Quaker, we
are in a great strait, we must now either all turn Quakers, or else in
Preaching and Praying we do but perform the service which God rejects.

Q. p. 35. Chapter And is not their singing an acceptable service? for they that
can sing praises, are in a good condition. Fath. But they have David's words
put into Meeter by Hopkins and Sternhold, and given them forth as they were
David's condition, and the drunkard, and the swearer, and the liar sing
together, who know nothing of David's condition, and so they sing lies in
Hypocrisy, which is not a right service, nor accepted of God.

Pr. David's Psalms in Meeter is a despised service; for this reason we can
make no right melody in our hearts to the Lord; like so many fools, we do not
rightly understand what we sing; the Quakers, to the shame of true
Christianity, are they only who sing with the spirit, and with understanding,
when their spirit moves on their waters; as for the Ministers and people of the
Church of England, we are sensual, not having the spirit; like those that sing
Ballads, other men's words, we do only sing David's words put into Meeter by
Hopkins and Sternhold. To mount the baseness of Quakerism aloft; the singing of
Psalms (at Court, in the Kings-Chappel, in the City and Country, in Cathedrals
and Parish Churches) is (according to these Quaking-lines) a very profane
piece of service; for here the drunkard and swearer, and liar, sing together,
who know nothing of David's condition; thus in singing Psalms we do nothing
else but sing lies in hypocrisy; if this be not a base lying charge drawn up
by this Quaker against the known practice of the Church of England, let the
unbyassed Reader judge.

Q. p. 36. Chapter I would know, father, how it is with those things called
Ordinances, as Baptism, and Bread and Wine, which are much used in their
worship. Fath. Why, child, as to those things, they rose from the Popes
invention, who has had power in the night of Apostasy, and has set up his
devices, which are yet continued in England; and the whole practice of those
things, as they use them, had their institution by the Pope, and were never so
ordained of Christ; for he did not ordain sprinkling water in a child's face;
neither did he ordain bread and wine to be so used and received; and the wine
is another of the Popes inventions; who has invented a silver cup, and pours
wine into it, and then the Priest gives it to the people, and tells them, that
is the blood of Christ that is shed for them, when it is wine and not blood;
and gives them bread, and tells them, that is the body of Christ that is broken
for them; when people neither discern the body, nor the blood of Christ, and so
eat and drink damnation to themselves; true Baptism, child, is in the spirit,
which baptizeth into one body; the true meat and drink is the body and blood of
Christ; which the worthy receiver feeds upon in his heart; so that these things
be false, and not to be regarded by the true Christians, who live in the
spirit, who is the substance.

Pr. their right use in the Church of England; as for those things called
Ordinances, as Baptism, Bread and Wine, which are much used in our public
worship, this Quaker does boldly say, they rose from the Popes invention; in
the night of Apostasy they were conceived and brought forth; they are only
devices of the Popes setting up; they are continued yet in England, as the Pope
left them; nay further, this Quaker does basely add, that the whole practice of
those things called Ordinances, as baptism, and bread and wine, as we use them,
had their institution by the Pope; they were never so ordained of Christ:
behold, is not this rake-shame stuff? is it of the Spirit of God, to affirm,
that Baptism, the Lord's Supper, rose from the Popes invention? who before this
Quaker did term them devices of the Popes setting up? is it not high base, to
say (as this Quaker does) that the whole practice of Baptism and the
Lord's Supper, as we use them, have their institution by the Pope? that they
were never so ordained of Christ? according to this Quakers wild assertions, is
it not very plain, that we baptize in the Popes name, and receive bread and
wine only according to the Popes institution? how does this Quaker in a
ridiculous manner assert, that Baptism is only sprinkling water in a child
face, which Christ did never ordain? who can read this consident ignorance
without blushing, (Is it not another base boldness to say, that neither did
Christ ordain bread and wine to be so used and received, as they are in the
Church of England?) except this deluded Quaker, who has said, that the wine is
another of the Popes inventions? risum teneatis amici? who can but laugh this
Baals Prophet to scorn? or rather, who can but pity his great ignorance? the
rest of his discourse is a confused Chaos; surely his hasty spirit was not at
leisure to digest it better; only let this be noted, that this Quaker owns no
other baptism but that which is in the spirit, which certainly is no
Scripture-baptism. As for the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, there is in this
Quakers eye no such thing; for the body and blood of Christ is, as he tells us,
the true meat and drink, but bread and wine in the Lord's Supper are not so;
these things, i. e. baptism, bread and wine (according to this Quakers mind)
are false things, not to be regarded by true Christians, who live in the
spirit; according to the sense of this Quaking-father, all Quakers are those
true Christians, who do so live in the spirit, as that they are above Baptism
and the Lords Supper; these are those false things which are not regarded by
them; may it not be truly said, Alas poor despised Church of England! how low
art thou fallen? What Is become of thy two Sacraments which are generally
necessary to salvation? Art thou now beholding to the Popes invention for them?
How are Christ's own Ordinances now made to be the Popes devices? In baptizing
and receiving the Lords Supper, what is the whole practice, but according to
the Popes institution? Did thine Husband, the Lord Jesus Christ, ever ordain
Baptism and the Lords Supper, so as thou usest them? Why do thou receive
bread and wine according to Christ's institution? did he ever ordain bread and
wine to be so used and received? Do thou not know that the wine in the Cup is
another of the Popes inventions? Do thou not consider, that Baptism and the
Lords Supper are two falsehoods? How far art thou from true Christianity, from
living in the spirit, that do regard these false things? In this Glass you
see the ugly face of these Quaking-lines; without just offense it may be truly
said, That Quakerism is not of God, because it overthrows what Christ, the Son
of God incarnate, has established till his last coming to judgment.

Q. p. 38. Chapter But is not the place in which all these things are performed, a
true Church? Fa. Nay, the true Church is in God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and Christ is the Head of it; but the place in which such things are
performed, is also of the Popes invention, and he counts himself to be the Head
of it; and is a place made by men; and it is wood and stone, which do decay and
come to naught; then they make levies, and gather money to repair it again; and
if they do not so, it will consume, and turn into mire and dirt; but the true
Church is a living thing.

Pr. Ecclesia malignantium, the congregation of evil doers, with which this
Church and Kingdom is too much pestered; it is no slander to term this Quakers
Church, which he calls a living thing, a mere Chimera, or his own brainsick
notion; where a company of Quakers are got together, there is this living thing
to be found.

Q. p. 39. Chapter But are not these the true Christians that practice and perform
such things? Fath. They have got the Christians words, and so count themselves
Christians; but they are not in the Christians life, neither is their way the
Christians way; so they are practicing those things that God requires not at
their hands, neither does he accept them.

Pr.

Q. p. 40. Chapter I observe that people make much to do one with another when they
meet together, or part one from another, in putting off their Hats, and bowing,
and cringing, and going backward, and scraping; and I am doubtful whether this
be true honor, with which I am to honor all men. Fath. Thou may be assured
that it is not the true honor. Chapter How may I be assured of it? Fath. Why,
child, they that seek honor one of another, they do not believe in Christ the
power of God, which is honorable in all men, and this seeks not the honor
below, or to have the Hat put off, or the body to bow, or cringe, or the feet
to scrape; it neither seeks such honor, nor can give such honor; and so men
seek honor one of another, and they give it one to another with their hat and
knee, and Your humble servant, Sir; and such are not in the power of God, but
in the vain customs of the Heathens, and so it is got in a custom to put off
the hat, and bow, and cringe, and scrape; and women to courtesy and droop; and
these are the apostate Christians that are out of the power of God, and so seek
honor one of another, and are respecting one another person, and the rich and
the proud they get the honor, and the poor and the needy are not regarded.

Pr. Abraham the father of the faithful, bowing himself before the people of
the land of Heth? or if he had heard Ephron the Hittite calling Abraham his
Lord, and Abraham bowing himself to acknowledge his kindness, to honor him
again? would he have told Abraham that he did not believe in Christ the power
of God? surely if this Quaker had been in St. Paul's time, St. Paul would have
been looked on by him as an apostate Christian, for this way of speaking, most
noble Festus; is it not plain, that this Quaking-father is under gross
mistakes? are they not causelessly blamed by this clownish father, that do
mutually honor one another, which is a due debt? does he not unjustly charge
them to be Pharisee-like Christians, such as do not believe in the power of
God, for tendering due honor to whom it belongs? does he not ignorantly call
it seeking honor of one another? without offense let it be said, the power of
God, which the Quakers pretend to, is basely abused by them, it is made by
their folly as mere a clown as themselves; according to this Quaking-father, it
was not the God of power, who said, Honor thy father and thy mother; nor was
it the Spirit of God in St. Paul, who moved him to say, Honor all men, in
honor preferring one another; to have the hat put off, or the body to bow, or
the feet to scrape, this is honor below, which this Quakers power of God seeks
not, nor can give; but without doubt this is neither Old nor New Testament
Divinity, to take one another by the hand (as the Quakers are known to do) to
say, how is it? how do thou do? This is some of the Quakers true honor: As
for Thou and Thee, the distinguishing characters of a Quakers vain faith, they
are so much in request, as that for their sakes all other expressions of civil
honor are with the Quakers out of date; men scraping with their feet, women
courtesing and drooping, as this Quaker speaks, are by this rude man absurdly
censured, as being apostatizing Christians, that are out of the power of God;
till the poor deluded Quakers came on the stage of this world, no man was so
silly as to tax hat and knee-honour: To perch Quakerism higher; according to
these Quaking-lines, at Court it is not lawful to kneel before the King, nor to
stand bare in his presence, for they that do thus, are not in the power of God,
but in the vain customs of the heathens; as for Your humble Servant, Sir,
that is an old threadbare complement, which this Quaker is ashamed to own; as
for hat and knee-honour, they that use them are as bad as heathens, nay they
are far worse, they are apostates. To pass over this Church and Kingdom, this
Quaker rings a sad peal for all Courtiers, they are all apostate Christians,
such as have turned their backs upon the true Christian faith (the term sounds
harsh, it is this Quakers own) they are such as are not in the power of God;
they are such as are in the vain customs of the heathens; they are the rich and
proud of the Land, that get honor from their equals or inferiors.

Q. p. 41, 42. Chapter But is there not such an honor that belongs to Magistrates,
and men in Authority? Fath. Nay, Child, such honor does not belong to them;
neither are they honored when it is done so unto them; for true honor is from
the heart, and not from the hat. Chapter But seeing such a thing is expected by men
in Authority, is it not better for me to give it to them, than to offend them?
Fa. Thou must be careful, Child, how thou reasonest about it, lest thou runnest
into transgression: for, if thou respectest persons, thou committest sin;
therefore mind the Lord and his teachings; but the woe shall be to that in them,
which would be honored with thy hat, from whence the offense comes. Chapter And
does not the Lord require any such things to be done? Fa. Nay, the Lord
requires it not, but the pride of man's heart seeks it; for the Lord requires
that thou should honor all men in him, and that is to give honor to whom it
is due; but unto a proud, heady, high-minded man, there is no honor due,
though he be great in the world, and be in place to rule; but in the power of
God the poor is as honorable as the rich, and the beggar as he that rules; and
the honor is given as due unto the power, and not unto any man's person.

Pr. Charles in querpo, plain Charles, as the Quakers drink healths to him, is
all that is due to him; for neither hat-nor knee-honour do belong to the King:
Thou King Charles has but too often been used by some rude Quakers: behold
here is the root of this base spirit; while the King is no Quaker in the power
of God, there is no outward honor due to his person; this Quaker says, True
honor is from the heart, not the hat; therefore, according to this Quakers
mind, it is but false honor to stand bare or kneel before the King; to the
King, the chief Magistrate, the Fountain of Honor, there is by the Quakers no
true outward honor due. But suppose the King (as he has just cause) should be
offended with his Quaking-subjects, or any of his Courtiers, for not giving him
both hat- and knee-honour, which are due to him; were it not better to give the
King the honor, than offend him? In this case, what must be done? According to
this Quaking-Instructor, all his Quaking-friends, and all Courtiers (if they
should be Quakerized) must be careful that they run not into transgression by
such reasoning: for to honor the King with their hats, with their knees, is
respecting of his person, to whom no honor is due; a sin which the Law of God
will convince them of; like this Quakers Child, what must they now do?
Therefore (to use this Quakers words) that they may not offend the King, they
must mind the Lord and his Teachings: Is it not hence plain, that to honor the
King with either hat or knee-honour, is neither of the Lord, not that which is
taught by him? Now consider well what is done daily at Court; the Kings Majesty
is outwardly honored by all Courtiers; what says the Quaker to this? By
giving the King that outward honor, his Courtiers do neither mind the Lord,
nor his teachings: I am sure this is the naked substance, the true import of
his discourse. To step on, to track this Quaker a little further; Look upon the
King (as he is) as Gods Vicegerent, the Supreme Magistrate of this Kingdom,
who does expect that all his subjects should acknowledge his high honor, their
own great distance, with heads bare, with knees bowing in his presence; then
mind what cursed doctrine is delivered by this quaking-father, thus, But the woe
shall be to that in them which would be honored by the hat; according to this
Quakers cursed doctrine, the King, the Nobility, with all that are in Authority
under him, are accursed by this Quaker for taking that outward honor that
belongs not to them; as for outward honor to be given to the King, or any
other Magistrates, this Quaker is basely bold to say, it is more than the Lord
requires; this is that which man's proud heart seeks after: Are not the Kings
subjects by this Quaker, ill principled, taught here to deny outward honor to
the Kings Majesty, as if the Kings high honor were none of the Lords
requirings? in a Quakers mouth, Charles how is it? Let Charles live: Plain
Charles is honor enough for the King; what is more, comes of evil; for this
Quaker says, the Lord requires no outward honor to be given to Magistrates;
and I am sure, of these the King is chief: To back this unchristian doctrine,
this Quakers spirit has a lie put into his pen, for the Lord does no where
require that we should honor all men in him; neither is this to give honor to
whom it is due, as this Quaker does ill understand this point. Besides, this
quaking-father is grossly mistaken; for dominium non fundatur in gratia, it is
not true grace that does entitle any Princes only to their Crowns and Scepters.
Cyrus, that was no truly gracious man, was King of Persia, and the Lords
anointed. King Darius an heathen, was owned and honored by Daniel. But this
Quaker has not yet done; here is more lamentable bad doctrine against the Lords
anointed; I hope I may write without offense, that here are Treason and
Rebellion taught against our Sovereign; according to the tenor of his own
words, you may take this supposition: Suppose the King were a proud, heady,
high-minded man, what then? in this case what is to be done? This Quaker says,
there is no honor due to him, though he be great in the world, and be in place
to rule. Is it not plain, according to this quaking-doctrine, that without
goodness there is no true honor due to the Kings greatness? nay, behold more
of this abominable stuff! here is the power of God mentioned by this Quaker, in
which power enjoyed or lived in, the poor is as honorable as the rich, and the
beggar as he that rules: according to the true meaning of this Quakers words,
the Kings high honor is basely degraded, his Majesty is ranked with the
meanest of his subjects, that is a Quaker, one that is in the power of God:
for, unless that this Quakers power of God be in the King; or more plainly
thus, unless the King be a Quaker, the beggar-Quaker is as honorable as
himself; and the reason of this Levelling-Quakers vile doctrine is this, for
the honor is given as due unto the power, and not to any man's person; is it
not plain from this wild reason, that there is no true honor due to the Kings
person at all? But suppose the power of God (as this Quaker cants) were in the
King, what would be got by it? he would not be one jot better than the meanest
dry or wet Quaker; the poorest Quaker in the same power of God, would be as
honorable as his Sovereign that rules: Surely this wretchedly base doctrine is
not fit to be told in Gath, nor published in Ashkelon; the greater is the shame
of Quakerism, that it should be published in our Valley of Vision; this Quakers
doctrine tends directly to nothing more, than to lay the Kings honor in the
dust, to strike the Crown from his Majesty's head, and to share with the King
in his high honor; it may be truly said, Beware of Quakers; for like the
Jesuited Papists, they are not in truth the Kings Loyal subjects.

Q. p. 43, 44. Chapter I would be informed of another thing, Father, what language
I am to speak to a single person: whether Thou or You be the true language to a
single person? Fa. Why, Child, a single person being one and no more, the true
language is Thou, unto him or her, and has been the language spoken by all
that have been guided by the Spirit of God without respect of persons; and we
do not read of another that was spoken by the holy men of God unto any person,
whether a King, or any in authority under him; for the spirit of truth leads
into all truth; and Thou to one is the language of truth, without respect; and
the spirit of truth teaches to speak it, and not another. Chapter But how is it
then that the people use the word You to one another when they speak one to
one? F. Because in that thing they do not mind the Spirit of God, and its
teachings; and so the false spirit acting brings fortha false word; for [You]
to one is an apostate language, and is become seated in the pride of heart.

Pr. Grammarian, after his quaking-fashion to teach little children to speak
properly; to give [Thou] to one person, and no more; but [You] to more than
one; [Thou] is become the Quakers Shibboleth, to distinguish them from all
others; it is in truth a main principle of the Quakers delusion, distinctly to
character them from all whom they count counterfeit Christians; by them great
stress is laid upon this word [Thou], it is no less than a language with this
Quaker; like Jacob's Ladder, it is made by them to reach to Heaven; they are all
from below, that do not use [Thou] to a single person; probably at the
confusion of languages [Thou] is the true language, which is fallen to the
Babel-quakers share; this Quaker tells us, that they who use not [Thou] to a
single person, are none of them guided by the spirit of God; to mount this
Quakers folly to its full height, to say to the King, May it please your
Majesty, to any Peer of the Realm, Your Grace, Your Honor; to any great man,
Your Excellency; to others, Your Worship; these are according to this Quaker,
such expressions of civil honor as were never spoken by any holy men of God; I
may truly say, that [Thou] like Moses his Rod has swallowed up all these
Serpentine words; they (whether at Court or Country) who do not use this
Quakers [Thou] to a single person, (whether King, Peer, or Subject) are
sensual, not having that spirit of truth, who leads into all truth; without
[Thou Charles] to the Kings Sacred Majesty, without [Thou] to every Peer of
this Realm without respect, the language of truth (says this Quaker) is not in
that man's mouth; that man that is not a Thou and Thee-quaker, is not taught by
the spirit of truth; according to this Quakers mind, when we do speak one to
one, we must beware of [You] to one another, for all they that do use [You] to
the King, to the Nobility, to the Magistrates and Gentry of this Kingdom, do in
this thing not mind the Spirit of God and its teachings. This Quaker says
moreover, that to use [You] to any one man, is that false word brought forth by
the Devil, the false spirit acting in them that use it; nay, which is worse,
[You] to a single person, is the apostate language; now is not this inference
rightly drawn from his own words, to say to the King, Your Majesty; to the
Peers, Your Grace, your Honor; to others, Your Worship; are no less than false
words brought forth by the Devil; no less than an apostate language? Thus you
see that this word [Thou] is so doted on by this Quaker, as that for its sake
all that use [You] instead of it, to a single person, do speak as the Devil,
the false spirit acts them; they are all apostates, such as are fallen from the
true Christian faith; to give full weight, they are all proud like Lucifer, who
have [You] seated in the pride of their hearts; may it not be truly said, this
Quakers spirit is both bold and blind, who durst write after this silly rate?

Q. p. 45. Chapter But is it not a thing that will become me to use good manners?
and people do not take the word [Thou] to be good manners when I speak to my
betters. Fath. It is evil words, child, that corrupts good manners, but true
words is mannerly, and is spoken in the manner of truth, which is good manners;
and thou must not mind what others say, but mind thou the Lord, and his
teachings, and he will teach thee to speak good words, and true words, which is
good manners; and people that know not the teachings of God, nor the truth of
God, they know not the manner of it, and so are seeking how to honor one
another, and to speak to one another, and after what manner to do it, which is
not in the manner of truth, but in the false spirit, which corrupts their words
and actions, and so corrupts good manners.

Pr. English; [evil words that corrupts good manners] is that false English,
which cannot be made into true Latin by any Quaker amongst them all; but this
was not a stumble by chance, we have his Quaking-spirit tripping again, [true
words is mannerly, and is spoken in the manner of truth, which is good manners]
give me leave to say, perhaps this man's spirit was in some great heat or haste,
and so was not at leisure to help him to write better English. Now let us see
if this Quakers manners are any better than his nonsense; the old Proverb may
not amiss be applied to him, As the fool thinks, so the bell clinks; to speak
in the manner of truth, is (with this Quaker) good manners; except the tongue,
and then it is plain, that this Quaker knows not what belongs to good manners;
to speak this Quakers mind fully, [Thou] to the King, to the Peers, to the
Gentry of this Realm, spoken in the manner of truth (that is, spoken as the
Quakers do) is all the good manners this Quaker owns; you may see that what is
more than [Thou and Thee] is a parcel of evil words which do corrupt good
manners; according to this Quaking instructor, St. Paul was ill manner'd, he
did not speak in the manner of truth, when he said most noble Festus; according
to this Quakers estimate, to bow the body to any superiors, to honor them by
word or gesture, is that which is not of the Lord, nor proceeds from his
teachings; except Quakers, you see, that no people do know the teachings of
God, nor the truth of God, nor do speak in the manner of truth, that do give
civil honor to their superiors; this rude Quakers discourse serves to be-clown
all Courtiers that do honor the King in their words and gestures; for in
effect this Quaker tells them that they do not speak in the manner of truth,
those good and true words which are mannerly words; they neither know the
teachings of God, nor the truth of God, which is far worse. Thus you see that
here is the Quakers School, their rude Court to learn those manners which are
in the manner of truth; as for our civil way of speaking to our superiors,
betters and equals, by being thus mannerly, we do but seek to honor others in
the false spirit, who is the Devil; if this Doctrine do not tend to make men
Clowns, to re-baptize them into the Quakers false spirit, to make their
Proselytes as errant Clowns as themselves are known to be, then let any wise
men judge.

Q. p. 46, 47, 48, 49, 50. Chapter And how must I do concerning Oaths, seeing that
swearing in many things is required? Fath. Whatever men requires of thee,
child, thou must mind what the Lord requires of thee; Christ Jesus has
forbidden all Oaths; it is not lawful to swear upon any account, because Christ
has commanded not to swear at all; if thou love him, thou will keep his
Commandments, and not transgress against him, because men require thee; do thou
mind the spirit of truth, and it will teach thee to speak truth in what thou
art called unto: Let thy yea be yea, for what is more comes of evil. Chapter But
there is much said concerning the lawfulness of an Oath, as to end strife, or
engage to a Ruler; and there are many Scriptures brought for it. Fath. They
that bring Scriptures to plead for swearing in this day, do not understand the
Scriptures; for he who is Lord of all, says, swear not at all, but let your
yea be yea, and your nay, nay, for what is more comes of evil; thou art to obey
Jesus Christ, whose Doctrine is true, who ends the dispensation of Oaths where
strife was; now Jesus Christ who ends all changeable things, says, swear not
at all; it is without putting any difference betwixt vain Oaths and solemn
Oaths; he says, not at all, nor by any thing; therefore, child, obey thou
Christ's Doctrine; if thy yea will not be taken, let nothing else be done by
thee, lest thou fallest into condemnation.

Pr. showed to Jesus Christ? for in so doing they have broken his Commandments;
by thus swearing they have presumptuously transgressed against him; which of
the Kings sworn subjects have minded the Spirit of truth when they took those
oaths? By their so swearing, have they not done that which comes of evil, or of
the Devil, the evil one? Is not this rare quaking-stuff? according to this
Quakers false doctrine, it is altogether unlawful for any of the Kings subjects
to swear subjection to him any more, lest they fall into condemnation; as for
any oaths which are truly lawful, they are so condemned by this Quaker, as that
there is no Scripture-warrant for them in this day; to plead Scripture for
those oaths that are in truth, righteousness, and judgment, it is like using an
old Almanac out of date; it may well be said, To what end did St. Paul tell
the Christian Hebrews of God swearing by himself, and that an oath is to put an
end to all strife? for had this Quaker been in St. Paul's time, he would have
catechized him otherwise, that he did not understand the Scriptures; that St.
Paul had taught other doctrine than the Lord Jesus had done, for he faith,
Swear not at all; but let your yea be yea: That solemn oaths are as bad now as
vain oaths: That swearing was lawful under the old dispensation, but unlawful
now: Then St. Paul might have known this new-light-doctrine, That Christ ended
the dispensation of oaths where strife was. If all this be not ungrounded
abominable doctrine delivered by this Quaker, then let wise unbiassed Readers
judge.

Q. p. 50, 51. Chapter Father, inform me concerning the observation of days, as
holy days, and Sunday, which some call Sabbath Day, and some the Lord's Day; and
whether the Lord requires that I should observe them? Fa. If thou observest a
day, observe it to the Lord; but he requires not the observing of particular
days: for the Seventh day was holy, in which he rested from all his works, and
that was the Jews Sabbath, and they observed it to the Lord, as he commanded;
but Christ Jesus has fulfilled it, and ended it; and those called Holy Days
are set up in the Apostasy, in which the Saints have been killed and martyred,
upon which days the Apostles rejoiced and feasted, and they are called Festival
days; and thou art to abominate the observing of them, because they were set up
in the blood-thirsty spirit; and for that called the Lord's Day, or Sabbath Day,
people do not understand what they say; for the Sabbath is the Seventh day, and
the observing of that is ended in Christ; and that called the Lord's Day is the
first day of the week, and the name Sunday is from the heathens, who celebrated
that day to the Sun, and so called it Sunday; but Child, every day is the Lords
day, and thou art to observe them all unto him; and who come to Christ, and
believe in Christ, come over the observation of days, into the one day of the
Lord, which is as a thousand years.

Pr. Jews; behold again how this Quakers spirit has inspired him to write a
contradiction; but as for us Christians under the Gospel, there is no
particular day to be observed to the Lord; there are no Holy Days owned by this
Quaker; these days are like so many brats of Babylon rejected by him; these
days, he says, were set up in the Apostasy, at that time when the Saints were
killed and martyred: does not this Quakers ignorance, in effect, count all
Holy Days to be Apostatical days? Are not these the Festival days which his
Child is instructed to abominate the observing of? What is more plain from
these Quakers words, than this, That Holy Days observed by the Reformed
Churches abroad, and the Church of England at home, are abominable days, not
fit to be observed? But why are Holy Days to be abominated? This Quaker gives
this reason, Because they were set in the blood-thirsty spirit; it is hard to
understand the meaning of these words; however we have no Holy Days which this
Church observes, but such as were at first set up by a blood-thirsty spirit;
surely if this Quaker had lived in those days of old, he would have fallen as
strangely foul upon the Jews Feast of Purim, as being from another
blood-thirsty spirit; but this Quakers aking-tooth is at the Lord's Day, or
Sabbath Day; in this matter the Profane and the Quakers are well agreed, they
do neither of them make conscience to observe this day to the Lord; for that
called the Lord's Day, or Sabbath Day, this Quaker says, that the people do not
well understand what they say; to speak according to this Quakers own words,
both King and Parliament were fallen low in their understandings, when they made
an act for the better observation of the Lord's Day; in their debates they said
they knew not what, who named it either Sunday, Lord's Day, or Sabbath Day; had
this Quaker been consulted, they might have known thus much, that the
Seventh-day Sabbath is ended in Christ; that the Lord's Day is the first day of
the week; that Sunday is from the Heathens, but in truth every day is the
Lord's Day; so that to declare this Quakers mind truly, there is indeed no such
day as the Lord's Day to be observed by any Christians, for every day of the
week is to be observed as the Lord's Day; and this is not this Quakers single
opinion, for he says, that they who come to Christ, and believe in Christ, do
(which is strange) come over the observation of days; is not this Quakers
meaning this, That all real Quakers do neither observe Holy Days, nor the
Lord's Day; not Holy Days as this Church appoints, nor the first day of the
week, as being the Lord's Day, which is their degenerating from the practice of
the Primitive Christians, to say no worse of them; but whither do the Quakers
come, when they are gotten over the observation of days? for my part I cannot
tell; this Quaker is of age, let him speak for himself, who says, that they
come into the one day of the Lord, which is as a thousand years; and here I
leave him.

I Shall transcribe no more out of him, but proceed to some of James Parnel's
Pamphlets; the Book which is made use of, is called, A Collection of the
several writings given forth from the spirit of the Lord through the servant of
God, James Parnel, who bore a faithful testimony for God, and died a Prisoner
under the hands of a persecuting generation, in Colchester-Castle, in the year
1656. Published 1675.

Pr. James Parnel was the Quakers martyr that bore a faithful testimony for
God, even unto death, in Colchester-Jayl; with respect to this Quakers great
worth, they were a persecuting generation, who did persecute this Quaker
according to his true demerit. This Collection was published in the year 1675,
to tell this generation, that this Quaker was like Abel, who being dead, yet
speaks; but I shall truly say, not like righteous Abel. Let us look into some
of his Pamphlets, for with them all I shall not trouble your patience. The
first of the Pamphlets is called [ A trial of Faith] which is thus put to the
test.

Q. p. 4.

Pr. peccatum ne sit; a sinless estate reserved for the Kingdom of Heaven, is
no true Divinity in the Quakers School; according to this high-flown Quaker, we
must either be wholly free from sin, like the angels, or we can be no true
believers in Christ; St. Paul burdened with his body of death, was a wretched
man in the worse sense, one that was not built by faith on Christ, no truly
faithful Christian; suppose this Quaker to be in the right, what then? then St.
John was grossly mistaken in saying thus, If we say that we have no sin (which
the Quakers usually do) we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; this
Quaker is certainly for a more holy faith, than God himself did ever require;
it is not the ruling power, but the being of sin, which this Quakers faith makes
free from; without doubt this is to be righteous overmuch in this world; I
leave it to others to judge, if the ill spirit of the old Catheri was not gotten
into this young Quaker; however it is most clear, that unless the Quakers
idolized perfection be owned as the true, only touchstone of faith, the best
grounded, the most steadfast and saving faith of any Christian is not worth a
rush, it is an unholy faith (to speak this Quakers mind) that does not cleanse
from all sin in being; thus this Quaker being dead, has unrighteously spoken a
lie in the name of the Lord; by his false Doctrine he has concluded the Church
of England at home, all reformed Churches abroad, under unbelief, for being of
this right sound mind, that they shall never be made free from all their sins
as long as they are here.

Q. Parnel's is called, Christ exalted into his Throne.

Pr.

Q. p. 15.

Pr. Abel the righteous his language, nor a faithful testimony born for God;
except another Quaker, Atheist, or Antiscripturist, none would have laid such
base things to the charge of the holy Scripture; except a Quaker, no man did
ever call Christ the rule; this Quaker is guilty of weak reasoning, because
Christ is the word, the light, the life, therefore Scripture is not the word of
God, a light, the word of life, a judge, a guide, a trier of spirits; behold, is
not this rare quaking Logic? is it not a great shame that such dull reasoning
as this is, should be fathered on the holy Spirit who is God? without question
it is for want of good Catechizing, that the Quakers vent such irrational things
in print; these quaking-lines are fitter for pity, than a more serious answer;
however let it be duly considered, that at this door has been brought in all
the filth that has been cast upon the holy Scripture; the Scripture is not the
light, what is it then? darkness, says one Quaker; not to be minded in any
thing, says another; not the word, what then? the letter, a dead letter, say
several Quakers; not the life, what then? putrefaction and corruption; not the
judge, what then? it is the spirit alone which gives true discerning, says
another Quaker; not the rule, what then? the Scripture is not the rule of my
faith and practice, says another Quaker; not the guide, what then? the Light
within is the true guide, say all Quakers; not the trier of spirits, what then?
the Scripture cannot help to discern betwixt true and false, says another
Quaker. Thus you see clearly how the Scripture, the word of God, is become like
a dung-cart, to receive what filth the Quakers and the Papists have to throw
into it; is it not very sad that the Quakers way of exalting Christ is by
debasing the good word of God? what manner of spirit it is that leads the
Quakers, let all wise men hence judge.

Q. p. 16.

Pr. Abel is not yet in these quaking lines; with this Quaker both people and
Priest are alike, they are both alike ignorant of Christ the Light; because
neither people nor their teachers are fond of this Quakers false Christ, the
Light within, therefore this Quaker says they do fondly dote upon the
Scripture without, and this is done with dark minds; behold, as this Quaker
thought, this is our great fault; because we make the Scripture (not the
Quakers Light within) the rule of our faith and life, therefore (as this Quaker
says) we are ignorant of Christ the Light, doting on the Scripture; observe it
well, to read in, to meditate of, to study, to believe, to live according to
the Scriptures, is (as this Quaker calls it) our doting on them; and this is
done with our dark minds there; except Quakers, who cannot but have a very good
opinion of themselves, who follow the Light within them, as their Lord God and
Savior, all others, both people and teachers of this world, do but dote on the
Scriptures with their dark minds; nay, to take this Quakers mind more at large,
they are like the blind Pharisees, the people being blind themselves, are led
by their blind teachers; thus they go blind-folded, seeking life in the
Scripture doted on, where it is not to be found; I may now truly say, according
to this Quakers mind, that the Scripture is basely accounted of, either as a
dead letter which has no life in it, or as Christ's tomb, or empty grave, where
Christ the true Light is not to be found.

Q. p. ead.

Pr. Abel; he does harp still upon his old string, as if Christ were dethroned,
because the Scripture, Gods Word, is a light unto our feet; behold, if either
people learn, or are taught such true doctrine as this is, then the people and
their teachers, with their dark minds, do (as this Quaker says) take the
authority from Christ, and give it to the Scripture, which is (says this
Quaker) a dead letter. Without doubt this is a base slander; the Grand Seignior
would not suffer his Alchoran to be thus reproacht; however in this point their
elder brethren the Papists, and our modern Quakers are well agreed; to both of
them, the Holy Scripture is no more but a dead letter: By the way let it be
observed, that here is James Parnel a servant of God, whose Writings were
pretended to be given forth from the Spirit of the Lord, a Martyr, one that
gave his testimony for God, who called the Scripture a dead letter; is not this
corrupt tree plainly to be known by this bad fruit? do you not espy a wolf in
sheeps clothing? are not those streams which make glad the City of God, basely
fouled by him? I am sure the testimony of this Quaking-Martyr, is not the
testimony which the Scripture bears of it self; no undeluded Christian can
believe that it is from the true Spirit of the Lord, to term the Scripture a
dead letter; without controversy, it is a standing-shame to Christianity, that
Christ the light of life cannot be rightly exalted, but the Scripture must
first be declared to be a dead letter; this abominable doctrine was first
hatched amongst the Papists, and and is now maintained amongst the Quakers.

Q. p. 16, 17.

Pr. Diana of the Ephesians was Demetrius his Idol, so the Scripture (says
this Quaker) is the Idol of all Gospel Ministers to get money by; by
instructing the people out of Gods word; Ministers (if you can believe this
Quaker) do nothing else but cause people to err, and lead them in blindness; by
following the Doctrine taught by Gods Ministers, the people are like the
heathen Athenians; this Quaker says, they do in vain worship a God whom they
know not; by making the Scripture to be the rule of their faith and life, this
Quaker says they cry up the Scripture to the Lord Christ's high dishonor,
exalting it in Christ's place; if this be not high base doctrine, then what is
such? The Turkish Alchoran was never so debased by any Mahometans, nor Heathen
Priests so vilified in any part of the world by their Vassals, as the Word and
Ministers of the Most High God have been by this deluded Quaker.

Q. p. 18.

Pr. Peter was grossly mistaken; that the holy men of God, mentioned by him, did
not speak the word of God as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; That the sure
word of Prophecy is no light shining in a dark place; That those primitive
Christians did very ill to take heed to any such light without them, as the
Scripture, the sure word of Prophecy is. To speak a little more according to
this Quakers mind, by no means the Law and the Testimony, mentioned by the
Prophet Isaiah, may now be our Rule; we do all follow a blind guide, if we are
led by the Scripture: Has not this man quaked to purpose? Is not the Scripture
by him shaken to nothing? for it is no word of God, no Light, no Rule, no Guide,
no Teacher, no Judge. Surely it is matter of lamentation, that a false Christ,
the Light within, who is not God and Man in one person, must by Quakers be thus
exalted, to lay the honor of the Scripture in the dust, to make the word of
God of none effect.

Q. p. 19.

Pr. Quaker pretends to be the Priests Cabin-Counsellor, to discover their
secrets; he brings them to light, as being such as do only hold fast the divine
authority of the Scripture to save their main stake; mark how he supposes them
to say among themselves (even that which none but this Quaker, or others like
himself, did ever hear) If we let go the authority of the Scripture, then all
is gone: This he takes for his Text; now follows his gloss; That is to say,
take away our idol, then take away our maintenance, then down with our
Ministry: Is not this rarely quaked? What will not a real Quaker say, to
asperse the Ministring-Priests of the Lord? This Quaker has clearly for his
own purpose hit this nail on the head; well may none but Quakers cry Euge
Jacobe: Observe it once more, here is the Scripture standing again for an idol,
and all Ministers of the Gospel (because not quakerized) for the Priests of
this Idol, the Scripture; is there not here a sound, like that of old, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians? Do not the Priests, like those Craftsmen, make a great
stir about their Idol, the Scripture? Do they not say in this Quakers hearing,
Take away our Idol, then take away our Maintenance, then down with our
Ministry? Surely it is new very clear, that the Quakers have very mean thoughts
either of the Scripture, or of Gods true Ministers; the latter are in scorn
called Priests, the former is more basely termed their Idol; by this Quaker we
are come to a strange pass, seeing that no Ministers may stick close to the
divine authority of the Scripture, but their gain is their only end in so
doing; and the Scripture, the word of God, is their Idol, which they worship
for advantage sake, that their maintenance may not be taken away, and that
their Ministry (which some Quakers profanely enough call their trade) may not
go down. I need add no more but this, Nigro carbone notetur, without question
this quaking-doctrine deserves a black mark.

Q. p. 22.

Pr.

Q. p. 25. Matthew, Mark, Luke and John the Gospel.

Pr. Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the Gospel; this is, as he says, no less
matter than to bring another Gospel into the world; suppose this to be what it
is not, a true charge, then according to St. Paul's Doctrine, this Quaker would
make us accursed, and all that have gone before us for this new Gospel; surely
this Quaker did not well consider what he wrote, for no Quaker doubtless dare
say, that the matter of those Books is not true Gospel; how then came this
Quaker to talk of our bringing another Gospel? by affirming these Books to be
the Gospel of St. Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, as the Church of England does,
as the Reformed Churches do abroad, this Quaker would make us to be faulty in
an high degree, for by bringing in another Gospel, we have another Christ to be
our Savior, than he that is God and Man in one person, the word made flesh; it
is certainly very sad that we may not call the matter of those four Books, the
Gospel, which was written for our instruction, by those four Evangelists, St.
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, but we must be basely charged to bring another
Gospel, which St. Paul terms accursed.

Q p. 26.

Pr.

The next Pamphlet of James Parnel is called, The Trumpet of the Lord blown, or
a blast against pride and oppression.

Pr. silver Trumpets of old; there is no small danger in this Quakers blast; I
shall endeavor to cast some Church-mould upon it; the first sound is a
terrible long blast.

Q. p. 28, 29, 30. Dives-like, devouring the Creation, spending it upon your
lusts, your hearts being adultred from God; your fellow creatures labor like
slaves under you; you sit at ease, and poor Lazarus lies starving without; you
think scorn that a poor man should stand with his hat on before you; you will
be called Masters, upholding that which Christ's Doctrine forbids, who says, Be
not ye called Master; you think scorn to be Thoued of your fellow creatures,
but you will Thou God and Christ; but though you be exalted as high as the
Heavens, and set your nests among the Stars, thence will the Lord fetch you
down, and cast you into hell, the pit, as he did Lucifer, Dives and Haman, and
Pharaoh, and Herod, and the rest of your forefathers.

Pr. Sinai, when the Lord gave his Law to his people: here is a fearful blast
blown, no less than the Lords woe is pronounced against all Lords, Ladies,
Knights, Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, yea, against all that are called Master,
Mistress, Madam; all these without exception are declared by this Quaker to be
in a miserable condition; to use his own words, or explain more fully this
Quakers mind, they are like Lucifer, or the Devil, who is fallen as low as
hell; they are like Dives, who is miserable in hell torments; they are like
bloody Haman the enemy of the Lords people, who died a cursed shameful death;
they are like Pharaoh who kept Gods people in hard bondage, a prepared vessel
for the Lords wrath, who perished miserably in the Red Sea; they are like
Herod, whom our Savior called a Fox, whose last end was miserable; all these
were their forefathers, as this Quaker says; now let us see their faults for
which they are thus accursed by this poor Quaker; amongst them all, there is
not one righteous, nor one that does good, as this Quaker does vainly imagine;
here is indeed no respect of persons; observe it well, this Quaker says, all
that are called Lords, Ladies, Knights, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, Master,
Mistress, Madam, are alike, all very bad; hear his foul charge according to the
true import of it, they are the exalted of the earth, proud, oppressing,
wanton, given to pleasure, lustful, belly-gods, sensual, lofty minded, riding
on lofty horses according to their lofty minds; Dives-like sinners, devourers
of the Creation, spiritual Idolaters, such whose hearts are gone a whoring from
God; so unmerciful, as that poor Lazarus lies starving at their gates; so
proud, as that they will not suffer a poor man to keep on his hat before them;
yea, so basely proud, as that their fellow creatures may not Thou them, but
they themselves will Thou God and Christ. Now from this Quakers lines let us
see their downfall; according to this Quaker, the last end of all the
aforesaid persons, without exception, is to be destroyed for ever; for, as he
says, though they are as high as the Heavens, nested like the Edomites among
the Stars, yet this Quakers pretended Lord, (not the Lord God) will fetch them
thence; this Quakers false Lord will cast them into hell, like Lucifer, Dives,
Haman, Pharaoh, Herod, and the rest of their forefathers; according to the true
import of this quaking-scribble, all that are called Lords, Ladies, Knights,
Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, Master, Mistress, Madam, shall every one of them,
unless they turn Quakers, be damned for ever; you see that they are said by
this Quaker to be all alike wicked and accursed, like Lucifer, Dives, Haman,
Pharaoh, and Herod, and the rest of their wicked, miserable forefathers, they
shall without any exception be all cast into hell. I shall say no more but
this, surely this quaking-doctrine is not according to the tenor of the fifth
Commandment, nor according to the charitable spirit of the Gospel; without a
new Gospel it is unjustifiable.

Q. p. 31, 32, 33.

Pr. worth; it is but the profession of Godliness, which is the hypocrites badg;
all their Prayers, Praises, Graces, singing of Psalms, do not go one step
beyond a formal imaginary worship; their Chaplains or Priests are as bad as
themselves; like those Idolaters before the Golden Calf, they do all the week
spend their time in eating and drinking, and rising up to play; their Priests
are only men that design for money, serving them for their money; but as for
the Light within, the Quakers adored Pearl, both they and their Chaplains do
want it; in this Quakers account, both they and their Chaplains or Priests are
clawbacks well met; they call him a Minister of Christ, and he faith, they are
Christians; but according to this Quaker there is no such matter, both Priest
and people are all heathens; such heathens as do live without God in the world;
the blind people are led by their blind Priests into the same ditch; they are
such vile miscreants, as that he says, the Lords woe is coming on them; they
are such professors and hypocrites as the Lord abhors; such whoseworks are the
works of the Devil; such as serve the Devil in their hearts and actions; in
plain English, this Quaker says, both Priest and people are no Christians,
what then are they? he says, but heathens; such as are strangers to the life
of God: now let us review this Quakers testimony; is it not hence apparent that
the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom are both abominable and accursed? are
not their Chaplains and Priests worse than any pitiful Quaker? are they not the
scum of the world? the filth of the place where they live? behold the Religion
of the Nobility, Gentry and Priests of this Kingdom, what is it in a Quakers
eye? are not they and Priests declared by this Quaker to be no Christians, but
heathens? Is it not lamentable that such rake-shame doctrine as this is should
be accounted the Lords testimony? is not this the ready way to make Religion
ridiculous? surely Quakerism exalted, is but a pretended religious foolery.

Q. p. 34, 35, 36. Haman-like, be you silent; away with all your profession,
tremble before the Lord, you children of the Devil; howl in sackcloth and
ashes, for the Lord is coming to burn you up as stubble; you are the fruitless
trees that cumber the ground, who are for the sire, all unrighteous persons
must be cast into the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone for ever; now
read your selves, and your portions all you lofty ones, for thither you must
go, there you must lie for evermore (the Lord of Hosts has spoken it) with
Dives and Haman; you are enemies and persecutors of all those that enter in at
the strait-gate, as Haman and Dives, and the high Priests, Pharisees and Rulers
were; all you proud ones, remember your father Dives his end, for you must go
into the everlasting burnings as he did, whose belly was his god, as yours is;
young and old, rich and poor, Lord and Lady, and beggars, shall all be turned
into hell without respect of persons, then shall it be with the Mistress, so
with the maid; as with the servant, so with the master; as with the people, so
with the Priest; then Lord and Lady, Master and Mistress, and all the earthly
honor shall be laid into the sire.

Pr. Haman, they must be silent; like their father the Devil, they must tremble
before the Lord; instead of their rich attire, Lords and Ladies, Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen, Masters and Mistresses must howl like dogs, in sackcloth and
ashes; as for their profession, this Quaker says, cast it away, as if it were
a menstruous filthy cloth; as for themselves this Quaker counts them but so
many fruitless trees, a burden to the earth that bears them, sit fuel for
hellfire; as for their dewlling place, the Lake which burns with fire and
brimstone for ever, is the fit place to receive them all; thus this Quaker has
helped them to read themselves and their portions; hither to this Lake he says
they must all go, here they must lie for evermore; but how does this Quaker
know all this? he says, the Lord of Hosts has spoken it; behold, here is a
lying divination of his own brain, delivered in the name of the Lord; but what
company shall they have? this divining-Quaker says, they shall lie for
evermore in the Lake with Dives and Haman; is not this, this Quakers plain
meaning, that all Lords and Ladies, Knights, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen,
Masters, Mistresses, and Madams, shall like Dives and Haman be surely damned
for evermore? like proud bloody Haman, like unmerciful, proud, sensual Dives,
like the high Priests that put Christ to death, like the Pharisees and Rulers
that had their hands deep in his blood, this Quaker says, that Lords and
Ladies, etc. are the enemies and persecutors of God people; who have proud,
merciless, cursed Dives for their father, whose end they should remember, for
as he says, they must go into everlasting burnings, as he did; Quakerism you
see sits heavily upon the skirts of the Nobility and Gentry of this Land, it
proclaims their last end to be no better than that of Dives, they must all to
hell at the last; with Dives they must be tormented in the same hell-flames;
Dives and they are both alike bad, they do both serve the same God, both
belly-gods alike; without respect of persons they shall all be turned into hell
with their father Dives; hear this Quakers bead-roll, he says, old and young,
rich and poor, Lord and Lady, Mistress and maid, Master and servant, people and
Priest, shall all go (thus paired by him) to the Devil, they shall all be
turned into hell without respect of persons; thus Lord and Lady, Master and
Mistress, with all their earthly honor, shall be laid into the sire of hell;
behold, where was this Quakers Christianity? what Old or New-Testament-rule had
he for thus dooming uncharitably all Lords and Ladies, Knights, Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen, Masters and servants, Mistresses and maids, old and young, rich
and poor, Priest and people, all without exception, to the fire of hell? if
this quaking-doctrine be not a bold piece of unchristian censoriousness, then
what is? except a Quaker, whose heart was ever so hardened, as to say, that all
Lords and Ladies, all Knights, all Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, that all Masters
and servants, Priests and people, old and young, rich and poor, are so
unrighteous, so proud, as that they shall be turned into hell, they shall go
into the everlasting burnings, and there they must lie for evermore? amongst
all the Prophets of the Old Testament, amongst all the Apostles of the New
Testament, there is no president to be found for this cursed doctrine.

Q. James Parnel, is called, A Shield of the Truth.

Pr. Rabshakey revived; for it is a gross piece of railery against all lawfully
ordained Ministers of the Gospel. That I may not be too tedious, I shall but
touch here and there.

Q. p. 66. Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do they withstand the Truth
all the ways they can; for Jannes and Jambres were the Magicians of Egypt that
imitated Moses; so those University-men, by their Magick-arts, inventions and
imaginations, and studying old Authors, have gotten the form of the Prophets,
Christ and his Apostles Words to trade with, but deny the power; and so are
Traitors to Christ, men of corrupt minds, reprobates concerning the faith.

Pr. England is in a very bad condition, her Teachers are deceivers; this
Quaker gives us plainly to understand thus much, That they are like to Jannes
and Jambres, no better than those Magicians were; they withstood Moses, these
(he says) do withstand the truth all the ways they can. In this Quakers
account, her Teachers are but bare University-men, beholding to Magick-arts,
inventions, imaginations, and old Authors, for their skill in Divinity: by this
Quaker they are looked upon, as a sort of petty-chapmen, that have gotten a form
of words to trade for Money with; like Judas, they are Traitors to Christ; like
those false Teachers of old, they are men of corrupt minds, men of no right
judgment concerning the doctrine of faith: Thus you see, how this Quaker has
declared all Priests to be a base generation of men, worthy to be regarded, as
men do the dirt under their feet.

Q. p. 70, 71.

Pr. husk, which is far short of the kernel; Does not this Husk say, that the
Scripture is unprofitable like an husk, which is good for nothing? 3dly, They
who make the Scripture their rule, their guide, are Swine feeding on husks.
4thly, That man is said, by this Quaker, to be a deceiver, one that erreth, one
that knows not the Scripture, who says, that the Letter is the Word; or to
speak more plainly this Quakers meaning, That Christian is very much to blame,
and grossly mistaken, who says, that the Scripture is the Word of God. 5thly,
That man is blind that puts the Letter for the Word; this is putting (as the
Quaker says) the shadow for the substance. Does not this Quaker, in effect,
term all Christians blind Bayards, that take the Scripture to be the Word of
God? Is it not hence clear, that this Quaker counts the Scripture to be that
shadow, which other Christians mistaken, take for the substance: which is a
base quaking assertion? 6thly, That man is without, a Swine feeding on the
husk, one that is ignorant of the true Light, who says, that the Letter is the
rule and guide of the people of God. The plain meaning of this Quakers words is
this, that the Scripture termed by him the Letter, is neither the rule, nor
guide of the people of God, and that man that says it is their rule and guide,
is one that knows not Christ the true light.

Q. p. 73.

Pr. and no Christians; according to these quaking-lines the Church of England
is grossly mistaken, to affirm that Baptism is a sign of profession, a mark of
difference to discern Christians from those that are no Christians; if this
Quaker shall be heard, in our Baptism there is no such thing as a sign of
Regeneration, whereby as by an instrument the baptized are grafted into the
Church; England into a mere delusion; it is likewise clear, that let Quakerism
go uncontrouled, it will soon unchristian any Nation; it is basely done both to
bid defiance to Christ's institution, and unchristen a Nation.

Q. p. 75.

Pr. carnal and natural, that it passes out of the belly into the dunghill;
are not these base words, fit only for a Quakers mouth? as for the Cup in the
Lords Supper, that is no better esteemed by this Quaker than the bread is; that
which is indeed the cup of blessing with St. Paul, is with this Quaker but the
worlds cup; in receiving Sacramental bread and wine, all Communicants are told
by this Quaker that they do but feed upon the husk and shadow without; except a
Quaker, who did ever count receiving the Lords Supper to be feeding upon the
husk and shadow without? in a Quakers account the Lords Supper is a very empty
Ordinance of the Gospel, bread and wine are but the husk and shadow without.

Q. p. 78, 79.

Pr. Ammonite-like Quaker; they are said by this Quaker to trade with the
letter and form; they do as it were serve a seven years apprentiship, to get
humane learning; like hirelings they serve for a certain wage, what they get by
study into their brain, they sell for money; the letter or the Scripture is the
dust, the Serpents meat, which they feed upon; they do strangely feed death
with death; the Scripture is no more (in this Quakers esteem) but the carnal
letter with which they feed their carnal minds; they are no Ministers by the
will of God, they do only come by the will of man, and are upheld by the will
of man; their call and ministry are both bad alike, all real Quakers do deny
them; as for their call and ministry, this Quaker tells us, it is as bad as
Baptism, for it is nothing but a formal imitation and invention of man, a mere
delusion; their ministry is very bad also, it is dark without the true light,
dead without the true life, cold without any holy warmth; surely these
quaking-lines do eat like a canker; the true David's messengers are shamefully
abused by this Quaker; surely these are hard speeches, which no truly good man
dare own.

Q. p. 80, 81. Cain to envy and murder the innocent; now heads of England and
such Ministers and their Ministry we deny; here is the difference of the
Ministers of the world, and the Ministers of Christ; the one comes by the will
of man, the other by the will of God; the one is upheld by the will of man, the
other by the will of God; the one is of the letter, the other is of the spirit;
the one has the form and shadow, the other the life and substance; but from
such turn away, for they are mere deceivers and witches, bewitch the people
from the truth.

Pr. are by this Quaker declared to be very bad: how bad? so bad, as that, to
speak this Quakers mind, they are lawless, the commands of God do not bind
them; like cursed Cain, that was of the Devil, they are Vagabonds and Fugitives
from the Lord; as wicked Cain slew his righteous brother Abel, so priest,
people, and rulers (says this Quaker) do go in the way of this bloody Cain to
envy and murder the innocent: But hear this Quaker speaks more fully, now
there are neither heads of England, nor Ministers, nor Ministry, whom the
Quakers own; it is hence very clear, that both the Magistrates and the known
Ministry of Fngland, are absolutely denied by all thorough-paced Quakers: As
for the ordained Ministers of the Gospel, this Quaker has given this
differencing-account of them; They are the Ministers of the world, such as come
by the will of man, such as are upheld by the will of man, they are Ministers
of the Letter, they have only the form and the shadow, they are mere deceivers
and witches, they do bewitch the people from the truth; the preaching of the
Gospel by any Priests of the Church of England, in this Quakers account is only
the Ministry of the world, that which is set up only, and maintained by the
will of man, there is nothing of good in it, nor of the Ministration of the
Spirit, it does only consist of form and shadow; nay, the preaching of the
Gospel by any such Priests, is but deceit, and witchcraft; for they (by this
Quaker) are termed deceivers and witches, such as do bewitch the people from
the truth. If this be not a foul slander, then let all unquakerized Readers
judge.

Q. p. 81, 82, 83, 84. who know not God; so Cain slays Abel within them, and
they suffer Cain to slay Abel without them; the wicked have more liberty in the
Nation than the righteous; the Land abounds with iniquity, oppression, and
treachery, because such corrupt Magistrates wink at deceits for carnal ends,
and uphold iniquity and oppression, and tread truth under foot; corrupt
Magistrates put corrupt Magistrates in office; such as these uphold corrupt
Ministers and false prophets, which the Nation swarms of; the Beast upholds the
False-prophet, and they combine together against the simple, and the Law is
made a stalking-horse to deceive the simple; such Magistrates and such
Government we honor not; by such Magistrates and Government did the righteous
ever suffer; and Haman, who stood in the corrupt will, would have destroyed
Mordecai, because he could not bow to him; and also Pharaoh, and
Nebuchadnezzar, and Herod who beheaded John, who stood in their own wills; but
the hands of the Lord they did not escape; but Christ comes to end all outward
Laws and Government of man, and he himself will reign; as truth and
righteousness grows, the Law is fulfilled and passes away; this is the cause
why corrupt Magistrates beat down the truth as much as they can; but Pharaoh
God will plague and confound; but such Magistrates as are guided by the light
of God in the Conscience, and rule by it, we own and honor in our hearts, such
are a terror to evildoers, such bear not the sword in vain; this Government is
of God.

Pr. Quakerism stamped on them, are either owned or honored by any Quakers; as
for any other Magistrates, Laws, Government, no right Quakers do own them; but
let this Quaker speak his own mind, it is but Magistracy in its place which is
owned by any Quakers; here is nothing, as it is Gods Ordinance; as for the
righteous (that is Quakers) they are from under the outward Law, because they
are a Law unto themselves; then I pray in what sense do the Quakers own any of
the Laws or Lawmakers of this Kingdom? Is it not hence plain what kind of
subjects the lawless Quakers are? Is it not hence as evident, that King and
Parliament, Magistrates, Laws, Government of this Kingdom, are very little
either owned or honored by any Quakers? But let us confer a little more with
this Quaker; what thoughts he has of Magistrates, let us now observe: The
Magistrates (he says) are very bad, they are such as know not how to rule.
Here behold their great ignorance; they are guided by their own wills; behold,
their wills are their law, they rule with partiality; behold, they are such as
rule with respect of persons; they give forth laws in their own wills; behold,
their laws are the corrupt issue of their corrupt wills; as for righteous laws,
we have no such made in this Kingdom; they are such Magistrates as do persecute
the righteous, as do encourage the heathen, who know not God; behold, they are
unchristian Magistrates, like Ishmael they do persecute the righteous; as for
baptized Christians, they are the heathen that know not God, who are encouraged
by our Christian Magistrates; nay behold and wonder, this Quaker goes on to
tell us, That our Magistrates have (that which is strange) Cain slaying Abel
within them, and they themselves do (as strangely) suffer Cain to slay Abel
without them: Is not this proclaiming our Magistrates to be men of blood,
bloody Magistrates? He says likewise, that the wicked have more liberty in the
Nation than the righteous have; behold, they are wicked Magistrates, wickedness
is indulged by them; because of these corrupt Magistrates, who wink at deceits
for carnal ends, who uphold iniquity and oppression, who tread truth under
foot, this Kingdom is spoiled by them; the land abounds with iniquity,
oppression, and treachery; behold how this land is said to be corrupt by the
Magistrates, whom this Quaker calls corrupt Magistrates. He says also, that
corrupt Magistrates put such in office; behold, the King and Parliament are
corrupt Magistrates, who put corrupt Magistrates in office. He says moreover,
that these corrupt Magistrates do uphold corrupt Ministers and false prophets,
which this Nation is full of: behold, here are corrupt Magistrates corrupting
the Church as well as the Kingdom; behold also, these Magistrates are the
Beast, that do uphold the false prophet; behold also, how the Beast-like
Magistrates, and the falseprophet-like Ministers, do, like brethren in the same
iniquity, combine together against the simple, that is, the Quakers, who are so
in the worst sense: By this Beast, (that is, the Magistrates) the Law is made a
stalking-horse to deceive the simple: Behold how the Law is basely said by this
Quaker, to be perverted and abused by the Magistrates of this Land. Now let us
see how the Quakers stand affected to Magistracy; in this matter he tells us
plainly, That such Magistrates and such Government we honor not; behold, no
Magistrates, no Government, which have not the Quakers image or superscription
on them, are honored by any simple Quakers; in effect this Quaker opens his
mind thus: That by the Magistrates and Government of this Kingdom, the
righteous (that is the Quakers) do suffer, as Gods people have done under the
Ten Persecutions; he says also to this purpose, That the Magistrates of this
Land do (like Haman) stand in their own corrupt wills, and would destroy (as he
would have destroyed Mordecai) the Quakers for not bowing to them; that they do
(like Pharaoh, the Israelites) pursue the Quakers unjustly to death; That they
would (like Nebuchadnezzar) burn all Quakers to death for not worshipping the
Image of the Beast; that they do (like Herod, who beheaded John the Baptist)
stand in their own wills, to kill the Quakers. Now let us hear this Quaker
divine, and tell us what shall become of the Magistrates of this land? behold,
he says, they are like Haman, Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Herod, who did not
escape the hands of the Lord; according to this Quaker, all the unquakerized
Magistrates of this land shall have a miserable end, they shall all to the
Devil at last; but behold this diviner has seen a vain vision, which is this,
that Christ comes to end all outward Laws and Government of man, and he himself
will reign; as truth and righteousness grows, the Law is fulfilled, and passes
away; behold, this Quaker is strangly turned Antinomian, against all humane
Laws; according to this Quakers vain mind St. Paul was mistaken, in saying, Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers; if this Quaker had been in those
days, he would have withstood St. Peter to his face once more, for commanding
those scattered Christians to submit themselves to every Ordinance of man for
the Lords sake; he would have told these two Apostles that they did err in so
teaching, for Christ's coming is to fulfill and end all outward laws and
government of man; it is no Quakers duty to be subject to the higher powers; all
they have to do is to obey the Light within them; as for submitting themselves
to the King as supreme, or to those that are in authority under him, or to
every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, this subjection belongs not to any
Quakers; for Christ is come, as this Quaker says, to end all outward laws and
government of man; by the truth and righteousness, which grow in Quakers, the
Law is fulfilled and passes away: now behold, how all Quakers with their false
Christ, the Light within them, are in print a lawless generation of people,
professed opposers of the government of this Kingdom, and it is vainly fancied
that Christ himself will reign to the overthrow of all humane laws and
government: with reference to this brainsick folly, this Quaker does weakly
fancy the Magistrates of this Kingdom to be such as do beat the truth, because
they are no deluded Quakers; but what says this Quaker to this? he says, but
Pharaoh God will plague and confound; what is the meaning of these strange
words? is not this it; the supreme Magistrate who is no Quaker no more than
Pharaoh was, is the Pharaoh here, whom God (as this Quaker says) will plague
and confound? now let us view those Magistrates whom the Quakers do own and
honor; to be sure they are no such as this Kingdom has; this Quaker sets them
thus out in their colors, such Magistrates as are guided by the light of God
in the conscience, and rule by it, we own and honor in our hearts; such are a
terror to evil doers, such bear not the sword in vain, this government is of
God; you see how clear it is, that the Quakers do own and honor only those
Magistrates in their hearts that are real Quakers; as for the King and all
other Magistrates, that are not guided by the Quakers light in their
Consciences, nor do rule by it, the Quakers do neither own nor honor them in
their hearts; Unquakerized Magistrates are no terror to evil doers, they do
bear the sword in vain, their government is not of God; now behold and judge how
the real Quakers do oppose and deny the lawful Magistrates, overturn the Laws,
and overthrow the Government of this Kingdom.

Q. p. 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93. Thou to any one, rich or poor; in
the beginning God Thoued Adam, and Adam Thoued him; here was the plain language
betwixt God and Adam; God Thoued Moses, and Moses Thoued him; this was the
plain language betwixt God and his people in all ages; thou that disdainest to
be Thoued, would exalt thy self above God, who Thouest God in thy formal
prayers; therefore thou must come down as Lucifer did; it is Lucifer in thee
that is exalted, who must be cast down into the pit; it is he who is head in
man, who would be honored, and would be above God, and calls this manners,
breeding, to bow to him and honor him; who can honor him the most, those (he
says) are the best bred, and those he calls Noblemen and Gentlemen; but he
that seeks preferment in the world, seeks to get his breeding, that so he may
be in favor with Lucifer, that sits in the Courts and high Palaces; but both
he and Lucifer must be cast down into the pit together; here is the ground of
the worlds superiority, nobility, gentility, honor, breeding and manners; here
they Lord one over another in their corrupt wills; here is the ground of all
tyranny and oppression, and the persecutions of the righteous; all arises from
proud Lucifer and lust in man, who would be honored; all this is under the
curse; but now Lucifer and his image is cast down, the pure Law is witnessed,
which respects no man's person; amongst us there are no superiors after the
flesh; he that respects persons commits sin; the Angel would not suffer John to
bow to him, but said, he was his fellow servants; here proud Lucifer and his
image is cast out; here all his honor is thrown down, his breeding, manners
and fashions; he must be tormented quick, and all who bear his image or his
mark; and these are some of his marks which he calls Nobility, Gentility,
honor, breeding, manners and civility, but true nobility we own; the seed of
God is noble; who can witness the seed of God born up to rule, there is true
nobility, there is true gentility after the spirit, and this is to be honored;
for honor is due to this, both in Magistrate and Minister, Fisherman or
Plowman, Herdsman or Shepherd; this is no more after the flesh, but after the
spirit; here all the Prophets of God were Noblemen and Gentlemen sprung of the
noble seed; and so are all now who are of the same seed; to those belongs the
true honor; the true honor is no more after the flesh, but after the spirit;
you who are giving and receiving outside earthly honor, are in the unbelief,
out of the Doctrine of Christ, cringing and bowing, honoring and exalting the
Devil, worshipping the beast and his image; as for manners, breeding, courtesy
and civility, learn to do unto all as you would have all do unto you; speak
every one truth to his neighbor; let no corrupt communication proceed out of
your mouth, for evil communication corrupts good manners; let your yea be yea,
and your nay, nay, for whatsoever is more is of evil; here is manners and
breeding, courtesy and civility; who are of the noble seed, have these
manners; but the nobles and great ones of the earth want these manners, and
this breeding, and both Priest and people of all sorts; the time now is, that
before this seed the Kings and Nobles of the earth shall be bound in chains and
fetters of iron; the nobility, gentility, superiority, honor, breeding and
manners of the world, is after the flesh, sprung from proud Lucifer, the lust
that reigns in man; they are bastards and no sons, who are not sprung from the
noble gentile seed; to those honor is not due, neither can we bow unto them,
for if we should, we should set the Devil in the room of God; we cannot give
unto Caesar that which is Gods.

Pr. Thou, as that for its sake all civil honor is by him decried to the pit
of hell; Adam Thouing God, and God Thouing him, is, says this Quaker, the
plain language to be spoken by all; he tells us also, that unless our
superiors are Thoued by us, they do exalt themselves above God; nay, which is
far worse, he says, that every man who uses not Thou to his superiors, must
come down to hell as Lucifer the devil has done; as for civil honor to our
superiors, it is so far disowned by this Quaker, as that he says, it is
Lucifer (the devil) in him that is exalted; it is he who is the head in man,
who would be honored; that it is the devil who calls this manners and breeding
to bow to him, and honor him; behold, according to this Quaker, no inferion
may civilly honor their superiors, without bowing to and honoring of the
devil, who is in them; to get preferment at Court, is according to these
quaking-lines, to get in favor with Lucifer (the devil) who sits in the Courts
and high Palaces; behold how this Quaker makes the Kings Court and Palace to be
those seats where the Devil is seated; according to this quaking-doctrine the
Kings Majesty upon the Throne, the Peers with their Nobility and high honor,
the Knights with their worship, the Gentlemen with their gentility, are as bad
and miserable as the devil; for this wild man says, both he that is exalted,
and Lucifer (the devil) must be cast down into the pit together; but this is
not all, for according to this Quaker, there is no superiority, nobility,
gentility, honor, breeding, manners, but the devil is the ground of them;
hence comes all Lordship over one another in their corrupt wills; by this
Quaker how is this Kingdom turned upside down! for there is in it no
superiority, nobility, gentility, honor, breeding, manners, lordship, but the
devil is the ground of them all; they do all (as he says) arise from proud
Lucifer (the devil) in man, who would be honored; this Quaker is so far from
honoring any superiors, as that he says, all this (civil honor) is under
the curse; but by the Quakers, who give civil honor to no superiors, nobles,
or others, the devil, and civil honor his image, is cast down; instead of the
Old and New Testament, the Quakers have a pure law which beclowns them, which
respects no man's person, neither the Kings, nor any other man's person; amongst
the Quakers there are no superiors after the flesh; behold, the King, the
Nobles, the Knights, the Gentry of this Kingdom are (in this Quakers account)
but superiors after the flesh; amongst the Quakers it is a judged case, he that
respects persons (the King, Nobles, Knights, Gentlemen, to honor them
according to their degree) commits sin; the Angel who would not suffer plain
John to bow to him with religious worship, is the Quakers president for not
giving civil worship to the King, or any other superiors after the flesh; here
(but where I know not) proud Lucifer and his image is cast down, here all his
honor is thrown down, his breeding, manners, fashions; however in these
quaking-lines it is plainly to be seen, that honor, breeding, manners,
fashions, are by this Quaker called the devils honor, breeding, manners,
fashions; now this Quaker goes on to tell us, that the devil must be tormented
quick, but not alone, for all (Superiors, Nobles and Gentlemen, who bear his
mark) must be tormented with him; but what are his marks to know the devil by?
you have them from this Quaker thus, these are some of his (the devils) marks,
which he (the devil) calls Nobility, Gentility, honor, breeding, manners,
civility; now not I, but this Quaker says to this purpose, that in this
Kingdom all Noblemen, Gentlemen, persons of honor, breeding, manners,
civility, do bear the devils image, or his marks, and must be tormented in hell
with the Devil, whose image and marks they bear. But notwithstanding all this
base stuff, it is here said that the Quakers do own true Nobility; but what is
this true Nobility? This quaking-account is given of it, The seed of God is
noble; the seed of God born up to rule, is true Nobility, true Gentility, which
is no more after the flesh, but after the spirit. The true meaning of these
quaking-lines is this, That real Quakerism is the true Nobility and Gentility,
which is no more after the flesh; this Nobility, this Gentility is to be
honored; to this Quakerized Nobility, Gentility, true Honor is due. To speak
this Quakers mind more at large; The Magistrate- or Minister-Quaker, the
Fisherman or Plowman-Quaker, the Herdsman or Shepherd-Quaker, is the only
honorable person at this day. Behold, now neither King, nor Peers, nor
Knights, nor any other Gentlemen in this Kingdom, are to be honored, because
they want the Quakers seed of God, which is noble, which is born up to rule;
according to this abominable doctrine, any Peasant-Quaker is more honorable
than the Kings Sacred Majesty; more noble, more gentile, than all the Nobles
and Gentlemen of this whole Kingdom; behold, how the abject Quakers are
strangely over-valued beyond their true worth; like the Prophets of God, who
were Noblemen and Gentlemen, sprung from the Noble seed (not Quakers sure),
like Christ sprung of the Noble seed (oh abominable! that he should be a Quaker
too!) like the Noble Apostles, sprung of the Noble seed (oh strange, that these
should be Quakers too!) so are all Quakers noble, who are sprung of the same
noble seed; now whether does this base high-flown doctrine tend? is not this
the scurvy result of it? in comparison of any, or of all the Quakers within
this Kingdom, the Kings Majesty, the Nobles, the Dignities of this Realm are of
no true worth; in comparison of Quakerism, all superiority, majesty,
excellency, nobility, honor, gentility, breeding, manners, do stand for so
many ciphers, they are all nothing worth, for this Quaker says, the true
honor is no more after the flesh; it is well known that the Kings of England
are born heirs of the Crown, but this Quaker is boldly base to say in print,
that there is no honor belongs to them that are born after the flesh; how
plain is it that the Quakers do acknowledge no honor to belong to the Royal
blood, to any Peers or Gentlemen? according to this base Quakers doctrine, are
they not made as mean, as base as any Country-peasant? for true honor, as this
Quaker rants it, is no more after the flesh; thus you see how all superiority,
nobility and gentility are cried down by this Quaker, that the Quakers may be
the only noble, or men of true honor, which to speak the truth is a proud
devilish design; but to go on still with this Quaker, he calls giving and
receiving civil honor, that which is earthly and outside honor; which is a
base reproach to the Kings high honor, which is both given and received; but
as for them who give, who receive this civil honor, he says, they are in the
unbelief; behold, according to this abominable teaching, both the Courtiers who
give, and the King who receives honor, are no better Christians than Turks,
Jews and Infidels, they are in the unbelief; they are out of the Doctrine of
Christ, they do by their cringing and bowing, honor and exalt the devil, they
do (what this Quaker means, I know not) worship the beast and his image; if
this be not high base doctrine delivered by this Quaker against all
superiority, nobility, honor and gentility, then let all wise men judge; now
let us step on to see what this Quaker means by manners, breeding, courtesy
and civility; the account given by him is this, Do as you would be done by;
speak every one truth to his neighbor; let no corrupt communication proceed
out of your mouth, for evil communication corrupts good manners; let your yea
be yea, and your nay, nay, for what is more is evil; he says here is manners,
breeding, courtesy and civility; and further he tells us, that the right noble
Quakers have these manners; but the sting of this Quaker is yet behind, for (he
says) that the nobles and great ones of the earth want these manners and this
breeding, and so do both Priests and people of all sorts; you may in this
Quakers glass see that all the nobles and great ones, the Priests and people of
this Kingdom are a sort of unmannerly clowns; they are all in this Quakers
account ill-mannered and ill-bred; I need not review what this Quaker calls
manners and breeding, courtesy and civility; let it be remembered that he said,
the nobles and great ones, the Priests and people of all sorts want them, which
is to beclown the whole Kingdom; but now we are brought by this Quaker to the
time that now is, that before the right noble seed in the Quakers, the Kings
and Nobles of the earth shall be bound in chains and fetters of iron; do not
these words smell strong of a religious rebellion? without doubt these words do
look as if they had been blown out of Sheba his Trumpet; I may truly say, they
have no little wildfire in them; our Superiors do well know that this Kingdom
has sadly suffered by perverted places of Scripture; when the Quakers begin to
talk of binding Kings and Nobles in chains and fetters of iron, the alarm is
given; by this Quaker, here is a further account given of the nobility,
gentility, superiority, honor, breeding, manners of the world, he says, it is
all after the flesh; it is likewise sprung from proud Lucifer, who is the
devil; as for all Nobles, Gentlemen, Superiors, persons of Honor, breeding,
manners, they are (says this Quaker) bastards, who we know are base born; to
speak his mind, they are all inferior to the noble Quakers, none of them are
sprung from the noble gentile seed, as the deluded Quakers are; to all these,
or any of them, no honor is due; thus in this Quakers account, they are no
better than the scum of the world; for this reason (as this Quaker tells us) no
noble-born Quakers can bow to them; for if they should (what then? it follows
thus) we should set the devil in the room of God; behold, it is hence very
clear, that (according to this base quaking-doctrine) to honor the King, or
any Nobles, or Superiors, or Gentlemen, with that honor which is due to them,
is to set the devil in the room of God; from this foregoing evidence, it is
fully manifest that the Quakers (who are noble in their own eyes) are basely
destructive, by their rude doctrine to the Kings Majesty, to all superiority,
nobility and honor, to all gentility, breeding, and manners of this Kingdom;
and that the Quakers do not give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, nor
that fear to whom fear, or that honor to whom honor is due.

Q. p. 93, 94. Thou or Thee, Thou is the proper word to one particular person,
yea to God himself; You is the proper word to more than one; at all times when
the Apostles spoke to Christ, they used the word Thou or Thee, and when he
spoke to more than one of them, he used the word You or Ye; also Paul Thoued
King Agrippa, and King Agrippa Thoued him; it is plain that it is an invention
of proud Lucifer in man to exalt himself; the great and rich ones of the earth
Thou or You one another, (if they be equal in degree); if a man of low degree
come to speak to any of them, then he must You the rich man, but the rich man
will Thou him; you shall find it so betwixt Priest and people; a poor laboring
man must You the Priest, and the Priest Thou him; here the heathen lord over
one another by their corrupt wills; but this is contrary to the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ, and yet those will call themselves the Ministers of
Christ, and the word minister signifies a servant, and they are masters, and so
they have gotten the name but not the nature, and so are bastards, who are not
sprung from the gentile seed, and yet they are hired as the servants of men,
and yet bear rule by their means, as Masters over them that maintain them, Jer.
5.30, 31; he that has an eye to see, let him see the deceits of the professed
Ministers of England.

Pr. Thou and Thee, and the gross deceits which this Quaker charges on the
Ministers of England; the whole transcript is ridiculous; this ill-inspired man
says, Thou is the proper word to one particular person; behold, was not this a
notable quaking-discovery? Not his Light within, but his Accidence, might have
told him thus much; Thou seen in the Quakers false light, is vainly doted on by
them; for this Thou's sake, they proclaim no civil respect and honor to be due
to any Superiors, Noblemen, and Gentlemen; this Quakers ignorance makes him
bold to say, that all do speak improperly that do not Quaker-like, use this
word Thou to all, without respect of person; to speak this Quakers mind more
fully, Thou is so appropriate to God himself, as that the King must be Thoued
by his Quaking-subjects; as for your Majesty, your Excellency, your Grace, your
Honor, your Worship, this Quaker gives us to understand that they are improper
expressions of honor, which have no pattern; for God and Christ were both
Thoued; nor are they that give them, like to the Apostles of Christ, who Thoued
Christ when they spoke to him; behold Paul Thouing Agrippa the King, is
instanced by this Quaker as a president for all Courtiers to follow; thus
vainly is Thou idolized by this Quaker; but behold far worse, Thou and Thee are
so much set by, as that this Quaker says, it is plain that it is an invention
of proud Lucifer (the Devil) in man, who exalts himself; to speak this Quakers
mind in more plain English, To use any other words but Thou or Thee to the
King, to any Peers, Superiors, or Gentlemen, is an invention (says this
Quaker) of proud Lucifer in man to exalt himself: Behold then, according to
this Quakers mind, that Your Majesty, Your Excellency, Your Grace, Your Honor,
Your Lordship, your Worship, Your Servant, etc. are all of them found out by
the proud Devil to exalt himself in that man to whom they are given, or in that
man that gives them; but a great eyesore to this Quaker is this, That it is so
betwixt Priest and People; this he cannot away with, that a poor labouring-man
must you the Priest, who Thou's him; for thus doing, both the rich and great
ones, and Priests, are (by this Quaker) termed Heathens, who lord it over
others by their corrupt wills: Behold now how this Quaker over-values Thou and
Thee! how he counts them but Heathens, worse than Turks and Jews, that do not
Thou one another, or are Youed by others! he looks upon them as so many
Tyrants, who lord it over others in their corrupt wills: That the Priests (for
Thouing others, and being Youed themselves, are in this particular contrary to
the Apostles and Ministers of Christ; as for the Priests, he says further,
they do unreasonably call themselves the Ministers of Christ; they are so
proud, as that they are Masters; whereas this Quaker tells them, they are only
servants; but (according to this Quakers mind) they are grossly mistaken, for
they are neither Ministers nor Masters; what then are they? This Quaker says,
they are Bastards, who have the name of Ministers, but want the nature (as this
Quaker adds) they are not sprung from the gentile seed; like the servants of
men, they are hired, they bear rule by their means; Jer. 5.30, 31, this place
of Scripture is wrested by this Quaker to abuse the Priests of the Most High
God; by the foregoing quaking-prattle it is now evident how highly Thou and
Thee are advanced by this Quaker, to the Kings high dishonor, to the debasing
of all Nobility, Gentility, and Superiority in this Kingdom; and likewise how
basely the professed Ministers of England, are slanderously disgraced, to the
shame of true Christianity.

Q. p. 95, 96. Lucifer, whereby he is honored, and worshipped, and exalted in
man; but the Scripture does not speak of any such fashion used in any age; but
man has found out many inventions; now it is a fashion throughout the Land,
whereby one man is exalted above another; if a poor man comes before a rich
man, it may be the rich man will move his hat, that is called courtesy and
humility; but the poor man must stand with his hat off before him, and that is
called honor, and manners, and due respect to him; but if the rich man do bid
him put it on, it is counted a great courtesy, and he gets honor to himself
there, to be accounted a courteous man; but this respect of persons was never
ordained of God, but by the Devil, whereby he exalts himself in man; but James
witnessed against it, and said, He that respects persons, commits sin, for
there is no respect of persons with God; therefore (says James) howl ye rich
men; here your professed Ministers abide not in the doctrine of Christ, and so
have not God, but the devil; now you shall see the partiality of the names in
this your breeding and manners; from a poor man to a rich man, it is called
honor, and due respect, and manners; from a rich man to a poor man, it is
called courtesy and humility; amongst the rich and nobles of the earth, it is
called Courtlike breeding; of those of the lower degree, it is called
Country-breeding; amongst the lower sort of the world it is called
neighborhood, and civil respect one to another; and so the devil has covers
for all his deceit; and so he is honored both in Court and Country; but woe
unto them that hide their sins, and cover with a covering, and not of the
spirit of the Lord; but this is the riches of the world, and the devil that
makes so many degrees, as between Dives and Lazarus, Haman and Mordecai, for
the Lord has made all the Nations of the earth of one mould and one blood.

Pr. Lucifer, who is the devil; according to this Quakers mind, by putting off
the hat to them, the devil is honored, worshipped and exalted in man, to whom
it is done; according to this quaking-document, when all Courtiers stand bare
in the Kings Presence, what are they then doing? this Quaker says in print,
thereby the devil is honored, worshipped and exalted in man; if this be loyal
doctrine delivered by this Quaker, let the whole world judge; this Quaker says,
that putting off the hat is such a fashion as the Scripture does not warrant;
according to this Quaker, then standing bare in the Kings Presence, is civil
honor given to the King, without any Scripture-warrant; behold, the Scripture
is abused by this Quaker, to tell us, that man has found out many inventions;
but this is most certain, that till Quakerism was hatched (which is not yet
thirty years old, or not much elder) to put off the hat was none of these
inventions; till there was an yester-day-Quaker, no man was so far imposed upon
by the spirit of error, as to say, that putting off the hat to the King, to
superiors, to our equals, was an invention of the devil; but this Quaker is
arrived in the ship of folly, at a strange discovery; that which is rightly
called courtesy, humility, honor, manners, breeding, due respect, this Quaker
by a false light within him, has discovered here to be that respect of
persons, which was (he says) never ordained by God, but by the devil; behold
here is a base discovery; to be courteous and lowly to inferiors by moving the
hat to them, to give honor, to show manners and due respect to superiors; to
bid a poor man put on his hat, is courtesy, to be counted a courteous man; but
all this is (as he says wickedly) that respect of persons which was never
ordained of God, but by the devil; let me say without offense, it is easy to
guess at whose Torch this Quakers light within him was fired; to give honor to
the King, Peers (to name no more) is according to this Quakers lines) that
respect of persons which was never ordained by God, but by the devil; by
stirring in this puddle, there is more of this Quakers stinking stuff; to
second this Quakers false base doctrine, St. James his words are basely wrested
by him; St. James never said, howl you rich men, because it was then in use
sinfully to respect them by putting the hat off to them; St. James explains
himself otherwise in that Chapter; surely this Quakers spirit was dull-sighted
to be thus grossly mistaken; but this Quaker has his by-fling at Ministers; he
says, here (where? in teaching to give honor to the King, to the Peers, to
any to whom it is due) your professed Ministers abide not in the Doctrine of
Christ, and so have not God, but the devil; behold, how this Quaker makes all
Ministers for teaching the truth, to be no better than the Ministers of the
devil, or such as have the devil for their God; now this Quaker goes on to tell
us, what is called honor, due respect, manners; what is called courtesy and
humility; what is called Court-like breeding, Country-breeding, neighborhood
and civil respect; surely this Quakers spirit was at no little leisure to
attend such trifles; but what of all these? mind it well, honor, due respect,
manners, courtesy, humility, Court-like breeding, Country-breeding,
neighborhood, civil respect, are (according to this Quaker) covers which the
devil has got for all his deceit; by these (he says) the devil is honored
both in Court and Country; but like the devil, this Quaker quotes Scripture
wrongfully to prove what he has said amiss; saying, But woe unto them that hide
their sins, and cover with a covering, but not of the spirit of the Lord; now
to what purpose are these Scripture-words? Surely they are sent by this Quaker
on that errand, to prove that which the most wise God never intended them for;
any considering person may soon see enough to this Quakers shame for his
impertinent alleging of them; but this Quaker has brought us to another new,
but strange discovery, which is this, That the Riches of the World, and the
Devil, have made so many degrees, as between Dives and Lazarns, Haman and
Mordecai; does not this Quaker in effect say thus much, That the many degrees
of Honor that are either in this Kingdom, or elsewhere, are of the Devils
making? behold how this Quaker is become a downright Leveller; for as all
degrees of men are of the Devil, so his quaking-equality is pretended to be
from the Lord; for (he says) the Lord has made all the Nations of the Earth
of one mould, and one blood; I may truly say, That this wild stuff is nearly
allied to this, When Adam dug, and Eve span, where then was the Gentleman?
Except deluded Quakers, and doting Levellers, none do derive the Degrees of men
from the Devil; according to this Quaker, the King as Supreme Head of this
Kingdom, has that Degree of Honor above all his Subjects, which is made by
the Devil; which is a most base aspersion cast on the Kings most Excellent
Majesty by this Quaker.

Q. p. 97, 98, etc. We are accused that we say, That we are perfect, without
sin. I answer, Man was perfect without sin before the fall; I shall leave this
as a query with all both Priests and people, who deny perfection from sin here,
Whether Christ is but part of a Redeemer, or a perfect Redeemer? and which is
the place betwixt Heaven and Earth, where man shall be made free or cleansed
from sin, if not upon earth, seeing that no unholy nor unclean thing can enter
the Kingdom of God? it is a great delusion of the devil to keep people in sin,
to tell them they shall never be made free from sin so long as they are upon
the earth; but he tells them Christ died for all; and if they can but lay hold
on him by faith, he will not impute their sins unto them, though they sin
daily, for the righteous man sins seven times a day, and all the holy men of
God sinned, and so he takes Scripture to maintain his Kingdom; this he delivers
by the mouth of his Ministers, here he carries them on an easy delightsome way
to the flesh, and so heals them up in their sins with a feigned formed faith;
here they settle upon their lees, set up a rest in the devils Kingdom; here all
tenderness of conscience is done away; whosoever witnesses Christ their
Redeemer, shall witness that he is come to destroy the works of the devil, to
redeem out of the fall, out of sin, out of the devils Kingdom, which is sin;
this we witness, who through the Lamb, our Savior, do reign above the world,
death, hell, and the devil; none can witness this, whose eye is outward,
looking at a Redeemer afar off, and still live in sin; try your faith and hope
who plead for sin, all your faith is vain, and your hope which does not purify
the heart; it is feigned hypocrites faith, not faith in God; this the Apostle
witnessed, and that he was made free from sin, and more than conqueror through
faith in Christ Jesus; they who dwell in the righteousness in Christ, sin not;
this is the devil which pleads for sin; your teachers which tell you, you can
never get out of sin, nor be cleansed from sin here, err, not knowing the
Scripture, nor the power of God; but deny the end of Christ's coming, bring
another doctrine, which they have from their father the devil; and so are the
deceivers which Paul speaks of, who creep into steeple houses and lead silly
people captive full of sin and corruption; they daub you up with untempered
mortar, divining lies; they have healed the hurt of the people slightly; sowed
pillows under their arm-holes; these are your teachers that make your
habitation in your sin while you are upon the earth; so your leaders cause you
to err; the utter enemies of your souls, who persuade your hearts in sin; here
all your feigned formed faith is unbottomed, all your Priests found liars,
deceivers, antichrists, in whom the false Prophet rules.

Pr. You see that the Quakers are accused justly, page 98. that this was
Christ's work to redeem to man that which man had lost; behold, according to
this Quakers mind, nothing less than a perfect freedom from all sin on earth,
was the end and aim of Redemption by Jesus Christ; to deny a perfect freedom
from all sin in this life, is (according to this Quaker) to make Christ only a
part of a Redeemer, and to establish a middle place betwixt earth and heaven,
in which to be made-free from sin; to assert this great truth, that there is no
perfect freedom from all sin to be attained to in this life, is (as this Quaker
does basely speak) a great delusion of the devil, to keep people in sin; page
98. He that says he has no sin, deceives himself, and is a liar; behold what
this bold Quaker says to this! what says he? he says, this is no other but a
Scripture brought by the devil; but observe him a little further; he says,
that the devil tells men, that Christ died for all; that if they lay hold on
him by faith, their sins shall not be imputed to them, though they sin daily;
that the righteous man sins seven times a day; that all the holy men of God
sinned; that the devil does thus take Scripture to maintain his Kingdom; and
that this is that doctrine which the devil delivers by the mouth of his
Ministers; behold, how Gospel Truths are by this Quaker said to be told men by
the devil, and how Gods Ministers are said by him to be the devils mouth in
delivering the foresaid truths! except Quakers, who dare affirm it, that all
those Ministers of the Gospel are the devils mouth, in saying, that Christ died
for all; that their sins shall not be imputed to them that believe in Christ,
though they sin daily; that the righteous man does sin often in one day; that
the holy men of God have sinned; that do deny a perfect freedom from all sin
attainable in this life? But now let us observe what this Quaker says further,
to teach that there is most certainly no quaking freedom from sin in this
world, this is (according to this Quaker) that doctrine whereby the devil
carries on people in an easy delightsome way to the flesh; a doctrine which
heals them up in their sins with a feigned faith; a doctrine which settles them
on the lees; a doctrine which sets up a rest in the devils Kingdom; a doctrine
which destroys all tenderness of Conscience; to speak this Quakers mind,
without being perfectly cleansed from all sin, no man can witness Christ to be
his Redeemer, nor witness that he is come to destroy the works of the devil;
nor can he witness that Christ is come to redeem him (which are his own words)
out of the fall, and out of the devils Kingdom; it is no marvel that the Quakers
do ignorantly plead for a perfect freedom from all sin in this life, for this
is their top-gallant error, which makes them (as this Quaker says) to reign
like Kings, above the world, death, hell and the devil; which makes them (I may
more truly say) miserably proud, in their own eyes no less holy and happy than
Christ himself is; without this haughty, over-holy dotage of this Quaker, all
other Christians are of no account; they are, says this Quaker, such whose
eyes are outward, they do look at a Redeemer afar off, still living in sin; by
this quaking doctrine of Perfection, this Quaker says, page 101, That the
children of God and the children of the devil are made manifest; behold, in
this Quakers account they are manifestly the children of the devil, who do not
hold a perfect freedom from all sin on earth; thus this idolized Perfection of
the Quakers serves to unchristian all but themselves; according to this Quaker
the faith of all Christians is vain, and their hope is no better; their faith
is the faith of all hypocrites, no true faith in God, if they do not own a
quaking-perfection; as for St. Paul, this Quaker tells us untruly, that he did
witness this perfect freedom from all sin, that this was his being more than a
conqueror; surely this Quaker never understood Romans 7. in vain does this
Quaker tell us, that they who dwell in the righteousness of Christ sin not, for
the Scripture records no such over-holy inhabitants; it is true, it is the devil
who pleads for sin, and let that man's mouth be stopped for ever that does so; but
to affirm the in-being and dwelling of sin in the best of men in this world, is
no siding with the devil in the same plea; but this Quaker has laid a foul
load on those Ministers of the Gospel, who teach that none can be perfectly
cleansed from all sin in this life; he says to this purpose like the Sadduces,
they do all err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God; they do deny
the end of Christ's coming; they bring another doctrine, a doctrine which they
have from their father the devil; they are deceivers, who creep into
steeplehouses, and lead silly people captive; but this Quaker is mistaken, for
St. Paul never said so; page 103. he says, they are such teachers as are
accursed; they are daubers with untempered mortar; such seers as see vanity;
such as divine lies; such as heal the hurt of the people slightly; such as sow
pillows under their arm-holes; such as sooth people up in a false peace; such
as make the people to take up their habitation in sin as long as they live;
such leaders as cause them to err; the utter enemies of their souls; such as
persuade their hearts in sins; now give me leave without offense to say, oh
quaking-perfection from all sin in this life! oh brainsick whimsie! to what
extravagant assertions, to what devilish expressions, to what foul aspersions
have thou transported this poor deluded Quaker? let all wise unquakerized
persons judge, if this quaking-error can be that unbottoming doctrine which
declares our faith to be feigned, our Priests to be liars, deceivers,
antichrists, such in whom the false Prophet rules; surely because this Quaker
was not rightly instructed to distinguish well betwixt the being and ruling
power of sin, therefore the holy Scriptures have been sorely tortured to speak
what he would have them, in favor of his false doctrine; hence, I hope, was
the true rise of this Quakers gross mistakes, base assertions, and foul
charges; but I have done with this Pamphlet, not for want of more pitiful
matter, but because I hasten to the next Pamphlet of this James Parnel, called,
The Watcher; it is a conceited Title, in it the baseness of Quakerism is drawn
to the life, but I shall not dwell upon it; I shall only transcribe so much as
may serve to lay open the Quakers pitiful teachings; you will soon perceive
that this Watcher is none of the watchmen of the true Israel.

Q. p. 138, p. 145. Antichrist has reigned ever since the Apostles days over
the world, under a Gospel-profession; here has been a long time of cruel
darkness and ignorance; the Lord has been a long time as a stranger in the
earth; they that were accounted to believe on God or Christ, looked at him as a
God afar off in the Heavens, without, far off, they know not where; they that
said they believed that that was the Christ that died at Jerusalem, and that he
died for their sins, and rose again, and was sitting at the right hand of God,
etc. were baptized with water, and called Christians, when as before they were
called Heathen, and those had the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, which
are called Scripture, and so were the keepers of the Letter, that they look for
their rule to walk by; they gave their own meanings and imaginations upon it;
they sprinkled their children, and by that were they entertained into their
Church and Faith, thus came up Infant Baptism, for which there is no Scripture,
nor example; they call this an ordinance of Christ; they had their two
Sacraments, for which word they have no Scripture; they had the carnal bread
and wine, as the Priests and people have now; thus they planted their Church in
England and other places, then Bishops were set up, and Archbishops, and Deans,
and Priests, and Deacons, and Popes; and the Bishops bore rule by their means,
and the Priests preached for hire; thus Antichrist set up his Kingdom under a
profession of the Gospel; then Tithes came up to maintain the Priests, contrary
to any rule of the Gospel; then Universities were set up to make Ministers or
Priests; thus they were set by the will and tradition of man, as the false
Prophets always were; then they had long robes like the Pharisees; then they
set up Idols-Temples, which the blind now call Churches, or houses of God; then
they got up into their Pulpits, the chiefest places in the Synagogues, called
of men, Master, Doctor, had the uppermost rooms at Feasts, and greetings in the
Markets, as it is now; and then they stole the Apostles words; as the false
Prophets stole the word from their neighbor, so did (and do) those; took a
verse and studied from it a divination of their own brain; and so do the
Priests vow, they run like the false Prophets; then with feigned words through
covetousness, they made merchandise of the people, made a prey of the sheep as
they do now; began to seek about for great Livings, and fat Benefices, left a
lesser, ran to a bigger; there was their beloved, which they sought for, as the
false Prophets who sought for the fleece, not for the flock; cried peace to
those that put into their mouths; but they that did not put into their mouths,
they prepared war against them, haled them before Courts and Benches, as they
do now; thus they sought their gain from their quarters, and ruled them with
rigor; so that the Priests reigned like Lords over the people; thus your
Priests old fathers planted their Church, and so set every thing in form and
tradition, according to their own imaginations; here is the ground and
foundation of the Faith and Church of England; here are the old Fathers and old
Authors that your Priests have so much talked of, even the Popes and the
Bishops; thus Antichrist has long deceived the Nations under the profession of
the faith of Christ; one generation has gone and another come, and have not
known the Lord that bought them; many may see by this what liars the Priests
are, how they came up, and were ordained; they will be found the Ministers of
Antichrist, such as shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men; all people may
now see how ignorantly you have been led, as strangers from the father of light
after the vain traditions, customs, forms, ordinances and imaginations of man,
with a vain profession and feigned faith; still strangers from the God of life,
and from Christ the Savior and Redeemer; thus you lie under the power of
darkness and delusion of Antichrist, both Priests and people; your leaders
cause you to err by their lies; you are lost for want of true knowledge; only
differing from the heathen in name and profession.

Pr. England in particular; according to this brainsick Quaker, there has
been in the whole world no true profession of the Gospel since the Apostles
days; behold, a black mark is set by this Quaker upon all Christians since that
time; to speak this Quakers mind more fully, in all ages of the Christian
Church since the Apostles days, instead of Christ, Antichrist has reigned over
the world, under a Gospel-profession; instead of true Gospel Light (he says)
there has been only a long time of cruel darkness and ignorance; as for the
Lord (this Quaker says) he has been a long time, ever since the Apostles
days, as a stranger in the earth; behold (according to this Quaker) there has
been no true Christianity, nothing but Antichristianism, cruel darkness and
ignorance, and estrangedness from the Lord in all ages of the Christian Church,
ever since the Apostles days; now let us proceed, this Quaker is still bold to
tell us, that ever since the Apostles days, all the believing on God or Christ,
has been nothing else but an unprofitable looking at him, as a God afar off,
in the Heavens, without, they knew not where; according to this Quaker you may
perceive that there have been no truly faithful Christians in the world since
the Apostles days; to speak this Quakers mind, ever since the Apostles days,
they were only vain believers, who said, they believed that that was the Christ
that died at Jerusalem, rose again, sits at the right hand of God, etc. who
thus believing were baptized with water, and called Christians; behold, how by
this Quaker believing in Christ that died, etc. is slighted! and likewise the
baptizing of those Christians who did so believe in Jesus Christ! in effect all
this is looked upon by this Quaker to be a pitiful piece of Christianity; as for
the Scripture (this Quaker says) that was the Letter whereof these called
Christians were the keepers, which they took for their rule; according to this
Quakers mind the Scripture has been the mistaken rule of all Christians to
walk by, ever since the Apostles days; as for any Commentaries written upon the
Scriptures since the Apostles days (this Quaker says) they were but their own
meanings and imaginations; behold how all Expositors of the holy Scriptures
both ancient and modern are basely asperst by this Quaker! their Expositions
have been no more but their own meanings and imaginations obtruded on the
Scripture. As for Infant Baptism used in all ages of the Christian Church (this
Quaker like an Anabaptist says) there is no Scripture nor example for it; that
it is in vain called an Ordinance of Christ; then, (says this Quaker) that is
in the reign of Antichrist, they had their two Sacraments, but without any
Scripture-warrant for the word Sacraments; as for the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, this Quaker calls it only carnal bread and wine; thus in the reign of
Antichrist (this Quaker says) the Church was planted in England and other
places; behold, according to this Quaker, both the Church of England, and other
particular Churches planted since the Apostles days in any part of the world,
are all under the dominion of Antichrist; their baptism with water is no
Ordinance of Christ; the Lords Supper is only carnal bread and wine; both
Sacraments without Scripture-warrant; but mark what follows, Then (that is, in
the reign of Antichrist, in the long time of cruel darkness, in the time of the
Lords absence from the earth) were (as this Quaker says) Bishops set up, and
Archbishops, Deans, Priests, Deacons, Popes; the Bishops bearing rule by their
Means, Priests preaching for hire: Behold, how this Quaker gives us a distinct
sound of the Antichristian Hierarchy, which has continued since the Apostles
days! Thus (according to this Quaker) in all Centuries of the Christian Church
since the Apostles days, not Christ, but Antichrist has set up his Kingdom
under the profession of the Gospel; thus the Christian Church has since those
days had no Ecclesiastical Governors but such as were Antichristian; thus all
Bishops, Archbishops, Deans, Priests, Deacons, as well as Popes, have been (in
this Quakers account) Antichristian for above sixteen hundred years bypast,
being masked under a vain profession of the Gospel: Then (that is, when
Antichrist reigned) Tithes (says this Quaker) came up, contrary to any rule of
the Gospel; behold how Tithes are made by this Quaker to be Antichristian too,
a maintenance contrary to the Gospel! Then (that is, in the Reign of
Antichrist) Universities (says this Quaker) were set up to make Ministers or
Priests; behold, Universities by this Quaker are all made to be so many
Antichristian Schools; thus (according to this Quaker) after an Antichristian
manner were Priests set up by the will and tradition of men, as the false
Prophets always were of old; then (in the foresaid reign of Antichrist)
University-Priests had their long robes like the Pharisees; (according to this
Quaker) Ministers habits are both Antichristian and Pharisaical; then (that is,
when Antichrist reigned) Idols Temples, called Churches, or houses of God, were
set up; (according to this Quaker) all public places consecrated and set apart
for Gods public Worship, are neither the material Churches, or Houses of God,
but Idols Temples, and Antichristian too; then (that is in the reign of
Antichrist) the Priests got into their Pulpits, the chiefest places in the
Synagogues, being proudly called of men, Master, Doctor; according to this
Quakers mind, Pulpits for Priests are become Antichristian too, and the
Antichristian Priests are got into them, like so many Scribes, being proud
Masters and Doctors, having the uppermost rooms at feasts, and greetings in the
market, like the old Pharisees, Scribes and hypocrites; then (that is in the
reign of Antichrist) began (to speak this Quakers mind) the Ecclesiastical
thieves, who stole the Apostles words (as the false Prophets did) who took a
verse, and studied from it a divination of their own brain; just as the Priests
do now, they run like the false Prophets; (according to this Quaker) ever since
the Apostles days, all Gods Priests have been thieves like the false Prophets,
preaching a divination of their own brain; like false Prophets running without
God sending them; then (that is in the reign of Antichrist) thorough
covetousness, they made merchandise of the people with feigned words; like
wolves upon sheep, they preyed upon the people; they sought about for great
livings, for fat benefices; they ran from a lesser to a bigger living, the
beloved which they sought for; like the false Prophets they sought for the
fleece, not regarding the flock; they cried peace to them that put into their
mouths; they prepared war, sued, lawed those that did not feed them; thus they
sought their gain from their quarter, and ruled like tyrants with rigor;
(according to this Quakers mind) you see that since the Apostles days all
Priests in the Christian Church have been basely covetous; vile cheats; bloody
wolves; sordidly self-seeking; minding the fleece more than the sheep; like the
false Prophets; greedily seeking their gain from their quarter; ruling like
tyrants with rigor; thus (according to this Quaker) our Priests old fathers
planted their Church, and so set every thing in form and tradition, according
to their own imaginations; behold, since the Apostles days (to speak this
Quakers mind fully) there has been no Christian Church, but such as was
planted by the old fathers of our Priests, and this Church was planted by them
after the worst fashion, according to their own imaginations; that we may not
mistake this Quaker, he tells us plainly, his particular thoughts of our own
Church, saying, here is the ground and foundation of the Faith and Church of
England; here are the old Fathers, and old Authors, that their Priests have so
much talked of, even the Popes and Bishops; behold (according to this Quaker)
both the Faith and Church of England are Antichristian; Popes and Bishops (in
this Quakers account) Antichrists creatures, are those old Fathers, who planted
this Church and Faith, according to their imaginations, who are so much talked
of by our Priests; but he says, Thus Antichrist has long deceived the Nations
under the profession of the faith of Christ; behold (according to this Quaker)
not only the Church of England, but all other Christian Nations (since the
Apostles days) have thus long been deceived by Antichrist under the profession
of the faith of Christ; according to this Quaker, there has not been one jot
of true Christianity in this Church, or in any part of the world for many
hundreds of years bypast; he says, one generation has gone, and another
come, but they have not known the Lord that bought them; behold, ever since the
Apostles days, all Christians in the world have not known the Lord Jesus
Christ their Redeemer; (according to this Quaker) they have all been
Antichristian; I may truly say, That this Quaker is so taken with this
Antichristian glass, as that he says, many may now see [strange sights] what
liars the people are! how they came up, and were ordained! that they are the
Ministers of Antichrist; that they do shut up the Kingdom of heaven against
men; the people may also see (says this Quaker) how ignorantly they have been
led, estranged from the Father of Light; carried after vain traditions,
customs, forms, ordinances, imaginations of man; deceived with a vain
profession and feigned faith; kept strangers from the God of life, and from
Christ the Savior and Redeemer; behold (according to this Quaker) what base
persons all the Priests of the Church of England are; for in his account they
are all liars, Ministers of Antichrist, as bad as the Scribes and Pharisees
were in Christ's time, for they shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men; blind
Teachers of the people; estrangers of the people from God the Father of Light;
such as have carried them after vain traditions and imaginations of man;
deceivers with a vain profession and feigned faith; such as have kept the
people strangers from the God of life, and from Christ the Redeemer; but this
is not all; for this Quaker says, That both Priests and people do lie under
the power of darkness, and delusion of Antichrist; behold, in the Church of
England (according to this Quaker) it is like Priests like people, the power of
darkness belongs to both, they are both so far from true Christianity, as that
they are both under the delusion of Antichrist; but (according to this Quaker)
the Priests are the greater offenders of them two; for they are (he says) the
peoples Leaders, who cause them to err by their lies; they destroy the people
for want of true knowledge; they lead them captive in their sins; they do only
differ from the Heathen in name and profession: Behold once more, that
(according to this Quaker) the Priests of the Church of England are teachers of
lies, by which they cause the people to err; soul-murtherers, destroying the
people for want of true knowledge; like the Devil, they lead the people captive
in their sins; they are nothing else but Heathens in truth. Thus you see that
this quaking-Watcher has seen nothing belonging to true Christianity for a
long time (even ever since the Apostles days) in the world, or in the Church of
England; as for this Church and Kingdom (according to this Quaker) there is
nothing but Antichrist, and what is Antichristian, to be found in them.

Q. p. 145, to 149, those you account Heathen, that is not amongst you, and
does abound? Be ashamed you Priests of England, to see the fruits of your
Ministry so laid open before you; you are those who come near the Lord with
your mouths, but your hearts are far from him; you are hypocrites, and your
hearts are full of deceit, envy, wrath, bitterness, covetousness, pride,
earthly-mindedness, self-love, self-wisdom; you are out of the life and
practice of the Apostles, and the children of light; your Teachers are such as
bring another doctrine, and climb up another way, who are shut out for Thieves
and Robbers.

Pr. England, are by this censorious Quaker declared to be guilty of most
notorious crimes; they are all (according to this Quaker) either as bad, or far
worse than any Heathens are; behold, how bad this Quaker has made all Priests
and people of this Church and Kingdom to be without exception; quarrellers,
murderers, drunkards, swearers, liars, scoffers, revilers, backbiters,
whoremongers, adulterers, proud, covetous, idolaters, high-minded, oppressors;
by these black names does this Quaker point them out; behold, is this the
Christian Charity that thinks no evil? Is this the Christianity that speaks
evil of no man? But in p. 146; this Quaker does a little seem to eat his own
words, but they are soon disgorged; As for those people and Priests that are
not drunkards, swearers, etc. this Quaker makes them as bad as the rest, as if
he were in Gods stead, he ransacks their hearts to make them no better than
those heart-wicked Pharisees were of old; (according to this Quaker) in the
Church and Kingdom of England, the peoples Priests are no Christians, but
idolaters; their conversations are worse than heathens, for they abound in
gross wickedness more than they; as for those people and priests that are not
so bad as others (in this Quakers account) they are but cursed hypocrites; as
for any true Christianity (this Quaker says) there is none to be found among
them, for the people are out of the life and practice of the Apostles; and the
Priests are cursed Teachers, who bring another doctrine; thieves, that climb up
another way; if this Quaker has not born false witness against his neighbor,
then let any sober impartial Christians judge; surely this poor man was in a
great quaking-heat, swadled up in much consident ignorance, which made him cry
out, Be ashamed and blush you Priests of England, why so? to see the fruits of
your Ministry so laid open before you; had this Quaker lived in those days,
then he would have looked upon the sins of Israel to have been the fruits of
their Prophets Ministry; or if he had been alive in Christ's time, he would have
said that the sins of the Jews were the fruits of Christ's Ministry, and of his
Disciples; I may truly say, the Quakers may truly be ashamed and blush to see
so much inspired folly in print; I need add no more in so plain case.

Q. p. 150, 151. England's Church, which England's Priests have planted, now
differs from the heathen; set drunkards aside, set swearers aside, set liars
aside, set proud ones aside, set covetous ones aside, set railers aside, set
murderers aside, set whoremongers aside; set wild ones, profane ones, wanton
ones aside, set quarrellers and fighters aside, hypocrites, dissemblers,
persecutors aside, backbiters, extortioners, lustful ones aside, then see where
England's Church is.

Pr. England; that (in this Quakers account) this Church is none of Gods
Vineyard, nor of his own planting; with him it is only England's Priests
Church, which differs not at all from the heathen; to speak this Quakers mind
more fully, England's Priests Church, is nothing but a corrupt body consisting
of bad members; they are either as bad or worse than heathens, that are members
of the Church of England; what can this Quaker mean by all this [setting aside]
here mentioned? is not this his quaking-mind? that the Church of England is no
sacred fold for Christ's sheep; for if the wicked like goats were set aside,
then it would appear what kind a Church it is; he that considers those
quakinglines well, may well conclude, that the Quakers do believe that the
Church of England is not the Church of God, nor any member of the holy
Catholic Church, that Mystical body, whereof Christ is the head; behold once
more, that (according to this Quakers mind) drunkards, swearers, liars, proud
ones, covetous ones, railers, murderers, whoremongers, wild ones, profane ones,
wanton ones, quarrellers, sighters, hypocrites, dissemblers, persecutors,
back-biters, extortioners, lustful ones, (that is the worst of men) are the
chief members of the Church of England; for (says he) set these aside, then
see where England's Church is; I need not tell the Judicious Reader that this
Quaker has showed himself grossly ignorant of the nature of a particular
visible Church; if this man had lived in the Wilderness, or in the Prophets
days, or in the days of the Apostles, then at this rate of ignorance he would
have unchurched the Church of God, as he has unchurched at this day the Church
of God in England; however all the right-bred children of the Church of England
may now see what filth, what disgrace has by this Quaker been cast upon their
Mother; I may truly say that this deluded Quaker has said enough to make the
Church of England to become a den of thieves, Antichrists dominion, and the
devils Kingdom, which is no doubt a most base aspersion.

Q. p. 177.

Pr. they are Christians thus made; behold, here is our Saviors Godhead shared
amongst the Quakers; behold, here are the Quakers made more than coheirs with
Jesus Christ, no less God than himself is; like George Fox the old Quaker, they
are all equal with God himself; with reference to this high base doctrine, it
may truly be said, that every real Quaker is truly godded with God, and
christed with Christ, for (according to this abominable quaking assertion) they
are all partakers of that same Divine nature which Christ has. Mr. Higginson
in his relation of the Irreligion of the Northern Quakers, has this passage,
page 3. One Williamsons Wife, a disciple of Milners, when she came to see him
at Appleby, said in the hearing of diverse (whose names might here be inserted
if it were needful) that she was the eternal son of God; when the men that
heard her told her, that she was a woman, and therefore could not be the son of
God; she said, no, you are women, but I am a man. This relation I showed to two
Quakers yet living, hereby to let the blasphemous folly of Quakerism appear in
its own colors to them; but they were so far from blushing, that they did both
of them justify this abominable blasphemy, saying, that all this might be made
good; at this horrid boldness I became silent; but now behold, here is Parnel a
Quaker, boldly but basely affirming that all Quakers are partakers of Christ's
Divine nature; hence (according to this quaking-blasphemy) it appears
evidently, that women as well as men-quakers, are no less the eternal sons of
God, than Christ himself is, for they do alike partake of Christ's Divine
nature; to back this intolerable blasphemy, this Quaker in the next lines was
not ashamed to misapply St. John's words, as he is, so are we in this world;
this horrid blasphemy is so apparent, I shall dwell no longer upon it, nor make
any inferences from it; I may truly say that James Naylors notorious blasphemy
was the genuine issue of this abominable doctrine; according to that infallible
spirit, who is said to guide all Quakers; this is an infallible
quaking-principle, That all Quakers are partakers of Christ's Divine nature:
besides, it is no wonder that this Quaker said, p. 174, Thus is God with us
manifested in the flesh; thus all real Quakers are in their own vain
imaginations godded with God, and christed with Christ, no less God incarnate
than our Savior; that man is a stranger to Theologia Germanica, who sees not
how the leaven of that little Book has sowered the Quakers whole lump; this
quaking-blasphemy is so gross, that for its sake the Quakers may well be
ashamed of their Light within.

Q. p. ead. Israel.

Pr. Donatism revived; the true Church is now only to be found amongst the poor
deluded Quakers; most of these Unities heaped together by this Quaker, must
necessarily be understood according to the notorious false principles of all
Quakers; what then? then without a quakerized unity there is no true Church of
God, either in England, or any-where else; any man of common sense may easily
see, that these quaking-unities do only serve to unchurch the holy Catholic
Church, with all its members, throughout the world. It Is needless to touch at
every point in this Quakers Compass; for here are no true directions to be got
for finding out the true Church; this quaking-unity belonging to the true
Church, has no Scripture-bottom to stand on; no Christian Writers of any
Century did ever describe the true Church of God after this canting rate; but
this Quaker is so confident of this mean new discovery, as that he does first
unchristian, then unchurch all others that cannot bear witness to the abovesaid
Crotchet of his own brain; behold, they are all such as are strangers to
Christ, and strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel.

As for this Quakers Works, I have now done with them; for the rest of his
Pamphlets are very trivial; in reading them over, I found cramben his coctan,
and nothing more material than what has been laid before the Readers eyes
already: I shall only add, That I met with vainglorious Titles affixt to his
Scribbles, but without substance.

THE next Book proposed to your consideration, is thus entitled, The Heathens
Divinity set upon the heads of all called Christians. G. F. Printed in the year
1671.

Pr. George Fox; the cunning design of the Title is to represent all that are
not Quakers, to be Christians only in name, but heathens in truth; and that the
knowledge which they have of God, or Christ, only from the Scripture, is the
Divinity of Heathens: for it follows thus in the Title Page, Christians, that
say they had not known that there had been a God, or a Christ, unless the
Scripture had declared it to them. You must not expect that I shall much
expatiate; I shall only touch at some points, and so dismiss this Pamphlet.

Q. p. 9. Balaams Ass may reprove you all, who are going mad in preaching for
Rewards and Gifts, cursing, and excommunicating, and imprisoning such as will
not give, and put into your mouths.

Pr. Baalam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness, whose ass may reprove them
all for their madness; behold what manner of persons all Priests are in this
Quakers account, but such mad fools as Balaam's ass may reprove.

Q. p. 12.

Pr. London, or elsewhere, according to the law of God and the King, they have
(as this Quaker says) but builded so many old Mass-houses, and denied Christ
come in the flesh; behold, in this Quakers estimate, our material Churches are
no other than Mass-houses; then, what is the divine service that is performed
in them? then, what are they that minister in them? then, what are the people
that worship in them? is not this Quakers meaning hence, this, That the divine
service is Mass-worship; the Priests, Mass-Priests, and the people,
Mass-worshippers?

Q. page 28. yet pretend to be Preachers of God, and of Christ, but know
neither, but are Preachers for your bellies, and serve them, and not the Lord
Jesus.

Pr. England, or elsewhere, did ever deny that, That God might not be known by
the light of nature within them, or the works of God without them; but only
that a clearer knowledge of God is got by the Scripture; but it seems, to know
God according to the Scripture is not the right knowledge of God in a Quakers
account; behold, how blind this Quaker takes all Priests to be! for (he says)
though they have the Scriptures, they do not know God, nor Christ; behold, in
this Quakers esteem, all Priests are both ungodly and unchristian; they are
preachers for their bellies; these are the gods which they serve, but not the
Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. p. 32, 33.

Pr. England in this Quakers eye? is she not a will-shorshipper? is not her
religion, her worship, of her members own making and setting up? is not her
worship that which was never set up by God, nor the Lord Jesus Christ? well may
the Church of England be despised, whilst the Quakers are suffered thus to spit
in her face, to asperse her religion and worship in this scandalous manner.

THe next Book with which I shall trouble your patience, is called, Truths
defense; Given forth by George Fox, and Richard Hubberthorn, Printed 1653, in
York. I shall only glance at new matter, as I pass along; it is a scurrilous
Pamphlet, but I shall leave them to answer to another for their hard speeches.

Q. p. 2.

Pr.

Q. p. 14.

Pr.

Q. p. 15.

Pr. both; that the divine inspiration of both is alike for substance; if this
be not an abominable assertion, then what is?

Q. p. 39. Take heed to the light of God within you.

Pr. See how vainly these Quakers do pretend to the same spirit that the
Apostles had; for they have in those words belyed the Apostle; no Apostle did
ever say, Take heed to the light of God within you; this is only a whim of the
Quakers brain, which has no foundation in any Apostolical writings; in
Scripture we find mention made often of Christ the light, and sometimes of
Christ in you; but no Apostle did ever say, Take heed to the light of God
within you; this is only the Quakers false doctrine.

Q. p. 44.

Pr.

Q. p. 57.

Pr. George Fox; in them we have this account of Quakers, that they are in the
eternal unity, and that George Fox is owned by them to be one with them in the
same eternal unity; surely these lines smell strong of Parnel's partakers of
Christ's divine nature, that God is with us manifested in the flesh; all which
is abominable blasphemy.

Q. p. 64. Babylon has long reigned, and the works of the Beast, by which ye
are descended that profess Scripture to be your rule.

Pr. eye that do profess the Scripture to be the rule of faith; behold, here is
mention made by them of the dark time and power of Babylon, and the works of
the beast (to use their own words) by which they are descended! according to
these Quakers, they are basely descended, who do profess the Scripture to be
the rule of faith.

Q. p. 69. Moses, and through the Prophets, and through John, to come to
Christ, then shall thou see that the light is but one.

Pr.

Q. p. 75, 76.

Pr.

Q. p. 78. Moses, with Michael the Archangel, who said, The Lord rebuke thee;
so say I now, the Lord rebuke thee, who art disputing about the body of Christ,
for the body of Christ is but one, and he is the head of the body, which is the
Church.

Pr. Quakers words is plainly this, that Christ Jesus his body is one, which is
his Church; behold, except the Church, which is Christ's mystical body, our
Savior has no other body; to speak the Quakers mind more fully, two of my
Neighbour-quakers told me, That Christ's body did vanish at his Ascension, and
that now he has no other flesh, or body, but the flesh or body of his people;
behold, (according to the meaning of Quakers) how the Lord Jesus since his
Ascension into Heaven, has no true body united to his Godhead in his own
person! that the body or flesh of Quakers, his pretended people, is the only
body or flesh of our Savior! or to use these Quakers words, the Church (in
their sense) is the one body which Christ now has.

Q. p. 80.

Pr.

Q. p. 80.

Pr. shall rise, these Quakers give this answer, they shall rise in that body
which Christ does live in, for he is the Savior of the body; but what body is
it whereof Christ is the Savior? have not these Quakers told us, it is the
Church; so then this (according to the Quakers) is the body in which Christ
lives, and in this body the Saints shall arise; thus you may plainly see that
the Quakers do plainly deny that particular Saints shall rise from death to
life at the last day with their own particular bodies, and in what corrupt
sense they do hold the resurrection of the body.

Q. p. 83.

Pr. Quakers do in their bold ignorance speak evil of those things they know
not, saying, that Philosophy and Logic are of the devil! the baseness of this
charge is evident, I need say no more of it.

Q. p. 85.

Pr. three distinct Persons in the Godhead is likewise the making of three Gods.

Q. p. 98.

Pr.

Q. p. 99, 100.

Pr.

Q. p. 100. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness
of any thing.

Pr. Sinai; surely no man of common sense can swallow this quaking inspiration;
the great folly of this poor man is transparent.

Q. p. 104.

Pr. Gods book, given by inspiration of God, is with all Quakers decryed, as
being not the word of God, no light, no rule, but the letter, a dead letter, an
idol, husk, a shadow, dust, a carnal letter; whilst their papers and books are
owned by themselves to be given forth from the immediate Eternal Spirit of God;
I may truly say, That quaking-Pamphlets are in high honor, to the Scriptures
great disgrace. But thus I have done with this idle Scribble.

THE next quaking-Pamphlet to be briefly touched upon, is termed, The Power and
Glory of the Lord shining out of the North; or the Day of the Lord dawning: By
one whom Ishmaels brood calls a Quaker, whose name in the flesh is James
Naylor. London printed 1653.

Pr. Quaker, looks upon all unquakerized persons as being Ishmaels brood; the
Title is vainglorious enough; Bristol and Bridewell have known the abomination
of this man's quaking-folly; but amongst deluded Quakers, he is still in too
much request. Let us look into his Pamphlet.

Q. p. 5.

Pr. England is Heathenism in this Quakers account; to take a full view of this
Quakers mind, Idolatry and Heathenism did at this time bear the chief sway in
England; That our Material Churches are still Idol-Temples; That our Worship of
God in them is idolatrous; That our Customs still are Heathenish.

Q. p. 8.

Pr. Quakers opinion, both Hebrew and Greek Tongues are only carnal Learning,
and natural Tongues gotten at Cambridg and Oxford; in this man's account the
former is not the Original of the Old Testament, nor the latter of the New
Testament; for (he says) the Spirit is the Original. To add no more, it is very
clear that this Quaker was grossly ignorant.

THE next quaking-Pamphlet to be considered, is called A Warning from the Lord,
by one named of the world, Edward Borough.

Pr.

Q. p. 2.

Pr.

Q. p. 5, 6, 9, 10. of God, but an imitation, and is an abomination in the
sight of God; your Communion I deny, for it is heathenish, having proceeded out
of the imagination of the proud; your breaking of bread, and drinking of the
cup, is abomination; God never commanded it; your singing is carnal,
traditional, and heathenish; and is not with the Spirit of Jesus, but with the
spirit of the world; with the spirit of Cain, with the spirit of the Scribes,
and Pharisees, and chief priests; you worship an unknown God; be ashamed of all
your profession, and of all carnal Ordinances

Pr. Cain, and with the spirit of the Scribes, Pharisees, and chief Priests; he
also says, that the Worship is of an unknown God, like those idolaters at
Athens: In the last place, this Quaker calls upon unquakerized Christians to be
ashamed of their profession of the Christian Religion, and of all Ordinances,
which he calls carnal.

Q. p. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. England, to be drunk with the wine of her who has
deceived the Nations, who sits upon the scarlet-colored beast, and has the
golden cup in her hand, full of abominations, whose name is written in her
forehead, [ Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and abomination
of the earth] and in this light do I declare against all them which are in the
generation of the false prophets of Israel, which seeks for their gain from
their quarter, which steals the word from their neighbor, and sells the
divination of their own brain upon the Scriptures to the poor blind people, and
teaches for the fleece; against all these I do declare to be no Ministers of
Christ, but are seducers, and blind guides, and are Antichrists, and leads the
poor blind people into the ways of death and destruction; these have run, but
has not been sent of God, and therefore their souls are in the dark heathenish
nature, leaning in the imaginations, and not in the counsel of the Lord, and in
lying, swearing, drunkenness, covetousness, and oppression, and according to
the course of this world; these iniquities are ruling among people, priests,
and rulers in the Nation, from the least of them, even to the greatest, every
one is given to covetousness, from the prophet even to the priest, every one
deals falsely; all your hirelings and greedy dumb dogs I do deny; all thy
Teachers, O England, is denied of them who are taught of God; and by thy
Teachers, who are in the way of the Pharisees, art thou blindly led in the ways
of darkness and ignorance; and all thy carnal worship, which is to read, sing,
and preach, I deny, and declare to be no worship of God; the living God is but
mocked by you in your imagined worship; your reading, and singing, and
preaching, is carnal and heathenish, no worship of the true God; this worship I
do declare to be deceitful, and abomination to the Lord, which is but Cains
sacrifice. O England, I do declare against all these thy Teachers, and against
this thy worship, as from the mouth of the Lord; all thy imagined formal
worships and carnal traditions and ordinances, is the Lord risen to declare
against; O people, your Teachers has beguiled you, and fed themselves with the
fat, but your souls are hungered by them; they love the wages of
unrighteousness, and follows the error of Balaam for reward, and have devoured
souls for dishonest gain; the Lord is rising to require his flock at the hands
of the idols shepherds; O ye idol dumb shepherds, you have scattered the sheep,
and have fed your selves with them; ye shall no longer wear garments to
deceive; you have long deceived the simple by your lies; the mystery of
witchcraft is not now hid; O England, thy prophets are treacherous persons, thy
Judges judges for reward; thy priests preach for hire; thy rulers are
evening-wolves, which seeks for the prey; all thy corrupt judges, and officers,
and rulers, will the Lord cut off; and he will avenge the cause of the poor,
that is, oppressed by priests in their tithes, by lawyers in their fees, by
officers in their unrighteous dealings; the sword of the Lord is drawn in thee,
O Nation, and put into the hands of them which is scornfully called Quakers,
and thy unjust rulers and officers cannot hurt them; O Land, depart from all
thy teachers, lest thou be partaker of their plagues.

Pr. England; by raking in this dunghill no little filth will appear; behold
how the Teachers of England are aspersed foully by this quaking zealot; to
write his mind more plainly, they are no better than the false Prophets of
Israel; covetous teachers, who seek their gain from their quarter; thieves who
steal the word; their preaching is but the divination of their own brain which
they sell for money; that their teaching is for the fleece; that they are no
Ministers of Jesus Christ; what then are they? this Quaker says, that they are
seducers, blind guides, antichrists, such as lead poor blind people into the
ways of destruction; that they are such as are not sent of God; that the people
do not profit under their Ministry, for their souls are in the dark heathenish
nature, leaning (as he says) in the imaginations; to speak this Quakers mind,
they are very wicked teachers, for these iniquities, lying, swearing,
drunkenness, covetousness, and oppression, and living according to the course
of this world do rule among the Priests; from the Prophet to the Priest (as he
says) every one deals falsely; in this Quakers account, the teachers of
England are no more but hirelings, and greedy dumb dogs; the Quakers who
pretend to be taught of God, do deny them all; he says that the teachers of
England are in the way of the Pharisees, who (we know) were accursed of Christ;
that they do blindly lead the people as the Pharisees did of old; that (as
cheats use to do) they have beguiled the people; that (like the false Prophets)
they have fed themselves with the fat, but starved the peoples souls; that
(like Balaam) they have loved the wages of unrighteousness, followed Balaams
error for reward; that they have devoured peoples souls for dishonest gain;
that they are the Idols shepherds, yea, Idol dumb shepherds, that have
scattered the sheep, and fed themselves with them; that they wear garments to
deceive; that they have long deceived the people by their lies; that they have
a mystery of witchcraft; that they are treacherous persons; Priests preaching
for hire; that they are oppressors, by whom the people are oppressed in their
Tithes; that they are dangerous teachers, not fit to be heard, for this Quaker
says, O land, depart from thy teachers, lest thou be partaker of their
plagues; now let us see how the worship of God used in England is despised by
this Quaker; to come to particulars, he names reading, singing, preaching, all
which do belong to Gods public worship; but what says this Quaker of this
worship? take his own words, he says that this worship is carnal; that it is
no worship of God; that it is an imagined worship, by which the living God is
mocked; that our reading, singing, preaching is heathenish, no true worship of
God; that this worship is deceitful and abomination to the Lord; that it is
Cains sacrifice; that all this he does declare from the mouth of the Lord;
which is an unparalled quaking boldness. Now let us likewise see what this
Quakers mind is touching the Magistrates of England; he being of age shall
speak for himself; who says thus, That these iniquities, to wit, lying,
swearing, drunkenness, covetousness and oppression, and living according to the
course of this world, do rule among the rulers in this Nation; from the least
of them even to the greatest, every one is given to covetousness; that the
Judges of England (he says) are Judges for reward; that the rulers of England
(he says) are evening wolves, who seek for the prey; that they are those
corrupt judges, officers, rulers whom the Lord will cut off; that they are such
officers as do oppress the people in their unrighteous dealings; but now this
Quaker says that the sword of the Lord is drawn in England, and put into the
Quakers hands; what is meant by these words, I do wholly leave it to the wisdom
of the Magistrate to interpret; though I have hitherto forgot it, yet let it be
remarked, that by the false Light within, this Quaker has seen a lying vision
for England, which is this, that all her teachers are drunk with the Whores cup
of Babylon, which is full of abominations. I shall add no more but leave the
serious Reader to abound in his own sense upon those quaking-words.

Thus I have done with this hotheaded Quakers Pamphlet.

THe next quaking-book to be briefly considered, is called, The warnings of the
Lord to the men of this generation, particularly to those in power, who are
lately passed away, and to them that remain, as they were given forth in sundry
Letters, and sent to Oliver Cromwell, Richard his Son, late Protectors, etc.
(whom for brevity I have omitted, but may be seen in the Title Page) by his
Servant George Bishop, who is moved of the Lord (now) to publish them: London
printed by M. Inman, 1660.

Pr. The warnings of the Lord; behold how this abettour of rebellion, this
publisher of high Treason, George Bishop said, that he was moved of the Lord
(now) to publish them; as if this lamentable scribble were the Lords immediate
work. Now let us pass on to the Book it self.

Q. p. 1.

Pr. Oliver Cromwell, not as an Usurper, but as his friend! how he calls upon
his friend in the fear of God to hear and consider! how much he was concerned
for this Usurper, as being his friend!

Q. p. 3. the burden from off the shoulder, that delivered the poor from him
that was too strong for him? was it ever so with man in these latter
generations, as it was with thee, whilst God was with thee, whilst the Rock had
not forsaken thee?

Pr. Oliver Cromwell an Usurping Traitor, as one whose sword took the spoil of
the mighty; before whom the spirit risen against the Lord in these three
Nations could not stand; as one for whom nothing was too hard; as one whose
counsels succeeded well; as one with whom was wisdom and counsel as the oracles
of God; as one that became as the army of God; as one at whose feet the
proudest enemy ( quaere, was not this King Charles the First?) fell down and
bowed; as one who came upon Princes as mortar, and as the potter treads the
clay; ( quaere, were not these Princes the Nobles of England, Ireland and
Scotland?) as one that had the hearts of honest men knit to him as one man; [
quaere, who were these honest men?] as one at whose remembrance honest men did
not sigh; as one whose remembrance was pleasant to those honest men, as life
from the dead; as one with whom it was so in these latter generations as with
no other man, for (as this Quaker says) God was with him, as his Rock; behold
(according to this Quaker) how in the time of Oliver Cromwell's Rebellion, high
treason, usurpation, traytorous actings, God was so with him, as he never was
with any man in these latter generations; according to these quaking-lines a
man may be a rebel, a traitor, a man in actual arms against the Kings Majesty,
his lawful Sovereign, and yet be the best man in his generation, one that has
Gods special presence with him, and become as the army of God, a man whom God
his Rock does not forsake; where are those loyal Quakers that dare call these
quaking-lines the movings of the Lord? surely they are ashamed of this quaking
brother in print, and have much more cause to abandon the quaking spirit, who
leads themselves.

Q. p. 4.

Pr. Bishop we are told, That the Lord did hear the groans of some that
suffered because of their consciences in the days of the Bishops. This is but a
quaking-insinuation, to make credulous fools believe that the late Bishops did
persecute men for their consciences; this was the old flabellum seditionis,
which this Quaker was fond of. But mark how this Quaker says, that the Lord in
anger did pull up (like weeds) that generation; according to this misled
Quaker, the Lord is very angry with Bishops; but that is not all, he tells us,
That the Lord swept away the powers that supported them, in his sore
displeasure. To speak this Quakers mind more plainly, The Lord was so angry
with the King and Nobility, that supported the Bishops, as that in his sore
displeasure he swept them (like cobwebs or dirt) away from the face of the
earth: Nay further (he says) that the Lord became terrible to the men of high
stature, he broke in upon them with a furious blow of horror and amazement; he
smote them with an incurable wound. But who were they that were thus afraid,
thus furiously dealt with, thus incurably wounded? This Quaker gives this
account of them, saying, They, and their King, their Nobles, their men of war,
their Captains, their Counselors, their Priests, their Officers, their whole
strength; according to this Quakers mind, the men of high stature were the
Bishops; but what became of them, their King, their Nobles, their Men of war,
their Captains, their Counselors, their Priests, their Officers, their whole
strength? This Quaker says basely of them to this purpose, That the Lord in
his anger left their name an astonishment, and a wonder, and a curse to
posterity; according to the plain meaning of this Quakers words (to name no
more) the late King Charles the first of blessed memory, was smitten with an
incurable wound, and his name is left, in this Quakers account, for an
astonishment, and for a wonder, and for a curse unto posterity. Let all wise
men judge how this rebel and traitorous Quaker was moved of the Lord to write as
he has done.

Q. p. 4, 5.

Pr. Quaker crying up Oliver Cromwell as being not unlike the man Christ Jesus;
for he says, that Oliver Cromwell was the man who did bear, as upon a common
shoulder, the sufferings of the oppressed; but what tender consciences many of
them had, it has been better understood since that time; their tender
consciences had no feeling of Rebellion, Treason, and other men's estates. To go
on with this Quakers comparing tacitly Oliver Cromwell and Christ together; he
says, that their sufferings went to his heart; that he felt their sufferings
on his shoulder; that he could have laid down his life for one of them; that
his heart was tender, that his bowels did sound, that the hearts of his
sufferers flowed in to him; that in them and him there was but one spirit, and
one heart; but in all the time of his Rebellion and High Treason, whose
servant, whose instrument was, whose work did Oliver Cromwell? Behold what this
Quaker says of him! the Lord did call and raise him up to head his Armies; he
made him his Sword; and the Lord did execute by this Oliver Cromwell, his
vengeance on those generations. Does not this Quaker plainly tell us, that the
Rebel-Army under Cromwells command, was Gods Army? that called and raised this
Traitor to be the head of his Army? that God made Cromwell his Sword? that God
by Cromwell did execute vengeance onthose generations? who these generations
were, the Reader must judge.

Q. p. 9, 10. Charles Stuart could have put off from himself the sufferings of
the Puritans upon the Bishops, and have alleged that they were a
nonconformable, factious generation, and did contrary to the Law; but that
could not excuse him, nor his standing still whilst he had power to remedy it,
but did not; nor that those Laws were of long standing; nor the disaffection of
great men, and nobles, and rulers, and bishops, and priests, and the generality
of the Nation to that way, from the judgment of God which has taken hold on
him, and his children, and his party, whom he has made a dreadful example of
his vengeance, and that by thy Sword as an instrument.

Pr. Bishop are abominable; not to point at every base passage in them, this is
plainly the mind of this wild inspirado, that the judgment of God (to use his
own words) has taken hold on Charles Stuart, and his Children, and his party;
that the Lord has made the King, his Children, his party, a dreadful example
of his vengeance; and that Oliver Cromwell's sword was the Lords instrument of
this judgment, and of the vengeance executed on the late King and his Children,
and his party; that I may not be looked upon as a bloody Priest, I shall
squeeze these lines no further; only let me say without offense, that no man of
any common sense dare justify what this Quaker has written to be the moving
of Gods spirit; without question these are such traytorous lines as were never
seen in print from the eternal God before.

Q. p. 14.

Pr. Oliver Cromwell, that he was once the Lords battel-axe, his weapon of war,
to the cutting down of the King; behold, how this Quaker in print does justify
the basest of murders, as if it had been the Lords doing by Cromwell, as his
battel-axe, as the Lords weapon of war for this bloody work.

Thus I have done with this Quakers Letter to Oliver Cromwell, which was dated
from Bristol the 16 of the fifth Month, 1656.

Subscribed thus, George Bishop.

Surely this lamentable Quaker was strongly huffed up by his rebellious and
traytorous spirit, when he took himself to be moved of the Lord to publish them
again in the year 1660; he that desires to know more of this Quakers pretended
warnings of the Lord, or to see how a Quakers light within him can act the part
of disloyalty, rebellion and high Treason against the Kings Sacred Majesty, may
peruse this quaking-Pamphlet more at large.

THE next book which might be transcribed, is called, A comparison between the
true and false Ministers, by Nicholas Knight; printed 1675.

Pr. By the late Impression of this Quakers scribble, it is evident against
which Ministers this quaking-author writes, that they are the Ministers of the
Church of England that are the false Ministers here meant; to ease my Readers
patience, and consult my own ease, I shall contract his whole book thus:

Q. p. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Pr. England are thus described: They are false Teachers, who go, and are not
sent; they go forth in their own names without any commission from God, only in
the will of man; they call themselves the Ministers of Christ, but are not;
their doctrine is false and traditional, it is not from heaven, but men below;
they do teach for doctrine the traditions of men; they are the false Teachers;
they preach a divination of their own brains, they come not in at the door,
they climb up another way; they speak in the wisdom of men's words; they are
men-pleasers by enticing and feigned words; they are deceivers, seekers of
their own praise; they seek more the fleece than the flock; they preach for
hire, and divine for money; they expect gain from their quarters; like the
Scribes and Pharisees, they make long prayers, and under that pretense devour
widows houses; such as say and do not; they limit the Church of Christ to a
Nation; they are blind leaders of the blind, and both fall into the ditch; they
hold the truth in hypocrisy and unrighteousness; they take the words of God
into their mouths, when they hate to be reformed; they have a form of
godliness, and deny the power; they are deceivers, and being deceived, cause
the Name of God to be blasphemed and evil spoken of; they observe months, and
days, and consecrated places; their preaching is limited to days, hours, and
hour-glasses, and to the wills of men, to outward observations, traditions, and
ceremonies; by their fruits these trees may be known; out of the evil treasure
of their hearts, they bring forth evil things; they are an ill savor; clouds
that hold no water; they are sounding-brass and tinkling cymbals; they do not
profit the people at all; being weighed, they are still found too light; they
do neither believe nor understand what they preach; they have no experience of
the word of life; like those silly women, they are always learning, but never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth; they flee the cross; they are not
willing to forsake all for Christ; they choose rather to be subject to the
corrupt laws and wills of men, than to obey Christ in denying themselves; they
lay heavy burdens on men's shoulders, which they touch not with one of their
fingers; they have respect to their interest, profit, ease, security; they
count gain godliness; they are preachers and setters up of tithes, which Christ
came to put an end to, with the law; they sue men at law for them; they are
hirelings, who do falsely apply Christ's words to themselves, The labourer is
worthy of his hire; tithes are only claimed by false Teachers; they deny the
doctrine of Christ enlightening every one with a saving-light [and that truly,
for it is a quaking-falshood); they deny the manifestation of the Spirit in
all; they reproach the true Ministers of the Light [and justly, because of
their folly]; they are persecutors of the children of light [but the Quakers
have no truth nor righteousness to be persecuted for]; they deny that any are
made perfect from all sin in this life [which they ought to deny]; they preach
up the power and dominion of the devil's leading into sin, above the power of
Christ over sin in this life; they exalt their Master the Devils power above
Christ, who came to overcome the Devil; they preach up outward worship, bodily
service, outward forms, ceremonies, and observances of outward Ordinances and
Traditions of men, of worship in outward Temples, and consecrated places, and
outward conformity, out of the life and power of godliness, in Common Prayer,
service, and singing of David's Psalms; they please themselves with an outward
melody to their ears, with voice and organs; their labor is to bring people
to, and keep them in outward communion, under the outward profession and name
of Christians, to come to an outward washing and sprinkling to make them
Christians; to partake in outward eating of bread, to drink of the outward cup
of wine; their fellowship is only in the world and with the world; they do not
what God requires at their hands; they are preachers up of the Kingdom of the
Beast and false-Prophet; they are bewailers of the great city Babylon; their
trade and merchandise depends on her.

Q. page 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.

Pr. Episcopal, Presbyterian and Independent Teachers are alike corrupt; they
do all preach in their own wisdom of words; they do differ from the true
Ministers of Christ, his Gospel and life; that they all want a
thorough-reformation; that they have taken up their stations in formalities;
that they are rejected of God; such from whom the Lord is departed; such as are
denied of the Lord to be his Ministers; to them the Lord (as this Quaker
pretends) says, Who has required these things of your hands, wherein you have
polluted my name? they seek their own, more than Gods; they have not the
Spirit; they are turned aside to fables; they are quenchers of the Spirit; they
are despisers of Prophecy; they speak evil of that they understand not; they
are none of Christ's Ministers in the Spirit; they convert not any unto God;
they go forth in the will of man; they are not of God; they are false
shepherds; they speak their own words; they compose their Sermons in their own
wills and wisdom; they are no true guides in the way of life; they are
deceivers and Seducers, who wax worse and worse; they run in the way of Balaam;
they are the false guides who lead to destruction, whose ways are the ways of
death, whose end is everlasting misery; who are ready to blaspheme that holy
name whereby the Quakers (but in pretense and falsely) are called.

I may without just offense to any say, That I have truly set down from his own
words this Quakers base account of all the Ministers of the Church of England;
for the most part this is done in this Scribblers own words; if not so, then in
the genuine sense of his own words; when I am put to the test, this will be
found true. As for this and the other quaking Pamphlets, I can truly say, hisce
oculis vidi, hisce manibus tractavi; observe but the time when their Books
consulted by me were Printed, and then this truth will be evident.

To their Books I shall instead of an Index, add an Appendix, which the Reader
may be pleased to look upon, as The Quakers unsound faith, which I shall be
bold to set down as the Quakers Belief, because in that Book of theirs called,
Truths defense, they do boldly say, page 104, That they are moved by the
immediate Spirit of Christ to write or to put in print; That their papers or
printed Books are from the immediate Eternal Spirit of God. The Articles of the
Quakers faith will be supernumerary, above twice four and twenty; I shall set
them down with reference to what has in the foregoing discourse been taken out
of their own Books; all this I shall do either in their own words, or according
to the true meaning of them. By the letter Q. is meant Quakers. To begin with
their unsound faith.

ARTICLE I.
THE first Article is this. We Quakers do believe as W. P. does write, That
Jesus Christ is not a distinct Person without us; and that there is not one
place of Scripture to prove him to be so; nor do we believe Christ to be
God-man, for it is no Scripture Phrase. See Numb. 1, 2, 3.

ARTICLE II.
We Q. do believe, That the Scripture is not a Rule directing our
understandings, or lives; and that the Spirit alone does give true discerning.
See Numb. 4.

ARTICLE III.
We Q. do believe, That the Light within ought to be the Rule of our faith and
practice. See Numb. 5, 6, 7.

ARTICLE IV.
We Q. do believe, That Baptizing with water is no Ordinance of the Gospel,
instituted by Jesus Christ. See Numb. 8, 9.

ARTICLE V.
We Q. do believe, That the Justification of a sinner is not by Christ's
righteousness imputed by faith; That Justification by Christ's imputed
righteousness is a dangerous, sin-pleasing notion; that it is a speaking peace
to the wicked; that it is a doctrine of devils; that it allows the devils
Kingdom to continue in being. See Numb. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

ARTICLE VI.
We Q. do believe (and are of the same mind with our friend G. Whitehead) That
Christ God-man did never purchase the redemption of any sinners by the price of
his own blood; That redemption thus purchased, is non-sensical and
unscriptural; That it is an upstart-doctrine, which is no elder than the
Presbyterians and Independents. See more Numb. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

ARTICLE VII.
We Q. do believe, That there is no Salvation to be hoped for after this life
is ended, by any faithful Christians; and that there is no resurrection of the
body from the grave unto life everlasting. See Numb. 20.

ARTICLE VIII.
We Q. do believe, That after this bodily life is ended, there is no life
everlasting for faithful Christians; that there is no resurrection of the body
from the grave; that there is no coming of Christ as a Judge at the last day;
that they may look till their eyes drop out, who look for the Son of Mary to be
their Savior at his last coming to Judgment. See Numb. 21.

ARTICLE IX.
We Q. do believe (as the Papists do, and do approve their faith herein) That
true Justification is only by inherent righteousness; that the righteousness by
faith is, when the law is performed in us by the works of the Spirit. See Numb.
22, 23, 24.

ARTICLE X.
We Q. do believe, That Jesus our Savior is not the Son of Mary, nor the Son
of the substance of his Father; that he does not exist bodily without us at
Gods right hand; that he does not sit at Gods right hand in heaven; that he is
not a distinct person from God the Father; that Christ the Son of Mary is not
to be worshipped as being God; that Christ is not God and Man in one Person;
that the Son of Mary is not glorified at Gods right hand; that Mary is not the
Mother of God; it is Popery to call Mary the Mother of God, and Christ the Son
of Mary. See Number. 25, 26.

ARTICLE XI.
We Q. do believe with our friends S. C. and George Fox the younger, That the
fear of God is learnt not from the Scripture. Number. 27, 28.

ARTICLE XII.
We Q. do believe, That deliverance from condemnation is not by believing in
Christ who died to save sinners by his blood, but by obeying the Light within.
See Number. 29.

ARTICLE XIII.
We Q. do believe, That all the Priests of Englands Church, are deceivers, and
no Ministers of Christ. See Numb. 30.

ARTICLE XIV.
We Q. do delieve, That there is no knowledge of any truth to be gotten by the
Scripture, and that they are deceivers that do teach otherwise. See Numb. 31.

ARTICLE XV.
We Q. believe, That the Priests do preach for filthy lucre, and are deceivers,
and in transgression, and that they are contrary to Christ and Paul. See Numb.
32.

ARTICLE XVI.
We Q. do believe, That they are no Ministers of Gods Word, nor Ministers of
Christ, who teach that the Scripture is the Word of God. See Numb. 33.

ARTICLE XVII.
We Q. do believe, That there are not three distinct Persons in the Godhead;
that the doctrine of the Trinity is an imagination contrary to the Scripture; a
doctrine only taught by those who know not what they say. Numb. 34.

ARTICLE XVIII.
We Q. do believe, That the Scripture cannot bring any to know God and Jesus
Christ, and the Spirit of Truth. See Numb. 35.

ARTICLE XIX.
We Q. do believe, That there is no knowledge of God to be gotten by the
Scripture, as our friend W. Smith does in his new Primer write. See Number. 36.

ARTICLE XX.
We Q. do believe, That all the Priests of England have their power and
authority from man; that they are no Ministers of Christ; that they are wolves
and time-servers. See Numb. 37.

ARTICLE XXI.
We Q. do believe, That the Scripture is no Rule to walk by, and that we
Quakers are to mind the Spirit alone in all things, which Spirit is the Rule.
See Numb. 38, 39.

ARTICLE XXII.
We Q. do believe, That the time called Sunday, or the Lord's Day, that the
place called a Church, that the persons belonging to the public worship used
in England, are Heathenish, Popish, and of man's making. See Numb. 40.

ARTICLE XXIII.
We Q. do believe, That the Priests of England do preach no sound doctrine,
that their doctrine is after the tradition of men, and not after Christ. See
Numb. 41.

ARTICLE XXIV.
We Q. do believe, That their praying in England is not an acceptable service
to God; that they do neither pray with the Spirit, nor with understanding; that
neither their Preaching nor their prayers are accepted of God. See Numb. 42.

ARTICLE XXV.
We Q. do believe, That singing of David's Psalms in Court, City, Country, is
but a profane thing, it is a singing lies in hypocrisy. See Numb. 43.

ARTICLE XXVI.
We Q. do believe, that Baptism and the Lord's Supper rose from the Popes
invention; that the whole practice of them (as they are used) had their
institution by the Pope and not by Christ; that the wine is another of the
Popes inventions; that they are devices of the Popes setting up; false things
not to be regarded by any true Christians. See Numb. 44.

ARTICLE XXVII.
We Q. do believe, That a material Church is of the Popes invention, who is the
head thereof. See Numb. 45.

ARTICLE XXVIII.
We Q. do believe, That the People and Priests of England are no true
Christians; that they are not in the Christians life and way; that they do
practice that, which God requires not at their hands, nor does accept. See Number.
46.

ARTICLE XXIX.
We Q. do believe, That there is no outward civil honor due to the King, or
any others; that they are not in the power of God, that do give civil honor to
the King, or any man else; that they are Apostates who do give civil honor to
any others, be they King or subjects. See Numb. 47.

ARTICLE XXX.
We Q. do believe, That there is no civil honor belonging to Magistrates, and
men in Authority; that this is that respecting of persons which is sinful; that
there is the Lords curse which attends hat-honour; that this civil honoring of
Magistrates and men in authority, is not required by God; that the
beggar-Quaker is as honorable as he that rules; that there is no honor due to
the Kings Person, for the honor is due to the power, which in is us Quakers.
See Numb. 48.

ARTICLE XXXI.
We Q. do believe, That Thou to the King, or any other man, is the true
language; that they are not guided by the Spirit of God, who do not use this
language Thou; that this is the language of truth; that the Spirit of God
teaches to speak this language; that they do not mind the teachings of the
Spirit of God, who do use any other language than Thou to the King, or any
others; that You to any one man is an apostate-language. See Numb. 49.

ARTICLE XXXII.
We Q. do believe, [though it be not true Gramar] That good manners is to speak
true words, which is mannerly, and is spoken in the manner of truth; that those
people do not know what good manners is, who do in their words give civil
honor to the King or his Subjects; that they do not speak in the manner of
truth, but in the false spirit, which corrupts good manners. See Numb. 50.

ARTICLE XXXIII.
We Q. do believe, That all manner of swearing is altogether unlawful; that
Christ Jesus has forbidden all oaths: that it is not lawful to swear upon any
account; that the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, or any other Oaths
enjoined by any Authority on earth, are altogether unlawful, because Christ
has commanded not to swear at all; that no swearing is warranted by the
Scripture; that the dispensation of Oaths where strife was, is ended by Christ,
who says, Swear not at all; that vain Oaths and solemn Oaths are both alike
forbidden by Christ. See Numb. 51.

ARTICLE XXXIV.
We Q. do believe, That all Holy Days are set up in the Apostasy; that there is
no observation of particular days; that in calling the first day of the week
the Lord's Day, or Sabbath Day, people speak they know not what; that the name
Sunday is heathenish; that every day is the Lordsday. See Numb. 52.

ARTICLE XXXV.
We Q. do believe (as our dear friend James Parnel has written) that they are
no truly faithful Christians, who do deny, that there is a perfect freedom from
all manner of sin to be had in this life; that their faith is not the true
faith, if it does not cleanse them from all their sins. See Numb. 53.

ARTICLE XXXVI.
We Q. do believe, That the Scripture is not the Light, nor the Word, nor the
Life, nor the Judge, nor the Rule, nor the Guide, nor the tryer of spirits. See
Numb. 54.

ARTICLE XXXVII.
We Q. do believe, That the people and teachers are ignorant of Christ the
Light; that they dote on the Scripture with their dark minds; that they do,
like the blind Pharisees, seek life in the Scripture where it is not to be
found. See Numb. 55.

ARTICLE XXXVIII.
We Q. do believe (as our beloved James Parnel says) That the Scripture is a
dead letter. See Numb. 56.

ARTICLE XXXIX.
We Q. do believe, That the Priests of England are the peoples leaders, who
cause them to err; that the Scripture is their Idol to get money by; that by
the Scripture they do lead the people into blindness; that they do in vain
worship a God whom they know not; that they do dethrone Christ Jesus by
exalting the Scripture. See Numb. 57.

ARTICLE XL.
We Q. do still believe, That the Scripture is not the Word of God, nor the
Light, nor the Rule, nor the Guide, nor the Teacher, nor Judge concerning
matters of faith and life. See Numb. 58.

ARTICLE XLI.
We Q. do believe, That the Priests of England do maintain the authority of the
Scripture (which is their Idol) only for their own ends, to uphold their
corrupt maintenance and deceitful Ministry. See Number b. 59.

ARTICLE XLII.
We Q. do believe, That the Priests of England have nothing but the Scripture
without, which is a dead letter; that they are without the true Light; that all
those are in darkness and confusion, who call the Scripture their Rule and
Guide; and that the Priests of England are like them; and that they know not
the truth. See Numb. 60.

ARTICLE XLIII.
We Q. do believe, That they bring another Gospel into the world, who call the
four books, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the Gospel. See Numb. 61.

ARTICLE XLIV.
We Q. do believe, That it is a false light in any which leads them to profess
the Scripture to be their Rule, who do not live well. See Numb. 62.

ARTICLE XLV.
We Q. do believe, That all that are called Lords, Ladies, Knights, Gentlemen
and Gentlewomen, Master, Mistress, Madam, are all accursed of God, and shall be
cast into hell; and that they are no better, nor shall fare better than
Lucifer, Dives, Haman, Pharaoh, Herod, and the rest of their forefathers. See
Numb. 63.

ARTICLE XLVI.
We Q. do likewise believe, That all who are called Lords, Ladies, Knights,
Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, Master, Mistress, Madam, are all very wicked; that
they do only make a profession of godliness; that their worship is formal and
imaginary; that their Chaplains are wicked like themselves; that they are like
the worshippers of the golden Calf; that they and their Chaplains are Heathens;
that Priest and people do live without God in the world; that they are all
accursed of God; that their works are the works of the Devil; that they serve
the Devil with their hearts and actions; that they are no Christians, but
Heathens, both Priest and people. See Numb. 64.

ARTICLE XLVII.
We Q. do believe still, That all Lords, Ladies, Knights, Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen, Master, Mistress, Madam, young and old, rich and poor, and
beggars, menservants and women-servants, who are no Quakers, are the children
of the Devil; fruitless trees that cumber the ground, which are for the fire,
stubble to be burnt; unrighteous persons, to be cast into the lake which burns
with fire and brimstone; that thither they must go; that there they must lie
for evermore with Dives and Haman; that they are all as bad as Dives, Haman,
and the Highpriests, Pharisees, and Rulers were, who put Christ to death; that
their belly is their god; that they and all their earthly honor shall be laid
into the fire. See Numb. 65.

ARTICLE XLVIII.
We Q. do believe, That the Priests of England are like Jannes and Jambres, who
withstood Moses; that they do likewise withstand the truth; that they are
University-men with their Magic Arts and Imaginations; that they do get a form
of the Prophets, Christ's, and Apostles words to trade with; that they do deny
the power of godliness; that they are Traitors to Christ; men of corrupt minds;
reprobates concerning the faith. See Numb. 66.

ARTICLE XLIX.
We Q. do believe still, That the Scripture is a dead letter; that it is the
husk (which is usually thrown away); that they are Swine feeding on husks, who
make the Scripture their Rule and Guide; that he is a deceiver, one that
erreth, that knows not the Scripture, who says the Scripture is the word of
God; that he puts the shadow for the substance, who takes the Scripture to be
the word of God; that that man is without, that he is a swine feeding on the
husk; that he is ignorant of the true light, who says, that the Scripture is
the rule and guide of the people of God. See Numb. 67.

ARTICLE L.
We Q. do believe, That there is no other baptism but the baptism of Christ
with the Holy Ghost and with fire; that baptism with water is but a formal
imitation, and the invention of man; that it is a mere delusion; and that they
are all heathens and no Christians, who are so baptized, and cannot witness the
other baptism. See Numb. 70.

ARTICLE LI.
We Q. do believe, That there is no such thing as Sacramental bread; that it is
only the bread which the world breaks; that it is carnal and natural; that the
cup is such like; that there is no such thing as the holy Communion, for it is
the communion of the world; that communion which is natural, outward, carnal;
that that which is called the Lords-table is the table of devils; that in
receiving that which they call the Lord's Supper, they do feed upon the husk and
shadow. See Numb. 71.

ARTICLE LII.
We Q. do believe, That the Priests of England have only the letter and form to
trade with; that to get humane learning they do for several years (as it were)
serve an apprentiship; that they pretend to study divinity; that among blind
people they get a certain wage; that they do sell that which they get into the
brain; that they live upon dust the Serpents meat; that they do feed death with
death; that they do feed the carnal mind with the carnal letter; that their
Ministry only has the form, and denies the power; that they come by the will
of man and not by the will of God; that their call and ministry is a formal
imitation and invention of man, and a mere delusion; that their ministry is
dark, dead and cold. See Numb. 72.

ARTICLE LIII.
We Q. believe, That the Priests, people, and rulers of England are vagabonds
and fugitives from God; that they go in the way of Cain who was a murderer;
that the Priests are the Ministers of the world, who come by the will of man,
who are only Ministers of the Letter, who have only the form and shadow; that
they are not the Ministers of Christ, but mere deceivers and witches, who do
bewitch the people from the truth. See Numb. 73.

ARTICLE LIVE.
We Q. do believe, That we are righteous; not under the outward Law of the
King, for we are a law unto our selves; that the Magistrates of England do
neither know how to rule, nor govern; that they are guided by their own wills;
that they rule with partiality; that they give forth laws in their own wills;
that they do persecute us righteous Quakers; that they do encourage the heathen
who know not God; that Cain slays Abel within them; that they suffer Cain to
slay Abel without them; that they are wicked as well as bloody Magistrates, who
fill the land with sin and wickedness; that they are corrupt Magistrates; that
they do put corrupt Magistrates in office; that they do uphold corrupt
Ministers and false Prophets; that they are the Beast who upholds the false
Prophet; that they make the Law a stalking-horse to deceive the simple; that
there is no honor due from us Quakers to such Magistrates and Government; that
the Magistrates of England are like Haman, Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, and Herod;
we believe also that Christ's coming is to end all outward laws and government
of man; that he himself will reign; that by truth and righteousness growing in
us Quakers, the law is fulfilled and passes away; that the Pharoah-like
Magistrate God will plague and confound; that there are no right Magistrates
but Quakers, and such quaking-Magistrates we own and honor in our hearts; that
the government by Quakers is only of God. See Numb. 74.

ARTICLE LV.
We Q. do still believe, That [Thou] was the plain language betwixt God and
Adam, and betwixt God and Moses; that not [Thouing] one another is a damning
sin; that the devil is the head of man who would be honored; that manners and
breeding are of the devil; that the best-bred Noblemen and Gentlemen are of the
devils naming; that breeding at Court or any where else is the devils breeding,
who sits in the Courts and high Palaces; that to get preferment is to get into
favor with the devil, who sits in Courts and high Palaces; that the Kings
Court, the Inns of Court and Palaces, are the devils seats; that both he that
is exalted and the devil must be cast down into hell together; that the devil
is the ground of superiority, nobility, gentility, honor, breeding, manners;
that they do all arise from the devil and lust in man who would be honored;
that all superiority, nobility, gentility, honor, breeding, manners, are under
the curse of God; that the pure law of us Quakers respects no man's person; that
amongst us Quakers there are no superiors after the flesh; that honor,
breeding, manners, fashions, are the devils image, his honor, his breeding,
his manners, his fashions; that nobility, gentility, honor, breeding, manners
and civility, are the devils marks; that the devil, and all superiors,
noblemen, gentlemen, who bear the devils mark, shall be tormented in hell quick
together; that there is no true nobility, but in us Quakers, who have the noble
seed; that there is no true gentility but in us Quakers, who have the seed of
God born up to rule; that honor is only due to us Quakers, who have the noble
seed which is to be honored; that we Quakers are all noble by birth; that
there is no honor due to King, Peers, who are only noble after the flesh; that
any of us despised Quakers is more noble than either King, or any nobles after
the flesh, because of the noble seed which is in us; that they who give and
receive honor are in the unbelief, that is infidels; that they by so giving
and receiving honor, do honor the devil, and worship the Beast and his image;
that the nobles and great ones of the earth, and both Priest and people, are
unmannerly and ill-bred; that before the noble seed in us Quakers, Kings and
nobles shall be bound in chains and fetters of iron; that the gentility,
nobility, superiority, honor, breeding, manners of the world, is after the
flesh, and sprung from the devil; that all noblemen, gentlemen, superiors, men
of honor, of breeding, and of manners, are bastards and no sons; that to these
no honor is due; that we Quakers can give no honor to them; that to honor
such, is for us Quakers to set the devil in Gods room. See Numb. 75.

ARTICLE LVI.
We Q. do believe, That Thou is the proper word to one particular person, and
You to more than one; that You to a single person is an invention of the devil
in man to exalt himself; that in Youing the great and rich ones, and in Thouing
the poor labouring-man, which is done by the Priest, the great man, the rich
man and Priest are heathens, lording it over others; that the Priests that are
called Masters, are contrary to the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, that they
have the name, but not the nature; that they are bastards, that they bear rule
by their means, over them that maintain them; that the professed Ministers of
England have their deceits to be seen. See Numb. 76.

ARTICLE LVII.
We Q. do believe, That putting off the hat is another invention of the devil,
whereby the devil is honored and worshipped, and exalted in man; that to put
off the hat, or stand bare before superiors, noblemen, gentlemen, or others, is
that respect of persons which was never ordained of God, but by the devil,
whereby he exalts himself in man; that this respect of persons was witnessed
against by James, who said, therefore howl ye rich men; that by putting off the
hat, or teaching others so to honor their superiors, the Ministers of England
do not abide in the Doctrine of Christ, and so have not God, but the devil;
that all that which is called honor, due respect, manners, courtesy, and
humility, Court-like breeding, Country-breeding, neighborhood and civil
respect, are but so many covers which the devil has for all his deceit; that
by these covers the devil is honored both in Court and Country; that they are
all accursed of God that hide their sins with those covers of the devil; that
it is the devil that makes so many degrees betwixt rich men and poor men, great
Courtiers and honest men; that the Lord has made all the Nations of the earth
of one mould, and one blood; (or if you will) that degrees of honor are not of
the Lord, for he has made all the Nations of the earth of one mould, and one
blood. See Numb. 77.

ARTICLE LVIII.
We Q. do believe, That there is a perfect freedom from all manner of sin to be
had in this life; that to deny a sinless perfection in this life, is to make
Christ only a part of a Redeemer; that to deny it is a great delusion of the
devil; that this Scripture, He that says he has no sin is a liar, is brought
by the devil; that it is the devil who tells men that Christ died for all, that
if they believe in him their sins shall not be imputed to them, though they sin
daily; that the righteous man sins seven times a day; that all the holy men of
God sinned; that to deny a sinless perfection in this life, is that Doctrine
which maintains the devils kingdom; that it is a doctrine which the devil
delivers by the mouth of his Ministers; that it is a doctrine whereby the devil
carries on people in an easy delightsome way to the flesh; that it is a
doctrine which heals them up in their sins with a feigned faith; that it is a
doctrine which sets them on their lees; that it is a doctrine which sets up a
rest in the devils kingdom; that it is a doctrine which destroys all tenderness
of conscience; that without being perfectly cleansed from all sin in this life,
no man can witness Christ to be his Redeemer, or that he is come to destroy the
works of the devil, or that Christ is come to redeem him out of the devils
kingdom; that by being perfectly free from all sin in this life, we Quakers do
reign above the world, death, hell, and the devil; that without this perfection
from all sin, others are such whose eyes are outward, only looking at a
Redeemer afar off; that they are manifestly the children of the devil, who do
deny a perfect freedom from all sin in this life; that their faith is vain, and
their hope is bad; that it is the feigned hypocrites faith, and not faith in
God; that Paul did witness this perfect freedom from all sin; that they who
dwell in the righteousness of Christ, sin not; that those teachers who deny our
quaking-perfection, do err, not knowing the Scripture, nor the power of God;
that those teachers do deny the end of Christ's coming; that they bring another
doctrine, which they have from their father the devil; that they are deceivers,
who creep into steeple houses, and lead silly people captive, laden with sin;
that they daub with untempered mortar; that they divine lies; that they heal
the hurt of the people slightly; that they sow pillows under their arm-holes;
that they make the people to dwell in sin as long as they live; that they are
their leaders who cause them to err; that they are the utter enemies of their
souls, who persuade their hearts in sin; that they have but a formed feigned
faith; that they are found to be liars, deceivers, antichrists, in whom the
false Prophet rules. See Numb. 78.

ARTICLE LIX.
We Q. do believe, That Antichrist has reigned over the world under a
Gospel-profession, ever since the Apostles days; that there has been a long
time of cruel darkness and ignorance; that the Lord has a long time been as a
stranger in the earth; that they who were accounted to believe on God or
Christ, looked at him as a God afar off, they knew not where; that they who
said that they believed that that was the Christ, who dyed at Jerusalem, and
that he dyed for their sins, and rose again, and was sitting at the right hand
of God, were no Christians in truth, but so called; that they were the keepers
of the Letter, which they took for their rule to walk by; that they gave forth
their own imaginations on the Scripture; that they set up Infant Baptism, for
which baptism there is no Scripture; that they have no Scripture for the word
Sacrament; that they set up the two Sacraments of baptism and the Lords Supper;
that like Priests and people now, they had carnal bread and wine; that the
Church in England and other places, was planted by them; that Bishops,
Archbishops, Deans, Priests, and Deacons, and Popes, were set up by them; that
Antichrist did thus set up his Kingdom under a profession of the Gospel; that
in the reign of Antichrist tithes came up, and Universities, to make Priests by
the will of man, who had long robes like the Pharisees; that in Antichrists
reign Idols Temples, called Churches, were set up; that in the same reign the
Priests got into their Pulpits, the chiefest places in the Synagogues; being
called of men Master, Doctor, and having the uppermost rooms at Feasts, and
greetings in the Markets; that in the same Antichristian reign they stole the
Apostles words, and took a verse, and studied from it a divination of their own
brain, and ran like the false prophets; that in the same reign of Antichrist,
with feigned words, through covetousness, they made merchandise of the people,
and a prey of the sheep, and sought about for fat benefices, and like the false
prophets sought for the fleece, and cried peace to those that fed them, and
prepared war against them that did not, and sought their gain from their
quarters, and ruled with rigor; that after this manner the Priests old fathers
planted their Church, and set every thing in form and tradition according to
their imaginations; that here is the ground and foundation of the Church of
England; that here are the old Fathers, the Priests have talked so much of,
even Popes and Bishops; that in this manner Antichrist has long deceived the
Nations under the profession of the faith of Christ; that from one generation
to another they have not known the Lord that bought them; that by this it may
be seen what liars the Priests are; how they came up, and were ordained; that
they are the Ministers of Antichrist, such as shut the Kingdom of Heaven
against men; that the people have been ignorantly led by their Priests as
strangers from the Lord, after the vain traditions, customs, forms, ordinances,
and imaginations of man, with a vain profession and feigned faith; that they
are still strangers from the God of life, and from Christ the Savior and
Redeemer; that in this manner both Priests and people do lie under the power of
darkness and delusion; that the Priests are the peoples leaders who cause them
to err by their lies; that they are lost for want of true knowledge; that they
do only differ from the heathen in name and profession. See Numb. 79.

ARTICLE LX.
We Q. do believe, That both the Priests and people of England are very wicked,
like the Heathen; that both Priests and people are envious and malicious; that
they are dissemblers, cheaters, defrauders of one another; that there is no sin
amongst Heathen, which sin does not abound amongst them; that the Priests of
England are very wicked; that they do draw near the Lord with their mouths, but
their hearts are far from him; that they are hyporrites, whose hearts are full
of deceit, envy, wrath, bitterness, covetousness, pride, earthly-mindedness,
self-love, self-wisdom; that they are out of the life and practice of the
Apostles; that they are such teachers as do bring another doctrine; that they
do climb up another way; that they are shut out for thieves and robbers. See
Numb. 80.

ARTICLE LXI.
We Q. do believe, That Englands Church was planted by Englands Priests; that
it differs not from the heathen; that Englands Church consists chiefly of
drunkards, swearers, liars, proud ones, covetous ones, railers, murderers,
whoremongers, wild ones, profane ones, wanton ones, quarrelers and sighters,
hypocrites, dissemblers, persecutors, backbiters, extortioners, lustful ones;
that if these were set aside, then Englands Church would be no where to be
found. See Numb. 81.

ARTICLE LXII.
We Q. do believe, (as our friend James Parnel has written) That we are
partakers of the Divine nature of Christ, by which we are made Christians, and
that God is with us manifested in the flesh. See Numb. 82.

ARTICLE LXIII.
We Q. do believe, That the true Church is no where but amongst our selves,
where there is but one teacher, and one Lord, one light, and one life, (that
is, the light of life within us) one faith, (which overcomes all manner of sin,
and makes us free in this life from all sin) one way, (which is the despised
way of Quakerism) one shepherd, (who is the light within us) and one sheepfold
(which is made up of us Quakers wheresoever dispersed) one Priest over the
household of God, (who is the light within belonging to this household, which we
Quakers are) one hope, (which none but we Quakers have) one baptism, (which is
not with water) one language, (which is Thou) one family, (which by H. N. was
called the Family of Love) one God and Father of all, (who is the Light within
all Quakers); that they that cannot witness all this to be true, are strangers
to Christ, and strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel. See Numb. 83.

ARTICLE LXIV.
We Q. do believe, as George Fox writes, That the Priests of England are going
mad in preaching for rewards and gifts, in cursing, excommunicating and
imprisoning, so that Balaams Ass may reprove them all. See Numb. 84.

ARTICLE LXV.
We Q. do believe, That to build a Material Church, is to build an old
Mass-house; that to warrant the building of such a Material Church by any
Scriptures, or the Kings law, is to deny Christ's coming in the flesh. See Numb.
85.

ARTICLE LXVI.
We Q. do believe, That to know God according to the Scripture is no true
knowledge of him; that the Priests of England, though they have the Scriptures,
and declare him according to those Scriptures, do neither know God nor Christ.
See Numb. 86.

ARTICLE LXVII.
We Q. do believe, That the Religion and Worship used in England, are of the
Priests own setting up in their steeple houses; that neither God nor the Lord
Jesus did set them up. See Numb. 87.

ARTICLE LXVIII.
We Q. do believe, (as George Fox and Richard Hubberthorn our friends have
written) that the Scriptures may as well be condemned to the fire, as our
friends papers of Queries may. See Numb. 88.

ARTICLE LXIX.
We Q. do believe, That the Scripture is the earthly Letter. See Numb. 89.

ARTICLE LXX.
We Q. do believe, That the Letters written by Quakers, are given forth by the
same Spirit that the Prophets and holy Apostles had. See Numb. 90.

ARTICLE LXXI.
We Q. do believe, (what is not true) That the Apostle said, Take heed to the
Light of God within you. See Number. 91.

ARTICLE LXXII.
We Q. do believe, That all true Quakers have the same gift of the Holy Ghost,
or gift of Miracles, that the Apostles had. See Numb. 92.

ARTICLE LXXIII.
We Q. do believe, That we are one in the Eternal Unity, and that George Fox
the Elder is one with us in this Eternal Unity. See Numb. 93.

ARTICLE LXXIV.
We Q. do believe, That the dark time and power of Babylon has long reigned,
and the works of the Beast; that by these they are descended that profess
Scripture to be their rule. See Numb. 94.

ARTICLE LXXV.
We Q. do believe, That there is a way to go through Moses, and through the
Prophets, and through John, to come to Christ; that when a man has gone this
strange way, then he may see that the Light is but one. See Numb. 95.

ARTICLE LXXVI.
We Q. do believe, That the Priests of England are Ministers of the Letter;
that they are persecutors of the Spirit. See Numb. 96.

ARTICLE LXXVII.
We Q. do believe, That Jesus Christ remains in the Heavens; that the same that
did descend, did ascond; that it is disputing as the devil did about the body
of Moses, with Michael the Archangel, to enquire what manner of body Christ
has; that such enquirers are to be rebuked as the devil was by the Archangel;
that the body of Christ is but one, which is the Church. See Numb. 97.

ARTICLE LXXVIII.
We Q. do believe, That to redeem and make free from sin, is done with the body
of Christ, which we have told you is the Church. See Numb. 98.

ARTICLE LXXIX.
We Q. do believe, That Christ lives in that body which is the Church; that in
this body, which is the Church, the Saints shall arise. See Numb. 99.

ARTICLE LXXX.
We Q. do believe, That both Philosophy and Logic are of the devil. See Numb.
100.

ARTICLE LXXXI.
We Q. do believe, That (except the Church which is his body) Christ has no
true humane body, no more than God the Father has; that that man looks upon
Christ with a carnal eye that looks upon him to have a true body, as he has;
that that man knows the fathers body, that knows Christ to have a true humane
body, which is without sin; that that man is full of subtilty, that does query
how the Son may be distinguished from God the Father; that they make both many
Gods, and three Gods, who do distinguish the Son from the Father. See Numb. 101.

ARTICLE LXXXII.
We Q. do believe, That there is no Baptism with water; that they are filthy
dreamers and liars of Christ, who tell people that this Baptism is an Ordinance
of Christ; that it is but sprinkling a little dirty water on Childrens faces;
that Christ did never send his Disciples on this dirty errand. See Number. 102.

ARTICLE LXXXIII.
We Q. do believe, That there is no Sacramental Cup to be received and drunk
of; that this Cup is the Cup of devils; that that Table called the Lords-Table
by Priests, is the Table of Devils; that it is an Idol and imitation; that the
Priests receiving in remembrance of Christ sacrificed, is sacrificing to
devils, not to God; that that fellowship which Priests and people have at the
Lords-Table is very wicked; that such Priests and people do present themselves
at the Table of Devils, and do drink the cup of devils. See Numb. 103.

ARTICLE LXXXIV.
We Q. do believe, That Priests, and suppers, and bread, and wine, is an image,
which is the likeness of a thing; that Priests, and suppers, and bread and
wine, is that image, or likeness of a thing which is forbidden by God in the
second Commandment, in these words, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
image, nor the likeness of any thing. See Numb. 104.

ARTICLE LXXXV.
We Q. do believe, That we are moved by the immediate Spirit of Christ to
write, to teach, or to exhort, or to put in print; that our giving forth Papers
or printed Books, is from the immediate eternal Spirit of God. See Numb. 105.

ARTICLE LXXXVI.
We Q. do believe, (as our old friend James Naylor has written) That all
Material Churches are Idol-Temples; that the worship is an Idol-worship; that
in England their customs are heathenish. See Numb. 106.

ARTICLE LXXXVII.
We Q. do believe, That the Spirit is the original; that by this original the
mystery is revealed to the Spirit within man. See Numb. 107.

ARTICLE LXXXVIII.
We Q. do believe, (as our friend Edward Borough has written) That Ordinances
used in England are carnal, traditional, and an abomination to the Lord; that
they are odious in his sight; that the worship used is an imagination of man's
dark mind. See Numb. 108.

ARTICLE LXXXIX.
We Q. do believe, That the worship used is carnal, that it is but a mocking of
God, and dissembling with him; that the Ordinances are such like; that
baptizing with water is denied by us; that it is not of God; that it is an
abomination in the sight of God; that the communion celebrated is heathenish;
that it has proceeded out of the imagination of the proud; that breaking of
bread and drinking of the cup is an abomination; that God did never command it;
that singing of David's Psalms is carnal, traditional and heathenish; that it is
done with the spirit of the world, with the spirit of Cain, with the spirit of
Scribes, Pharisees and chief Priests; that unquakerized Christians do worship
an unknown God; that such Christians ought to be ashamed of their profession,
and carnal Ordinances. See Numb. 109.

ARTICLE XC.
We Q. do believe, That the Teachers of England are all drunk with the wine of
the Whore, which sits upon the scarlet-colored Beast, whose name is, Mystery,
Babylon the great, the mother of Harlots, and abomination of the earth. That
they are in the generation of the false Prophets of Israel; that they do seek
their gain from their quarter; that they do steal the word from their
neighbor; that they do sell the divination of their own brain upon the
Scripture to blind people; that they do teach for the fleece; that the Teachers
of England are no Ministers of Jesus Christ; that they are seducers, and blind
guides, and antichrists; that they do lead poor blind people in the ways of
death and destruction; that they run, but are not sent of God; that by means of
these teachers the peoples souls are in the dark heathenish nature, leaning in
the imaginations, and in lying, swearing, drunkenness, covetousness, and
oppression, and according to the course of this world; that the foresaid
iniquities are ruling among people, Priests and Rulers of England; that from
the least of them to the greatest, every one is given to covetousness; that
from the Prophet even to the Priest, every one deals falsely; that the Teachers
of England are hirelings, and greedy dumb dogs, who are denied by us; that they
are in the way of Pharisees; that England is blindly led by them in the ways of
ignorance and darkness; that reading, singing, and preaching, is Englands
worship, which is carnal, and no worship of God; that it is an imagined
worship, whereby the living God is mocked; that it is carnal and heathenish, no
worship of the true God; that it is deceitful and an abomination to the Lord,
which is but Cains sacrifice; that our friend Edward Borough did declare
against the Teachers of England, and the worship thereof, as from the mouth of
the Lord; that the Teachers of England have beguiled the people; that they have
hungered the peoples souls; that they have loved the wages of unrighteousness;
that they have followed the error of Balaam for reward; that they have
devoured souls for dishonest gain; that they are Idols shepherds; that they are
Idol dumb shepherds who have scattered the sheep, and fed themselves with them;
that they have worn garments to deceive; that they have deceived the people by
their lies; that they have had the mystery of witchcraft; that they are
treacherous persons; that the Judges of England are Judges for reward; that her
Priests preach for hire; that Englands Rulers are evening-wolves; that her
Judges, Officers, Rulers are corrupt, whom the Lord will cut off; that the
Priests are oppressors of the people in their Tithes; that the Lawyers do
oppress them in their fees; that the Officers do oppress them in their
unrighteous dealings; that the Lords sword is drawn in England, and is put into
our hands, who are scornfully called Quakers; that England should depart from
all her teachers, lest she be partaker of their plagues. See Numb. 110.

ARTICLE XCI.
We Q do believe, (as our friend George Bishop of Bristol has written to
Oliver Cromwell) That the said Oliver Cromwell was one of our friends whom we
wished well to. See Numb. 111.

ARTICLE XCII.
We Q. do believe, That Oliver Cromwell was no Rebel, nor Usurper, nor Traitor;
that he was one whose sword took the spoil of the mighty; that there was a
spirit risen up against the Lord in these three Nations, which could not stand
before Oliver Cromwell; that there was never any thing which was too hard for
him; that his counsels were made to prosper; that wisdom and counsel were with
him, as the Oracles of God. That at his feet the proudest enemy did fall down
and bow; that this O. Cromwell became as the army of God; that he came upon
Princes as upon mortar, and as the Potter treads the clay; that the hearts of
honest men were knit to him, as one man; that they did not at any time sigh at
the remembrance of him; that the remembrance of this Oliver Cromwell was sweet
and pleasant to them, as life from the dead; that God was with Oliver Cromwell;
that it was never so with any man in these latter generations as it was with
this Oliver Cromwell, whilst God was with him, and his rock had not forsaken
him. See Numb. 112.

ARTICLE XCIII.
We Q. do believe, That the Bishops in the late Kings time, were persecutors;
that that generation was pulled up in the Lords anger; that the powers that
supported them were swept away in the Lords sore displeasure; that the Lord was
terrible to the men of high stature; that the Lord did break in upon them with
a furious blow of horror and amazement; that he smote with an incurable wound
the Bishops, and their King, and their Nobles, and their mighty men of war,
their Captains and Counselors, their Priests and their Officers, and their
whole strength; that the Lord left the name of Bishops, King, Nobles, mighty
men, Captains, Counselors, Priests, Officers, to be an astonishment and a
wonder, and a curse unto posterity. See Numb. 113.

ARTICLE XCIV.
We Q. do believe, That Oliver Cromwell was the man, who did bear as on a
common shoulder, the sufferings of the oppressed for conscience sake, who with
himself were appointed to the same destruction; that their sufferings went to
his heart; that he had a fellow-feeling of them on his own shoulder; that he
could have laid down his life for one of those sufferers; that his heart was
then very tender; that his bowels did sound for them; that the hearts of all
his fellow sufferers flowed in to him; that in them and him there was but one
spirit, and one heart; that for this cause the Lord did call Oliver Cromwell,
and raise him up to head the Lords armies; that this Oliver Cromwell was made
the Lords sword; that the Lord did by him execute his vengeance on those
generations. See Numb. 114.

ARTICLE XCV.
We Q. do believe, That the Puritans were great sufferers under the Bishops;
that Charles Stuart was inexcusable touching their sufferings, for not
remedying them according to his power; that the disaffection of great men, and
Nobles, and Rulers, and Bishops, and Priests, to that way of the Puritans did
not keep them from the judgment of God; that the judgment of God has taken
hold of Charles Stuart, and his Children, and his party, and has made him, his
Children and party, a dreadful example of the Lords vengeance; and that this
judgment was executed on the late King, his Children and party, by Oliver
Cromwell's sword as an instrument. See Numb. 115.

ARTICLE XCVI.
We Q. do believe, That Oliver Cromwell was the Lords battel-axe, and his
weapon of war, to the cutting down of the late King. See Numb. 116.

ARTICLE XCVII.
We Q. do believe, (as our friend Nicholas Knight has written) That all the
Teachers of England, whether they are Episcopal, or Presbyterian, or
Independent, are false Ministers, no true teachers, who are not sent, who have
no commission from God; who go forth in their own names, only in the will of
man; that they are no Ministers of Christ; that their doctrine is false and
traditional; that it is not from heaven but men below; that they do teach for
doctrine the traditions of men; that they are the false teachers; that they
preach a divination of their own brains; that they come not in at the door;
that they climb up another way; that they speak in the wisdom of men's words;
that they are men-pleasers by feigned words; that they are deceivers; that they
are seekers of their own praise; that they seek more the fleece than the flock;
that they preach for hire, and divine for money; that for a pretense they make
long prayers (like the Scribes and Pharisees) and devour widows houses; that
they say and do not; that they limit the Church of Christ to a Nation; that
they are blind leaders of the blind; that they do hold the truth in hypocrisy
and unrighteousness; that they hate to be reformed; that they have a form of
godliness and deny the power; that they are deceivers, and being deceived,
cause the name of God to be blasphemed and evil spoken of; that they do observe
months and days, and consecrated places; that their preaching is limited to
days, hours, hour-glasses, to the wills of men, to outward observations,
traditions and ceremonies; that these trees may be known by their fruits; that
out of the evil treasure of their hearts they bring forth evil things; that
they are an ill savor; that they are Clouds which hold no water, that they are
sounding brass and tinkling cymbals; that they do not profit the people; that
they are too light in the balances of the Sanctuary; that they do neither
believe nor understand what they preach; that they have no experience of the
word of life; that like those silly women, they are ever learning, but are not
able to come to the knowledge of the truth; that they flee the Cross; that they
are unwilling to forsake all for Christ; that they do choose rather to be
subject to the corrupt laws and wills of men, than to Christ; that they lay
heavy burdens on men's shoulders, which they touch not with one of their
singers; that they respect their own interest, ease, profit, and security; that
they count gain to be godliness; that they are hirelings; that they do preach
up the power and dominion of the devils leading into sin, above the power of
Christ over sin in this life; that they do exalt the devils power, who is their
master, above Christ; that they preach up outward worship, bodily service,
outward forms, ceremonies and observances of outward ordinances and traditions
of men, of worship in outward Temples, and consecrated places, and outward
conformity, out of the life and power of godliliness, in Common Prayer,
service, and singing of David's Psalms; that they please themselves with an
outward melody of voice and organs; that they labor to bring people to an
outward communion, under an outward profession and name of Christians; that
they make them Christians by an outward washing; that their fellowship is only
in and with the world; that they do not what God requires at their hands; that
they are preachers up of the Kingdom of the Beast and false Prophet; that they
are bewailers of the great City Babylon; that their trade and merchandise do
depend on her; that they are pretended Ministers of Christ; that they are
Antichrists Ministers; that the Gospel preached by them is of Antichrists
setting up; that they are led by the spirit of Antichrist; that they make
merchandise of the words of God; that they are not Ministers of the Spirit;
that they are hypocrites, who draw near to Christ with their mouths, but deny
him in their works; that Episcopal, Presbyterian and Independent, are alike
corrupt teachers; that they do all preach in their own wisdom of words; that
they do differ from the true Ministers of Christ, his Gospel and life; that
they do all want a thorough-reformation; that they have taken up their stations
in formalities; that they are rejected of God; that they are such from whom the
Lord is departed; that they are denied of the Lord to be his Ministers; that
they are such teachers to whom (as our friend Knight says) the Lord says, who
has required these things at your hands, wherein you have polluted my name?
that they seek their own more than Gods; that they have not the Spirit; that
they are turned aside to fables; that they are quenchers of the Spirit; that
they are despisers of Prophecy; that they do speak evil of that which they
understand not; that they are none of Christ's Ministers in the Spirit; that
they convert not any unto God; that they go forth in the will of man; that they
are not of God; that they are false shepherds; that they speak their own words;
that they compose their own Sermons in their own wills and wisdom; that they
are no true guides in the way of life; that they are deceivers and seducers,
who wax worse and worse; that they run in the way of Balaam; that they are
false guides, who lead to destruction, whose ways are the ways of death, whose
end is everlasting misery; that they are ready to blaspheme that holy name
whereby we Quakers are called. See Numb. 116, 117.

ARTICLE XCVIII.
In the last place, We Q. do steadfastly believe, (as George Fox and Richard
Hubberthorn our friends do) That our dear friends W. P. G. Whitehead, William
Smith, G. C. and George Fox the younger, James Parnell, George Fox the elder,
and Richard Hubberthorn, Edward Borough, George Bishop, and Nicholas Knight,
have written and printed their forenamed Books, and given them forth from the
immediate eternal Spirit of God, and therefore by good consequence they and
their writings are no less to be believed than the Penmen of the Scripture, the
Prophets and Apostles are.

FINIS.
The Names of the Books cited in this Treatise, with the Page where the Author
begins to extract the Quakers corrupt Creed out of them.
I. THE Counterfeit Christian detected, and the real Quaker justified: By a
lover of Truth and Peace, W. P. Printed 1674. Page 4 II. The nature of
Christianity in the true Light asserted. Written by a Servant of Christ, G.
Whitehead. Printed in the year 1671. Page 13 III. The Quakers Primmer, by S.C.
and George Fox the younger Page 27 IV. Two Treatises: viz. a new Primmer, and a
new Catechism; both written by William Smith. Printed 1668. Page 33 V. A
Collection of the several Writings given forth from the spirit of the Lord,
through the servant of God, James Parnel, who bore a faithful testimony for
God, and died a Prisoner under the hands of a persecuting generation in
Colchester- Castle in the year 1656. Published 1675. Page 59 VI. The Heathens
Divinity set upon the heads of all called Christians, G. F. Printed in the year
1671. Page 118 VII. The power and glory of the Lord shining out of the North;
or the day of the Lord dawning: By one whom Ishmaels brood calls a Quaker,
whose name in the flesh is James Naylor. London printed 1653. Page 128 VIII. A
Warning from the Lord, by one named of the world Edward Borough. Page 129 IX.
The Warnings of the Lord to the men of this generation, particularly to those
in power who are lately passed away, and to them that remain, as they were
given forth in sundry Letters, and sent to Oliver Cromwell, Richard his Son,
late Protectors, etc. by his servant George Bishop, who is moved of the Lord to
publish them: London printed by M. Inman, 1660. Page 135 X. A Comparison
between the true and false Ministers, by Nicholas Knight, Printed 1675. Page
141

