The Vanity of Female Pride:
BEING A True Relation of a Sow that Pig'd Seven Monstrous Pigs, at Highworth
in Wiltshire, on Tuesday the Ninth of June 1691. all with High Top-Knots, one
having the Face of a Woman, Four Ears, Four Tails and Eight Legs; the other Six
being shaped much after the same Monstrous manner.

depiction of a porcine monstrous birth

NOtwithstanding the many Signs of God's Displeasure to the People of this
Nation, for their continual Provocations, we find the same no way abated, but
rather augmented; more especially in the intolerable Pride of the Female Sex,
as to their Towers and Top-Knots, and the rest of their Gaudy Attire, which is
the Root of all Evil; and it is to be feared, will draw heavier Judgments upon
us than we shall be able to bear. But we hope the same God will open their
Eyes, whereby they may behold their Folly, and in time flee from that Wrath
which is threatened to such obdurate Sinners, who wilfully continue in their
Wickedness. Indeed the Strangeness of this Relation may seem some what
improbable, but all must confess there is nothing impossible with the Almighty.
You shall have it as exactly as we can relate it from Letters sent us from the
same place, and likewise from those who were Eyewitnesses to this Prodigy in
Nature, and now in London ready to testify the same to the Incredulous. Which
take as follows.

At Highworth in Wiltshire, at the Sign of the White Heart, the House of Mr.
John Bailey, on the Ninth of June, there was Pig'd of one Sow, Seven very
Strange and Monstrous Pigs, each representing on its Head a Monumental
Top-Knot, one of which had a Face like a Woman, and the Topping of three
several Colors, as Red, Black, and White, having four Ears, four Tails, and
eight Legs; its Tails seemed to have Root each in a several place, as about the
Rump and Sides: Another had a Face like a Bear, dressed with Top Knots, six
Ears, four Tails, and seven Legs, all after the same manner.

The rest having the proper Phisnomy of Pigs, but with the like Gallimaufrays,
or Top-Knots on their Heads. What should be the reason or this Monstrous
Conception, we cannot apprehend, unless it might be that our Jolly Dairy-Maid,
being decked with those Ornaments, expecting the Company of her Dearly Beloved,
and the Sow just then in the Act, her Eyes being fixed upon the Maid, and that
(say some that would have it so) might be the occasion of this Monstrous
Production; but am afraid their Judgment fails 'em, and would advise them
better to consider of it.

The Owner was much surprised at the sight of this unexpected Litter, but
however did presently dispatch them all, and buried them together, which
afterward he repented himself of, when he heard it might have been to his
Advantage to have kept them alive.

It seems a Lady not far from thence, hearing of these Monsters, was curious to
know the Truth of what we have related above; and employed a Young Lad to
procure one of them; which he did, diging it up, and carrying it to, the Lady,
who was very well satisfied in the Truth thereof, and gratified the Boy beyond
his Expectation.

As a farther Confirmation, if you please to give your self the trouble to
enquire of the Carrier who lies at the White Horse Inn in Friday-street, he
will fully satisfy you to your desire.

And now Females, I hope this is enough to deter you from persisting any longer
in a Stubborn Resolution; lay aside therefore this nasty Pride, which is
nothing but Vanity, and bedeck your selves with those Beautiful Ornaments, and
Graces of the Soul, (proper Dresses for so refined a Sex, before corrupted)
such are Humility, Virtue and Modesty, which will make you acceptable in the
sight of the Creator, and far more pleasing to the whole World.

It Is not the High Top Knots, the Powdered Hair, a Beautiful Face, a Clear
Skin, a well-shap'd Body, and those, other Charming, Lineaments and Delusions,
has the least Influence on a Generous Friend: And unless you leave off these
trifling Shadows, on purpose placed to ensnare and decoy the Wanton sort of Men
to your Licure; or to speak more favorably, to Entice and Entrap the more
Sober sort to a Confined State (for one of these must needs be the reason) it is
great pity you should taste the Sweetness of a Marriage Bed, and so for ever be
destitute of a Husband.

LONDON: Printed by G.C. at the Blue Ball in Thames Street, 1691.


